THE USE and PRACTICE OF FAITH: OR, Faiths Universal Usefulness, And Quickening
Influence into every Kind and Degree of the Christian Life.

Together with the Excellency of a Spiritual Life (in difference from all
other) by way of Prooeme.

And the excellent WORK and REWARD of Converting others to the Faith, commended
by way of Close.

Delivered in the Public LECTURES at IPSWICH.

By the late Eminent and Faithful Servant of his Lord, Mr. MATTHEW LAWRENCE,
Preacher to the said Town.

-- By it he being dead, yet speaks, Heb. 11.4. LONDON: Printed by A. Maxey
for Willian Weekly Bookseller at Ipswich, and are to be sold by John Rothwell
at the Fountain and Bear in Goldsmiths-Row, Cheapside; and by Robert
Littleberry at the Unicorn, Little-Britain. 1657.

To the Right Worshipful, The BAILIFFS and PORTMEN WITH The Residue of the
Incorporation of the Town of Ipswich.
Worshipful, and Beloved!
WHen this Piece is once come into your hands, there needs nothing be spoken
further, either by way of commendation of the Work, or upon the account of its
Dedication to you. The Author and his Labors having been of that worthy
Estimation amongst you, and his Memory still so precious, as a Commendatory
Epistle from us would be less. And for the Right of whatever may be called His,
whose Name this bears, it undoubtedly resolves on You, whose he was, both by
your free Choice, and his most willing Service. Moreover, the Subject here
presented, besides its own uncontroverted Excellency and Necessity, which
commends it to all, comes singularly commended to You upon a double Respect;
partly, as that which was the largest and choycest part of his Labors with
you; partly, as what of all other was the Vote of his last Bed to have made
public for your use. Had himself survived to have completed his own Papers,
as he had began in his weakness to revise them, the whole surely had been more
semblant and exact: yet as it is, it is his own as he left it; not lame, or
torn, though here and there undrest (especially toward the beginning) and such
as nevertheless speaks a sufficient worth, even without its due dress.

And now two of your eminent Lights have shone before you, Mr. S. Ward and the
Author.
especially in this one Tract; and have left behind them a clear and large
Pathway for you, of Living by Faith. Whose Faith, and Works of Faith, Heb. 13.7.
O that you may be found as eminently to follow! their combined Light begetting
in you the stronger heat. Surely, God expects of you an exact Hand in this
Work, whom he has graced with so fair Copies. Others in other places have
traveled likewise in this Theme, but we dare say, None more compactly and
lively than the former, nor copiously and distinctly than this latter of yours;
Of which the one may have seemed to have given the Text, the other the
Commentary; so as the Furniture of both makes you complete in this kind.

Possibly the Work comes forth much later than your desire and expectation; and
truly, than ours too: not one or two, but more years having passed since the
Authors death. But so it has happened through some cross and unavoidable
occurrences. May the Benefit of it at length recompense the Delay, which we
both hope and pray. We shall add no more by way of Preface, but commit this so
useful Treatise, and your diligent perusal of it, to Him, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7
who alone, while Paul plants, and Apollo waters, gives the increase.

Your Servants in the Lord, JOHN WARD. NATHANIEL SMART. JOSEPH WAIT.


AN EPISTLE and PREFACE TO THIS TREATISE.
Christian Reader,
WE desire not to know to give flattering Titles to any man, Job 32.
though dead; nor to stretch our selves beyond our measure to any living: Yet
being called hereunto, 2 Cor. 10.14.
We presume it our duty to Preface something to this excellent Piece of
Practical Divinity, as referring to the honor of the precious Author,
departed: so also to the more endearing to thy Soul that precious Grace of
Faith, and its use here handled.

The little of the Life of Faith amongst men, and of Faith and Truth in Life,
excites us to become, though not Midwives to deliver, nor as Nurses to dress,
yet as standers by and servants to commend this Birth as Legitimate and Lovely.

1 Timothy 6.12.
Though we take not upon us to put weapons into thy hand for this good fight of
Faith, ( that this Tract does) yet if we may but encourage to the use of them,
like the Drum and Fife, and such inferior Officers, it suffices.

2 Cor. 3.
We cannot say (as the Apostle) in these days, Need we Epistles of Commendation
to you, or Letters of Commendation from you? Indeed we do need them both: for
our Persons, Office, Doctrine, all are under the foot of Pride and Ignorance.
We love not our Food, and loath our Physic, and (at the best) give
entertainment to the most Sermons and Books which ore heard and read, according
as they that speak and write them are famed; and esteem and approve Doctrines
by Persons, Tertul. de Praescript. Haer. cap. 3.
and not Persons by Doctrines, as an Ancient has it.

That we might therefore by giving a due report to the Name of this worthy
Writer, raise a Spiritual seed to him (a deceased Brother) and encourage thee
to the Use and Practice of this his pious Piece, hear us in a few things, as
furtherers of thy Faith and Joy.

For the Composer hereof, Reverend Mr. Matthew Lawrence (though he be now in
Heaven above our Praises) yet know, he has by his Doctrine, and living this
Doctrine of Faith, Heb. 11.
obtained a good report, and was of known integrity, a mighty Apollos in the
sacred Scriptures; so abundant in alleging apt and cleef Scriptures for
Grounds and Enlargements, 1 Timothy 4.6.
that he might be called, as another once was, The Ark of the Scripture.

His Life and Disposition was made up of a meek and quiet Spirit; a melting
Heart toward God, and a healing closing Spirit toward Brethren, though in
some things dissenting. Such low Spirits are fitted to receive the high
Revelations of Faith, and living by it.

Such empty Vessels, are most capable of the Oil of the Spirit. The meek, Psalm.
25.
he will teach his way. He was indeed a living Paraphrase and Comment upon his
Text; A Just man living by his Faith.

For the Treatise it self, one of us had the happiness of near Cohabitation
some years to the Reverend Author, and lived under the Divine droppings of much
of this heavenly Doctrine that distilled from his lips; which had he been
delivered up unto, as it was faithfully delivered unto him, he might have been
more enriched in the stock of Faith. The other of us, having perused these
Papers, (though modesty may forbid him to utter Hyperbolical Praises, as being
happily, by Providence, united in nearest Relation with a Branch of that
dead-living Stock, the deceased Author) yet accounts it but the just Honor and
Duty he owes him, to judge this Tract, through Gods blessing upon a serious
reading and digesting it, much conducing to make an able Christian and Divine.
Indeed, it holds forth to us the way that we should walk, Jer. 42.3.
and the thing that we should do to attain Heaven and Salvation.

Many Ministers and others did desire the publishing of this Treatise by the
Author in his Life: but his modesty, and other constant labors, hindered. Now
it is come forth, we wish it may not find the like entertainment that the
Friar wittily and sharply said his Auditors gave to his Sermons, they dealing
with them, as with his Holy Water, sprinkled on them; they called for it
eagerly, but when he cast it on them, they presently wiped it off again. Make
this Book now published, more public, by holding forth the Life and Practice
of Faith in thy Life and Station. Do not only once read it, Verba vivenda
and cast it aside, but carry it in thy heart, as the Carpenter his Rule in his
hand, to square all thy actions by it.

We shall only add some Motives to excite thy Practice, and then commit all
to the Blessing of God.

1. Consider, this Life of Faith is a high Mystery: Christ believed on in the
world, is a like Mystery with God manifested in the flesh, and received up into
glory. Faith in the habit or root, is not a Plant of Natures Garden: The very
nourishing of it, and causing it to bring forth in our hearts, is much more
difficult than that of Plants in a strange Country. Grace, in exercise is
difficult. Indeed its in us, as fire under dead ashes, or in a Flint: Exciting,
quickening, cooperating Grace with us, must be added to that within us. Grace in
us, lies like some Physic of dead Drugs, which works not until stronger
Physic be given. Without me ye can do nothing, Joh. 15.5.
says Christ of his Disciples.

But especially, the living daily, in all conditions and actions by the
exercise of Faith, is much more hard. To believe is above Nature; but to act
Faith in each act of Life, is above our very Grace.

Consider farther the difficulty of this Life, and so make use the rather of
this Help.

Other ways of life, viz. Trades, Multi vident cruces, qui non vident
unctiones. Bernard.
are called Mysteries; but this above all is a Mystery of Mysteries. We wonder
how some men live, who have a secret way of Trading: but this is not only a
supernatural Secret, but directly opposite to flesh and blood.

The Carnal and Profane scoff at it, as a Fancy, Paradox, and golden Dream of
Melancholy Spirits. They count all persons who admire discourse of, and
practice this Life of Faith, but silly Abraham's in the world, as Want-wits for
managing or getting an Estate. Yet who does or can without this so much
despised Faith, Esaias 53.1.
believe our report of these things.

It grieves our Souls to observe how many professing Christians look upon the
Use of Faith, as the staff of their Old Age only; or as a strong Cordial only
in fainting Fits; or at best, to be worn, as our Holiday-clothes, when we
attend on the Word, Prayer, Sacraments: (then put it on.) But this is not to
live as becomes Saints, (in all things, and at all times) by our Faith; as that
devout Scotch Divine, whom M. Trap relates to have eat, drank, and slept
Eternal Life.

Do thou find it hard to live by thy Labor, by thy Lands, Learning,
Friends, Wits? yet all these ways are far beneath this high Mystery of
believing and living by it.

Bless God then, as for Other, so for This Master of the Assemblies, who
designs in this Work to teach thee this Mystery and Trade, how to pick a living
livelihood out of this (Now) dead Commodity, viZ. Faith.

2. Consider what may farther stir thee up to the exercise of this Grace; as
also, to the Reading and Meditating on this heavenly Directory to the Life of
Faith.

We shall not forestall those things which thou may find in the Author; nor
dispute how far some Branches of this Tree of Life, viz. Faith, may spring out
even in Heaven it self: Yet take this as Solomon's Argument, that Wisdom
excells, because it gives life to him that has it, Eccles. 7.12.

Vita optimus modus Entis.
Life, is the best and highest manner of Being. A living Worm excels the Sun in
glory. Rational Life exceeds the life of Plants and Beasts: So does Faith
Reason, as the highest Life man is capable of on earth.

Seneca and others may write of a blessed Life, but Faith only finds it. This
Life must come from Heaven, which is so far above the Earth, and so rare to be
found in it.

He who has all his Provisions about him of his own, must needs keep the best
house, and have all (as we say) at the best hand: So is it by Faith; we have
all within our selves, from God in Christ. The good man is satisfied from
himself.

Antisthenes gained this by Study and Learning, that he could walk with
himself, as not needing to go abroad, and be beholding to others for Exercise
or Delight. O thesauris omnibus opulentior fides! O virtutibus corporis omnibus
fides fortior! O medicis omnibus salutarior! Ambros.
This is much more true of Faith: Faith walks with Christ and God on the Mount
of glorious Discoveries every day, and takes all as out of his hands. What
Grace more admired by Christ! Paul spends a whole Chapter, Hebr. 11. as a
Chronicle of Faiths Victories and Trophies. Its Worthies are there mentioned,
as David's elsewhere.

This very Text, on which this Tract is built, is cited no less than four
times: Romans 1. Gal. 3. Heb. 10.
Thrice in the New Testament, which may convince us of the excellency of it,
being worthy of a double, treble Medita^^on, as the summary of our Christian
Faith, both Doctrinal and Practical, Tarnovius inter opuscula.
as a learned man hints on the place.

3. Consider the seasonableness of this Counsel, about living by Faith in these
days.

1. As they are sickly dying evil Times, in respect of Sufferings. 2. As the
latter Times, and so evil in respect of Sinning.
Quis inter haec trepidus and maestus, nisi cui spes et fides deest; jus est
enim mortem timere, qui ad Christum nolit ire. Ejus est ad Christum nolle ire,
qui se non credit cum Christo incipere regna^e. Scrip^um est enim justum fide
vivere Cyprian de Mort.
Cyprian wrote his Book of Mortality in a time of Mortality. And this Cordial
of Life is now given out in season, to teach us how to live, and fit us to die.

A Minister, as has been related, being sick, and meeting by Providence with
Mr. Ball his excellent Book of Faith, (which then came newly out) he took it as
a Guide by the hand, to lead him through that dark Valley, and fit him for
Heaven.

We wish this Book may be so entertained by thee and all others who meet it, as
a Pillar and Cloud in this Wilderness, as the Rock and Manna to refresh thee,
as thy Viaticum to Eternal Life and Glory.

Secondly, as these are evil Times in respect of Sin, ^ Tim. 4.
Apostasy, falling from the Faith, both Doctrinal and Practical; and also the
latter days of the World, wherein Faith shall fail, Luke 18.8.

Yea, these are the days wherein this S^^^^ of Faith by many of the mighty harh
been vilely cast away. 2 Samuel 1.18, 25, 27.
Faith in Doctrine and Life is forsaken, and cast off by many formerly famous
for Profession.

Now to teach the use of this Shield, and how to uncover and anoint it, is a
word in season.

Credis in Christum? fac Christi opera; ut vivat fides tua fidem ^uam dilectio
animet, actio prohet. Bernard.
And sure, did men retain the Doctrine of Faith more in their Minds, they would
better practice Faith in Life: And did we live more by it, we should know more
of it, Joh. 7.17.

Quest. But have not many Divines already written of this Subject? how then can
this be so season^ble a Treatise?

Ans. We may say (its truth) the world abounds with Books; and as the waters
cover the Sea, knowledge abounds: but never less practice of Faith,
especially if we consider the means and time of enjoyment.

Many Captains and Physicians, we say, may lose the City, and spoil the
Patient; but not when they agree in judgment and practice. Divines harmoniously
handling the same Subject, do more clear and beat out the Truth.

Who would be offended with any who should invent a nearer way to the Indies,
or, at some Design to advance Trading, or an Engine that would draw up Pearls,
and the Riches out of the Sea, that all men might be made more rich, and more
suddenly so, than ever? Thus it is here. This Servant of the Lord, entering on
this Subject, was desired by some of his Auditors to enlarge it; which he,
coming after many other, by the largeness of his own heart, and especially by
the supply of the Spirit, has done, and brought out of his treasure riches
enough, and more than the whole world can expend.

And as concerning this Branch of the Life and Practice of Faith, we know none
has gone beyond this Treatise. So as we may say of it, as Solomon of the
virtuous Wife, Thou excellest them all. Prove. 31.29.
(With respect we mention it to other learned and painful Labors) Especially,
as to the methodical Contexture, and copiousness of the matter, for which it is
highly commendable (as the Orators Oration, the longest was his best) and who
can think that can be too much spoken, Nunquam satis dicitur, quod nunquam
satis diso^tur.
which is for our Life here, and Eternity hereafter. That is never taught too
much, which is never sufficiently learnt.

We shall add no more, but a few Directions for the Reading of this Book, lest
we cloy thy appetite, which we desire to sharpen.

1. Then, to help thee how to read to thy profit: Come not with prejudice
against the Doctrine it self, the Preacher, or his manner of handling it. A
great Scholar, and learned in the School of the the Remonstrants, reading a
piece in Dr. Prestons Works, could find no excellency of it: And so Mr. R.
Bolton, before his Conversion, in his first hearing worthy Mr. Perkins, had
suchlike thoughts of him: And so Nathaneel, in Joh. 1.46. was prejudiced
against the place where Christ was educa^ed in, and it had well-nigh hindered
him of the benefit of his Doctrine. Expect not here a Garden of gaudy Tulips to
please thy fancy, or Jewels of ^igh Notions to hang on thy ear, but wholesome
Herbs, and Spiritual Simples, for the health and recovery of thy sick-dead
Soul, and Cordials to comfort thy Heart.

2. Be sure to get the grace and habit of a true and lively Faith of Gods
Elect, ere thou go about to live by it: first be possessed of this Shield, then
^earn to handle it, uncover it, anoint it. Have the Bow, then learn the use of
it; seek the Stock, and then improve it. Esaias 38.
By these things men live.

3. Crucify in the strength of Christ, Sense and Carnal Reason, which will
obstruct thee in this way, and rob thee of thy comfort in this living by Faith.
We walk by faith, not by sight.

4. Hold up this Shield against all the fiery darts of Satan, who shoots
especially against the standard bearer. Faith, Luke 22. Resolve as they of old,
to return with, or die upon this Shield of thy Faith, in all thy contendings
with the Devil.

Remember, Faith must be had, Vnde haec incredula cogitatio? quid facit in domo
fidei perfidum pectus? quid, qui in Christo omnino non credit appellatur and
dicitur Christianus? Cyprian. Ambula perfidem ut pervenias ad spem, spes non
aedificabit in patria quem fides non consolatur in via. August.
if ever thou be saved; and the Life of it maintained, if ever thou have
comfort in Life and Death.

5. Pray much to Jesus Christ, the Author and Finisher of thy Faith, and to and
for the Spirit of Faith, to direct, enlighten, Heb. 12.
and strengthen thee in the reading, understanding, believing and obeying what
thou read. Go not out in thine own strength.

To conclude: Our Prayers are and shall be (through grace) continued, That this
Universally Useful Subject may be crowned with Divine Blessing, to the highest
improvements of Faith in every Christian Reader; Especially in the hearts of
our much Honored and Right Worthy Friends; the Magistrates and Inhabitants of
Ipswich, which the Lord has long made famous and happy, as a Valley of
Gospel-Vision. Our due and deep respects of Affection are much knit and drawn
out to our Christian Friends in that Town, so long eminent for Profession of
Godliness. Our hearty desires are, that they may never want able Helpers of
their Faith and Joy, that their Faith may flourish exceedingly, according to
all the high dispensations of the Lord toward them; that so living and dying
in the Faith, they together with us, may receive the end of our Faith, the
Salvation of our Souls, through Him, in whom, and for whom we rejoice to remain,

Your Soul-Servants, John Fuller. Samuel Smith.

London, Aug. 26. 1657.
THE GENERAL CONTENTS Of the whole TREATISE. Yet referring more fully to the
Alphabetical Table at the close of the Book, wherein are the Special Contents.
The TEXT. HAB. 2.4.

Behold his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him: but the just shall
live by his faith.

CHAP. I.

Contains a Prooeme to the main Treatise, setting down a clear opposition
'twixt Believers and Unbelievers, as to their Description and Condition.

The Exposition of the Text, with its various Readings.

Two general Observations, both spoken unto, and applied briefly.

Two special Doctrines:

1 Gods People are in a state of life by way of eminency; They are partakers of
the best life.

This is set out in seven Particulars; viz.

In the 1 Nature and Kind of it. 2 Fountain and Principle. 3 Comforts of it. 4
Measure of it. 5 Safety and Security. 6 Continuance. 7 End of it.


Together with the Reasons of the Doctrine, and five Uses; viz.

1 of Conviction, that there is such a Life. 2 Persuasion, to desire this Life.
3 Examination, whether we have this excellent Life. Where are 10 Rules of
Trial. 4 Information, of the worst kind of Murder. 5 Thankfulness for this
Life.
Second Doctrine mainly intended:

Whatever Life the Just man lives, in a more excellent manner than other men:
He lives that Life by virtue of his Faith.

Eight general Questions for the better unfolding of the Doctrine.

Quest. I.

What Faith is?

It is a gracious habit infused into the heart by the Spirit of God, whereby
the Soul rests, or rowls it self upon Christ in a way of Promise, for all
things pertaining to life and godliness, for Gods glory, and its own Salvation.

Where the several parts of the Definition are explained.

Quest. II.

What it is to live by Faith?

It implies five things: 1 A Right in Christ. 2 A clearing our way in point of
Duty. 3 A clearing our Right to the Promise. 4 A searching the Scripture for
Legacies bequeathed to us in the Promises. 5 A remembering them, and a
seasonable applying them to particular cases and occasions.


The order or Series which is taken by the Lord, to cause a Christian to live
by Faith. A fivefold step to this Life.

The Lord makes use of Faith all along from first to last, in the order of
working Spiritual Life; and that in all parts and faculties of it, which are
seven.

1 Quickening faculty of Faith. 2 Expulsive faculty. 3 Nutritive faculty. 4
Digestive faculty. 5 Motive faculty. 6 Breathing faculty. 7 Augmentative
faculty.
In all these respects, the Just lives by his Faith.

Quest. III.

Why a Christian is said to live by Faith, rather than any other Grace.

Where four Reasons are assigned, and two Uses.

Quest. IU.

Who it is that lives by his Faith?

Answ.

The just, or Righteous person.

Where is shown, that there is a double Righteousness; viz.

Twofold Righteousness Of Justification. Of Sanctification.


The Text comprehends both, in the term (Just)

Yet he does not say. The Just shall live by his Justice, because the
Righteousness of Sanctification is imperfect, and deserves death: but, By his
Faith; that is, that perfect Righteousness of Christ which Faith lays hold on,
and applies. This is that Righteousness, whereby believers are reputed Just,
and accepted with God to Life Eternal.

Hence it follows. That though an unbeliever may be predestined to
Justification and Faith, yet he is not actually Just, or justified, till he
believe. For the just only shall live hy Faith.

Quest. V.

By whose Faith shall the Just live?

Answ.

By his own, not by another man's.

Two Reasons, why it must necessarily be a man's own Faith by which only he can
live.

For the right understanding of this, observe four Particulars, by way of
Caution, in the amplification of this Assertion.

1 It is not so a man's own Faith, but that still God is the Author. 2 In
Temporal respects, one man's Faith may benefit another. 3 In Spiritual respects,
the Parents faith acted by virtue of Gods Covenant, including the posterity of
the just, may benefit the children of such parents. 4 Such just ones who
convert others instrumentally, may and shall have much more comfort and glory
by the faith of their Converts, than otherwise they should have had.
Four Considerations, by way of Restriction, as unto this Truth, That one man's
Faith may procure some benefit unto another.

1 It holds not always in Temporal respects. 2 When another faith procures
Temporals, yet such temporals are not sanctified to any, without an act of
their own faith, exercised in the Word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.4. Psalm. 78.30. 3
Though natural parents by birth, and spiritual parents by office, supposing
both to be Spiritually renewed themselves, may procure much good to their
children and people by their faith. Yet not 1 To all the children and people
always, Genesis 17.18. Romans 9.1, 2, 3. 2 To any, so as to have comfort by such
good procured, till such children and people believe themselves in their own
right.

4 Those who have heen Instruments of others Conversion and Faith, shall have
more joy and glory, supposing such to have faith themselves.
Hereunto is annexed a Quaere,

Whether an unbelieving Minister may beget faith in others?

Answ.

Very rarely: when they do, they cannot rejoice in another faith sincerely,
having none themselves.

See this more largely handled in the Treatise it self.

Uses of the Just man's living by his own Faith, not another.

1 Reproof of the Papists, whose faith is cobled up of Pride and Ignorance, it
being a blind assent and implicit obedience to the Canons and Dotages of that
Apostatical Church. 2 Reproof of such carnal Professors, who have no other
faith, but only what is pinned on other men's sleeves, who put carnal
confidence in their Spiritual Relations. 2 Use of Instruction: If every one
must have a faith of his own, then every one must have a Minister of their own.
3 Use of Exhortation: To prove our own selves, and so to prove our own faith.
Quest. VI.

When and how long the just lives by faith?

Answ.

No time is specified, to include All time.

The just lives by his faith All his life, and in every part of his life. The
Question is double: When? respects the season: How long? the continuance.

The season of living by Faith, has respect either 1 To the parts of Time.
Which are three: Time Past, Present, and to Come: In all which the just lives
by faith. 2 To the Adjuncts of Time.


These are especially two:

Prosperity and Adversity: Good and evil days.

First, For Prosperity, the Just lives by Faith, 1 In seeking or obtaining of
it, wherein Faith directs, 1 In the right order and seeking of it. 2 In the
right measure. 3 In the right means.



Which are two: 1 Diligence in a lawful Calling. 2 Not trusting to our own
Diligence, but Gods Promise to the diligent.


2 In using Prosperity aright, wherein Faith works, 1 In causing a holy
Diffidence in our selves and the Creature, lest we should by Pride and Security
deny God, or forget him. 2 It raises a holy humble confidence in God, so that a
Believer lives upon him, when he most abounds in the Creature. 3 It causes the
Believer not to serve himself or his lusts, but the Donor, with his full
estate. 4 Faith lays out earthly treasure so Spiritual advantages, Luke 16.9.
3 In being willing to part with a prosperous state.
1 Use Reproves those who live not by Faith in prosperity, in which estate we
are most beset with Temptations. 2 Use, Examine whether you live by faith in
prosperity.
Secondly, In Adversary the just lives by Faith.

Where you have these four particulars: 1 That it is so. 2 In what things
living by faith then consists. 3 In what manner he does so live. 4 By what
Means.


Then follows Application.

Next to the Conquering of those Adversities, which happen to Believers in the
course of their life: That they live the Life of Faith in Death, comes now to
be treated of.

The Life of Faith in Death.

Wherein you have these particulars handled: 1 That Faith is a godly man's life
at the time of his death, as appears by the living speeches of dying men. 2 Six
Reasons why Believers do all of them die in faith, Heb. 11.13. 3 Seven Uses
drawn from the perpetual usefulness of faith in all estates; especially, that
the just live by it in Adversity and Death.


Quest. VII.

What Life is that which the Just lives by his Faith?

Answ.

All kind of Life, which may truly be called Life.

First, Natural Life, a Saint lives this by Faith, 1 In the very act of living:
where is showed, the different grounds upon which believers and unbelievers
enjoy this Natural Life. 2 In the Conservation of Life: They use not the same
means in the same manner, for maintaining of Natural Life. 3 In the
Preservation of Life from such things as are destructive. 4 In the Prolongation
of Life, the Just live by Faith. 5 In ordering aright all the natural and civil
actions of life. 6 In respect of the Comforts and Blessings of a Natural Life.
Instances of particulars, for the obtaining of which, and in the managing of
which, a Saint lives by Faith: 1 Wealth: 2 Health. 3 Peace. 4 Good success. 5
Good Name. 6 Posterity. 7 Single Estate, and Marriage.
7 In the valuation of Natural Life. Faith teaches Neither to under-value Life.
Faith teaches Nor to overvalue Life.



USES.

1 Reproof, to those who say they trust God for Eternal Life, and yet cannot
trust in him for this Temporal Life, and the things of it. 2 Use of
Exhortation, to live by faith in respect of this Life Natural, seeing believers
hold these things not only by common Providence, but by Promise also from God,
so far as is needful for them.
This is twofold: Spiritual Life lived by Faith. Either the Life of
Justification. Or the Life of Sanctification. Life of Faith in Justification.


Wherein these Particulars are opened: 1 Wherein the Nature of Justification
consists. 2 How does the Just live by Faith the Life of Justification.


This is declared in three respects: 1 They live by Faith, for the first act of
God in justifying a sinner; or which is all one, for their being put into a
justified state, which flows from their immediate union with Christ. Four ways
Faith disposes the Soul for this state. 2 How Faith acts for the continuance of
Justification, and renewing of pardon. 3 The Just lives by faith for the
assurance of being justified. Faith is acted five ways, in order to such an
assurance.
1 In moving a man to desire more faith. 2 In using and embracing such means
which may assure. 3 In the trial of assurance it self, whether sound or false.
4 In answering all Objections and Doubts which cloud assurance. 5 In
expectation that assurance shall be given, upon the diligent and humble sincere
use of means.


All these Particulars are largely insisted on, together with diverse Uses,
drawn from this Life of Faith in Justification, especially Examination, whether
we be in a justified state. Signs thereof. As also Motives to labor for this
blessed estate, and the assurance of it. Means how to get assurance that we are
justified, and how we may live by Faith, till we obtain such assurance.

The Life of Faith in Sanctification; or Renovation.

Resolution of four Quaeres.

1 Whether there be any such life in a Christian, distinct from the
Sanctification which is in Christ himself, asserted. 2 What it is, and wherein
it consists. Difference 'twixt Morality and Sanctification. 3 How and by what
means it is wrought in the Soul. Acts of faith in it. When Spiritual actions
flow from Faith in Christ. 4 Why Sanctification is necessary in all justified
persons. Means which Faith Uses to promote Sanctification.
The Life of Faith in Fructification.

How faith has influence into Fructification, six ways.

The Uses of Faiths influence into Renovation and Fructification.

1 Examination of the Truth of Faith. 2 Reproof of Carnal Professors. 3
Apology against Papists. 4 Exhortation to Faith, as the root of Sanctity and
fruitfulness.
Motives to live by Faith the Life of Sanctification.

Motives to act Faith for fruitfulness in season.

The Life of Faith in Mortification.

1 How Faith proceeds in the Mortification of Sin. 2 Why Faith will have Sin to
be mortified.
1 Use of Information, in three Particulars. 2 Marks of true Mortification.
Some Objections answered, and a Case stated. 3 Use of Conviction and Reproof,
to seven sorts. 4 Use of Exhortation, to mortify Sin. Motives and Means. 5 Use
of Comfort, against the vigor and rigor of Sin.
The Life of Faith in Vivification.

Wherein two things demonstrated by way of Explication: 1 Gods Children are
subject to deadness: What are the Causes, Kinds and Degrees of it. 2 Saints
recover by Faith out of deadness: Four Reasons of it, and how Faith acts in
such recovery.


Four Arguments of Faith to quicken under deadness. Use of the Life of
Vivification.

1 of Reproof. 2 of Exhortation. Eight Motives to Vivification. Six Means of
Quickening.
3 Trial of true Faith in Vivifying. Four Signs of inlivening living Acts.

The Life of Faith in Augmentation.

Two Propositions: 1 The Just live the Life of Augmentation. Four Reasons of
Spiritual growth. 2 Augmentation is by Faith. Four Reasons why Faith has an
influence into it.


USES.

1 Information about spiritual growth, in four respects. 2 Reproof of five
sorts of men. 3 Examination. Five signs of spiritual growth. What is the
increase of God, ( Col. 2.18, 19.) ^ig. four things. Cases of Conscience
stated, about growth.
4 Humiliation for small growth. 5 Thankfulness for growth. 6 Exhortation to
growth. Six Motives to growth. Nine Means of growth. Seven Impediments of
growth.
7 Comfort at small beginnings in Grace. 8 Direction, how strong grown
Christians should behave themselves toward the weak.
The Life of Faith in Perseverance.

Two Proposositions: 1 The Just does persevere. 2 Perseverance is by virtue of
Faith. Six Reasons why the Just shall persevere. Three Reasons why Perseverance
is by Faith.



USES.

1 Confutation of the Doctrine of falling from Grace. Five respects, in which
there may be falling away. Seven things from which the Elect can never fall.
Seven Objections against Perseverance, answered.
2 Use, Information about assurance of Salvation. 3 Use, Labor for persevere.
4 Use, Labor for Perseverance. Six Motives to Perseverance. Seven Means of
Perseverance.
5 Use, Examination of the Truth of Faith, by its persevering. How far a
hypocrite may go, in six respects. Six Particulars, wherein hypocrites come
short.
6 Use, of Thankfulness for Perseverance. 7 Use, of Encouragement to persevere
amidst all discouragements. Five main Discouragements removed by Faith. Faiths
Triumph over fear of Divine desertion. God may forsake his people, in five
respects: yet it is but gradual and momentary, not total and final. Reasons of
Gods forsaking his people. 1 For prevention of Evil, two ways. 2 For
Confirmation in Good, five ways.


The Life of Faith in Consolation.

Two Propositions stated: 1 That the Just lives the Life of Consolation. 2 That
he lives this Life by Faith.


Four Reasons why the Lord will have the Just live comfortably.

Six Reasons why Consolation comes by Faith.

Faith fetches in Comfort from the Trial and Evidence of the Truth of Grace.

Objections against Assurance of Divine Love, inferred from Marks and Signs of
true Grace, answered.

It is a preposterous course to judge of our interest in Divine Love by our
Comforts, before we have tried the sincerity of our Graces.

Differences of Regenerating Grace from Common.

Uses of the Life of Consolation in Believers.

1 Use, Information, in five Particulars. 1 Of the cause of sadness in the
faithful. 2 Unregenerate souls are uncomfortable souls. 3 Religious Life, is
the only comfortable Life. Objection against this, That the Saints walk sadly,
answered. Where the Rise of the Saints heaviness is discovered in three general
Causes. The first is taken from themselves, in five particulars. The second
from Satan. The third from God himself, who eclipses his Peoples Comforts, for
three Reasons.
4 Information, what to desire for our best friends. 5 Information, what great
happiness attends the end of Saints in death.
2 Use, of Reproof. 1 Of mis-judging the Life of the faithful. 2 Of Papists,
who rob of Comfort, while of Faith. 3 Of such who fetch Comfort from Sense. 4
Of such who refuse Comfort upon the Promises. 5 Of such who go for Comfort to
false Prophets.
3 Use of Exhortation, To live this life of spiritual comfort. 1 Three Motives:
Under the third is set forth ten Properties, wherein a believers joy excels all
natural worldly sinful joy. 2 Means to get and maintain spiritual Joy. Faith is
acted seven ways for the increase of Joy.

Having seen how the Just live by Faith in regard of Spiritual Life: It remains
to show, how they live by Faith in regard of Eternal Life.

The Work of Faith about Eternal Life.

Faith assures of three things about Eternal Life.

1 That there is an Eternal Life. This Faith makes good by Scripture, and five
Reasons flowing by necessary Consequence from Scripture. 2 Faith informs a
Believer what the happiness of Eternal Life is, and wherein it consists; viz.
In the perfect Vision of God, which causes perfect transformation in perfect
Knowledge, Love, Obedience, Joy: which perfect transformation causes perfect
Satisfaction, which Satisfaction consists privatively in a fivefold freedom
from whatever may annoy or interrupt the Joy of glorified Saints positively, in
the possessing of whatever good can be desired to make up complete Joy and
Satisfaction, which consists in a fourfold fullness of the Subject in glory, as
also in the fullness of the Object, viz. The beatifical Vision of God. 3 Faith
assures a Believer of his peculiar interest in Eternal Life, Under which Head
is shown,
How Faith assures a Believer of his particular interest in Eternal Life.

This it does six ways* all which are largely handled.

Five Reasons, why Believers are kept out of possession of heaven so long,
after assurance of their interest in Eternal Life.

Uses of living by Faith in order to Eternal life.

1 Use, Confutation of such who deny Eternal Life, both in respect of the Soul
at present, and of the Body after the Resurrection. Five proofs of Eternal Life.
2 Use, Reproof to five sorts of persons. 1 To such as complain that Religion
is a fruitless Profession. 2 To such as despair, in stead of acting Faith for
Eternal Life. 3 To such as exercise their fancy more than faith, concerning
Eternal Life: where vain curiosity in moving Questions about the state of
glory, rather than a due care to make sure an interest in it, is condemned. 4
To such who have an interest in Eternal Life, but do not act faith to the
improvement of that interest. 5 To such who mind Earth for a portion, more
than Eternal Glory.
3 Use, Examination of Faith in respect of Life Eternal, Whether we believe
aright, that there is such a state, and that we have an interest in it. 1 Sign.
By our carriage in Life, Whether our Affections, Meditations, Speeches and
Actions be heavenly, such as suit such an inheritance. 2 Sign. By our respect
which we bear to Death; viz. as a passage to Eternal Life; as a conquered
Enemy. Four Degrees of Christ's Conquest over Death for all his Question stated,
Whether godly persons may not be afraid to die, and unfit to die?

4 Use, Exhortation, To live by Faith in respect of Eternal Life. Five Motives
to get assurance of Eternal Life. Four Means to assure of Eternal Life.
5 Use, Comfort and Encouragement against the evils and temptations of this
present life, drawn from the nature of our heavenly life: where hope or
assurance of heaven is demonstrated, to bear up the heart under adversity, and
to preserve the Souls integrity under temptations of Prosperity. 6 Use,
Admiration and Thankfulness for our heavenly life. To excite to this, the
excellency of heaven is set out five ways: 1 By the excellent Names or Titles
given to it. 2 By the excellent Properties of it, which are four. 3 By the
excellent Price given for it. 4 By the excellent Causes of it. 5 By the
excellent Effects of it.

Thankfulness for Eternal life demonstrated, two ways.

Reasons for living by Faith.

The Eighth General Head or Quaere concerning the Life of Faith; viz.

What are the Reasons why God will have the just to live by Faith, and why a
Christian should be willing thus to live?

First sort of Reasons, taken from a Believers Condition in the flesh. This is
set out in five particulars: 1 Absence from the Lord. 2 Distance of time 'twixt
the Promise and Performance. 3 The necessity of keeping the Saints humble. 4
Saints present state of Imprfection: for whose direction and support, the Word
and the Ministry of it is afforded. Question herestated, concerning the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures. Arguments of four sorts to prove it.
5 Past Experiences of Gods faithfulness in fulfilling his Promises, are given
for a firm encouragement to exercise future Faith. Three Grounds to expect that
God will make good the same Promises for time to come.


Second sort of Reasons for living by Faith; viz. The Relation betwixt Christ
and Believers.

1 Relation, Christ is the Fountain of all Grace; of whose fullness we receive
only by Faith. 2 Relation, Christ is our Lord, and we cannot honor him
without Faith.
Faith honors the Grace, Faithfulness, and Power of God.

Third sort of Reasons, taken from the nature and use of Faith.

1 It is our livelihood, with the difference of Faith under both Covenants. 2
We first fell away from God by unbelief, therefore he will recover his honor
in the way of believing. 3 That Salvation may be on free and sure grounds. The
general Uses drawn from the Life of Faith.
1 Use, Information, in seven Particulars. 1 The happy condition of Believers.
They have comfort in six respects. 2 The misery of unbelievers, in six
respects. 3 The Reason of Satan's enmity against Faith. 4 The difference 'twixt
the Life of Christ, and that of a Believer. 5 Why so many remain spiritually
dead. 6 There cannot be any thing of Christ, or of Spiritual life in the
Creature, before Faith: As Christ and life, so Faith and life come both
together. 7 What is the choice work of a Minister.
2 Use, of Reproof to three sorts. 1 Such who live upon other things, in stead
of living by Faith; as namely, their Sins, Pleasures, Creatures, Riches,
Friends; or upon themselves, either sinful Self, natural Self, artificial Self,
moral Self, religious Self, These particulars are enlarge. 2 Such who profess
Faith, but live not by it. 3 Such as act not their Whether 1. In Actions. 2.
Conditions. 3. Elections.
3 Use, of Examination. 1 For Trial of persons, whether we be just, and in a
state of spiritual life, or no? Diverse Marks of true Faith from feigned. 2 For
Trial of all Doctrines and Religions, whether they be true or false: Where
living by Faith is demonstrated to be the Touchstone of them.
4 Use, of Thankfulness for Faith. Five Grounds or Arguments, to provoke
Believers to Thankfulness for Faith.
1 It is Gods gift. 2 Its necessary to the very Being of a Christian. 3 Such a
gift as none else can give: where there are five Wonders of Faith spoken unto.
4 Faith is a most precious Gift. Three things very precious. The preciousness
of Faith in four particulars. 5 The rarity or scarcity of Faith.
5 Use, Humiliation for Unbelief. The evil of Unbelief is set forth in 7
Particulars.
1 It dishonours God. 2 It grives the Holy Spirit. 3 It pleases the Devil. 4 It
is the Mother-Sin. The Brood of Unbelief. 1 Ignorance. 2 Security. 3
Worldliness. 4 Hypocrisy. 5 Heresy. 6 Apostasy. 7 Atheism.
5 Unbelief is a Stepmother to Grace. 6 Unbelief is the Nurse of Sin. 7
Judgments on Unbelievers.
6 Use, of Exhortation: wherein four Branches. 1 Branch, Exhort. To get Faith:
where Faith is proved to be the wisest Purchase, and Unbelief the greatest
Self-murder.

The excellencies of Believing: which contains, 1 Strength. 2 Wisdom. 3 Riches.
4 Beauty. 5 Honor. 6 Faith honors God. 7 Dead without Faith. 8 Faith makes to
prosper.


Q: How shall we get Faith?

Here are Means Negative and Positive prescribed.

Negative means to get faith, or the removal of the Impediments of faith.
Means Negative, is the removal of the Impediments of Faith, which are these: 1
Self. 2 Satan. 3 The World. 4 Gods hardening: where hardness of heart is treated
of, and Gods Justice justified in hardening some sinners. Relief is prescribed
to all four. 5 General Impediment contains seven mixed Impediments of Faith;
viz. 1 False Trust. 2 Limiting of God. 3 Harboring some Lust. 4 Our own
Unworthiness pleaded against the Promise. 5 Laying too much stress on the depth
of Humiliation. 6 Want of feeling. 7 Doubt of Election. To all these,
particular Cures are applied.
6 General Impediment of Faith; viz. Neglect of the Means which should work
Faith, or beget it. Five Causes of the neglect of Means.
1 Prejudice quarrels the Means of Faith. 2 Pride contemns the Means. 3 Sloth
recoils from the Means. 4 Presumption postdates the use of Means. 5 Despodency
quits and casts off the use. To all which, Cures are applied.

7 General Impediment of Faith viz. Supposition of having Faith already, when
it is nothing so.


Differences 'twixt Presumption and true Faith.

1 In the Conception: 2 In the Birth: 3 In the Growth: 4 In the Fruit.

The second Branch of false Supposition, is, That we have not Faith, when we
have it. This hinders the actings ad increasings of Faith.

Four Corollaries or Conclusions from the difficulty of Believing.

1 The Word of God: Positive means for obtaining of Faith.
Every Word of God is an object of Faith, especially the Promise. How the
Spirit convinces of sin. The method of converting Grace. Six Reasons, why
Humiliation must go before Faith. Humility appears in all the periods of Grace.
Direction to humbled sinners, how to apply Promises. 2 Means of begetting
Faith, is Prayer. Question stated, Whether a natural man ought ta pray? 3
Means, Good Society. 4 Means, Meditation on Gods Name. 5 Means, Sight of
Treasure in Christ. 6 Means, Diligence in the use of Means: which signify
three things.
2 Branch of Exhortation, To keep Faith. Where is showed,
The general usefulness of Faith. Reasons why we should look well to the
keeping of it. 1 Reas. The Benefit of keeping Faith. 2 Reas. The Enemies who
opposite it. 1 Corruption. 2 Temptation. 3 Troubles.

3 Reas. It is the glory of a Christian to be found in the Faith at Christ's
appearing.

Means of preserving Faith.
1 Soundness. 2 Trial of it. 3 Love of the Truth. 4 A good Conscience. 5 A
right Bottom. 6 Commit it to God. 7 Prayer for establishment with Gods free
Spirit.
What the free Spirit of God establishes.

How the free Spirit of God establishes.

3 Branch of Exhortation, viz. To act Faith, and to live by it. Six Motives to
act and exercise Faith. Diverse Helps for the acting of Faith.


4 Branch of Exhortation, viz. To increase the stock of Faith. Six Motives to
increase in Faith. Five Signs of a weak Faith. Seven Means for the increasing
of Faith.


Conclusive Sermons on Dan. 12.3.
An Appendix, concerning the Converting of others to the Faith.

Doctrine.

The Conversion of Souls to the Faith, as it is the most excellent Work: so it
shall certainly be crowned with the most excellent Reward.

Explication twofold: 1 It is the most excellent Work. Seven Reasons to prove
this, handled largely. 2 It shall have the most excellent Reward.


USES.

1 Information, of the Dignity of the Ministry. 2 Reproof, to four sorts of
persons. 3 Exhortation, to Convert Souls. This is directed in general to All:
but in special to Ministers. Eight Motives to quicken converted ones, to labor
to Convert others. Eight Means, whereby the Conversion of Souls may be promoted.
4 Exhortation to Ministers, to preach in a Soul-saving way. 5 Exhortation to
the People: 1 To be willing to be wrought upon. 2 To attend upon such Means as
are proper.
6 Use of Thankfulness: 1 If we our selves are Converted. 2 If any by our Means
be Converted. Seven Marks of sound Conversion.
7 Use, of Comfort to the Promoters of others Conversion, in the midst of
Opposition and Reproach.
The EPILOGUE.

Courteous Reader,
BE pleased (before thou read this Treatise) to correct with thy Pen the
following mistakes in printing, that the sense of the Author may not be
misrepresented.

ERRATA in the Titles of the Pages.
Page 230. read Bawkers of Impediments. Page 417. r. Life of Faith in the midst
of Death. Page 429. r. Love of Lust. Page 510. r. Contrariety uniting in the
Unbelievers ruin.
ERRATA in the Body of the Book. PAge 4. Line 5. read, without God. p. 9. l.
31. r. all comforts. p. 12. l. 34. r. who give p. 16. l. 30. r. grace p. 17. l.
14. r. make p. 24. l. 26. r. delights p. 40. l. 31. r. this p. 43. l. 18. r.
about it p. 44. l. 28. r. us p. 51. l. 11. for And r. Cured p. 57. l. 26. r.
sees p. 77. l. 1. r. they have p. 100. r. unaccustomed p. 106. l. 34. r. our
hands are taken off from our own righteousness p. 121. l. 22. r. and says, O
that p. 126. l. 9 r. us l. 11. r. but if p. 134. l. 18. r. glorifying l. 27. r.
imputed p. 141. marg. r. examination p. 148. l. 5. add obtain p. 150. l. 4.
add the life of p. 174. l. 25. r. revive p. 198. l. 29. r. against which p.
198. l. 15. r. to exercise their common graces p. 217. l. 18. r. Rome be not l.
19. r. is p. 118. l. 21. r. worm p. 219. l. 7. r. it p. 219. marg. r. 2 Peter
3.18. p. 257 l. 12. r. religio p. 264. l. 26. r. be^al p. 266 l. 22. r. in the
womb p. 272. l. 4. r. place p. 281. l. 13. r. 1 Thessalonians. 3.8. p. 288. l. 34. r.
uncomfortable p. 292 l. 25. r. and shall be sure of heaven p. 297. l. 13. r.
one side p. 300. l. 19. 3. 1 John 3. 14. p. 301. l. 34. r. Genesis 8. p. 301. l.
27. r. act of faith which is the testimony p. 307 l. r. fled for refuge p. 313.
l. 7. r. 1 John 1.7. l. 30. r. Gal. 5. p 315. l. 20. r. of the Lord l. 33. r.
6, and 7. p. 316. l. 9. r. all l. 34. r. cases p. 324. l. 13. r. mad man p.
330. l. 14. r. possess p. 333. l. 23. r. Psa. 2.11. p. 335. l. last, r. Luke
16. ult. p. 341. l. 31. r. 2 Cor. 5.1. p. 363. marg 1. Phil. 1. p. 367. marg.
r. 1 John 3. p. 367. l. last but l. 4. add is p. 405. l. 26. r. Luke 1.70. p,
433. l. 6. r. breadth p. 429. l. 15. r. Job 20.12. p. 448. l. 13. r. heart-tied
p. 470, l. 21. r. every p 475. l. 17. r. that he p. 475 l. 25. r replied p.
476. l. 2. r guidance l. 17. r special l. 25. r stand in p. 490. mar. r Mat.
7.23 p. 424. l. 34 r purified p. 505. l. 8. r all l. last, r. remove p. 505. l.
24. r our p. 510. l. 22. r wait it ^ut to the last, Man l. 31. r swarve p. 518.
l. 16. r the Spirit p. 521. l. 34. r believe, and whatever p. 531. l. 12. r
through p. 539. l. last, r at death p. 357 repeated, should be 145 and 544
repeated, should be 552 line 31. r wind p. 578. l. 5. r ^^rse p. 581. l. 11 for
says, r both p. 602. l. 8. r the same.

HABAKKUK. 2.4. Behold his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him; but
the just shall live by his Faith.
IN these words is set down a clear Antithesis or opposition of two sorts viz.
Believers, and unbeleevers. In both which we have their 1. Description. 2.
Condition.

1. Their Description. First, An Unbleever is a proud man; A Believer is an
humble man. 2. An Unbeleever lives by sense; A Believer by faith.

2. Their condition. The one is not right; the other is. The Unbeleever is not
right, either in point of duty, or in point of safety; The Believer is right in
both.

In the words consider, 1. the note of Attention. Behold -- It is a thing
worthy our best observation. 2. The thing to be attended to: His soul is not
right in him; but the just lives by his faith.

make it the more full. His soul, quae elata est, says one. Lifted up, as into
a Tower. Psalm. 24.4. who has not lifted up his soul to vanity. 2. Others read
it, quae ebullat; that swells like a bubble, and so at last breaks in sunder.
3. Others, quae se subduxerit, ((...)) (as the 70) that withdrawes it self. And
to the Apostle cites it, Heb. 10.22. If any man draw back, etc. 4. quae
incredula est, says a 4th. The unbeleeving soul is not right. So, the Chaldee
Bible in a paraphrastical manenr expresses it thus: Ecce impii, etc. Behold
the wicked say in their heart, these things shall never come to pass; But the
just shall ba made strong in the truth of God

All these readings do not cross, but confirm one another. For he that is
lifted up, his soul does swell like a bubble, (he is full of aerie and empty
conceits;) he that is thus swollen is a proud man, he that is so proud is an
unbeleever, whoever is an unbeleever, he withdraws himself (first from God's
service, then from God's protection) and by consequence, his soul is not right
in him.

The Apostle Heb. 10. speaks in the person of God, -- My soul shall have no
pleasure in him. But that is all one too; For Gods soul has no pleasure in
him, whose soul is not upright in himself.

So then, non est recta, His soul is not right, Not right in point of Duty. For
we cannot trust to God, and trust to other things too. 2. Not right in point of
Safety; For if God be a rock of confidence, then he that makes other things his
confidence, (does as between two stools.) between two rocks he makes
shipwreck. His soul within, his life without is not right i.e. quiet, firm, and
composed, as the Hebraisme signifies; but is unquiet, uneven, and unequal. As a
ship without anchour or ballast; for want of faith, his life is miserable and
inconstant.

Observe here. How Pride and Unbleef; Humility and Faith are coupled together.
A proud soul is ever an unbeleeving soul; an humble soul is ever a faithful
soul. For here, A soul lifted up is opposed to a believing soul. Psalm. 73.6.
Understand it, 1. Of Pride in the Dominion; when a man is proud of his pride,
and wears it as a chain. Otherwise it may be, where it is, as a pair of
fetters. 2. Of Pride also in the degrees; the more pride the less faith, See
Jer. 13.15. Jer. 43.2 and 44.10. Habak. 2.5, etc.

other; and so to abhor both. We think it a small thing to admire our selves
and the creature, but in a same act there is a departing from the Lord, by
unbelief, Jer. 17.5. On the other side, we think it a small matter, not to
believe; we think it a piece of humility, (O I am unworthy to believe!) but
indeed it is a piece of pride. Behold thy soul is not right.



Observe Secondly. How his soul that is lifted up is not right.

1. Not right in point of Duty. It is an unbeleeving soul; that withdraws from
Gods precepts, promises and threatenings. From his precepts. Jer. 43.2. -- Thou
speak falsely, say they, the Lord has not sent thee. Jer. 44.15.16. -- As
for the word thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not
hearken unto thee, etc. From his promise and threatenings. Jer. 42.7, 8. God
promises (there) safety, if they tarry in Judea; if they go into Egypt, he
threathens destruction: but the proud persons regard neither. Thus the proud
soul is not right in point of Duty.

right in point of Safety. Unbelief makes the heart not right.
1. Their hearts are unquiet within. Isa. 7.2, etc. The heart of Ahaz and of
his people were moved, as the trees of the wood. And the Prophet tells them, If
ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established. And Isa. 57.20. The
wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest.

Reas. 1. Because all creature-helps with God are lying vanities. Jonah 28.
Therefore as the soul is lifted up in trusting to them: so it must needs be
cast down as much when the creature fails them. Nahael is merry, and dead.
Haman proud and dejected. Ahitophel crafty and simple.

2 Because their counsels vary, as the creatures in which they trust vary. The
fool changes, as the moon. He grounds his opinion, his practice upon
correspondence with the creature, or upon contingent events, therefore is
unstable in all his ways. Jam. 1.
But the heart of the just is fixed, trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 112.

3. Because the conscience smites. The Lord says. Jer. 17.5. Cursed be the man
that makes flesh his arm, etc. I have trusted, thinks he, in this and that,
and therefore God is angry. His heart, as the tossed Sea, casts up, such mire
and dirt, Isa 57.

4. Because he wants his anchor to keep him steady. -- which hope we have as an
anchor sure and steadfast. Heb 6.19. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing
by prayer, etc. and the peace of God shall keep your hearts, Phil. 4.6.7. Here
is the true anchor-hold; but the unbeleever cannot lay hold on it, go.

2. Unbelief makes their condition not right.
2 As their hearts are unquiet, so their condition is very unstable and
tottering. His heart is not right, and his estate is not right. -- As a bowing
wall and tottering hedge. Psalm. 62.3. His life and livelihood is very
uncertain. Therefore a proud man (and in particular Nebuchadnezar) is compared
to a drunkard that reels to and fro. He is a drunkard, drunk with pride, Hab. 2.
and God makes him drunk with judgments. The builders of Babel had their souls
lifted up, so high as if they meant to overtop Gods Judgments, but they and
their Tower together fall into confusion. The soul of Pharaoh was lifted up,
who is the Lord, says he, etc. but it was not right in him. For this cause
have I raised thee up, etc. Exodus 9 16. The soul of Goliath was lifted up, he
defied the armies of Israel, but David coming in the name of the Lord, the
Captain of Israel, slew him with a sling and a stone. 1 Samuel 17. The soul of
Amaziah was lifted up, but to his own destruction. 2 Chronicles. 15.19. The soul of
Haman was lifted up. Hest. 3.6. but he was lifted up as high on the gallows,
as before he was in his own conceit. cap. 7.10. So the souls of the Israelites,
Isa. 9.9, and 11. of Nebuchadnezar. Dan. 4.30. of Belshazar. Dan 5.1. of the
rich fool. Luke 12. But they were not right; you read what befell them.

Reas. 1. Because of God's threatenings. Reasons.
Pride shall have a fall. Prove. 18.12. Isa. 2.11. Ezech. 31.10. Exodus 18.11.

2. Because God has said, in his own strength no man shall be strong. 1 Samuel
2.8. Nothing weaker then Pride; nothing stronger then Humility. Prove. 3.5, 6.
As the thunder delights to melt the sword and spare the scabbard, to rend the
heart of Oaks and spare the rind: so God, to rent the caul of the heart of
proud persons, Hos. 13.8. Psalm. 147.3.
and to bind up the broken heart.



Pride. Sinful confidence.


1. As we love our selves, souls, safety, beware of Pride. whether 1. inward
pride of heart. Prove. 5.6. The proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord. or
2. outward pride of men, whose glory is their shame. As pride of the eyes. Isa.
10.15. -- proud looks. The first of seven abominations is a proud look. Prove.
6.17. Pride of the tongue. Psalm. 12.3. The Lord shall cut out the tongue that
speaks proud things. Psalm. 17.10 Their tongue speaks proudly* ver. 13. Up
Lord disappoint him. Pride of head and feet; and all parts from top to toe.
Threatened. Isa. 3.16.17. Pride of gesture and apparel. ibid. ver. 25.

2. Beware of sinful Confidence the daughter of Pride. Whether Confidence, 1.
in our selves, in parts and gifts. Ezekiel. 28.3 Prove. 21.30. No wisdom nor
counsel against the Lord, or in strength. Jer. 9.23. Let no man glory, etc. or
in works and duties. Gal. 3 11. Deuteronomy. 9.4. Or, 2. Confidence in the creature,
as, Riches. Psalm. 40.6. Prove. 11.4. Favor of great men. Psalm. 118 8. Armor
and ammunition. Isa. 22.8, etc. Prove. 21.31. Psalm. 33.16. Devil and his
instruments. 1 Samuel 28.4. Isa. 28.19.

-- But the Just shall live by his Faith. AS God speaks words of death in the
threatenings, which go to the hearts of wicked men: so he speaks words of
life, Hos. 6.5.
in the promises, which go to the hearts of Gods people to revive them. But the
just, etc.

From the opposition of this proposition to the former might be hinted a
twofold observation.

1. As every Believer is a just person: so every Unbeliever is an unjust person.

2. As every Believer is in a state of life: so every Unbeliever is in a dead
condition. But we shall content our selves with two conclusions from the words,
unto which other things will be reducible in the handling of them.

D. 1. God's people are in a state of life, yea they are in a state of life by
way of eminency; they are partakers of the best life. D. 2. What ever life the
just lives (in a more excellent manner then other men) he lives that life by
virtue of his faith.
Object. But it may be objected; It is manifest that the Prophet here speaks of
temporal deliverance from the Caldeans, why then should we carry the words in a
spiritual sense, of the life of grace?

Answ. There are good reasons for it.

1 As the same blood of Christ purchased a sanctified use of temporal mercies,
as well as of spiritual: so the same faith that lays hold on the one, layth
hold on the other. Matthew. 6.
A man must first seek Gods Kingdom, before he can have a sanctified use of
temporal mercies. He must first lay hold on Christ by faith before he can lay
hold on temporal deliverances in him. Romans 8.32. God first gives us his Son,
and then with him all things. The same faith that teaches us to pray, Give us
this day our daily bread; teaches us also to pray, Forgive us our trespasses.

2 Because the holy Ghost, who is the best Interpreter of all, gives this
Interpretation of the text. Whereas a man might say, It Is not clear to me that
the Prophet Habakkuk did mean any other living by faith, than that which is
concerning this present and temporal life: yes, says the Apostle, it is
evident the words are to be understood in the largest latitude, so as to
comprehe^d the life of grace also, the life of justification. Gal. 3.11. But
that no man is justified by the works of the Law in the sight of God, it is
evident, (and here it is evident.) Even by this testimony of the Prophet
Habakkuk) For the just shall live by faith.

viz. Gods people are in a state of life by way of eminency. But the just shall
live --

The Doctrine arises clearly from the opposition, But, etc. q.d. The
unbeleever lives not; or if he does live, it is a life of unquietness and full
of danger. (For he is a sentenced man by the judgment of God's mouth, and shall
ere long be executed by the judgment of his hand.) And therefore his soul is
not right in him; but the life of a Believer is full of safety, full of peace,
and that in the worst times, before the vision be fulfilled. v. 3. Besides that
the one lives but by sense, the other by faith; the one lives upon his pride
and self-confidence, but the other upon his humble dependence; the one lives
upon creatures, the other upon God; the one a natural, the other a spiritu^l
life. Therefore it is a more excellent life. An unbeleever indeed has a kind
of life, but it is not worth the name of life. There Is defect in his very soul,
which should give life to all the rest. But the just shall live. If you would
speak of life, to the life, it is here to be found and no where else The
unbeleevers's life being like a shadow, is but a shadow of life; as the Apostle
Paul speaks of those wanton widows that live in pleasure, they are dead while
they live. 1 Timothy 5.6 They are quasi viventes, but vere mortuae; as living, but
dead. But the just in the greatest pressures are quasi morientes, but vere
viventes; -- as dying and behold we live. 2 Cor. 6.9.

One life is more excellent then another either in the The excellency of the
life of Gods people in 7 things.
1. Nature and kind of it. 2. Fountain and Principle. 3. Comforts of it. 4
Measure. 5 Safety and security. 6. Continuance 7. End of it.


God's people live a more excellent life in all these respects. 1. The kind of
their life.


First, In regard of the kind of life. It Is spiritual Natural life has indeed
an excellency in it, but it is common. The spiritual life of grace is peculiar
to God's peculiar people, even to such, whose names are written in the book of
life This life consists in the union to, and communion of the soul with God. 1 John 1.3. And truly our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus
Christ. Called 2 Pet. 1.4. a participation of the Divine nature. and Ephesians. 4.24.
conformity to Gods image in righteousness and holiness; and is therefore, the
life of God. It Is a gracious, it is a glorious life, and therefore must needs be
excellent in the nature of it; it is something indeed to live, if it be but the
life of a plant; more, to live the live of a beast* better then that, to live
the life of a man or angel; But best of all to live the life of God.

Secondly, In regard of the fountain and principle of it; 2. The principle of
their life.
which is Christ as Mediator. True he is the Light that lightneth every one
that comes into the world. Joh. 1. But as Mediator, he is the Fountain of life
only to his own people. Joh. 6 57. As the living Father has sent me, and I
live by the Father; so he that eats me even he shall live by me. Wherefore
Christ is said to be our life. Col. 3 4. i. e. the fountain and principle of
it. An excellent life therefore it must needs be, which has such a spring to
feed it. Psalm. 36.9. With thee is the Fountain of life, and in thy light shall
we see light.

Thirdly, In regard of the Comforts of it. 3. The Comforts of their life.
And indeed comfort is the life of life. Not to live, but to live comfortably
is life indeed. A life under discomforts is no better then death, The Caldean
be^ots himself. The Just shall live comfortably by his faith.
nay death is better then that and preferred before it The life of a Christian
is most comfortable, whatsoever the world and devil would whisper into our
ears; They would persuade a man, when once he turns to God, Farewell and
comforts. But no such matter. Thou shall not loose thy delights but only
exchange them, for the better. Mic. 6.
Thou rejoycedst before in proserity at the sound of the Harp and the Violl in
thy feasts; But now thou art able to rejoice in adversity at the sound of the
Drum, and noise of War. The truth is, the worst of a Believers life, is
better then the best of a natural man's life: and Moses chose it rather. 1 Pet.
4. 2 Cor. 3.
Heb. 11. And if his discomforts be such what are his comforts? If in
sufferings a glory rests on them, how must their comforts needs exceed in
glory? Only none knows them but they that taste them. O taste and see! Psalm.
34.8. A Straenger shall not intermeddle with this joy. Prove. 14.10 Therefore
it is an excellent life for the comforts of it. And if they want at any time
earthly comforts, they have a Comforter sent from Heaven instead of all. Joh.
14.


4. Measure of it.
Fourthly, In regard of the measure of it. A man may live indeed if he have but
so much as will keep life and soul together; The Caldean shall decay, the Just
shall live.
but there is little comfort in that. We account that an excellent life, when a
man is full of spirit (as we say) and full of life, such a one is a alive, and
alive's like. Yet this life will decay; the most spiritful man in the world,
his heart will fail him; the ^out-hearted must sleep their sleep. But herein is
the excellency of the life, Prove. 4.18.
we have from Christ; it is ever on the increasing hand. The Sun of
righteousness (the Fountain of their life) is ever rising upon them higher and
higher, but never setting. He came to give life, and that more abundantly as it
is, Joh. 10.10. Contrary to the nature of other life, they have more vigor and
spirit, and consequently bring forth more fruit in old age. Psalm 92.14.

5. Safety of it.
Fifthly, In regard of the safety and security of it. Hazard takes away the
comfort of life, otherwise excellent. That which God threate^s Deuteronomy. 28.66. Thy
life shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shall fear day and night, etc.
But the life of a Christian is sure, Col. 3.3. The Caldean dream's of long
Empire, ver. 5. but he shall dye, ver. 8.
because it is hid, ('it is laid up) with Christ in God If the life of Christ may
fail, then, the life of a Christian. But, because I live, ye shall live also.
Joh. 14.19. Besides their life is in God's keeping, Psalm. 31.15. My times are
in thy hands. The Caldean threatens he will spoil and kill; but God says his
people shall live.

Continuance of it.
Sixthly. It is an excellent life for Continuance. This is implyd in the words;
The Gospel is the power of God to salvation. Romans 1.16, 17. as it is written,
The Chaldean may threat destruction: yet the just shall live.
The just shall live by his faith. The life of God's people then is an eternal
life, and therefore excellent. Every life is accounted so much more excellent,
as it is of longer continuance; the life of an oak, that continues many years,
then the life of the grass that grows upon the housetop, that withers before
it be plucked up. Therefore as life is a blessing: so long life, Psalm.
is a great blessing. What account then should we make of an eternal life, that
knows no end; 1 Pet. 1.
springing from an incorruptible seed, the Word of God; and maintaind, by a
never dying principle, the Spirit of God? He that lives the longest life of
nature must die at last: Genesis 5.
but he that lives the life of grace shall never die. 1. His grace shall never
die. 2. Though he die, he is out of the reach of the second death. Joh. 11.25,
26. The just shall live. --

Seventhly, Lastly it is excellent in regard of the End. 7. The end of it. The
Caldean imputes his power to his God c. 1.11. but the just, etc.
It Is the end crowns the action. God is in a more special manner glorified by
this life. The strong people shall glorify thee. Isa. 43. Now as Gods glory is
the ultimate end of all his works. (Prove. 16.4.) so that life must needs be
most excellent that comes nearest that end. Gods glory and the creatures
happiness are wrapped up together in the same end. 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor
me, I will honor. Therefore this life is excellent.

And this leads us to the reason of it, Reason. from Gods praise.
why God's people receive a more excellent life from him. God does it, to the
praise of his free grace. Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of his grace, both in the
cause; for none could deserve this life, before they had it. (Romans 9.23.) and
in the effect of it, viz. that they might walk worthy of it. As God had life in
himself and did enjoy himself before there was any creature: so the reason why
he made any, or gave life to any, was his own praise; And therefore as any
creature has a more excellent life then other, it is therefore that God may
have more praise then from other. From the Saints therefore God expects that
his high praises should be in your mouths. Psalm. 149.6. Even the high praises
of the most high God. All thy works praise thee, and thy Saints give thanks
unto thee, says the Psalmist. Psalm. 145.13. The Saints in a special manner;
They praise God for themselves, and they praise God for the rest of the
creatures, being as it were the tongue of all the rest, whilst they blazon
forth the wisdom and power and goodness of the Creator in the wonderful fabric
and orderly government of the creatures.

Conviction that there is such a life.
Luke 24.11. idle tales, and men believe them not. And so, if we never believe
this life, we shall never seek it, and if we never seek it, we shall never be
saved. Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born again (and so have a new life) he shall
never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

It is true, This life is a hidden life; which arises. 1. In regard of the
inward and secret nature of it; The Kingdom of God is within you. 2. From the
mean outside of it; for God chooses weak and foolish things, and things that
are not. 3. From the infirmities of those, that live it, which much blemish it;
as David, Peter, etc. 3. From misreports of it -- Slanderously reported of.
Romans 3. And 5. from the work of Satan, blinding the eyes of them that believe
not. 2 Corinthians. 4 3. Yet there is such an excellent life; and that is proved,
and plainly made manifest.

First, because it carries men to actions beyond the power of nature It enables
some men to forsake the pleasures of natural life for the sake of spiritual
life; and this work of self-denial proves it. Yea it makes willing to lay down
natural life, if need be; therefore such must have a better, that gives as skin
for skin, so life for life.

Secondly, because when natural life is weakest, the acts of spiritual life
many times appear strongest. Therefore there is a life besides that of nature.
2 Cor. 4.10. There, the dying of the Lord Jesus in Paul's body, makes manifest
the life of Jesus in the same body.

Persuasion to desire this life.
And therefore the tree of life was placed in the midst of Paradise, as if it
were the perfection of all other comforts. How sweet is then the sweetest life?
In comparison whereof all other life is but death. Luke 15. last. Thy brother
was dead, and is alive -- O, that we had eyes to see, and hearts to consider
the excellency of this life! Look how much difference there is, betwixt the
life of a child in the womb, and the life thereof, when it is come abroad into
the world, where it has freedom of breathing, hearing, seeing, and exercising
all the senses: so great a difference there is betwixt the life of nature and
grace, as also betwixt the life of grace and glory. We do no more know, what is
reserved for us in Heaven, then a child in the womb what is reserved for it
when it comes into this wide world. Only as there is a natural instinct in the
child to go forth of the prison of the womb into a better life: so there is a
spiritual and supernatural instinct in all Gods children to be made partakers
of a better life, For as the whole creation groans: so we ourselves groan
within ourselves, etc. says the Apostle, Rom 8 22. In the mean time before we
come to enjoy the life of glory to the full, glorious things in their degree
are spoken of the life of grace, in regard of the nature, Psalm.
principle, comforts, etc. of it, as abovesaid. To all which we might add it is
excellency in regard of operations; viz. the crucifying our corruptions,
overcoming the world, and all opposite powers, making us more then conquerours
in Christ.

Therefore it is an excellent life, and thence most desirable. Did a beast know
the life of a man, he would desire it; did a natural man know the life of a
Christian, he would desire that too: For it is as far above the life of a
man, as his above the life of a beast.

Hence Christ to the woman, Joh. 4. -- If thou had known the gift of God: and
who it is asks of thee, etc. So I say, If thou had but known the excellency
of this life, thou would greatly desire and ask it of Christ.

Examination.
There is not much need of giving motives. 1. None come to live the life of
glory, but such as live the life of grace, all are Saints on Earth, before
Saints in Heaven. 2. Till we know whether we have this life or no, we can
neither seek it, if we want it, nor praise God for it, if we have it. 3.
Besides we have command to make our calling and election sure. 2 Pet. 1.10.

For Rules of Trial. 1. Did God ever give thee to see thine own deadness, 10.
Rules of Trial.
and to bewail it? Though thou may leave sin and perform duty, if thou do
this by thy own strength thou art not alive. 1. Sight of deadness.
When such a soul comes to it self nevertheless it cries, O sick, sick; give
me something to comfort me. (Cant. 2.5.) Alas! sick of unbelief, and a hard
heart! etc.

2. Knowledge of this life.
Secondly, Do thou understand the Nature of regeneration, of this life and
this new birth? Nichodemus did not, before Christ told him. Joh. 3. It Is said.
2 Cor. 5.17. He that is in Christ is a new creature: New in understanding,
will, affections, and conversation.

3. Instrumental cause of begetting.
Thirdly, If thou art alive, what was the instrumental means of begetting this
life, under God? was it the power of Word preached upon thy soul? 1 Pet. 1.33.
being, born again not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible by the Word of
God, etc.

Affections stirring without the Word, or moral persuasion with the word, or
corrupt seed beside the Word, these are not enough. See 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. 2 Cor.
3.6.

4. Cause main^aining.
Fourthly, if alive, what is the instrumental means of maintaining this life,
under God? and every creature desires food; even the insensible creature, the
youngest plants thrust their fibra's into the earth to suck nourishment thence.
And the young Lambs suck the duggs of their damme's upon their bended knees.
Every life desires food for self-preservation, and the nature of the food must
be suitable to the nature of the life, spiritual life must have spiritual food.
That which will feed a swine fat, Ex iisdem nut^rimur, etc.
will starve a sheep. What is begotten of the word, will be nourished of the
word 1 Pet. 2.2. And the more life, the more desire after food. The healthful
child cries most eagerly after the breast. Such was David's hunger and thirst
after the word. Psalm. 42.1. etc.

Fifthly, If thou art alive, thou have a faculty within to resist and expel
whatsoever is an enemy to life. 5. Enmity of the contrary. 1 Pet. 5.8.
Sin is a spiritual poison, and Satan a murderer. Do thou so resist them? Or
when there is deadness of spirit, do thou rub and chafe thy soul by prayer?
Quicken me, O Lord, by thy Word. Psalm. 119. A good sign.

6. If thou art alive, thou shall perceive it, as by outward sense and motion,
so by inward quickening and vivification. 6. Sense and motion.
1. By outward sense and motion. Every living creature exercises some sense.
Examine this by, what Breathing faculty thou have. Where there is the
inspiration of spiritual life, there is the expiration of holy speeches. (Only
it is not wholesome when our expiration exceeds our inspiration.) 2. Exam. what
sight thou have? Ephesians. 4.18. with 5.8. 3. What hearing? He that is of God
hears us, etc. 1 John 4.6. 4. What tasting? 1 Pet. 2.3. -- If so be you have
tasted how gracious the Lord is. 5. What smelling? Cant. 1.3. Thy name is an
ointment powered forth. 2. By inward quickening and vivification, of the heart.
As the heart is first formed, so informed, and reformed. Primum vivens. Rev. 3.
And without this, there is but a name to live. The heart is the first member
of the new man. Gal. 4.4. If sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into your hearts, etc. Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God shall circumcise thy heart,
etc. All performances without the heart are dead works. God begins at the
heart, therefore examine the heart.

7. Spring of life.
Seventhly, If thou say thou art alive, then what is the spring and principle
of thy life and the actions thereof? Is it thy own strength, and opinion of thy
own parts, and applause of men? Or do thou in an humble distrust of thy self,
look up to Christ for strength? Quest. How is that known? Ans. If Christ's
glory he made the end, then the grace of Christ is the principle. The stream is
never higher then the fountain. 2. Besides, then this strength comes in a
promise. It Is Christ in a promise. What promise do thou lay hold on?

8. Growt^.
Eighthly, If alive, where is thy growth? where ever there is life there is
growth, till the creature comes to the (...). Ephesians. 4.11. Till we all come to
the measure of the the stature of Christ. Object. If this be so, (may some say)
then I have no life. Answ. spiritual growth is not discerned by every days
observation: but some long time, as the shadow on the dial. 2. A soul careful
to grow, and mourning for want of growth, I dare pronounce it does grow, though
it perceive it not. Trees though they do not grow, are fitted for growth in
winter.

9. Propagation.
Ninthly, If thou art alive, know it, not only by growth and augmentation, but
also by a desire of a propagation, and conveiance of that life to others. The
Father delivers the lamp of his life to his son; as one candle lights another.
So it is in this life of grace, it begets the like to it self. Examine therefore
whether thou art one like Pharaoh that seek to kill the children of gace in
the birth, (this is to play the tyrant, nay the Devil Rev. 12.) Or whether
thou art like God, and godly men that say, as the Apostle. Gal. 4.19. They
desire to see Christ formed in others.

10. Delight^.
Tenthly, If alive what company delights thee. Psalm. 16.2. my delight is in the
Saints, and the excellent. The living converse with the living; and not among
Tombs, unless they be possessed, as the man in the Gospel. Why seek ye the
living amongst the dead, said the Angel? Such are dead company, as dead men.

worst murder. Information of the worst murder.
Surely that which takes away the best life. And that is the murder of the
soul. God commands, in the sixth commandment: Thou shall do no murder. Every
man startles at that; but many are found guilty of soul-murder. See Ezekiel. 33 8.
If the watchman warn not, the blood of them that perish in their sins, God will
require at his hands. This made Paul so careful to purge himself. Act. 20.26. I
am free of the blood of every one of you. See also Ezekiel 13.18.

Thankfulness.
to have our souls prosper. 3. Epist. Joh 2. And if we find any decay, remember
the counsel to the Angel of the Church of Sardis. Rev. 3.2. Be watchful and
strengthen the things which remain; that are ready to die; for I have not found
thy works perfect before God.

But the Just shall live by his Faith. DOCTRINE II. Whatsoever life the just
man lives, in a more excellent manner then other men, he lives that life by
virtue of his Faith.

The life that I live, I live by the faith of the Son of God, etc.

This is a lesson that is often taught, and yet very hardly learned. For as the
life of a Christian is a hidden life: so the means of conveyance of it is in a
hidden way; hidden and dark to a natural man. This water of life runs, as it
were in a conduit-pipe under the ground A natural man perceives it not, But the
Just shall live by his Faith.

For the better unfolding of his mysterious and useful trade of living by
faith, we shall endeavor by God's assistance (who is, the Author and Finisher
of our faith) to show these things, Heb. 12.2.
viz.

First, What Faith is. Secondly, What it is to live by Faith. Thirdly, Why
living is by Faith, rather then love, etc. Fourthly, Who it is that lives by
Faith. Fifthly, Whose Faith he lives by, viz. his own. Sixthly, When and how
long. Seventhly, What life it is he lives by Faith. Eighthly, The Reasons why.
Lastly, What use we are to make of all.
QUEST. I. What Faith is.
FOR the first; You have the definition, at least the description set down by
the Holy Ghost. Heb. 11.1. It is the subsistence of things hoped for, the
evidence of things not seen. For example, tell a natural man of God's favor
and the comforts of his Spirit, and the future recompense of reward, which is
more worth, then all the comforts of the world, he thinks it a mere notion,
that there is no reality in it but all feigned. But a Christian by faith sees
there is truth, reality and subsistence in these things, and in whatever God
promises, who calls those things that be not, as though they were Romans 4.17.
To whom all things are possible. Mark 9.23. And thereby becomes a kind of
omnipotent faith.

By others it is defined thus. In general, A believing the Gospel. In
particular, Definition of Faith.
A gracious habit infused into the heart by the Spirit of God, whereby the soul
rests, or rolls it self upon Christ in a way of promise, for all things
appertaining to life and godliness, for Gods glory and it is own salvation.

It is not then 1. a bare disposition, but an habit. 2. An habit not acquired
by frequent acts, but infused by the spirit; called therefore, 1 Cor. 4.17. the
spirit of faith. 3. Infused not into the head only, but the heart. Romans 10.10.
with the heart man believes. And therefore it stands more in affection than
notion. Indeed in faith there is both an Assent of the mind to the truth of the
message sent to sinners indefinitely. 1 Timothy 1.15. and a consent of heart and
will, to the goodness of it, whereby this or that particular sinner receives it
to himself. Gal. 2.20. -- Christ Who loved Me. Joh 21. -- My Lord and my God,
which differ as a garment in the cloth and on the back. Christ is put on by
faith.

Fourthly, We say, -- whereby the soul rests, or rolls its self, or leans. For
assurance and full persuasion is not of the being of faith, but the well-being.
There Is faith of Evidence, and faith of Reliance; Or rather there is a double
evidence, 1. Of sense. 2. Of reliance. Faith in Scripture is set out in regard
of the latter, in such terms as we have given. Psalm. 37.5. Isa. 50.10. Mark
9.24.

Fifthly, Upon Christ] Who is the main object of faith; and it is not
sufficient to believe in God out of Christ. Joh 14.1. Ye believe in the Father,
believe also in me; and otherwhere, None comes to the Father but by me.

Sixthly, In way of a promise] No promise, no Christ. Abraham laid hold on a
promise in those extraordinary things as an ordinary mean. Romans 4.20. -- he
staggered not at the promise through unbelief. See 2 Pet. 1.3. Ephesians. 2.12. --
Covenant of promise, etc.

Seventhly, For all things, etc.] First for Christ, and then all things with
him. Romans 8.32. Wherefore the promises in Christ, are called Rich and Precious
promises.

Eighthly, For God's glory] Romans 4.20. -- gave glory to God, and our own
salvation. Heb. 10. last -- that believe to the saving of the soul.

QUESTION. II. What it is to live by Faith.
To live by Faith.
Ans. TO live by Faith, is not only by laying hold on Christ by faith, to
receive life by Christ. 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son has Life.

Secondly, But also in the use and exercise of faith, to receive daily from
Christ both the preservation and increase of this life. Ephesians. 4.13.

Thirdly, Enabling a Christian by virtue of Gods grace to perform all duties of
thankfulness, 1 Stirring him up to duty, Gal. 5.6. Faith works by love; and
Jam. 2. Faith without works is dead. 2. Directing what to do. Psalm. 119.66.
Teach me good judgment and knowledge, for I have believed thy Commandments. 3.
Strengthening to do it. Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ
strengthening me. 4. Finding acceptance in doing. Heb. 11.4- whereby he received
witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts.

Fourthly, Assuring him of all needful encouragement of blessing by virtue of
God's promise, 1. In believing the promise of reward. Matthew. 4.4. Man lives not
by bread, alone, but by every Word of God. 2. In suing out the promise by
prayer. Psalm. 119.49. Remember the word to thy servant, upon which thou have
caused me to hope. 3. In praising God for it, Heb. 13.15. -- Let us offer to
God the sacrifice of praise continually -- giving thanks to his Name.

So that to live by faith is to rest satisfied with God's command, though we
see no reason of it; Heb. 11.8, 9.
and with God's promise though we have no present performance, yea, even then
when providence cross promises; as to believe we shall come to the Haven in
the greatest storm, in case we have a promise, as Paul. Act. 27.22, etc. As a
wordly man (in his way) lives comfortably, that has good store of bonds in his
coffers, though all his money be out of doors, and in other men's hands; how
much more do believers live comfortably, that have bond and seal, and oath from
the God of truth, though they have nothing in hand for present.

Thus the Just lives by faith. Caution. Not as if there were any natural or
moral worth or efficacy in faith to beget this life, or to make us righteous;
But only as an instrument of the spirit applying Christ, our life and
righteousness. And indeed it is he begets faith in us, For it is the gift of
God. Ephesians. 2.8. Christ is the root, faith is the instrument of this life.

Thus living by faith implies, these 4 or 5 things, 1. Right in Christ. Gal. 2.
2. A clearing our way in point of duty. Romans 14. What is not of faith is sin.
3. a clearing our right to the promise. Heb. 11.17. -- He that had received the
promises. 4. a constant searching of the Scripture for the legacyes bequeathd
to us. Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal
life. The heir cannot sue for his legacyes or inheritance, unless he know what
it is. Act. 20.25. Luke 22.19.
5. A remembering them. Psalm* 119.52. And a seasonable applying of them to
particular cases and occasions. What can a plaster do if it be only kept in
the pocket, and not laid upon the soar?

Which implies, it is not enough to have the habit of faith to possess it, but
the act also is required that we may comfortably live by it. We must put it to
use. Therefore Act. 13.39, faith is set forth by the act of believing. -- By
him, all that believe in him are justified. For howsoever it is true He that
possesses the habit of faith, shall never totally and finally fall away; yet
for want of acting of it, as he sins against God so he loses the comfort of
his life, Luke 24.25. Matthew. 8.26.
and in his own apprehension is like a dead man, or at least exceeding dull,
heartlesse and fearful. Usually in proportion to the acting of the life of
Justification will be the strength of the life of Sanctification* for faith
works by love, the more faith, the more love. Whence is Paul's exhortation to
blow up the gift of God in him As a man lives by exercise, 2 Timothy 1.
and grows diseased for want of it: So it is in spirituals.

To show then how a Christian lives by faith, this is the sum of what has
been spoken; He lives by faith as a mean or instrument, not as the efficient
cause or author of this life. But this is the order or series.

First, God predestinates or determines this life to such. Ephesians. 5.5. -- Having
predestined us, etc.

Secondly, He gives Christ his Son to death for the purchasing this life;
because by nature every man is in a state of death; dead in sins and
trespasses. Col. 3.4. 1 John 5.12.

Thirdly, He makes known and holds forth this life in a promise to poor sinners
Rev. 22.17.

Fourthly, He requires faith in the promise of all such as would have the
benefit of this life; that so they may glorify God's truth and goodness and
power in believing that he will and can make his word good. So he calls men to
believing in the preaching of the Gospel Joh. 3.16.

Fifthly, He bestows faith upon the soul of his free grace (because by nature
we are shut up under unbeleef. Romans 11.32.) Ephesians. 2.8. -- it is the gift of God.
So he calls men inwardly by his Spirit.

So that faith and life and Christ come all together. Only he works this life
in a way of believing, and makes us sensible of it by the act of faith. So that
a Christian has his life from God in Christ: from Christ in the promise: Col.
3, 3:
from the promise apprehended by faith: from faith working by love and other
graces; which is the exercise of this life. All graces are enlivened by faith;
faith receives life from the promise; the promise from Christ; Christ as
mediator, from God the Father. Joh. 6.57. God in Christ is the fountain of
spiritual life, the promises are so many Conduit-pipes that convey it, faith is
the hand that turns the Cock, or the mouth to receive the water of life.

So that however God in Christ is the sole author and finisher of spiritual
life, yet he makes use of faith all along from first to last in the order of
working, and that in all parts and faculties of spiritual life; viz. in the
quickening, expulsive, nutritive, retentive, motive, and breathing faculties.

First, God makes use of faith in the Quickening faculty, 1. Quickening faculty
of faith.
or first infusion of life. So the just lives by his faith. Ephesians 2.5. with 8*
Even when we were dead in sins, he has quickened us together with Christ -- for
by grace ye are saved, through faith. The heart is primum vivens in grace, as
well as in nature; and the heart is enlivened by Christ in a way of faith. Ephesians.
3.16. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. So that whereas there is
great dispute among men, whether Christ, or faith, or righteousness of life
comes first to the soul; all is answered in one word, They come all together,
not any one before or after another. Christ brings all along together with
himself. So soon as ever a soul is quickened, it does believe, and so soon as
ever it believes it is quickened. Yet faith is most perceptible in the act of
Adherence.

2. Expulsive faculty of faith.
Secondly, God makes use of faith in the Expulsive faculty; in expelling the
enemies of spiritual life. And so the just lives by his faith. Act 15.9. -- By
faith purifying their hearts. Unbelief and other corruptions are deadly enemies
to spiritual life. Faith expels them and purifies the heart from them. As the
living fountain, if dirt be cast into it, never leaves working and working,
until it has wrought it self clear again: So a believing heart, if earthly
thoughts from Satan, like dirt, be cast into it, never leaves working, till it
has wrought it self pure, and fit for God's service. 2 Timothy 2.21. If a man
purge himself from these, etc. It overcomes and abandons all within, and all
without, resists Satan, 1 Pet 5.8, overcomes the world. 1 John 5.4.

3. Nutritive faculty of faith.
Thirdly, God makes use of faith in the Nutritive faculty, or attractive
faculty, in drawing such things to it self, as whereby is life nourished and
maintained. And so the just lives by his faith. Faith like the firstborn of
graces (though indeed they are all twins) delight to be in the arms of God's
mercy (where it first receives life,) and there it lies at the breast of the
word, at the nipple of the promises, drawing virtue and strength, and
nourishment from them; tasting every day how sweet and gracious the Lord is. 1
Pet. 2.3. Psalm 34.8. O taste and see that the Lord is good; blessed is the man
that trusts in him. q.d. by trusting in God we live upon God, and taste how
good he is; For else we tempt God. It were a miracle to live without meat. But
the more strength, the more food.

4. Digestive faculty of faith.
Fourthly, God makes use of faith in the Retentive and Digestive faculty,
turning the word into wholesome blood. And so the just lives by his faith.
Whereas an unbeliever hearing the word, receiving the food of his soul, is like
a man of a weak and bad stomach; no sooner is the meat down, but it mixeth with
some base humor and up it comes again; it will hold nothing to do it good. So
it is with an unbeliever not mixing the word with faith; but being mixed with
some base humor of pride or passion, up it comes again with violence, though
it be in the very face of the Physician. Prove. 9.2. He that rebukes a wicked
man gets himself a blot. But where the word is mixed with faith, it meets
with a good stomach, and there it turns into good nourishment; the party grows
and thrives, and comes on in grace, and so lives by faith, as a man lives by a
good stomach. See Psalm. 36.7, 8. They that put their trust under the shadow of
Gods wings, are abundantly satisfied with the fatness of his house, etc. Good
meat does well, a good stomach is better; Gods blessing upon both is the best
of all: and so it is in the life of Grace.

Fifthly, God makes use of Faith in the Motive faculty: 5. Motive faculty of
Faith.
And so the just lives by his Faith. For as bodily exercise profits much for
bodily health (when the Apostle says, It profits little, his meaning is, in
ordine ad spiritualia; 1 Timothy 4.
for doubtless, as to bodily health, it profits much, it is instar omnium, in
stead of all Physic, and without this the best diet in the world will be
defective) It is so with the soul. Be the diet, the means of grace never so
good, yet without exercise of grace and godliness, all comes to nothing. Now it
is Faith, and only true Faith, which puts a man upon profitable exercise.
Faith will not suffer a man to be idle in his calling It will not only move
his tongue, (though it will move that too; Acts 4.20. We cannot but speak -- 2
Cor. 4.13. I believed, therefore spoke -- For he is a very dead-hearted
Christian, that has the dead palsy in his tongue, that cannot speak a word
for God) But it will move his hands also, and his whole man to be active for
God. Jam. 2.
Show me thy faith by thy works. Christians full of faith, are full of action,
and so full of life. (See Acts 6.3, 6, 8, 10) Whereas unbelievers are like
sluggards with hand in bosom, or like Idols of the Heathen, Psalm. 115.
having eyes, and yet see not; ears, and hear not; feet, and walk not; neither
speak they through their throat: and so prove dead for want of this exercise.

6. Breathing faculty of Faith.
Sixthly, God makes use of Faith in the Breathing faculty: And so the just lives
by his faith. Breath is the Chariot of life; called therefore, The breath of
life* This breathing is twofold: 1. Inspiration: 2. Expiration; these maintain
life. And both these in a spiritual sense do spring from Faith.

1. Inspiration.
First, for the act of Inspiration. For howsoever, every first inspiration of
the Spirit gives life, yet Faith draws more and more of this heavenly air from
day to day, for the maintaining and increasing of this life. A man can no more
live a spiritual life, without the continual breathing of Gods Spirit into his
soul, than he can live a natural life without the continual sucking in of fresh
air into his body. And therefore it is observable, Our blessed Savior chose to
convey the Holy Ghost under that similitude: Joh. 20.22. He breathed on them,
and said, Receive the Holy Ghost; q. d. Ye can no more live the life of grace,
without my Spirit, than you can live the life of nature, without the breath of
your nosthrils. We are all by nature like Ezekiels dried bones. Now it is the
voice of Faith that cries out, Ezekiel. 37.9.
O Breath, breathe upon these slain, that they may live. And again, when a man
has life, and begins to exercise himself in the way of Gods Commandments, he
knows he cannot exercise to purpose, unless it be in this fresh air of the
Spirit. Therefore David's Faith put him upon this practice, I opened my mouth
(says he) and panted; for I longed for thy Commandments, Psa. 119.131. He took
in fresh gales of the Spirit from day to day, to uphold the vitals of the New
man.

Secondly, 2. Expiration.
There is another act of the Spirit in spiritual life, and that is Expiration;
an holy breathing out of holy speeches, and holy prayers. And usually in
proportion to our inspiration, will be our expiration. As in Nature, it is
unwholesome to breathe out more then we suck in, when the expense of spirits is
beyond our receipts: so also in grace, when our expiration of holy speeches,
does exceed our inspiration of the holy Spirit. But when these go hand in hand,
all springs from Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. We having the same Spirit of faith, as it
is written, I believed, therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore
speak. Faith will put a Christian upon it. Faith is as it were the very breath
of his nostrils.

Seventhly, God makes use of Faith in the Augmentative or growing faculty: And
so the just lives by his Faith. 7. Augmentative faculty of Faith.
As Faith grows, (for Romans 1.17. the righteousness of God is revealed from
faith to faith) so other graces grow with it. See 2 Thessalonians. 1.3. having
mentioned the growing of their faith; then follows, And the charity of every
one of you abounds. So 2 Pet. 1.5. Add to your faith virtue, and to virtue,
etc. all follow Faith. Again, 2 Pet. 3. last, Grow in grace: how? -- and in the
knowledge (or faith) of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Show me thy faith by
thy works, Jam. 2. Not only the truth, but the measure of our Faith is seen by
our works. And so much for the second general Question, What it is to live by
Faith?

Only now it were good to examine our selves upon all this, Whether we do thus
live by Faith, making our particular application of our souls to each of the
particulars forementioned? But I pass to the third Question.

QUESTION III. Why a Christian is said to live by Faith, rather than any other
Grace?
Love, or Thankefulness, or Patience, etc? The reason is (in a word; for what
is said already may give light hereunto:) First, because Faith is not only the
grace which receives Christ, Joh. 1. 12.
who is our Life; but it is also the grace that receives all other grace from
Christ. Therefore Faith is the first link of all that Chain of Graces, 2 Pet.
1.5, etc. at least in order to their working. Otherwise indeed, we know all
graces are infused simul and semel, in respect of their being and existence.
See Joh. 7.38. He that believes in me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of
living water. The graces of the Spirit run into the Soul, and out again in the
issues of life, and all through the conduit-pipe of Faith.

Indeed a Christian has great use of other graces, but Faith only lays hold
on Christ for all. Sanctified knowledge says, There is an infinite fullness in
Christ, the fullness of a Fountain; Faith says, This is all for me, for he is
my Husband; then Prayer says* If all this be thine, I will go and fetch it for
thee; and Thankefulness says, I will return praise to God for it (and that is
better than the receiving of mercies) Psalm 63.5. My soul shall be filled with
marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips.

It is plain therefore, however spiritual life is much exercised in other
graces, as well as in Faith; as in Prayer, and Patience, and Love, and
Thankfulness: yet because Faith acts and exercises, and puts life into all,
therefore a Christian is said rather to live by his Faith. As may be seen, Heb.
11. through the whole Chapter. For Prayer is no prayer, unless it be a prayer
of Faith, Jam 5. and Patience is no patience, unless joined with Faith, Here is
the faith and patience of the Saints, Rev. 13. and so of all the rest.

Secondly, Because Faith lays hold upon that Word by which man lives. For man
lives by the word of God, Mat 4.4. Other graces are begotten by the Word, but
do not lay hold on the Word. So as no word, no means can profit us without
Faith.

Thirdly, Because when other graces and comforts (to our sense) lie dead, and
useless, even then Faith lives, and acts its part. It is like the Cork that
swims aloft, when the Leads, and all the Net is under water. It is like the
Card or Compass, when Heaven and Earth fail; no sight of Earth or Heaven, or
comfort from either; when it is a day of darkness and gloominess, as that
described Zeph. 1.15. or when it is with us, as it was in Paul's voyage, Acts
27.13. to 26. neither sun nor star appearing for many days; or a time as that,
Isa. 50.10. wherein we sit in darkness, and see no light; yet then says, can
trust in the Name of the Lord. It is as an Anchor in a storm; so long as the
Anchor holds, there is hope; but if that break, there is no more governance of
the Ship. So Faith is compared, Heb. 6.19. It is as the Widows Oil; when all
other provision failed, she lives upon that, because she had a word from God.
So when all fail, Faith shall not totally nor finally fail, because there is a
word from God, which was spoken to Peter in person, of all the faithful, Luke
22.32. I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Or like the heart in
the body, though other parts be dead, yet so long as the heart lives, the man
is alive. Psa. 73.26. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of
my heart, and my portion for ever.

Thus David lived by Faith when all failed, and by it thus speaks himself,
Psalm. 42.5. Why art thou disquieted, O my soul? -- still trust in God, for I
shall yet praise him. When graces fail, performances fail, so that we abhor our
selves and duties, yet Faith says, We are a holy Priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God (1 Pet. 2.5.) by Jesus Christ. When
Paul cried out, Romans 7. O wretched man that I am, etc. yet by Faith he can
thank God through Jesus Christ. When the Church is under water, yet she can
speak thus in Faith, Mic. 7.8. Rejoice not over me, O mine enemy; though I
fall, I shall rise again. When Job considers his body turned to dust and worms,
Job 19.19, 25. yet by Faith he sees, my Redeemer lives, etc. Even when Patience
failed in Job, yet Faith failed not. Though God kill all other graces and
comforts, and my soul too, yet he shall not kill my Faith, says he. If he
separate my soul from my body, yet not Faith from my Soul. If he kill me, he
shall not kill my Faith. And therefore the just lives by Faith, rather then
other graces, because when all is gone, yet Faith remains; and Faith remains,
because the Promise remains: For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in the
heavens, Psalm. 119.89. And this is the proper and principal meaning of this
place.

Fourthly, Because even then, when neither graces, nor comforts do fail, yet
then the just lives principally by his Faith: 1. Because there is yet more to
be believed then we already enjoy; for we walk not yet by sight, and therefore
by faith, 2 Cor. 5.7. 2. Because Faith is sur^r, then any sense or feeling in
the world. When the Apostle had spoken of the glorious Vision; and their being
eyewitnesses, 2 Pet. 1.19. yet, says he, We have a more sure word of
prophecy, etc. Now it is the property of Faith to live upon the word.

precious Faith, precious above all other graces.

manifestation that we are alive, but to live by, and maintain the life of all
other graces.

QUESTION IV. Who it is that lives by his Faith?
The just -- Ob. But where shall we find him? Does not the Scripture speak
expressly, Psalm. 14.2. There is none just, no not one? And again, Romans 3.10 etc.
They are all gone out of the way, they are all become abominable, etc.

A. The meaning is not, as if a man should be just, before he come to believe;
but because his believing makes him, and proves him just, in applying the
justice and righteousness of Christ, Isa. 53.11. By his knowledge my righteous
Servant shall justify many. And therefore Jer. 23.6. he is called, The Lord
our Righteousness. And this is imputed Righteousness, the Righteousness of
Justification.

But that is not all. He that believes, is just also in some measure by
inherent Righteousness, or that which he does in his own person by the help of
Christ's Spirit: 1 John 3.7. Let no man deceive you; he that does righteousness
is righteous, even as he is righteous. Whereas we are apt to be deceived, and
to say, Faith is sufficient of it self to declare that I am righteous, you are
deceived, says S. John: for ver. 3. He that has this hope purifieth himself,
as he is pure; and here, does righteousness, as he is righteous. So you see
plainly, as there is a righteousness of Justification. so there is a
righteousness of Sanctification, and the word of the Text comprehends both; The
just --

Yet mark: He does not say, The just shall live by his Justice; because the
righteousness of Sanctification is imperfect, and deserves death: but by his
Faith, because that implies the Righteousness of Justification, the
righteousness of Christ, and that is perfect. And this distinction is enough to
avoid that evil and slander, which is cast upon the Ministers of the Gospel at
this day. They say, we preach Law and Gospel, Note.
Christ and Works both rogether in point of Justification. But this is a mere
Cavil. For however we teach, That every believer must evidence his Faith, or
his Righteousness of Justification, by his works of Sanctification; yet we do
not say his Righteousness of Sanctification, is his Righteousness of
Justification, no more then we say, His Righteousness of Justification is his
Righteousness of Sanctification (as some would vainly confound one with the
other.) Though we say, He that believes the Gospel, must do the things
contained in the Law; yet we do not say, He that does them shall live in them
(for that is the voice of the first Covenant, the Covenant of the Law) but we
say, He that does them shall live by his Faith: (for that is the voice of the
second Covenant, the Covenant of the Gospel, the Covenant of Free Grace. For
this tells us, There must be a justice in the person that believes, (not an
antecedent, but a consequent justice) yet he lives not by his justice, but by
his faith; and by his faith, as applying the Free Grace of God in Christ. The
just shall live by his faith. And thus for the fourth Question, Who it is that
lives by his Faith?

Note.
how contrary it is to this Text, and to the Scripture phrase throughout.

We grant, an unbeliever may be predestined to Justification as he may be
predestined to Faith; but to say he is actually justified before he believes,
is to be wise beyond that which is written. For there is no such thing written
in the Scripture; and therefore such wisdom is forbidden. If we may not think,
much less may we speak above what is written, 1 Cor. 4.6. We are bound to keep
our selves not only to the pattern of wholesome matter, but to the pattern of
wholesome words, or sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of found
words, etc, Now to say that a believing person is a justified person, that is
wholesome and sound, for the Text warrants it; but to say an unbeliever is just,
or a justified person, is unsound and unwarrantable. For as he that lives by
Faith is just: so he that lives not by Faith is unjust.

Know ye not, says the Apostle, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God? whatever they talk of their Faith.

But so much for the Person, who. The just shall live --

QUEST. V. By whose Faith shall he live?
AND the answer is in the Text, By his (own) faith; not by another man's faith.
Therefore in the Confession of Faith, every one says for himself [I believe]
not my Friend, not my Father, not my Brother believes for me, but I my self
believe for my self. One man's prayer may obtain good for another, but one man's
faith cannot save another. No more than one man's soundness of constitution can
give health to another that is sick; or one man's soul give life to another,
that is in a dead or dying condition. No, the just man shall live by his own
faith Mat. 9.22. There Christ speaks to the woman with the bloody issue, Thy
faith has made thee whole; not the faith of any other that were about him. So
Luke 7. last. And he said to the woman, Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace.
Reasons of living by a man's own faith.


And why must it necessarily be a man's own Faith?

essence of saving Faith, for a man to make particular application of Christ to
himself, as we heard before, Gal. 2.20. -- that loved me. And Thomas, when he
had any stirrings of spiritual life cries thus, My Lord, and my God. Yea, in
the greatest shakings of Faith, there is some secret application and
appropriation of God to the soul. When we seem to put God away with the one
hand, we pull him to us with the other. As it was in the speech of David, and
Christ too, My God, my God, why have thou sorsaken me! Forsaken me? and yet my
God still. Where there is any life at all, there some Faith. None can live
spiritually, none can live eternally; but such as have faith of their own. It
is both the means, and the mark of eternal life: Mark 16.16. He that believes,
shall be saved; he that believes not, shall be damned. There must be a
particular application of Christ to the souls of all that are saved. They live
by their own Faith. Therefore Christ in Scripture is compared to those things,
that can do a man no good unless they be applied; as to Salve, Job 6.53. Gal.
3.27.
to the Balm of Gilead, to Meat and Drink, and Garments. What good can Salve,
etc. do me, unless it be applied to my body? It Is not enough that my nearest or
dearest friend applies these to himself, that will not heal me, nor feed me,
nor cover my nakedness. Every man lives by his own eating and drinking, is
covered and kept warm by his own garments: so the just lives by his own Faith.

none to spare for another man; and therefore every man must live by his own
Faith. They are guilty of pride and folly (proud Fools) that think they have
faith enough, and grace enough both for themselves and others ('it is the
Prerogative Royal of the King of Saints, to justify others by his
Righteousness.) And though they may seem to be humble, that would be beholding
to another for such a favor; yet they are but humble fools, Mat. 25.8. the
foolish Virgins said to the wise, Give us of your oil -- of your faith, and
grace: For the wise answered, Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you.
They had enough for themseves, they had none to spare for others. He is a
foolish Soldier, that being to go into the field with a wise and vigilant
Commander, thinks to borrow Arms of his fellow-Souldier; if his fellow-Souldier
would part with them, his Commander will never suffer it. Every Soldier must
appear at the general Muster with his own Arms: Every Christian Soldier (I am
sure) must; else there is no looking Christ in the face, who is the great Lord
General of the Field, and the Captain of our Salvation. Heb. 2.
Every Soldier must appear completely armed: Ephesians. 6.11. Put on the whole
armor of God; and ver. 13. Take unto you the whole armor of God. Mark, first,
every Soldier must have it: 2. Put it on: 3. He must put on all: 4. Above all,
the shield of Faith ver. 16. So that every Christian Soldier must be armed
with his own shield of faith; he must either stand or fall to his own Master,
viz as he appears in this posture, or otherwise.

Now shall we come to the Use. Rules about living by a man's own faith.
But before to speak something by way of Caution: 1. In the Amplification: 2.
In the Restriction of this Truth.

Particulars:

First, Not so a man's faith, but still it is Gods; he is both the Author, and
the Finisher of our faith. It Is the faith of the operation of God, Col. 2.12.
Hence God will have us see our own backwardness both first and last: what ado
to believe at first? what ado to keep it when we have it? how often at such a
loss, that if the mighty power of God should not revive our dead faith, we and
our faith should both dye together? We are kept through faith, but it is by
the power of God to salvation, 1 Pet 1.5. So that if at any time we glorify
God by believing, we may say as David, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. Of thine own have we
given thee: we live indeed by our own faith, but so our own, that it is Gods
more then ours: Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved, through faith, and that is the
gift of God.

temporal respects the faith of another man may do him good. Masters by their
faith obtained healing for their Servants; Parents for their Children: Mat.
15.28. O woman, great is thy faith! Mat. 9.2. Jesus seeing their faith, healed
the sick of the Palsy. Gods people for the town or place where they live: The
innocent (i. e. the faithful doer) shall deliver the Island, Job 22. ver. last.
Gen 18.32. If ten righteoous persons shall be found there, I will not destroy
it for ten sake. Especially in Magistrates, Moses. Numb. 14. Hezekiah, Isaiah
37. put up prayers, and God saved the people, and places they praid for: Then
Phineas executed judgment (appeased God by faith) and so the plague was
stayed, Psalm. 106.30.

spiritual respects also, another man's faith may do good in the exercise of it.
Parents faith may do much for the spiritual good of their children: By faith
Isaac blessed Jacob, and Esau, concerning things to come; and, By faith Jacob
blessed both the sons of Joseph, Heb. 11.20, 21. They plead a kind of
hereditary right by the grand Charter. As the Devils Covenant runs much in a
blood, (many times) where there is a curse upon a family: so Gods Covenant,
where there is a blessing, Genesis 17.7. I will bless thee, and thy seed after
thee. And so Rom 11. They are beloved for the fathers sake, i.e. for Gods
promise of Free Grace made unto the Fathers, and pleaded, and sued out by the
faithful. Parents have God upon the hip (to speak with reverence) when they
wrestle with him in Prayer for their children. So you read of an hereditary
faith, as of hereditary temporal possessions; and it is a strong hold, if the
Livery be sued out: I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith which is in thee,
which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice, 2 Timothy 1.5.
It Is a strong pair of bellows to blow up the grace of God to a great flame. So
in the Ministry, who are spiritual Parents, faith may do much good exercised
in Preaching and Prayer, to beget the like faith in others; as one Candle
lights another, or one Natural Life begets another: so one Spiritual Life
begets another, by the immortal seed of the Word, warmed and inlivened by the
Spirit of God. 1 Cor. 4.15. Though you have ten thousand instructers in Christ,
yet not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the
Gospel. Hence the Apostle writing both to Timothy and Titus, uses great
boldness of speech, 1 Timothy 12. To Timothy, my own son in the faith; 1 Tit. 4.
To Titus, my own son after the common faith, says he. That faith which was in
Paul, did beget the like faith in Timothy and Titus.

comfort and glory also, by the faith of other men, than otherwise he should
have, when he under God has been an instrument of it. 1 Thessalonians 3.7, 8.
Brethren, we were comforted over you, in all our afflictions and distress, by
your faith; for now we live, if you stand fast in the Lord. See, the Apostle
did even live by their faith; i.e. far more comfortably than otherwise he
should have done. Phil. 4.1. My brethren, dearly beloved, and longed for, my
joy, and crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved. The Apostle calls
the believing Philippians, his joy, yea his crown of rejoicing; his Crown, not
only here, but hereafter to all eternity. Dan. 12.3. They that turn many to
righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. O how should this
quicken us to the duty! Jam. 5.19, 20. Brethren, if any of you do err from the
faith, and one convert him, let him know, that he which converteth a sinner
from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a
multitude of sins.

Thus much for Caution by way of Amplification. Secondly, by way of
Restriction; and there arise these Considerations:

sometimes in temporal respects, the faith of one may do good for another, yet
not always. The case may be such as in Ezekiel. 14.20. Though Noah, Daniel and
Job were in the land, as I live, says the Lord God, they shall deliver neither
sons nor daughters, they shall save only their own souls by their faith. Nay,
Christ himself, though he trusted in God his Father perfectly, yet had not
faith enough to save some temporally: Mark 6.5. And he could there do no mighty
work, save that he laid his hand upon a few sick folk, and healed them. Take
heed we never so harden our hearts against God, as to be rendered incapable of
good by others faith and prayers for us.

procure much temporal good for another in many things, yet it is not
sanctified in any, without an act of their own faith exercised in Word or
Prayer: 1 Timothy 4.4. Every creature of God is sanctified to us by the word and
prayer. Moses had faith enough to obtain many temporal blessings for the
people, which (because they had not faith to use them) were turned into curses
and judgments, Psalm. 78.30. They were not enstranged from their lust, but
while the meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them.

To all their Children and People always: Abraham could not do it for Ishmael,
Genesis 17. v. 18. O that Ishmael might live before thee, said he. Paul could not
do it for the Jews, Romans 9, 1, 2, 3. I could wish my self accursed from Christ,
for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh, who are Israelites; and
therefore carries away a heavy heart, v. 2. 2. Not to any, (so that they shall
have any comfort by it) till they believe themselves. Look as Parents convey a
natural life under God to their children, but they have no comfort in it, till
they live themselves, till they see with their own eyes, and breathe with their
own nosthrils, etc. So it is in spiritual life, though they may be means under
God of conveying, yet for all that the children do not live by their Parents
faith, nor people by their Ministers faith, but children, and people, and all
live by their own faith; every man must stand upon his own bottom, according
to the foundation he rests upon. The [just] shall live by his faith.

instruments of others conversion and faith, shall have more joy and glory, yet
you must understand that only of such as have faith themselves. Only such can
say, I live, if ye stand fast in the Lord. I will not dispute whether an
unbelieving Minister can beget faith in others. I suppose it may be so; Note.
else God himself by the mouth of the Apostle would not suppose it, 1 Cor. 19
27. lest while I preach to others, I my self become a castaway. They may be
like the builders of Noah's Ark, that made the Ark to save others, but were
drowned themselves. But I suppose very rarely God does honor them so. But
suppose it prove so, I am persuaded it is little joy to them. But as some carnal
Parents complain they have so many children; so they complain when any of Gods
children spring up under their Ministry. And surely their Consciences tell
them, that such must rise up in judgment against them another day. Thou that
teaehest another (and by preaching convertest others) teach thou not thy
self, Romans 2. Therefore such have no joy in others faith, unless they believe
themselves: So that in every respect it is true in a sound sense, The just
shall live by his faith.

Now for Use.

Papists, that talk much of the Cobblers Faith, Against the ^aith of Papists.
who had no faith of his own, but by saying he believed as the Church believed,
drove away the Devil. And (for my part) I believe it may be true, that the
Devil was willing to be driven away upon these terms, that he might confirm the
blind Papists in the Cobblers Faith, that is cobled up of Pride and Ignorance;
Pride in their great ones, that think they have so much faith and grace to
spare; and Ignorance in their mean ones, that are so silly, as to think they
may borrow, or buy of others for love or money, what they want themselves. And
therefore Mat. 25.9. as the five foolish Virgins they are sent to buy oil for
themselves of them that sell it. Some conceive those words [Go ye rather, and
buy] to be, not an Exhortation, but a Derision of foolish people, that think
they may buy the Oil of Grace, of others. As if a true Christian in the day of
Judgment, should say to an obstinate Papist, (then, when he is glad to lay
hold on the skirt of a Christian, and say, O let me go along with you, and
appear where you appear) No, we must look to our selves, go your way to your
Bishops and Priests, and purchase your Pardons and Indulgences from them, and
see if they can save you from the wrath of the Lamb, we cannot help you; every
man must live by his own faith. Ezekiel. 18. as the soul that sins shall die the
death; so the soul only that believes, shall live this Spiritual and Eternal
Life.

carnal Professors, as have no other faith, Of them that pin their faith on
others.
but what is pinned upon other men's sleeves. Ask them, why they are of his
Faith and Religion, rather then any other, they can give no sound reason from
the Word of God, but rather from Tradition; they received it by Tradition from
their Elders; their Fathers, and Forefathers were of that Religion before them,
and therefore they will be so too. Others it may be are profane, and
irreligious themselves, but they hope God will show them favor for their
friends sake. It may be their Father or Mother, or some in the family, are
eminent in the faith, and they hope they shall fare the better for their sake,
and that they shall slip into heaven under their wing, or by taking hold on
their skirts. Certainly, there may be a carnal confidence in spiritual friends;
Zech. 7.
therefore the Apostle says by way of prevention, 2 Cor. 5.16. Henceforth know
we no man after the flesh; yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh,
yet now henceforth know we him no more. Alas, it will be little comfort to a
man that he has kindred in Christ after the flesh, that he has been in his
company many a time and often, and heard him preach, and showed some respect unto
him; and yet this is that which wicked men do bear up themselves withal,
insomuch that they shall with much confidence plead it to Christ's own face at
the day of Judgment, Luke 13.26. Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten,
and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets, etc. but what
is Christ's answer? I tell you, I know you not whence you are; depart from me ye
workers of iniquity. But assure we our selves, Satan will not only delude
wicked men with carnal knowledge of Christ, but with a carnal and common
knowledge of their Christian friends: They shall bolster themselves up in this,
my Father, or my Grandfather were eminent Professors of the faith, and
therefore I doubt not but I shall crowd into heaven in their company. The Jews
boasted much of Abraham's faith (who was their father) and so of Isaac, and
Jacob, and of the Prophets, surely they had a strong presumption that they
should fare the better in the last day for their sakes: and therefore Christ to
take away their carnal confidence, tells them plainly, Luke 13.28. There shall
be weeping, and gnashing of teeth, when they shall see Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and they themselves thrust
out. O many a wicked Wife, Son, etc. shall see his glorified Father, Husband,
etc. but little enough to their comfort then: there shall be two in one bed,
the one shall be taken, and the other left; the one shall go to heaven, the
other to hell. Why so? The one was a believer, the other an unbeliever. And
look as the unbelievers infidelity cannot prejudice the believer; so the
believers faith faith cannot privilege the unbeliever. Every man shall then
stand upon his own bottom, whether he has built upon the rock, or upon the
sands. And therefore as it was wittily said of Non-residents, He that serves
his place by a Curate, must go to heaven by a Curate: so we may say truly and
seriously in this case, He that believes only by another, must only go to
heaven by another: for he shall never come there himself, unless himself
believes; for the just shall live by his faith.

faith of his own, then every one should have a Minister of his own;
Instruction.
for that is the usual way of begetting and increasing faith, Romans 10.17. Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. I confess God may sometime
bless the Ministry of a stranger: but that which God delights to work by most
commonly, and most effectually, is a Minister of our own. Heb. 13.17. Submit to
them that have the rule over you; for they watch for your souls, as they that
must give account. Every soul then should have a Watchman. Think seriously what
answers they will be, Note.
when God asks three Questions on the sickbed, and you need spiritual help and
comfort: 1. Why do ye not send for the Minister? according to Jam. 5.14 If any
be sick, let him send for the Elders of the Church, and they pray for him. And
you answer, Lord, we have none of our own. 2. Why no Minister? according to
that in Heb. 13.17. Answer, We were not able to maintain one, unless he would
vow perpetual single life. 3. And then God asks, Are you not able to expend
twice, thrice as much in things less necessary for feeding or clothing the body
in one month or week, than you should in a whole year to your Minister? And
you feign to answer, I Will beg mercy of God: At what time soever a sinner
repents, he shall find mercy. When alas, that answer is not Scripture, but
coined. This is Scripture, Prove. 1.28. When distress and anguish comes upon
you, then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer: they shall seek me
early, but shall not find me, for that they hated knowledge, and did not
choose the fear of the Lord.

prove our own selves, and so to prove our own faith. 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your
selves, Exhortation.
whether you be in the faith; prove your selves. We will examine our gold and
silver, and if we suspect it, we will not take a piece, but we'll bring it to
the balance and touchstone: and why so? because we are like to have an
interest in it, it is like to be our own, we are like to be the gainers or
losers by it, or else we would not take so much pains about. And shall we not
try our own faith, whether false, or counterfeit? Yet this is a common fault,
we are more busied about other men's matters then our own, as Peter said, Joh.
21. Lord, what shall this man do? or what do you think of such a man? is he
right? and all this while it may be we are strangers at home. As the Lapwing
draws the traveller as far as she can from her Nest: so the Devil draws men as
far as he can from the examining their own faith, he fills their heads full of
curiosity, either in matters of opinion, in stead of matters of Faith and Life,
and living by faith; or if they be busied about matters of practice, then to be
more curious about other men, than to make inquiry into our own condition. But
the truth is, we shall never have comfort in such a way; if ever we would have
sound comfort, we must prove our selves, our own faith, our own works. Gal.
6.4, 5. Let every man prove his own work, so shall he have rejoicing in
himself, and not in another.

QUESTION VI. When and how long the just lives by Faith?
ANswer, All his time, and at all times. Therefore no time is specified (to
include all.) Now this Question is double: 1. When? 2. How long? When] has
respect to the season. How long] to the continuance.

The season has respect either 1. To the Parts; or 2. Adjuncts of time. The
Parts of time are three; viz. Past, Present, and To come. The Adjuncts are
especially two, Prosperity, and Adversity: whence days are said to be good or
evil days, 1 Pet. 3.10. Not as if there were any inherent good or evil in one
time more than in another, simply considered. But only as sin and misery makes
them so. Now in all these seasons, the just lives by his faith, all his life,
and in every part of his life.

1. Parts of Time.
And, first for the Parts of time, Past, Present, to Come.

Time past.
1. He lives by faith in respect of Time past. Though a natural man makes little
or no use of time past, but looks at it as lost, that which death possesses;
unless sometime vainly wishing, O mihi praeteritos referat, etc.
O that I had my time before me again! or, O that I were young again! Yet a
good man makes good use of time past, and faith lives upon that which God has
done long before, or enabled is to do in our dependence upon him. Faith gathers
ground upon God, by such like Arguments as these: 1. For himself. I know God
loved me in times past; therefore sutely he loves me still. Jer. 31.3. The Lord
has appeared to me of old, saying, Yea, with an everlasting love have I loved
thee, etc. He did good to me in time past, therefore he will do good to me
again. Psalm. 77.5. I have considered the days of old -- Will the Lord cast off
for ever -- I will remember the years of the right hand of the most High. Psalm.
71.5, 6, etc. Thou art my hope, O Lord, from my youth, etc. 2. For the Church.
Isa. 51.9. Awake, awake, O arm of the Lord, awake as in the ancient days, in
the generations of old, etc. As if he had said, Thy power is everlasting, and
thy Covenant is everlasting, that is the same for ever: Ergo. Thus faith puts
life in the soul, by laying hold on time past. Though times change, Mal. 3, 6.
yet God changes not.

2. For Time Present. Thus Faith lives upon God: Time Present.
1. In asking daily bread, and all other necessaries, because God promises to
be the God of his people at all times, and in all places for ever. Heb. 13.5.
Phil. 4.11.
2. In being content with the present condition, and believing that present
dispensations are for our good. Thus 1 Cor. 3. -- Present things are said to be
ours. Faith tells a man, whatsoever is done in the course of Providence in
Heaven or Earth, it is ours, and for our good. Whereas unbelievers are never
content with the present, but always Wishers and Woulders.

3. For Time to Come. Time Future.
All that God will ever do (and that is much) all shall be for our good, come
what can come. Faith says, My Father sits at the stern* and guides all.
Unbelievers, though well for the present, are ever distrustfully careful for
the morrow, next day, next year; O what shall become of me and mine! But the
believer lives by his faith. Genesis 17. I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed after thee. Heb. 13. -- I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.

Thus he lives by faith in the several parts of Time, past, present, and to
come. And faith in the one, strengthens faith in the other: 2 Cor. 1.10. Who
has delivered us, and does deliver, in whom we trust that he will yet deliver
us.

Secondly, for the Adjuncts of time; Prosperity, 2. Adjuncts of Time.
and Adversity, good and evil days, one or other. Psalm. 62.8. Trust in him at
all times, ye people -- God is a refuge for us.

1. Faith in time of Prosperity.
1. For Prosperity. And as touching it, we shall observe how the just lives by
faith; 1. In obtaining: 2. In using: 3. In parting with a prosperous condition.

1. In seeking it.
1. He lives by faith in obtaining Prosperity: For, faith both directs a man in
the right order of seeking it; viz. By seeking the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness of it in the first place, and then expecting all other things to
be added, Mat. 6.
Mat. 6.33. And they are the best riches, that are thus got by way of
consequence. While the unbeliever hastes to be rich, O cives, cives, etc.
and has an evil eye (Prove. 28.22) and cries, Money, money before all. And
faith also directs a right measure and moderation of Spirit, in seeking. Prove.
30.8, 9. Give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food convenient for
me; making us willing to be at Gods carving. And moreover, in the right means,
as giving understanding out of the Word, to hate every false way, Psalm.
119.128. not as the unbeliever, who lives by his wits, not by his faith. First,
Negatively; Faith seeks not Prosperity either by Usury, Prove. ^8.8. or by
Cheating, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. or by Gaming, Prove. 13.11. [Which Gaming, besides it
has no blessing, is also the occasion of many sins, as Covetousness, Anger,
Blasphemy, etc. and believe it, such sport will bring down judgment in
earnest.] Secondly, Affirmatively; Faith directs to seek Prosperity: 1. By
Diligence in our Calling. Prove. 10.4. The hand of the diligent makes rich. 2.
By not trusting to our diligence, but Gods promise to the diligent: Prove. 10
22. The blessing of the Lord, it makes rich. Not sacrificing to our own Net,
but acknowledging with the Psalmist, that unless the Lord build the house, they
labor in vain that build it, etc. Psalm. 127.1.

2. In using it.
2. He lives by faith in the using of Prosperity. As 1. with an humble
diffidence in our selves and the creature, lest when we are full of the world,
full of our selves, by pride and security; and self-confidence, Prove 30 9.
we should forget God. The Moon at the full is furthest from the Sun, and in
greatest danger of Eclipse, because the earth is then between. Wherefore faith
applies that Caveat, Psalm. 62.10. When riches increase, set not your heart on
them. 2. With an holy confidence in God, when we have most, Job, 1 Timothy 6.17.
Charge the rich, that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living
God, etc. Faith applies that charge. It then crucifies a man to the world, when
he is full of the world. 3. In not or his lusts, but serving God in his good
estate. So did Job, by the Devils own confession, when he said, Does Job serve
God for naught? Job 1.10. To be rich in good works, is made the right use of
riches: 1 Timothy 6. Honor the Lord with thy substance; that is the Command, Prove.
3.9. An unbeliever says, May I not do what I will with my own, etc? He
remembers not, that what he has is Gods, and himself but a steward: therefore
he serves himself, and makes provision for the flesh, Romans 13.
to satisfy the lusts of pride, of drunkenness, of uncleanness, etc. When I
fed them to the full, they were as fed horses, (Jer. 5.7.) A full-fed horse
that lifts up his heel against his Master, is unworthy of his provender. But
ordinarily, this poor creature is more loving to his Master, then men to God;
according to that complaint, Isa. 1.2. Lastly, laying his goods out to
spiritual advantages; so making friends of enemies (for ordinarily no greater
enemy to our salvation, than these things) friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, Luke 16 9. So to lay out, is to lay up against a time of need,
not only in the world to come, but in this world. Eccles. 11.2. Give a portion
to seven, and also to eight, for thou know not what evil shall be on the
earth: Contrary to the reasoning of an unbeliever, or churlish N^bal.

3. As he lives by faith in obtaining and using, 3. In parting wi^h it.
so in being willing to part with a prosperous condition. He that in prosperity
terminates his desire in the creature, lives by sense: But he that terminates
his desire in God, lives by faith. For as we must rejoice in God when we have
no Creature Comforts, (as Hab. chap 3.17.) so when we have all manner of
Creature Comforts. We are by faith to set loose from the world, when we have
most of it; as a passenger that stays but for a fair wind, and then he is
willing to let loose from the shore, and hoyse up sail into the Main; if God
give a fair call, willing to leave all: as Job, chap 2. and those Christians,
Heb. 10.34. -- that suffered joyfully the spoiling of their goods; or the
faithful Priests and Levites, that left their suburbs and possessessions, to go
to Jerusalem from the Idolatry of Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14. The natural
man, when he has abundance, says he has something to trust to; Soul, eat,
drink, aad be merry, thou have much good laid up for many years, etc. as the
rich fool, Luke 12. It Is dangerous to live upon the creature: For Jer. 17.5.
Cursed be that man that makes flesh his arm, etc.

neither poverty nor riches. But there is most danger in prosperity. It has
slain its ten thousands, as was said of David in the Song. The prosperity of
fools slayes them, Prove 1. last. Whereas adversity sometimes saves them. So
David, Psalm. 119 It was good for me that I was afflicted: Periissem, nisi
periissem, as he said. Therefore you have the need of faith in prosperity so
pressed: Deuteronomy. 8.10, 11 When thou art full, take heed, etc.

we live by faith, by considering what we do about our prosperity, according to
the Particulars spoken of, in getting, using, and being willing to part with
our Estates.

But so much for the first Adjunct of Time; viz. Prosperity.

Now let us see how a believer lives by faith in Adversity. Things adverse,
fall out either 1. In time of Life: 2. Faith in time of adversity.
or 2. In Death: He lives by Faith in respect to either.

First, in time of Life. I Branch. In Life.


And this is principally meant here, where this great Oracle of our Faith, or
living by faith is delivered. The people being in great distress by means of
Babylon, the Prophet upon his Watchtower, expostulates the case with God: God
answers, He will deliver them, but not yet. -- The vision is for an appointed
time. Obj. But how shall they be able to subsist in the mean time? A. The Lord
by the Prophet answers, That, the proud person will scorn to to wait upon the
Lord so long. -- His soul that is lifted up: and withdraws it self to false
refuges; yea, But the just shall live by his faith in these evil times, and in
the midst of greatest discouragements.

For the further clearing of this, we shall let see, 1. That it is so, The just
does then live by his faith. 2. In what things living by faith then consists.
3. In what manner he does it. 4. By what means: and then apply it.

Paul, Gal. 2.20. Though the Apostle was crucified with Christ, i.e. partaker
of his sufferings, Nevertheless, I live, says he: he is also partaker of the
life of Christ. Moses, Heb. 11.^4, 25. by faith chose afflictions, rather than
the pleasure of sin. David, 1 Samuel 30.6. under heavy affliction and adversity,
comforted himself in his God. See for all, Psalm. 119.50. This is my comfort in
my affliction: for thy word has quickened me.

Ans. 1. In relation to inward troubles, Ans. 1. In relation to inward Troubles.
he lives by faith under Corruptions, Tentations, Desertions. 1. Instance of
the life of faith under Corruptions, you have in the Church: Mic. 7.19. He will
subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all our sins into the depths of the
sea. And in Paul, Romans 7. -- O wretched man that I am, etc. yet, I thank my God
through Jesus Christ my Lord. He puts up head from under water as it were. 2.
For Faith under Temptations, see 1 Pet. 5.8. Whom (ie. Satan) resist, steadfast
in the faith. Fairh can resist him. Besides, faith sees the devil chained up,
(2 Pet. 2.4.) that he cannot tempt whom, when, how far, how long he wills.
Clear instance in Job's case, Chap. 1.10. 3. Under Desertions also: For though
Communion with God may be debarred for a time, yet Union is unchangable (Heb.
13.5, 6.) I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: So that we may boldly say,
The Lord is my helper, etc. And that 1. On Gods part, Romans 5.10. If when we
were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more
being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. Therefore he that sits in
darkness, and sees no light (as it is Isa. 50. last) has encouragement to
trust in the Name of the Lord. See how David stays his heart in this case,
Psalm. 42.5. Why art thou sad, O my soul; put thy trust in God, I shall yet
praise him, etc. 2. The Union is unchangeable on our parts too: For God has
promised, Jer. 32.40. to put his fear in our hearts, that we shall not depart
from him, as he will not from us. Wherefore the Apostle says, 1 John 3.9. He
that is born of God cannot sin, (i.e. utterly) because the seed of God
remains in him. 3. On the enemies part also, as to any thing they can do to
break it. Romans 8.35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, or distress, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? etc.

2. In relation to outward Troubles: 2. In outward troubles.
he lives the life of faith, both in respect of the Troubles themselves, and
the effects of those troubles.

The troubles themselves may be considered: 1. As in the Body. And here are
sicknesses and infirmities. In these he lives by faith, as acknowledging them
the effect of his sin, Lam 3.39, 40, and therefore is stirred up to search and
try his ways; and then with David, to cry to the Lord for healing: Psalm. 41.4.
Heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee. The touch of faith can heal. The
prayer of Faith and Hezekiah, Isa 38. The prayer of faith saves the sick, Jam
5. 2. Or in the Estate; and here are losses, and crosses, and wants. Faith in
the loss of goods, apprehends a better and more enduring substance, Heb. 10.34.
In the loss of Friends, Faith says, Yet my God lives; if a Husband. Yet my
Husband Christ lives; if a Father, Yet the faithful can say, Our Father which
art Heaven; if Children, David you see could comfort himself in the loss of his
Child, 2 Samuel 12.23.

Obj. Yea, and so could I, if I were assured of their good estate.

Ans. However, thou may have comfort by virtue of these general promises:
Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, to such as keep his
Covenant. And Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together for good to
those that fear God. 3. In Name: and here are reproaches, lies, slanders, etc.
You have a large instance of faith, bearing up against such evils, Heb. 10.33,
35, 36, 37, 38. 4 In Doubtful actions. Here faith has a promise; Psalm. 37.5.
Commit thy way to the Lord, and he shall bring thy desire to pass. 5. Or in
Opposition of Enemies; whether 1. Wicked men, Psalm. 3.6. Or 2. Satan, 1 Pet
5.8. Or 3. The World, 1 John 5.4. 6. Lastly, troubles may arise from the
Displeasure of Friends. Faith also overcomes these: Jacob's faith his Brother
Esau's anger, Genesis 32. Moses faith, the wrath of Pharaoh, Heb. 11.27. Daniels
faith made him fearless of the Kings Decree, Dan. 6.10.

So for the Troubles themselves. 2. The just lives by faith also in the effects
of outward Troubles; and that either 1. In themselves; whence arises Passion:
or 2. Toward others; whence arises Compassion.

Faith in Passions.
First, he lives by faith in those disquieting Passions and affections, which
outward troubles stir up in the soul: which are especially three; Fear,
Sorrow, Care. Fear is stirred up from the apprehension of imminent evils:
Sorrow, from the feeling of present evils: and Care, from both; viz. to
prevent, if the evils be imminent; to bear, or remove, if present. Now a
Christian lives by faith in all these.

1. Of Fear.
1. In his Fears. Fear is a strong Passion; it makes sometimes the very life
hang in suspense. See Deuteronomy. 28.66. Peter on the water cries out for fear, Save,
Master, I perish. Now, What time I am afraid, says David, I will trust in
thee, Psalm. 56.3. So Jehosaphats fear drove him to God: 2 Chronicles. 20. -- He
feared, and proclaimed a fast; and cried, Lord, we know not what to do, but our
eyes are up unto thee. David and Jehosaphat only, and such eminent Saints. No:
for it is said of any faithful man, Psalm. 112. He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings; How so? -- his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. Whereas a carnal
man, sometimes he is killed with the very fear; Dan. 5.
as Belshazzar, his fear strikes him to the very heart at first: But a believer
presently looks at both Command and Promise, Isa. 8.12, 13. Fear ye not their
fear, nor be afraid, but sanctify the Lord in your heart; let him be your fear
and your dread, and he shall be for a Sanctuary, etc.

2. Of Sorrow.
2. In Sorrows. Though a believer puts not off natural affection, yet he does
not sorrow as those without faith, -- without hope, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. But
according to that of the Apostle in another place, 2 Cor. 6.10. He is as
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing. -- Rejoicing in hope, Romans 5.2. even before
the evil be removed: ver 3. -- We glory in tribulations, etc.

3. In Cares. Whereas a carnal man is eaten up of cares; 3. Of Care.
cares choke the seed of the Word in him: Faith teaches a Christian to cast
all his cares upon God, 1 Pet. 5.7. viz 1. By looking to the Promise: Heb.
13.5. He has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. 2. By making his
request known, Phil 4 6. 3. By doing his duty, and leaving the success to God:
Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way to the Lord; he shall do it. What is begun in his
strength, trust him with the end and issue. 4. In making God his portion in
want of all things: Psalm. 16.2. O my soul, thou have said to the Lord, Thou art
my Lord. See there how a believing soul acts faith in the worst hours, even
when the grave and hell is apprehended, ibid. v. 9, 10. Yet then, O my soul,
though have said unto the Lord, Thou art my portion. My good extends not unto
thee; yea, but thy goodness extends to me. Mark: my goodness extends not to
thee -- if I had all the world. (For magis and minus make no difference.) Yea,
but thy goodness extends to me, if I had nothing in the world. There is
virtually in God, whatsoever is in all Creatures: So that God can nourish
without meat, as well as with it; warm without clothes, etc. Therefore God is a
sufficient portion of himself, And faith believing this, can cheerfully embrace
Christ and Reproach, Christ and a Prison Christ and Poverty, Christ and Death.
Thus the soul lives by faith in adversity, as having nothing, 2 Cor. 6.
and yet possessing all things.

Secondly, Faith in Compassions.
He lives by faith in the effect of our own trouble toward others, and that is
Compassion. Faith tells us, this is one main end of our sufferings, that we may
pity others: 1. In Soul straits. One that knows what belongs to a wounded
Spirit, cannot but pity: Pro. 18.14. Other infirmities a man's own Spirit can
sustain, but a wounded Spirit who can bear? It Is a true saying, (besides
reading, meditation, and prayer) Temptation makes a good Divine. Therefore such
an one is set out as meetly qualified for a High Priest -- who can have
compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way, for that he
himself also is compassed with infirmity, Heb. 5.2. And also 2. In outward
troubles; as sickness, poverty, banishment, and the like. One that has been in
them, knows the better to pity others: Exodus 23.9 Ye know the heart of a
stranger, seeing you were strangers in the land of Egypt. 2 Cor. 1.4. We are
comforted in our tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them which are in
any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.

Quest. How does the just live by faith in point of Compassion?

Ans. Diverse ways: 1. In observing the Precept unto it: 1 Pet. 3.8. Have
compassion one of another; love as brethren; be pitiful; be courteous. 2. In
heeding the threatening of judgment without mercy (Jam. 2.10) to them that show
no mercy. 3. In eying the Promise, Mat. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy. And Prove. 19.17. He that has pity on the poor, lends to
the Lord, and he will repay him again: And says Christ, With the same measure
that you mete, shall it be measured to you again, etc. Luke 6.38. And here I
cannot but give you of this place thanks for your liberality to the poor, the
stranger, the fatherless, and widows, for the many bowels refreshed by you, etc.
And these are the things which the just lives by faith in concerning adversity.

manner he lives by faith in troubles? or in what particular passages of
Providence. And here are these things observable:

Ans. Manner of living by faith in troubles.
1. That he does it, 1. In preventing the storm: So 2 Kings 19.6. upon Hezekiahs
prayer of faith, the storm of Sennacheribs invasion was driven back. And Jon.
3. the Ninevites believing God, drove back that storm threatened by Jonah. Nor
Devils nor Witches have any power over a man, if he believes; therefore Christ
to Peter, Luke 22.32. Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to have you, that he may
winnow you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: as if
he had said, So long as Faith holds out, Satan has no power, whom therefore
resist, steadfast in the faith, 1 Pet. 5.

2. In looking at God Ordaining all troubles; sc. 1. That every man must look
for some, Rom 8.29. where speaking of sufferings, he says, We were
predestinate to be conformable to the image of his Son. 2. What and how many
every man shall have. Faith sees the Cup in a Fathers hand: Thou could have
no power, unless it were givon thee from above, said Christ to Pilate.

3. In looking at God Ordering and Disposing all things in midst of
Confusion. Joseph his selling, imprisoning, and exalting again, all was by Gods
disposing* though the instruments knew it not. Phil. 1.12. Paul tells them,
that the things which happened to him, seemingly as a stoppage, in truth made
for a furtherance of the Gospel. And Romans 8.28. We know that all things work
together for good, to them that love God.

4. In seeing God Bounding and Limiting troubles, as in Jobs case, Chap. 2.
When affliction breaks in as the sea, Faith hears God say, Huc usque; Hitherto,
and no further, shall thy proud waves come: Isa. 10 22. The consumption
determined, shall overflow in righteousness. And so again, Isa. 27.7, 8. In
measure thou will debate with it: He will stay his rough wind in the day of the
east wind.

5. In seeing Gods Protection; that however the storm comes to fall upon us,
yet he is so merciful, as to hold his holy hand of protection over us. Yea,
Psalm. 91.4. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall
thou trust, his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

6. In Supporting, or seeing Gods Support; that however the storm comes and
falls upon us without any shelter, yet God is merciful in giving sufficient
strength to bear it: 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to
be tempted above what you are able, but will with the temptation make a way to
escape, that you may be able to bear. It is many times a wonder, nay a Miracle,
to see how God supports his people, when they cannot get off the trouble, yet
making them hear, My grace is sufficient for thee, viz. my grace applied by
faith.

7. In Sanctifying troubles: Rev. 7.17. There, they that came out of great
tribulations, washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
There is a malignity in all afflictions; but faith in Christ crucified, takes
away that malignity and venomous sting? Isa. 27 9. This is all the fruit (of
those troubles) To purge away their sin.

8. In Saving and Delivering, or fitting the soul for deliverance; that
howsoever troubles lie on a great while, the Lord will send help in due time:
Therefore God is styled, A present help in time of trouble, Psalm. 46. And
although many be the troubles of the righteous, yet the Lord delivers them out
of all, as it is Psalm. 34.19. Wherefore it is noted, that it was by faith, that
Israel was delivered out of Egypt, when they passed through the Red sea, Heb.
11.29.

9. In Sanctifying Deliverance: Luke 1.74, 75. Who has delivered us out of the
hands of our enemies, that we might serve him, in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our lives.



Ans. Means of living by faith in troubles.
Ans. First, in weighing spiritual mercies against temporal evils. 1 Samuel 30.6.
David ready to be stoned, comforted himself in the Lord his God. The Lord
himself propounds a spiritual mercy against a temporal evil, to sustain his
people under it. Isa 30.20. Though the Lord give you the bread of affliction,
and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers be removed into a
corner. The Apostle make use of such a support, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17. For this cause
we faint not; for though our outward man perish, our inward man is renewed day
by day.

2. In making the soul to rest upon the naked Word of God, though it be against
ordinary reason. So Abraham, Romans 4.17. Believed in hope against hope --
according to what was spoken, so shall thy seed be. In hope of Faith, against
hope of Reason. Thus by faith we believe the Creation of the World by the bare
Word of God, without precedent matter, Heb. 11.3. Faith looks up to the
promise. Isa. 43.1, 2. -- When thou passest through the waters; I will be with
thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee. when thou walk
through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, etc.

3. In enabling the soul to rely on Gods Attributes, which make good his Word
and Promise. As 1. His Power, Genesis 17.1. I am God Almighty, walk before me, and
be thou perfect. 2. His Truth, (and this binds him, as Power enables him to
help) Psalm. 31.5. Into thy hands I commit my Spirit -- O Lord God of Truth.
Heb. 11.11. Sarah believed him faithful who had promised. 3. His Love, to help,
and even to prevent, as the Prodigal's father ran to meet his son afar off.
Isa. 65.24. Yea, before they call, I will answer; and while they are yet
speaking, I will hear. See Psalm. 32.5. 4 His Unchangeableness. Jam. 1.17. with
whom there is no shadow of change.

4. In making the absent good to be present. Faith looks beyond the clouds and
skies, and seek all clear above. Moses, Heb. 11.25, etc. looks through the
affliction and reproach of Christ, and sees the recompense of reward. We
rejoice (now) says the Apostle, in hope of glory, Romans 5.2. So faith sees the
after-good of the Church as present, Revel. 18.2. Babylon, as good as fallen
above a thousand years before.

5. In strengthening Patience. Therefore Faith and Patience are joined together.
So Heb. 10.35, 36, 37. Cast not away your confidence, which has great
recompense of reward: For, you have need of patience, that when you have done
the will of God, you may inherit the promise. Now by patience we possess our
souls; through it, all is calm within, while storms are without. A wounded
conscience within, is worse then the outward burden; like a sore back to the
horse: But faith heals this sore, giving us peace with God, and so enables to
bear the outward burden, the inward burden being removed. As for this, it
casts all the burden of its cares, fears and sorrows, upon God; and so is
quiet. And thus much for the Life of Faith in those Adversities which happen in
the course of our Life.

Now see how he lives the Life of Faith in Death.

II Branch Of Adversity, viz. Faith in death
A believer lives by faith in Death. Faith is a godly man's life at the time of
his death; as it appears by the living speeches of dying men. David, Psalm. 23.
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil:
Simeon, Luke 2. Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace.

The Cloud of Witnesses, Heb. 11. All these died in faith, v 13.

Reasons. 1.
1. They died in faith, because they believed the accomplishment of promises to
be fulfilled after death: as in the same place, Heb. 11.13. -- not having
received the promises, but seeing them afar off, and persuaded of them.
Believers dye in faith, 1. For their Posterity; as in the examples of Isaac and
Jacob, Heb. 11.20, 21. who, because God had promised to be the God of their
seed, when they were dying, applied it to their posterity, and blessed them
concerning things to come. 2. For the Church, believing that God will make it a
praise in the earth, Isa. 67.2. 3. For Themselves, when they go down to the
waves of hell and the grave; they see land afar off. Stephen, ready to be
stoned, Behold, says he, I see heaven opened, and the Son of Man standing at
the right hand of God, Acts 7.56 Stephen sees heaven opened to receive him. And
Job, chap. 19.25. I know my Redeemer lives -- and though after my skin, worms
destroy this body, yet in my flesh I shall s^e God. Moses likewise, in the
hazarding of himself in Egypt, had respect to the resurrection of his name and
body, and the recompense of reward, Heb. 11.26. The Saints (like Moses upon the
top of Mount Nebo, Deuteronomy. 34.1.) take a view of Canaan by faith, and then they
are willing to dye. See Paul for further instance, 2 Cor. 5. from v. 1. to 9.

2. Believers dye in faith, because they see it a Conquered enemy. Death, says
the Apostle, is swallowed up in victory, by Christ. Hos. 13.13. O death, I will
be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction. It Is part of Christ's
victory to conquer Death: 1. By conquering the devil, that had the power of
death. 2. Our fear of death, See Heb. 2.14, 15.

3. They see the sting of death pulled out; so conquered, as disarmed. 1 Cor.
15.55. O death, where is thy sting! -- The sting of death is sin -- But thanks
be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

4. They see it, not only a conquered and disarmed enemy, but made their
servant. All things are yours, says the Apostle to believers, 1 Cor. 3.21* 22.
as Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas are yours, so death is yours, says he. As you
are under God, that is under you.

5. Nay, they see it as a Friend. 1. In freeing them from the miseries of this
life: 2. In being their Porter or Usher into eternal life. There are five
Concomitants of this life which make it troublesome, and Death befriends the
Saints in them all, by taking them away from them.

There is, 1. The sinfulness of their Natures, which makes them cry out with
Paul, O wretched man* that I am, who shall deliver, etc? 2. There is the vanity
of the Creature, a sore evil. For here, Omnia vanitas, All is vanity. 3. The
Wickedness of the World, that constrains the Saints many times to complain with
David, Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, etc. 4. There are also
Gods judgments upon the world. In which respect death makes the godly happy:
for as it is Isa. 57.1, 2. -- they are taken away from the evil to come; they
rest in their beds, etc. 5. The last evil Concomitant is, the believers
distance from Christ: 2 Cor. 5.6. while we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord: therefore we desire, says he, to be absent from the
body, and present with the Lord.


6. Death is not only changed to a believer, but faith in death is seen also
by altering our judgments concerning death. The natural face of death is
terrible to Nature, and feared: but faith sees it with desire. Paul and Simeon
can say, I desire to be dissolved. Christ has not only conquered death for
his, but the fear of death, as was said before, Heb. 2.14.

And this resolves the second part of the Question, How long a believer is to
live by his faith: and that is, All his life long, till death, and then in
death: Therefore it is said, Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will
give thee the crown of life. And Gal. 2.20. I live, says Paul (all the while I
live) by the faith of the Son of God, etc. Hence the word of the Text is put in
the Future tense, [The just shall live by his faith] to signify the perpetuity
of this life of faith. As long as we live, we must live by faith.

But no longer. And therefore though Faith is excellent in some respect; yet
Love is more excellent in another, viz. in regard of durance. 1 Cor. 13.8. to
the end, it is said there, Love never fails. But knowledge, and means of
knowledge, shall cease, and faith shall cease, but Charity never. And therefore
though Faith is above
before Charity in the first apprehension of Christ; yet Charity is above Faith
in the everlasting enjoyment of Christ, and the society of true Christians,
However, Faith is of excellent use all ou^ life long; till we come to a perfect
vision, we live by faith (2 Cor. 5.7.) But no longer; for we need it no longer:
As a man that sends home a friend wi^h a candle and lanthorn in a dark night,
commands the messenger to light him to his own door, and then to return again:
for it is supposed he has more light in his own house, than the lathorn could
afford. Such a charge God gives to his Word, (and to faith the lanthorn-bearer)
Psalm. 119.105. Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my paths: Go,
give such a man light until he come to Heaven, and leave him there. Or, as God
gave Commission to the Angel, Acts 12. to awaken Peter, and to shake off his
chain, to clothe him with garments, to open the gates, to lead him through the
first and second Ward: and when he had done so, forthwith the Angel departed
from him. Just so, Faith is like this Angel; it awakens us out of the the sleep
of sin, shakes off the chains of Satan, clothes us with the righteousness of
Christ, opens the door of the ear and heart, leads us through the first and
second Ward of all oppositions and temptations, yea through the iron gate of
death it self, and then it leaves us. Or as the Pillar of the Cloud and fire
went along with the Israelites al^ ^^e way of the Wilderness (and a very
comfortable companion it was, indeed the very Angel of God's presence:) But
when it once came to Canaan, then it left them, they saw it no more. So Faith
is a sweet companion, to direct us in a right way in the wilderness of this
life, till we come to the Celestial Canaan, that flows with the milk and honey
of Gods Beatifical Presence; and then it leaves us, because then we shall have
in possession what before we did hope for, and apprehend by faith. Thus see how
long we live by faith: as the Stars give light till the Sun arises; so Faith,
till Christ, the Sun of Righteousness shines bright in Heaven. A man has no
use of a Ship or Boat any longer than he is at Sea; when he once comes to the
Haven, it will carry him no further; if he will have it any further, he must
carry it, it will not carry him: So faith carries a man upon the waters of this
troublesome world, till we come to the haven of Eternal Happiness, and then
there is no further use of it. In the meanwhile, make much of it, and take
heed above all things, that thou make not shipwreck of faith. 1 Timothy 1.19.
To conclude, Faith is a Christians Companion all along: it says to the Soul,
as Ruth to her Mother, Ruth 1.16, 17. -- Whither thou go, I will go; and
where thou lodgest, I will lodge; where thou die, will I die, and there will
I be buried.

Now for the Use of this sixth Head of the Life of Faith.



Discovery of the excellency of Faith.
1. It triumphs over Death: It is a Conqueror over Conquerors; and therefore
makes us more then Conquerors, through Jesus Christ that has loved us, Romans
8.37. Faith is sure of victory beforehand. Nay, though we are overcome in some
respect, we overcome those that overcome us in other respects. Even those that
have power to put us to death, we may overcome them by dying. Rev. 12.11. And
they ^vercame him (the Dragon) by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of
their Testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death.

2. Here Is also the Excellency of Faith: A Christian lives by it in time of all
adversity. When all other comforts dye, this lives. It Is like the Laurel, it
flourishes in winter, when all other Trees cast their leaves. It Is like Noah's
Ark, it lifts a man above the floods of many waters, when others sink into the
gulf of despair. And indeed, it was not so much the Ark of Noah, as the Faith
of Noah, that bare him above the waters. Heb. 11.7. By faith Noah -- prepared
an Ark, to the saving of his house, etc. All other men in the floods of
adversity are born up with bladders, the windy bladders of some vain confidence
in Creature Comforts, O they have such a friend, such a device, etc! And when
these break, down they sink. But a believer by Faith is born up by the
everlasting mercy of God. Deuteronomy. 33.27. Underneath are the everlasting Arms,
etc. And therefore he can never sink so low, but faith will raise him up again.
Psalm. 32.6. Surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come nigh unto
him. Faith therefore is an excellent grace; A Christians strong water in
fainting-fits: (Psalm 27.13. I had fainted, but that I hoped to see the goodness
of God) Yea, it is his life in Death.

Trial of faith from adversities.
both for the Being of it, and Degree. In Luke 8.13. you read of some that
believe for a while, but in time of Temptation fall away. These had never true
faith, if they totally and finally fall. There may indeed be shakings of faith
in adversity, as the Disciples in the storm were full of fears. Mat. 8.26.
But then it argues the less Faith; Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?
The more faith, the less fear; and the more fear, the less faith. You shall
have some men in prosperity, O they are mavelous confident, as Peter was,
Mat. 26. Though all men shall be offended because of thee, says he to Christ,
yet will I never be offended: yet in adversity their hearts sink, and they are
ready to deny Christ, as he Prove. 24.10. If thou faint in the day of adversity,
thy strength is but small. Every bungler can sail fairly in a calm: but it
proves a skilful Pilot to govern a Ship well in a storm. Every common Professor
can believe in health, in wealth, in prosperity: But if thou can believe in
sickness, in poverty, in adversity of all sorts, then bless God for his free
grace in Christ, with Paul, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ,
which strengthens me.

Showing the necessity of faith in adversities.
O build on the Rock; when the rain descends, and the floods come, and the
winds blow. We cannot live comfortably without it one day, one hour, minute!
Mat. 7.24.
Every time is either prosperous or adverse: we need faith in both; in every
thing we do, suffer, enjoy. We hear by faith, we pray by faith, buy and sell by
faith; eat and drink by faith: therefore we cannot live without it. Non aqua
and igni magis utimur. We use not fire and water more; no, not the air which we
suck into our nostrils. We cannot be one moment without it.

Learn patience in adversity.
There are many impatient ones, like Micah robbed of his gods, Judge 18. or like
Rachel, Jer. 31. weeping, and refusing to be comforted; or Cain, Genesis 4. that
complain of their punishment, as greater than can be born. But it is for want of
faith; strangers in this to the Covenant of Grace. If we be in the Covenant,
then know, 1. That there is living in adversity; yea, possibly better living
than without: Never less in prison, than when in prison: Never less overcome of
the world, than when I lose all the world; as a gracious woman said. 2. There Is
more exercise of faith in adversity. If we lose friends, we are put upon
seeking friendship with God; if we lose goods, or silver, or gold, there is
increase to be made of the golden Grace. 1 Pet. 1.7. The trial of your faith,
much more precious than gold: Therefore be patient, faint not Prove. 3 11. My
son, despise not the chastening of the Lord, nor be weary of his correction.
There are two extremes to be avoided under afflictions; the not bearing them,
or their overbearing us.

To make much of faith as our life in troubles.
To cherish and nourish it, may increase it, 1 Pet. 2.2. As new born babes
desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby. And we need it
all: For if the righteous scarcely be saved; the just that lives by his faith,
if he scarcely (i.e. quoad nos) be saved, what shall those do that are without
it? We should make much of our faith, as men make much of that Medicine, or
that Strong-water, that stands them in stead, and preserves their life at a
dead lift. Get good store of that we must live by in adversity. Therefore as
Sailers provide Tackling fit for a storm; so provide we for that storm, when
this earthly Tabernacle shall crack; when the keepers of the house shall
tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease, etc.
as you have it in that elegant description, Eccles. 12.3, 4, 5. That degree of
faith which will serve turn in a ship, will not serve turn when we come to walk
upon the waters, with Peter, Mat 14.28, 29* That degree of faith which will
serve turn in a calm, will no serve turn in a storm. Peter walked till he saw
the wind boisterous, then he was afraid, and began to sink. Therefore pray
Christ, as the Disciples, when they had a hard task set them, Luke 17.3, 4, 5.
Lord, say they, increase our faith.

Live by faith in adversity.
desertion; in troubles outward, in body, goods, and actions, from friends or
from enemies, learn to live by faith.

Motives. Motives.
1. God is more glorified in our living by faith in adversities. Sure God is
made known for a good Master, when his servants are seen to stick so close to
him as Job, Chap. 1.^0, 20, 21. and Chap. 2.5, etc. So Job 13.15 If he slay me,
I will trust in him.

2. The Church, and our Fellow Members, are hereby edified. As many were
strengthened through Paul's bands and imprisonment, Phil. 1.12 etc. And sanguis
Martyrum, was called semen Ecclesiae.

3. Our selves shall be the rather comforted and rewarded: Heb. 10.35. Cast not
away your confidence, which has great recompense of reward. Jam. 1.12. Blessed
is the man that endures temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the
crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him. 1 Pet. 1.7.
The trial of your faith, much more precious than of gold which perishes, shall
be found to praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

Reproof for want of faith in* bearing evils.
As they are justly reproved who live not by faith in prosperity, but upon
themselves and creatures, resolving to repent and believe when they come into
straits (who keep faith, as men keep Bezoar or Aqua-vitae, for a dead lift) so
they are to be reproved, who seem to live by faith in prospe^ity, but nothing
so in adversity. As if a man should ride with sword and buckler all the way,
and then cast them away when he meets with the enemy. While Prosperity and
Profession go hand in hand, who but they? Though all men deny thee, yet will
not I deny thee. But when they come to the Highpriests Hall, then deny, and
swear, and forswear, They know not the Man. Whilst it is fair weather, all
Birds sing merrily; but, few sing in a storm. Few Christians sing the praises
of God in a storm of adversity. Few, like the Nightingale, sing in the dark
night, with the thorn of Persecution at their breast. Few sing, nay few live,
especially the life of faith: Or, if they live the life of nature, are ready to
take the counsel of Job's wife, Curse God and dye. The reason is, Because they
are not sound in prosperity. If faith shake in affliction, it is weak; if wholly
lost, 'twas false. There is building on the Sand, Mat. 7.24. Therefore be sound
in the faith: for, an hypocrites hope, is as the spiders web, Job 8.14. yea it
is nothing: for, (Job 27.8.) What is the hope of the hypocrite? If you be such
as Peter, you will fall shamefully* if such as Simon Magus, you will fall
irrecoverably. Not to live by faith in adversiry; it argues, That such 1. Prize
not spiritual Mercies. 2. Rely not on a naked Promise without a Pawn. 3. Count
not on Gods Attributes; believe not his Truth, Power, Willingness,
Unchangeableness.


QUEST. VII. What Life is that the Just lives by his Faith?
ANd the Answer is very general, All kind of life, that may truly be called
life. For the life of sinners, though never so pleasurable, is a death rather
than a life. He or she that lives in pleasures, is dead while she lives, 1 Timothy 5.6. yea, twice dead, Jude v. 12. For the death of the soul, is the
separation of the soul from God, who is the life of the soul, as the soul is
the life of the body.

But all kind of life, that is worth the name of life, the just lives it, by
faith. Therefore it is spoken of, indefinitely [The just shall live, etc.] that
it may include all lives. As all life comes from that God in whom there is a
Trinity of Persons: so from this God, the just does enjoy a Trinity of lives.
It Is said, Genesis 2.7. Jehovah Elohim breathed into man's nostrils the breath of
lives; viz. either the Vegetative life, common with Plants, the Sensitive,
common with Beasts; and Rational, common with Angels: Or else take it of life
Natural, Spiritual, and Eternal: All which, in some respect, the just lives, by
virtue of his faith.

First then, for Natural Life: he lives this, by faith (I speak not of corrupt
Nature, I. Natural life lived by faith.
but of that life which flows from the conjunction of Soul and Body) 1. In
respect of the act of living. Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, 1. In the act of
living.
but Christ lives in me; and the life I now live, I live by the faith of the
Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. That a justified person is
suffered to live and breathe, it is by the benefit of faith.

Obj. But you will say, All enjoy natural life, even unbelievers as well as
they that do believe.

Ans. Yet upon different grounds. It Is true: All being sinners in Adam, and in
our selves, we have forfeited our lives: yet God takes not the forfeiture on
believer^, no nor on unbelievers. But on different grounds. To make it plain by
a Similitude: Suppose two men condemned to dye; the one is Reprieved, the other
Pardoned by the mediation of a friend at Court. The Reprieved man is dead in
Law, though he live; and must dye shamefully at last. But the other lives so,
as not to be questioned again; and when he dies, he dies with honor and
respect. Just so, an unbeliever lives as a man Reprieved: Joh. 3.18. He that
believes not, is condemned already. A believer lives as a man pardoned and
absolved by the merit and mediation of his friend in the Highest Court of
Heaven; and though he die, his death is honorable; it is but a change for a
better life. Thus we read of David pardoned in respect of his temporal life, 2 Samuel 12.13. The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not die.

2. In the conservation of life.
2. In respect of the Conservation of life in the use of means: For however a
believer and unbeliever use both of them the same means for the maintaining of
life, yet not in the same manner. They use both the same air, the same
exercise, the same bread: but the unbeliever uses these means as a beast, and
rests in the means, and never looks higher: Luke 12.19. Soul, thou have much
goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. The
believer by faith looks above the means; he knows man lives not by bread
alone, Mat. 4.
but by every word that comes out of the mouth of God; he knows, except the
Lord build the house, Psalm. 127.
they labor in vain that build it, etc. Indeed faith teaches him to use the
means, else he should tempt God: But faith teaches him not to rely upon the
means, for then he should sligh^ God.

3. In respect of the Preservation of life from such things as are destructive;
as sicknesses, enemies, 3. In the Preservation of life.
and the like. Therefore faith is called a Shield, Ephesians. 6.16. Thus Daniel lives
by faith in the Lions den, the three Children in the fiery Furnace, Hezekiah in
his mortal sickness (and is recovered to his perfect strength again) Paul in
his shipwreck, Acts 27.25.

Obj. But these had particular Promises for their faith to rest on.

Ans. It is true; yet we have all that general ground of the Psalmist. Psalm.
31.15. My times are in thine hand, deliver me, etc. But of this before in the
sixth Question.

4. In respect of the Prolongation of life. As a just man prolongs his Parents
life, so God prolongs his. 4. In the P^olongation of life.
Compare Prove. 15.20. and Genesis 27. last. Thus a child dutiful to the natural
Father, lays hold on the fifth Commandment (which is the first with promise)
and so has life prolonged. Ephesians 6. Heb. 12.
Thus also a child dutiful to the Father of Spirits, lays hold on that
promise, Prove. 3.16. Length of days are in her right hand, and in her left
riches and honor. (See before, v. 2.) Or that, Isa. 40.30, 31. Even the youths
shall faint, etc. But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength,
etc.

5. In ordering the Actions of life* as eating, 5. In the Actions of life.
and drinking, and even recreation, labor, and rest. Eccles. 10* 16. W^e to
thee, O Land -- when thy Princes eat in the morning. Happy art thou, O Land --
when thy Princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness. And
Romans 14. last, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: if it be not a particular
for these things, yet it is a general Rule.

6. He lives by faith, 6. In the Blessings of life.
in respect of the Comforts and Blessings of a natural life. In general, 1 Pet
3.10. He that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue
from evil, etc. More particularly in respect of

1. Wealth, Prove. 3.16. Wisdom* there, has both hands full of blessings, if
thou have but a hand of faith to receive them. And Prove. 10.22. The blessing of
the Lord it makes rich; and he adds no sorrow with it: whereas the riches of
an unbeliever will not suffer him to sleep, Eccles. 5.12. The abundance of the
rich will not suffer him to sleep, viz. Through his care of getting, or
keeping, or losing.

Obj. But many believers are poor.

Ans. Temporal blessings are promised only so far as needful for our frame of
Spirit, and present condition. See 1 Pet. 1.6* Now, if need be, ye are in
manfold temptations: and so, if need be, ye shall be crowned with many
blessings.

2. Health, Prove. 3.8. Wisdom (in which faith is included) shall be health to
thy navil, and marrow to thy bones. David's experience, that depended on God by
faith, Ps. 103.3. who heals all thy diseases; and v 5. makes thee young. The
love of God strengthens the Creature.

Obj. By this rule they should never die, who always live by faith on God for
health.

Ans. Temporal promises are made only pro tempore, and to be applied so long
as they shall be meet and expedient for us, (as was said of the former) and no
longer. Now so long as God by faith raises up the heart to lay hold on them,
it is a sure sign he means to fulfill them; But when he means to withdraw them,
he lays the keys of Faith and Prayer out of the way.

3, Peace. The just live by faith for peace: 1. By looking at the promise of
it: Prove. 16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes his enemies to be
at peace with him. It Is a promise on condition, yet of free grace. 2 At the
Precept, as a means to peace: Romans 14.19. Let us follow after the things which
make for peace, etc. We must follow the temper of love described, 1 Cor. 13.5
7. Charity does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, etc. It bears all things, believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things; viz. unless the actions or Doctrines of men be app^rently
evil: for then the contrary is required, 2 Epist. Joh. v 10. If there come any
unto you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not in^o your house, nor bid
him God speed: Rev. 2 20. The Church there is reproved for suffering the woman
Jezebel to teach, and seduce Christ's servants, and commit fornication, etc So
we must not suffer, if any teach Antinomianism: for Christ says expressly, Mat.
5 17. I came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it.

4. Good success, in the improvement of a man's natural life, not only for his
own good, but for the public good. And this implies many particulars: For
Faith teaches a man, 1. To improve his Natural life, in undertaking some place
of employment in a civil life. It will not suffer a man to live without a
Calling. So 1. Cor. 7.20. Let every man abide in the same calling, wherein he
was called: which is meant of a particular Calling, and supposes every
Christian must have such a Calling: for he mentions it as a charge under that
general, of keeping the Commands of God, ver. 19. 2. It stirs a man up to look
to God for gifts for the discharge of that Calling. 1 Kin. 3.7, 9. Now O Lord
my God, thou have made thy servant King, -- and I am but a little child, I
know not how to go out and in -- Give therefore thy servant an understanding
heart to judge thy people, etc. So the Apostle directs to live by faith in this
case, as well as other: Jam. 1.5. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God.
3. It stirs a man up in the use of those gifts, to seek not his own things, but
the things of other men. Non nobis solum nati sumus; No man is born to serve
himself, but his generation: Acts 13.36. David, after he had served his
generation according to the will of God, fell asleep. A Christian has not a
private, but a public spirit. 4. It stirs him up in serving his generation,
and in serving men, to serve God, Ephesians 6 5. Even servants (there) in serving
their Masters, are to serve Christ. So again, Col. 3.22. Israel is reproved
(Hos 10*1.) because as an empty vine he brings forth fruit unto himself. As one
end of natur^l life, is the civil life: so the end of both is a religious life,
to the glory of God. 5. It teaches him to depend upon God in all for good
Success. So we are taught, Prove. 3.5, 6. Trust in the Lord with all thine
heart, and lean not to thine own understanding: in all thy ways acknowledge
him, and he shall direct thy paths. Psalm. 1.3. Whatsoever the righteous does,
the Lord shall make it to prosper. 6. It teaches him to make a voluntary,
humble, and bold Resignation of his calling, and so of his civil life, and
natural life also into Gods hands, when he shall call for it. As in the
forementioned example of David (Acts 13.36.) who fell asleep, according to the
will of God, as soon as he had served his generation. So Aaron (Numb. 20.23
etc.) by faith put off his Office, as willingly as a man puts off his clothes,
when he goes to bed. Such a disposition there was in Paul, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7. I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course -- henceforth a crown of Glory,
etc. As a believers success is from God, so into Gods hands he resignes his
place with his Spirit And then he may lay down his head, he may lay down his
life with comfort.

5. Good Name: for God says, 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me, I will honor;
and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. And Psalm. 17.6. There is a
promise, that if the righteous trust in the Lord, though they were under a
night and cloud of reproach* yet their name shall break forth as the light.

6. Posterity. Psalm. 112.2. He that fears the Lord, his Seed is promised to be
mighty, and his Generation blessed: As on the contrary, wicked men can entail
nothing but a curse on their children, Psalm. 109.9, 10, 12, 13.

Only understand all these Promises to be made in Christ, Note
and not to Duties abstractly considered out of Christ.

7. Single state and Marriage. He lives by Faith;

1. For the blessings of single life, when God calls him thereto, especially in
troublesome times, and troublesome places, and in unsettled conditions: 1 Cor.
7.8. I say to the unmarried and widows, that they abide even as I. Thus then he
lives by faith in this condition, in the use of means for the upholding him:
whether 1. Ordinary, as moderation of diet, exercise, civil and religious
company: Or 2. Extraordinary, as fasting, and prayer, and covenanting with
himself, as Job 31.1. He charged those Sentinels, they should not betray the
stronger Fort of his heart into the hands of the weaker vessel. So Mat. 19.12.
Some have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven.

2 For the blessing of a Married condition, when God calls thereunto,
especially in times of peace and prosperity: He looks at a meet Help, as a
portion promised from God, for the better bearing the manifold encumbrances of
this present life. Eccles. 9.9. Live joyfully with the wife of thy youth -- all
the days of thy life, etc. for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy
labor which thou take under the Sun. The truth is, a good Conscience within,
and a good Consort without, are two of the most comfortable helps under heaven,
for the better bearing of the greatest burdens upon the face of the earth. The
poor beast with a great burden on his back, goes cheered partly with his
Provender, partly with the music of his B^lls. A good Conscience is music
within; the Bi^d in the breast. A good consort is music without; the Bird in
the ear, who shall do thee good, and not evil, all the days of her life, Prove.
31.12.

Lastly, The just lives by faith this natural life, in respect of the prizing
or valuation of his life; 7. In the valua^ion of life.
so as neither to be a Prodigal nor a Niggard of it. Faith teaches a man
neither to undervalue nor overvalue his life. A Christian holds the rein of
life by the hand of faith, neither too fast, nor too loose. Reason will teach a
man a notional valuation of his life, but only faith will teach a man a
practical valuation of it.

1. Not to undervalue it. Natural Reason tells a man That of all temporal
blessings, natural life is the greatest; but every sinner sets more by his
lusts than his life. 1. The envious person, whiles he envies another man's life,
pines away himself, and destroys his own: He is neither fit to live by others,
nor enjoy his own life: Prove. 14.30. Envy is the rottenness of the bones. 2.
The lustful and luxurious person, he sins against his own body: He falls not
only into a consumption of his estate, but his flesh also; Prove. 5 10, 11. And
mourn, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed. 3. The covetous person; he
loves his goods better then his life. If it would save his life, he has not
power to eat thereof, Eccles. 6.2. He punishes both back and belly, and so
wastes his life, and dies. If a man had faith, it would rectify Reason in
these particulars, or rather fortify Reason by Scripture: Mat. 6.25. Is not
life better than raiment, etc? yea, the Devil could allege, That Skin for skin,
and all that a man has will he give for his life, Job 2.

2. Not to overvalue life. An unbeliever overvalues his life, when he prizeth
it above his soul, which is the life of his life; yea, above the Gospel and
Christ, who is the life of his soul: Mat. 19.20, 21, 22. The young man there
would not exchange his possessions for treasure in heaven. But faith teaches
better husbandry, not only to lose goods, but life also for the Gospels sake:
Acts 20. Neither count I my life dear, so I may finish my course with joy. Paul
counted his life cheap in comparison of the Gospel, and the preaching of it.
Heb. 11.35. Others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might
obtain a better resurrection. He that either undervalues or overvalues his
life, he murders himself; the one directly, by loving danger; the other
indirectly and by consequent, exposing himself to the judgment of God: for
Mat. 10.39 He that finds his life shall lose it, and he that loses his life
for my sake, shall find it.

Thus the just lives by faith, in regard of the good things of this natural or
temporal life, as well as of eternal life; as he has the promises for this
life, as well as for that which is to come. Look as the same love and care in
an earthly parent, that moves him to give an inheritance to his Son at the
last, moves him to maintain him, and provide for him in the mean time: And the
same spirit of filial dependence that moves the child to depend upon his
fathers love and care to provide him an inheritance, moves him to depend upon
him for maintenance in his minority: So it is in this case; the same faith that
moves us to depend upon God for eternal life, moves us to depend upon him for
the good things of this life; and the one assures us of the other. Luke 12.12.
Fear not little flock (viz. in regard of temporal provision) for it is your
heavenly fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdom. And in truth, he that will
not trust God for a penny, will not trust him for a pound: He that will not
trust him for temporal life, how will he trust him for eternal?

But so much for the first; The believers living by faith in respect of the
life which we call natural.

Some Use of this Branch.

Every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names sake, shall receive an
hundred fold, and shall inherit eternal life. For life, Mat. 10.39. -- He that
loses his life for my sake, shall find it. Yet many will trust God no further
then they can see him: That, whereas they say, they love God above all the
world, etc. indeed they love the world above God, and so make a god of the
World, and are enemies to God; according to what is written, Jam. 4.4. and 1 John 2.15. He that loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

2. Exhortation, to live by faith in respect of this life, and the things of
this life. And indeed, God does train up his servants to exercise faith for
better things, by exercising their faith first in things of lesser moment. The
Church in her infancy was trained up this way; God first exercised her faith
for earthly Canaan, and then for that which is heavenly. So it is with each
Christian in his infancy: God does first exercise his faith in things more
sensible, and then in things more spiritual. And if we exercise not faith and
faithfulness in these, how can we exercise the same in things of higher
concernment? Luke 16.10, 11. If ye have been unfaithful in the unright^ous
Mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches?

It Is true, all both good and bad possess the same life, health, wealth, etc.
but some hold these upon better Tenure than others do. Look as amongst men,
there are diversities of Tenures in reference to men, some Copy hold, some
Freehold, and these we prize far above the other: So in reference to God, some
hold by common Providence, but some by Promise from God, 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness
has the promise of this life, etc. These are Freeholders indeed: John 8.
If the Son make you free, then you are free indeed; as, free from other sins;
so, from usurpation of the creatures. I do not deny but wicked men have a civil
right to the creatures, and that by Gods own appointment also; but a wholesome
and a sanctified use, they have not: This is proper only to the faithful.
Others are but Copyholders, at the will of the Lord, (and therefore forfeited
that too) but these are Freeholders; they hold in Capite from Christ their
Head and King: 1 Cor. 3.21. All things are yours, and you are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods. This is the best Tenure under heaven; this is the sweetest
enjoyment of the creatures: Waters are sweetest that are drank out of the
Fountain (or at least, in such a stream as is united to the Fountain) Whereas
all carnal men drink of the creatures, as of Puddle-waters; there is neither
that sweetness nor that wholesomenesse in the enjoyment of them; their very
table is made a snare, and that which should have been for their welfare,
becomes a gin and a trap, Psalm. 69 22. And so like a company of Flesh-flies, or
venomous Wasps, they are drowned in the very Honey-pot of worldly pleasures
Their wealth is their utter undoing; the prosperity of fools shall slay them,
Prove. 1.32. and that because they live not by Faith, but by Sense; they have no
other wisdom in the enjoyment of the creatures, but what is either earthly, or
sensual, or devilish: Jam 3.15. The unclean Spirit does possess them, and
what they know naturally, as brute beasts even in those things they corrupt
themselves, Jude ver. 10.

As an unbeliever extracts some evil out of the greatest good upon earth (as
good creatures, good meat and drink, the bane of the Soul; and the good Word of
God, 2 Cor. 2.
the savor of death to them:) so a believer extracts some good out of the
greatest evil, out of the eater comes sweet meat. Faith sucks sweet Honey out
of the Lions carcass, out of wasting and devouring afflictions, out of the Rock
of Offense: that which is made a Rock of Offense to others, is made a Rock of
Defense and Shelter to them.

Look as the heavenly Bodies, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, have a strong influence
upon these inferior Bodies, and make a sweet extraction from the earth, from
whence we have our Honey-dews, that fall down into the Mothers lap, in which
they were first begotten, (as Job 38.28. has the rain a father? or who has
begotten the drops of the dew?) So this heavenly grace of faith (which is no
other than the arising of the Day Star, and the shining of the Sun of
Righteousness in our hearts) has a sweet influence upon these inferior
things, and makes a sweet extraction from common experiments of Gods goodness
and faithfulness in things of a lower nature, from whence the Soul gathers
many sweet Honey-dews of Gods unchangeable love and favor in Christ. By this I
know thou favourest me, because mine enemy does not triumph over me, Psalm.
41.11.

II. Spiritual life lived by faith.
Secondly, In respect of Spiritual life, the just lives by Faith: for so the
Apostle applies this Text very frequently, to prove that the just man lives a
Spiritual life by Faith.

Obj. But the Apostle may seem to wrest the words, because the Prophet speaks
here of a temporal deliverance from the Chaldeans.

Ans. 1. Their deliverance from temporal Babylon, was a Type of their
Deliverance from Spiritual Babylon.

2. However, the secondary objects of Faith be diverse, some Temporal, some
Spiritual, some Eternal: yet the prime and principal object of faith, is still
one and the same, and that is Jesus Christ, and Gods favor in Christ; and
before I can embrace the other; I must first embrace this: Therefore the same
faith in Christ, that enables me to live in temporal things, enables me to live
in spirituals also; and so the Apostles argument from one to the other holds
good. Well then, the just lives by Faith, in respect of Spiritual life, which
is far more excellent then the other, as grace is above nature. And this is
either the Life of

I. Justification, whereby the Soul lays hold upon Christ: or,

II. Sanctification, whereby the Soul draws virtue from Christ.

And that is either,

Renewing and Cleansing virtue, the Life of Renovation: or Fructifying, the
Life of Fructification: or Mortifying Virtue, the Life of Mortification: or
Vivifying, the Life of Quickening and Vivification. Confirming Virtue, the Life
of Conservation, that God will not forsake his people* Augmenting, whereby life
is increased; and Comforting Virtue, the life of Consolation.
In the first our spiritual life is purified, in the second beautified: and in
all these, the just live by faith.

THE LIFE of FAITH IN JUSTIFICATION.
1. HE lives by faith the Life of Justification, and so the Apostle applies
this very Text: Romans 1.16, 17. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed
from faith to faith, as it is written. And so again, Gal. 3.11. (where he does
oppose justifying by faith, to justification by works of the law) But that no
man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is evident; for the just,
etc. The just does not live by his own justice, but by faith; that is, by the
application of the justice and righteousness of another.

That we may the better understand the excellency of this Life of
Justification, it will not be amiss to add the definition of it, according to
the Scriptures seeing whatsoever is truly known, is known by the causes
thereof. Justification therefore is thus defined: It is a most gracious and
righteous action of God, whereby he imputing the righteousness of Christ to a
believing sinner, absolveth him from his sins, and accepts of him as
righteous in Christ, and as an heir of eternal life, to the praise and glory of
his own Mercy and Justice.

For Explication, consider,

1. The Act; to justify. 2. The Object; a sinner, and yet a believing sinner,
and so made righteous. 3. The Application of the Act to the Object; and that is
only by Faith.

1. The Act to justify: Now to justify, signifies properly to make just; as
to magnify, to make great (though sometimes only to declare great) Now God
makes just, either

By Imputation: or Infusion
of Righteousness.

The first is the life of Justification; the second of Sanctification: the
first perfect, the latter imperfect.

2. The Object is a sinner: God does not justify those that were just before,
but such as were unjust: 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ has once offered for sin, the
just for the unjust. There was a time then, when we were unjust, a time when we
were sinners, when we were ungodly: Romans 5.6. Christ dyed for the ungodly; and,
While we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us, much more then being justified,
we shall be saved from wrath through him. So that as to heal, signifies of a
sick man to make sound; so, to justify, is of a sinner to make righteous: and
if it were not so, where were the excellency of Gods free grace to make us
righteous, if we never were in a state of sin? He that in no consideration
looks at himself as a sinner fallen in the first Adam, cannot possibly look at
himself as a righteous person recovered in the second Adam. How can God be said
to show mercy to that man, that was never in misery? to redeem that man, that
was never lost? Lost (I say) and that really, and not only in his own conceit
and apprehension.

3. The Application of the Act to the Object, and that is by Faith; as here in
the Text. Though a sinner be justified, yet it is only a believing sinner; and
so of a sinner is made just: Romans 5.1. being justified by faith, etc. By Faith,
how? not as the meritorious, but only as the instrumental cause of our
justification. For the clearer understanding of this, we must know, according
to the former definition, there are several causes of our Justification; viz.
Efficient, Material, Formal, and Final.

The Efficient cause is either 1. Principal: or, 2. Instrumental.


Principal, is either 1. Working: or, 2. Moving to the Work.


Causes of Justification.

1. Principal.


The 1. Principal working Cause is God himself. It Is an action of God, Romans
8.38. it is God that justifies: Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he, etc. Vide Romans
9.16. All other causes are nothing to this; though man believes, and man
wills, and runs on cheerfully in the ways of God, yet from whence comes all
this, but from God that justifies a poor sinner? So that it is not of him that
wills, or of him that runs, etc. but of God; of God the Father, as the
Primary Cause; the Son, as the Meritorious; the Holy Ghost, as Applicatory. It
is God that justifies, who shall condemn, etc. He that is the Lawgiver, he
justifies from the offenses committed against the Law.

The 2. Principal Cause, Moving or promoting to the Work, is either 1.
Internal, Gods Mercy Justice
It Is a gracious and a righteous action of God, nothing without him, the first
Mover. 2. External, 1. Man's Misery, moving to pity; the Samaritan, etc. the
Infant, Ezekiel. 16. 2. Christ's Merit, moving to forgive, Col. 1.14. In whom we
have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.



2. Instrumental Cause: 2. Instrumental.
and that 1. On Gods part; the Word: Manus offerentis. 2 Cor. 5.18. He has
given to us the Ministry of Reconciliation, Dan. 12.3. Romans 4.11. 2. On our
part, Faith: Manus accipientis. Romans 4.5. But to him that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted for
righteousness. Romans 10.5 etc. Therefore faith does not justify by merit, and
dignity of the work, (for then we should be justified by works, though by
faith) but only by the Instrumentary application of Christ's Righteousness.


2. The Material Cause, Christ's Righteousness: Material cause.
(as Jacob gat his blessing in Esau's garment) therefore called, The
Righteousness of God, Romans 1.17. the Righteousness of that Person who is God.
Now there is a twofold Righteousness in Christ, 1. Active. 2. Passive.


For in that we owed a double debt to the Law, the one being perfect obedience
for the present; the other most deserved punishment for our f^rmer
disobedience. It was requisite that Christ being our surety, should pay
whatsoever we owed unto God; and that was the double debt of Doing and
Suffering whatsoever the Law of God required at our hands.

1. Active, fulfilling all Righteousness, and that for us, as he became a
Creature, and not for himself, Matthew. 3.15.

2. Passive, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law,
being made a curse for us; as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs
on a tree.

Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, etc. Philip. 3.7,
8. and, that I may be found in him, not having my wn righteousness, etc.

Formal Cause.
3. The Formal Cause, Imputation of Christ's righteousness. As by imputation of
Adams sin, we are guilty: so by imputation of Christ's righteousness, we are
righteous. Romans 5.19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners,
so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. Rom 4.5, 6. But to him
that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith
is counted for righteousness.

For such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, and undefiled,
separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens. Jer. 23.6. He is the
Lord our righteousness: Only his righteousness is infinite, and everlasting,
Dan. 9.24. to bring in everlasting righteousness, etc. The righteousness of
Angels and Saints, is finite, as well as tattered and torn: the poor, weary,
and heavy laden naked Soul, can never lie down with rest in his bed, (Isa 28
20.) for the bed is shorter than that a man can stretch himself on it, etc. but
Christ's righteousness is so long and so large that it gives a man rest on his
sickbed: Psalm 41.3. The Lord will strengthen him upon his bed of languishing.
What is his comfort then, but a clear sight of Christ's righteousness? Job
33.23, 24. If there be a messenger with him, to show unto man his
righteousness, etc. Rest on the deathbed, and afterward in the grave. Isa.
57.2. They shall lie down in their beds, and peace shall be with them, etc.
Rev. 6.11. And white robes were given unto every one of them, and it was said
unto them, that they should rest. So that as God says, Psalm. 134.14. This is
my rest for ever; so may the Soul.

Final Cause.
4. Final Cause.

1. Supreme.
1. The Supreme, Gods glory. Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made all things for
himself, etc. This is the end of all, especially this work, (Rev. 5.9.) The
glory, either of

1. Mercy and Love: God so loved the world, etc. Joh. 3.16.
Well, says God, rather than Souls shall perish, I will pour out the blood of
my own Son. Romans 5.8. But God commends his love toward us, in that while we
were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. Romans 8.32. He spared not his Son, etc.

Or 2. Justice; not forgive without satisfaction. Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is
righteous in all his ways, and holy, or merciful in all his works.

2. Subordinate 1. Sanctification. 2. Subordinate
2. Salvation.
Romans 6.22. But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, you
have your fruits unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.

All, or most of these causes, are set down by the Apostle, Romans 3.20, to 29.

1. The Efficient primary moving Cause, internal free grace, v. 24.

2. External moving Cause; Man's Misery, v. 23. Christ's Merit, v. 24.

3. Instrumental; 1. The Word, v. 21. 2. Faith, v. 22.

4. Final: 1. The glory of Gods 1. Severest Justice, v. 26. 2 Richest Mercy, v.
24. 2. Glorification of Man, in Gods Justification, and Salvation of Man v. 23,
etc.



parts and degrees of Justifications Manifestation. For though it be a perfect
act of God, yet it is a continued act; and there are degrees of the
manifestation of it. To speak therefore 1. Of the Act it self: 2. Of the
Continuing and Renewing of the Act: 3. Of the Assurance of the Act. See how the
just lives by Faith in all these.

1. For the first Act and work of Justification. Faith in the act of justifying.


First, Faith Convinces a man of sin in a saving manner, and so of his need of
Christ, and of his own impotency to obtain Justification and Salvation without
Christ, Mat. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in spirit; as Gal. 5.6. Faith works by
love; so by poverty of spirit.

Secondly, Faith puts persons into a Mourning, confessing, prayerful frame,
Mat. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn; but no blessedness, if not springing
from faith. Zech. 12.10. I will pour upon them the Spirit of grace and
supplication, etc. Jer. 31.9. They shall come with weepings, and with
supplications will I lead them. Acts 2.37. They were pricked at their hearts,
etc. This is the work of Faith, though not always so easily discerned to be of
Faith by the party himself.

Thirdly, Faith subdues the heart, to lay down all Oppositions against God, and
to be willing to take any course God directs for Justification and Salvation.
Matthew. 5.5. Blessed are the meek, etc. Acts 9.5, 6. Paul speaks reverently,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? Jer. 31.18. Surely I have heard Ephraim
bemoaning himself, Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised as a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke; turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the
Lord my God, etc. He submits obediently; they are tame as a lamb, Isa. 11.6.

Fourthly, Faith fixes the heart upon Christ alone, and his Righteousness held
out in the Promises, with renunciation of our own, even with indignation in
point of Justification. The Soul is hungry after Christ's Righteousness, as most
excellent, and loathes its own as dung and draught: Phil. 3.6, 7, 8, etc. What
things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ; yea, doubtless I count
all things loss, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having my own
righteousness, etc. See these, or most of these, Luke 15.
in that gracious Convert, mentioned Luke 15. set out as a pattern, as a
picture, and as a lively inviter, for a poor sinner to look to, that desires to
partake of the like mercy.

1. Faith Convinces him to be in a perishing condition, without his Fathers
love, ver. 17. And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of
my Father have bread enough, and to spare, and I perish with hunger. I say, it
was Faith that wrought this same conviction; for it was not before he came to
himself, that is, before he raised him up from his dead condition, etc. Verse
the last.

2. It puts his Soul into a mourning, confessing frame, v. 18. I will arise,
and go to my Father, and say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven,
and before thee.

3. It subdues his heart to lay down all Opposition, and to take any course for
his living, v. 19. -- make me as one of thy hired servants. Observe, he uttered
not so much as he intended, his Father prevented him with his mercy; as Psalm
32.5. I said, I will confess my transgressions to the Lord, and thou forgavest
the iniquity of my sin.

4. It fixes his heart upon his Fathers mercy, not upon his own merit. Faith
tells him, Though thou have forgotten the duty of a Son, thy Father has not
forgot the bowels of a Father. The word Father runs much in his mind: I will
go to my Father, etc. Here now a Spirit of Adoption begins to work, whereby he
cries, Abba Father. O dear Father! Father, I have sinned against heaven, etc.
But yet thou art my Father. This is the last act of justifying Faith, by which
the Soul is put into a child-like condition, and fit to receive a childs
portion of God. All is of his free grace: Jer. 3.19. And I said, How shall I
put thee among the children? Thou shall call me, My Father, etc. Thus the just
lives by Faith in the work of Justification, Vid. Cotton p. 14. and D. Downame.
Faith in the Renewing of justification.
in the Conscience of the sinner.

2. For the Continuance and Renewing of Justification.

The just lives by Faith daily, as well as at the first day that he believed.
So Abraham, Romans 4.3, 4. He believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness; which is cited out of Genesis 15.6. and so it appears to be after
such time as he was in Covenant with God, and in the state of Grace. Yet still
his Justification is continued by a renewed act of Faith; and so David sues out
his Justification by a renewed act of Faith and Prayer, Psalm 51. though he were
justified before.

And therefore Christians are much to blame, who after they have once believed
in God for Justification, do not labor to renew this act from day to day: and
thence comes flatness in Spirit, and deadness in Duties, when we see not a
daily need of going out of our selves into Christ. And surely if Christ applies
his own sacrifice daily to us by intercession with his Father. [Heb. 7.25. He
ever lives to make intercession for us -- ]

Why should not we apply it daily by Faith and Prayer, that God for Christ's
sake may forgive us our daily trespasses, as we are taught to pray? And this is
to live by faith in a continued act of Justification: Therefore it is put, not
in the Present Tense, but in the Future; it is not here [doth] but he [shall]
live by his Faith; that is, as long as he lives.

Take heed the blood of Christ run not cold in the veins of Faith; that you
trust not more to grace received, than to the fountain of grace and pardon in
Christ. The truth is, our best duties stand in need of pardon, and our best
graces of quickening, and nothing will quicken us more, than the assurance of
our Justification. And therefore though a man's spirit be without guile, and he
knows nothing by himself (he allows himself in no known evil) yet even at such
a time, 1 Cor. 4.
he is not thereby justified, but then, he must fly to Christ for
Justification, and say, Blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven,
etc. Psalm. 32.1, 2.

Faith in the assurance of being justified
3. For the Assurance of the Act; the just lives by Faith. 1. In moving a man to
desire more Faith. 2. In using and embracing such Means by which we come to
Assurance. 3. In the Trial of Assurance. 4. In An^wering all such Objections
and Doubts which do cloud and darken this Assurance. 5. In Expectation of
Assurance.

First, In moving a man to desire more Faith. In Motives to Assurance.


The reason is,

1. Because true Faith, (if but as a grain of Mustard Seed) moves man to desire
more Faith. Luke 17.5. Lord, increase our faith. Mark 9.24. Lord, help my
unbelief: And never rests rising higher and higher, till it comes to full
Assurance. Therefore lazy faith is false faith, that says, I cast my self on
God, and there is an end; I never desire more, so I can but rub out, etc. This
is a sign it is not true: The just lives by Faith, for the increase, till
assured; and true Faith suggests Motives, to persuade us to seek after full
Assurance.

Quest. What are those Motives?

Ans. 1. 1 Motive.
Gods Commandment (which Faith looks at) as to believe, 1 John 3.23. [And this
is the Commandment, We should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus] Christ] So
to be assured. 2 Pet. 1.10. Give all diligence to make your calling and
election sure. Both; 1 John 5.13. These things have I written unto you that
believe on the Name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal
life, and that ye may believe on the Name of the Son of God.

2. Because it is the End why the Scriptures were written; yea, the end of the
Seals; 1. Public, the Sacraments: 2. Privy, the Spirit witnessing. Therefore
says Faith, Receive not the grace of God in vain. There are many deceived:
Micah 3.7. Then shall the Seers be ashamed, and the Diviners confounded; yea,
they shall all cover their lips, for there is no answer of God. Mat. 7. 1 Cor.
6.9. Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

3. A difficili; that which would discourage another, does encourage a faith^ul
man the more, because many objections and temptations: therefore strive -- Tu
ne cede malis -- The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, etc.

4. A possibili; -- Both are objects of Christian fortitude. Example -- Job
19.25. For I know that my Redeemer lives, etc. Paul, Rom 8. For I am persuaded
neither death, nor life, nor angels, etc. Steven saw heaven opened, Acts 6.

5. A necessario; (not ad esse, but been esse) as health and vigor to the
well-being of natural life. 3 John 2. I wish thou may prosper, and be in
health, as thy soul prospers. Health comprehends life and aliquid amplius; so
Assurance, Faith, and the joy of Faith. Faith may be without Assurance, but no
true Assurance without Faith.

6. Ab utili, strong Faith is able to do that which weak Faith cannot (as a
strong man can work under a burden) though both receive Christ. -- Nothing
shall be impossible to you. Mat. 15.28. O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto
thee even as thou will. -- Luther said, Domine, fiat voluntas mea: Lord, let my
will be done. Neh. 8.10. The joy of the Lord is your strength.

7. A decoro; or, ab honorifico: for 1. This brings more honor to God. Such
are more fruitful. Heb. 6.11, 12. And we desire, that every one of you do show
the same diligence, to the full assurance of hope unto the end, that ye be not
slothful, but followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the
promises. 2 Cor. 5.14. For the love of Christ constrains us, etc. 2. Receives
more honor from God. Rev. 2.17. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of
the hidden Manna. And mark, the Promise is made, not to the Combatant, but the
Conqueror [To eat of the hidden Manna.]

Obj. But Christ is that Manna: Joh. 6. I am the Bread came down from heaven;
therefore the weakest believer eats of him.

Ans. Yet such a one tastes not at the first so much sweetness: Exodus 16.31.
The taste of it was like wafers made with honey -- A pleasant taste, but not at
first. Manna was set within the Holy of Holies (Exodus 16.32.) before the
Testimony: they did not taste it so soon as they entered into the Temple.

8. A jucundo; Luke 10.20. Rejoice, because your names are written in heaven:
like Paul, are caught up into the third heaven. By the least degree of faith, a
man is in the first heaven; by a strong faith, in the middle region of a
Christian: by full assurance, in the third heaven. This is to be with Christ in
the Garden, in the Wine-cellar, in his Bosom, as John; Cant. 1.
to be kissed with the kisses of his mouth to wear his favor which he gives to
his especial favorites (Joh. 15.15. All things that I have heard of my Father,
I have made known unto you) to be e secretioribus consiliis: a joy that the
world knows not of. Prove. 14.10. A stranger does not intermeddle with their joy.

9. A periculoso; or, ab incommodo: for 1. Life is uncertain, as a vapor, and
death uncomfortable, if it come before we be assured. Therefore David, Psalm.
39. ult. O spare a little, that I may recover strength, etc. Simeon -- Lord,
now: not before. Say to thy Soul, I may be dead before night, and in hell
before morning, therefore it is good to be sure -- For temporal estate, its a
great trouble to think estate is not made sure to Wife and Children; its a
great mercy to set our house in order, Isa. 38.1.
but a greater to set our souls in order; they are dearer then the dearest: and
then we shall not fear, though we walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, Psalm. 23.4. 2. If it were certain, yet there is danger in deferring this:
1. When God commands to make sure, and we do not endeavor after it, this is
rebellion, as the sin of witchcraft. 1 Samuel 15.
2. It Is more difficult to obtain (in ordinary course of working) Mark 9.21. If
Satan long possess, he is hardly outed. 3. The best condition of life is bitter
without this. Dan. 5.5, 6. Belshazzar troubled in his feasting, etc. e contra,
this will sweeten the most bitter affliction, cause to sing in prison, Matthew
9.2. Christ said to the man sick of the Palsy, Son, Be of good cheer.


10. A minori ad majus; si isti callidi rerum aestimatores, etc. If men take
pains to make sure the World, yea Hell, let their folly teach us wisdom. If
any thing be given by Will, man rests not till he see his own Name written, etc.

11. Such have great boldness at the Throne of Grace in Prayer, if they know
Christ their High Priest, Heb. 10.21, 22.

2. Means of Assurance.
2. In using of the Means by which we may come to Assurance. True, the Spirit is
all in all: Romans 8.16. The Spirit bears witness with our spirits, etc. yet
this witness comes by means used: As,

General Promises.
First, Applying general Promises to our particular condition: Whether they be
1. Such Promises as are made to sinners in general; as 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a
faithful saying, etc. And therefore says the Soul Though I am a sinner, though
I am the chief of sinners, as he said there, yet there are no rails made about
the promise to keep me off: only, I must know thus much, I can no sooner lay
hold of the promise, but the very first touch will draw virtue from Christ, to
make me a new man in the frame of my heart: Acts 15.9. Purifying their hearts
by faith: Or

2. Whether such promises were made to sinners, so, and so qualified (not as if
these qualifications did spring from themselves; for God himself works all in
all as he pleases.) As for Example, Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me, all ye that
are weary, etc. Now then, when I see my self not only in this condition, that
I am weary of my sin, but willing to obey the Command, surely then I have as
great cause to apply the Promise, as to apply the Commandment; I may as well
claim the Promise for my Comfort, as the Commandment for my Duty. If I be
willing and obedient, in yielding to the Commandment (and my heart tells me its
holy, and just, and good) why then God tells me from his Word, That if my sins
were as scarlet, they shall be as wool, Isa. 1.17.

3. Or in laying hold of the Promises tending directly to Assurance it self.
Isa 60 16. Thou shall also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the
breasts of Kings, and thou shall know that I the Lord am thy Savior, and thy
Redeemer, etc. Isa. 57.19. I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace, to him
that is afar off, and to him that is near, says the Lord; and I will heal him.]

2. In receiving the spirit, in the sealing work of it: Sealing of the Spirit.
For there is one work of the Spirit, whereby we cast our selves upon a
Promise, before we get assurance, (yet this is faith, Isa. 50.10. Who is among
you that fears the Lord, etc. -- that walks in darkness, and has no light,
let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God,) And another work
of the Spirit, after this Faith is begotten, that assures us, we do indeed
believe, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. -- In whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed
with the holy Spirit of Promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, etc.
And this especially in Scripture is called a Seal, wherein Christ is offered
particularly, as meat and drink: 1 Cor. 11.24. Take, eat, this is my Body, etc.

Exercise of Prayer.
3. By stirring us up to exercise the spirit of grace and supplication, more
abundantly than formerly. Psalm. 35.3. Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.
Zech. 12.10. They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and mourn: Then
they shall have a clear sight of Christ crucified, and they shall mourn.

Obj. But where is Assurance in this mourning condition?

Ans. Godly sorrow does nothing hinder godly joy; nay, they are ever twins of
the same womb: for as godly sorrow, so joy springs from Prayer: John 16.24.
Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. Dan. 9.23. and the 10,
11, and 19 verses. Faith puts the soul upon prayer; the more faithful, the more
prayerful: I have believed, therefore have I spoken: therefore Prayer is
called, The Prayer of faith, Jam. 5.14. e contra, Romans 10. How shall they call
on him, in whom they have not believed?

Hearing of Prayers.
4. By stirring us up to observe how God hears our Prayers: for this assures us
both of Gods love to us, and of our loves back again to him. Psalm. 116.1. I
love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my supplication. Judge.
13.23. If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a
burnt-offering, and a meat offering at our hands; neither would he have showed
us all these things, etc.

5. By receiving the Spirit in the sanctifying work of it: 2 Pet. 1. from ver.
5. to 12. 1 John 3.19. Hereby we know we are of the truth, and shall assure our
hearts before him. Psalm. 50.23. To him that orders his conversation aright,
will I show the salvation of God. John 14.21. He that has my commandments, and
keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he shall be loved of my Father, and
I will love him, and will manifest my self to him. Cant. 6.4. But let every man
prove his own work, and then he shall have rejoicing in himself alone, and not
in another.

6. By making a bold and resolute Confession of Christ: Christ uses to confess
such, and acknowledge and own them. Matthew. 16.16, 17, 18. after Peter had
confessed Christ, Christ confesses him, calls him by name, tells him his
privilege, and that which flesh and blood had not revealed to him. Rev 3.8, 9.
-- Thou have not denied my name, behold, I will make them of the Synagogue of
Satan to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee.
There Is a new Name legible to him that overcomes.

7. By getting and using an humble Spirit: the proud, God beholds afar off, but
comes near to the humble, to them will he look, to revive them, Isa 66 2. and
57.15. See 1. Pet. 5.5. Mary Magdalen the woman of Canaan, calls her self a
dog, and so has a special expression of love from him.

8. By attending diligently upon the use of all Means for the further knowledge
of God in Christ, private and public, hearing, asking Questions, etc. Cant.
3.1, 2, 3 4. It may be thou have used some, but not all, and therefore want
assurance.

9. By laboring to be eminent in the filial, reverential fear of the Lord,
such God more and more assures of his love. Mat 4.2. To you that fear my name,
shall the Sun of Righteousness arise, etc. Acts 9.31. The fear of the Lord, and
the comfort of the Holy Ghost, are coupled together: Psalm. 25.14. The secret of
the Lord is with them that fear him: Prove. 14.26. In the fear of the Lord is
strength and confidence. Parents do not use to show much countetenance to such
children, as they know will grow wanton under the expression of their favors:
So he: but for such as grow more awful and regardful of their commandments, the
more kindeness they receive, they care not how much love they show to such,
etc. And Faith begets fear, Heb 11. Noah moved with fear, etc.

10. By calling to mind experiences, Psalm. 77.3, 7. etc. there is great reason
to do this, for his love is everlasting.

11. When all is done, or when all fail, in renouncing all in thy self, and
rely on the free grace of God in Christ: it may be the reason why thou art not
assured, thou leanest too much on thy own Graces, Duties, or Works, as the
meritorious cause of Assurance; not as merely instrumental, as being the
effects of free grace. Oh! thou despairest, because thou art a great sinner; if
less, there were hope. But rely only on Christ: for 1. God loves freely. 2.
Invites such as have no worth, Isa. 55.1. 3. There is Mercy promised to him
that cannot work, but believe, Romans 4.5.


Caution. If true Assurance, then presently it will change the heart.

12. By a right apprehension of God in his Nature and Attributes, very Truth.
Tit. 1.2. (God that cannot lie) Power, Romans 4.20, 21. what he promises, he is
able to perform.

3. Trial of Assurance.
3. He lives by Faith in the Trial of his Assurance: for bold presumption is
most blind, and yet most confident. Hos. 8.1, 2, 3. Israel cries, My God, we
know thee: yet, set thy trumpet to thy mouth, he shall come as an Eagle, etc.
Some love not to be tried: Joh. 3.20 21. For every one that does evil, hates
the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But
true men love to be put upon their trial. Jacob, Genes. 31.32. With whomsoever
thou find thy goods, let him not live: before our brethren, discern thou
what is thine with me. A fool is confident, and he rages if you question his
tenure, as a man in a fine dream rages, if awaked: -- O, I was in the finest
dream; I dreamt heaven was mine, and Christ was mine, that I was supping with
him, and feeding upon him, but as Isa. 29.8. he is empty still: so, etc. Be not
deceived with such dreams. Jer. 29 8. Let not the prophets and diviners that be
in the midst of you, deceive you, etc. I had rather awaken you now, than that
the last Trump should awake you -- But as true Faith says to God, Lord prove
me, and search my heart, Psalm. 26.2. and 139.23. So to men, Mal. 2.7. The
priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth,
etc. as men go to Lawyers to ask counsel in their Conveyances and Assurances,
etc. So to its own Soul, 2 Cor. 13.5. Prove your selves, whether you be in the
faith.

1. There Is great reason to try Assurance: Reason of Trial.
All is not gold that glisters.

1. One may have a great name in the world to live, and yet be dead, as Sardis,
Rev. 3.1. 2. Men may be confident and bold, yet blind Bayards: Hos. 8.1, 2. 3.
There Is an assurance and peace in the Soul from Satan: Luke 11.21. When a
strong man armed keeps his palace, his goods are in peace. 4. An inheritance
may be hastily gotten at the beginning, but the end thereof shall not be
blessed, Prove. 20.21. So, etc.
Quest. How shall we know true Assurance from false?

Ans. By the inward witness of the Spirit: It Is true, those that have received
this, cannot be deceived; but because those that have not received it, may be
deceived, and think they have it: Ergo, Try; as Doctrines, so Assurances: 1
John 4.1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, etc.

Quest. But how shall we know true Assurance?

Ans. From the Cause instrumental, the Word: Trial it self.
The Spirit works by the Word: Isa. 57. ult. I create the fruit of the lip,
peace, peace, etc. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. He has committed to us, the word of
Reconciliation -- not revelations without the word: Psalm. 119.81. I hope in thy
word: that is the object of Faith, No Word, no Faith.

2. Effects of New Birth; Love.

1. To God, begetting this assurance: 1 John 4.19. We love him, because he
loved us first. 2. To the Word, by which begotten: it is sweeter than the honey
and the honeycomb -- Not magnify the Spirit to slight the Word: John 14.26.
The Spirit comforts by the Word, and brings to remembrance. 3. To the godly,
begotten of God: 1 John 5.1. Every one that loves him that begat, loves him
also that is begotten. 4. To Holiness, the fruit of all true assurance: 1 John
3.3. Every one that has this hope, purifieth himself: This is no Doctrine of
looseness, as the Papists say. Prove. 25.19. Confidence in an unfaithful man in
time of trouble, is like a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint, etc. Ask,
does thy Assurance make thee more holy, etc?
3. By the Manner of working, both in the work, and after it. There Is some
difficulty; therefore, strait is the way -- strive to enter, etc. Mat. 7.14.

1. In the first work, therefore called a Birth, John 3.5. When was any birth
without pain? A spirit of bondage, Romans 8.15. I speak not this, as if we should
indulge our selves in these pangs so and so long -- I will not say, how long
have thou been about it? for Ephraim was a foolish son, because he stayed so
long in the place of breaking forth of children, Hos. 13.13. However, it is
difficult.

2. After the work, still some wrestling against Doubts and Fears.
Reason: No grace of the Spirit, but it has something of the Flesh to wrestle
against. Gal. 5.17. The Spirit lusts against the flesh, and the flesh against
the Spirit: therefore they that never doubt after once they are assured, but
are always alike, have cause to suspect themselves, that they are not right.
Philip. 3.12. Not as though already perfect, says the Apostle. They that think
they are at the top of the ladder at the first step, it is likely they never
set a step upon the ladder: If you never doubted after believing, faith was
perfect at first, and so no growth, etc. True faith is of a growing nature.

Obj. The heart is deceitful: therefore fruits are no evidence.

Ans. It Is true, of Unregenerate men, not Regenerate; such by proving may know:
Gal. 6.4. Let every man prove his own work, etc. John 21 17. Peter could
appeal, Lord, thou know that I love thee. Salvation is far from the wicked,
though they may be confident: 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the kingdom of God, etc. Psalm. 119.155.


4. He lives by Faith, 4. Objections against Assurance.
in answering all such Objections that might cloud and hinder his Assurance; as
the Sun dispels and scatters all clouds and mists, that would hinder the light
and heat thereof: so the Sun of Righteousness, by the powerful work of Faith,
dispels and scatters all such Objections and Doubts, by which Satan, and our
corrupt hearts, would hinder and darken the light and heat of our Assurance. As
for Example.



Manasses, Solomon, Mary Magdalen, and many more. Though my sins are great
sins, (not Mole-hills, but Mountains) yet God is a great God, and his Mercies
are very great; he has a sea of Mercy, that is able to drown Mountains, as
well as Mole-hills. The Mariners tell us, the Sea is so deep in some places,
that they can find no bottom, no line will reach so far. I am sure, such is
the Sea of Gods Mercy, we cannot find the bottom, but must cry, O altitudo, O
the depth, etc.



To him that is joined to the living, there is hope, especially if thou seek
God for his own sake, because he is lovely in thine eyes: Psalm. 69.32. Your
hearts shall live that seek God.



deserve the favor of God. If God has but troubled thee so far, to desire
Christ upon his own terms (with his Cross, as well as his Crown) then come, and
welcome, if thou be willing to put off the Devils yoke, and to put on
Christ's. Mat. 11.28, 29. All ye that are weary and heavy laden, take my yoke
upon you.

bullock accustomed to the yoke.

I have believed thy Commandments: Romans 14. the last, Yea, every Commandment
has the virtue of a Promise, because God works all our works, in us, and for
us. Isa. 26.12. Lord! thou will ordain peace for us, for thou also have wrought
all our works in us: Ezekiel 36.27. I will put my spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my statutes.



complain so much for want of grace: a man can never desire that he knows not,
or that he tastes not. Jer. 31.18. Ephraim was in a good condition, when he
bemoaned himself.

feeling and assurance of it.

Faith is the evidence of things not seen. There Is a twofold evidence; the one
of Sense, the other of Faith: Assurance by the witness and fruits of the
Spirit. 2 Cor. 5.7. We walk by faith, not by sight. Therefore it cries out to
God, in stead of answering the doubts of Unbelief, Lord, I believe, help my
unbelief. It Is a comfort to have a lively feeling, but others may have Faith
also: Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed, John 20.29.
and that is certain, for the conclusion of all, That Soul that wrestles against
the disease of unbelief, has some life of faith in it, it is a justified Soul.

5. He lives by Faith in the Expectation of Assurance, 5. Expectation of
assurance.
if he has it not: Genesis 49.18. I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord: Cant.
3.1. By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loved: Isa. 8.17. I will wait
upon the Lord, who hides his face from the house of Jacob. Faith says, as
Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown for the righteous, etc. Psalm. 85.8. I will hearken
what God the Lord will say, for he will speak peace, etc. Surely God shall
command his loving kindness in the daytime. True, it thinks long: Why tarry
the wheels of his Chariots? Cant. 2.8, 9, and 17. and Cant. 4. the last, Be as
the Chariots of Amminadab: Psalm. 40. the last, Make no long tarrying, O my God.
Yet it will wait, as Jacob for Rachel: yea, Faith chides the Soul out of
unbelief, by propounding the Promise of future Assurance, Psalm. 42.5. Why art
thou cast down, O my soul, etc! Psalm. 27. last. Faith gives courage in waiting;
Psalm, 31.
Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy heart. Christ has his several
seasons of manifesting himself Vide Mr. Reynolds.
. Blessed are all they that wait for him. He that believes, makes not haste:
Though he tarry, wait for him. Christ showed himself first to Mary, then to
Cephas or Peter, then to James, then to the twelve, then to above five hundred
brethren at once: 1 Cor. 15.6. and last of all he was seen of Paul, as of an
abortive; because there is more pain in the birth of such. But as in the bodily
sight of Christ, some saw him sooner, and some later; so in the spiritual: and
as he showed himself soonest to those, that stood most in need of comfort, as
Mary, and Peter, for what was past, and James for what was to come, Acts 12. so
spiritually Christ shows himself soonest to those have most need, etc. And as
he entered the doors, being shut, when they were full of fears, Job. 20.19. so
sometimes he comes into the heart, when we think the doors most fast shut up.
Only wait, and then sooner or later he will show himself, to some in their
middle age, to some in their old age, to some at their death, to some at the
Stake; as that gracious Martyr cried out joyfully to his fellow-sufferer, He is
come, he is come. Therefore be sure to wait, and he that has appointed to
come, will come, and will not tarry: Blessed are all they that wait for him.
Romans 8.25. If we hope for that which we see not, then do we with patience wait
for it.

Reason why wait; Because true faith can never be lost, till it come to full
assurance: Matthew. 12.20. A bruised reed, etc. This is the life and comfort of a
weak Christian, A babe shall be a strong man: Philip. 1.6. He that has began
this work, will perfect it: Luke 22.32. Christ's Prayer for Peter.



1. This Reproves those that wait not: Believe in the Lord your God, so shall
you be established, etc. 2 Chronicles. 20.20.

2. Reproves those that Rest in the first degree of Faith, and say, I care not
if I can but go to heaven at last. Other things grow up to their (...), and
decay again; but the faithful grow from strength to strength. He is no good
natured child, that will say, I am sure to have my Fathers inheritance at
last, and therefore I care not though he frown upon me in the mean time: No, a
good child prizeth his Fathers love, and the light of his countenance, above
his inheritance: even Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.31. could say, Let me see the Kings
face, etc.

3. Exhortation, To live by Faith in waiting for Assurance.

Motives.
1. It Is certain, He that has appointed to come, will come, Heb. 10.37. 2.
It Is worth the staying; as Jacob stayed for Rachel. This is better then life,
Psalm. 63.3. 3. It Is the sweeter when it comes, Olim haec meminisse, etc. as the
Sun rising, after a long Winter night -- half year night. Prove. 13.12. Hope
deferred makes the heart sick; but when the desire comes, it is a tree of
life. 4. It Is the property of Faith, not to make haste: Isa. 28.6. He that
believes, makes not haste.
4. See the difference 'twixt just and unjust: The just, as they expect, so
they shall be assured, though poor in spirit; yea, because poor, Matthew. 5.3.
Psalm. 9.18. The expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever: Prove 24.14.
Thy expectation shall not be cut off. But for the wicked, Job 8.13, 14. Their
hope shall perish, and be as a spiders web: Job 11.20. Their hope is as the
giving up the ghost. Therefore fear God, and be righteous: For Prove. 10.28. The
hope of the righteous shall be gladness; but the expectation of the wicked
shall perish. Therefore, Prove. 23 17, 18. Let not thine heart envy sinners; but
be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long: for surely there is an end,
and thine expectation shall not be cut off.

5. Comfort to such as believe, but want Assurance. He may yet live by Faith in
the expectation of it. Be not discouraged, when thy Soul is ready to faint for
the salvation of God. Lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees:
Be assured, where there is any true light, it will increase more and more, till
the perfect day, Prove. 4.18. The state of the Soul is good, and Salvation is
certain in the mean time. Though many complain for want of Assurance, yet if
they can but trust, etc. Isa. 50.10. He that walks in darkness, and has no
light, let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. They are
sure to be comforted at the last, and supported in the mean time.

Thus you see, how the just lives by Faith the Life of Justification.

Use of all in general.
1. OF Humiliation: Use of the Doctrine of Faith in justification

1. Humiliation.


If a Christian lives by Faith the Life of Justification, in applying the
righteousness of another, it may be matter of Humiliation. A Prisoner that is
freed from Condemnation by a Pardon from the King, and not by
Self-justification, has cause to walk humbly for ever after. This is our case,
etc. It was a great sin in Absalom, after his Father had pardoned his Murder,
and received him into favor again, and kissed him, the next news we hear of
him, he prepares him Chariots, and Horses, and Men to run before him, that by
stealing away the hearts of the people, he might step up into his Fathers
Throne, and thrust him out. And surely it is the greatest expression of neglect
and unthankfulness that can be, after God has pardoned our sins, and received
us into favor, for us to steal away the hearts of his people, and to set up
our selves, in stead of magnifying the Name of God; to draw Disciples after our
own selves, in stead of drawing Disciples after Jesas Christ. It is a sin, and
a temptation, which is common to the nature of man, even the Regenerate
themselves are not out of this Gunshot: Paul was in danger to be xalted above
measure; and the great contention among the Disciples themselves, was Who
should be the greatest? If this was the Condemnation of the Devil; and after
that, the Devils Temptation upon our first Parents, that they might fall by
Pride, as he did: I see not why any should secure themselves from this
Temptation in the state of grace. Therefore you that stand, take heed lest you
fall; though you shall never fall finally by this sin, yet you may fall
fearfully, if you look not well about you. And surely, this is one good means
among the rest, to keep us from falling to consider. We are justified by the
Righteousness of another. We live as pardoned men; we live upon mercy, we live
upon alms. A poor creature, who (like lame Mephibosheth) is fed at the Table of
another, and clothed with the garments of another, and has nothing that he can
call his own, has little cause to be proud: this is our condition. We live at
Gods finding for meat, drink, and clothing, not only for our Bodies, but for
our Souls also, from day to day. As God has put meat into our mouths; so he
puts words of prayers into our mouths first: Hos. 14 2. Take unto you words,
and say unto the Lord, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: And
so our blessed Savior, Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our
trespasses, etc. Mark ye, here are Petitions put into our mouths every day, as
well as the first day of our conversion, both concerning giving and forgiving:
though some are so proud now adays, they know not how to say that Prayer.
Shall Christ teach them how to pray, or shall they teach Christ? Is there a
greater Soloecism, than to be proud Beggar? A Beggar, and yet proud! A Beggar,
and yet one that scorns to beg! One whose wants beg, and cry aloud, and yet his
tongue begs not! I know no better means to cure this pride, than the
consideration of this; We live not upon our selves, but upon God: the very life
of our Souls, the food of our Souls, the clothing of our Souls, all is from God.

Examination.


Quest. How shall we know?

Mark 1.
Ans. 1. It Is a Soul-humbling life, if we lay hold on Christ's Righteousness,
our hands are our own. Psalm. 134.2. In thy sight shall no man living be
justified. Unjustified persons are proud of their pride. Rev. 5. They cast down
their Crowns. Luke 18.14. The Publican, as he was humble, so justified. Isa.
64.6. All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags: Phil. 3. I count all but
dross, and dung, etc.

2. A Soul pacifying life: Isa. 57.19. Mark 2.
I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace, etc. Romans 5.1. Being justified
by faith, we have peace with God.

Obj. But I am troubled.

Ans. 1. Yet thou art supported: Cant. 2.6. His left hand is under my head, and
his right hand does embrace me.

2. There is the seed of peace and joy in thee. Light is sown for the
righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. Psalm. 112.

3. A God-glorifying life: Rev. 4.10. Mark 3.
The four and twenty Elders fall down before him that sat on the Throne, and
cast their Crowns before the Throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive glory, etc.

1 In all holy Actions, Romans 6.15, 16 etc.

2. In humble Passion or Submission; i. e. in all Sufferings. He that is
justified by God, will even justify God in all that befalls him: He will not
quarrel, and say, Lord, I am a justified person, why do thou punish me? but
as David, Psalm. 51.4. that thou may be justified when thou speak, etc. or
as Ezra 9.13. -- Thou our God have punished us less then our iniquities
deserve, etc.

4. A Christ-magnifying life: 1 Pet. 2.7. If we believe. Mark 4.
Christ is precious. Luke 7. Kiss his very feet, wash, and wipe, etc.

Instruction.
To acknowledge this life of Justification in others: 2. To imitate God our
selves, and justify those that sin against us.

Acknowledge this in others. Let us justify those whom God does justify, when
once it appears to us; Receive such as God receives, though weak in the faith,
Romans 14 1, 2, 3. One that is made a Freeman of your Town, a Member of your
Corporation, you receive into your Society and Communion upon all occasions.
Now all justified persons are made free ipso facto, and admitted into Communion
of Saints, Ephesians 2.12, 13. It was Simons sin, he would not justify that gracious
woman whom Christ himself had justified (and he might see it by the fruits too)
Luke 7. Luke 7.37.
Like those Priests Ezekiel. 13.22. They condemn whom the Lord justifies, and
justify whom the Lord condemns.

Imitate God, in justifying or forgiving those that sin against us; I mean, so
far as it concerns us: Forbearing one another, etc. Coloss. 3.13. Matthew. 18.21,
28. Forgive thy brother, until seventy times seven times. God forgives more
than we can.

Motive. This Confirms the Assurance of our own forgiveness: Matthew. 6.14, 15.
If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you,
etc. The one the cause of the other: Our forgiving others, is a natural effect
of Gods forgiving us.

Obj. By this Rule, there should be no need of Courts of Justce among men: If
Offenses must be forgiven, no man should accuse one another, no man witness, no
man judge; and so, as the Anabaptists say, No Magistrate, etc.

Of forgiving offenses.
Ans. Offenses and wrongs must be considered in diverse relations:

1. As they concern our selves alone, here we have power to forgive, to hide,
and conceal them: Love covers a multitude of faults, Jam. 5.

2. As they are of a public interest: There is a threefold interest;
Reipublicae of State, Ecclesiae of Church, Dei of God.
As in Theft, Murder, Idolatry, all have an interest, every one of these is
wronged, Deuteronomy. 13.6. these we must not conceal. He that is partner with a
thief, hates his own soul, Prove. 29.24. Here the Accusers, Witnesses, and
Judge, must do their parts; yea, and their Justification and Redemption ties
them to this: Luke 1.74. -- that being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, might serve him without fear, etc. Else they were abominable. He that
justifies the wicked, and condemns the just; even they both are an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15. So a man who has his person justified by
God, may for some particular unjust act, be condemned by the Magistrate; Luke
23.41. And we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward of our deeds, etc.
Romans 13, 1, -- 7. Only have a care to do justly in judgment. Observe: Malach.
3.5. I will be a just witness against those that oppress the hireling in his
wages, the widow, and the fatherless, etc.

Thankfulness.
Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3. Bless the Lord, O my soul -- who forgiveth all thine
iniquities, who heals all thy diseases. As the Philosopher, who blessed God,
That his Life was Rational, That he was a Man, Born in such a Country, and
City, That he was a Philosopher. This is Gods end: Ephesians. 1.6, 12. To the
praise of the glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the
beloved, etc.

Suppose 1. A poor man in Debt, and the Creditor cross the Book: O happy man!
Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is he whose iniquity is forgiven. And Psalm. 51.1, 2. --
according to the multitude of thy mercies, blot out my transgressions, etc.

2. If a poor naked man lying in the mire ready to perish with cold, should be
clothed with warm and rich Apparel, O how thankful would he be! (Not like the
Snake, that when the Husbandman brought it to the fire, and it was well warmed,
spit in his face) but as Jobs poor Hospital-men, Their very loins whom he had
clothed did bless him. We were such naked polluted creatures, Ezekiel. 16.6.
Therefore let us bless his Name so much the more, as clothing the Soul is
better than the Body, etc.

3. Suppose an Imprisoned man set at liberty, etc.

4. Suppose a Condemned man absolved; O how thankful would he be! Christ has
procured our absolution; In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sins, Col: 1.14.

Exhortation.
this is not a vain thing; as Deuteronomy 32.47. Pray for it. Isa. 43.26. declare that
thou may be justified; and say what thou can. But Job 9.14, 15. How shall I
answer him, and choose out words to reason with him? Every one would be glad to
be accounted just before men; How much better is it to be so in the sight of
God, who, out of Christ, is a consuming fire? Let us not rest in our own or
others Righteousness, Angels or Saints.

Obj. We lived this Life from eternity, only now we are to labor for the
sense of it.

Ans. 1. Then what is the meaning of those places? Luke 15. the last verse. It
was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead,
and is alive again; he was lost, and is found. And Ephesians. 2.1, -- 3, etc. You
has he quickened, who were dead in sins and trespasses. 1 John 3.14. We know
that we have passed from death to life, etc.

2. We could not live before we had a being; nor be justified before we were.

Motives.

1. A poor weary, and heavy laden Soul, can never lie down with rest in the bed
of his own Righteousness, etc.

2. Hereby our persons are pleasing to God: This is my beloved Son, in whom I
am well-pleased: Cant. 1.15, 16. Thou art all fair, my love, etc.

3. Then duties are accepted, Genesis 4. Abel and his offering: First the tree
good, and then the fruit good. Our duties cannot be accepted out of Christ,
because imperfect.

4. Hereby we are encouraged, and strong to duty: Surely, shall one say, In the
Lord have I righteousness and strength, Isa. 45.24. The joy of the Lord is your
strength, Nehem. 8.10.

5. Hereby freed from Condemnation: Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods elect? It Is he that justifies, who shall condemn! Whereas
all unjustified persons are liable to Condemnation;

From 1. The Law, Gal. 3.10. As many as are under the works of the Law, are
under the curse. 2. Conscience: Romans 2.15. -- their conscience bearing witness,
and their thoughts the meanwhile accusing or excusing one another. Tit. 3.11.
-- He that is such, is subverted and sins, being condemned of himself. 3.
Satan: Psalm. 109.6. Let Satan stand at his right hand. 4 Men: as they tempt one
another, so accuse one another; as Adam lays the fault on Eve, she on the
Serpent. 5. The Gospel: John 3.19. This is the condemnation. 6. The mouth of
the Judge: Matthew. 25.19. Then shall he say to them on the left hand, Depart
from me, etc.


But all believers, and justified persons, are free from condemnation: Romans
8.1. There Is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

Of 1. The Law: Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law,
etc. Acts 13.39. And by him all that believe are justified from all things,
from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Romans 7.6. But now we
are delivered from the Law, etc. 2. Conscience: Romans 5.1. Being justified by
faith, we have peace with God, Heb 9.14. 3. Satan: Rev. 12.10. The accuser of
our brethren is cast down, which accused them before God day and night. Zech.
3.2. The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan; even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem,
rebuke thee. 4. Men: Number. 12.8. Gen 4.6. Luke 7.39 etc. 5. The Gospel: Romans
1.16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel. 6. The mouth of the Judge: Mat.
25.34. Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed, etc.


6. The Righteous are bold, Prove. 28.1. as a Lion; fear not enemies, Mic. 7.8,
9, 10, 16, 17, 18. Psalm. 91.5, 6, 7.

II. THE LIFE of FAITH IN SANCTIFICATION.
THE second Part of Spiritual Life, is the Life of Sanctification: 2 Cor. 5.17.
Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a New Creature. And thus the just
lives by Faith also. As Faith lays hold upon Christ for Justification; so it
draws virtue from Christ for Sanctification: and that either Renewing and
Cleansing, or Fructifying, Mortifying, and Vivifying, etc. ut supra.

So then the just live by Faith the life of Sanctification: for, as Faith works
by Love; so, by Humility, Patience and other Christian Graces: and so the
Apostle applies this very Text, Heb. 10. where he persuades them to possess
their souls in patience. Yea, but how shall they get patience? Why, get Faith,
and they shall be sure to get Patience, and all other needful Graces: Ver. 36,
38. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye
might receive the promise. Now the just shall live by Faith, says he.

Branch. 1. Renovation.
And first, for the Life of Faith in Sanctification it self, or the Renovation
of the Soul.

For the better prosecution of this Point, it will not be amiss to give you in
brief the Resolution of these Questions: Whether there be any such Life of
Sanctification in a Christian, besides the Sanctification that is in Christ
himself? If there be so; then what it is, and wherein it does consist? How, and
by what means it is wrought in the Soul? What Is the reason, that such a Life is
necessary in all justified persons?


Quest. 1. Whether there be a life of Sanctification in believers.
1. For the first, it may seem a Question out of question, but that the vanity
and petulancy of men's fancies and opinions begins to call all into question in
these days, and so this.

That which starts the Question, is the wresting of certain Scriptures, which
they pervert, (as they do many others) as

1 Corinthians. 1.30. He is made to us (amongst other things) Sanctification.
Therefore, say they, there is no other.

Heb. 10.14. He has by one offering for ever perfected those that are
sanctified. Therefore, say they, Christ is our Sanctification, and it can be no
other, because it is perfect.

Before we Answer these Scriptures, we shall show the contrary by the full
evidence of other Scriptures, which will give us the clearer light in answering
those former alleged places.

There is therefore a Life of Sanctification inherent in every true Christian,
besides that which is inherent in the person of Christ himself. Which is proved
by these Arguments:

1. Because there is a Sanctification of the whole person in parts and
faculties by the Spirit of Grace: 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. And I pray God your whole
spirit and soul, and body, be preserved blameless, etc. Every believer is thus
sanctified, as Water is warmed, or the Air enlightened, all at once.

2. There is a Sanctification of the Conversation, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. For this is
the will of God, your Sanctification: 1 Pet 1.15. As he which has called you
is holy: so be ye holy in all manner of conversation.

3. This is part of the New Covenant, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. Then will I sprinkle
clean water upon them, and they shall be clean, etc.

4. Argument is drawn from an absurdity: If there were no Sanctification in a
Christian, besides that in Christ, then there should be a confusion of these
two great Benefits of Justification and Sanctification; but the Apostle does
every where distinguish these, as in the forementioned place, 1 Cor 1.30.
Righteousness, Sanctification, etc. So 1 Cor. 6.11. -- But ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified, but ye are justifi^d. And indeed, there is a great deal of
difference: for

1. Justification is imputed; Sanctification is imparted: John. 16. Of his
fullness have all we received, and grace for grace.

2. Justification is without a man; Sanctification is within him.

3. Justification absolves a man from all his sins; Sanctification does not so.
Who can say, I am clean from my iniquity?

4. Justification is perfect, and complete: Acts 13.39. Being justified from
all things. Sanctification is imperfect: so says the Apostle, Phil. 3.12. Not
as though I were already perfect. Christ has laid hold upon me, that I may lay
hold upon him, to draw still further virtue from him; therefore it is not
perfect at the first.

But what then shall we say to that place of Scripture, Heb. 10.14 He has by
one offering, etc.

Ans. 1. The words import no more but this, (as appears by the context) That
what is wanting in our own works and duties, (and so in our Sanctification)
Christ has perfected by the benefit of our Justification: or

2. By that offering of his, he has sanctified and set us apart to be his own
peculiar people. For sometimes to sanctify, signifies no more, than to set
apart from a common use, to some special service:

So Times Things Persons
are said to be sanctified.

Then whereas it is said, 1 Cor. 1.30 He is made to us sanctification, etc. The
meaning is no more but this, That he is the Author and Finisher of our
Holiness, as well as of our Faith, as we shall see in the resolution of the
third Question. In the mean time, let us come to the second Question.

Quest. 2. What Sanctification is. Sol.
2. What this Sanctification is, and wherein it does consist? And it may be thus
described: It is an inward and powerful change of a person justified, whereby
the image of God is renewed in him, by the work of the spirit.

It is a change, and a powerful change, to distinguish it from that work that
may be in a civil man, whereby his corrupt nature is suppressed, and
restrained, though his corruption be not mortified.

2. An inward change, to distinguish it from outward reformation, such as was
in Herod, who heard John gladly, and reformed many things; and yet his heart
was not changed: but true grace does ever begin at the fountain, it purifies
that in the first place, and then the streams which flow from thence, Mat.
23.25. Psalm. 51.10.

3. It is the change of a justified person, to show, that however Justification
be not Sanctification, nor Sanctification Justification; yet Sanctification is
a necessary fruit, and an inseparable companion of Justification. That person
that is once justified, is also sanctified, as in the place before-named, 1
Cor. 6.10.

4. The form of Sanctification, consists in the Renewing of Gods Image; in
which Image Man was created at the first, having not only a spiritual
substance, a Soul, and spiritual faculties of that Soul, Reason and Will; but
spiritual and divine Properties of those Faculties, Light in his Reason, to
know the Truth; a sweet flexibility in his Will to obey the Truth, according to
the Will of God. Now after the Fall, though man have the same Soul, and the
same Faculties, yet he has not the same divine Properties of those Faculties:
for as he fell by the Devils temptation, so he fell into the Devils sin and
condemnation. The Devil fell by Pride he would needs be above God, or as God,
and so he tempted our first Parents to fall by the same kind of Pride; and
ever since, man in the state of corruption, would be somebody in those two
main Faculties of his Soul, Reason and Will: (and therefore we are all
naturally Papists and Arminians in this Point) his Reason he would lift up
above the Word of God (as they do their Traditions) and his Will above the
Will of God; whereby it come to pass, that his Pride makes him very wilful in
sinning against God, Jer. 44.16. or else presuming upon a false supposed
liberty of converting himself to God at his own pleasure: whereas the Apostle
says flatly, It is not in him that wills, etc. Romans 9.


But this is the condition of Man in the state of corruption; the Image of God
is thus fearfully defaced. Now when grace comes in the work of Sanctification,
there is presently a change wrought, not in the very substance and faculties of
the Soul, but only in the properties of them: presently the lofty looks of man
are humbled, and the haughtiness of men is bowed down, and the Lord alone
exalted in that day, Isa. 2.11. There Is no more, My Reason, but, Thy Word,
Lord, shall be my guide; then, no more My Will: but, Thy Will be done: Let it
be done in earth, as it is done in heaven; then, no more, I will do this or
that by my own strength; I will repent when I am old; I can convert my self to
God when I list -- No: but as poor Ephraim cries out, Turn thou me, and I shall
be turned; convert thou me, and I shall be converted: for thou art the Lord my
God, Jer. 31.8. Thus truth of Grace sanctifies Reason, and it sanctifies the
Will, and so it sanctifies the Affections to love God, and by consequence, to
love that which God loves, and to hate the contrary; it sanctifies the
Conscience to accuse, and excuse upon just grounds; it sanctifies the Memory,
to retain good things; it sanctifies the Tongue, to speak good things, or at
least it is pain and grief to keep silence (Psalm. 39.) it sanctifies the ear to
hear good things, and shut the door against the contrary; it sanctifies the
hand to do good things; it sanctifies the feet, the feet of the Soul, to walk
in good ways. In a word, it sanctifies the whole man to the service of that
God, who has redeemed him from death. And thus the form of Sanctification,
consists in the renewing of the Image of God in righteousness and holiness,
Ephesians. 4.24. which implies also the defacing of the Image of old Adam, and of
Satan; the pulling down of the old structure of sin, before there can be a
rearing up of the new structure of Grace; a putting off the old man, before
there can be a putting on the new.

Thus you see the second Question resolved, What this Sanctification is, which
by the way should teach us to examine, whether we live this Life or no.

Use. Examine, whether we are sanctified.

Motive. The just lives by Faith in the Trial of his Sanctification, as well as
Justification, Psalm. 139.23. Search me, O God, and know my heart, etc. Master,
is it I? 2 Cor. 11.2. I am jealous over you, etc. Is there any more in us then
Civility or Morality can produce? Is there an inward, powerful, universal
change?

Quest. What difference is there between Morality and Sanctification?

A^s. This is a profitable question, because many are deceived in this
particular, as the young man, Mark 10.20. so many at this day rest in Civility,
etc.

Obj. Is there any hurt in Civility and Morality? why do you Preachers speak so
much against it?

Ans. We speak not against the things themselves, Of Civility.
but men's trusting to them, and resting in them: they are good in themselves,
and lovely dispositions; as Christ looked upon the young man, and loved him:
But when men rest in them, and cry them up for true Sanctification, there is the
danger. Though Silver and Gold are the best Metals, yet Brass, Copper, and Tin,
are good in their kind: but if a man will set the Stamp of good Coin upon
Copper, Brass, etc. and gild it over, that he may put it off for Gold, etc. he
deserves to suffer for it: So if a man will set the Stamp of true Grace upon
Civility or Morality -- Jer. 6.28 30

Quest. What difference?

Ans. A mere Moral man's Obedience is not general:

As,

1. For Extent: Difference betwixt Morality and Sanctification.
The Civil or Moral man his obedience is not general. Herod must have his
Minion, Mark 6.17. Therefore Jam. 2.10. He that offends in one point, is guilty
of all: but a gracious man does all (in purpose of heart:) Acts 13.22. (...): e
contra, Saul, 1 Samuel 15. will pick and choose.

2. For Object: The Moral man's obedience is more to the Law than the Gospel,
because the Law is revealed by nature, Romans 2.14. but the Gospel not so, it is
a mystery, 1 Cor. 2.7 8. therefore he slights Christ: Publicans and Harlots
shall go into the Kingdom of God sooner than they. On the other side, Romans
1.16. the Gospel is powerful to salvation.

3. More in duties of the Second Table than the First, (because these are more
known by nature than the first.) Hence profane ones take Gods Name and Sabbath
in vain, either in Oaths, or ordinary talk; as, O God! O Lord! though (Deuteronomy
28.58.) It is a glorious and fearful Name; but Psalm. 119.228. I esteem all thy
precepts concerning all things to be right, says a Saint.

4. For Quality: Moral men are only for the form, not the power of godliness;
they hate that: as Vlpian the great Lawyer, Galen the great Physician, and
Porphiry the great Philosopher, great enemies to godliness. Difficult duties,
exact walking, loving enemies, Matthew. 5.43. these things they love not to hear
of; but especially that hard lesson of Self-denial, Luke 14.33. as that young
man, Mark 10.22.

5. His obedience is outward, not inward, so long as he abstains from actual
Murder, and Adultery, Matthew. 5.21. But Christ shows there the spiritualness of
the Law: 2 Cor. 10.5. Casting down imaginations -- bringing into captivity ever
thought, etc. Romans 6 17. Ye (true believers) have obeyed from the heart.

6. He makes no bones of small sins, as the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat 5.19, 20.

7. He hates such as are powerfully godly, Acts 7* 54. as they were out to the
heart, and gnashed on Steven with their teeth: e contra, 1 John 3.14. We know
that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren.

8. A mere Moral man does commonly and willingly fail in the Principle, End,
and Manner of Duty.

1. Principle: He does all in his own strength, but the other in the strength
of Christ: Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

2. End: His own glory; Jehu, 2 King. 10.16. Come see my zeal, etc. So he; See
my gift in prayer: Mat. 23.5. to be seen -- Contra, Psalm. 115.1. Not to us, O
Lord, not to us, etc.

3. Manner: as well as matter of actions, either he rests in the notion; Romans
2.18. And know his will, approving the things more excellent, etc. or if he
be drawn down to actions, yet affection is wanting: Heb 9.14. dead works;
Cheerfully, Diligently, Zealously,
Romans 12.11.

9. They love not to be touched in their Freehold; they love not
discriminating differencing Doctrines; according to Jer. 15.19. Separating the
precious from the vile, etc. Luke 4.29. When they heard these things, they were
filled with wrath, and thrust him out of the City. But one that has any grace,
loves to be tried, and that God would send a messenger to search my heart to
the bottom, Psalm. 139. Luke 7.23. Blessed is he that is not offended; i.e.
offended with it, or the messenger of it, which Christ spoke in the same case:
The poor receive the Gospel; men of eminent parts for Civility and Morality are
passed by, and those men that renounce all these in point of Justification, and
are poor in spirit, these are blessed.

Thus Faith tries Sanctification, 1 Pet. 1.21. And if upon examination we be
found guilty, take the counsel, Rev. 3.17, 18. Because thou say, I am rich,
etc. -- I counsel thee to buy of me gold, etc. If upon examination we find we
be truly sanctified, prize Christ. Phil. 3.6, 7.8 What things were gain to us,
we count loss for Christ. Be thankful, 1 Timothy 1.13, 17. -- who was before a
blasphemer, etc. but I obtained mercy: so, etc.

Quest. How shall we do to live this Life of Sanctification?

Ans. The answer to the third Question will resolve this; viz.

By what means Sanctification is wrought.
How, and by what means this Sanctification is wrought in the Soul.

God; He is the Author, as of the first, so of the second Creation: Ephesians. 2.10.
For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus, unto good works.

God the Father as the Efficient Cause: Jude, ver. 1. To them that are
sanctified by God the Father.

God the Son as the Meritorious Cause: Heb. 2.11. For both he that sanctifies,
and they who are sanctified, are all one.

God the Holy Ghost, working this: 1 Cor. 6.11. -- But ye are sanctified in the
Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God.

It springs not from our selves, nor from our parents: no, though they be holy,
it springs not from them.

Sow the purest Wheat you can get, yet it springs up with chaff again, when it
brings forth another Crop: So the best parents bring forth children, with the
chaff of natural corruption cleaving to them. Grace comes not from Nature, but
from God; Joh. 1.13. Which were born, (not of blood) nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. God therefore is the Original and
principal Cause.

Use. Go to God for Sanctification for our selves or others: 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. And
the very God of peace sanctify you wholly, etc. Mat. 8.2. And behold, a leper
came, and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean.
Psalm. 51.7, 10. Create in me a clean heart, etc.

Faith is the Intrumental Cause of the Life of Sanctification, in the order of
working; and so the just lives by Faith the Life of Sanctification. Acts 15.9.
Faith purifies the heart; and chapter 26.18. it purifies the life of the whole man,
that they may receive inheritance among them that are sanctified, by faith that
is in me.

Quest. And how does Faith purify? or how does the just live by Faith the Life
of Sanctification?

Ans. 1. Acts of faith in sanctifying. 1. Applying Christ, either 1. In general.
As laying hold on Christ the principal object of Faith, especially on the
blood of Christ, the meritorious Cause of cleansing.

I say, in general, laying hold upon Christ, the principal object of Faith; not
as if Faith had this life, or this power to give life in it self, no more can
it give the life of Sanctification, than of Justification: but as by it we are
united to Christ our Head, and Fountain of Life. Faith comes from Christ, and
returns to Christ again; like the Flower called The Wonder of the World, it
grows out from the stem or stalk, and turns round to it again: So Faith comes
from Christ and turns round to him again, to draw still more virtue from him.
As our Communion with Christ in grace, flows from our Union with him: so also
all spiritual Operations, or living acts of spiritual life. Look as in the
natural body, the life of all the Members is from the Head, and that Life
conveyed by certain nerves and sinews to every part: so the Life of
Sanctification in all the Members, is derived from Christ the Head, and that by
the sinews and nerves of Faith, conveyed to all the elect in due time, by which
they live, and more and more increase from day to day. Vide Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
Coloss. 2.19.

Quest. But how shall I know, that my spiritual actions and operations (suppose
Prayer, Preaching the Word, practicing of that we hear in any particular) do
spring from my Union with Christ?

Ans. This is a profitable and necessary Question, When spiritual actions
spring from faith in Christ.
because a man may do many good things, and yet these actions not flow from our
Union with Jesus Christ. A man may have excellent common graces; nay, and he
may counterfeit saving graces too, and yet these not spring from Union with
Christ. Nay, a man may be strengthened by Christ to do work and service for
Christ, and yet that strength and those services not flow from Union.

Isa 45.1, etc. Concerning Cyrus his doing friendly offices for the Church, and
this prophesied of him about 200 years before he was born.

Isa. 1O.3. O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, etc. correcting and afflicting
the Church, and they had their strength from God, -- a staff in his hand, and
yet they did not know this, nor acknowledge it themselves; v. 7. Howbeit, he
means not so, etc.

A man may have excellent common graces, as Judas had, and those, Matthew. 7.22.
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, and in [thy Name, i e. in thy power]
cast out devils? etc.

A man may counterfeit saving graces even to the life, that he may deceive
others: Rev. 3.1. Thou have a name that thou live, and art dead -- (Though
God is not mocked.)

Quest. The Question then is, How shall I know, whether my holy actions,
motions, and operations, do spring from Union with Christ, or no?

Ans. 1. (To follow the Metaphor of Head and Members) If thy holy actions
proceed from inward principles, (1 Cor. 6.17. Being made one spirit) and not
outward principles only.

As a living hand or foot, is moved from invisible nerves and sinews within;
but a wooden hand or foot, is moved only by outward ligatures, by which it is
bound to the body: So a man may pray and preach, and be only moved by outward
ligatures -- of profit, credit, envy, etc. Philip. 1.15. Some preach Christ of
envy and strife, and some of good will. So Mat. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. They gave
alms, and prayed in the streets to be seen of men: but he that does it by
virtue of Union, is moved by an inward principle of the Spirit of Christ.

Obj. But may there not be a common gift of the Spirit to move a wicked man; as
2 Chronicles. Ezra 1.1. The Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus King of Persia? etc.

Ans. Yes: but then it proceeds not from the inhabiting Spirit of God, whereof
the Elect are the Temple, 1 Cor. 6.19. but only from a present, common, and
transient work of the Spirit, as in Baalam: so sometimes good and evil spirits
have had power to enter into bodies, and carry them up and down; but yet not to
inform them, as the Soul informs the Body, nor to dwell there, etc. -- So the
Spirit of God, etc.

Quest. How shall I know my Spiritual actions proceed from the inhabiting
Spirit?

Ans. By savouring and minding the things of the Spirit, Romans 8 5. They that
are of the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after the
spirit, the things of the spirit.

Though Gods Spirit spoke in and by Baalam, yet he had no through relish of
what he spoke; for he still loved the wages of unrighteousness.

2. We may know it by the End of spiritual actions, if it be the glory and
honor of Christ, and a care to preserve the things of Christ; as the Members
of the Body have a principal care of adorning and preserving the Head: The Arm
receives a blow to defend the Head; so a living Member of Christ, truly united
to him, as he goes to Christ for strength, Phil. 4.13. so he refers all to the
honor of Christ in conclusion, another adventures himself far for the truth
and cause of Christ; as Paul, Acts 20. Neither is my life dear unto me, so I
may fulfill the Ministry of Christ, etc. So in general Faith lives on Christ.

2. In particular, Or, 2. In particular
he lives by Faith in the Application,

Means 1. His Death.
1. Of the Death of Christ; for though we have benefit by the Birth of Christ
(Luke 2.10, 11.) (as we showed this day fortnight) yet not so much as by his
death; and joy in birth, only in relation to his death: He is born a Savior,
i.e. one that shall die for your sins, Romans 5.10. Heb. 2.14. Through death he
destroyed him that had power of death, that is, the devil.

Yet there is joy in his Birth, as in the approach of a friend that comes to
loose as out of Prison, if we be in for Debt or Murder: We then rejoice, when
he comes to the door, but only in reference to paying of the Debt; for if he
should then turn back, it would sad us the more: So in this case.

Must Aarons ear, and hand, and foot be sanctified? it must be done by the
application of the Blood of the Covenant, Exodus 29.20. Thus our hearing, thus
our words, thus our works, thus our walking, is sanctified in the application
of the Blood of Christ. Heb. 9 14. -- the Blood of Christ purge your
consciences. It Is all the price of Blood. 2 Cor. 5. ult. He has made him to be
sin for us, etc.

Faith sanctifies, as by laying hold of the Blood and Death of Christ; so of
the Resurrection and Life of Christ.

Means 2. His Resurrection.
As the Resurrection of Christ is a Birth, (so, he is called, The firstborn
from the dead) so, the assurance of his Resurrection (proved by the powerful
government of the Church, and of the whole World, for the Churches sake, in his
Session at the Right Hand of his Father) this begets a lively hope, and so a
spiritual new birth in us: 1 Pet. 1.3. We are begotten again to a lively hope,
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. Faith or Hope makes use of
Christ's Resurrection, and this New birth of faith begets a New life of
Sanctification. Coloss. 3.1. If ye then be risen with Christ, etc. The love of
Christ dying for us, and rising for us, and reigning for us, (acting all our
affairs at the Right Hand of God his Father; yea, the love of Christ begetting
of us to this lively hope, by his Death and Resurrection: all these constrain
us to a holy life, 2 Cor. 5.

Ver. 14. For the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that
if one dyed for all, then were all dead: and that 15. He dyed for all, that
they which live, should not live henceforth unto themselves, but unto him which
dyed for them, and rose again: Therefore 16. We live no more after the flesh;
i.e. with carnal and sinful affections. And 17. If any man be in Christ, he is
a new creature; a new man, a regenerate person, and has a renewed conversation.


Therefore? Wherefore? because he, seeing the love of Christ, by the eye of
Faith, in dying for him, and rising again; this raises up his heart to newness
of life: As if he heard Christ persuading of him, like as a tenderhearted
mother persuades her child, per viscera, by her own bowels, If thou art my
child, if thou do own me for thy Mother, then obey my commandments, and
follow my advice: so says the Apostle, Col. 3.
If ye be risen again with Christ, if ye be partakers of a New Birth, through
the pangs of his Death, and the power of his Resurrection, if ye be his
children, if ye acknowledge God for your Father, set your affections ow things
which are above, Phil. 3.20.
and let your conversation be in heaven. And so the just lives by Faith the
Life of Sanctification, in the application of the Death and Resurrection of
Christ.

3. He lives by Faith the Life of Sanctification, Means 3. His Appearing and
Judgment.
in the application of the Appearing of Christ, and the Judgment of Christ: 2 Timothy 4.1. I charge thee therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his kingdom, Preach
the word, be instant, etc. Look as the warning of an Assize or Sessions makes
one careful to provide themselves, that their cause may be found good, that
they may be able to stand in Judgment: so in this case. The same argument, see
Tit 2.13. -- Live soberly, righteously, etc. looking for the glorious appearing
of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. And 1 Cor. 15. last, The^efo^e
my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, etc. Wherefore? for as much as ye know,
etc. i.e knowing by faith or believing, your labor (one day) shall not be in
vain in the Lord. A cause of all sins is made, not believing the Judgment: 2
Pet. 3.3, 4. Where is the Promise of his coming, etc? and a cause of holy
walking, the believing of it; ver. 11, 12. What manner of persons ought ye to
be in all h^ly conversation and godliness, looking for, and hasting to the
coming, etc. Therefore it is observable in Scripture, wherever almost there
is mention of the last Judgment, it speaks of Christ's judging men by the
fruits of Faith, rather then by Faith it self; that the believing of the last
Judgment, may stir us up to a holy life. Mat. 25.35, etc. 2 Cor. 5.10. and
Rev. 20.12. there the Books are opened (the Book of Gods Decree) and yet men
judged according to their works. Think of this, you that have to do in
Judgment this day *: other Books must one day be opened. It may make a Felix
tremble; it may move all to be holy and righteous in all their actions.

Means 4. His Word.
4. He lives by, Faith the Life of Sanctification, in the application of the
Word of Christ. Without Faith, the Word profits not, neither this, nor any
other way; but being mixed with Faith, Heb. 4.2.
it is quick, and powerful, and mighty in operation, 2 Cor. 10 4.
to the pulling down of strong holds; i.e. proud thoughts, earthly thoughts,
unclean thoughts. Joh. 15.3. Now are you clean through the word that I have
spoken to you: Psalm. 19.
The word of the Lord is clean, and endures for ever. And as it is clean in it
self, so it is a cleansing word in the effect: Joh. 17.17. Sanctify them
through thy truth, thy word is truth. Not as if the Word had power to sanctify
without the Spirit, but the Spirit does it by the Word: the Word is an
instrument of cleansing in the hand of the Spirit. 1 Pet. 1.22. Ye have
purified your souls on obeying (i. e. in believing) the truth through the
spirit.

As the Spirit makes use of the Word of Precept and Threatening (Psalm. 17.4. By
the word of thy lips have I kept me from the paths of the destroyer) so of the
word of Promise also, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these Promises, let us
cleanse our selves. What? has God promised to be a Father to me, (as it is in
the words before) and that I should be a son or a daughter to him, this Lord
God Almighty, upon condition that I will separate my self, and touch no unclean
thing; and shall not I be willing so to do? Nay, has God promised to perform
the condition for me, namely, to sprinkle clean water upon me, that I might be
clean, Ezekiel. 36.25. and to subdue my iniquities, and sanctify me throughout,
in Soul, Body, and Spirit, and shall not I make use of these his Promises? Has
God showed so much love to me in making the Promise, and shall not I show love
to him in obeying his Precept? And thus by laying hold upon the Word, both of
Promise and Precept, the just lives by Faith the Life of Sanctification:
therefore Faith is called, Most holy Faith, Jude, n. 20. namely from the
effect, because it works holiness in him that has it. Most holy Faith: it is
not said, Most holy Love, Joy, or Peace, but most holy Faith, not Subjective,
sed Effective:
All lean on this building as the Foundation; Christ is the foundation of
Merit; Faith, of Order: Christ is the Foundation which Faith finds, and tries
as the Workman, etc.

Faith is like a strong purge, that never leaves working* so long as there is
any corruption in the body: So Faith never leaves working, so long as there is
any corruption in the Soul, and that is as long as we live: Only, as Faith
grows stronger, corruption grows weaker from day to day; but, it is not wholly
purged out, till our daying day, and therefore there is use of Faith as long as
we live: but because when we die, our corruption shall die with us also, there
shall be no use of Faith any longer.

Means 5. Sacraments.
5. He lives by Faith the Life of Sanctification, in the application of the
Sacramental Signs. These are means of our Sanctification: Ephesians. 5.26. Christ is
said to give himself for his Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it
with the washing of water by the word. And Tit. 3.5. He saved us, by the
washing of Regeneration. But this washing is by Faith. Philip said to the
Eunuch, Act. 8.37. If thou believe with all thine heart, thou maaist be
baptized.

Obj. Then Infants are not to be baptized, because they cannot believe.

Ans. God looks at Infants in their Parents faith. Genesis 17. I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed. So far as want of faith might hinder circumcision, so
far it may hinder Baptism. For 1. The Covenant is the same, Rom 14.11. and the
Seals are the same for substance, 1 Cor. 10 1, 2. 2. The Grace of God is the
same; yea; more abundant, Tit. 2. ver. 12. The grace of God (...), has shined
forth: Opposed to the shadows of the Old Testament. And did God shine upon
Infants in those times, and shall we put them under a cloud now? Want of faith
did not hinder them then, and why now? It hindered heathens then, and so now. No
Proselytes were admitted, but such as made profession of the Faith of Abraham:
So, etc.

Means 6. Afflictions.
6. He lives by Faith the Life of Sanctification, in the right use and
application of Afflictions. Afflictions sanctified, are a means of sanctifying
us: That may be one reason why they are called a Baptism; Mat. 20.23. Christ
said to the two Disciples, Ye shall indeed be baptized with the baptism that I
am baptized with: Meaning, a portion of his Afflictions. If Christ learn
obedience by the things which he suffered; much more may we. Heb. 5.8.
Afflictions sanctified, work the quiet fruit of righteousness, Heb. 12.11.
Afflictions are like the Red Sea; they drown some, but they save and purge
others. And what is the reason of the difference? Some have faith to pass
through them, but some have none: They drown those that have no faith, but they
purge and preserve those that have Faith: Heb. 11.29. By faith they passed
through the Red Sea, which the Egyptians assaying to do, were drowned: And this
was not only a Baptism of Affliction, but of Purgation and Sanctification; 1
Cor. 10.2. And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea. Thus
the just lives by Faith in time of Adversity, not only as preserved therein,
(which was handled before) but as washed and sanctified thereby. Revel. 7.14.
These are they which came out of great Tribulation, and have washed their
Robes, etc.

Lastly, The Prayer of Faith is a mean to sanctify: Means 7. Prayer.
and the just lives by Faith in the exercise of Prayer, carrying the Soul to
the Fountain of Life, Joh. 4.10.

Therefore if God be the Author and Effector of this Life of Sanctification, go
to God for it. Do thou feel the want of Sanctification of Spiritual Life?
Do thou feel thou art dead in sins and trespasses? It argues the beginnings
of Life; but go to God for more Life; pray him to sprinkle and apply the Blood
of Christ; Psalm. 51.7.
pray him to apply the Word, to speak to thy heart in that voice behind thee;
pray him that is Jehovah, Isa. 30.21.
to give a being to his Promise; pray him to make Sacraments effectual, and to
Baptize thee with the Holy Ghost, and with fire; Man. 3.
pray him to open thine ear to hear Discipline, and seal thy Instruction, that
when thou art corrected, Job 33.16.
thou may be sure to be instructed. In a word, pray him who is the Author of
Sanctification, to cause thee to live by Faith (through all means) the Life of
Sanctification. Go to God by Prayer; by the prayer of faith. For the just shall
live by Faith in this respect. Jam. 1.5.
What S. James says of one saving grace, Wisdom, we may say of all, If any man
lack -- any grace, or all grace, let him ask of God, etc. But let him ask in
faith. Faith lives the Life of Sanctification, in drawing holiness from the
Fountain in the Conduit-pipe of Prayer: Isa. 12.3.
With joy draw ye the waters out of the wells of Salvation: Lie at the breast
of the Promise, if thou have any life at all, and draw out, of the sincere milk
of the word, that thou may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. which must needs be
meant of the Life of Sanctification; for the Life of Justification is perfect
at the first, though it be a continued act. Therefore do not only hear the
Word, but Pray. Hearing the Word, is the laying the mouth to the breast; but
Prayer is the drawing of the breast. Therefore draw hard.

New-years-day.
O thou that createdst the first Heaven, and the first Earth of nothing! O thou
that createst the New Heaven, and the New Earth, (wherein dwells Righteousness)
when sin had made the creature worse then nothing! O thou that createst the New
Jerusalem, coming down from Heaven as a Bride! O thou that createst the New
Creature, the New man, fit to be an inhabitant of the New World, of the New
Jerusalem! O thou that have said, Behold, I make all things New: Create thou in
me, even in me, Psalm, 51.
a clean heart; renew a right Spirit in me. Plead with God, and say, Lord, thou
have commanded me, whilst it is called, Heb. 1.
To day, to hear thy voice, and not to harden my heart: I beseech thee
therefore whilst it is called, To day, hear my voice, and harden not thy heart
against me: For if thy heart be hardened against my Prayer, my heart must needs
be hardened at thy Word. Say, Father, let others give what gifts they please to
their friends, if thou please but to give me grace, Ephesians. 4.
grace to put off the Old man with the Old year, as the circled Snake casts her
skin; and to put on the New man, Psalm. 103.
as the Eagle renews her bill and her age both together: I shall esteem it the
best New-years-gift that ever was given: And say, Father, I have fast hold on
thee, and I will not let thee go, Genesis 32.
except thou bless me; except thou giv'st me this blessing, this New-years-gift
of a new heart. Lord, I lay hold of thee in thine own promise; Thine
everlasting Truth is a cord strong enough, strong enough to hold Thee: and
Lord, I must needs make bold to bind thee to thy Word. Have thou not said,
Lord, A new heart will I give you? Lord, for whom is this new heart laid up in
thy Promise: for them that have it, or for them that want it? etc. Therefore I
beseech thee, of thy faithfulness to answer me, and in thy righteousness, say
unto me, Though thy faith be weak, Be it unto thee even as thou will: Let there
be light, Mat. 8.
let there be heat, let there be a new heart: Be thou holy, as I am holy, that
thou may be happy for ever, as I am happy.

Thus much for the third Question, How, and by what means this Sanctification
is wrought in the Soul.

4. Questions follow; Quest. 4. What Reason of the necessity of Sanctification.
What is the reason that such a life is necessary in all justified persons?

Reason. Because this is one of the great Ends of our freedom by the Death of
Christ: He died not only to redeem us from Hell, and from Satan, and all our
Enemies, but from our vain conversation also, 1 Pet. 1.18. Tit. 2 14. He gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Yea, he delivered us from the
hands of all our enemies, that we might serve him in holiness, Luke 1.74.

designs in the work of our Redemption, to make us conformable to the Image of
his Son, as in suffering, Romans 8.29. so in sanctity; that as we have born the
Image of the Earthly: so we might bear the Image of the Heavenly. 1 Cor. 15.
We look upon Christ by the eye of Faith, (as they looked upon the brazen
Serpent) not only to save us, but to transform us and heal us. The vision of
Christ, begets transformation; and transformation, satisfaction: this is partly
in this life, but perfectly in the life to come. Psalm. 17. ult I shall behold
thy face in righteousness: when I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy
likeness. In the mean time, there are degrees of transformation and
satisfaction to the Soul, so far as it is able to look upon Christ by the eye
of faith, in the glass of the Ordinances: 2 Cor. 3. ult. But we all, as with
open face, beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed, etc.
To be changed into the Image of Christ, is a great part of a Christians
happiness, a great part of this happiness, is his holiness: without which, even
heaven it self, and the glorified Presence of God, would be a hell to him: for
so long as men are unregenerate, and wicked they say unto God, Depart from us,
we will not have the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.14. Therefore that they may
be made like Christ, and take comfort in the fellowship of Christ, it is
necessary they should live by Faith the life of Sanctification.

Adam we stand guilty of a twofold sinfulness: 1. Imparted: Romans 5.19. As by
one man's disobedience many were made sinners: so, etc. 2. Imparted: Job 14.4.
Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?


Only let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel, etc.

2 Samuel 10.4. Hanun's abusing David's Servants, was to cut off half their
garments.

many sins were forgiven to Mary? (Luke 7.47.) Because she loved much. And how
does she prove her love? by the fruits, her cost, and care, and pains, ver. 37,
etc. If ye love me, keep my Commandments, says Christ, Joh. 14.15. Faith works
by love, Gal. 5.6. As Faith applies Promises for Comfort, so commands for
Performance of Duty, Psalm. 119 66.

And so much for the first Branch in Sanctification; viz. Renovation.

BRANCH. II. THE LIFE of FAITH A LIFE OF FRUCTIFICATION.
SEcondly, The just lives by Faith the Life of Fructification: (for we shall
speak of the Use of both together, in the fruits of New Obedience: And this, in
these particulars:

How, or in what manner faith has influence into the life of spiritual
Fructification: 1. Faith makes us good trees.
1. In making of us good Trees. A man must be a good Tree, before he can bring
forth good Fruit, Mat. 12.33. Now Faith makes us good Trees, by grafting us
into the Mystical Body of Christ: Romans 11.17. Thou being a wild Olive Tree,
were grafted in, and partakest of the root and fatness of the Olive. Thou
derivest sap, and juice, and life of grace in Christ, and so thou do not
only bud and blossom (as Aarons Rod, Numb. 17.) by good words, and fair
Promises, but thou bringst forth fruit of New Obedience, to the glory of God
Joh. 15.1, 2, etc.

2. In telling of us, or discovering to us, 2. Faith discovers what is good
Fruit.
what is good Fruit.

For the Matter. Faith tells us what is Gods revealed Will; and it lays hold
of the Command of God for direction, as well as of the Promise of God for
consolation, Psalm. 119.66. I have believed thy Commandments: and whatsoever is
not thus of faith, is sin, Romans 14. ult. So Faith laying hold of the Word,
tells me what is my duty as a Magistrate, as a Minister, as a Master, as a
Neighbor, as a Fellow-Member, etc.

If I do not live by Faith in all these, the fruit I bring forth cannot be
good. Prove. 19.2. That the soul be without knowledge, is not good, etc.

3. In stirring up the Soul to be fruitful: 3. Faith stirs up the Soul to be
fruitful. How? First,


First, By guickning Considerations, drawn not only from our duty, but from
the Promise of God, and the glory of God.

1. The Promise of God; as Moses, Heb. 11.26, 27. choosing affliction, etc,
for, he had an eye to the recompense of reward. So says Faith, If thou do
this, the Promise is thine. 2. Glory of God. Faith tells the Soul, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
ult. Matthew. 5.16.
Herein is thy heavenly Father glorified, if thou bring forth much fruit,
Joh. 15.8.
Secondly, By drawing strength from Christ the Root: John 15.4, 5. Abide in me,
etc. Nothing without Christ, all through Christ: Therefore Faith and Prayer
sucks strength from Christ: Psalm. 119.4.5. Thou have commmanded me to keep thy
Precepts: O that my ways were so directed, etc.

4. In timing and seasoning of the Fruit, 4, Faith suits all our scruples to a
proper season
which is a beautiful thing. Eccles. 3.1. True indeed, our whole time is due to
God, Luke 1.75. Gods Trees are so full of sap that they must bring forth fruit
all the year long. Yea, but yet there are several fruits for several seasons,
for several months, Ezekiel. 47.12. There are several winds which blow upon the
Garden of the Heart, and cause several fruits to flow out, Cant. 4.16. There
are gales of the Spirit, and gales of Providence: Gales of the Spirit Joh. 3.8.
The wind blows where it lists -- so is the Spirit: O set up thy sails, when
thou have so fair a wind, if thou art bound for the Land of Promise: Gales of
Providence, viz. The north wind of adversity; O now bring forth fruit with
patience: The south wind of prosperity; O now bring forth fruits with joy, and
thankfulness.

Besides, there are seasons of grace for thy self and for others. For thy self:
see 2 Cor. 6.2. Now is the accepted time, etc. when God calls by his Word, or
by his Rod; whilst the waters are troubled, John 5.
then is the time of healing. For others, in gaining them to bring forth fruit
to God. Some are made Fishers of m^n. It is excellent to know the season, and
the bait, to cast out the Net at Gods word and his time. (Faith teaches this.)
It is good fishing in troubled waters; that is the season. As it is with a man
ready to be drowned: you must take him when he rises up, and holds forth his
hand, and cries for help, etc.

Beloved, there is no Ordinance, no Providence, but calls for some seasonable
duty at our hands. As every day has its proper trouble (Mat. 6.34.) so every
day has its proper task and service. Now it is Faith only that can instruct
us, and enable us to know our time and take our time. As he that believes,
makes not haste, Isa. 28.16. So he will not be too slow, Heb. 6.12. -- not
slothful. Natural men, and unbelievers, know not their times, nor the seasons
of their visitation, Luke 19.42, etc. So nor of their Fructification. Natural
men know natural seasons of Sowing, Setting, Planting, Plowing; every Almanac
can tell this. But only the true Believer, the spiritual man, is instructed in
the spiritual good husbandry, to know the right seed-time and harvest of Grace,
and to know the season of every fruit of Grace: Eccles. 8.5, 6. A wise man
knows time and judgment, etc.

5. The just lives by Faith the Life of Fructification, 5. Faith ripens the
fruits of new obedience
in ripening the fruit. Faith is a bright beam of the Sun of Righteousness,
that ripens the fruit of New Obedience: without Faith, it is but crude, and raw
fruit; yea, dead, and withered fruit; dead Prayers, dead Preaching, dead
Hearing, dead Practice, dead Works. As Faith without Works is a dead faith,
Jam. 2.17. So Works without Faith are dead works: Heb. 9.14. How much more
shall the blood of Christ purge your consciences from dead works to serve the
living God. There are works that are called dead works, that have all the
outward lineaments of good works, only they want life: and we are purged from
these by the blood of Christ, applied and sprinkled upon the conscience by
Faith, and so there is life put into them, and they are made living works, fit
to be presented to a living God.

6. And so lastly, He lives by Faith in Fructification, 6. Faith procures
acceptance of our fruitfulness through Christ.
in regard of the Acceptance of this fruit, when it is presented to the hands
of the great Master of the Vineyard. Faith presents it by the hand of a
Mediator, and so it is accepted, which otherwise would certainly be rejected.
Look as, Whatsoever we ask the Father in Christ's Name, it is granted: so
whatsoever we present to God in his Name, is accepted. Gen 27. Jacob gat the
Blessing in the garments of his elder Brother. Take the same good works for
matter: Suppose the one presented by the hands of a faithful man; the other by
the hands of a proud unbeliever, whose heart is lifted up in him, and he thinks
God is beholding to him for his service; the one is accepted, the other is
rejected. The Lord had respect to Abel and his offering; but to Cain and his
offering had he not respect, Genesis 4. And what is the reason of the difference?
The difference is not in the Offering, but the Offerer. The one had Faith, the
other had none. By faith Abel offered a more excellent sacrifice than Cain --
God testifying of his gifts, Heb. 11.4. The diversity of the persons, makes a
diversity in the Present. They are like the two Baskets of Jeremiah's figs,
(Jer. 24.) The one had very good figs, like the figs that are first ripe; the
other had very naughty figs, that could not be eaten, they were so bad. True
Faith dares invite God to eat of the fruit of his own Planting, and of his own
ripening. Though it be not full ripe in it self, it is mellow'd in Christ. Cant.
4. last, Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat of his pleasant fruit.

Thus the just man lives by Faith the Life of Fructification; both the Life of
Renovation, and the Life of Fructification. Now for the Use of both together.

Use of all in general.
FIrst, Let us hence Examine the truth of our Faith. Use 1. Example of Faith by
its ^eno^^^ing and ^ructifying.
If it be right, then we live by it the Life of Sanctification in Renovation,
etc. as well as of Justification. Many say, They live by Faith the Life of
Justification, but we see nothing in them of Sanctification: Therefore their
Faith is not true. True Faith is full of Virtue: 2 Pet. 1.5. -- add to your
faith, virtue. True Faith is an active grace: As it is wrought powerfully, Ephesians.
1.19. -- according to the working of his mighty power: So it works powerfully;
Col. 2.12. it is called -- Faith of the operation of God. Faith puts a
Christian not only upon all holy speeches, (Prayer, Preaching, and Conference,
are the breathings of Faith) as 2 Cor. 4.13. I believed, therefore have I
sp^ken: Acts 4.20. We cannot but speak the thing, which we have seen and heard:
But also upon all holy actions and duties. There is the work of faith twice
mentioned, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. An idle Faith is vain, Jam. 2.
a dead faith; and a dead Faith is as good as no Faith at all. The Wisdom that
is from above, is full of good fruits, Jam. 3.17. It is as impossible for a
Christ^an to live the Life of Justification, without Sanctification, as for a
man to have life without breath.

Secondly, It Reproves two sorts of people; Use 2. Reproof to Papists and
carnal Professors.
Papists on the one side, and carnal Professors on the other side: who separate
these two precious Lives, which God has inseparably joined together,
Justification and Sanctification. Being Twins or Sisters of the same Womb, and
ever born and brought forth together in the Christian Soul. Other Twins may
die, at least one of them; but these live and die together: yea, they live and
never die. As Jacob took hold of the heel of his brother; so the Life of
Sanctification follows the Life of Justification close at the heels. 1 Cor 6
11. -- But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified -- As you
cannot separate the light of the fire from the heat thereof; no more can you
separate the light of Faith in Justification, from the heat of Faith in
Sanctification. Mat 3.11. -- He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with
fire.

And yet, I say, Papists on the one side, and Carnal Professors on the other
side, separate these two precious Lives, or at least they would cause one of
these Sister-Twins to devour the other. The Papists make Sanctification to
devour Justification; and the Carnal Professor makes Justification to devour
Sanctification.

First, the Papists make Sanctification to devour Justification: For, they say,
in effect, Our Sanctification is our Justification. For, they say, to justify,
is only to make just by inherent Righteousness. Again, they make Remission of
sin not to be the Pardon of sin, but the utter deletion or expulsion of sin by
infusion of Righteousness; as darkness is expelled by light, and cold by heat.

Thus they make Justification wholly to consist in the parts of Sanctification:
For whereas Sanctification is partly Privative, which we call Mortification;
and partly Positive, which we call Vivification; which is either Habitual, Vide
Down p. 50. Papists make sanctification to devour justification. Carnal
Professors e contr.
(consisting in the habits of grace) or Outward and Actual (consisting in the
exercise of that grace, in the fruit of good works) All this, and only this,
they make the matter of their Justification. And so they make Sanctification to
devour Justification.

On the other side, Carnal Professors, they make Justification to devour
Sanctification. O, say they, our Justification is our Sanctification, we have
no holiness in our selves. And thus the Devil drives men to extremes; and, like
a cunning Wrestler, he twitches on both sides. For the first of these Opinions
proceeds from Pride and Presumption: The other from false and feigned Humility,
joined with Despondency, and with a kind of spiritual sloth and laziness of
Spirit.

O, says the Papist, we have no righteousness in Christ; only Christ has
merited, that we should merit. And Rank Pride is the root of this Opinion. O,
Rank Pride the root of P^pish sanctity.
says the Carnal Professor, we have no righteousness nor holiness in our
selves. Alas! what can we do! it is all one, whether we do any thing or nothing;
we have no Righteousness or Sanctification but in Christ. And thus, as with a
wet finger, he shakes off all the duties of godliness: and this springs, as I
said; from false or feigned Humility, Feigned humility and ^^ziness of spirit
the root of Libertinism.
and laziness of Spirit. This is the sluggards hinge, upon which he turns
himself about to no purpose. As good never a whit, says he, as never the
better. When you press him to duty he holds up this, as Ajax his Shield, to
bear off all blows. Tell him of his Omissions and Commissions, O, says he,
Christ is my Righteousness and Sanctification; as if he might sin, that grace
might abound, or that grace had abounded, that he might sin. But you see this
Error confuted. There is a Sanctification in Gods people inherent, besides
that which is in Christ. The just lives by Faith the Life of Sanctification.
Therefore justly are reproved such Christians, as bury themselves above ground.
As Cato said of Idleness, it is vivi hominis sepultura: Such indeed are dead
whilst they live, 1 Timothy 5 6. As good be out of the world, as do no good in
the world; mere cumber-grounds, Luke 13.

Third Use, may be a just Apology for true Christians, Use 3. Protestants
apology against Papists, who say, we deny the use of good works.
against the unjust Cavil of Antichristian and Popish Spirits: who say, That
because we teach a man is justified by Faith alone, therefore he is justified
by such Faith as is alone. But there is a great deal of difference betwixt
these two Assertions. Though they differ not much in words, yet they differ
much in sense. There is difference betwixt Fide Sola, and Fide Solitaria; Faith
alone, and Faith that is alone. To make it plain by Similitude: Suppose Esther,
attended with her Maids, goes in to the King to beg the life of her people;
Esther alone obtains their life, but not Esther when she was alone; for she was
attended by her Maids, and they were witnesses of the fact. So Faith alone,
through Christ, obtains the life of Justification but not Faith as alone in the
person, for it is ever attended with good works, that are witnesses of that
life. Or as a man that is guided in his way by the benefit of a Torch; he is
only guided by the light of the fire: but that is never alone, for it is
accompanied with heat: So a Christian man, he is guided in his way to heaven,
by the light of the knowledge of Christ through Faith: but the light is never
alone for it is ever accompanied with the heat of love; Gal. 5.6. Faith works
by love. Therefore they slander, when they affirm we teach the contrary: For we
teach, That a Christian lives the life of Sanctification and Fructification in
many powerful and quickening Considerations. Wherefore let us by well-doing put
to silence the ignorance of foolish and malicious men. 1 Pet. 2.15.


Use 4. Exh. to faith, etc. as the root of conveying all godliness and
fruitfulness.
Fourthly, for Exhortation and Quickening, in three Branches.

1. To labor for Faith, and increase in it. Why? because Faith is the Root of
Holiness and Fruitfulness, or the foundation, as it is Col 2.7. Rooted and
built up in him, and established in the faith, etc. A man that would have a
goodly and a fruitful Orchard, will be sure to plant Trees with a good Root:
Otherwise, have they never so goodly Tops, they will but the sooner wither
away, and come to nothing: So those that would be fruitful and flourishing
Trees in Gods Orchard, should be sure to look to the Root of Faith, the root of
all Holiness and Fruitfulness: otherwise be the Top and Branches, and Leaves of
our Profession never so great, all will soon wither and come to nothing. Such
will be as trees twice dead, and plucked up by the roots, Jude v. 12.

2. To live by Faith this Life of Sanctification. 2 Exhort. 1. Motives to live
by faith the life of Sanctification.


Motive. 1. Else we shall never manifest we live the Life of Justification; for
they are Twins, as has been said.

2. This is the most excellent Life; makes us like God, and is therefore
called, The life of God. How do men aspire to imitate great men in their
speeches, gestures, 2. Ephesians. 4.18.
actions? O that we could aspire, and desire to imitate the great and good God,
to be like him, and live the life of Holiness. It is something to live, if but
the lowest life; but the life of grace is above all lives: for this is to live
the Life of God. Holiness is the highest Attribute of Honor.

Without holiness, none shall see the Lord, Heb. 12 14. Our happiness consists
in the Beatifical Vision: 1 John 3.2, 3. and, He that has this hope in him,
purifies himself, as he is pure.

What shall I render to the Lord? Psalm. 116. And as David, Psalm. 103. Bless the
Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name. Nor is that
enough; but surely all that is without us too should bless him; our Tongues,
our Hands, and all our Members: All our very bones; Psalm 35.10. All my bones
shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee? etc. All our actions; and so our Body;
as well as our Souls. It is the Apostles argument, Romans 12.1. I beseech you by
the mercies of God, that you present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable to God, etc. Let us therefore live unto him, by whom we enjoy our
lives: Let us live to him the Life of Sanctification, from whom we receive the
Life of Justification: Let us live to him the Life of Fructification, from whom
we receive the Life of Faith.

Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me: and to him that orders his
conversation aright, etc. God the Father is glorified, Joh. 15.8. Herein is my
Father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit. God the Son, or Jesus Christ;
for hereby it appears, Heb. 7.
he is able to save to the uttermost: how? by saving from sin, as well as from
hell: Mat. 1.21. The Spirit is glorified; for the fruits of the Spirit, are,
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, goodness, etc. Gal. 5.22. It Is the way to
glorify and adorn our Profession. Tit. 2.10. Servants are commanded to be
faithful: Why? That they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all
things. To glorify Free grace: Tit. 2.11, 12. The grace of God has appeared,
Teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, etc.
Otherwise, it is the greatest dishonor to the grace of God, when we turn it
into wantonness, Jude v. 4. yea, it is to deny God, Tit. 1.16. in works deny him.

Exhort. 3. Resolve to be fruitful, but take the present time.
3. To do it timely. Not only resolve to be fruitful, but take the Time. Time
is one of the most precious things God has committed to the sons of men.
Redeem time, Ephesians. 5. viz. at any rate. How has God laid out the glory of his
wisdom and power, in making so many glorious Bodies to measure out Time to us?
that we might learn to take notice of the preciousness of it, and do all our
works in time: yet we squander it away, as if we knew not how to spend it fast
enough. And we put off to the future, what belongs to the present. We hardly
return brazen Performances for golden Opportunities.

Remember, 1. It Is excellent to know and take the time. It was the commendation
of the men of Issachar, 1 Chr. 1.32. As on the contrary, nothing more
unpleasant, than doing things out of time: Pro. 10.26. As vinegar to the teeth,
and smoke to the eyes, so is the sluggard to them that send him.

2. It is very difficult to know and take time. The foolish Virgins lost their
tide: the wise had much ado to gain it. Mat. 25. Jacob said, Surely God was in
this place, Genesis 28.16.
and I was not aware: So may we say -- In this Time, in this Providence; and
yet I was not aware of it. In Cant. 5.3. etc. The Church was but a minute too
slow, and she paid dear for it.

3. It makes every duty easy, if we do take it in time; or else it is
difficult. It Is easy to enter, if the gates of a Castle be open, and the
Governor invites; but if there be stay till it is shut, and the Portcullis let
down, it may cost much blood. It Is easy to lift a great weight whiles many
lift together; but if each asunder, most hard. So while God says, Hear now,
etc. it is easy to move in grace or duties; but if we go about it after, we
may move as Pharaoh's Chariots, Exodus 14.
with the wheels taken off. And late fruit, we know, is killed with Winters
frost.

4. If we do not take it, Opportunity may be irrecoverable. A tree may be
fruitful next year, if not this, if it stand; but it may be the Ax may cut it
down: So it may be, we may never have the like opportunity, as now. Time and
Tide stay for no man. We may happen on a day after the Fair.

5. We know not how soon the folding-doors of time shall be folded up together;
when the Heavens, 1 Cor. 7. 2 Pet. 3.
that measure Time, shall be rolled up as a Scroll. And though time should last
never so long to the world in general, yet how soon the Angel may swear
concerning thee or me, Time shall be no more (Rev. 10.6.) we know not.

6. We must not only account for the means of fruitfulness, Isa. 5. What could
I have done more, etc? but for the time afforded for fruitfulness, Luke 13.7.
These three years have I come looking for fruit, and behold, I find none: Cut
it down, etc. Eccles. 11.9. God will take account of the days of thy youth,
therefore call thy self to account, and be fruitful in season.

7. Lastly, What would the damned in Hell give now for one of these hours to
become fruitful? If the rich glutton, Luke 16.27. would so willingly have a
messenger sent to his five brethren: What would he have given to have been the
messenger himself? but could neither.

So much for the two first Branches in the Life of Sanctification, which the
just man lives by his Faith. Now follows the Third.

BRANCH III. IN THE LIFE of FAITH IN SANCTIFICATION; VIZ. MORTIFICATION.
THE just lives by Faith the Life of Mortification: which consists in the
killing and crucifying of sin; and this follows fitly upon the Life of
Fructification. For sin is the Caterpillar upon the Branch, that devours all
the fruits: Nay, it is the Worm at the Root, that hinders the fruitfulness of
it; or else it is the Toad at the Root, that poisons the fruit. Deuteronomy. 32.32,
33. Their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrha; their
grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter, their wine is the poison
of dragons, and the cruel venom of Asps. The best fruits of natural men, where
sin lives in the dominion of it, are no better than such poisonous fruits.
Therefore the just man lives by Faith of Mortification: He is dead to sin, and
dead to the law, that he may bring forth fruit unto God, Romans 7.4 For the more
sin dies, Faith resem^les the expulsive faculty in the natural body.
the more grace lives; and the more sin lives, the more grace dies. Therefore
Faith lives in killing that, which is an enemy to its life; and is as the
expulsive faculty in the body.

Obj. But is not sin dead as soon as a man believes? Romans 6.11. Likewise reckon
ye your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Ans. Sin indeed has received its deadly wound at the first blow, but yet it
will not be wholly dead, till we die. Nay, it fares with it, as with a creature
that has received its deadly wound; it struggles and strives more violently
than ever before. Romans 7.8, 9. Sin taking occasion by the commandment, wrought
in me all manner of concupiscence; for without the law sin was dead, etc.
Insomuch that this combat continues till our dying day. Gal. 5 17. The flesh
lusts against the spirit, and the spirit lusts against the flesh, and these
are contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot do the things that ye
would. And Satan, he takes part with our corruption; he is Sins Second in the
field. Now Faith is a Christians chief weapon, by which he defends himself, and
offends his adversary: Ephesians. 6.16. -- the shield of faith.

For the method of proceeding in this Head; it shall be to show, 1. How Faith
proceeds in Mortification of sin. 2. Why Faith will have sin to be mortified.
3. The Uses hence.

Quest. I. First, How Faith proceeds in mortifying sin?
I answer,

It does it as men use to do in the prosecution of a Malefactor: As the avenger
of blood pursued the Murderer in a legal way: Sin is put to death by the law:
Romans 3.22.
By what law? of works? nay, but by the law of faith. So that as the Jews said
of Christ, faithful men may say of sin, We have a law, and by our law he ought
to die.

rising of the heart against the person. How faith goes about the mortifying of
sin. Gal. 5.6.
A man will never prosecute him whom he has no quarrel against. So Faith stirs
up a Christian to hate his sin; as it stirs him up to love God, so consequently
to hate sin, Gods deadly enemy: yea, he hates it to death: Col. 3.1, 5. Ye that
love the Lord, hate that which is evil, Psalm. 97.10. Nay, says Faith to sin, I
will have thy life; nothing shall satisfy me but thy life. Thou have wronged
my dear God, therefore I will be revenged of thee. True Repentance, and true
Faith, work indignation and revenge; 2 Cor. 7.11. Yea, what indignation, what
revenge -- As we cannot love God too much, so we cannot hate sin too much.

diligent enquiry after the Malefactor. So faith sends out Hue and Cry, Where
is the Rebel, the Traitor? It is the voice of Faith, that Lam. 3.40. Let us
search and try our ways, etc. Faith knows, if we find not sin out, sin will
find us out; Number. 32.23.
and if it sees us first, it slayes us, as the Basilisk. Faith knows all the
haunts of sin, as Saul said of David to the Ziphites, 1 Samuel 23.22. Go, I pray
you -- know and see his place where his haunt is. It searches the root of all
actual sins: Psalm. 51.5. In sin was I shapen, etc. An unbeliever hides,
extenuates, excuses, denies his sin: But Faith never leaves till it discover,
and brings it before the judgment seat. As Rahab entertained the spies, Heb.
11 31. So faith entertains the spies of enlightened reason, Psalm. 119.105. and
Prayer, Psalm. 139.23.

Accusers of sin: 1. The Law, Joh. 5.45. There is one that accuses you, even
Moses: Romans 7.7. I had not known sin but by the Law. 2. The Gospel, though it
saves the sinner, it condemns the sin, Romans 6.1, 2. Shall we (we believers)
continue in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid. How shall we that are dead
to sin, live any longer therein? 3. The Renewed man, converted by the Gospel:
Romans 7.17. It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me: whereas sin
accuses the godly man to be the troubler of the person, family, 1 Kin. 18.18.
Josh. 7.25.
state, etc. Faith says to sin, Thou art the troubler of Israel, therefore
thou deservest to be stoned to death: Jam. 4.1. From whence come wars and
fightings amongst you? come they not from your lusts?

Witness against sin: whereas sin pleads for it self, and accuses Holiness and
strictness to be the cause of all misery. Faith brings in witness to the
contrary: 1. Outward; By faith we understand the world was made, etc. Heb. 11.
and so, that the world was destroyed by sin; once drowned; again reserved for
fire, to wash, 2 Pet. 3.
to burn out the filth of sin. All evils that ever befell the world, in the
world, from Adam to this day, is laid to the charge of sin. Faith says, As
where no transgression no curse; Romans 3.
so wheresoever there is curse, there is transgression. Whatever sad stories
are reported, of 70 years Captivity, of Sword, of Pestilence, and Famine, etc.
yea, says Faith, you may thank sin for all this. Was Cain a runnagate, Pharaoh
drowned in the Sea, Joseph's brethren in sad perplexity, etc? Surely they may
say, We are verily guilty, Genesis 42.21.
etc. Yea, Gods people may thank sin for all their affliction: Isa 27.9. This
is all the fruit, to purge away your sin. Sin is like a stubborn Tenant, or a
Thief, that will not out, unless the house be fired over his head. 2. Inward
Witness, which is the Conscience; in stead of a thousand witnesses: Romans 2.15.
Their own consciences bearing them witness, etc. What say thou Conscience?
did not sin do thus and thus, and is the cause of all this misery, etc?

Jury of Saints or Believers (not as unbelievers, that compare themselves with
themselves; 2 Cor. 10.12. For what part has he that believes with an infidel,
2 Cor. 6.15.) and calls in the Judge. For sin must be judged by God and the
Bench: See Psalm. 50.5, 6. and not by the Country of Carnal men. For though the
Conscience of Carnal men can bear evidence against sin, yet they are partial
Jurymen; they would fain have sin live: Let loose Barabbas, and crucify
Christ. But the Bench of godly men (sitting with Christ upon his Throne) as
they shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6. so they judge sin. They find sin guilty
and worthy of death, and cry out for Justice, Justice, my Lord, upon sin. These
are the cloud of Witnesses, and Jurymen, that account sin as the greatest
burden in the world, Heb. 12.1. Therefore, says Faith, (if asked, to which of
the Saints will thou turn? Job. 5.1.) I will be judged by all the godly in the
World.

And this Jury, ground their Verdict upon Evidence: Note.
Works outwardly, Conscience inwardly, have brought in this witness against
sin. 1. It Is a deadly enemy to God and his Grace: Romans 8.6. -- it is enmity
against God. Nothing is contrary to God, but sin. 2. It gives Laws against God:
Romans 8.2. -- the law of sin and death. God says, This must be done; Sin says
the flat contrary. 3. It forces its Obedience; it is a Tyrant over Gods people;
makes them cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me, Romans 7.24.
Luke 19.14.
Indeed wicked men are voluntary slaves. 4. It is guilty of all the slain that
lie in the pit. If it be said, Who slew all these? we may say, Sin. 2 Kin. 10.9.
Though the Devil be a Murderer, John 8.
yet he cannot slay one Soul, without the assistance of Sin. The Soul than
sins shall die, Ezekiel. 18.5. It Is guilty of Christ's blood. Sin, thou have
crucified the Lord the Life: Our sins were the nails in his hands, and spear in
his side; and is not he worthy to die, that put Christ to death?

Judge; as the importunate widow, Luke 18.3. Avenge me of mine adversary. Faith
makes God in his Word to be the Judge; ( viz. the Doctrine of the Twelve
Apostles) Both, Whether sin be thus guilty, or no? Jam. 1.13. Let no man say
when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, etc. Sin would lay the fault upon God;
but God lays the fault upon sin. And secondly, What punishment sin is worthy
of: No less than death, says God. Therefore thou must die, says Faith to Sin.
1 Cor. 11.31. For this cause many -- sleep, i.e. die.

condemnation of Sin. God has condemned sin to die: Romans 6.14. Sin shall not
have dominion over you. Therefore, says Faith, I have Gad on my side: Sin must
not reign: nay Sin must not live. As the soul that sins must die: so the Soul
than is freed from death, is freed from sin, both in the guilt and power.

Execution of the Sentence upon Sin; Heb. 11.17.
Offers up the dearly beloved sin. And that in respect 1. Of the time;
presently, whilst it is called to day. There is no truce, no reprival, no
sparing of sin: Life must go for life. Sin is never the better for kind usage:
Some sinners are won that way, but not sin it self. God cannot reconcile sin to
himself, though he reconcile sinners to himself. 2. For the Means: where there
is, 1. Arming our selves, Ephesians. 6. Take to you the whole armor of God --
especially the shield of faith. 2. Disarming sin: The strength of sin lies
either in the Law of God, 1 Cor. 15.56. The strength of sin is the law: Or in
the power and policy of Satan: Ephesians. 2.2. -- that works in the children of
disobedience. Now Faith disarms Sin: 1. It cuts the sinews of the Law; Romans
6.14 We are not under the law, but under grace. 2. It cuts the sinews of Satan;
1 John 3.8. For this cause the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy
the works of the devil. Therefore, that Soul that is willing Christ should live
in it, shall be sure to have sin die in it. Lastly, Taking sin captive; leading
this Captivity captive; Ephesians. 4.8. Psalm. 149.6.
and putting it to death by the two-edged sword of the Word in its hand, and so
executing the judgment written. Heb. 4.12.
So much for the first Quaere.

Quest. II. Secondly, What are the Reasons, why Faith will have sin to be
mortified?
Answ.

Many. 1. Reasons of the mortification of sin.
Because sin is most contrary to the nature of Faith. Faith is a most holy
Faith, Jude v. 20. It is that which purifies the heart, Acts 15.9. And sin is
loathsome and impure: For it defiles 1. The Person: Tit. 1.15. To the
unbelieving, -- even their mind and conscience is defiled. 2. The Actions:
Hag. 2.12, 13. -- every work of their hands, and that which they ^ffer, is
unclean. 3. The Name: as Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Genesis 34.30. Ye have
troubled me, to make me to stink among the inhabitants of the land. 4. It
defiles others; as that incestuous Person's sin, 1 Cor. 5.6. as leaven, spreads
over the whole lump. 5. The Land it self: Gen 6 11. The earth also was corrupt
before God, and the earth was filled with violence. So the Lord says, Number
35.33. The land is polluted and defiled with blood. Therefore Faith and Sin are
contraries and contraries hate one another to the death; Mutuo se expellunt --
they cannot live together.

The just shall live by Faith. The design of Sin is to bring death to the Soul.
Ezekiel. 18.
The soul that sins shall die the death; and, The wages of sin is death, Romans
6. last. Therefore Faith must kill sin, or else not bring its design to pass:
for Rev. 21. last, No unclean thing shall enter into life. Even Gods own people
shall not enter, until they attain perfection of Sanctification.

who was delivered for our transgressions, etc. O, says Christ to Sin and
Death; I will be your death, though it cost me my life. Hos. 13.14. O death, I
will be thy death, etc. He was crucified, that our old man might be crucified
with him, Romans 6.6. Therefore, says Faith, as I believe in Christ crucified, I
must also crucify sin, Romans 6.11. Wherefore reckon ye your selves dead unto
sin; (...): Hoc enim refero ad fidei syllogismum, says Beza. It Is the reasoning
of Faith.

Avenger of blood. Only it is in this unlike, that there is no City of Refuge
for sin. Col 3.5. Mortify therefore your members on earth; fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, etc. And Gods command is
the object of Faith, as well as a Promise.

He will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the
depth of the sea. As Satan is Captain on the one side: so is Christ on the
other side; as was held forth in the Vision to Joshua, cap. 5.14. As Captain of
the host of the Lord am I now come. 2 Chro. 20.12.
Therefore, says the faithful Soul, I know not what to do; though I have no
power, yet mine eyes are unto thee. And so, as David against Goliath, they go
out against sin, in the Name of the Lord, with this poor Sling of Faith, and
the Pebble-stone of the Word; and so strike this Giant of Corruption in the
forehead, that it sinks down by degrees, and at last they tread upon the neck
of their proudest Lusts.



1. From the Object of Mortification, sin; viz. 1. From the object of
mortification.
That those that are in Christ, have sin and sinful affections remaining in
them. For what must the just that lives by Faith mortify? Surely, not his
grace. It is something that is sinful; he must not fight with his own shadow.
The body of sin must be destroyed; Romans 6.6 The law of sin and death abolished,
Romans 8.2. God sees something, and an enlightened Soul sees something that is to
be mortified, and fights with somebody. Col. 3.5. Mortify therefore your
members that are on the earth, etc. And lest they should say, We have no
earthly members; the Apostle gives instance -- fornication, uncleanness, etc.
And lest they should say, We do not live in these sins now, the Apostle
answers by way of Concession, Ver. 7.
You do not live in them indeed, you do not walk in them; but yet a remainder
of the seeds of these sins is in you still; you may be tempted to them, and
therefore strive against them: Put off all these vile affections, etc.

2. From the Act. To mortify, is to kill outright. 2. From the Act.
It Is not enough to abstain from the outward acts of sin; but we must subdue
the inward desire, will and affection to sin. Why? Because abstaining from the
outward act, is but a restraining or imprisoning of sin. But the subduing the
inward desire, will, and affection of Sin, is the Mortifying of Sin. For, the
Life of Sin lies in the Will. And therefore of the two (in evil things) it is
less dangerous to do that which we will not, Romans 7.19, 20.
than to will that which we do not. Sin is never mortified, until inordinate
affections be mortified: In these lies the heart-blood of sin. Mat. 5.27.
Whosoever shall look -- to lust -- has committed adultery in his heart.

3. From the Instrument.
3. From the Instrument. If by Faith sin be mortified; see the mistake of those,
that will needs have sin mortified before they believe, or else they will not
believe. O, say they, The error of such who will not believe till first made
whole.
if such and such a lust were mortified, I could believe; but so long as the
case stands thus, I dare not. As much as to say, If they were rid of the
disease beforehand, they would go to the Physician, and take Physic. Indeed
its required, they should be sensible of their disease. And though we do not
say, we must thus prepare our selves; yet we may safely say, God thus prepares
his people for Christ. Mat. 9.12, 13. They that are whole need not the
physician, but they that are sick -- I am not come to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance. Now then, seeing we cannot be rid of our disease, till
we come to the Physician, and we cannot come without faith, therefore we see
the error and mistake of those that will not believe, till first made whole.

Examination.
Gal. 5 24. They that are in Christ, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts. Have thou done so? Many are mistaken, and think, some,
that sin is not mortified, when it is, others, that it is, when it is not. A
poor child of God cries out, Mine enemies (my sins) live, and are mighty etc!
therefore I live not by Faith. But a Moral man, he can say, I was once a
Drunkard, or Swearer, but now I have left all my vain company, therefore my sin
is mortified: and yet it may be he is as covetous now as luxurious as before.
Wherefore, its hard to know whether sin be truly mortified: for as in some,
Grace has a name to live, and is dead; so in others, Sin has a name to be
dead, and is alive. Sometimes, one sin drives out another; while particular
ends and aim, or light of Nature, etc. overruled in this, rather than that.

Therefore Examine. But how shall we know if sin be mortified indeed?

Ans. 1. If sin die, then we are first sick of sin: Marks of true Mortification.
as commonly before men die, Ipsa senectus, morbus; themselves are weary of
themselves. As the Soul is sick of love to Christ, Cant. 2.5. so it is also
sick of sin: Psalm. 38.4. Mine iniquities are gone over my head; as an heavy
burden they are too heavy for me: my wounds stink, and are corrupt, etc.

2. If sin dies aright, it dies in all parts. 2 Mark. Col. 3.
Mortify your members, not one member only. As a natural death seizes on all
parts, heart and all; so true Mortification extends it self to all parts of the
old man; even to the best beloved sin, and that which lies next the heart.

3. Then there is no more delight in sin. 3 Mark. Romans 6.
If sin be dead in us, we are dead to sin. Bury my dead out of my sight, said
Abraham of his beloved Sarah, when she was once dead, Genesis 23.4.

4. Further, let us see, 4 Mark.
if we have proceeded against sin as the avenger of blood, in those eight
Particulars abovementioned; viz. Is there 1. A rising of the heart against sin?
2. A diligent enquiry after it. 3. An accusation of it, etc.

Obj. But my sin revives in me, rather than is mortified.

Ans. I answer, as before: When a beast is struck, it struggles. Besides, as
Christ died a lingering death; so does a believers sin, that is crucified with
him. There is a long Combat between the flesh and Spirit, as there was between
the houses of Saul and David. Gal. 5.17. 2 Samuel 3.
The flesh lusts against the Spirit, etc.

Obj. Yea, but there is a combat in the Conscience of Natural men against sin
(as there is in the Regenerate, of the Spirit against the flesh:) And I am
afraid mine is no more; how shall I know it?

Marks of the combat of flesh against Spirit.
Ans. Know it thus: 1. By the Cause. What is the Cause of this Combat or
Trouble of Conscience? Is it only some gross sin or great judgment; That, may
proceed from the horror of natural Conscience? But if thy very corrupt frame of
Nature troubles thee, and its putting forth in the least sins, in sinful
thoughts, in sinful looks, etc. This combat proceeds from a Nature renewed by
the Spirit of God: Romans 7.23, 24. I see a law in my members, rebelling against
the law of my mind -- O wretched man that I am, etc!

Second Mark of the difference 'twixt a true and false combat.
2. By the Aim. The aim of a natural man in his combat or wrestling, is only
to give sin a foil, or at most, a fall; and he is willing to let it rise again,
so it will be quiet, and not bring him to shame, by giving him a fall in the
place of lookers-on. But the aim of a spiritual man in his combat, is not
only to give sin a fall, but to kill it, and crucify it. He lives the Life of
Mortification; he desires that all that natural enmity which is in his heart
against God, Ephesians. 2.16.
may be utterly slain.

3 Mark.
3. In the Effects and Issue. For 1. the combat of a Natural man drives him to
false succors. When the evil Spirit troubles Saul, he runs now to his Music,
now to the Witch of Endor; Cain to his building of Cities: But a spiritual man
runs to Christ; Romans 7.25. Who shall deliver me from the body of death? I thank
God, says he, through Jesus Christ our Lord. 2. The combat of a Natural man
ends usually either in Despair, or Dissoluteness. The flesh gets the better
hand, and at last his troubled conscience comes to be drowned or seared. But
the combat of Spiritual men ends in Victory: his conscience is more tender,
and smites him for the lap of a garment, or any small thing; and so he gets
more power against sin from day to day. Though he halts for it, yet he gets the
victory.

Conviction and Reproof to 7 sort of persons


peace with sin, than fight against it. Though the Lord has sworn that he will
have war with (this) Amalek, from generation to generation. Exodus 17.16.
What is this, but to make a Covenant with Death, and to be at an Agreement
with Hell? Isa. 28.15.

against sin, fight for it. See also Jer. 44.16.
As the Sodomites for theirs, Genesis 19. or the Benjamites in defense of theirs,
Judge. 20. or the Ephesians for their Diana, Acts 19. Such take the Devils part,
and fight against Christ, as the Dragon against Michael, Rev. 12.7.

Solomon says of one Sin, may be said of all, Prove. 23.32 At last it biteth
like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder, These are such as make provision
for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it, Romans 13. last.

indeed; for all are either with Christ, or against him. But some seem Neuters,
as Laodicea, Rev. 3.16. that is neither hot nor cold. Double-minded men, that
are unstable in all their ways, Jam. 1.8. Such as the Lord will spew out of
his mouth. Why halt ye between two, said Elijah, 1 Kings 18.21. if Baal be God,
follow him, if God be God, follow him.

Saul did before David, My Son -- I have done very foolishly: and Pharaoh
before Moses, 1 Samuel 14.16. Exodus 9.27.
The Lord is righteous, but I and my people are wicked: and Judas did before
the High Priest, I have sinned, in betraying the innocent blood; and yet for
all that, they spare the life of them. They had rather kill themselves, than
kill their Sins; as Saul did, and Judas also.

imprison it, or bind it to its good-behavior, or cast it so bound into a pit
(as Joseph was cast by his Brethren) that the world may not see their
wickedness, Genesis 27.21.
but they are resolved they will never kill it outright: No, but they plead for
the life of it, as Reuben pleaded for the life of his Brother; Let us not kill
him, 2 Samuel 18.5.
etc. Or as David for Absalom, Deal gently with the young man. Just so men deal
with their Sins; they are kinde-hearted to their Sins, but cruel to their Souls.

scourge their Sins, and themselves for their Sins, but spare the life of it:
As Papists do, by their Fastings, Pilgrimages, and Scourgings; and then
presently give a new Indulgence to Sin. As the worshippers of Baal cut
themselves with knives and lancers: 1 Kings 18.
So these mortify the outward man, but the inward man is never pricked at the
heart. Alas! it is easier to endure all outward torments, than to mortify one
lust. The sinner will endure any pain, Job 2.
so his sin may live: Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for
his life. Now Sin is the very life of a sinner, in his own apprehension, dearer
than his right hand or his right eye.

wound them sore, and leave them half dead. He that was drunk over night,
smites upon his breast in the morning, as if he and his sin would die together.
But alas! worldly sorrow does but leave it half dead; and therefore no sooner
is it carried to a common Inn, but presently it recovers life again.

spare Agag, 2 Samuel 15.
and the best of the spoil (some fat, profitable Sin, of Bribery, or
Oppression, or Lying, or Overreaching in Bargains, etc.) this they are
resolved to spare. But as good never a whit, as never the better. True
Mortification strikes at all Sins: Jam. 2.10. He that offends in one, is
guilty of all: kill all, or we kill none. He that only lops and tops his Sin,
and never strikes at the root, he does but make it grow the thicker and the
faster. By true Faith are pulled up vitiorum fibrae, the sprigs of wickedness;
lest any root of bitterness should spring up, to the destruction of the Soul,
Heb 12.15.

Exhortation to mortify sin.
to mortify our Sins: Not only as a shield (a weapon defensive) to defend us
from our enemies, but as a sword (a weapon offensive) to kill and destroy our
enemies, especially our Sins, our worst enemies. The life of a Christian, is a
Soldiers life: The life of man upon earth, is a warfare, says Job. Our first
Sacrament is a military Sacrament; we take Christ's Prest-money to fight
manfully against the Flesh, the World, and the Devil: and he that conquers the
Flesh, will easily conquer the other two. And therefore, I say with the
Apostle, 1 Cor, 16.13. Behave your selves like Soldiers; watch ye, stand fast
in the faith, quit your selves like men, be strong in this war: Let nothing
satisfy but the life of your adversary. Lo, here is a lawful Murder, such an
one as is both commanded and commended, to mortify our earthly members. And
let no man say, I have done this already, and therefore what need I do any
more? for this is a work we must be doing to our dying day. Natural Corruption
is that monstrous Hydra; as some Heads are cut off, others are still springing
up in their room: and therefore we must follow our first blow as long as we
live. We must not be negligent in following the victory: Jer. 48 10. Cursed be
he that does the work of the Lord negligently; and cursed be he that keeps
back his hand from blood. And if he be cursed that spares the life of Sinners,
(when God calls him to their slaughter) much more he that spares the life of
Sin. Therefore that Gods Trumpets may put some life into you in this Spiritual
warfare, let me add some quickening Alarms to stir you up to live this Life of
Faith in Mortification. (The Ministers of God were to sound the Alarm before
the battle, Number 10.8, 9.) And then some Means or Martial Discipline, by which
you may know your postures.

Motives to Mortification.
First, The first Alarm or Motive, is, Gods Command, above all Motives. The
great General of the Field, he gives the Word, and therefore we must fall on.
God speaks, as Absalom to his Servants, 2 Samuel 13.28. When I say unto you,
Smite Amnon, then kill him; fear not, have not I commanded you? Be courageous,
and be valiant.

Danger of violating Gods Command. It Is present death in a soldier, not to
obey the Word of his Commander. As it is a great sin to kill where God has
said, Thou shall not kill: so it is as great a sin not to kill, where God has
said, Thou shall kill. Remember what God said to Ahab, 1 Kings 20.42. Because
thou have let go out of thine hands a man, whom I appointed to utter
destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life. If we kill not sin, sin
will kill us. In Col. 3.4, 5, 6. it is observable, that Mortification of sin is
set between Life Eternal and Death Eternal. As if God should say, When I
command you to mortify your sins, I set before you Life and Death: Life, if
your sins die; and Death, if your sins live.

Enemy, as well as ours. Suppose sin were our dear friend, yet if Gods deadly
Enemy, we must not spare it. Who is on the Lords side? said Moses, Ex. 32.26.
-- slay every man his brother, etc. If we be of Christ's spiritual kindred, we
will avenge his blood on sin. Sin crucified the Lord of Life: Acts 3. Psalm. 105.
this was the iron that entered into his soul. God indeed has appointed a City
of Refuge for sinners, even for those that murdered the Lord of Life; they may
hide themselves in the wounds themselves have made: but no City of Refuge for
sin. Therefore follow it to the death.

help us in our warfare. What encouraged Joshua and Israel to be strong, and
of a good courage? Because God had said, I will not fail thee, Josh. 1.
nor forsake thee. Take heed you bring not an evil report upon the Lords
Battles, Number. 13.
as the Spies did on the Land of Canaan: Our Corruptions are so strong we shall
never master them, etc. But remember it is the Lord your God that fights for
you; therefore be strong and courageous, 2 Cor. 10.4.

sure of the victory beforehand; and so more than Conquerors, Romans 8. This
should make us fight with courage: 1 Cor. 15.57. Thanks be to God, which gives
us the victory through Jesus Christ our Lord. As Jehosaphat encouraged the
people, 2 Chronicles. 20.17. Ye shall not need fight in this battle, set your
selves, see the salvation of the Lord: or as Jonathan himself, and his
Armor-bearer, 1 Samuel 14. So should we, though there be the greatest
unlikeliness, because of the Lords Promise.

Property of all true Christians, all that are espoused to Christ, thus to do.
The Soul cannot be married unto Christ, unless the first husband be dead; viz.
The Law and Sin, Romans 7.1, 2.

Christ, we shall live with Christ, If our old man die with him, our new man
shall live with him: For ye are dead, Romans 6.
and your life is hid with Christ in God, etc. Now who would not be willing to
have sin die, that Christ may live in their Souls, and they in him to all
eternity. Otherwise, if sin live to eternity, we must die to eternity. If sin
be not killed here, it will never be killed. In Isa. 66. last, it is said of the
damned, Their worm shall never die. Therefore now learn to live by Faith this
Life of Mortification.

Quest. It may be thou will say, I am willing to kill my sins, if I knew how:
what means therefore should I use; for I am a very unskiful Soldier in this
warfare?

Means of mortification.
Ans. The first Means is to look up to God, who teaches thy hands to war, and
thy fingers to fight. Go out in his Name, as David did against Goliath. Fall
down before him, as Joshua before the Captain of the Lord, host, Josh. 5.14. Be
much in Prayer, and add Fasting to Prayer. Some sins cannot be cast out
without this.

hate sin. A man hates to death, what he mortifieth; and though he cannot kill
it outright, 1 Job. 3.
yet, as he that hates his Brother is a manslayer; so he that hates his sin (as
sin) is a sin-slayer, in Gods account. For ye are dead -- says the Apostle,
Col. 3.3. then follows, Mortify therefore your Members, etc. ver. 5.

Love of Christ, and this will constrain to suffering and doing: 2 Cor. 5.14.
For the love of Christ constrains us. We love our sins naturally as our right
eye, and therefore are loath to part with them. It must be the sense of a
greater love, that will make us willing to pluck out our right eye. He that was
next of kin to the person murdered, was to be the Avenger of blood, because it
was to be supposed, he loved him best. If we consider what enemies our sins are
to Christ our best beloved, we shall do that part. Love Christ much, and you
will hate sin much; and the way to love Christ much, is to be assured of
Christ's love to us; 1 Cor. 15.31. I protest by our rejoicing we have in Christ
Jesus, I die daily.

knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him. The death of Christ is
the death of sin: First, because it is the meriting Cause, meriting the Spirit
by which our sins are mortified. Secondly, the serious Consideration of Christ's
death, does give sin a deadly wound. What, did Christ die for my sins! O let me
crucify them, that crucified him! Did Christ love me so well, as to be willing
to lose a precious life? Let me love him so well, as to part with a sinful
life, or the life of sin. The death of Christ, is the slaying of the Enmity,
not only betwixt man and man, Ephesians. 1.16.
but between God and Man: I am crucified with Christ, says the Apostle Gal 2.20

Put on therefore the whole armor of God, etc. Where you see two things, 1.
God has provided for a Christian Complete Armor. 2. Every Christian that
would stand in the day of battle, must put it on.

But what is the Armor God has provided?

Ans. See there in the verses after; they are the Graces of Gods Spirit, all
Christian Virtues

1. Truth, the Soldiers Belt, that knits all other graces (all other pieces of
the Armor) fast together. Truth of Doctrine, opposed to Error; Truth of
Graces and Actions, opposed to Hypocrisy. Hypocrites are fearful; true men are
valorous: One true man beats two or three thieves, Prove. 28.1.

2. The Breast Plate of Righteousness: Righteousness imputed, and Righteousness
imparted; and this is Murus aheneus. Though infirmities may be in many, yet
this saves the Vitals.

3. Shoes of Patience, like brazen Greaves, whereby the Christian Soldier
treads upon Scorpions; he treads down Satan under his feet in this Spiritual
Combat.

4. The Shield of Faith above all, or over all: For this covers all our Armor,
all our Graces, and strengthens them in the Combat.

5. The Helmet of Salvation, which is Hope, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8.

Then lastly, there is the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God; of
which in the next Means.

Word. In Hos. 6.5. God hews them by his Prophets, and slays them by the Words
of his mouth. This is a sharp and two-edged sword, that pierces to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit, Heb. 4.12. And here apply the threatenings as well
as the Promises, to the mortifying of sin. When the Minister reproves such
sins as we are guilty of, every one should turn the Point to his own breast.
Suppose it be Lying, or Adultery, or Idolatry, etc. out of that place, Rev
22.15. If there be an hundred in the Congregation, every one should say, Surely
God meant, I should take this to my self: Suppose Despising of the Word, out
of Prove. 1.25. Suppose partaking of other men's sins, out of Psalm. 50.18. When
thou saw a thief, thou consentedst, etc. We should do as Job's friends
advised him, Job 5.27. Hear it, and know it for thy self. This was that, which
pricked their hearts, Acts 2.36, 37. when Peter told them, they had crucified
that same Jesus.

Spirit: for, the Word is but the Sword of the Spirit: Romans 8.11. If ye by the
spirit mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live: Gal. 5.16. Walk in the
spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. This will conquer
Corruption: For 1. It is of a most contrary nature to it; a holy Spirit. 2. It
is an Almighty Spirit, able to cast corruption out: 1 John 4.4. Greater is he
that is in you, than he that is in the world. Therefore walk in the guidance
and strength of the Spirit Look higher than our selves for new supply of
strength, as we have new Employments, new Trials, new Temptations. Do not only
desire it, and pray for it, but use it kindly. The Spirit is of a tender and
delicate nature; very free, where it is entertained, and acts with freedom. If
thy Soul welcome the Spirit, he will soon thrust out those domineering lusts,
that have disturbed his quiet and peaceable possession. And hereunto look with
an eye of faith unto those great Promises of the Spirit, Isa 44.2.3. Ezekiel
36.25, etc. Joel 2.28. The Spirit is promised to be poured out largely under
the Gospel; as Ezekiel's waters, chap. 47. it is observable, the further they
run, the deeper they grew. They took the Jews up to the ankles, the Primitive
Christians to the knees, the Middle Times to the loins, etc.

lawful things. Satan gets great advantage in these things: Corruption is
strengthened by immoderate use of lawful things. Luke 17.27. They eat, they
drank, they married, and gave in marriage -- and the flood came and destroyed
them all. They were first drowned in their security and unbelief, and then the
flood drowned them:

Vows. As they vowed the death of Paul, Acts 23. so do thou of thy sins. Vows
are against, either things absolutely unlawful; and these bind ad semper,
always, as the Vow in Baptism, against the World, Flesh and Devil: or things
indifferent, but in danger to be abused; and these it is best to be made only
ad tempus, for a time, lest afterward they become a snare.

Occasions of Temptations. Some do tempt the Devil to tempt them, by thrusting
themselves upon apparent danger of sinning; as, into evil company, and lewd
houses: whereas the Holy Ghost says, Remove thy way far from her, and come not
nigh the door of her house, Prove. 5.8.

Comfort against the vigor and rigor of sin.
against the vigor and rigor of sin, which is like the Egyptian Taskmasters,
every day imposing new burdens, by fleshly lusts ever warring against the
soul. A great discomfort this is, which makes a gracious Soul complain with
David, Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the
tents of Kedar: or Paul, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from this body of death! Yet here is comfort, he lives by faith the Life of
Mortification. Faith tells him, 1. Christ is on his side, as Jehu cried, Who is
on my side, who? 2. The victory is sure, 1 Cor. 15. pen. Let this therefore
comfort a Christian that is troubled more for sin, Job 36.21.
than affliction. And it is our duty to strengthen the hearts and hands of such
in their spiritual, warfare: Heb. 12.12. Lift up the hands that hang down; Isa.
40.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God; speak ye comfortably
to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, etc. As the
house of Saul grew weaker every day, so shall sin. Though there be cause to be
humbled; yet also Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. And
as the Apostle exhorts Christians not to sorrow as men without hope for the
dead, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. because they shall live again at the last: So say I, let
not Christians sorrow as men without hope, by reason of their living enemies,
their powerful corruptions, for they shall die at the last. It may be said to a
Christian at his last gasp. These Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall
see them again no more for ever: The Red Sea of death shall drown them all.

BRANCH IV. IN THE LIFE of FAITH IN SANCTIFICATION; VIZ. VIVIFICATION.
THE just lives by Faith the Life of Vivification. When his heart is ready to
sink, Faith lifts it up again, and puts a new Life as it were into it: And the
very Text seems to drive at this also, if we make out the Antithesis or
opposition to the full betwixt Unbelief and Faith. The Unbeliever lifts up his
heart, in Creature-strength; but the Believer lives by Faith in Gods strength.
Jehosaphats heart was lift up in the ways of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 17.6. In the
midst of all damps, he lived by Faith this Life of Vivification: which is as it
were (under God) the life of our lives, or at least the liveliness of our life;
as we say, Such an one is a lively Christian, or a man full of life. For I do
not here mean by Vivification, the first quickening work of the Spirit (for that
we spoke of before, in the Life of Renovation) but I mean the quickening and
reviving work of the Spirit, after some deadness has seized upon the Soul.

Two Propositions.
Therefore two things are to be demonstrated: 1. That Gods own Children are
subject to be overtaken with spiritual drowziness or deadness of Spirit at some
times, as the foot may be asleep through obstructions.

2. That at such times as these they live by Faith, and by Faith recover the
quickness and activity of their spiritual life again.

1. Gods children subject to deadness.
The first we premise; That the best of Gods Children are subject to deadness:
Even the five wise Virgins, as well as the foolish, all slumbred and slept,
Matthew. 25.5. The Spouse complains of her drowziness, Cant. 5.2: I sleep, but my
heart waketh. Christ charge the Church of Sardis with this, Rev. 3.1, 2. Thou
have a name that thou live, and art dead. What! quite dead? No; but ready to
die, as it follows, ver. 2. And so Mr. Perkins expounds it. Experience shows
this daily: How many Christians full of complaints of their deadness, as David,
Psalm. 119.25. My soul cleaves unto the dust, quicken thou me, etc.

Quest. How comes this to pass, or what is the reason and cause of it?

Ans. It is good indeed to know the cause. The cause of a disease being found
out, it is half cured. For answer then hereunto, we must distinguish of
Deadness.

Causes of this deadness.
A Christians deadness, is either Accidental, Sinful, Penal, or Probational.

1. Accidental.
1. The cause of Accidental deadness springs sometimes from age, sometimes from
sickness, sometimes from melancholy. In which cases, a man may have a very
good will to do service with life and activity: but bodily weakness pulling him
down, and the natural spirits being low, he is just like a Bird that has her
wings clipped, who would fain fly, but cannot. And this unfits to any duties, as
well natural and civil, as religious.

2. There is a Sinful deadness, 2. Sinful.
when a man has little heart or affection to the service of God. And if we
enquire into the reason of this, it springs from sinful causes: Which are
either Privative, as the want of good Food, the Word, which is animae pabulum:
Or good Exercise; 1 Timothy 4.7. Exercise thy self rather unto godliness: Or good
Company, which is quickening; one stick of this fire kindles another; he that is
all alone soon falls asleep: Or good Air, I mean, a good Ministry. Heb. 10.24,
25
As the presence of these things in nature, makes men active and vigorous, and
the want of them, makes heavy and dead: so in Grace.

Or else they are Positive causes. And such are 1. Excessive cares or
pleasures, which do overcharge the heart, Luke 21.34. 2. Bad Company: Peter's
heart was deaded in the Highpriests Hall. It Is said of Nero, he tied the
bodies of living men to those that were dead; which was cold comfort, and half
a death to them. Nothing dulls more, than the society of dull and dead-hearted
men. 3. Custom in Sin, which makes insensible in sinning. Prove. 23.34, 35. They
have stricken me, and I was not sick; they have beaten me, and I felt it not,
etc. 4. Satan often rocks the cradle. It was more than a natural drowziness, that
the disciples were so heavy and sleepy, when Christ was upon his Passion. You
may know the disease by the remedy, watch and pray, says our Savior, that ye
enter not into temptation. Mat. 26.40, 41.


3. There is a Penal deadness: and God inflicts this as a punishment of former
sins. Is. 6.9, 10. Go and tell this people, 3. Penal.
Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not: make
the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, lest they see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, etc. The word sometimes makes men worse,
rather than better; as the beams of the Sun harden the Clay, and soften the
Wax; withers the grass upon the housetop, and makes the grass in the meadows
flourish; comforts sound eyes, and offends sore eyes.

4. Probational.
4. There is a Probational deadness; which God dispenses or permits, for the
trial of his Servants graces. This was in Peter for a time, to let us see what
we are, when God leaves us to our selves. Summer were not so comfortable if we
had not a Winter. Look as it is in natural life, Psalm. 104.29, 30. Thou hidest
thy face, they are troubled; thou take away their breath, they die and return
to the dust: Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are created, etc. So in
spiritual life: whence there is so much difference betwixt one man and another;
yea, in the same man at one time, and at another.

Propos. 2. Saints recover by faith out of deadness.
But it is better to know how to come out of this estate, than how we come into
it; though both be needful. Therefore I come to the second Proposition:

That, at such times as these, the just lives by faith, and by Faith recovers
the quickness and activity of his spiritual life again. In the 2 of Tim. 1.6.
the Apostle persuades Timothy, to stir up the gift of God that was in him,
(...), to thrive, or rekindle it, to blow it up as a spark into a flame. Now
Faith is as the bellows to blow it up. The breath of the Lord indeed is the
wind that breathes upon dead bones, so upon dead Souls: But Faith is as the
bellows, that draws this wind, and blows it forth again. And therefore if you
observe it, the Apostles Exhortation [to stir up, or blow up the gift] is
grounded upon the former verse viz. I call to mind the unfeigned faith that is
in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, etc. As if he should have
said, Thou that have faith, art too blame, if thou do not stir up the gift
that is in thee, (Ministerial gifts especially) by the exercise of thy faith.

This is the Aqua-vitae of a Christian in fainting fits and dead fits, when
Qualms of sorrow and spiritual sickness come over the heart. Psalm. 42.5. Why
art thou cast down, O my soul, why art thou disquieted within me? still trust
in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my
God. There was the cure, his Faith did revive him: and were it not for this, we
should quite sink away; Psalm. 27.14. I had fainted, but that I hoped to see the
Lord, the Lord in the land of the living. So then, the just lives by Faith the
Life of Vivification.

And the Reasons of it are:

time of quickening shall come; -- I shall yet praise him: as before. Psalm.
138.7. Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou will revive me -- and thy
right hand shall save me: The Lord will perfect that which concerns me, etc.

Mean of quickening; an active grace, that works and sets all a work, like the
Spring in the Watch. If Faith lies dead in a Christian, all is dead: If you
wind up the Spring of Faith, if you act your Faith, it moves every Wheel, it
quickens all your Humility, your Patience, Love, Zeal: and the stronger Faith,
the quicker the motion. Should we speak for God? As strong wine must have a
vent; so strong Faith. This made the Apostles speak so freely, Acts 2. when
others thought they were filled with new wine. Thus Elihu, Job 32.18. I am full
of matter, the spirit within me constrains me: Or do much for God? Act 6.8.
Steven full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles among the
people: This suffers us not to be slothful, Heb. 6.12.

quickening Means: As 1. It lays hold on a quickening Word: Psalm. 119 50. Thy
word has quickened me. Heb. 4.12. The word of God is quick and powerful, etc.
and Faith, lays hold on that Word: Especially the quickening Promises, Heb.
9.14. and 12.11, 12. Hos. 14.5, 6, 7. Isa. 40.3 last verses. Jer. 29 10, 11,
12. Prove. 12.25.
Heaviness, says Solomon, in the heart of a man, makes it stoop; but a good
word makes it glad; that is, a word of Promise. 2. On a quickening Savior, 1 Timothy 6.13. God, who quickneth all things. How? in and by Christ. 1 Cor. 15.
John 6.
The second Adam is a quickening Spirit; that has life in himself, and gives it
to all others. As the root quickneth the branches; so Christ, Joh. 15.5. The
life of the branch in winter is hid in the root; so is our life hid with
Christ, Col. 3.3. And 3. Faith receives a quickening Spirit: Joh. 6.63. It is
the Spirit that quickneth; Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2
Cor. 3.17. and where there is liberty, there is activity. Psalm. 119.32. I will
run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart. The Spirit
is compared to water, Joh. 7.38. not to standing water, but to running or
living water, because it is always in motion: Psalm. 45. Cor meum ebullit, etc.
my heart bubleth up, as a spring. Hence also it is compared to fire, Mat. 3.
Fire is an active element, it is always mounting upwards; and it warms those
that come near it. Dead and frozen members, are made useful and active by the
heat of the fire: so are dead and benumbed Souls by the warmth of the Spirit.

Meditations, or Arguments. Whilst I was musing (says David) the fire kindled,
Psalm. 39.3. Whether we meditate on good or evil, Meditation will blow up the
fire. The faithful man is described to be a man full of Meditation, Psalm. 1.2.
-- he meditates day and night: and, Psalm. 119.147, 148. I prevented the dawning
of the morning -- Mine eyes prevent the night-watches, that I might meditate on
thy Word.

Quest. But what Meditations or Arguments does Faith put the Soul upon to
quicken it?

Answer. Such as are drawn, 1. From former Experience, Arguments of faith to
quicken the soul under deadness.
that God who once quickened the Soul, will quicken it again: Psalm. 77.3, 5, 6.
I remembered God, -- I have considered the days of old -- I call to remembrance
my song in the night. -- Will the Lord cast off for ever, etc?

Attributes, of Mercy and Faithfulness: Psalm. 77.8. Is his mercy clean gone for
ever? does his faithfulness fail for evermore? Of his Perfection: His works are
perfect, Deuteronomy. 32.4. A perfect God will perfect his works.

Quicken us, and we will call upon thy Name: Psalm. 119.175. Let my soul live,
and it shall praise thee, etc.

Danger of Spiritual drowziness. First from the Judgment threatened, Revel.
2.5. Repent, and do thy first works, or I will remove thy Candlestick. Amos
8.10, 11
Such as sleep by candlelight, are in danger of burning the house over their
heads, or of their Masters removing the candlestick. Secondly, from the
Judgment felt, Psalm 32. David was in a dead condition of Soul, he made no
confession of his sins, but God quickened him by his afflicting Rod; ver 3, 4.
Thy hand was heavy upon me, etc. And as Faith will feel the Rod, so it is that
Heavenly Wisdom will teach us to hear the Rod, and who has appointed it,
Micah 6.9. An unbeliever is not stirred, Jer. 2.30. and 5.3.

Use of all in general.
Use of the Life of Vivification 1 Reproof.
FIrst, this then Reproves the want of living by Faith this Life of Vivification.

complain of it, in Prayer, in Hearing, in Practice, O weary of themselves! yet
labor not to blow up the fire, to stir up the gift, Genesis 49.14.
but like Issachar, bow under their burdens. They are like such as are
troubled with the Green Sickness, or some such lazy disease: Though motion be
the only way of cure, they had as lieve die as stir; they will not act their
Faith. O, say they, God must do all, I can do nothing; and under this pretense,
they give themselves up to Spiritual sloth: That look as some, turn the grace
of God into wantonness, who under pretense that Christ died for sinners, take
occasion to run into all excess of riot: So others turn the grace of God into
slothfulness, who under pretense that God must do all, will do nothing at all
themselves. But the Scriptures reason the contrary way. God our heavenly Master
works all the works of his poor Servants, Phil. 2.
in them and for them: therefore we should be encouraged to work. As when the
Master is willing to hold and guide the hand of the Scholar, he should be
encouraged to write. That is the Argument, Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your own
salvation -- for it is God that works in you, to will and to do of his good
pleasure. Thus, as the Father said, Agimus acti; when God helps us in the
action, we should be willing to act the grace received, and employ the talent
bestowed. The slothful Servant and the wicked Servant are put both together,
Mat. 25.26. Therefore they are justly Reproved, who live not by Faith this Life
of Vivification, but give themselves up to spiritual sloth and laziness. Such
are in danger of a sudden blow from God, if they smite not on their own hearts
to quicken themselves. The warning that Christ gives to the Church of Sardis,
is proper to such, Rev. 3.1, 2, 3. -- Be watchful, and strengthen the things
which remain, that are ready to die, etc. Else he threatens to come as a Thief
upon such drowzy Souls: A Thief comes suddenly and terribly; and so will
Christ. Though he may save their Souls at last, yet it may cost them a scouring
in the meanwhile.

Obj. But what can I do?

Ans. 1. Thou may come to the place of hearing: 2. Thou may frequent good
Company: 3. Thou may complain of thy deadness to God. This I do, but I am not
quickened: I confess my deadness is a burden to me; O that I might meet a
Messenger, one of a thousand, Job 33.
to deliver my Soul out of this pit of deadness. In answer to this therefore,
We shall propound a Second Use; viz.

Of Exhortation
To persuade us to live by Faith the Life of Vivification. Use 2. Exhortation.
In prosecution whereof, I shall first propound some Motives to make willing,
and secondly, some Means to make thee more able.

Motive 1. We should be active, stirring, lively Christians; because as God is
a pure Act, so he is active for us. 1. Motives to Vivification.
Joh. 5 17. My Father works hitherto, and I work, says Christ: and therefore
of him it is said, Acts 10.38. -- He went about doing good, and healing all --
for God was with him. Wherefore we should be always working for him, 1 Cor.
15. -- Always abounding in the work of the Lord.

loves active and lively Servants, as he is a living God: And as the God of
Spirits, he loves to be served in the Spirit, not only as it is opposed to
falseness and dissimulation, but as it is opposed to sloth and negligence. God
would not have an Ass to be offered up in Sacrifice, Exodus 13.13. because that
was a dull and slow creature. He makes his Angels his Messengers, because they
are all Spirit. And God would have us as Angels, not only in our
Intellectuals, but in our Practicals, that his Will may be done on Earth, as it
is in Heaven; and that is, with life and vigor. However, in Scripture,
Christians are compared to Stones; it is not for their coldness or deadness, but
only for their firmness; and then they are called too, Living stones, 1 Pet.
2.5. Therefore as their faith is a living faith Joh. 11.26.
, their hope a living hope 1 Pet. 1.4.
; so their prayers should be lively and fervent prayers, ascending up as
Incense; their works living works. The first Lesson, the very A B C of a
Christian, is Repentance from dead works, Heb. 6.1. In a word, himself should
be a living Sacrifice, if acceptable to God, Romans 12.1. In the 3 of Rev. 20.
after Christ had reproved them for lukewarmness, and exhorted to be zealous, he
then invites them to Supper: where we may observe, a lukewarm temper to be the
worst temper, and a zealous temper the best temper: the first, is a Dish for
the Devil, but the latter is a Dish fit for Christ's own palate. Now where there
is zeal, there is heat, and where there is heat, there is activity, as fire
mounts Heavenward: Therefore God would never have the fire go out upon his
Altar, to signify, there should be heat in all our spiritual Sacrifices, of
Prayer, of Preaching, of Hearing, of Meditation, Wisd. 4.13.
and Practice. In all these, we must live by Faith the Life of Spiritual Fervor.

lives long in a little time, as others live but a little in a long time. For
we live no longer to any purpose, than we fulfill the end of our life, which is
to do God service. Ioh. 20.4.
Herein active Christians do like that Disciple that out-ran Peter, and came
first to the Sepulcher. And indeed, they are fittest for the Sepulcher in
another sense, that are swiftest in their Christian race. It is the highest
commendation of a Christian on earth, and will be their Crown in Heaven,
through Free Grace, to have been active for God. Their Commendation on Earth.
The honorable salutation of active Christians, stands upon Record, that all
that are gracious may call them Blessed, Romans 16.12. Salute Triphena and
Triphosa, who labored in the Lord: Salute the beloved Perfis, who labored
much in the Lord. And their Crown in heaven. Mat. 25.21. It Is said to him that
had received and gained five Talents, Well done, thou good and faithful Servant
-- I will make thee ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord. They shall have the comfort of it to all eternity, that have been active
and stirring for God in their little time upon earth. There is a blessing upon
him that loves the Lord with all his strength; Ier. 48.10.
and a curse upon him that does the work of the Lord negligently, that puts not
forth that strength which God has given him, but quenches the Spirit. Such a
man loyters and loses his time; whereas the other redeems time: and we had all
need redeem the time, considering how much we have lost already, Ioh. 9.
and how little there is behind. The Sun is going down, and the night is
coming, when no man can work.

Satan has great advantage of a dead-hearted Christian: for he is like a man
half asleep (in a secure condition) he may soon be deceived, as Samson was,
Judge. 16.19. It was the field of the sluggard, not of the watchful and active
man, that was all overgrown with thorns and nettles, Prove. 24.30. What are
those thorns and nettles, but those extravagant ways of sin, which though they
seem to be smooth and pleasing at the first springing up, (as thorns and
nettles are) yet at the last they prove more dangerous, and prick like a thorn,
and sting like a nettle. And therefore, that we may not be overcome of these
Spiritual Philistines, we should, like Samson, rowse up our selves with all our
might, to live by Faith this Life of Vivification.

Rev. 12.12.
Times call for Activeness: They are laborious times, and dangerous times with
the Church. Satan was never more active, because his time is short: His
instruments never more active, compassing Sea and Land to gain one Proselyte:
The Church, never more distressed and standing in need of our help. Germany,
Ireland, Scotland, England, all stretch out their hands for help: As in Harvest
time, every one is with his sickle in his hand. See Rev. 14.15. And in
Building-time, like as in Nehemiah's days, Neh 4.17. -- every one with one of
his hands wrought in the work, and with the other held a weapon. It was a shame
for the Disciples to sleep, when Christ was in the midst of his Agony: and a
shame for Christians to be dead-hearted, when the Church is in her Agony. When
Zion cries, For the Lords sake; and the Lord cries for Zions sake, You that are
the Lords remembrancers, give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Isa. 62.1. and 7. The times therefore call for
activeness, which springs from this Life of Vivification.

Grace, to be more and more active, if it be supernaturally natural. All
natural motion is in fine velocior, swiftest near the end: whereas things moved
by violence, are slower. We throw a stone up with difficulty, but it drops down
of it self. The true Christians, they go from strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7.
As it is said of Time, Senescit, non Tardescit: So may it be said of a gracious
person, Though he grows more old, yet not more slow, but brings forth more
fruit in old age, Psalm. 92.

Note, It is so, if we yield to deadness.
Dead-hearted service, is a vain service, and so a taking of Gods Name in vain,
against the Third Commandment. That is vain, which is not accepted, and so
attains not it is end. Isa. 29.13. -- this people draw near me with their mouth,
and honor me with their lips, but have removed their heart far from me, etc.
which our Savior interprets, Mat. 15.9. In vain do they worship me. Religion
is a part of Gods Name, and must be used with zeal, Rev. 3.15. I would thou
were hot or cold. We are commanded to serve God with all our might.

coldness of the Times should make us active, as men in cold seasons are most
active to get themselves into heat. These are cold times for the Soul, as well
as for the Body. The Charity of many waxes cold, as Christ foretold; and so do
other Graces. Men are hot for the Disputes of Faith, and very cold in the Life
of Faith: Therefore we should be the more active to keep our heat. It was cold
weather, it seems, when Peter warmed himself among the Servants at the fire in
the Highpriests hall. But he went to the wrong fire, and to the wrong company;
he should have gone to Gods fire: and indeed Gods people use to do so in cold
times. Others coldness makes them the hotter, and others deadness makes them
the quicker, as contraries quicken one another by an Antiperistasis. It is time
for thee to arise, says David, Psalm. 119.126. because they have made void thy
law: Then adds in the next verse, Therefore I love thy Commandments above
gold. Therefore the coldness of the times should make us active, not cool and
lazy. Fenner.


These are the Motives. We come now to the Means of Quickening.
The first and chiefest of all, Means of Quickening. 1. Influence of Christ.
is to get into the Sunshine of Jesus Christ. You know poor Bees, and other
Flies, if they can creep into the Sun, it quickens them, and puts a new life
into them. So the Chickens that hang the wing, get under the warmth of the Hen.
The nearer we press to Jesus Christ by Faith, the more spiritual life and heat.
He is the Sun of Righteousness, that arises with healing in his wings, Mal.
4.2. The beams of his grace revive the drooping Soul: as she said, Joh. 11. If
thou had been here, my brother had not died; but I know thou art able to
raise him up again: So may a Christian say, If thou had been here, my Soul
had not died, not been in this dead and sad condition; but thou can quicken
it again. Faith draws quickening virtue from Jesus Christ, as we heard before in
the Reason.

2. Ordinances.
The second Means are quickening Ordinances, which are as beams from the Sun. One
of these Ordinances is a quickening Ministry; this puts life into the Soul. The
Word of God is compared to fire: 1. Word.
and therefore John Baptist is said to be a burning and shining light, Joh.
5.35. A shining light; so he taught the people: A burning light; so he
quickened, Did not our hearts burn within us, said the two Disciples going to
Emmaus, Luke 24.32. while he talked with us, and opened to us the Scriptures?
The Ministers lips are as fire, Peoples hearts as tinder. Elisha lived in a
dead time, and therefore he praid for a double measure of the Spirit of Elijah,
which was an active, powerful Spirit, that he might quicken the people If the
Ministers lips be touched with a Coal from Gods Altar, they do often inflame the
hearts of the hearers. Live under such a Ministry, if thou would be
quickened. A lively Ministry makes a lively people; a dead Ministry makes a
dead-hearted people. And therefore it is observable, Rev. 3.1.
that the deadness of the Church of Sardis, is charged upon the Angel or
Minister of the Church; Unto the Angel of the Church of Sardis, write, etc.
Therefore pray for your Ministers, that themselves being quickened, they may
quicken you. Another quickening Ordinance is Prayer. 2. Prayer. Psalm. 119.
How often does David pray for quickening grace? five or six times in one Psalm.
He begins many a Prayer with an heavy heart; and before he has done, he is
full of life. Therefore pray much, because all life is from God, and he
quickens whom he will. Only let me add this Caution, Caution.
before I let this pass, Be sure thy understanding and affection go along
together in every Ordinance, and in every part of the Ordinance, as thou
would have it a quickening Ordinance. Many complain they are dead under
Ordinances: and no wonder: They hear, and they pray without understanding, or
without affection. It is a Rule, Quicquid agit, agit per contactum: Whatsoever
thing acts effectually upon another, it is by some kind of touch or close.
When our Souls do not close with the duty in Prayer or Hearing no marvel if it
put no life into us. When we give way to distractions, to wandering thoughts, to
wandering looks, etc. we do but take Gods Name in vain, and the Ordinance is
vain to us. There is no life in it, therefore no wonder if there be no life
from it. Therefore keep thy head and thy heart close to the duty, if possible,
from first to last, and then it will quicken.

Thirdly, make use of Death to quicken Spiritual Life. 3. Meditation of Death.
Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with all thy might;
for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave
whither thou go. Think of the shortness of our time of service, in
comparison of the eternity of the reward: Say of service (which is most
affliction, passive service) Our light affliction, which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

Fourthly, set before thine eyes, 4. Gods Eye.
the All-piercing Eye of God. So was Peter quickened by a look from Christ. Rev.
2.18, 19. These things says the Son of God, who has his eyes like a flame of
fire -- I know thy works, and charity, and service, etc. and again, Chap. 3.1.
I know thy work, that thou have a name to live, and art dead; q. d. I look upon
the inside, where the life of the action is. This would quicken in Prayer,
Hearing, etc. Eye-service indeed, in relation to men, is not good: Ephesians. 6.6.
not with eye-service -- Partly, because men cannot always look upon us; and
partly, because the Conscience has a superior tie, from an heavenly Master,
at whose command they are bound to do service to their earthly Masters: But
Eye-service toward God, (who looks upon his children with an eye of Love, as
well as an eye of Observance) is very commendable. This it was made David so
watchful, Psalm. 139.1, 2. O Lord, thou have searched me, and known me; thou
know my down-sitting, etc. And it was Gods charge to Abraham, Genesis 17.1.
Walk before me, and be thou upright. God has an eye into our breasts; therefore
Faith will make a man take heed how he hears, take heed how he prays, take
heed what he thinks; Psalm. 16.
it will make him keep his heart with all diligence, because God searches the
heart and reins, and ponders the spirits. Faith setting God at our right hand,
will keep us from falling.

5. Assurance of Gods Love.
Fifthly, get assurance of Gods Love: This will make us love him again, 1 John
4.19. We love him, because he loved us first. Love will make us very active.
Men care not what they do or suffer, for those whom they love dearly: Jacob
served two hard Apprentiships for the love of Rachel; he endured the heat of
the day, and the cold of the night, and all was nothing to him, Gen 29.20. Love
is as strong as death, Cant. 8.6. and active as fire: Much water cannot quench
love. There is a constraining power in Love: 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ
constrains me, says the Apostle. You need not much persuade such a man to be
active for God, he has arguments enough in his own bosom. That Disciple who
lay in Christ's bosom, how much love does he express to God and Men! Oh how
active and passive too, was Paul for God! (2 Cor. 11.23.) and no marvel; for,
Who shall separate us, says he, from the love of Christ? shall tribulation,
etc. Romans 8 35.

6. Gods Power.
Lastly, look at Gods Almighty power, able to quicken the deadest heart. Rev.
3.14. Thus says the Amen, the Faithful and True Witness, the Beginning of the
Works of God. Ephesians. 2.10. We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, etc. Therefore David prays to God, Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a
clean heart, renew a right spirit. And there is a Promise for Faith, Hos. 14.7.
They that dwell under his shadow, shall return; they shall revive as the corn
(after winter) and grow as the vine, etc.

Use of Examination.
Whether we do live by Faith the Life of Vivification: Use 3. Trial of Faith in
vivifying.
And need we have to Examine, lest we be deceived. Many seem to be very active,
and yet they do not live By Faith for all that. Therefore say to thy self, as
Isaac did when he thought Esau had brought him venison, Genesis 27.21. Art thou my
very son Esau? says he: So, Art thou that very Life of Vivification? Say to
this or that particular Duty, Art thou the very true Issue and Child of such a
life? The DeVil is cunning to deceive us; as he raised up a counterfeit Samuel
in stead of the true Samuel, 1 Samuel 28. So he cozens men with a counterfeit Life
of Vivification in stead of a true.

Quest. But how shall I know one from the other?

Ans. This is partly delivered before. At present, they may be known by
Examining them: 1. In their Principle. 2. In their End. 3. In their Manner of
working. 4. In their issue and Event.

Principle. True living actions spring from a living and inward Principle.
Though a Clock moves, we do not say it is alive; because it is moved by the
Weights. Though an heavy Millstone moves apace, we do not say it is alive,
because it is moved ab extra, by the Wind or Water. But if we see a little Fly
or Ant move, we say there is life, because it is moved from an inward
Principle. So he that lives the Life of Vivification, his activity proceeds
from an inward principle of life.

And how is that discerned?

Ans. His actions spring 1. From Faith, both in the Precept, Psalm. 119.93. I
will never forget thy precepts, for by them thou have quickened me; and in the
Promise, whether of Assistance, or Acceptance, or Reward: as we see in Moses,
Heb. 11.25, 26. 2. From Love, 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ constrains me.
A natural man, or hypocrite, is not moved by any such Principle.

End. A true Christian aims at Gods glory: Elias is zealous for the Lord of
hosts, 1 King. 19. Whether he eats or drinks -- he does all to the glory of
God, 1 Cor. 10.31. And others Salvation; ver. 33 Even as I please all men in
all things, not seeking mine own profit, says Paul, but the profit of many,
that they may be saved. An Hypocrite, though zealous, and he says it is for
God, yet it is for himself, that he may be seen of men, Matthew. 6.6. So Jehu, 2
Kings 10.16. Come see my zeal for the Lord: This is his end, and this is his
Principle. For, Finis movet agentem; That which is last in Execution, is first
in Intention. Hence also his most lively actions spring from envy, and sinful
emulation; they scorn any should go beyond them: Some preach Christ of envy,
says Paul, Philip. 1.15. But a gracious heart is glad when others are active,
and exceed.

Manner of working, where there is true Vivification. 1. It strives against
Coldness, and meets with opposition; swims against the stream. An hypocrite may
be as active as he will, he finds nothing to let him. 2. He that is truly
active, desires to approve himself to God, and had rather God should approve
him, than all the world commend him: 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. It is a very small thing, I
should be judged of man's judgment -- but he that judges me is the Lord. Nay, 2
Cor. 10. last, Not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord
commends. See Psalm. 139. John 21.17.


Issue and success. The true Life of Vivification, increases strength and
spirits: Prove. 24.5. A man of knowledge increases strength. The counterfeit
life of Vivification, decreaseth strength and spirit; like the blazing Comet
that wastes it self; or as unnatural predatory heat, devours the spirits and
strength, whereas natural heat increases both. False zeal, is like
Nebuchadnezzars Image, Dan. 2.32 the head of gold, but downward worse and worse.

BRANCH V. IN THE LIFE of FAITH IN SANCTIFICATION; VIZ. AUGMENTATION.
NOw next, the Just lives by Faith the Life of Augmentation, he draws
increasing Virtue from Christ. Christ is to the Church, what the Head is to the
Natural Body; not only a principle of life and motion, but of increase also:
Col 2.19. Not holding the head, from which all the body by joints and bands
having nourishment, ministered and knit together, increases with the increase
of God. Now what are these joints and bands, but the Spirit and Faith uniting
each Member to the Head: So that by Faith the Soul draws both quickening and
increasing Virtue from Christ the Head. The just lives the Life of Augmentation
in Spiritual Respects, however he fares in Temporal; to apply it to the
occasion of the Text. Whereas it might be objected, The Caldeans will so crush
the people of God, that they will make them even weary of their lives, (as
Jethro said to Moses, Exodus 18.18. Thou will surely wear away, both thou and
this people.) The Text answers, Now the just shall live by his Faith; though
the outward man decays by affliction, yet the inward man, in all true
Believers, is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. i.e. Gods people are quickened,
strengthened and enlarged in their Spiritual Life one day after another. And to
this increase of Spiritual Life, the Prophet alludes in the very Context of
this Chapter, ver. 14. The earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the
glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea: Which words, howsoever some do
refer to the manifestation of Gods glory, in the destruction of the Caldeans
(which is true also) yet others extend them further, even to the abundant
pouring forth of the Spirit of grace, (as a fruit of their affliction.) So the
very same words are used isa. 11.9. where he shows, how such men as have been
Wolves and Leopards, shall be made of a Lamb-like disposition: And how so? For
the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, etc. So that these
words do necessarily refer to the abundant increase of grace; and so the just
lives by Faith the Life of Augmentation in the Winter of Affliction. As the
unbeliever swells at first [ebullat,] but vanishes to nothing afterward: So
the believer is small at first, but increases exceedingly. What John Baptist
said, I must decrease, but he must increase; so may the unbeliever say. See ver
5, 6, 7.8.

We are then to insist upon two things: 1. That the just lives the Life of
Augmention: 2. That he lives this Life by Faith.

Propos. 1. Just live the life of Augmentation.
First, the just lives the Life of Augmentation: It is his duty, property and
practice, to grow and to increase: 2 Pet. 2. last, But grow in grace, and in
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: 1 Thessalonians 4.1. -- abound more and more,
ver. 10. -- increase more and more: Col. 1.10. -- increasing in the knowledge
of God. They that travel heaven ward, they go from strength to strength, Psalm.
84.7. Nicodemus was weak in grace at first, and so was Joseph of Arimathea, for
they both came by stealth to Christ, at the beginning of their Conversion, for
fear of the Jews. But afterward they grew so strong in grace, that though
Christ was crucified, they came boldly and begged his body of the Governor,
Joh. 19.
and committed it to the grave with an honorable Burial. Peter was so weak at
the first, that the breath of the Damsels voice makes him fall back; but
afterward he grew so strong, that he stands like an unmovable Rock at all the
Thunderclaps, and terrible threats and stripes of the Highpriests, Acts 4.
and Rulers of the people. Thus it was with the rest of the Disciples, and so
it is with all Gods people.

And the Reason is drawn,
Reasons of spiritual growth. 1.
First, From the nature of true Grace: It is of a growing nature. Thus it is
with the Kingdom of God, or Church in general; it increases from very small
beginnings, to a great bigness: like Gideons Barley-cake, or like a Snow-ball,
it rowls up and down the world, and grows bigger and bigger, and subdues all
before it. Therefore it is compared to a grain of Mustard Seed, Mat. 13.31.
which being the least of seeds when it is sown, yet the greatest of herbs when
it is grown. Besides, Mustard Seed, you know, sows it self, after the first
year: and so it is in the growth of Gods Kingdom: Therefore Psalm. 72.16. it is
compared to a handful of Corn upon the top of the Mountains, (a barren place)
which yet by shaking, and so growing afresh, fills the whole earth with plenty.
So did the Law which went out from Mount Zion. This is that Stone cut out of
the Mountain without hands, which grew so fast, that at last it filled the
whole earth, Dan. 2.34.

And as it is thus with the Kingdom of God in general, with the Kingdom of God
without us: so it is with the Kingdom of God within us, with the Kingdom of
grace in every particular Christians heart: it grows from small beginnings to a
great height; from a spark to a flame; from break of day, to high noon. Hence
grace in Gods people is compared to the morning light, Prove. 4.18. to Ezekiel's
waters, Chap. 47.3. to Elijah's Cloud, 1 Kings 18.44. And the reason hereof is,
because grace is not perfect at the first; and theaefore there must be a
growing till we come to the (...). And because this is not till the end of our
life, therefore we must be growing all our life long. We are never at our full
height, till we be ready to be cut down by death; never at the end of our race,
till at the end of our life. The Apostle himself, who had outstript all the
rest of the Apostles, yet he was growing still, and running still; and he gives
the reason, Because he was not yet perfect, Phil. 3.12, 13. Not as though I
were already perfect, or had obtained, etc. Every thing, you know, in nature
grows, till it comes to its perfection, as a child till he comes to be a man.
As a man is not born a perfect man in nature for degrees, though he be perfect
for parts; so it is in grace also: and a Christian must grow, till he comes to
perfection. We read 1 John 2.12. of little children, young men; i.e. strong
men, and old men in Christ; only with this difference, In the old age of grace
there is no decay of strength of spirits, or fruitfulnesss: Psalm. 92.14. They
shall bring forth fruit in old age, etc. We are bound, you know, to love God
with all our hearts, even to love him perfectly for degree, as well as kind:
But so long as we live here, as we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. So we love but
in part and are gracious but in part; and therefore we must ever be upon the
growing hand, till we come to perfection, -- perfect man in Christ, Ephesians. 4.13.

sweet and desirable nature; insomuch that he that has once tasted of the
sweetness of it cannot but desire more. [He that says, he has enough, plainly
discovers he never had any at all.] 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. As new born babes, desire
the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby: If so he ye have
tasted, etc. He that has once tasted, cannot but thirst for more. Though the
painful thirst of total indigence be quenched, and so he shall never thirst,
Joh. 4.14. yet the thirst of delight, and the thirst of desire for further
enjoyment, is not removed, but increased. And blessed are they that thus hunger
and thirst after more righteousness, for they shall be filled, Mat. 56. Hence
also the Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a Treasure, Mat. 13.44. in digging up
whereof, a man does every day more and more enrich himself.

End of Christ's Commission, which he received from his Father at his Mission;
and the very end of his coming in execution of that Commission, not only to
bestow spiritual life upon his people, but to increase it also day by day. That
was the extent of his Commission, Joh. 10.10. I am come that they might have
life, and that they might have it more abundantly. As a living spring bubbles
and boils forth, and empties it self, that the channel might be filled with
water; and it, as it runs along, here it meets with one Spring, and there with
another; it may be it meets with an hundred fresh Springs, that it may be
filled more abundantly, till it runs out at last into the Ocean it self. So
Jesus Christ, the Fountain of Living Waters, empties himself by the work of his
Spirit into the believing Soul. He that believes in me, says Christ, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living waters, Joh. 7.38. And as the believer
runs along in his Christian course, here he meets with one fresh spring of
grace, and there with another, Psalm. 84.
(as they that go through the valley of Baca, they dig up fountains still) it
may be they meet with an hundred fresh springs of grace, till at the last those
sweet streams of grace, are swallowed up in the Ocean of glory: and then is
fulfilled the saying that is written, I am come, that they might have life, and
that they might have it more abundantly. And this is the third Reason, why the
just lives the Life of Augmentation, The End of Christ's coming.

Gods Faithfulness. Seeing God daily puts Christians upon higher duties, as
Fasting and Prayer; (Mat. 9.15. -- then shall they ^ast) and stronger
Temptations; ( not having yet resisted to blood, Heb 12.4.) and new wine not
being fit for old bottles: Therefore God is so faithful, as to give them more
grace. And Philosophers define the end of natural Augmentation to be, Ad
edendas actiones proprias and convenientes. Magir. Phys. p. 465.
For exercising the proper Functions: God will not be wanting here. 2 Cor. 12
9. When Paul had a new temptation, says God, My grace is sufficient for thee:
and so 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted
above that you are able, etc. If God command to make more brick, he will give
more straw; yea he will give more strength. And so much for the first thing.

Now follows the second.
The just lives this Life of Augmentation by his Faith: Propos. 2. Augmentation
is by faith
His faith does increase in it -- from faith to faith, Rom 1.17. As faith
increases or decreaseth, so does his Lie of grace: As Philosophers say of the
ebbing and the floving of the Sea, The position and disposition of the Moon is
the cause of it, which is apparent in your Spring i^es at the Chance and Full
of the Moon; as the Moon increases, the Waters, and all moist Bodies, do
increase; and as it decreaseth, they decrease again. So is i^ betwixt Faith and
other Graces; as Faith increases, (Faith under the Sun of Righteousness) so
they increase; Mal. 4.
and as Faith decreaseth, so they decrease again. 2 These. 1.3. We are bound to
give thanks to God for you, brethren, -- because that your faith grows
exceedingly, and the charity of every one of you all toward each other
abounds. Mark, as their Faith abounded, so their Charity abounded, and so
other Graces abounded also: 2 Pet. 1.2. Grace and peace be multiplied unto you,
through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord. See here, the Apostle
prays for the multiplication of grace: but how should it be multipled? he
tells you, through the knowledge of God, and Jesus our Lord: What is meant by
the knowledge of Jesus our Lord, but Faith in Jesus our Lord? as Joh. 17 3.
This is eternal life, to know thee, i.e. to believe in thee, and him whom thou
have sent, Jesus Christ. So that then all grace is multiplied, in the increase
and multiplication of Faith.

Radical grace; it is like the Root of a Tree, in relation to the Branches. They
which had no depth of root in the Parable of the Seed, (Luke 8.13.) are such as
had no depth of faith: Col. 2.7. we are said to be rooted and stablished in
Christ by faith. Now then, you know, as the root grows, so the branches grow;
as the root decays, so the branches decay; if the root once rot within the
ground, though you see not that, yet you shall soon see the branches rot above
ground. So, however you cannot easily see how a man's faith decays, because
that is as the root; yet you shall soon perceive a decay in the exercise of
other graces, because they are as he branches. And on the other side, as the
root of faith prospers, so other graces thrive, and bring forth fruit in the
branches: 2 Pet. 1.5. Add therefore unto your faith virtue, and to virtue
knowledge, etc. See here how Faith is made the root of all, Virtue, and
Knowledge, and Temperance, and Patience, etc. all grow upon Faith as upon their
root. As the increase of the root, increases the branches; so the increase of
faith, increases other graces.

Caution.
Yet we a^^ to understand this warily: We must not so take it, as if faith were
a Root (exclusive) excluding Christ himself: for Christ is the Master-root, and
Faith but a spurn, or a sucker from him. Therefore in the place fore named,
Col. 2.7. we are said to be rooted in him, when we are established in the
faith. And this minds us of a second Reason, why the just lives by faith the
Life of Augmentation:

uniting Grace, (It unites the Soul to Christ, as the Cien is united to the
Stock, as the Members in the body are united to the Head) not originally, or as
the principal Efficient, for that is the work of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. but
instrumentally, as Sinews and Nerves unite the Members to the Head, and so are
the instrumental cause of the growth of them; not that they can give any
nourishment of themselves, but only as they convey it from the Head, as
Organical means: So Faith does nourish other graces, not of it self, but as it
sucks and draws, and so conveys nourishment from Christ, who is the Head of the
Church, to every Member, as appears from Ephesians. 4.15, 16. compared with verse.
13.

Because he lives by Faith the Life of Fructification and Vivification. For
that which does act grace, and put it to the use, does necessarily increase
grace also: Not only in a rational way, in a way of sound Reason; in that,
frequent acts do strengthen each habit with Gods ordinary concurrence (as a
Scholar that is diligent in his way, by often hearing, and reading, and
writing, and speaking, and disputation, and meditation, and studying, becomes
rich in learning, that his very lips feed many hungry Souls) But also, in a way
of grace, or in a way of Covenant-mercy, by virtue of Gods Promise, which he
has made to the diligent hand: The diligent hand, says God, makes rich,
Prove. 10.4. As rich to the world, so rich Heavenward. Use grace, and have
grace, says God, Mat. 25.24. For unto every one that has shall be given, and
he shall have more abundantly; but from every one that has not shall be taken
away, even that which he has. To every one that has -- What Is that? that has
made good use of Talents formerly received (as appears by the context) that man
shall increase, he shall have more abundantly. This is that honest and
honorable Usury, by which we may lawfully put out, not Money, but the Grace of
God to Use, till we grow rich toward God in all utterance, and in all
knowledge, (as it was said of the Corinthians) so that we come behind in no
gift, waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: Being like those
fruitful Trees planted in the Courts of the Lord; they are not only fruitful,
Psalm. 92.
but they increase in fruitfulness. Whereas on the other side, men of excellent
parts for want of Faith to exercise their grace, they are blasted and wither
away, and come to nothing; they are as trees without fruit, twice dead, and
plucked up by the roots, Jude v. 12.

removes, or at least helps us against the hindrances of Spiritual growth it is
Causa removens, as well as promovens. As

1. The Commonness of the ground, when it is like the Highway, without hedge or
wall; a very road for the Devil to pass up and down in, and spoil all. But now
Faith sets a fence about the heart, and guards it against such temptations as
might render it unfruitful: 1 Pet. 5.8. -- whom resist, steadfast in the faith.

2. The Stonyness of the ground, that hindered the growth of the Seed in the
Parable: for which Faith lays hold on that Promise, Ezekiel. 36.26. I will take
away the heart of Stone, and I will give you an heart of Flesh.

2. The Thornyness of the ground, which also hinders growth. And these thorns
are expounded by the Maker of the Parable, to be the Cares of the world, and
deceitfulness of riches. But faith removes this hindrance, 1. Joh. 5.4. This is
the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith. Faith will tell us, All
things are but loss and dross in comparison of Christ.

4. The Worm of sinful corruption: this at the root hinders growth. But the
just lives by Faith the Life of Mortification, and therefore of Augmentation.

5. Evil Winds, that blast the fruit, hinder growth These winds are Errors and
false Doctrines: but Faith removes this hindrance. They that are well stored
with Faith, will not be like children tossed to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.13, 14.

Hence then we may receive Information in diverse Particulars.

Difference between this life and all other lives. Other lives, as they have
their increase, Information about spiritual growth.
so they have their decrease also. Like the Sun, when it once comes to the high
Noon, it declines again, and at last goes down, and leaves the world in
darkness. There must come a time when the Sun of our life must set: Though it
may be morning yet with some, and high-noon with others, yet the night of death
comes, when no man can work. The times come on apace, when the keepers of the
house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders
cease, because they are few, and they that look out of their windows be
darkened, etc. Eccles. 12. The strongest life in nature must yield to death: but
this Spiritual life of the Soul, is always on the increasing hand, and never
declines. The just lives by Faith the Life of Augmentation to his dying day,
even till he comes to the state of perfection, and in that state he stands for
ever. How excellent therefore is this life above all other lives! yea, above
all other things in the world! All flesh is grass, (Isa. 40) of a withering
nature; but the word of the Lord (and that life which is begotten by that Word)
endures for ever; it is ever upon the growing hand. Some love to give in their
Coat of Arms, a young Branch, or the Moon increasing, with this Motto -- Plu^
Vltra. But alas! if they look at Temporal things, they do but speak as they
would have it, not as they shall have it: It Is but a dream, not a reality. They
think their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling-places to all
generations: but alas! they do but think so; for, man being in honor, abides
not, he is like the beasts that perish, Psalm. 49 They shall be sure to perish,
and their houses too. The greatest Persons, the greatest Families, the greatest
Kingdoms have their periods; they have their declensions, old age, and death,
as well as their youth and manhood. Gray hairs are here and there upon Ephraim,
Hos. 7.9.
though he know it not: But true grace is ever in the Spring, there is no fall
of the leaf in this Region: Psalm. 1.3. A Christians Arms are indeed like
Joseph's, A fruitful Bough, even a fruitful Bough by a well, whose branches run
over the wall, Genesis 49.22. Some fruitfulness indeed does hinder the growth of
trees; but a Christians fruitfulness does increase his growth; though he be
fruitful, yet his branches run over the wall. His life of Fructification does
help forward his life of Augmentation. The just lives by Faith the life of
Augmentation.

increase; Hypocrites like the Moon in her wane, ever less and less, till it
altogether disappears. They are like the grass upon the house top, Psalm. 129.
which withers before it grows up to its full height: But true Faith is ever
upon the growing hand.

Degrees in Sanctification, because there is a growth in Sanctification; and
therefore Sanctification is not perfect at the first: For where any thing is
perfect, there can be no addition or diminution. But in Sanctification there is
a daily addition and augmentation. They that are truly gracious, grow in grace,
2 Pet. 3.
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And therefore it
shows the Mistake of those, who conceive Sanctification to be perfect at first;
and so make no difference betwixt Sanctification and Justification: whereas the
Scripture makes a wide difference: for* Justification is imputed,
Sanctification is imparted and inherent: Justification is perfect,
Sanctification is imperfect in this life in the best of Saints, even in the
Apostle himself: Phil. 3.12. -- I count not my self perfect. Therefore there
are degrees in Sanctification, it is not perfect at the first. Though all
Saints are justified alike, they have an equal measure in that grace; yet all
are not sanctified alike, each has his measure, Ephesians. 4.7. some have two
talents, some five, etc. Mat. 25.

content himself with a small measure of grace. He that has Faith, lives the
Life of Augmentation. So that it is not enough to walk according to the Rule in
some things, but our endeavor must be to walk up to the utmost extent, even to
the height and breadth of the Rule, which is to walk accurately, Ephesians. 5.15. And
till we come up to the Rule, we must ever be on the increasing hand, getting
ground of corruption, and coveting earnestly the best gifts. For this is the
man that lives by Faith the Life of Augmentation* And if we do not grow and go
forward, we are sure to go backward; as it is with the Mariner that is rowing
against the stream, if he do but intermit a stroke or two, he loses of his
course; and as it is in our vital heat, Vid Ames. cas. consc. l. 2. c. 12.
it never stands in one state, if it increases not, it decays.

It also serves for Reproof.

grow not at all: Reproof for want of due growth.
They are like Trees or Beasts that are hide-bound, they stand at a stay, they
thrive not, they come not forward: May be, they had as much knowledge, love to
God, etc. seven years ago* as now; and so when for the time they ought to be
teachers, they had need one teach them which be the first principles of the
Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12. Like those silly women spoken of by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.7. ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.
Have these the true life of grace? Remember the grounds before laid down: That
1. Grace is of a growing nature. 2. Of a sweet and desirable nature. 3. That
the End of Christ's coming, is frustrate in respect of them. Again, have these
any Faith? For 1. as Faith increases, so other graces: Where is the Root, when
there is no growth in the Branches? 2. How are such united to the Head, that
grow not? O what a dishonor to their Head, as if he had no virtue to
communicate to his Members! 3. How do such remove the impediments of Spiritual
growth? How can such as these have any good assurance that they are planted in
the Courts of the Lord? You would wonder, in case you had purchased a piece of
ground in a good soil, planted a young Orchard, appointed a skilful Gardener,
took notice of the height of your Trees, if you should come ten or twenty years
after, and find them no higher. You would say, I never saw the like in all my
life, these Trees were just as high when I planted them, as now; I could reach
the tops of them then, and so I can now: it is the strangest thing that ever I
saw; surely they are dead. And yet do but change the name, and thou art such a
Tree: thou were planted in God^ Orchard twenty years ago, thou had then as
much love to God, and zeal for God, as now: it is to be feared thou art dead,
though thou have a name to live. Rev. 3.1.


judgment is corrupted. As the Apostle speaks* Tit. 1.15. Their very mind and
conscience is defiled. If a man's judgment be corrupted, how should he get the
victory over corruptions? As diseases are most dangerous, when they take the
Brain and the Heart, and so seize upon the vital and animal parts: So in this
case, they grow not* and they think verily they need not grow. Oh, says one, I
love God with all my heart: I thank God, I have a strong Faith, says another;
I am as perfect as ever I shall be, says a third; as perfect as Adam in the
state of Innocence, or the Saints in heaven. Indeed, if this were so, we need
not grow* if our assurance were as good at first, without all doubting, as ever
it shall be, we need not pray, Lord, increase our faith; or, Lord increase our
other graces. But because we are but babes in grace at the first, we had need
grow, and pray that we may grow, till we come to be perfect men in Christ.

grow downward in stead of growing upward; they grow lower, in stead of growing
higher; they move earth-ward, in stead of moving heavenward. These are
Monsters in grace, such as have declined from their first love; as Ephesus did,
Rev. 2.4. It may be, time was, they had great love to God, his Word, his
Messengers, to Family Duties, but now they are grown more remiss and lukewarm,
if not altogether opposite to what they so much loved before. Gal. 4.15. Where
is then the blessedness you spoke of? For I bear you record, that if it had
been possible, you would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them
me. Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? Some that
professed great love, now opposite to those persons whom they loved before, and
opposite to those duties which they loved before; they think they are above
such duties, they fear not to neglect them, and so seldom perform them; truly
fulfilling, what was falsely laid upon Job, Thou castest off fear, Job 15.4.
and restrainest prayer before God.

Opposers of growth in piety, are the Devils firstborn.
as are so far from growing themselves, that they do what they can, to hinder
the growth of others. And doubtless, the Spirit of Satan is in such men. The
Devil, if he cannot hinder the Conception of Grace, he will do what he can to
prevent the Birth; if he cannot prevent that, he will do what he can to devour
it, so soon as it is born, or at least to hinder the growth. And so it is with
men that are acted by that Spirit, if they cannot hinder the beginnings of
Grace, they will do what they can to hinder the growth of it. They are as the
Plague of Locusts where they live: As the Locust and caterpiller devour every
green thing (Exodus 10.15.) no sooner does a bud or blossom begin to peep out,
but they devour it; so it is with these men, no sooner do they perceive some
fair puttings forth, or blossoms of Grace in any, but they will be sure to snub
them, and to carp at them. O, say they, what need you be so forward! you are
too hot to hold! you cannot be content to do as the rest of your Neighbors do!
Are you wiser than Goodman -- such a one? or Master -- such a one? And thus,
many an old weather-beathen sinner, is just like some old stinking Alder-tree,
it grows not it self, but cumbers the ground, and hinders the growth of all the
Plants that are round about it, by the unwholesom and malignant droppings of
it, and is good for nothing but the fire. Such as these, have much to answer
for; they must be answerable not only for all the good they have neglected
themselves, but for all the good they have hindered in others. Methinks, when I
consider the judgment of these men, I seem to hear the voice of that revenging
Angel, Rev. 8.13. flying through the midst of Heaven, saying, Woe, woe, woe to the
inhabiters of the earth: for this is that very woe and curse, which is
pronounced from the very mouth of Blessing, I mean, from the mouth of Christ
himself, Mat. 23.13. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye shut
up the Kingdom of Heaven before men; for ye neither go in your selves, neither
suffer ye those that would enter to come in. Thus these kinds of men neither
grow themselves, nor suffer they those that would, to be upon the growing hand.
I say, they grow not themselves* or if they do grow, it is the wrong way, (as I
said before) they grow worse and worse, till they have filled up the measure of
their iniquity. Evil men, and seducers, grow worse and worse, deceiving, and
being deceived, 2 Timothy 3.13. And believe it, these are sins that fill up the
measure apace, when what they can do, is done by taunts, and by threatenings, or
cruel mockings, to hinder the growth of others. Such as these, are far enough
from living the life of Faith in Augmentation.

grow in sin, instead of growing in grace; that exceed the deeds of the wicked,
while they strive to out-drink, out-swear, outvie one another. As it is said of
Herod, He added this yet above all, that he shut up John in the prison. There
are measures in sin, as well as in grace; and it shall be more tolerable for
some sinners in the day of Judgment, than for others. Therefore take heed of
growing in sin, for with the same measure that we mete withal, shall it be
measured to us again.

Use 3. Examination about spiritual growth.
Next, let us examine whether we live by Faith aright; for then we live the Life
of Augmentation. True grace is of a growing nature; the true Members of Christ
are ever increasing. Col. 2.19. The whole body, and every part of the body,
increases with the increase of God. Therefore, 1. Do thou increase? And 2.
is that increase the increase of God, equal, uniform?

Quest. How shall I know whether I grow?

Ans. The first sign of growth in grace, First sign of growth.
is lessening of corruption; as one increases, the other decreaseth, as it was
with Paul and David. And in particular, the lessening of sinful Self-love. The
more a man loves God, the less he values his own Self-interest, the more
willingly he parts with it. Therefore, where Christ bid the young man, Go sell
all, Mat. 19.21. he proves he was not so well grown in grace, as he took
himself to be: Yea, such as had truth of saving grace, declared their weakness
by this; Self-interest made Peter and the rest deny Christ: but when they had
more grace, they neglected their liberty and their lives; they rejoiced they
were counted worthy to suffer for him. What things were gain to me, those I
counted loss for Christ, says Paul, Phil. 3.7. This was Levi's commendation
for eminency of grace, Deuteronomy. 33.8, 9. Who said unto his father, and to his
mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his own brethren, etc.

Second sign of growth.
Secondly, if thou growest, thou desire, and take in more nourishment. This
is a good sign, and strong evidence of growth, a strong desire of nourishment,
proceeding from a right principle. The natural Philosopher gives this to be the
reason, why children and young men feed the oftener, and more than others do,
because they grow faster. Men that are either declining, or standing at a stay
by reason of age or sickness, are but pinglers at their meat, in comparison of
the others; they must have thus and thus dressed or sawc'd, or else little or
nothing will down with them: Whereas the other that grow apace, will eat and
digest any thing that is Man's Meat. So in Spiritual respects, it is a good
evidence of a fast and well- growing Christian, when he is a well- feeding
Christian. Oh! he comes constantly to the Ordinances, he is so hungry and
thirsty after the Word, he will not easily be persuaded to miss a Meals Meat:
He lies drawing and sucking at the breasts of the Ordinances, like a battening
and well-thriving Child: 1 Pet. 2.2. Job 23.12.
He says with Job, I have esteemed the words of his mouth, more then my
appointed food. Whereas another, who grows little or nothing, is a very pingler
at his meat, he cares not how seldom he hears or prays; he is full of noisome
humors, and therefore his full soul loathes the honeycomb of the Word. He must
have it thus and thus cooked, or else he turns the the dish about, and cries,
Tush, this is no meat for me. It may be the very smell of the meat offends his
dainry stomach, and so he rises up from the Table, and turns his back upon the
Ordinances: Whereas a growing Christian feeds hard upon a plain dish, he can
well digest plain Preaching; he inquires not how toothsom, but how wholesome
his meat is. A well-feeding Christian therefore gives an infallible sign of a
well-growing Christian.

Only take it with these three Cautions: Caution in 3 particulars.
1. If he desires all parts of his nourishment. 2. If he desires it from all
persons, whom God has set apart to dispense it faithfully. 3. If he desire it
at all times, when God administers opportunity, and he may take it.

viz. the word of Correction, as well as the word of Comfort and Instruction.
Herod fed gladly upon the latter, but the former would not down with him. And
it is so with many hearers, they must have all sweet, or nothing will down with
them; sweet flowers upon the top of the dish, and sweet sauce at the bottom;
the flowers of humane Eloquence for the manner of speaking, and the sweet sauce
of Placentia for the matter. Isa. 30.10. Which say -- to the Prophets, Prophecy
not to us right things, speak unto us smooth things, etc. They cannot endure
any thing that is sharp, and bitter, though never so wholesome; they will not
swallow all the Roll: though the Apostle says, Tit. 1.13. Rebuke them sharply,
that they may be found in the faith; and David says, Psalm. 141.5. Let the
righteous smite me, and it shall be a kindness, etc.

all Stewards, or from all Cooks, that dispense it faithfully. An hungry
stomach is not over-nice in the choice of a Cook, so he be confident of his
fidelity, that he will mix no poison with the meat: Whereas it may be a weak
stomach longs for such a dish, and it longs for such a Cook too, or else he can
eat nothing; and when he has it, it does him little good. As I have heard the
story of a Scholar, who falling sick many miles from his College, had a great
mind the Cook should be sent for to prepare him a dish: Accordingly he came,
and prepared it; when the Scholar had it, he could eat none. O says he, this is
none of the College-broth: Nay, said the Cook, you have not your
College-stomach. So it is with many Christians now adays, who formerly had a
notable stomach to the Word; now, they must have such or such a Cook to dress
it, or else none will down; and when they have what they desire, they feed not,
they grow not as they were wont to do, because they have not the stomach they
were wont to have. And truly, this argues little grace, and much carnality in a
Christian: 1 Cor. 3.4. For while one says, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollos,
are ye not carnal? Note the phrase, Luke 1.70. As God spoke by the mouth of his
holy Prophets, etc. there is Prophets in the plural Number, and Mouth in the
singular; as if all the Prophets had but one mouth. Therefore as God speaks by
the mouth of all his Prophets, we should hear from the mouth of all the
Prophets: As they speak as it were with a single mouth, so we should hear with
a single ear; not sinfully preferring one before another, while they all speak
the same truth. This was Ahabs fault, his false Prophets must dress all his
dishes; there was but one faithful Cook (Micaiah) and he cries out against him,
as if death had been in the pot, I hate him, says he, for he does not prophecy
good unto me, but evil. Whereas all the fault was in the stomach, not in the
Cook; Micaiah was not an evil speaker, but Ahab was an evil hearer, full of
prejudice, and full of partiality.

all times. As David says, Psalm. 106.3. Blessed is the man that does
righteousness at all times: So we may say, Blessed is the man that hears the
Word of Righteousness at all times. Men may be Time-servers in their hearing,
as well as Time-servers in their speeches or actions. Herod, and Agrippa, and
Felix, had their good moods in hearing at some times, but they were soon weary:
Act. 24.25. Go thy way, says Felix to Paul, for this time, and when I have a
convenient time, I will send for thee. But we never read of that convenient
season any more, it seems he had enough of him at that time. Some will have a
Sermon at a running-pull, as it may be they will have a Meals meat, once a week
or once a month, or upon some high-day, as they call it, and yet disdain the
same Word at other times. As if Sermons were like some kind of dainties and
rarities, only in season at such a time. Thus multitudes desire a Sermon upon
Christmas day, (as they call it.) I do not deny, but some may desire it out of
a kind of conscience to the duty: but I am confident the major part, though
they desire a Sermon, yet they more desire their carnal liberty, etc.

Thirdly, it is a good evidence of growth, Third sign of growth.
if thou gettest more strength by thy nourishment. When the Gospel comes* not
in word only, but in power, thou gettest more strength; Explicated in 3 things.
1. To do more: 2. To bear more: 3. To shake off the yoke of Ceremonies and
Indifference with more ease.

This is an evidence of growth.

1. Thou can do more than formerly, 1. Strength to do duties.
in performance of holy Duties. 2. In resisting Temptations.

1. In performance of Duties: a strong man will do twenty times as much as a
child or a sick man. How does Christ convince the Church of Ephesus, that she
had lost her first strength of love to God, but because she had lost her first
works? Therefore he says, Rev. 2*5. Remember whence thou art fallen, and
repent, and do thy first works. On the other side* how does he prove the Church
of Thyatira to be on the growing hand? How does he prove her grace to be more
than formerly, but by her works? because her works were more, Rev. 2.19 I know
thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy
works, and the last to be more than the first. If Christians can pray better,
and hear better, and confer better, and meditate better, and practice better,
and all this from an inward Principle, it argues they are upon the growing
hand: Therefore they are grown to a strange pass, that cast off all care of
duties.

And resist temptations.
2. If thou growest, thou can ordinarily do more in resisting Temptations. 1 John 2.14. I have written to you, young men, because ye are strong, and have
overcome the wicked one. How does he prove they were strong in grace, but
because they had overcome the evil one? On the other side, how did it appear
that Samsons strength was departed from him, but because he could not do as at
other times, when the Philistines came upon him? It argues a Christian is weak,
and decays in grace, when he cannot resist Temptations as formerly* Time was,
when Jerusalem was beautiful, and yet could resist Temptations to Spiritual
Adultery: but when she had once yielded, and was overcome by her filthy lovers,
God says, How weak is thy heart, O Jerusalem! Ezekiel. 16.30. He has most grace,
who taking to himself the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6*10.
is strongest in the Lord, and in the power of his might, that he may be able
to stand against the wiles of the Devil.

2. Strength to bear.
2. As he is able to do more, so to bear more: He is the strongest Christian,
that can bear the heaviest burden,

In 3 things.
1. Of Afflictions and Persecutions: 2. Of Wrongs and Injuries: 3. Of his
Brethrens Infirmities.

1. Afflictions.
1. Of Afflictions or Persecutions. It argued a great growth of grace in the
Apostles, that whereas before Christ's Passion, they could not so much as endure
to hear of it with patience; (O says Peter, Be it far from thee, Lord* this
shall not be unto thee, Mat. 16.22.) Now they themselves can suffer and that
not only with patience, but with much rejoicing: Acts 5.41. They rejoiced,
that they were counted worthy to suffer for his Name.

2. He is grown stronger, 2. Injuries.
that can bear a greater burden of Wrongs and Injuries. Time was, he could
bear no thing, but was fire and tow; like the two Disciples, that would have
fire come down from heaven to consume the Samaritans: but now he is grown so
strong, he can pity and pray for those that wrong him most, as Steven did. It
is very observable, that when Christ commands his Disciples to forgive those
that wrong them seven times a day, Luke 17.5. they pray, Lord, increase our
faith; as much as to say, there must be a great strength of faith to enable to
forgive injuries.

3. He is grown stronger, 3. Infirmities of others.
that can bear a greater burden of his brethrens Infirmities. When he sees
they are weak in knowledge, weak in love, weak in the government of their
passions, yet he bears with them, he will not presently cast them off, and
unbrother them. Time was, when he was weak in grace himself, he was very
censorious, when he saw the failings of others, he would say, The man has no
grace in him, I will have nothing to do with him: but now he is grown stronger,
he can better bear the infirmities of the weak, Romans 15.1.

3. He is stronger, 3. Strength to shake off Ceremonies.
that can shake off the yoke of Ceremonies, and things indifferent, with more
ease, not making conscience of them as of things necessary. Therefore Romans
14.7. the Apostle shows they were weak that made a difference of meats and
days, where God had made none. Now they, because they would be sure to eat no
forbidden meat, would live only upon herbs: He that is weak, says he, eats
herbs. It is the weakness of Christians, to be too scrupulous in meats and
days, especially where the Ordinance of man has only made the difference:
This is not their strength, but their weakness.

4. Though he that has most grace has most strength, Fourth sign of growth.
yet he is also on the growing hand, that is most sensible of his weakness. For
the strongest Christian has much remaining weakness. Now it is part of our
strength of grace, to be sensible of this weakness: When I am weak, then am I
strong, 2 Cor. 12.10. A weak Christian is ready to think himself strong, as
Peter did, when he was weak as water; Lord (says he) though all men should
deny thee, yet will not I. But a strong Christian is most sensible of his
weakness, for his sight is clearer to see his sin, and his will is more
sanctified to hate it: therefore if thou say thou art rich, it argues thou
art poor. Rev. 3.17. Thou say thou art rich, and have need of nothing, and
know not thou art poor, and wretched, and miserable: and if thou say thou
art poor, it argues thou art rich; Rev. 2.9. I know thy tribulation, and
poverty, but thou art rich: And the reason is* because the true sense of our
own poverty and weakness, does cause us to run to God; and like the Conies, to
make our buroughs in the everlasting Rock of his Name. Here is the strength of
a feeble people: Prove. 30.26. The Conies are a feeble people, yet make their
houses in the Rock. It argues strength of grace, when we are so far gone out of
our selves, out of our graces, duties, parts, performances, that we borough
our selves deep in God.

Fifth sign of growth.
5. The more any aim at Gods glory in what they do, the more grace they have
received from God. The Scribes and Pharisees were men of great parts, but they
did all for their own glory, Mat. 6.2. therefore they were but Hypocrites, they
had no grace: but they that have most grace, do most seek Gods glory, Isa.
25.3. The strong people shall glorify thy Name: and the more Job saw of God,
the more he debased himself; Job* 42.5, 6. I have heard of thee by the hearing
of the ear, but now my eye sees thee; therefore I abhor my self, and repent in
dust and ashes.

Thus we are to examine whether we do increase or no.

And 2. Is that increase the increase of God? Exam. 2. What is the increase of
God.
1. For the Author. 2. For the Matter. 3. For the Manner. 4. For the Measure.

1. There is an increase, which is but the increase of the Creature, a natural
increase, which a natural man may attain to, in the exercise of Moral Virtues,
the habit whereof is strengthened by frequent acts: for, Romans 2.14. They do by
nature the things contained in the Law: This only makes the increase of the
natural man.

2. There is a Diabolical increase, when a man is puffed up with knowledge, with
a superstitious observation of a voluntary Humility in meats, and drinks, and
days, Col. 2.16, 17, 18, 19.
and worshipping of Saints and Angels. It is an easy matter to increase in
this kind of devotion; the Devil will be a man's Tutor in this School; this is
but a Diabolical increase. It may be truly said of such persons. Non crescunt
sed turgent, They do not grow, but swell; like some excrescence, like a Byle or
Wen upon the Body, it has no kindly growth from the Head, but unnatural
Tumor, from some vicious humor: Hab. 2.4. His soul which is lifted up, [or,
which is swoln] is not upright in him.

But 3. there is an increase which is called the increase of God. Col. 2.19.


First, as God is the Author of it, not any Creature. 1. Author of Divine
increase.
As God begins this life, so he carries it on: Joh. 1.13. They that believe,
are born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, but of the will of God:
And he increases it, Phil. 1.6. He begins the good work, and he will perform,
or finish it, to the day of Christ.

Secondly, for the Matter of it. True Humility, 2. Matter.
Self-denial, saving Faith, which are Graces incommunicable to natural men and
hypocrites: These are graces which do accompany Salvation, as the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 6.9. And they are God's for the matter of them, under a more
special consideration.

Thirdly, for the Manner. 3. Manner.
The increase of God is uniform and proportionable; such a man increases in
all parts alike, Head, Heart, Hands, Feet, and all; he increases in the
knowledge of the Truth and the love of the Truth proportionably. But now the
increase of the Hypocrite is very uneven and unequal, a monstrous increase;
like the increase of some Monster, Simile.
that has a great Head, and a little narrow Breast, without Hands and Feet;
such is the increase of an hypocrite: he may have a great Head, a great deal of
superficial knowledge, but a narrow Breast, no love to the Truth, no Hands to
practice that which is good, no Feet to walk with God: This is a monstrous
increase.

4. Measure.
Fourthly, for the Measure. The increase of God is a great increase; as in
Scripture, Trees of God, signify great Trees; and Mountains of God, great
Mountains: so the increase of God is a great increase. Though the beginnings of
such as have the truth of grace, be small, yet their latter end does greatly
increase, Job 8.7. Every gracious person goes beyond an hypocrite, he grows
beyond the sphere of his activity, beyond the sphere of nature or art; and so
he increases not with the increase of a Creature, but with the increase of
God, 2 Coloss* 19.

Q. But will some say, If we must thus judge of our growth, then I fear I have
no Faith, no Grace, because I cannot perceive that I grow, unless it be
downward; methinks I grow worse and worse, therefore I fear I have no Grace.

What to judge in sense of want of growth.
Ans. 1. Possibly thou have none indeed, therefore examine whether ever thou
were soundly humbled or no, so as to be effectually driven home to Christ, and
have received him for thy King and Prophet, as well as Priest.

A. 2. If so; yet know, it is possible for a gracious person, for want of
watchfulness in the use of Means, to stand at a stay, or to decline and fall
back.

Q. But you will say, What then is the difference between the falling back of
an Hypocrite and a true Believer?

Ans. 1. The Believer is humbled when he loses ground, Difference of drawing
back.
therefore he cries out, as David, Psalm. 119. ult. I have gone astray like a
lost sheep; Lord, seek thy servant: but so does not the Hypocrite.

A. 2. A Believer recovers himself again ere it be long, and gets strength by
his fall, as Peter did; but an Hypocrite does not so, but still goes down the
stream, and will never take the pains to row up again.

A. 3. Whereas thou say, Thou do not grow; it may be it is with thy Soul,
as with Trees in Winter, though they do not grow above-ground, yet they grow
underground; though they do not grow in the branches, yet they grow in the
root; and the growth of the root in the Winter, will further the growth of the
branches when Summer comes. And this is Gods method with his people, he makes
them first grow in the root, before they grow in the branches: Isa 37.31. The
remnant of the house of Judah shall take root downward, and then they shall
bring forth fruit upward. Now it may be thou do not grow so much upward for
the present, (which is the grief of thy Soul) yet for thy comfort, if thou
growest more downward in Humility, and Self-denial, and Self-abhorrency, thy
condition is good, and the Spring of Grace will come upon thy Soul ere long,
when thou shall hear that comfortable voice of Jesus Christ, Cant. 2.10, 11,
13. Rise up, my love, and come away; for lo, the winter is past, the rain is
over and gone, the flowers appear on the earth, the time of the singing of
birds is come, etc. So that, even your complaining of your want of growth, may
be a sign of your growing in the root. I had rather hear an humble Soul say,
Alas! I am wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind* and naked; then to
hear a proud Pharisaical Laodicean say, God I thank thee, I am not as other
men, I am rich, and increast with goods, and have need of nothing.

A. 4. I answer, Whereas thou say, thou do not grow; it is not an easy
matter to perceive growth very suddenly. If a man stands and looks on a Tree
never so long, he cannot perceive it to grow; but if he take the height of it,
and come again five or six years after, he shall easily perceive it is grown.
And so it is in grace; it is not easy for the present to discern its growth:
Mar. 4.27. The seed springs and grows we know not how; but in time we shall
easily perceive it is grown.

A. 5. Whereas thou say, Thou do not grow; it may be it is true, for the
present thou do not grow at all, but art like the parched earth; yet if thou
can but lay hold of Gods Covenant by Faith, that will make thee grow afresh;
as the Rain and the Sun makes the grass to revive, that was even withered and
dead before. This was David's comfort, though he was like a branch springing out
of a dry ground, as it is said of Christ, Isa. 53.2. yet, 2 Samuel 23.3, 4, 5. he
was assured, God would make him grow again, even as the tender grass out of the
earth, by clear shining after rain.

Use 2. Humiliation for small growth.
The fourth Use is for Humiliation, in that (upon trial) we find so little
growth amongst us. We grow more opinionative from day to day, but we grow not
more active: we deserve not the commendation of the Church of Thyatira, Rev.
2.19. Thy last works are more than thy first; but rather the reproof of the
Church of Ephesus, ver. 4, 5 Thou art fallen from thy first love; repent, and do
thy first works. Therefore we have cause to be humbled, and repent. Christ may
say to England, as to Ephesus, I have this against thee, that thou art fallen
from thy first love. We are like forgetful and careless Scholars, deserving to
be put down into a lower Form: Whereas it is the property of such as are
admitted into the School of heavenly Wisdom, to increase in learning. Prove. 1
5. A wise man will hear, and increase learning: and Prove. 9.9. Give instruction
to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser. It is true indeed, our heads are full
of disputes, but our hearts are so little grown in the love of the Truth, that
we are but very dwarfs in practical Religion. If we compare our selves with the
Worthies of God in former generations, (as the Spies said of the inhabitants of
Canaan) they may well seem as Giants in our eyes. What a deal of
heavenly-heartedness, what love, what humility, what faithfulness was to be
found among them? If Luthers Courage, Calvin's Painfulness, the Martyrs Zeal
(hotter than the fire which consumed them) might be found in our days, I should
hope we did then begin to grow, and to recover our first love. But alas! while
we are so lukewarm, that we can bear them that are evil, Rev. 2.
and bear evils in our selves, where is our growth? Do not many question,
whether the Pope be Antichrist, and whether the Church of Rome be a true
Mother? Others, though they cannot deny, but that the Church of Rome i^ the
Scarlet Whore, the Jezabel spoken of in Scripture, yet the zeal of some is
grown so cool, they could find in their heart they might have a Toleration,
even for Jezabel her self, contrary to manifest Scripture: Rev. 2 20. Thou
suffer the woman Jezabel, which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach, and
seduce my servants. Histories tell us, That Adrian and Heliogabalus, and some
other Roman Emperors, did command all kinds of Worship in one and the same
Temple; but it tended to no other purpose, than the like device of Julian the
Apostate, who gave Heretics freedom amongst right believers, not that he cared
for one or the other, but that by their mutual distractions and dissentions,
they might destroy both. And therefore what those Factors of Satan did invent
for the advancing of his Kingdom, let it be far from the practice of Saints:
Let us rather recover our first love to the Truth of God; yea, let it grow and
increase: and truly if we grow not, how shall we be able to look Christ in the
face, when he comes to take account of us? We are planted in such a soil,
ordered by such an Husbandman, watered by such heavenly showers, in the
dispensations of Ordinances, that we shall be both the wonder and shame of
Christians, if we grow not.

Use 5. Of thankfulness for growth.
The fifth Use, is to stir us up to thankfulness, that the just lives by Faith
the Life of Augmentation, especially in such times as these; That grace should
thus increase, either in the Church in general, or in any particular Christians
heart, considering how great opposition it meets withal: When ever does a man
in earnest profess himself a Christian, but all the Powers of Darkness, in
Hell, and upon the Earth, proclaim open wars against him? Besides the clog of
his own sinful corruptions, which hang heavy upon him, (for the Flesh is ever
lusting against the Spirit) and yet he grows; In spite of Satan, the Prince of
the Air, Ephesians. 2.
who blows forth many a terrible storm to blast the fruit; In spite of the
World, which sends forth many a sharp frost, to nip the fruit in the bud; In
spite of Corruption, which lies as a Worm at the Root, to eat out the very
heart and power of godliness; yet he grows for all this. And how comes this to
pass? Surely you will say, here is aliquid Dei, the finger of God must needs be
in it. The preservation of Grace in this case, is wonderful. If you should see
a Rush-candle set without doors in the midst of stormy Winds and Rain, and yet
continue light, you would stand and look upon it with admiration; and yet thus
is the little Candle of Grace preserved. Psalm. 18.28. The Lord my God will
light my candle; yea, he keeps it light, when the Prince of the Air, and all
his instruments, join all their forces to blow it out. God lighted such a
Candle by Luthers Doctrine, as could never be blown out to this day: All the
breathings, and threats, and bellowings of the Romish Bulls; all the
thunderings of the Popish Canons, could never blow it out. This is the Lords
doing, and it ought to be mavelous in our eyes: Mavelous indeed, that truth
and grace should be preserved under such opposition, but much more mavelous,
that it should be increased thereby, that it should be like the Camomile, the
more it is trodden upon, the more it grows; like a Tree, the more it is lopt
and topt, the more is flourishes and spreads. That the Churches should be
edified, and multiplied, when they had rest through all Judea, and Galilee, and
Samaria, it is not so wonderful, Acts 9.31. but that they should then grow and
increase, when there was no rest, no peace to him that went out, nor to him
that came in; That the Blood of the Martyrs should be the Seed of the Church;
That the Church should grow and thrive best under opposition, this is the
Wonder of Wonders! which plainly shows, the increase is not of man, but of God;
and therefore he should have all the glory of it.

The sixth Use, is for Exhortation, Use 6. Of Exhortation to growth.
To labor to live by Faith the Life of Augmentation. It is a shame for a
Christian not to grow: A Christian should out-grow others, as much as the
Palm Tree exceeds ordinary Plants: Psalm. 92.12, 13.14, 15.
therefore labor to grow, 1. In Prove. 2.7. and 10.14. and 15.7. Isa. 11.9.
Col. 1.10. Pro. 2.3, 18 and 2.1, 5, 8, 9. Phil. 1.9.10.
Knowledge; Let the word of Christ dwell plentifully in you, Col. 3.16. 2. In
Faith; to be rich in faith, though poor in the world, Jam. 2 5. Col. 2.7. 3. In
Charity, and in good Works, Phil. 1.9. The poor Macedonians were rich in their
liberality, 2 Cor. 8.2. The abundance of their joy and deep poverty, abounded
to the riches of their liberality. It is the best riches of rich men, to be
rich in good work^, 1 Timothy 6.18. Let not rich men give poorly, while poor men
give richly; let not a poor Widow cast in more, than all the rich men, into
Gods Treasury: However we grow in wealth, let us labor to grow in Grace.

1 Motive to incite us to it, may be a decoro, Motives
from the comeliness of it. It is the sweetest sight that can be, 1. Comeliness.
to see a Christian flourishing as the Palm Tree, and growing like the Cedar in
Lebanon, as Psalm. 92.12. Such are indeed the excellent of the earth, as Psalm.
16.2. We say of tall persons, they are proper persons: Oh what comely persons
should we be; if we were tall in grace; without this, the best of natural
perfections are but as so many Jewels in a Swines snout, Prove. 11.22. Let us
therefore labor to grow in grace, as we desire to be comely in the eyes of
Jesus Christ, Cant. 7.6, 7. Christ says of his Church, How fair and how
pleasant art thou, O love, for delights? thy stature is like a Palm Tree: O let
us not be as low shrubs, but as tall Palm Trees, if we desire to be comely in
his eyes.

2. Pleasantness.
2. A jucundo, from the pleasantness of it, Prove. 3.17. Her ways are ways of
pleasure, and all her paths peace: So that the further you go, the more
pleasure still you meet with; the deeper you drink in this cup, the sweeter
still; the more you grow in grace, (in ordinary course of dispensation) the
more you grow in comfort, Romans 14 17. The Kingdom of God is righteousness,
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. The more righteousness, the more you increase
your peace and joy, till you come to enter into the joy of your Lord; such as
grow in grace, get nearer heaven from day to day. For grace and glory do only
differ in degrees. Therefore, as that sweet Bird of the morning, the Lark,
sings and mounts upward, raising her Body and her Note both together, rising
still higher and higher, nearer heaven, and further from earth: So a Christian
raised up upon the wing of heavenly Affections, Meditations, Prayers, holy
Actions, whilst he thus grows in grace through the strength of Christ, he gets
nearer heaven, and further off from the earth: Col. 3. Phil. 3.
He sets his affections on things above, and not on things on the earth: His
conversation, and City and Trade, is in heaven; and thus he rises higher and
higher, and is translated from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of our
God: and is not this a pleasant life? and what is it, but to begin heaven upon
earth, even to sit with Christ in heavenly places.

3. Ab utili, from the profit of it: 3. Profit.
Though we could earn nothing but damnation by all our obedience, as of our
selves; yet God is so merciful, that he rewards every man according to his
works, Psa. 62.12. Also to thee, O Lord, belongs mercy, for thou renderest to
every man according to his works. So that if we yield our praise and increase
to God, the earth shall yield her increase to us: Psalm. 67.6. Then shall the
earth yield her increase, and God, even our God, shall bless us, when the
people praise him. But if we withdraw our service from God, the creatures shall
withdraw their service from us. Hos. 2.9. I will take away my corn in the time
thereof, etc. But if we yield our increase to God, then heaven and earth, and
all creatures, yield their increase to us: ver. 21. I will hear the heavens,
says the Lord, and they shall hear the earth, etc. Some are of opinion, that
we shall not only have more blessing upon earth, but more glory in heaven,
conceiving that there shall be degrees of glory, according to our degrees of
grace. There are Arguments on both sides: Some conceiving, glory shall be
equal, because the Merit of Christ is equal; Therefore in the Parable of the
Vineyard, he that labored most received no more, than he that labored the
shortest time; every man receives his penny, Mat. 20. But the Parable cannot be
meant of eternal life; for there are no murmurers in heaven, such as you find
in the Parable, that murmured because they had no more. But that other Parable
in the 19 of Luke, does rather set forth the state of glory, upon the return of
the Nobleman, where he that gained most, received most reward; he that gained
ten talents, was made ruler over ten Cities; and he that gained five, was made
ruler over five. Yet this does not infer merit of Works neither, but a gracious
disposition in God, to encourage his servants in a way of well-doing. It is the
Apostles argument, to quicken up Christians to be upon the growing hand. 1 Cor.
15. ult. Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, for your labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord. However, suppose it were in vain in respect of our glory, yet we are sure
it is not in vain in respect of Gods glory. You know what Christ says, Joh.
15.8. Herein is my Father glorified, that you bear much fruit. Now we should
prefer Gods glory before our own Salvation: therefore we should be upon the
growing hand.

4. Equity.
4. Ab aequo, from the justice and equity of it: for, God affords us as great
means for our increase in these Gospel Times, as ever he did; he puts us into
fat pastures, and well watered, Psalm. 23. therefore it is a shame for Gods
people not to grow, not to bring forth twins, as Cant. 6.6. They should grow
twice as fast, bring forth twice as many Lambs, twice as much Wool, twice as
much Milk, as those that go upon bare Commons. All the world may cry shame on
such a man that is high fed, and often fed with fat and sweet Ordinances, if he
be still like Pharaohs lean Kine, as lean and ill-favored as ever he was
before. Certainly, fat Ordinances and lean Souls do not well agree. We are to
look upon it as the greatest of Judgments, to have (as Psalm. 106.15.) leanness
sent into our souls, while we are fed with Manna. We look on it as an
affliction, to have an over-lean Body; but it is a far sadder condition, to have
a lean Soul. Of the two, it were much better to have a well-thriving Soul, and
a lean Body, than a well-thriving Body, and a lean Soul: it is a great mercy
when both prosper, 3 John 2. I wish above all things, that thou may prosper,
and be in health, as thy soul prospers. Oh it is a sweet thing, especially to
have a prospering Soul, and still upon the growing hand: and God expects it
should be so, where he affords good diet, great means of grace; as Dan. 1.10.
The Prince of the Eunuchs said to Daniel, I fear my Lord the King, who has
appointed your meat and your drink, if you should look ill, who fare so well, I
should be sure to bear the blame; it were as much as my head is worth. So
certainly, where God affords precious food for precious Souls, if these Souls
be lean under fat Ordinances, either those that are fed, or those that feed
them; either the Stewards, or the household; either Minister or people, or
both, are sure to bear the blame. It is but equal and just that such should
grow. We do not wonder to see lean Sheep upon bare Commons; but when we see
Sheep continue lean in fat Pastures, we think their meat is ill bestowed on
them: and therefore let us strive to be on the growing hand.

Obj. But it may be you will say, Whatever means we enjoy, what can we do,
without the Spirit which works all in all?

Resp. Therefore as a further Motive, or incentive of this Motive, thou have in
this respect, great advantage from the Time: For these are the times, wherein
God has promised to pour out his Spirit more abundantly; Joel 2.28. I will
pour out my Spirit upon all flesh. The Spirit was not given before, in
comparison; but now God has promised it shall be poured forth; therefore sue
out the Promise, and you shall grow: Luke 11.13. If ye being evil, know how to
give good gifts to your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give
the Holy Ghost to them that ask him? In this respect it was prophesied, that
Christians should be stronger, and better grown in the latter age of the world.
We have every way greater advantage: we do not only stand upon the shoulders
of our Forefathers Examples and Experiences, but we have (or may have) more
Spirit within us also. Indeed, in regard of bodily stature, the first age
brought forth Giants, and the last Dwarfs: But in regard of Spiritual growth,
it was prophesied, the last ages should bring forth the Giants, in comparison
of the former: Zech. 12.8. -- He that is feeble among them, at that day shall
be as David, and the house of David shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord
before them. Under the first Covenant, the Church was like a little child in
her minority, under Tutors and Governors, because she was weak: but now under
the second, being adult, and of riper years, it is expected she should be
taller and stronger in grace. Therefore as there is growth in the Church in
general, so there should be growth in every particular Christian also; the
plenty of means, and the pouring out of the Spirit in these days, calls for it
at our hands.

5. Safety.
5. A tuto, from the safety of this growth. A man indeed may grow too great in
other things; but there is no danger of exceeding in this growth. And yet it is
strange to see, how little Christians affect this better kind of growth. They
will say, They have Knowledge enough, and Grace enough: but one shall hear few
say, I am rich enough, and strong enough, and honorable enough. Men love
growth in their bodies, in their estates, in their children, yea, growth in
their cattle and trees: Oh how do they rejoice to see them grow well, and come
forwards? and why should we not much more love growth in our Souls? For a man
may grow too great in other things, but there is no danger of exceeding in this
growth. A man may grow too exceeding tall, he may become a Monster; he may grow
too fat, he may grow to be a burden to himself; he may grow too rich, as well
as too poor: Therefore says Agur, Give me neither poverty nor riches, but feed
me with food convenient, Prove. 308. Yea, one may grow too rich, though in the
place of a King: Deuteronomy 17.17. He shall not greatly multiply to himself gold and
silver, i.e. immoderately addict himself to get riches; and the reason is
given, Deuteronomy. 8.13, 14. Because excess in these things, lifts up the heart, and
makes it forgetful of God: therefore a man may grow too rich, there is danger
in that; but a man can never be too gracious too zealous, too holy, there is no
danger in that: for it is written, 1 Pet. 1. Mat. 5.
Be ye holy, for I am holy; Be ye perfect, as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect. There is safety in this growth.

6. A necessario, from the necessity of growth: 6. Necessity.
1. In regard of the Precept; for God commands us to grow in grace as well as
to have any grace at all: 2 Pet. 3. ult. Grow in grace. 2. In regard of the
End; 1. That God may be glorified by our growth: Such as grow not, dishonor
God, discredit Gods Ordinances, as if there were no strengthening virtue in
them; they discredit his Promise, as if there were no truth in them: therefore
Psalm. 92.14, 15. They shall be fat and flourishing, to show that the Lord is
upright; as those that grow apace, declare Gods righteousness, that he is
faithful upon his word; so those that grow not, as much as in them lies, would
fasten unfaithfulness and unrighteousness upon God. 2. As we our selves desire
to attain that happy end of appearing before God in Sion, we must go from
strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7. On the other side, there is woeful danger in
standing at a stay, not increasing, but hiding our talent in a Napkin: Mat.
25.28, 30. Take therefore the talent from him -- and cast ye the unprofitable
servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth. The
Word of God is a precious talent; but how many by their slothfulness and
unprofitableness, have deprived themselves of that precious treasure? What
admirable Prerogatives had the Jews once above all the world? To them were
committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3.2. and 9.4. But because they did not grow
in grace, but received it in vain, therefore was the Bread of Life taken from
them, and they now suffer that miserable famine spoken of Amos 8.11. a famine
of hearing the Word of God. Not much better is the condition of the Greek
Churches, which being planted by the Apostles themselves, enjoyed the light of
the Word as we do; but because they did not walk answerably to the light, and
grow in grace, therefore the sad night of Turkish Darkness and Tyranny has
overspread them. That the like judgment may not befall us, Let us labor to
grow by the Means, that God may continue them to us, and that we may leave them
as a Legacy to our Posterity after us

Q. But what are those Means, in the use whereof we be enabled to grow?

R^sp. For understanding whereof, however it is true, we can do as little by
any power of our own, for the increasing of our spiritual stature, as for the
increasing of our natural. Mat. 6.27. Which of you by taking care, can add one
cubit to his stature? Yet as we must not neglect eating, and drinking, and
exercise, under pretense that we cannot add a cubit to our stature; so we must
not neglect the use of spiritual Means, under pretense that we can add nothing
to our spiritual stature.

Q. What are these means then?

Means of spiritual growth.
R. If thou would grow, plant thy self in a good soil; not only in Christ,
but under Christ, in the society of the faithful: Psalm. 92.13. They that be
planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God. With
the holy, thou will still be more holy; but with the froward, thou will learn
more frowardness. The Tree grows not, that is planted in the barren heath, but
that which is planted in a fruitful orchard.

2. Mean. Much Prayer.
2. Be much in Prayer, That God would make thee increase and abound in love, 1 Thessalonians. 3.12. Paul may plant, and Apollo water, but God gives the increase, 1
Cor. 3.6, 7. Pray for wholesome showers, fair winds, and seasonable Sunshine,
that thou may grow.

1. Pray for wholesome showers. Isa. 5.
First, for wholesome Showers. When God would not bless, but blast his Vineyard,
he commands his clouds, that they should rain no more rain upon it. What are
these clouds, but the Ministers of his Word? Deuteronomy. 32.2. My doctrine shall drop
as the rain, my speech shall descend as the dew, as the small rain upon the
tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass. What the Minister draws and
exhales out of the deep Fountain of Gods Word, is distilled down again by the
heat of the Spirit into the hearts of the people, and so they grow.

Secondly, pray for fair Winds: a good and a wholesome air, makes much for
growth. 2. For fair winds
What are those fair Winds, but the sweet gales of the Spirit, going along with
the Word? The rain rides along upon the wings of the wind; and if the wind of
the Spirit do not bring the rain, we will never grow, so as to be fruitful in
Christ's Garden: Therefore pray with the Church, Cant. 4.16. Awake, O North
wind, come thou South, and blow upon my Garden, that the spices thereof may
flow out.

Thirdly, pray for seasonable Sunshine. It is the Sun, 3. For seasonable
Sunshine.
with the rain, that makes fruitful: 2 Samuel 23.4. The tender grass springs out
of the earth, by clear Sunshine after rain. The calidum and humidum in a sweet
mixture, is the life of every creature. What is this Sunshine, but the sense
of Gods love in Christ warming our hearts? Mal. 4.2. The healing wings of the
Sun of Righteousness.

3. We must Exercise grace much, 3 Mean. Much exercise.
as well as pray much, or else we tempt God in prayer. Bodily exercise is a
special Means of natural growth, else the best diet does no good: So is
Spiritual exercise a Means of Spiritual growth. Therefore Paul directs Timothy,
1 Timothy 4.7, 13, 14, 15. Exercise thy self unto godliness, give attendance to
reading, to exhortation, to doctrine, -- Neglect not the gift that is in thee
-- Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting
may appear to all.

4. Let the use of all Means be mixed with Faith. 4 Mean. Use all means in
faith.
The just lives by faith. Therefore pray, as Luke 17.5. Lord, increase our
faith; without it, no Word, nor Sacraments, nor Prayer, nor any Ordinance, can
be profitable for increase: Heb. 4.2. But the Word did not profit them, being
not mixed with faith in them that heard it. As some meats, mixed with some
ingredients, nourish much; so do the Ordinances, when mixed with faith, As
Daniels Pulfe, mixed with faith, made him look better, and grow fatter, than
those that fed on dainty fare: So men living under ordinary Means, may thrive
better, mixing the Word with Faith, than those that live under higher
enjoyments, continuing in unbelief.

5 Mean. A good stomach.
5. Get a good Stomach to thy Spiritual diet, if thou would grow. Though men
have never so good meat, yet they thrive not if they have no appetite to it: So
it is also in Spiritual respects; Luk 1.53. He fills the hungry with good
things, but the rich he sends empty away. Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they which
hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.

6 Mean. Draw influence from Christ.
6. If thou would grow, thou must be daily applying thy self to Christ thy
Head, for constant and renewed influence from him. As all life, so all increase
is from the Head: Christ is the Head, from which all the body by joints and
bands, having nourishment, ministered and knit together, increases with the
increase of God, Col. 2.19.

7 Mean. Applying the Promises of growth, and pleading them.
7. Lay hold of the Promise of growth, and plead it, if thou would grow to
purpose. That is the best growth, when there is a growth to a ripe harvest; and
that is the best harvest, that is both ripened and reaped by laying hold of the
Promise, as the root of all growth: Genesis 8. ult. Seed-time and harvest shall
not fail, says God; and so he has said concerning Spiritual seed-time and
harvest, Psalm 126.5, 6. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy; he that
goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtl^ss come again with
rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him. Plead this Promise of God, when thou
perceivest the seed of grace is sown in thy heart, but thou mournest for want
of growth; Lord, thou have promised, Seed time and harvest shall not fail, etc.
make this good to my Soul. Job 8.7.
Thou have said, Though the beginnings of thy people be small, yet the latter
end shall greatly increase. Thou have said, Such as are planted in thy house,
shall be fat and flourishing, Psalm. 92.13. Thou have said, I will be as the dew
unto Israel, and he shall grow as the Lilly, Hos. 14.5, 6, 7. Thus lay hold
upon God, and bind him fast in the words of his own Promise; and say, Genesis 3 2.
I will not let thee go, except thou bless me with this blessing of growth: and
then thou shall certainly find virtue flowing from Christ, in the Conduit-pipe
of the Promise. By these things do men live, Isa. 38.16. Mat. 4. 1 Kin. 17.16.
even by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. As life comes at the
first in a way of Promise; so life is increast also thereby from day to day.
And thus by Faith, laying hold on the Promise, the just live the life of
Augmentation; their life (as the Widows Oil) increasing by the Word of the
Lord.

8. Labor to take Delight in the ways of God, 8 Mean. Delight in Gods ways.
to find what is promised. Job 22.26. Thou shall have delight in the Almighty.
What children delight in, they prove excellent in that way, they grow up to
perfection in it. If we could delight our selves in the law of the Lord, then
we should be as Trees planted by the rivers of water, that bring forth their
fruit in season. Psa. 1.2, 3.

9. Be careful to remove Impediments of growth.

First, root up the Weeds of sinful Corruption, 9 Mean. Remove all Impediments.
which choke the good corn: Cast out those noisome Humors out of the stomach of
the Soul, which sour the good Milk of the Word, and make it unprofitable. 1
Pet. 2.1, 2. Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile and hypocrisies,
and envies, and evil speaking, as new born babes desire the sincere milk of the
word, that you may grow thereby.

Secondly, Take heed of a conceit of perfection, 2 Imp.
that we are grown enough already. What made the Church of Laodicea so lazy
and lukewarm, Rev. 3.17. but because she said, she was rich and full? What
made Paul so active for God, but because he was very sensible of his
imperfection? Phil. 3.12. He looked upon himself as not come up to his full
seize, not yet perfect, therefore he was still pressing forward.

Envy and Contention, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. The Corinthians were but babes in Christ:
why so? they were full of contentions: The Body of Christ edifies it self in
love, Ephesians. 4.16. Therefore it consumes it self, by fretfulness and envy.

Hypocrisy and Vnfruitfulness. I put them both together, because they are
never asunder. Those that have nothing but leaves without fruit, like the
barren Fig Tree, are ne^r unto cursing and blasting: Such are so far from
growing, that they wither away, and are good for nothing but the fire, becoming
trees twice dead, and plucked up by the roots, Jude 12.

Despising Ordinances; they are given to advance growth: Ephesians. 4 11. He gave
some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting
of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of
Christ, etc. Therefore where these are despised, there must needs be a decay;
therefore 1 Thessalonians. 5.19, 20. Quench not the Spirit, and Despise not
Prophesying, are put together, to show, That despising Prophecy, is the way to
quench the Spirit.

Conversation with wicked men: This is a hindrance of growth; this cools your
zeal, and gives a check to your speed in your Christian Race: therefore David,
Psalm. 119.115. Depart from me ye evil doers, for I will keep the Commandments
of my God. As if he could not possibly go on and grow in grace, so long as the
wicked stood in his way.

Spiritual pride and self-confidence.
Seventhly, We must know, That Gods withdrawing the influence of his grace from
the Soul, may cause a stop or a decay for a time; which God usually does,
either to prevent, or else to cure Spiritual Pride and Self-confidence. When
Peter was confident of his own strength, Christ tells him, Before the Cock
crew, he should deny him: and it was Christ's looking back upon Peter, that
quickened him again; therefore, I suppose, it was not so much the strength of
the tentation, as Peter's weakness in resisting, and that weakness proceeding
from Gods withdrawing himself, that was the cause of Peter's fall: For his
tentation was as strong afterward, when he was threatened by the same Authority
yet answered so courageously, Acts 4.19 But now God assisted, before he did
withdraw. Therefore take heed of Spiritual Pride, and trusting to the Mountains
of Grace received, Psalm. 30.6. for then God turns away his face, and we are
troubled; he withdraws the influence of his grace, and then we decay; it is
fall of the leaf with us, as with the Trees in Autumn, and we cannot grow
again, till the Sun of Righteousness make a new spring.

Comfort to those that are apt to be discouraged at the small beginnings of
grace; Comfort at small beginnings of grace.
as the old men wept, when they saw the Foundation of the second House, how far
it came short of the Glory of the first, Ezr. 3.12. So many, when they consider
the first fabric, how God made Man after his own Image, in perfect
Righteousness and Holiness; and then look on the second, in the work of
Regeneration, how far it comes short, they lament, Alas, alas! are these Bodies
and these Souls the Temples of the Holy Ghost? To such I would say, as Zech.
4.10. Who has despised the day of small things? Though the second Temple at
the beginning be far short, yet in conclusion it shall exceed the former. Hag
2.9. This Temple is made of living stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. nay, of growing stones,
Ephesians 2.21. We wrong a man's work, if we judge it before it be finished: so we
wrong Gods work, and our selves, if we judge it before it be finished. The just
should live by Faith the Life of Augmentation, to encourage him against all
discouragements. 2 Cor. 4.16. Therefore we faint not -- while we look not at
the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen. It was such an
encouragement to Elijah, when he discerned but a cloud about the bigness of a
hand, that he could from thence foretell abundance of Rain, 1 King. 18. So it
may be an encouragement to us, if we can but discern the least beginnings of
grace, for then it will certainly increase, till it be perfected to the day of
Christ, Phil. 1.6.

Use 8. Direction of behavior toward the weak.
The eighth Use, is for Direction, how to carry our selves toward the weak, not
in a way of morosity, to despise them, or discourage them; but in a way of
lenity and equanimity, to be tender over them, and encourage them. As Christ is
far from breaking a bruised reed, or quenching the smoking flax, that he
strengthens the one, and blows up the other: so should we do; and by this means
it may come to pass, that many that are last, may be first; they may out-grow
many that went before them. We do not expect that from newborn babes, that we
expect from grown men: but, because they are so little and tender, we are very
indulgent toward them; we nourish and cherish them, and so they grow on to
maturity. Thus they that are grown Christians, should carry themselves toward
them that yet are but babes in Christ. Thus we have seen, that the just lives
by Faith, in reference to the Augmentation or increase of his life, with the
uses of it.

BRANCH VI. IN THE LIFE of FAITH IN SANCTIFICATION; VIZ. PERSEVERANCE.
THe just man lives by Faith in reference to the Conservation of life, or
Perseverance. He draws from Christ confirming virtue; and this does fitly
follow the former: yea, it is that which sets a crown upon all the rest. For
otherwise, should a Christian grow never so rich in grace, if it might be said
of his Spiritual riches, as the Prophet Jeremy speaks of the Temporal riches of
the wicked, Jer. 17 11. He shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at
his end shall be a fool: what were he the better for all his growth? Now this
is the very crown of Augmentation and Fructification, that as he lives by Faith
for the present, so his Faith carries him on still to be faithful unto death,
that he may receive from God a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. And that this is also
the meaning of the Text, you may see by the words themselves, and by the
application of them by the Apostle.

1. By the words themselves; for it is not said, The just does live by his
Faith, but, The just shall live (vivet) therefore says Calvin upon the place,
Futurum tempus, vitae perpetuitatem designat: The Future Tense points out the
perpetuity of this life. He begins that life by Faith, which shall never have
an end.

2. This is clear by the Apostles Application and Interpretation of the Text,
Heb. 10.37. where the Apostle persuading to patient continuance in well-doing,
he brings this very Scripture, for an encouragment, The just shall live by
faith; he shall so live, as to go on and persevere in his Christian course. And
that this is the very sense, does plainly appear by its opposite member, But if
any man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him: Where we see clearly,
drawing back, or falling off, is directly opposed to living by Faith. So that
to live by Faith in the sense of the Text, and in the sense of the Apostle, who
best knew the meaning of the Text, it is to live by Faith the Life of
Conservatior. He draws from Christ conserving virtue, and so lives by Faith in
reference to Conservation and Perseverance.

Two things therefore we are to show: Two Propopositions.
First, That the just does Persevere. Secondly, That he lives this Life of
Perseverance by Faith.


1. The just does Persevere.
1. That the just does so live, as that he shall persevere, and hold out to the
end. Solomon tells us, That the righteous is an everlasting foundation. Prove.
19.25. a foundation that never shall decay. Our Savior Christ compares him
(Mat. 7.24.) to a building founded on a Rock, that out-stands all winds and
weather. David compares him to a Mountain, a Mountain that cannot be removed,
Psalm 125 1. The Prophet Isaiah gives him a Name, An Everlasting Name, that
shall not be cut off, Isa. 56.5 S. Peter compares his beginning to Seed,
Immortal seed, that shall never die, 1 Pet. 1.23. The Psalmist compares him to
a Tree, a Tree planted by the rivers of waters, that shall never wither, Psalm.
1.3. Our Savior himself calls the gift of saving grace, The good part, or
portion, that shall never be taken away, Luke 10.42. and therefore it is fitly
compared to fire, to that holy fire which came down from heaven, that never
went out, Levit. 6.12, 13. If once that holy fire of grace be kindled in a
believers heart, it shall never go out: Mat. 12.20. He shall not quench the
smoking flax, till he send forth judgment into victory. Poor weak Christian,
is thy judgment right for God, only thy grace is so weak, there is as much
smoke of corruption, as there is fire of good affection? yet let this support
thee, He shall not quench the smoking flax.

Obj. But though Christ do not quench it, or put it out himself, yet something
else may blow it out, or pluck it from us, Corruption, and Satan, and the
World, are very strong.

Ans. As Christ will not quench it himself, so he will not suffer it to be
quenched by any opposite power whatsoever: Job. 10.28. No man shall pluck them
out of my hands. The Apostle was confident of this, Romans 8.35, etc. Who shall
separate us from the love of God in Jesus Christ? etc. Shall tribulation, or
distress, or famine, or nakedness? The Apostle is not only assured against
these, but against all that Life, or Death, or Angels, or Powers, etc. can do,
to separate us from the love of Jesus Christ. The just then shall persevere.

2. Perseverance is by virtue of Faith.
2. He perseveres by virtue of his faith. He lives by Faith the Life of
Conservation; 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto
Salvation. Which words are are set down as an argument of strong consolation to
Gods people, against that great Temptation of Backsliding, by reason of their
own weakness, and their enemies power. For whereas it was said in the former
verse, there was an incorruptible inheritance reserved for them in Heaven: they
might object, But alas! we fear our grace is not incorruptible; though the
Kingdom of Heaven fades not away, yet our grace may fade away, and so we may
fall short of that Kingdom. For their comfort, he tells them, as the Kingdom is
kept for them, so they are kept for the Kingdom: and how kept? through Faith;
Who are kept by the power of God through faith to Salvation. Hence Faith is
compared to a Shield; not an ordinary one, but to such a Shield, as enables the
Soldier to fight it out, to see the last enemy slain, to persevere to the end
of the Battle; Romans 8.
yea, to be more than Conquerors, even to conquer Principalities and Powers,
etc. therefore says the Apostle, Take unto you the whole armor of God, that
you may be able to stand in the evil day; and having done all, to stand, Ephesians.
6.13. Mark, that Christian Soldier only withstands his enemy as he should,
that in the right use of his Spiritual Armor, is able to stand it out unto the
last. And I pray what is the principal part of this Spiritual Armor? Is it not
Faith? ver. 16. Above all, taking the Shield of Faith, whereby ye shall be able
to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked one. As if he should have said,
Faith is all in all, and without this, all the other parts of the Armor as
good as nothing: By this we withstand all our enemies; and having done all, are
able to stand it out to the last: So that a Christians life is conserved by
Faith. Come we now to the Reason, 1. Why the just man perseveres. 2. Why by
Faith.


1. Why the just perseveres? Reasons. 1. Why the just shall persevere.


1 Rat. is drawn from Gods Everlasting Purpose of Election. What did God Elect
his people unto? No less than to Eternal Life: Act 13.48. As many as were
ordained to Eternal Life, believed. He does not say, As many as believed were
ordained unto life eternal: but contrariwise, As many as were ordained to
eternal life, believed. To intimate, That Faith foreseen, 1. From Election.
was not the cause of Election, but Election was the cause of Faith; and so the
same Election is the cause of Perseverance in Faith, or else their Life should
not be eternal. Therefore that strong conclusion of strong Consolation, (Romans
8.35.) is fetched as far as from that everlasting VVell-head of Gods Fore
knowledge and Predestination; ver. 29. For whom he did foreknow, he did
predestinate; and whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he
called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.
Therefore the Apostle is bold to make that brave challenge, Who shall charge
us? Who shall condemn us? Who shall separate us? As if he should have said,
Neither Sin nor Affliction, nor Men nor Devils, shall ever be able to break
this Golden Chain of Gods Election, till it ends in glory: Therefore the just
perseveres. God has elected him to no meaner a life, than that which is
Eternal; and therefore he shall certainly have it, Romans 11.
the Election must needs obtain it.

2 Reas. From Gods Love, from which, 2. Gods love.
this Election springs in order of working. Gods love is an Everlasting love:
As God is from Everlasting to Everlasting, so is his Love; for, whatsoever is
in God, is God. Jer. 31.3. I have loved thee with an everlasting love;
therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee: which, I conceive, is not to
be understood a part post, after we are drawn to believe and obey; but even
before also, a part ante Gods love here, is made the cause of our being drawn
to believe and obey, and not our obedience a cause of his love.

Obj. But is it not said, Joh. 14.21. He that has my Commandments, and keeps
them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me, shall be loved by my
Father, and I will love him, and will manifect my self to him: therefore our
love of God, goes before Gods love to us?

Resp. There is a love of Benevolence, whereby we bear good will to another;
and a love of Beneficence, whereby we testify our love in doing good to him.
Gods love of Benevolence, is before our loving of him, Joh. 4.19. We love him,
because he first loved us: but Gods love of Beneficence, at least in part, does
follow our love to him, and is the reward of it, according to his free grace.
If Gods love therefore be everlasting, this must needs be an everlasting fruit
of it, even the life of Grace and Glory to all eternity.

3. The Covenant.
3 Reas. From the Covenant of God made with his People, which is an everlasting
Covenant, well ordered, and sure, 2 Samuel 23.12. and Jer. 32.40 I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them
good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from
me: Whereas the poor Soul might say, God indeed says, he will never depart
from us, so long as we do not depart from him; but then he might justly depart
from us. Therefore Gods Covenant is, That we shall not depart from him; I will
put my fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart from me. Therefore the
just lives not from any stability in himself, but from the stability of Gods
Covenant.

4. Gods Unchangeable nature.
4 Reas. From the Unchangeable Nature of God. Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change
not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. You are not consumed, not
because there is no principle of change in you, but because there is none in
me. As if God should have said, When I first entered Covenant with you, I saw
you polluted in your blood, and I foresaw full well, how ignorant, how
impotent, how unconstant, how untoward you would be afterward: but I am
resolved, as I did not choose you at the first, for the good I saw to be in
you; so I will not reject you, for the evil that I see in you, but will forgive
it, and heal it: for my gifts and calling are without repentance, Romans 11 29.

5. Reas. From the Power of God. 5. Power of God.
If Gods people do not persevere, it is either because God will-not preserve
them, or because he cannot. But

1. Not because he will not; for it is his own good pleasure moved him to make
an everlasting Covenant; and his own unchangeable Nature moves him to fulfill it
to this day.

2. Not because he cannot; for nothing limits Gods Power, but his Will, Psalm
135.6. Whatever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and earth, etc.
Therefore if the Lord will preserve his Saints in a state of grace for ever, he
is able to do it. Though we are not able to stand of our selves, yet he is able
to make us stand; Romans 14.
or in case we fall, he is able to raise us up again, Psalm. 37.24. Though he
fall, he shall not be cast off, for the Lord puts under his hand.

6 Reas. From the Merit of Christ, 6. Merit of Christ, etc.
the Prayer of Christ, the Spirit of Christ. As Christ has merited Eternal
Righteousness and Eternal Salvation, Heb. 5.6. So he applies his Merit
eternally by his Intercession, and the operation of his Spirit: Wherefore, Heb.
7.25. Intercession of Christ,
he is able to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for them. Wherefore we must either deny, That
God the Father hears the Prayers of his Son, (which is blasphemous to imagine,
and contrary to Christ's confession, 1 John 11.42. I know that thou hear me
always) or else we must need acknowledge, That all such as are once in a state
of Grace, shall persevere, and be saved to the utmost. Further, they that are
Christ's, And Spirit of Christ.
have the Spirit of Christ; and so long as the Spirit does not depart from
them, they shall never depart from God, for the Spirit leads into all Truth.
But the Spirit of God does never depart from them. Isa. 59.21. As for me, this
is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee, and my
words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, etc.
Therefore they shall never finally depart from God.

Thus we have the Reasons, Why the just shall persevere. 2. Why perseverance
through Faith.
Now see the Reasons, Why they live this life by Faith.
1. Faith lays hold on the Promise.
1. Because Faith lays hold on the Promise of Perseverance. 1 Cor. 18. He shall
confirm you to the end, that you may be blameness in the day of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Phil. 1.6. He that has begun the good work in you, will perform it
unto the day of Jesus Christ. Mat 16.18. The gates of Hell shall not prevail
against the Church. Now Faith lays hold on these Promises, as the pursued
person laid hold on the Horns of the Altar, 1 Kings 1.50, 51. And so the just
lives by Faith for Perseverance.

2. On Gods power and faithfulness.
2. Because Faith lays hold on the Faithfulness and Power of God in the
fulfilling of these Promises. Therefore 1 Pet 1.5. We are said to be kept by
the power of God through faith unto Salvation: Because Faith lays hold on the
Power of God; Faith has no power to save us of it self, but as it lays hold
on the Power of God to Salvation. Thus the Apostle lived by Faith in the worst
times. 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have trusted, and am persuaded that he is
able to keep that which I have committed to him till that day. He laid hold
upon the Word of God, and the Power of God, in fulfilling that Word, and
therefore he suffered, and was not ashamed.

3. Faith never fails.
3. Because true Faith never fails, therefore true Grace never fails. Luke 22
31, 32. I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.

Obj. But this Prayer was made for Peter, or for the rest of the Apostles
eminent persons, as Peter was; and what is this to such as we are?

Resp. What Christ prays for Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, he prays for
the rest of the faithful to the worlds end, Joh. 17.20. Neither pray I for
these alone, but for them also which shall believe in me through their word.
And if Faith fails not, then other graces fail not; not only upon this reason,
That he that has one grace has all; but also upon this ground, Because Faith
has a special influence on other graces, to quicken and strengthen them. 2
Pet. 1.2. Grace and peace be multiplied to you through the knowledge of God,
and of Jesus Christ our Lord. Where observe, That knowledge is put for faith in
God and Christ, as Isa. 53.11. Joh. 17.3.

Use 1. This may serve for Confutation of Arminians and Papists, who hold
falling away from Grace; Confutation of the doctrine of falling from Grace.
and many in these days, who cannot abide the Name of Antichristian, and
therefore fasten it upon others, yet embrace the thing, embrace Antichristian
Doctrines; as, those of Universal Redemption, Free Will, and Falling from
Grace. For my part, I had rather suffer in the Name, whilst I hate the Thing,
than embrace the Thing, while I seem to hate the Name.

Obj. 1. But is there no danger of Gods peoples falling away? Does not the
Scripture often admonish them? as Heb 3.12, 13. Take heed, lest there be in any
of you an heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God; but exhort one
another daily, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin: 2
Pet. 3.17. Beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked,
fall from your own stedfastness.

Resp. 1. We answer by way of Concession, That

1. Moral gifts and endowments, By way of concession; as 1. To Moral Gifts.
though they have a great resemblance to the truth of grace, may be lost: Men
may go far by the improvement of Natural Principles: Romans 2.14. They do by
nature the things contained in the law; yet these men, when they know God, yet
glorify him not as God, neither are thankful: God may give them up to
unnatural and monstrous lusts. Moral endowments may be lost, these are but
flesh, they spring from flesh, they are not the fruits of the Spirit; and all
flesh is grass, and grass will wither, come to nothing, Isa. 40.6.

2. Common grace.
2. Common graces of the Spirit may be lost, which are given as an advancement
to those natural excellencies, and many times given for the good of others,
rather than of the party himself which does possess them. These, I say, may be
lost. So Saul had both the Spirit of Government and of Prophecy, and both
departed from him, 1 Samuel 16.14.

3. Some taste.
3. Such as have a Taste only of the Heavenly Gift, may possibly fall away,
Heb. 6.4. When a man goes to buy a thing, he may taste of it, and yet go his
way, and so he may never eat and drink of it to the full. There are many common
Professors, many chapmen for Christ, who seem to bid fair, and take a taste,
and yet never go through with the bargain: and that their seize were but
as a taste, and short of saving grace, is clear, by comparing ver. 9, 10. with
ver. 5, 6 for there he speaks of better things than these, and such as
accompany Salvation.

4. True grace, as to 1. Degrees.
4. He that has truth of saving grace, may lose it, 1. In the Degrees, both
extensively, in regard of the muchness of it; and intensively, in regard of the
quickness of it. 2. Sense.
2. The Sense and Feeling of it, wholly, to his apprehension of it, may be
lost; as Cant. 4.1. the Church thought she had lost Christ, and could not tell
where to find him. 3. Operations
3. He may lose the present Operations of it: He may be like fire raked up in
the embers, or like a man in a swoon, who lies as if he were quite gone; as it
was with Peter in the Highpriests Hall.

5. As to the doctrine of faith.
5. He may lose the doctrine of Faith, in some part or branches of it, as some
of those Churches in the Revelations did.

Exception or Restriction, By way of exception.
There are seven things from which the Elect can never fall:

1. They can never lose Eternal Life, Joh. 10.28. Seven things never lost.
Christ says of his Sheep, I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hands: and therefore it is
said, Joh. 5.24. He that believes, has everlasting life, and shall not come
into condemnation, but is passed from death to life. He that believes, has
eternal life already, as he that believes not, is condemned already, Joh. 3.19.

2. They shall never lose Confirming Grace: In some degree they may, but not as
to the securing of their Spiritual state and station in Christ; 1 Cor 1.8. Who
also shall confirm you to the end: Psalm. 94.14. The Lord will not cast off his
people, nor forsake his inheritance.

3. They shall never lose Forgiveness of sins past, and repented of, Jer.
31.34. For I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sin no more.

4. They shall never lose the Seed of Grace, 1 John 3.9. His seed remains in
him, and he cannot sin, for he is born of God. He does not lose that, but it
still remains in him. It is noted of Job, Chap. 2, 3. when he had lost all
his Cattle, his Servants, his Children, all his Temporal goods, yet he kept his
Spirituals in spite of Satan, he kept his integrity; he will sooner part with
his life, Job 27.2.
than part with that. As it is with a man at Sea in a great storm, when all is
cast overboard, the very Corn that feeds him, the very Clothes that cover his
nakedness, yet he makes much of his life, he swims to the shore with that,
though he lose all the rest: So it is with a gracious person, whatever he loses
in Troubles and Tentations, he shall never lose the seed of grace. We may say
of him, as Paul, Acts 20.10. Trouble not your selves, for his life is in him.

5. They can never wholly lose the Spirit of Sanctification, from whence this
grace springs: As God promised he would not take his Spirit from Solomon, as he
took it from Saul, 2 Samuel 7.14, 15. So Christ has promised he will never
wholly take away his good Spirit from his Elect, but it shall abide with them
for ever. Joh. 14.16 He prays for a Comforter for them, that should abide with
them for ever.

6. They shall not lose the habit of Faith, Luke 22.32. I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith fail not. Though Peter lost the acting of Faith, yet not the
habit, that ceased not: as a man in sleep loses the acts of Seeing, Hearing,
Speaking, but not the habit; so a Christian in Tentations, may lose the acts,
but not the habit of Faith.

7. They never lose their Union with Jesus Christ, being knit to him by Faith
and the Spirit. As a Member knit to the Head by Nerves and Sinews, though it
may be benumbed or asleep, yet it is united to the Head still: so is a true
Believer at the worst, though he may be stupefied or benumbed by corruption or
temptation, yet he is united to the Head still.

finally and totally, that through mercy he gets strength by his fall; he grows
more wary and watchful, he trusts himself less, and trusts God more, and so
gets more strength by tentation and opposition. As a broken bone well set
again, is stronger than before: As we see in the case of Peter, and so in the
case of Job, Satan comes on purpose to destroy his grace, and Job waxes
stronger in it; as some read the words (Chap. 2.3.) He holds fast his
integrity; Job 2.3.
or, increases in strength in his integrity. So that true grace gains by
opposition; the more it is assaulted, the more it is increased, so far is a
true believer from finally falling away from grace.

Obj. 2. But we read of some, which for a while believe, Luke 8.13.
and in time of Tentation fall away. Therefore how does the just live by Faith
for Perseverance?

Ans. 2. This believing, was no more, than giving credit, or bare assent. to
the Word, as Devils, and making Profession of the Faith, as Simon Magus did;
Their hearts were never right with God: which appears by this, the seed never
sunk into their hearts, they were stony ground, stony hearts at the best: and
though they heard the Word with joy, as Herod did, yet not every part of the
Word; for they could not digest the Doctrine of Self-denial, no more than Herod
did.

Obj. 3. But we find, Joh. 15.6. Branches planted in Christ, that yet may
wither, and be plucked away, and cast into the fire.

Ans. 3. There is a twofold implantation into Christ: 1. Common and outward, by
Baptism and external Profession. 2. The other inward and spiritual, by true
Faith. They who are thus implanted, are ever fruitful; and as Cant. 6.6. there
is none barren among them.

Obj. 4. It is said, Ezekiel. 18.24 If the righteous turn away from his
righteousness, and commit iniquity, in the sin that he has sinned, he shall
die: Therefore a righteous person may fall away, and perish.

Ans. 4. 1. Some conceive the Text speaks of those only who are morally
righteous. 2. Others conceive, that only temporal judgment, and death, is
here spoken of: for, the peoples quarrel with Gods proceedings, in reference to
temporal judgment, is the occasion of this answer from God. 3. If it be meant
of such as have justifying Faith, and in reference to eternal death, yet we
say, A conditional speech, is but an eruditional speech, to warn us of our own
weakness, and to make us watchful: Nihil ponit in esse, it proves nothing
directly of it self.

Obj. 5. We read of some, 2 Pet. 2.20. that had escaped the pollutions of the
world, through the knowledge of Christ; and were washed, and yet return with
the Swine to the wallowing in the mire.

Ans. 5. He speaks not of the true faithful, but of hypocrites, who were
cleansed from gross and scandalous sins, and yet returned again to their mire,
so that they remained Swine, for all their washing.

Obj. 6. But we have the Example of Solomon, 1 King. 11.4. falling into
Sensuality and gross Idolatry, and so continued, for ought we read in the
story.

Ans. 6. It is confessed he fell grievously, to be an admonition to us, that no
man might trust to his wisdom, or created grace: but yet he repented, and was
saved. 1. The Holy Ghost gives him this Name, viz. Beloved of God, 2 Samuel
12.24. and Nehem. 13.26. he is said to be a man Beloved of God. 2. He was a
Prophet, and Penman of Scripture, and therefore a holy man, 2 Pet. 1. ult. The
Scriptures were delivered by holy men, as they were moved by God. Obj. But he
fell from his holiness. Resp. but he recovered again: for Luke 13.28. All the
Prophets are in the Kingdom of God. 3. God had promised, That he would not
forsake Solomon utterly, though he did correct him, 2 Samuel 14.15. 4. His Book
of Ecclesiastes, declares his unfeigned Repentance; and therefore is a
testimony of Gods acceptance of him, and of his Salvation.

Obj. 7. But this Doctrine will make secure and careless.

Security twofold, Spiritual.
Ans. 7. There is a twofold Security: 1. Spiritual, that makes the Saints
secure in God; as Psa. 23.4, 6. Though I walk through the valley and shadow of
death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me -- surely goodness and mercy
shall follow me all the days of my life. Carnal.
2. Carnal, when a man is secure in himself, in trusting to his own strength So
that this Doctrine does not make the Saints secure and careless, but more
courageous and diligent. However, though they shall not fall totally and
finally, yet, without heed, they may fall dangerously and fearfully; and
therefore they have cause to be watchful, and to be working out their Salvation
with fear and trembling.

Information about assurance of salvation.
For the main argument against the certainty of Salvation, is, The uncertainty
of Perseverance. If Perseverance be certain, then is Salvation certain: for, He
that continues to the end, shall be saved, Mat. 10.22. But the Saints shall
continue: Psalm. 138.8. The Lord will perfect that which concerns us; Phil.
1.6. He that has begun the good work, will perform it till the day of Jesus
Christ. The Apostle was confident of it, and so may we: for what is the ground
of this confidence? not any thing in our selves, (we are apt to fall way) but
the Promise, and Faithfulness, and power of God. He has begun the work, and he
has said it, and he will perform it, therefore we may be sure of Salvation.

Truth of Faith, and Truth of Grace, To labor for truth of grace.
above all other things. Why? because they are so durable. In all other things
we love Certainties, and cannot abide to be at an uncertainty. We do not love
to be Tenants at will, to be turned out at an hours warning; yea, we rather
desire to be Freeholders, than Tenants upon the best terms. Oh how careful are
men to make all sure to them and their heirs for ever, etc. Surely, Si isti
callidi rerum aestimatores, If the crafty esteemers of things, do prize Meadows
and Lands above other goods, because they are not so subject to hurt and
casualty; how much more should we prize the truth of grace, which gives us
interest in eternal life, and can neither be snatched away by force, nor stolen
away by craft? it can neither be lost by fire nor water. The best of other
possessions, in the account of Christ, are but other men's goods, Luke 16.12.
because ere long they must go to another; and are like a Football, now one man
has the Ball on his foot, by and by another takes it from him; within the
turning of a hand, a third catches it from him, and so it goes on from one to
another. So these worldly things turn, and are tossed up and down; they are not
our own, but another man's goods as well as ours: but grace he calls our own,
Luke 16.12. because we shall never lose it, it is durable riches indeed, Prove.
8.18. Let us therefore take our Saviors advice, Joh. 6 27. Labor not for the
meat that perishes, but for the meat that endures unto eternal life: and Mat.
6.19, 20. Col. 3.3.

Labor after Perseverance.
that it may appear, that our grace is indeed true grace, and that we live by
Faith. It is said of the Parthians, They begin their Battles with as great
valor as any people whatsoever, but they faint quickly, and continue but a
while: The like may be said of many in their Spiritual Warfare, With the
Parthians, and with the Galatians, they begin well, but they cannot say with S.
Paul, they have fought a good fight, they have finished their course; because,
like Hymenaeus and Alexander, they have fallen away from the Doctrine of the
Faith, and it may be from the Profession of the Faith also. But it is the glory
of a Christian, to persevere to the end. Therefore whatever you part with, do
not part with your grace, as Job 2.3. He held fast his integrity: Though he
lost Goods, and Children, and Friends, and almost life too, yet still he held
fast his integrity: Let it be our resolution, that whatever we lose, (by Gods
help) we will never let go our grace. Let us say of grace, as Jacob to the
Angel, I will not let thee go, till I have got the blessing. As a man at Sea,
is willing to part with all, so he may but save his life: So let us be willing
to part with any thing so we may keep Christ and his grace; for this is even
the life of our lives.

Mo^ives to Perseverance.
That we may be the more effectually stirred up to endeavor to persevere:

1. Consider, that God is constant in his love to us: 1. Constancy of God in
his love.
Heb. 13.5. He has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; therefore
we should be constant to him. And indeed, our constancy to him, is a certain
fruit of his unchangeable love toward us. The Saints will never utterly
forsake God because God does never utterly forsake them. And the consideration
of his Faithfulness should, as an argument, prevail with us to be faithful,
Heb. 10.23. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering, for
he is faithful that has promised. As God has loved us with an everlasting
love, Jer. 31.3. So let us love him with an everlasting love, a part post,
though we cannot a part ante.

2. It is the honor of a Christian, 2. A Christians honor.
to persevere against all opposition. God himself seems to admire it in Job,
chap. 2.3. that notwithstanding all his sufferings, yet he held fast his
integry. To hold fast our integrity in trying times, is not only commendable,
but admirable. To continue good, while we suffer evil, is the very height and
crown of Goodness. Look as it makes sin out of measure sinful, when we hold
fast our sins in the midst of Judgments (Amos 4.6, etc. I have smitten you
thus and thus, yet you have not returned to me, says the Lord: That was the
aggravation of their sin) So it makes grace, out of measure gracious; it is the
highest commendation and exaltation of grace, when we can hold fast our grace
in the midst of Tentation and Opposition. As God sets a brand of Infamy upon
such as trespass more in the day of their distress, This is that King Ahaz,
says God, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. when his Conscience within was seared, as with an
hot iron, God sets a brand upon his Name without, as Malefactors are branded at
the Bar, that all may know them for Rogues and Thieves: So God sets a Mark of
Honor and Renown upon such as persevere in evil times, This is that Job, says
God, that holds fast his integrity in the worst of times; and therefore
deserves to be ranked among the best of men, none like him in all the earth,
Job 1.8. It is the honor of a Christian, to hold fast his integrity: It is his
honor here, and it shall be his honor to all Eternity; Rev. 2.10. Be thou
faithful to the death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. On the other side,
Oh what a disgrace it is to fall from grace! yea, if it be but from some
degrees of grace! We think it a great shame to be degraded, and so divested
from Titles of Honor: he that falls back, and proves Apostate, he degrades
himself, he un-Saint, himself. Christ has made us Kings and Priests to God his
Father; Rev. 1.6.
but he that falls back, suffers another to take his Crown, Rev. 3 11. Hold
fast that which thou have, that no man take thy Crown.

To backslide, is a dishonor,

To backslide a dishonor.
1. To the Persons themselves: Luke 14.30. This man began to build, and was not
able to finish: He was mocked for it as a foolish undertaker.

2. To the Cause, as if it were not worth the owning, or maintaining; as if we
were ashamed of Christ and his words, Mark 8.38.

3. It is a dishonor to others: All suffer for the Apostasy of some; therefore
David prays, Psalm. 69 6. Let not them that wait on thee, O God, be ashamed for
my sake. However, it is a disheartening to others; therefore we should say as
Nehemiah, Neh. 6.11. Should such a one as I fly? Should such a one as I
backslide? How many may I be a means of deterring from coming in? how many may
I force to backslide?

3. Examples of Apostasy and Gods Judgments.
3. Examples of Apostates, and Examples of Gods Judgments against them, should
make us look to our standing. How many that have shined like glorious lights in
the Firmament of the Church, have been swept down to the very earth by the tail
of the Dragon? Rev. 12.4. All these seem to cry to us in the language of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.12. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed
lest he fall. Cyprian, in his Sermon de Lapsu multorum, makes mention of one
that went up into the Capitol at Rome, to abjure and recant Christian Religion;
which he had no sooner done, but he was presently struck dumb, and so justly
punished in that very Member wherein he had offended, by making his wicked
Recantation. A woman also he speaks of, who being revolted from the Truth, yet
presumed, without Repentance, to thrust her self into the society of them that
received the Holy Supper of the Lord. But mark the hand of God upon her: No
sooner had she received the Sacrament, but as if she had received with it the
Sentence of death, trembling and stamping, she fell down dead. Sleid. l. 21.
The History of Francis Spira, a famous Italian Lawyer, is very notable: who
being at first very zealous in the Protestant Religion, yet complaints being
made against him to the Popes Legate, being then at Venice, he was persuaded to
recant his Religion: but shortly after he fell into a grievous sickness both of
Body and Mind; and though he had perfect understanding, could receive no
comfort from any Promises, but was overwhelmed with a certain fearful looking
for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries,
and so he died. Mr. Fox, Acts and Monuments, 2101. tells us of one Burton of
Crowland, who having swallowed the Principles of Christian Religion in King
Edwards days, when the King was dead, up came his Protestant Religion: But see
how God spued him out of his mouth, by a remarkable Providence. One day as he
was riding, a Crow flying over his head, let fall her excrements on his Nose
and Beard, so that the poisoned scent thereof so annoyed his stomach, that he
never left vomiting and cursing the Crow that poisoned him, and so within a few
days died desperately.

4. It concerns us to be diligent in laboring to hold out, because Satan's Rage
is more in these last days, 4. Satan his rage.
than formerly: Rev. 12.12. Woe to the earth, because the Devil is come down,
having great wrath, because he knows he has but a short time. Therefore we
should carefully attend to the Apostles Exhortation, Heb. 4.14. To hold fast
our profession, as a man would hold a precious thing, that another is pulling
and tugging from him, he takes fast hold, and gripes it hard; so should we hold
fast our Profession.

5. God his liking
5. God takes it well at our hands, when we persevere, and hold out in evil
times against all opposition. God takes special notice of such, Rev. 12 13. I
know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is; and thou
hold fast my Name, and have not denied my faith, even in those days, when
Antipas my faithful Martyr was slain. To hold fast, and hold out in such times,
and under such troubles, Rev. 14.
Here is indeed the faith and patience of the Saints. And this God takes
special notice of, as if a Master should take notice of a Servant's not
forsaking him, though he venture his life for him: So God seems to be affected
with such Servants.

6. Else no Christ no salvation.
6. Without Perseverance, we have no Christ: Heb. 3.14. We are made partakers of
Christ, if we hold the biginning of our confidence steadfast to the end. 2. No
Salvation, Heb. 10 ult. they that draw back, draw back to perdition: He that
draws back, destroys himself; he that perseveres, is saved. A man may be
drowned, when he comes within sight of the shore, as well as in the midst of
the Sea. Oh what a misery is it, to perish in the very haven! and yet how often
do Apostates do so? As it is not sin simply, but final perseverance in sin
without repentance, that damns the Soul: So it is not grace, or any good
received, but final perseverance in that good without Apostasy, that saves the
Soul.

Q. But I find my self exceeding apt to backslide: what means should I use,
that I might be able to hold out, and persevere in the faith?

Ans. 1. Be careful to make sure, that God is your God, Means of Perseverance.
that you may be able to say, He is my God in Christ: and then, Romans 8.15. 1.
Particular assurance.
Who shall separate us from the love of God in Jesus Christ? A man will not
easily part with that which is his own; much less when he can say, God is his.
Psalm. 48.14. This God is our God for ever and ever, and he will be our guide
even unto death. And that you may prize an interest in God, labor to see your
misery without him, Ephesians 2.1, 2, 3, 12. what a child of wrath, what a slave of
Satan, how without hope and help, whilst thou art without God! and then give up
your selves to him in Covenant through Jesus Christ: for without him, God is a
consuming fire; and therefore accepting of Jesus Christ, subscribe with your
hand unto the Lord, to become one of his: Isa. 44 5. I will be your God, and
you shall be my people, go both together. God will never fail nor forsake them,
that are in Covenant with him: But unto the ungodly God says, What have thou
to do to take my Covenant into thy mouth? Psalm. 50.16.

2. Set up in thy Soul a firm Resolution to cleave to God, 2. Res^lution of
cleaving to God.
as they, Dan. 3.16, 17. that whether God (whom they served) would deliver them
out of their danger or no, they were resolved to serve none but him. When the
Scales hang even, in aequilibrio, a little thing will cast it this way or that:
but if a great weight lies in one end, or it be fast nailed to a Pillar, it is
not easily stirred: So it is with our hearts, if they be different ad
oppositum, then a little thing will cast them, and weigh them down; but if they
be resolved in the ways of God, they will not easily be moved or removed.
Therefore, Acts 11.23. the Exhortation is given, That with full purpose of
heart we should cleave unto the Lord.

3. Be thus resolute in Gods strength, not in thine own. 3. Resolve in Gods
strength.
Peter at first was resolute, but it was in his own strength; therefore he fell
foully, though not finally: God let him see his own weakness. Therefore if thou
would be strong indeed, be sure to be strong in God, and in the power of his
might, Ephesians. 6 10. God is a and o, to show, that as the beginning of Grace is
from him: so our perseverance in Grace is from him also.

4. Good grounding.
4. He that would persevere to the end, must be sure to make a good beginning.
He that would have his building stand for ever, must be sure to lay a good
Foundation; he must be sure to be well grounded in the fundamental truths of
Religion: Col. 1 23. They must be well grounded and settled in the faith, that
would not be moved from the hope of the Gospel. They that would hold close to
the Truth, must be well grounded in the knowledge of it. A little error in the
foundation, makes a great error before you come to the top of the building:
And who are they that are led aside into so many and great errors in these
days, but such as were never well catechized? So that, however some of them
presume to be Teachers, themselves had need that one should teach them, which
be the first principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5 12. These are soon made a
prey to Atheists and Papists. When a cunning Jesuitical seducer shall come, 1.
With some colorable pretense of Scripture: 2. Some flourish of Authority from
the Ancients: 3. Glorious Titles of Apostolical Succession and Antiquity: 4.
Voluntary Humility of Fasting and Penance, Col. 2.23.
etc. not sparing the body: 5. Feigned Miracles, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. 6. Flattering
and fair speeches, Romans 16.18. 7. A Roman Fortitude, in suffering for their
Cause. I say, when seducing persons shall come in all this deceiveableness, how
shall a silly unstable Soul, that was never grounded in the knowledge of the
Fundamentals of Religion, withstand these assaults, or the like, from other
seducers? How easily are ignorant persons drawn to any novel opinion? As a
child is sooner cozened, than a man of parts: so such as are children and
novices in the Doctrine of Faith, will easily be tossed to and fro with every
wind of Doctrine.

5. Christians that would persevere, 5. Watching over one another.
should be careful not only to watch over themselves in particular, but to
watch over one another mutually, Heb 3.17. Exhort one another daily, while it
is called, To day, lest any of you be be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin. Where we may observe, 1. There is none, even the strongest in the flock,
but have need of this mutual help. 2. There is none so poor and contemptible,
but the care of their standing belongs to all, even to such Christians as are
most eminent. 3. Sin has so many ways and devices, whereby it is apt to
beguile and seduce us, that each particular person had need of more eyes than
his own upon him, more observers than himself alone; therefore he that would
stand and persevere, let him not slight this Ordinance.

6. Take heed of Unbelief or Misbelief; 6. Taking heed of Unbelief.
strive against it, pray against it, be humbled for it: for, as the just lives
by his Faith, the Apostate departs from the living God by his Unbelief, Heb.
3.12. As Faith unites the Soul to God; so Unbelief separates the Soul from God:
Unbebelief denies to God the honor of his Truth, Mercy and Goodness, and by
consequence robs the Soul of that comfort it might have in the application of
these Attributes by Faith.

7. 7. Examples of crowned Saints.
Look to the Examples of all the persevering and crowned Saints: Look to the
Cloud of Witnesses, Heb. 11. who all died in the faith. See the excellency of
Paul's Spirit, Acts 20.24. who was nothing moved with afflictions, neither
counted his life dear to himself, so he might finish his course with joy: and
see how comfortable you find him at the end of his race, 2 Timothy 4.7. having
fought a good fight, and finished his course, and kept the faith, and now
expecting his Crown: Especially look to Jesus Christ, the Author and Finisher
of our Faith, Heb. 12.2. This Example the Apostle in a special manner sets
before us, while he is Exhorting us to run with patience the race that is set
before us: So that he that would hold out to the end of his race, must not so
much look upon his discouragements, his own Corruption, Satan's Tentations, the
Worlds Oppositions; as upon his encouragements: his eye must be fixed on his
Jesus, with loving and longing looks; he must look upon him as the Author and
Finisher of his faith; as upon such a Jesus, who has not only purchased
Salvation it self, but also the grace of Faith, to lay hold on this Salvation;
and not only the grace of Faith, but Perseverance in this Faith to the end. He
is the Finisher, as well as the Author of our Faith. He must look upon him, as
upon his Pattern and Example; as one who does not only point out the way of
Perseverance, by his Directions and Commands, but even tread and trace it out
before us by his Example. Such as look upon Jesus as a Pattern in the work of
Perseverance, may safely look upon him as a Pattern in the Reward: as he had joy
set before him, so have we; and as he, for the hope of that joy, ran with
courage, so must we; as he ran with the Cross upon his back all the way, and in
particular, with the Cross of Shame, or shame of the Cross, so must we; as
Christ made light of all their Reproaches, despised their Despisings, shamed
their very Shame, as unworthy to be taken notice of, when put into the balance
against the glory that is to be revealed, so must we; as Christ overcame all at
length, and has now laid hold on all the joy and glory for which he ran, so
shall we also in due time: If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him,
2 Timothy 2.12. Because he lives, we shall live also, Joh. 14.19 Therefore he that
would be strengthened and enabled to persevere, he should be still looking to
Jesus Christ, that he may daily be more conformed to him.

Examination of truth of Faith by its pe^severing.
whether we have the true life of Grace, and true Faith, for then we shall
persevere. Joh. 8.31. If you continue in my words, then are you my Disciples
indeed. Some indeed fall from the truth, but they never were truly of the
Church, only tied to the Body, as wooden Legs, never living Members: 1 John
2.19. They went out from us, because they were not of us; if they had been of
us, they would have remained with us. Therefore examine, whether thou art a
true child of God, or no: a true child of God abides in the house for ever.
Joh. 8.
A true Christian is no changeling no Time-server in matter of Religion; his
Yea is Yea indeed, and his Nay is Nay (as 2 Cor. 1.17, 18.) He knows Christian
Religion is not a thing that a man may play fast and loose with, say and unsay,
do and undo, as times, and company, and occasions alter: No, it is Religi a
Religando, of binding a man fast to God, and his Principles. A man is then a
Christian, when his confidence in Christ is held steadfast to the end, Heb.
3.14. Examine therefore, if thou have such graces as do accompany Salvation,
such as are not common to hypocrites. An hypocrite may go far:

1. He may esteem the People of God a blessed People, How far an hypocrite may
go.
as Balaam did.

2. He may join himself to them, as Simon Magus did.

3 He may reform his outward conversation in many things, as Herod did.

4. He may in outward appearance be like a wise Virgin, have his Lamp, and make
a show with it, though he want oil.

5. He may have much knowledge, and excellent gifts of Preaching and Praying,
Mat. 7.22.

6 He may have some sweet taste and joy in the word of Truth, such as
Philosophers do find in their studies: for, the contemplation of every Truth,
brings with it naturally a delight; and the more eminent the Truth, the
greater is the delight.

Q. But what is wanting then? whence is it that such an one comes short of
Salvation?

Where an hypocrite comes short.
Resp. 1. An hypocrite never come up to delight in the whole Truth, in every
part of the Truth; When it is a piercing and searching word, a cutting word to
say then, Good is the word which the Lord has spoken. Herod did not so.
Therefore examine thy self, how impartial thou art in receiving the whole Truth
of God, and that in the love of it.

2. He does not desire grace as grace, but only out of a natural desire of
happiness, as Balaam: therefore consider how suitable a good is grace to thy
Soul. Art thou, as Isa. 55.1. thirsty, and is grace as Milk and Wine, to the
refreshing of thy Soul? There is not in hypocrites a Spiritual appetite to feed
upon Jesus Christ, to eat his flesh and drink his blood.

3. If thou would go beyond an hypocrite, there must be an unfeigned study,
not only to keep from external acts of sin, but to mortify all that is flesh
in us, with all the affections and lusts of it, Gal. 5.24. and to serve God in
the Spirit: This care is wanting in hypocrites

4. Thou must attend to do what thou do in obedience to the Word, that proved
Josiah a good man indeed, 2 Chronicles. 35.26. viz. His goodness according to that
which is written in the law of God.

5. Thy great study and aim must be in all thou do, to approve thy self to
God, to please God and not men, to serve God and not thy self, Gal. 1.10. If I
yet please men, I should not be the servant of Christ, Col 3.22, 23. even
servants in their meanest employments in serving their Masters, must not do
what they do as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart fearing God; and
whatever they do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men.

6. All thy Obedience to God, must spring from Faith working by love, Gal 5.6.
If sins be forgiven, all duties will spring from Love; the Soul loving much,
having much forgiven, Luke 7.47. In all these Particulars, hypocrites come
short, and therefore it is no wonder if they fall short at last, but he that in
these things is sincere, shall never be moved.

Obj. But what shall we say of David and Peter? what difference between these,
and Saul and Judas? Did not these fall away from the grace they had received?

Resp. There may be great intermissions in the actings of grace in a truly
regenerate man, in time of Tentation or Spiritual Desertion: yet he shall not
continue in that condition, but shall recover his fall by the restoring grace
of God: Psalm. 37.24. Though he fall, he shall not utterly be cast down, for the
Lord upholdeth him with his hand: Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear into their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

Of Thankfulness.
this should excite and stir us up to Thankfulness. If Adam had cause to be
thankful to God, for making him in his own Image, placing him in Paradise, and
giving him dominion over all creatures; how much more have the Faithful cause
to be thankful, who are instated in a better condition of happiness, than
either Adam in Paradise, or the Angels in Heaven before their Fall: For however
it is true, their condition was very happy and glorious, yet it was mutable,
they might fall, and fall they did; and we find by woeful experience to this
day, the mortal wounds and bruises that cleave to the Sons and Daughters of
Adam through his Fall. But God (I say) has instated the faithful in a better
condition, that though in themselves they are weak creatures, yet through his
provision for their security, they shall never totally fall from the grace of
Regeneration. And therefore, if we ought to be thankful for outward mercies of
health, wealth, liberty, peace, and the like, which at best are very fading,
like the flower of the field, (How soon may a man's health be turned into
sickness, wealth into poverty, liberty into bondage, and slavery and peace into
war?) How much more should our hearts be raised up in thankfulness for such
mercies, as are not only Spiritual, and therefore more excellent in their very
nature, but are also the sure mercies of David, unchangeable! But the sure
mercies of David are unchangeable, and therefore more excellent in their
continuance. A man would be thankful to a friend that would give him a
livelihood for seven years; much more to such a one that would freely settle
the perpetuity upon him and his Heirs for ever. How thankful then should we be
to that God, who freely bestows upon us not a livelihood only, but even life
it self. And what life? not of Nature only, but of Grace also; not Temporal,
but Eternal: Psa. 21 24. He asked life, and thou gave it him, even length of
days for ever and ever. We prize lives according to their duration; some
creatures, they say, are born, and die again the same day, and are therefore of
little account: But we prize those most, that continue longest. The long life
is a blessing of that Commandment, Ephesians. 6.
which is the first Commandment with promise. And it was a blessing of the
first Age of the World, where God graciously provided, that men should live
longer, because they were sown thinner: Therefore some lived seven hundred
years, some eight hundred, some nine hundred and odd; but at last it is said
of the best, and strongest, and longest of the Sons of Men, Et mortuus est,
that he died: That is the way of all flesh, in regard of natural life: But it
is not the way of all flesh, in regard of Spiritual life; Joh. 11.26. Whosoever
lives, and believes in me, shall never die: His Soul shall never die, though
his Body die. Fear not those that kill the Body, but are not able to kill the
Soul, Matthew. 10.18. they are not able to kill the Soul; no, nor are they able
to kill the grace of the Soul: Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead, which die in
the Lord. Therefore say with David, Oh let my Soul live, and it shall praise
thee.

Of encouragement concerning Perseverance.
That the just live by Faith the life of Perseverance, and shall persevere in
the grace and favor of God: Nothing shall separate from the love of Christ.

There are four main Discouragements incident to a Christian in his earthly
Pilgrimage.

1. The inconstancy of Creatures toward Creatures.

2. The Creatures inconstancy toward God

3. A man's weakness, compared with the strength of enemies opposing.

4. A man's own sinful Demerits, daily forfeiting all his Mercies.

To which add,

5. The uncertainty of future Events.

But this Doctrine, that the just lives by faith the life of Perseverance, is a
great Encouragement against all Discouragements.

First, The inconstancy of the Creature. 1. In the inconstancy of the Creature
in it self.
Job 6.15 Job complains, his friends had forsaken him like a deceitful brook,
that is full in raining times, when there is no want of water; and empty and
dry in Summer heat, or when there is greatest need. For a man shall have many
friends, so long as God rains down showers of blessings from heaven upon him:
but if God once search him with the fiery trial of some such Judgment, as
dries up all his substance, he shall hardly find a drop of comfort from such,
as in time of prosperity did run in a full current of kindness toward him.
Well, suppose it be so, yet this is great Encouragement to a poor Believer,
when he can thus reason; Well, though my friends leave me upon earth, yet Faith
assures me, Heb. 13.
I have a friend in heaven that will not forsake me, who does usually let out
most of himself to his people, when they have the least of Creature Comforts;
he delights to visit his people in Egypt; in the fiery Furnace. His Servant
John Baptist in the Isle of Patmos; Paul and Silas in the Prison, when they had
little or no comfort from the Creature? And what is Heaven, but the Presence
God? Where there is most absence of the Creature, viz. in Heaven, where there
is neither marriage, nor giving in marriage; neither buying, nor selling, nor
possessing, nor rejoicing in the earthly Comforts of this life; yet there is
joy enough for all that, when there is no Creature-comfort at all: 1 Cor. 15.
God himself shall be all in all. And if the Presence of God it self alone,
shall be enough to make Heaven, when all the world shall be left, am I not
bound to believe Gods Person is enough upon earth, if all Creatures should
forsake me? If I can live by Faith the Life of Perseverance, in respect of
influence from God, what if I do not live by Sense the Life of Perseverance, in
respect of influence from Creatures? The former is Encouragement enough of it
self.

2. Creature-inconstancy toward God.
Secondly, The second great Discouragement, and indeed greater than the former,
is this, The Creatures inconstancy toward God. The Creatures goodness, is as
the morning dew, Hos 6.4. that is soon gone. O how quickly are they turned out
of the way, says God, Judge 2.17. Peter is ready to swear Allegiance to his
Master, and as ready almost to forswear with the same breath; and do not think
that thou have a better heart than Peter had: for, as in water, face answers to
face; so the heart of man to man, Prove. 27.19. One face is not more like
another, represented in water or in glass, then one man's heart is naturally
like another's: All are very fickle, and very inconstant in the love and
service of God. Now this is sometimes a great Discouragement to a gracious Soul.

Says such a Soul, I have such a base backsliding heart, I shall never be able
to hold out to the end: what will become of me?

For thy answer, Beware of Discouragement: though thou art unconstant and
unbelieving, yet God is faithful, and he has promised to make thee constant
and faithful, or at least to heal thy unconstancy and unbelief: 2 Timothy 2.13. If
we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself? What? if we
believe not at all? that is not the meaning of it: For he gives Faith, when he
intend Mercy; but if there be intermissions and interruptions in our Faith or
at least in the activity of our Faith, yet God is faithful to heal our
backslidings, and to love us freely, Hos. 14.4. And this is a great
Encouragement, Gods constancy in Covenant, opposed to our fickleness and
inconstancy: He will so put his fear into our hearts, as we shall never utterly
depart from him, Jerem. 32.40.

Thirdly, A third Discouragement, 3. In our own weakness.
is our own Weakness, as well as our own Inconstancy: yea, were we never so
constant in our resolutions, yet how weak are we in our performances? We are
weak, our enemies strong, our trials many and great; and this is a great
Discouragement to a gracious heart, that howsoever the Spirit is willing, yet
the flesh is weak, that should God leave us to ourselves, we should fall away
from him every day: in which respect, Christ commands us, to watch and pray,
lest we enter into temptation. Mat 26.41.

Well, be it so, that a Christian is so weak on the one side, and his enemies
so strong on the other, yet Faith administers this notable encouragement, in
the sight and sense of all our enemies and greatest infirmities. 1 Cor. 10.13.
But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you
are able to bear, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape: and
so the weakest believer, if a true believer, shall be kept by the power of God,
1 Pet. 1.
2 Timothy 1.12. I know in whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is
able to keep that which I have committed to his trust against that day.

Fourthly, The fourth Discouragement, 4. Against sinful distempers.
is a man's own sinful Distempers, daily forfeiting all his Mercies. All our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. 94.6. There is so much earthliness in
our Spirits, so much vanity in our Conversation, so much deadness in our
Duties, that we do enough every day to deserve, that God should strip us of his
grace, and cast us out of his Presence for ever. Well, be it so, there is the
encouragement, Faith assures us, though we deserve no better, yet Christ
deserved better; he has deserved, that God should continue his love and favor
to us to the end. This he has merited, and this he prays for, That they may be
kept for ever, in the Name of his heavenly Father, as many as are given him,
Joh. 17.11. And this Christ is able to save to the utmost all those that come
to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7.25.

5. Uncertainty of future Events. 1 Cor. 10.
The fifth Discouragement, is, The uncertainty of future Events. True, a
believer may say, There has hitherto no Temptation taken me, but such as is
common to man; other men have been in as bad a condition as I am in: but alas!
I do not know what may befall me for time to come! It may be I may be afflicted
and tempted, as never man was; It may be I may fall into such sins, as yet
never any of Gods people have fallen into, and it may be such Judgments may
befall me, as never yet befell any of Gods people; and may I not then forsake
God, and God forsake me? Who can tell what may bef^l a man for the time to
come? I can tell what is past, but who can tell what is to come? Is not this
the language of the Scriptures? Eccles. 11.
Eccles. 11.2, 5. For thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth: As
thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, nor how the bones do grow in
the womb of her that is with child; even so thou know not the works of God,
who makes all. As thou know not what is the way of the Spirit; that is,
what is the way of the wind, as some interpret it; Joh. 3.
Thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, nor
whither it goes: Or, as others interpret it, Thou know not what is the way
of the Spirit of man; that is, thou know not what are his thoughts, what is
in his mind, God only is the searcher of the heart; the Devil himself cannot
know the heart of man, but by some external expressions; much less then can
thou know the mind of God, what God means to do with thee the next year, or
the next day: which is very elegantly set forth by another similitude, Thou
know not how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child; even
so thou know not the work of God, who makes all. Which is as much as to
say, If thou do not know what so nearly concerns thy self, thy very natural
being, and that whereof thou may be (under God) either the natural or
material cause; how much less then can thou understand that which is more
remote and spiritual? If thou do not know what is in the natural womb, for
that is laid up amongst the Secrets of God, Psa. 139.15, 16. Only thine eyes,
says David, did see my substance, when I was made in secret; How then shall
thou know what is in the Womb of the next year, or of the next day? for such a
phrase you read of in the Scripture, Prove. 27.1. Boast not thy self of to
morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth: Jam. 4.13. Go to now,
ye that say, To day, or to morrow we will go into such a City, and continue
there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain: whereas ye know not what shall be
on the morrow: You know not what shall appear to come forth of the womb of the
morning. Gods purposes from eternity, are the conceptions of all productions of
Providence, that are as it were the births of several days and years. Our
purposes oftentimes (and that without God) are false conceptions, they bring
forth a lie: But Gods purposes are ever true conceptions, they never miscarry.
Prove. 19.21. There are many devices in a man's heart, but the counsel of the
Lord, that shall ever stand. But alas! how shall I know what is the mind and
counsel of God, and the way he will go in? How shall I know the womb of the
morning? I little know what birth the next morning may travel with; what Sin,
or what Judgment it may bring forth. It may be, when I shall say, Peace,
peace, then may sudden distress come upon me, as travail upon a woman with
child, that I shall no way escape. True indeed, if thou were an unbeliever, it
might be so; but if thou art a true believer, thou have a Promise for future
Events, as thou have Security for what is past: and that, both in respect of
sin and affliction.

First, for Sin: Whereas thou say, It Is possible I may fall into such sins,
as may for ever make a separation between God and my Soul.

I say, No, it is impossible: let this be spoken to thy comfort, 1 John 3.9.
Thou shall never fall into the Unpardonable sin, because the seed of God
remains in thee; thou shall never sin that sin unto death, 1 John 3.9.

2 Obj. But it may be some sore Affliction may make a separation, I know not
how it is possible I should hold out, in extremity of Famine, or the cruelty of
the Sword, or some such Persecution, as it may be, was never yet invented. What
do I know what is the womb of the morning?

I answer, There is no new thing under the Sun, Eccles. 1.9, 10. What ever
falls out, thou have a Promise for thy Security, it shall not separate thee
from God, Romans 8.35. nay, that very Providence is thine, and appointed for thy
good. Things to come are ours, as well as present and past, 1 Cor. 3.22. Think
seriously upon that golden precious Promise, more precious than gold that
perishes, if thou have but a hand of Faith to receive it; he that can receive
it, let him receive it. Heb. 13.5. I will never fail thee, nor forsake thee.
Come what can come, here is a Promise to lean upon, Luke 16.17. Psalm. 9.10.
that will never fail: The heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall
not pass away. Those that seek God sincerely, shall never be forsaken: Our own
experience, and the experience of Gods people all the world over, in all
places, and in all ages, will make good this Promise, They trusted in God, and
were helped; Psa. 22.4, 5.
Those called upon God, and were delivered; yea, Gods answers have exceeded
their desires and prayers: Ephesians. 3.20.
and if God will never forsake us, we shall not ^^rsake him.

Obj. But you will say, How is this true? Gods people have complained in all
ages, Why have thou forsaken us, Psalm. 2^.1. Psalm. 77.9.
O Lord? why have thou forgotten us? Were all these deceived? was it their sin
thus to complain? or did this complaint spring from the weakness of their
Faith? Possibly it might be so in the Saints, you say, but it could not be so
in Christ: yet Christ himself complains, My God, Mat. 27.46.
my God, why have thou forsaken me? Never did any more seek to God, and in that
hour, when he had most need of help; and never did any more complain of Gods
forsaking of him. And though God has not forsaken me, I know not what he may
do for time to come.

Ans. For the clearing of this doubt, Of Gods forsaking.
we shall propound to you several Considerations:

First of all, there may be a forsaking in appearance. 1. In appearance only.
As there may be a real forsaking, so there may be a forsaking in appearance;
As there may be the real presence of a thing, when it is not visible and
apparent. Many things have a real existence, when they give us no manifest
evidence of that their existence: God may be really present, when he seems to
be absent. For example, the Beauty of Christ is real, he is altogether lovely,
the fairest of ten thousand: but it is not manifest to the greatest part of the
world. Isa. 53.2. He has no form nor comeliness, there is no beauty in him
(say they) that we should desire him. The Comforts of a Christian are real, but
not always visible; and therefore it is called, The hidden Manna, Rev. 2.17.
The Soul of Man, and the Deity, are real, but not visible. It Is one of Gods
Properties, to be Invisible. The Winds have a real existence, as we see plainly
by their powerful operations: we have much ado to bear up our Sails against
them sometimes, and yet cannot see them. The Sun it self is so visible that it
makes all things else visible; and yet when it is under a Cloud, though we then
see all other things by the light of it, yet we cannot see the Sun it self. As
in Paul's dangerous voyage, neither Sun nor Star appeared for many days
together, Acts 27 20. The rich Mines of Silver and Gold, and the streams of
precious Rivers, they run sometimes under the earth many miles, and no eye
takes notice of them. How near was Hagars Well of Water, Gen: 21.19.
and yet she saw it not, till God had opened her eyes? Peter was really
delivered out of Prison by the Angel, but for a good while together, while he
looked upon Creatures, he thought it had not been true, but that he had seen a
Vision, or Representation of such a matter, Acts 12.9. The Mountain where
Elisha stood, was full of Horses and Chariots, but his Servant saw no such
matter, till he was faint to pray, Lord open his eyes, that he may see, 2 King.
6.17. And doubtless it is thus in Spiritual respects. There may be many strong
influences from God upon the Souls of his Servants, which they perceive not;
many eminent supports in their trials, which they take no notice of: They take
notice of the hand that cast them down, but they do not take notice of the hand
that holds them up. Job took notice of Gods afflicting hand, but he did not
take so much notice of Gods supporting hand, till the affliction was over. And
so David, Psa. 31.22. I said, I am cut off from before thine eyes. He speaks
like a man forsaken of God: but what follows? Nevertheless, thou heardest the
voice of my supplications, when I cried unto thee. Observe, God was nearer than
he was aware of. As Jacob said of his solitary journey to Padan-Aram, Surely
the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not, Genesis 28.16. God is nearer to his
Servants many times, than they are aware of: so as they may say with Job, Job
9.11. Lo, he goes by me, and I see him not; he passes on also, but I perceive
him not. The poor child cries after the Mother, What shall I do for my
Mother! Oh my Mother, my Mother, what shall I do for my Mother! And it may be
the Mother stands behind the back of the child, only she hides herself, to
try the affection of the child: So the poor Soul cries after God and
complains, Oh my Father, my Father! where is my heavenly Father! Has he
forgotten to be gracious? Psalm. 77.9.
Has he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure? when God is nearer than
they think for, Zech. 12. Romans 8.
shining upon them in a Spirit of grace and supplications, with sighs and
groans that cannot be uttered. Thus the gracious woman Mary Magdalen, she seeks
after Christ, she enquires, she cries after him, and weeps, My dear Savior, my
dear Lord and Master, he is taken out of the Sepulcher, Ioh. 16.20.
and I know not where they have laid him. Thus she complains to the Disciples,
and thus she complains to the Angels, when Christ stood at her very back, and
overheard all: nay, when she turned her about, and saw him, yet at first she
did not know him; nay, when he spoke to her, and she to him, yet she knew him
not, but thought he had been the Gardener, Joh. 20.11. Thus it is with many a
gracious Soul though God speaks home to their hearts in his Word, and they
speak to him by prayer, and they cannot say, but the Spirit helps their
infirmities; yet they complain for want of his Presence, as if there were
nothing of God in them.

Obj. But are all such complaints of Gods people mere mistakes? Did they not
complain upon good ground? Psalm. 44.9. Thou have cast us off, and go not
forth with our Armies.

Ans. Therefore by propounding a second Consideration, That there are many
times real forsakings by God, 2. In temporal respects only.
and not imaginary only: but then it is rather in Temporal, than Spiritual
respects. For look as on the one side Gods influence may be great in Temporals,
when he dries up the streams of special Mercies; men may have fat bodies, and
fat estates, whilst they have lean Souls: so on the other side, Gods influence
may be great in Spirituals, when he dries up the streams of Temporal Mercies.
Gods people may have thriving Souls, when they have least estates in the world.
Jam. 2.5, 6. Hearken, my beloved brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this
world rich in faith? Yea, but yet sometimes in a temptation they are ready to
complain of Gods forsaking of them, if he do but forsake them in some outward
and temporal respect: They are ready to reason as Gideon did, Judge. 6.13. when
the Angel said, The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valor: Ah! says
Gideon, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this befaln us? Has not the
Lord forsaken us, whilst he gives us up into the hands of the Midianites? So
reason another sort, The Lord has forsaken me, or else I should never be so
poor! Surely the Lord has forsaken me, says another, or else I should never
be thus bowed down with continual sickness. Surely the Lord has forsaken me,
says another, or else I should never be so friendless; Lovers and friends have
thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into darkness. And this was Jobs
argument, he confesses God was sometimes gracious to him, but now he looks at
him as an enemy: And why so? because he was under his afflicting hand; he had
stripped him of outward Mercies, Job 13.24. And this was Naomi's argument, Ruth
1.20. she said to her Neighbors, Call me not Naomi, but call me Mara, for the
Lord has dealt very bitterly with me: I went out full, but the Lord has
brought me home again empty. But what though she came home empty of temporal
blessings, so long as she came home full of spiritual grace? she had little
cause to complain of hard dealing on Gods part. But I say, Gods people are apt
to complain in cause of Temptation, if God do but withdraw himself in some
particular and temporal respects, they are ready to say out, God has wholly
and utterly forsaken them in all respects.

Obj. But will God only forsake his people in temporal good things, and not in
spirituals also? May not the Ordinances be taken from them, or they from the
Ordinances? as doubtless many of Gods faithful ones were, when they were
banished into Babylon.

Ans. I answer therefore, 3. Gods forsaking in spirituals, viz. Means.
God sometimes forsakes his people in spiritual good things; but then it is
rather in outward spiritual good things, than in those that are inward. It Is
true, God took his Ordinances from his people, when he removed them into
Babylon; but he did not take away his Spiritual, nor his gracious Presence from
such as were faithful. It is a Promise God makes to such as were banished from
the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 11.16. Although I have cast them far off amongst the
heathen; and although I have scattered them amongst the countries, yet will I
be to them a little Sanctuary in the countries where they shall come. As if God
should have said, Though they want the ordinary Sanctuary, and the ordinary
means of Teaching, yet I will be a Sanctuary to them my self, and teach them by
my Spirit: they shall not want inward Spiritual Mercies, though they want the
outward Means of Grace.

Obj. But does God forsake his people in outward Spiritual Mercies, 4.
Forsaking in spiritual comforts, not grace
and does he not forsake them in those that are inward also? Why else do they
so much complain of their Souls and Spirits, Psalm. 77.3. I complained, and my
Spirit was overwhelmed.

Ans. Therefore he may also forsake in regard of inward Spiritual Mercies; but
then, it is more in their inward Spiritual Comforts, than in Spiritual Graces.
Some Christians indeed have more Comforts, but less Graces, as in the day of
their first espousals to Jesus Christ: for that is a time of love and
rejoicing, Jer. 2.2. I remember, says God, the love of thine espousals. But
some Christians have more Graces, and less Comfort, as strong grown Christians,
Heb. 2.
whom the Captain of their Salvation puts upon hard services, for the trial of
their Christian fortitude. Psalm. 44.17. All this is come upon us, yet have we
not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in the Covenant: our heart is
not turned back, neither have our steps turned from thy way, though thou have
sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us with the shadow of
death. Indeed, the face of Dragons, and the face of Death, was very terrible;
but yet the hiding of Gods lovely face, was much more terrible, ver. 24. But
yet for all that, though God did withold their Spiritual Comforts, yet he did
not withold their Spiritual Graces; for they had never more strength of
grace, than when they were able to grapple with Dragons, and with Death it self.

Obj. But does God forsake his people in respect of Spiritual Comforts? Is it
not said, That such as have the Comforter once, he shall abide with them for
ever, Joh. 14.16. If that be so, why then should any believer be dejected?
Therefore I fear I never had true comfort.

Answ. That Is true, the Comforter abides for ever, but not in the Act of
Comforting, John 16.7, 8. I will send the Comforter to you, says Christ: What
then? Must they expect nothing but comfort, so soon as ever the Spirit is come?
No, there is an act of Conviction from the Spirit in the first place, Note.
When he is come, he will convince the world of sin. The office of the Spirit,
is to empty us of our selves, to humble us, and to convince us, as well as
comfort us: All these are acts of the Comforting Spirit, though not acts of
Comfort. They are all such acts as tend to comfort, and are conducible to that
end. As searching the Wound by the Surgeon, and stirring the humors by the
Physician, are conducible to the act of healing, though they are troublesome
and painful for the present. Neither does God always forsake his people, at
such times as he does withdraw their Spiritual comforts. Note.
Did God forsake Christ upon the Cross? or does he forsake Christians in their
mourning condition? No, surely, he is most in them oftentimes by the graces of
his Spirit, when he is least in them by the comforts of it.

Obj. But does not God forsake his people in their Graces, as well as in their
Comforts? and do not Gods people complain for want of grace, as well as for
want of comfort? Does not David pray, Psalm. 51. Take not thy holy Spirit from
me; as well as Restore to me the joy of thy Salvation. The resolving of this
doubt is needful, for the better clearing of the Life of Perseverance, and for
the better encouragement against all discouragements of this nature, concerning
Gods forsaking of us, or our forsaking of him.

Ans. I answer therefore, 5. Forsaking in graces not absolutely necessary.
God may withdraw from his people such graces as are called accessory graces,
but not such graces as are absolutely necessary. We call such graces necessary,
as tend to the very being of a Christian, and without which he is no Christian
at all; as Faith in Jesus Christ, and so Justification, and the Spirit of
Adoption: In these God will never forsake his people, 1 John 3.9. Now accessory
graces, we call such as are added to these, for the well-being of a Christian,
without which, he cannot so well act his part, as otherwise he might do. As for
example: Though a Christian have Faith, and the Spirit of Adoption in some
measure, yet he cannot so well discharge his duty, unless he be zealous in
believing, zealous in praying, zealous in preaching: But now in these,
sometimes God does forsake his people, when his people for sake him, by falling
from their first love, and from their first degree of zeal, Gal. 4.15. But God
does never forsake his people so far, as to suffer them to fall altogether from
those necessary graces, which tend to the very being of a Christian. A man
indeed may lose Aptitudinem ad Regnum, but not Jus ad Regnum; he may lose his
fitness for his present entrance into the heavenly Kingdom; his Lamp may want
some trimming, but he can never lose his right to the Kingdom, because at the
worst he has some oil in his Lamp: Justification, and Adoption, and the Spirit
of Regeneration abide for ever. These graces necessary to Salvation, shall
never be taken away.

Thus you may see, in how many respects God may be said to forsake his people,
and how not.

Obj. Love is a necessary grace, and yet may be lost, Rev. 2.4. Therefore to
all these Considerations, we shall add one more, that is this, All these
forsakings we have spoken of, are but

Ans. All forsaking, but gradual and momen^any.
First, Gradual, in respect of their Measure.

Secondly, Momentany, in respect of their Duration; which we ground upon that
place, Isa. 54.7, 8. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great
mercies will I gather thee: In a little wrath I hid my self from thee for a
moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord
thy Redeemer.

Q. But why is it said, God has forsaken his people in a little wrath, and for
a moment?

Ans. In a little wrath, because he suffers not his whole displeasure to arise,
he forsakes them not totally, therefore in a little comparatively.

1. Compared with their deserts, Ezra 9.13. Thou have punished us less than our
iniquities deserve. It was little in regard of our deserts.

2. And secondly, little in regard of others. Others shall suck out the dregs
of that Cup, whereof they shall but sip, to let them but taste what they have
escaped by the sufferings of Christ.

Secondly, For a moment, because not finally; as not totally, so not finally.
What are the sufferings of Gods people upon earth, to the suffering of his
enemies in hell? Alas! they are but momentany, if compared with their joys in
heaven, not worth the speaking of: These light afflictions, that are but for a
moment, Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17.
work for us a far more excelling and eternal weight of glory.

Obj. But why does God forsake his people so far as we have heard, though it be
but by trials temporally? It may seem to be a great interruption to the Life of
their Consolation.

Ans. No, it is for the good of his people, and not for their hurt. Indeed he
does it in much compassion to their Souls.

Q. But you may say, What good is it to their Souls?

Ans. Much every way, because it prevents a world of evils:

1. For God forsakes us, that we may not forsake God. Reasons of Gods forsaking.
As the Mother leaves the child for a time, and hides her self, when she is
about to go into a Fair or Market, 1. 1. For prevention of evil.
that the child may cry after her, and cleave the faster to her all the day
after: whereas otherwise, she may lose it in a crowd. Thus God forsakes his
people for a time, that they may not forsake him for ever. Experience sometimes
of Gods withdrawing himself, does teach Gods people, That they cannot live
without him, had they Mountains of Wealth, of Honor, of Natural Strength to
live upon. Psalm. 30.6. I said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved; Thou
Lord, by thy favor, have made my Mountain to stand strong: What follows? Thou
did turn thy face from me, and I was troubled: And what of that? Why, then I
cried to thee, O Lord, and unto thee, Lord, I made my supplication. Then he
cries after God again and again, and cleaves faster to him, than ever he did
before.

2. God forsakes us, that he himself may not forsake us; he forsakes us one
way, that he may not forsake us another; he forsakes us in lesser matters, that
he may not forsake us in greater: And it is the end that is all in all, and
that gives denomination in every action. Therefore Gods forsaking, upon the
matter, is no forsaking; nay, all the withdrawings of himself, tend to the
clearer manifestation of himself. Indeed, Saul gave Michal his daughter to
David, that she might be a snare to him: But God will not give his servants
some things, lest they should be a snare to them: He denies them their desires,
and so far he forsakes them; he forsakes them in appearance, that he may not
forsake them indeed; he forsakes in Temporal things, that he may not forsake
them in Spirituals; he forsakes them in their Comforts, that he may not forsake
them in their Graces; he forsakes them in their accessory graces, that he may
not forsake them in necessary graces: and to conclude, he forsakes them in a
little wrath, and for a little time, that he may not forsake them wholly, and
for ever. Therefore God least of all forsakes his people, when he forsakes them.

2. For confirmation of good.
As it prevents evil, so it confirms Gods people in that which is good; it
quickens and strengthens their graces.

1. Their Confidence in God, and their Diffidence in themselves. Christ left
Peter for a time to trust to himself; but after that Peter had such experience
of his own weakness, he will never more boast, that he loves Christ more than
all the world besides. It is well, if I can say in Gods strength, Ioh. 20.
Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee.

2. Self-abhorrence; loving of our selves, we are apt to make our selves our
own Gods, to set our Reason above his Word, and our Wills above his Will:
Therefore there is no way for God to set up himself in us but to pull down our
selves in our selves, and that is by his withdrawing.

3. Crying after God, and longing for his Presence, Hos. 5. last. When God
hides himself, his people will seek him early. In this life, one while God
hides himself, anoother while he manifests himself, and his hiding prepares for
manifestation. Whilst we are in the body, we are not fit for constant
manifestations of God to our Souls. In Heaven, there shall be perpetual light,
and no night; but in this life, in Spiritual respects, there is a mixture of
day and night, Zech. 14.7. But it shall be one day, which shall be known to the
Lord, not day nor night, neither perfect day, nor perfect night, that we may
long and cry after God.

4. A cleaving closer to God. When Christ had withdrawn himself, and the Spouse
had hold on him again, she held him faster than ever before, Cant. 3.4. I held
him, and would not let him go.

5. A clearing of God. Oh, says a Soul, if God forsake me, it is just; for I
have forsaken him days without number. Thus David clears God, when he forsook
him, Psalm. 51.4. that thou might be just when thou speak, and clear when
thou judge. Therefore, though God forsake his people in some sense, yet in
the main, he never forsakes them; and if he never forsake us, we shall never
forsake him: and this is great encouragement, against the greatest
discouragements we can meet with in our Christian course.

Thus have you heard how the just lives by Faith the Life of Conservation.

BRANCH VII. IN THE LIFE of FAITH IN SANCTIFICATION; VIZ. CONSOLATION.
WE come now to the last, which is the Life of Consolation; which God makes
the sweet closure of all the rest: and indeed, Christ reserves the best wine
till last. Ioh. 2.
The Devil feeds his followers with sweet Comfits at first, but he gives them a
deadly Pill at last: But Christ gives the bitter at first, and the sweet at
last. At the last, the just lives by Faith the Life of Consolation. You have
heard how the just lives by Faith the Life of Justification, in laying hold on
the righteousness of Christ, and making it his own. You have heard also how he
lives by Faith the Life of Sanctification, whereby the believing Soul draws
virtue from Christ; and that either Renewing Fructifying Mortifying Quickening
Increasing Confirming Comforting
Virtue: So he lives the Life of Renovation. Fructification. Mortification.
Vivification. Augmentation. Conservation, or Perseverance. Consolation.


So that we are come to the last, to the highest Stair on this side Heaven. The
just goes on so far from strength to strength, and from faith to faith, and
from life to life, till at the last, with great delight, he sits down under the
shadow of Jesus Christ, and his fruit is sweet unto his taste, Cant. 2.2. He
lives by Faith the Life of Consolation; he is a true Disciple of his heavenly
Master; he has taken all his Degrees in the School of Christ; his Grace has
past from the Life of Justification, to the Life of Sanctification; and herein
from the Life of Renovation, to the Life of Fructification; from the Life of
Fructification, to the Life of Mortification; from the Life of Mortification,
to the Life of Vivification; from the Life of Vivification, to the Life of
Augmentation; from the Life of Augmentation, to the Life of Conservation; from
the Life of Conservation, to the Life of Consolation: and now he is as high as
he can go, till he enter into Heaven it self. Yea, the Life of Consolation is a
piece of Heaven, like the the sheet in Peter's Vision, let down to the earth:
and so the just in believing, is transformed from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.
as by the Spirit of our God. He lives by Faith the Life of Consolation. And
indeed, this is the proper use and effect of Faith, to rejoice the heart;
though not always an immediate effect, especially to our sense and feeling; yet
we may safely say, The seed of Peace, and the seed of Joy, is sown in the
heart, so soon as ever a man believes. Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown for the
righteous, and joyful gladness for the upright in heart; though it may be he
reaps the full Harvest many a year after. There is first the sprouting, and
then the blade, and then the ear, and after that the full Corn in the ear, Mar.
4.28. And look as it is in the rising of the Sun, though there be light at the
first in some measure, yet there is but a little light, and less heat, in
comparison of that which follows: So in the first manifestations of the Sun of
Righteousness to the Soul, there is some light of knowledge, and some heat of
comfort at the very first, but little in comparison of that which shall be: And
therefore the just lives by Faith, in expectation of a glorious Noontide of
Peace and joy to follow after; and in the mean time, the more he increases his
Faith, the more he increases his Joy. You may easily see it in your selves and
others. It is possible a person may be both justified and sanctified; he may
live both these lives, and yet for the present he may be much to seek in his
comfort, in his own sense and apprehension; he may be in sad, and as it were in
a dead condition, for want of comfort; and therefore in due time, by the
exercise of Faith, God adds to both the former, the Life of Consolation, which
is more properly called Life. Indeed it is the very Life of our lives: for what
is life without comfort, but a living death? When Adam had tasted of the
forbidden fruit, he did not die presently, if we take it in a strict sense; but
he was made subject to all diseases, and all kind of miseries, which is all
one as if he had been dead: it is a dying daily, 1 Cor. 15.31. Whereas on the
other side comfort and joy, is called Life in Scripture phrase; they are used
promiscuously, sometimes Life is put for Joy, and Joy is put for Life, as if
they were all one: Psalm. 30.5. In thy favor is life; heaviness may endure for
a night, but joy comes in the morning. All one, as if he had said, Life comes
in the morning, according to the former expression, In thy favor is life. The
Philosophers have a Position; Nec voluptas sine vita, nec vita sine voluptate:
Pleasure cannot be without life, nor life without some kind of pleasure. And
it is true in Divinity, he only deserves the name of a living man, who injoys
some comfort in his life. And indeed, Eternal Life is nothing else but Eternal
Joy: For otherwise, the wicked shall live eternally, if we take the word in the
largest sense; but their Eternal Life, is called Eternal Death, because they
live not in Joy, but Misery. So that it is clear, to live, most properly, is to
live comfortably: 1 Thessalonians. 1.3 Now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord. We
live, how is that? Did not the Apostle live both the life of Nature and the
life of Grace, whether the Thessalonians should stand or fall? Without all
question he did: but his meaning is, Now we live comfortably, if ye stand fast
in the Lord: which life, is only worth the name of a life. So that when it is
said, The just shall live by Faith; the meaning is, he shall live a sweet and
comfortable life, whatever his outward troubles may be; he shall not want sweet
supports and comforts within; he shall, even then, live by his Faith. And that
this is the sense of the Text in the latitude of it, seems to be clear by the
opposite member; as the Life of Gods People is opposed to the Life of the
Caldeans (their enemies) and so the Joy of the one to the Joy of the other.
Their enemies have a kind of superficial flashing joy, arising from the
immoderate use or abuse of the Creature; and this joy tickles them, or puffs
them up for the present. In which respect, the Caldean is compared to a drunken
man, who, you know, thinks himself the only merry man in the world; he is
merry as Cup and Cann: while the spirit of the Wine is in him, and his heart is
lifted up, he thinks there is none so merry as himself: But behold his heart
that is thus lifted up, is not right in him; or, as some expound it, it is not
quiet in him; he has no true peace, or solid joy, but even as it is with a
drunken man, it may be the next morning, when the spirit of Wine is gone, his
heart sinks down, as Nabals did, as heavy and as dead as a stone; and therefore
his heart that is thus lifted up with carnal joy, is not quiet, it is not right
But the Just shall live by his faith; that is to say, He shall live
comfortably, as the strength of the opposition does necessitate the sense; he
shall live comfortably in the midst of troubles, as the other lives
troublesomely in the midst of comforts. For as an unbeliever has inward
troubles, and unquietness of spirit in the midst of all outward comforts; so a
believer has inward comforts, in the midst of all outward troubles. Be his
condition what it will be, or what it can be in other respects, yet the just
shall rejoice: 2 Cor. 6.9.
As sorrowing, says the Apostle, yet always rejoicing. And what resolves this
Riddle, but the Mystery of Faith? For the just lives by Faith the Life of
Consolation.

For Method, we shall first prove it, That the just does live by Faith the Life
of Consolation, and give Reasons for it.

Two Propositions.
First, why God will have the just to live the Life of Consolation: and

Secondly, why he is said to live this Life by Faith, and then we shall
endeavor to apply it.

Propos. 1. That the just lives the Life of Consolation.
1. The just does live the Life of Consolation. Comfort is the proper Portion of
Gods People: Isa. 40. Comfort ye, comfort ye me people, says your God; speak
ye comfortably to Jerusalem. God commands his people to speak comfortably to
his own People. But he never commands his People to preach comfort to the
wicked, whilst they remain so: Isa. 57. ult.
no, There is no peace to the wicked, says my God. And God complains of such
Ministers, as make sad the heart of the righteous, and strengthen the hands of
the wicked, by Preaching Peace and Comfort to them, whilst they continue in
their sins, Ezekiel 13.22. because with lies ye have made the hearts of the
righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the
wicked, that he should not return from his wicked ways, by promising him life:
for, True joy is the Portion of the just; The just lives the Life of Consolation

2. He lives this Life by Faith: Propos. 2. The just lives the Life of
Consolation by his Faith.
As his Faith does Justify, so his Faith does Comfort him; not originally, but
instrumentally: It is the Conduit-pipe of Comfort, as well as of Grace. The
just live by Faith the Life of Consolation: God gives faithful men leave to be
cheerful; Psalm. 5.11. Let all those that put their trust in God, rejoice; yea,
let them shout for joy. Nay, he commands them to be cheerful, Luke 8.48. And he
said unto her, Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole; go
in peace. Mark, he commands her to be of good comfort; and why? not so much
because she was whole, as because Faith had healed her; and so she had inward
peace, as well as outward healing. Thence it is, that Joy and Faith are usually
coupled together in Scripture, Phil. 1.25. [and joy of faith] It is called, The
Joy of faith, as if all true Joy did come from Faith: 1 Pet. 1.8. In whom
believing, says the Apostle, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of
glory. Mark, when they were full of afflictions, and full of temptations, as
appears by the connection, yet they were full of glorious joy: And how came that
to pass, but by virtue of their Faith? In whom believing, ye rejoice, etc.
That Is the reason, why the Apostle would pray for the increase of the Peoples
joy, when he prays for the increase of their Faith. Romans 13.13. Now the God of
hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope,
through the power of the Holy Ghost. As if there were no joy without faith, and
the more faith the more joy. No sooner did the Eunuch believe, Act. 8 39. but
the Text says, he went on his way rejoicing, as if he felt not the ground he
went upon; his joy was a pleasant companion by the way, who is as good as a
Chariot. No sooner did the trembling Jailer believe, but it was said, Act.
16.34. He set meat before the Apostles, and rejoiced, believing in God with all
his household. It was the merriest meals meat that he made in all his life. I do
not say, that all believers have the same degree of joy, much less that they
have the same joy at the first, it is enough that they have the seed of joy.
Suppose it were a wet and troublesome Seed-time, it may be they sow in tears,
yet this is sufficient security, God has given us his Word for it, in due time
thou shall reap, and reap in joy, if they faint not. Therefore let all those
that put their trust in God, rejoice.

But we come to the Reasons.

Reasons.
First, Why God will have the just to live the Life of Consolation.



1. Why God will have the just live comfortably.
For the first, God will have the just live by Faith the Life of Consolation,
because it makes much for the Glory of God; he delights in the service we
perform to him, when we our selves delight in it also. 1. For his honor.
As God loves a cheerful giver, so he loves a cheerful worshipper: Psalm. 100.2.
Serve the Lord with gladness, and come before his Presence with a song. The
cheerfulness of the service, commends the Masters service. You may well think
there is the wine of Consolation in the heart, where you see the oil of
Gladness in the countenance. Therefore God glads the hearts of his Servants by
the grace of Faith, that their very countenance and carriage may commend his
service to all the world. It Is true indeed, the service of Christ is called a
burden, Mat. 11.
and a yoke, and it is so for our corrupt nature; but so far as we are
spiritual, although the yoke is rough (you see nothing at the first, but
Afflictions, and Persecutions, and Self-denial) yet the inside is smooth, and
easy, it is tied on with the silken string of Love, and stuffed with nothing but
Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. It Is better to feel; than to see: for many
have boggled at the yoke, that have but looked upon it afar off; but never any
that took it up and wore it, but highly commended it to be the sweetest and
easiest yoke in the world, they have found such comfort in it. And this, I say,
makes much for the honor of the Master.

2 Reason. 2. For their own support.
God will have the just live the Life of Consolation, that the comforts of God
may Support their Spirits in the midst of many Troubles, Afflictions, and
Temptations they meet withal in their Christian course. You know it is a
Statute Law of Heaven, We must through tribulation enter into the Kingdom of
God, Act. 14.22. Therefore God, in much Wisdom and Faithfulness, proportions
the comforts of his Servants to their sufferings, lest they should faint in
their minds, and be weary. Psalm. 94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts within
me, thy comforts delight my soul: and so the more suffering for Christ, the
more comfort in Christ. 2 Cor. 1.5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so our consolations also abound by Christ. As Christ himself had greatest
comfort in his greatest temptation, (for then it was that Angels came and
ministered unto him, Mat. 4.11.) so Gods People may expect greatest comforts in
their greatest sufferings, especially if it be in a good cause. 1 Pet. 3.14.
and 4.13. If ye suffer for righteousness, if ye be reproached for the name of
Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you. So
that, as it was said of him that knew not how to pray, Let him go to Sea; so we
may say of the Christian that knows not how to rejoice, Let him take up the
Cross that lie; in the way of his calling, let him be willing to go to the
Prison, or to the Stake, if God call him thither. Etiam hic eris mecum, bone
Jesu, said the good Martyr; Even here, Lord Jesus, I find and I feel, thou will be present with me: So he that would meet God, and enjoy most of God on
this side heaven, let him not look for it in Princes Courts, but let him look
for it in the Dungeon of Adversity: There God met with Joseph, and there he met
with Jeremiah, and there he met with Peter, and there he met with Paul and
Silas, Act. 16.25. They were so full of comfort, they could not hold, they must
needs sing at midnight. Their hearts were never more at liberty, than when
their feet were fast in the stocks. Simile.
Wicked men, like other ordinary Birds, can sing in a Sunshine day of
Prosperity; but Gods People are Nightingals, they sing best in the midnight of
adversity. And were it not thus, Gods People would not be so ready to suffer in
the cause of God, they would be ready to say, Oh! there is a Lion in the way,
Pro. 22 13. I shall be slain in the streets. But when they remember God can
bring Honey out of the Carcass of the Lion; he can bring Meat out of the Eater,
as he did, Judge. 14.14. he can bring strength and nourishment to the Soul, out
of sharp destruction, and devouring affliction, they are not so much afraid of
the Cross. And that is the second Reason, why God will have his People live the
Life of inward Consolation, that they may the better live the Life of outward
Affliction.

3. To cause longing for heaven
3. God will have them live the Life of Spiritual Consolation in some measure
upon earth, that they may long the more to be in heaven. Indeed, the best
estate of Gods People here below, is but a mixed estate in respect of comfort.
Here is Night as well as Day, Winter as well as Summer: but there is Day and no
Night, Summer and no Winter. It is true indeed, he gives them some light, some
first fruits of comfort here: but to what end? certainly, that they may the
more earnestly long for the Harvest. When Paul was but a little while caught up
into the third heaven, he was never well till he came there again: Phil. 1.
I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of all. God
gives his People a taste, to set the mouth of their Souls on water after
heaven. Taste of my Hidden Manna, says God, and as you like that, take more.
Now, when they have once tasted, they long to be at the Kings
Banqueting House, where is fullness of joy, Cant. 2. Psalm. 16.
and pleasures for evermore. The Martyrs had but a taste, and they were ready
to run through fire and water to get to a full draught. And were it not thus,
did not God sometimes give to his People the first fruits of his Spirit, and of
heavens joys, they would be ready either to be detered in their journey to
Canaan by the perils of the Wilderness, or else to be allured back again by the
fleshpots of Egypt, or at best, to take up their rest with the two Tribes and
a half, on this side Jordan. Therefore, God gives his People something of the
very comfort of Heaven, whilst they are in the way thither, (like the Bunch of
Grapes that was brought out of Canaan beforehand) that they may long to be in
Heaven, and so to enter into that joy there, that does but enter into them here.

4. Here, 4. To be able to comfort others
God will have his People live the Life of Consolation themselves, that they
may the better minister comfort to others. A Scholar that knows the World by
Map, can give some direction to a Traveller, but nothing so exact, as he that
has traveled the same way himself. A man that never tasted of Honey, may
discourse of the sweetness of it, but nothing so feelingly, as he that has
sucked the Honeycomb: So a man that never tasted of the comfort of the Holy
Ghost, or peace of Conscience, may discourse of it at random to others, but
nothing so effectually, as he that feels the powerful working of it effectually
in his own breast; he will say, Come, Psalm. 34.
and I will tell you what the Lord has done for my Soul. Whereas a man that
never felt that comfort himself, but is a mere stranger to the joy of Gods
chosen, he is very unfit to comfort others. One sorrowful man is a miserable
comforter to another: Like the sad reflections of some doleful Echo, that
doubles and trebles the complaint; and so, one woe returns many: Or like the
answer of an evil Conscience, that always prophecies evil, and not good, to him
that inquires of it. But such a one as has felt the comforts of God himself,
is able to speak more feelingly to others. Now that they may do so, God
reaches forth the Cup of Salvation, and the Cup of Consolation to some of his
children, that they may commend it to others upon their own experience; that
they may say, O how sweet is the Cup of Gods Consolation! will you not pledge
me? will you not drink of the same cup? O taste, and see that the Lord is good.
O how sweet is he in the forgiveness of sins? how sweet in the comforts of his
Spirit? how sweet in supporting and chearing the hearts of his People in time
of afflictions? God comforts his People in this manner, that they may comfort
others by their own experience; Like Birds, that having found a heap of Corn,
never leave their chirping, till they have called in their fellows to partake
of their Banquet: 2 Cor. 1.14. Blessed be God, who comfort us in all our
tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them that are in any trouble, by
the self-same comforts whereby we our selves are comforted of God. As if God
should say to his afflicted fainting Servants, Lo, here is a Cordial from
Heaven, drink of it your selves, and when you have done, write upon it Probatum
est, and so commend it to your Christian friends: Thou being converted, and
comforted, strengthen thy brethren. And these be the Reasons why God will have
the just live the Life of Consolation.

2. Why Consolations come by Faith.
2. But then why are they said to live this Life by Faith? There are many
weighty Reasons of this also: as, Because Faith, the hand that takes hold of
this Cup, it takes hold of the right object of Consolation: or if you will,

First of all, because Faith is a powerful hand to keep off all such things as
are comfortable, and so to arm us against all discomforts: For that must needs
be a great comfort, that does arm the Soul against all discomforts; and so does
Faith: for it is a supporting hand to our burdened Souls. Faith is Omnipotent
in the strength of God: Nothing is impossible to him that believes, Mark 9.23.
An establishing hand to the wavering Soul; it is a protecting hand to the weak
Soul.

It Is a Supporting Hand to the overburthened Soul. 1. Faith is a supporting
hand.
It is Faith that teaches a man to cast the burden of his care upon God,
Psalm. 37.5. And what a hearts ease and what a comfort is this? They must needs
have a light heart, that are eased of such burdens. Faith is like the Cup of
Consolation, which the Jews gave to the friends of the deceased, that they may
drink and forsake sorrow, Jer. 16.7. Neither shall men give them the Cup of
Consolation for their father: Prove. 31.6. Give wine to those of heavy hearts.

It Is an Establishing Hand to the wavering Soul: 2. Faith is an establishing
hand.
It cures the Soul of the Spiritual Palsy, when it quakes and quivers up and
down, is full of fears and doubts, and knows not where to fix or stay it self.
Fix thy self here, says Faith, fix thy self upon God, fix thy self upon his
Word, this will stay the wavering Soul, as a Ship at Anchor in the midst of the
winds and waves of Temptation: Heb. 6.19. Which hope we have as an anchor of
the Soul steadfast and sure, which enters into that within the veil. I appeal
to such as have been tossed at Sea, to tell you, what a comfort it is to have a
sure Anchor in a Storm; and such is the comfort of a Christian, by the
Anchor-hold of his Faith: Psalm. 112.6, 7. Surely he shall not be moved for
ever, he shall not be afraid of evil tidings: Why? His heart is fixed, trusting
in the Lord. His heart is established, he shall not be afraid. So Faith is an
establishing hand to a wavering Soul.

It Is a Protecting Hand to the weak Soul: 3. Faith is a protecting hand.
It is such a Hand as not only holds a child, but it is a Shield it self, to
bear off all blows. Now is it not a comfort to have such a Shield? and such a
Shield is Faith, Ephesians. 6.16. It does not only bear off all blows from wicked
men. Psalm. 56.4. In God have I put my trust; there is the Shield: What follows?
I will not fear what flesh can do unto me: but it bears off all blows from
wicked Spirits: Ephesians. 6.16. Above all taking the shield of faith, whereby ye
shall be able to quench the fiery darts of the wicked one. It is a safe guard
from all evil: Psalm. 99.9. Because thou have made the Lord thy refuge, even the
most High thy habitation, there shall no evil befall thee, nor any plague come
near thy dwelling. Yea, it bears off all blows from God; it has such a
piercing eye, it can see a Fathers heart, under a seeming Enemies hand: Though
he kill me, yet will I trust in him, Job 13.15. And so the shield of Faith is
not only useful all our life; but it is Armor of Proof against the stroke of
death. And so, it is a Protecting Hand to the weak Soul. It is every way a
powerful hand, to arm against all discomforts, and so an argument of no small
comfort to a true believer.

The second general Reason, why the just lives the Life of Consolation by his
Faith, Why Consolation comes by Faith.
is, Because Faith is a Powerful Hand, to draw into the Soul all necessary
Comforts. Faith lays hold on the right Object of Consolation; it lays hold on
that God, who is the Fountain of all light and life: Psalm. 36.9. With thee is
the fountain of life, and in thy light shall we see light.

1. Faith lays hold on God the Father.
1. Faith lays hold on God the Father, who is called the Father of Mercies, and
the God of all comfort and consolation, the Beginning of all Divine Operations.
As all Rivers come from the Sea; so all streams of Comfort come from God the
Father.

2. Faith lays hold on God the Son.
2. Faith lays hold on God the Son, as the Conduit-pipe or Channel, through whom
all comfort is derived from God the Father, to the Souls of his People: For it
pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, that of his fullness
we might receive, as grace for grace, so comfort for comfort: for he was
anointed with the oil of gladness, as well as with the oil of grace, above his
fellows, that he might appoint to them that mourn in Sion, to give unto them
beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of praises for
the spirit of heaviness, Isa. 61.3. And hence it is, that Christ is called, The
Consolation of Israel, Luke 2.25. because all Gods People receive their comfort
from him. As all Stars borrow their light from the Sun; so all the Saints
borrow their light from him, who is called, The Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2.
But unto you that fear my name, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise, with
healing under his wings. But how do they receive this comfort from Christ? it
is by Faith: for, Christ dwells in their hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. As he is
a comfortable guest; so it is Faith that receives him, and bids him welcome when
he is come.

3. Faith lays hold on God the Holy Ghost: Gal. 3.2. 3. Faith lays hold on God
the Holy Ghost.
Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith? As
if he should say, Surely by the hearing of the Word mixed with Faith. Faith
receives the Spirit of God, which is called The Comforter, because it is the
special office of the Spirit, to comfort the hearts of Gods people, and to
witness to their Spirits, that God is now their reconciled Father in Jesus
Christ, and so it is called a Seal; and this comes after Faith, Ephesians. 1.13. In
whom after ye believed, ye were sealed by that Holy Spirit of Promise. And this
must needs be matter of unspeakable joy: for the love of God is better than the
love of all Creatures; nay, it brings along with it the love of all good
Creatures; and by this love, the hatred of evil Creatures shall do us no hurt.
The love of God, Job 5.23.
is the life of the Soul, as the Soul is the life of the Body; nay, it is better
than life, Psalm. 63.3. Thy loving kindness is better than life. Note.
Now Faith lays hold on the God of Love and on the love of this God, and
therefore must needs afford matter of strong Consolation. Consolation, what
properly.
For what is Consolation, to speak properly, but a certain Reasoning of the
Soul, whereby we oppose some certain good, to some oppressing evil? whereby we
mitigate our sorrow, and bear the evil with more ease. Now the greater and
sorer the evil is, the greater and surer good is required to weigh against it.
Now then, forasmuch as a Christian seeks comfort against the greatest of all
evils, which is sin, and eternal damnation for sin; therefore, it is not every
good, nor indeed any good, but only the Summum Bonum, the chiefest good, which
is God, that can be a sufficient remedy and cordial against this, the greatest
of all evils.

So then,

1. How Faith comforts.
Faith lays hold upon this God, reconciled to us in Jesus Christ, forgiving all
our sins, because of his sufferings; and

Forgiving them Freely, Frankly, Fully, Affectionately, Most Advantagiously,
and In respect of us.


For it ( viz. Faith instrumentally) redeems from Sin as a Debt; then from the
Prison of Hell; then from the Jailer, Satan, and re-instates in all the good
forfeited by sin. Believers shall have all things work for their good in this
life, and of Heaven at last. And this is a Plaster broad enough to cover all
our sores; If God speak peace, who can make trouble? Job 34.29. Here is an
object of unspeakable comfort, God reconciled in Christ; and this
Reconciliation witnessed by the Spirit of Truth. Again,

2. Second way, wherein Faith comforts.
Faith lays hold on the Ordinances, which are as Conduit-pipes from the Breast of
Jesus Christ, as Christ is a Conduit-pipe from the Father. And Faith, as the
mouth of the Soul, lies sucking at this Breast, and so draws in abundance of
Spiritual strength and comfort. Christ has entrusted his Spouse, the Church,
with these Breasts, for the nourishing up of all his children. Oh how sweet it
is, to ^ie in the Lap of such a Nurse! Isa. 60.10, 11. Rejoice with Jerusalem,
and be glad with her, all ye that love her; rejoice for joy with her, all ye
that mourn for her, that ye may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her
consolation, that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her
glory. For thus says the Lord, I will extend peace to her like a river, and
the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: Then shall ye suck, and be
born upon her sides, and be dandled upon her knees. As one whom his mother
comfort, so will I comfort you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. Lo,
here are the sweet breasts of the Church. Now the Word is one of these Breasts,
the Seal of the Word is the other.

First, the Word: 1 Pet. 2.2. 1. The Word is one of Christ's Breasts.
As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby, if ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. There is much sweetness
in this Breast. Psalm. 19.10. The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the
heart; more to be desired are they than gold, sweeter are they than the honey
and the honeycomb. Oh this is a sweet Breast, especially the Word of Promise:
for that is, as it were, the very Head and Nipple of this Breast; Put this into
the mouth of the most distressed Soul, and it will still it, when it cries out
by reason of affliction. Psa. 119.49, 50. Remember thy Word unto thy servant,
upon which thou have caused me to hope. And that must needs be the Word of
Promise. For what follows? This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy Word
has quickened me. But how does this Breast quicken and comfort the children of
God? Surely, not unless they draw and suck out this Milk of Consolation by the
mouth of Faith. Heb. 4.2. The Word preached did not profit them, not being
mixed with faith in them that heard it. The most comfortable Promise in all the
Word, if it be not applied by Faith, it has no manner of sweetness in it: But
if thou can receive it, and apply it to thy self in believing, Jer. 15.16.
it will be the very joy and rejoicing of thy heart.

Second Breast of Consolation
The second Breast of Consolation, is the Seal of the Word, the Sacrament. Oh,
there is much sweetness in this; there is much sweetness indeed in the Word of
Promise, as you have heard. Yea, but is this true, says the Soul, that begins
to believe, but is weak in Faith? Or does all this belong to me? Will God give
Christ to me, and the Spirit to me, and Heaven to me? Will God indeed love such
a vile wretch as I am? I am half afraid it is too good to be true! O that I had
some further assurance of it! O that God would set to his Seal that this is
true, that I might set to my Seal that God is true! O that he would set me as a
Seal upon his heart, that I might set him as a Seal upon my heart! I can and
will, says God to the believing, and yet weakly believing Soul. Art thou so
desirous of assurance? I Will give thee a Seal in the Sacrament. Lo, that is a
Seal of my love, and all the fruits of it: As sure as thou receivest the
outward elements, so sure shall thou receive what is signified and sealed
thereby, my Christ, my Spirit, my Comforter. And therefore this must needs be a
sweet Breast, where God does so sensibly put comfort into the mouth of the Soul.

Note. A great neglect of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
And if so, surely we have the greatest cause to lay it to heart, and to cry to
our heavenly Father, That one of our Mothers Breasts is in a manner dried up, or
that some of his children do frowardly wean themselves from this Breast, and
therefore God may justly take away the other also. And doubtless we find the
less comfort in the Word, because we neglect the Seal of the Word. It may be in
a Woman's Breasts, if one be dried up, the other may be the fuller; because that
nourishment which should run into two, does now run into one vessel- But it is
not so here, for the neglect of one Ordinance, makes the other more
unprofitable, because God never appointed any Ordinance in vain, and will not
endure the contempt of any. Well then, poor Soul, do thou complain for want
of comfort, thou can not find that comfortable assurance of Gods love active
or passive, thou were wont to find? It may be there is more estrangedness
every way. I answer, If it be so, blame thy self, and not God: thou do
neglect a comfortable Ordinance, thou suffer one of thy Mothers Breasts to be
dried up for want of sucking; in which, thou might otherwise find abundance
of comfort. You read in 2 Chronicles. 30.21, 26. Gods people kept the Passover with
great gladness; there was such exceeding great joy in Jerusalem, that there had
not been the like many years before, in those times when the Sacrament was
neglected. And you know the Sacrament of the Passover, and the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, are all one for substance. And so you read Act 2.46. They
continued in breaking of bread from house to house, with gladness of heart.
Well then, do thou want this gladness of heart, this Life of Consolation?
Consider, whether this be not the cause, thou have not for a long time laid thy
mouth to this Breast: No wonder then, if thou complainest for want of comfort.

I would not be mistaken: Caution.
for I speak to none but true children; as Christ says of his Bread, so I say
of his Breast, It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and give it to
whelps. For we must know, though this Breast be sweet, it is so only to the
believing Soul: The unbeliever sucks poison out of it; he eats and drinks his
own damnation. Therefore, says the Apostle, Let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat. And what must he examine? Surely his faith above all the rest. 2
Cor. 13.5. Examine your own selves, whether ye be in the faith. The Word and
Sacraments are the two Breasts, and Faith is the Mouth; and so the just by Faith
sucking at these two Breasts, he lives the Life of Consolation.

And that is the second Reason.

Reason, Because by Faith a Christian lives the Life of Justification, Why
consolation comes by Faith.
as we have heard at large; and therefore by consequence, by the same Faith
also, he lives the Life of Consolation. For, as sorrow is more properly the
consequent of sin, than sufferings: (For suppose suffering without sin, and
they are more truly the occasions of joy, than sorrow) So on the other side,
comfort is more properly the consequence of Righteousness, than of all outward
Blessings whatsoever: Romans 5.1, 2, 3. Therefore being justified by faith, we
have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, and we rejoice in hope of
the glory of God; and not only so, but we rejoice in tribulations. And so
tribulations cannot hinder the glorious rejoicing of a justified person.

The golden Chain and Order of Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost.
Therefore in that Golden Chain, Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God is
Righteousness, Peace, Joy in the Holy Ghost: Observe the order; First,
Righteousness, when a a person is justified through the Merits of Christ; then
Peace, when we understand God and we are friends: for what strikes terror but
this, Oh! I have sinned, says the Soul, and God is mine enemy? And what speaks
peace but this, I am justified from my sins, and now God is my friend? And then
thirdly, comes in Joy in the holy Ghost; for as nothing wounds the Soul, more
than to look at God under the notion of an enemy, so nothing comforts the Soul
more, than to look at God under the notion of a friend, and reconciled Father.
Therefore as Peace is the fruit of Righteousness, so Joy is the fruit of Peace;
and then both Joy, Peace, and Righteousness, the fruit of Faith: Therefore a
Christian lives by Faith the Life of Consolation. As you cannot separate the
heat of the Sun from the light of it; no more can you separate the comfort of
Justification, from the life and assurance of it; and the stronger the
assurance, the stronger is the comfort.

Reason, Because by Faith a Christian lives the Life of Sanctification, Why
Consolation comes by Faith.
both in purifying the heart from sinful corruption, and in quickening of it to
all holy duties, as we have already proved.

Now howsoever it is true, Caution.
the forsaking of sin on the one hand, and the practicing of holy duties on the
other hand, does not deserve the least comfort or encouragement from God; and
in this sense we do not ground our comfort upon our duties: Yet this we say,
from good Warrant from the Scripture, God of his free grace does usually make
holy ways comfortable ways, and sinful ways uncomfortable ways, even to his own
children. Hereupon David says on the other side, Psalm. 38. There is no rest in
my bones, by reason of my sin. And Solomon says on the other side, Pro. 3.17.
All her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. Hear what
S. Luke says, Acts 9.31.
Walking in the fear of the Lord, they walked also in the comfort of the holy
Ghost. God deals with his children, as we do with ours, though we intend not to
disinherit them for every fault, yet we will discourage them by correction when
they do ill, and encourage them by rewarding them when they do well. It is not
all one in point of comfort, whether we sin or sin not. God is a wise, as well
as a loving Father; he will show no countenance to his own children, if they
regard iniquity in their heart, Psalm. 66 18. If I regard iniquity in my heart,
God will not hear my Prayer: But blessed are the pure in heart; Why? they shall
see God, Mat. 5.8. What of that? why, here is the comfort, here is the happiness,
here is the very heaven of a Christian, to see God, 1 John 3 2. For, Vision of
God, works Transformation into the Image of God, Satisfaction; and
Satisfaction, even abundance of Soul-ravishing Consolation. Now this Wisdom,
Transformation, Satisfaction, and Consolation, God only disposes to the pure
in heart. And yet I do not mean such as are pure in heart from all acts of sin,
(for we sin in our best duties) but such as are pure from the approbation and
allowance of any sin, from the regarding of any iniquity in their heart. If a
justified person do not act his Faith to the purifying of his heart and life,
(In that sense we speak of) God will certainly suspend his comfort for a time:
The Sun of Righteousness will not shine upon a Dunghill heart but upon the
Garden; for the Spirit of God is grieved by the sins of his own people, or else
that Exhortation were needless, Ephesians. 4.30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of
God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of Redemption. And if we grieve the
Spirit of God, be sure it will grieve our spirits; it will make us glad to cry,
Restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation, Psalm 51.12. And if we rejoice the
Spirit of Ged, it will rejoice ours, Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me,
says Wisdom; so, I rejoice them that rejoice me: and what rejoices Gods
Spirit, but purity of heart and life? Prove. 11.20. The upright in the way are
his delight. So God dispenses peace to such, Psalm. 85.8. It is God who will
speak peace to his Saints, to his sanctified ones. It Is true indeed, a man
cannot be sanctified before he be justified; and so soon as he is justified, he
has the groundwork of peace. But the Word does strongly infer, That no man is
justified, but he is also sanctified at the same time: And God is pleased to
speak peace to none, but such as he is pleased to sanctify at the same
instant, when he first begins to speak peace unto them. Well, but what shall we
say for after times? May they then live as they list, when God has once spoken
peace to their Souls? No, as ever they desire to keep it when they have it, as
they love their peace, let them not again return to folly. As much as to say,
If they be so foolish to turn again to their former sins, God will turn again
to his former displeasure, of which he had spoken in the former verses: Not
that God will hate them, or look at them as his enemies, but they shall know
for all that, though God continues to be their Father, yet a Father knows how
to frown upon his children, and how to come with a Rod in his hand, if they
once wax wanton under the expression of his love and favor. Rev. 3.19. As many
as I love, I rebuke and chasten; be zealous therefore, and repent. Well then,
as ever thou desire to live the Life of Consolation, be sure to live the Life
of Sanctification: Though God do not dispense comfort for thy Sanctification,
yet he will never dispense it without Sanctification. The water of Consolation
must run in a clear channel. Blessed are the pure in heart; for they shall see
God to their comfort. Therefore, as Faith purifies the heart, Act. 15.9. so it
comforts the heart. And so the just lives by Faith the Life of Consolation.

Quest. Yea, but how shall I know I am sanctified, that I may have the comfort
of it?

Ans. I answered to this, in that precedent Chapter, viz. Life of Faith in
Sanctification. Vid. supra.

Reason, why the just lives by Faith the Life of Consolation; it is, Why
Consolation comes by Faith.
Because by Faith a man reflects upon his own Sanctity and Sincerity; he proves
it, and brings it to the touchstone, and when he knows it is right, he has the
comfort of it. For as Faith purifies the heart and conscience, so the
conscience thus purified, does the office of a faithful examined Witness and
Judge; who, upon examination, gives in this Judgment, Thou art sincere, says
Conscience to the believing Soul, thou art in the Faith; Christ is thine, and
therefore thou have cause to rejoice: 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this,
the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not
with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in
the world, and more abundant to you-wards. (Mark) the ground of Paul's
rejoicing was, the reflect act of Faith, in the testimony of his renewed
conscience. And lest any man should say, This was a singular case, it is
possible Paul might have ground of rejoicing, upon the through examination of
his own condition, but ordinarily Christians cannot have the like: Therefore
the Apostle makes it a general case to all believers, either they do, or they
ought to do so. Gal. 6.4. But let every man prove his own work, and then shall
he have rejoicing in himself, and not in another. (Mark) this is the duty of
every man that desires comfort, of every man that is in the Faith. Would thou
have comfort? Then make use of thy Faith to the proving of thy self, and the
proving of thy work. It may be thou think thy Joy and Consolation must
evidence thy good estate; but the Word says, The evidence of thy good estate
upon Proof and Trial, must bring sound comfort, if ever thou have it upon good
grounds. Thy comfort must not be thy evidence, Note.
but thy evidence must be thy comfort. Now this is the proper act and evidence
of Faith: And so by Faith the just lives the Life of Consolation. As for
example, the Word says, Blessed is every one that fears the Lord; Blessed
are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness; Even by this we know we
are translated from death to life, if we love the brethren, 1 John 3.4. But
says the conscience renewed by Faith, I fear the Lord, etc. therefore I have
cause to rejoice.

Obj. Oh, but these Marks and Evidences may fail you.

Ans. Heaven and Earth shall pass, but not one tittle of the Word shall fall.

Obj. But you may think you have these, when you have them not.

Ans. Therefore they are first to be tried by the Rule, for their Principle and
Existence.

Obj. If it be said, You may think you have the witness and comfort of the
Spirit, when you have not: Is there not a joy of the stony ground, and of an
hypocrite, as well as the joy of a true Christian? And is there not a peace
from Satan in the heart, as well as the peace of God? Luke 11.21. When the
strong man armed keeps the palace, his goods are in peace.

Ans. Oh, but he that has the true peace and joy in the holy Ghost, cannot be
deceived; so he that has the true fear of God, and hunger, etc. cannot be
deceived.

But of the two, Note.
it is easier to be deceived in our Comforts, than in our Graces. Therefore the
Scripture commands us to try our comforts by our graces, but never to try our
graces by our comforts, as in the place before-alledged, Gal. 4.6. And because
ye are Sons, God has sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba
Father.

It is true, the first evidence of a Christians Justification in order of
nature, is a pure simple act of Faith, laying hold on Gods free grace in a
Promise indefinite, made not to righteous persons, but to sinners, ungodlly
persons, and to enemies, and to such as are simply so: For God will strip a man
of all conceits of his own Righteousness, before he clothe him with the
Righteousness of Christ.

But then the second evidence of Justification in order of nature, (though it
be at the same instant in order of time, if we could perceive it) is a heart
renewed and sanctified, and in some measure endowed with a love of that God,
who has begotten us to a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3.
and with a love of our fellow-brethren, who are begotten of the same
incorruptible seed, and born of the same womb; 1 Ioh. 5 2.
who hang upon the same Breasts, and are heirs of the same inheritance with our
selves. Now when we see these things in our selves by a reflect act of Faith,
the testimony of a renewed Conscience; this evidence must needs bring abundance
of comfort to the Soul. This reflect act of Faith, it is like the Rainbow,
which is nothing else but the reflection of the Sun in a watery Cloud; which
though it be no Cause why the earth shall no more be drowned with waters, yet
it is made a sure Sign thereof by the Ordinance of God, Genesis 2.10, 11, 12. So
we say of this reflect act of Faith, in the looking upon the work of Love, and
other sanctified Graces in the Soul; though they are no causes why the
believing Soul shall be no more overflowed with the deluge of Gods wrath, yet
they are a sure sign and token thereof by Gods appointment, as the Rainbow was.
And indeed, the way of grace in Gods sanctified ones, is nothing else, but the
reflection of the Sun of Righteousness in a watery cloudy Soul, warming and
melting it into tears, because it can love Jesus Christ no more, or can get no
more assurance of his love. Well, says Christ to such a Soul, I will establish
my Covenant with thee, and this shall be the sign of it, Isa. 54.9, 10. For
this is as the waters of Noah unto me, as sure as the Covenant made with Noah
concerning the waters. For as I have sworn, that the waters of Noah should no
more go over the earth; so have I sworn, that I would not be wroth with thee,
nor rebuke thee: For the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be moved, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be
removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on thee. Therefore examine thy Grace.

Objections against trial of our comforts by our graces, rather than of our
graces by our comforts.
Obj. Oh, but he that has but common graces, may go very far; so that it is
hard to discern the one from the other, if we try our selves by our Graces, and
not by our Comforts.

Ans. As there are common Graces, so common Comforts; such comforts as are
common to Hypocrites, as well as true Believers. There is the joy of an
Hypocrite, of the stony ground, of Herod, who heard John gladly.

Obj. How then can we discern the one from the other, the joy of Gods People,
from the joy of an Hypocrite?

Ans. Though an Hypocrite may rejoice in some part of the word, as to hear of a
Christ, of a Savior, of Heaven, and Glory; yet he cannot endure to hear of
Affliction, and Self-denial. But a true Believer rejoices in every part of the
Word, even in that which holds forth Christ as a King, a Commander, a Crucifier
of the Body of Sin, as well as of his own Body for sin. Oh how glad is he, when
the Word strikes at the Master-root of his corruption! Oh, more of that, says
he; let the righteous smite me again and again: Good is the word which the Lord
has spoken. But an Hypocrite is so far from rejoicing in such a Word, that he
flies in the face of the Reprover, as Herod did, Note, that the same difficulty
of trial, and proneness to mistake, is as incident to that preposterous way of
judging our selves by our comforts, as by our graces.
when John came once to touch him to the quick But that is the first answer;
viz. There are common comforts, as there are common graces; Ergo, The trial of
our selves by our graces, is as easy as by our comforts.

2. We answer, when we speak of the Touchstone of Trial, from which a Christian
receives his comfort; our meaning is this. That we receive it only in such
graces as accompany Salvation; as, the true fear of God, the true desire after
God, in hungring and thirsting after his Righteousness, and a true love to the
People of God.

Obj. Oh, but there may be in an Hypocrite or Unregenerate man, all these; A
fear of God, a desire after God, a love to his People.

1. A fear of God, yea, such a fear, as to depart from evil: Jonah. 1.16. Then
the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered sacrifices to the Lord, and
made vows: Genesis 26.6. Abimelech was withheld from Adultery, by the light of
natural conscience.

2. A desire after God, and after grace, as the five foolish Virgins desired
oil, Mat. 25.8.

3. A love to Gods People, with great respect; such as was the respect of the
Egyptians to the Israelites, that they would lend them not ordinary
household stuff only, but that which was most dear and precious to them, Jewels
of Silver and Gold; and this was generally throughout all the Land of Egypt:
And what favors did Pharaoh show to Joseph; Nebuchadnezzar to Daniel;
Ahasuerus to Esther and Mordecai? Therefore these graces may be in unregenerate
men.

Difference of regenerating grace from common.
Ans. And though there may be a kind of fear of God, and desire after God, and
love to his People, which unregenerate men may have, yet not the true and
saving fear of God, etc.

Q. But how shall we know the difference?

Ans. Why, the Word does clearly hold forth a difference:

1. In the fear of God.
As for the first, An unregenerate man may have such a fear of God, as to
endeavor to depart from some evil, but not from all; like the Samaritans, of
whom it is said, after the Lord sent Lions amongst them, They feared the Lord,
and yet feared their own gods too; and therefore the Lord accounted it as no
fear at all, 2 King. 17.33, 34. But he that truly fears God, makes conscience
to depart from every evil way: Prove 8.13. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil,
if not in action, yet in affection and serious endeavors.

2. In desire of grace.
2. An ungenerate man; though he may have a kind of desires after grace, yet he
desires not grace as it is grace: First, he desires not grace for the love of
grace, but for the love of happiness. As the Virgins desired oil when they were
ready to die, not because they loved the oil or the light, but because without
that oil and light, they could not go in with Christ, but must be shut out, to
have their portion with the Devil and his Angels for ever. But the oil of grace
is truly lovely to a gracious heart: They have spiritual sense, to smell the
sweet favor of the ointment, Cant. 1.2 and they love the light, Joh 3.21. He
that does truth, comes to the light.

3. In love to Gods people.
3. Though an unregenerate man may love Gods People after a sort, yet not in a
sanctified manner; that is to say, neither all the People of God, nor all their
graces, at all times.

First, Not all the People of God; they hate some, as they seem to love others.
They are guilty of sinful partiality, Jam. 2.
having the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons. They seem to
love the rich, and despise the poor.

Secondly, Not all their graces. They may admire their common gifts, as Pharaoh
admired the wisdom of Joseph, and Nebuchadnezzar the wisdom of Daniel, but not
their saving graces: Every one that does evil, hates the light, Joh. 3.20.
Even that light of good works.

Thirdly, Not at all times. God sometimes indeed overrules their spirits
strongly, as he overruled the spirits of Lions, to preserve Daniel; and of the
Ravens, to feed Elijah: but so soon as that overruling Providence is over,
they are as they were before God, for a time, gave the Israelites favor in the
eyes of the Egyptians; but before and after, they were their utter enemies: but
he that has truth of grace, he loves;

1. All the Saints, poor as well as rich: Phil. 1.15. and love unto all the
Saints.

2. All their graces, saving as well as common; and more than common, because
the Image of God is most in those.

3. At all times, because his love springs from an inward principle, from
likeness of nature, and therefore it is unchangeable. Now this upon trial is
ground of singular comfort; and this trial is made by Faith. Therefore by Faith
the Just lives the Life of Consolation, because by Faith a man reflects upon
that Sanctity and Sincerity which God has wrought in the believing Soul.

Reason, Because Faith makes a thing absent, Why Consola- flows in, by Faith.
to be as it were present: For joy is properly the delight we take in some
present good. God, who seemed before to be absent, is present: things promised,
are present; Heaven it self is present: He has made us through faith to sit
together in heavenly places, Ephesians. 2 6. As it is said of the destruction of
enemies, Revel. 18.2. Babylon is fallen. Now what a comfort is this, it is even
Heaven opposed to earth? What a comfort and content is it to a man, when he
looks through a Prospective glass, and sees a friend coming toward him many
Furlongs off: It may be he looked before in the glass, and either he saw him
not at all, or else he doubted whether it was his friend or no; but the glass
draws him so near, that it puts all out of doubt, he sees the very color of
his clothes, of the hair of his face, and the proportion of his parts, so
perfectly, as if he were present with him; and therefore he smileth to himself,
and salute him at a distance, Oh my dear friend, I am glad to see you. Faith is
such a Prospective glass, that looking upon God, and Heaven, and things
promised, at a great distance, even as far as Heaven is from Earth, yet it
draws these good things so near, and makes them so present, so sure to the
Soul, that it cannot but rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory; as
Abraham saw Christ's day afar off, and rejoiced to see it; and so the rest of
the Patriarchs, Heb. 11.18. though they received not the things promised, yet
having seen them afar off, through the glass of Faith, they made them so near
to their apprehensions, Heb. 11.13.
that they even fell upon the neck of the Promises, and saluted them, as dear
friends salute and embrace one another at their meeting. And in this respect,
Faith is said to be the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of
things not seen, Heb. 11.1. It puts a man, as it were, into a possession of
good things to come; or at least it makes them as sure, as if they were
present. What comfort is this? We say, It is good to be sure: we do not only
rejoice in the excellency of a thing promised, but in the certainty of it; Yea,
but is this true, says the poor Soul? Yea, says Faith, thou may be as sure
of it; as if thou had it already in possession; for thou have the Word of
God, the Promise of God, the Oath of God, the Seal of God: And why so many ties
and engagements one upon another? but that by these immutable things, Heb. 6.18.
in which it is impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation,
who have fled for refuge, to lay hold upon the hope set before us. Faith lays
hold upon all these engagements; and so the just lives by Faith the Life of
Consolation.

Uses of the Consolation of the Faithful.
The first Use of Information,

Information of the cause of sadness.
which the Prophet Jeremiah called, The curse of God, Lam. 3.65. Not as if all
were cursed that are sad and sorrowful; for God knows how to fish in troubled
waters: but to show, That of it self it is the greatest of all evils; for, the
spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities, but a wounded Spirit who can
bear? Prove. 18.14. Now let us inquire what is the cause of this wound, of this
sadness and sorrow of heart: certainly, it is not the greatness of any outward
troubles, it is not Imprisonment, for the Apostles were so merry, they fell a
singing in the very Dungeon, Act. 16 25. It is not Reproach, for Job
professes, if his adversary should write a Book against him, he would take it,
Job 31.
and bind it as a Crown upon his head: And if a man rejoice not in a Crown,
what should be the object of his joy? It is not Poverty: for it is said of the
faithful, They suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods, Heb. 10.34. It is
not Persecution: for it is said, Act. 4.
the Apostles rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer for the Name of
the Lord Jesus. It is not simply Sin, Psalm. 49.5. Wherefore should I fear in
the days of evil, when the iniquities of my heels compass me about? It is not
Dis-respect, and ill will from men, Heb. 11.27. By faith he forsook Egypt, not
fearing the wrath of the King. Well then, if it be not any outward trouble,
that is the cause of sadness and sorrow of heart, what is it then? Surely you
shall find upon search, it is nothing else but Want of Faith, or at least want
of acting of Faith in the Promises of God. Heb. 11.27. He endured, as seeing
him who is invisible. Had we but Faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, and had we
skill to act it, we should say to Mountains of Sorrow that surrounded us, Be ye
removed, and they should obey. For the just lives by Faith the Life of
Consolation in the midst of troubles; and therefore in case thou art at any
time oppressed with sorrows, ask thy Heart and Soul that question which David
did, in the like case, Psalm. 42.5. twice in one Psalm, Why art thou cast down,
O my Soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? and certainly the Soul
would return answer, My distress of sadness springs from my Unbelief. You may
know the disease by the cure: In the very next words, O put thy trust in God,
hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance, and my God. All sorrow of heart springs principally from our
Unbelief, not from the greatness of other evils; I mean, destructive sorrow,
for godly sorrow is a friend to godly joy. It is not so much the weight of the
burden, as the soreness of the back, that troubles the poor Beast: So it is
not so much the weight of outward evils, as the inward soreness of a galled
Conscience; not purified nor healed by faith, that vexes and troubles the
poor Creature. Were all sound and well within, a believer might look upon the
grimmest visage of outward troubles, and laugh in their face. Job 5.22. It is a
believer he speaks to, At destruction and famine thou shall laugh; neither
shall thou be afraid of the beasts of the field. O the sweet Security that holy
men do find under the shield of Faith! It is not only a guard from outward
evils, but it guards the Hearts and Minds of Gods People from the very fear of
evils approaching, and from the sorrows of present evils. This is a Receipt
from Christ, to keep the Heart in a cheerful frame: Carry this about with thee
continually, and then shall thou be never overwhelmed with sorrow. I dare not
say, Thou shall be free from trouble; but this I dare say, Thou shall never be
overcome of trouble, so long as thou can believe. Hear what the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 4.8. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are
perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not
destroyed.

An unregenerate heart is a comfortless heart, Inform. 2. Unregenerate soul
uncomortable soul.
and so a faithless heart. Where there is no shield against sorrow, how can
there be comfort? Where there is nothing but deadness, where the Soul is
without God, without Christ, without the Covenant of Promise, Ephesians. 2.12. what
ground can there be of Hope? It is the presence of the Sun that makes day, and
the absence of the Sun makes night: So the Presence of God makes a daylight
of Comfort, and his absence makes a night of Sorrow and darkness.
Creature Comforts are but Starlight at the best; yea, without God they are
vanity, and vexation of Spirit: but when God is against a man, they take part
with God against the possessors of them; as Balaams Ass rises up against her
Master, when he rises up against God. How can a wicked man have comfort in his
Possessions, when God once possesses him with the serious thoughts of Death, of
Hell, of Wrath?

Therefore an unregenerate heart is a comfortless heart. Though Joseph's
brethren had their Sacks full of Corn, and their Bags full of Money, yet their
hearts were full of fear: and why? They doubted they had not the favor of the
Lord of the Country; and they knew they could not live without him; they must
to him again, when their Corn were spent, and they were afraid his displeasure
would be their utter undoing So it is with a wicked man, though he abound in
worldly comforts, although he have his Pastures full of flocks, his Barns full
of corn, his Coffers full of silver and gold; yet for all that if God be not
reconciled in Christ, all these are but miserable Comforters, he may lie down
in sorrow for all that, Isa. 50. last. Therefore an unregenerate heart is a
comfortless heart, There is no peace, there is no joy to the wicked, says my
God. Who would rest in such a condition, where there is no rest to be found? O
who would lie down in such a bed of Snakes?

Inform. 3. Religious life the only comfortable life.
The only truly comfortable life, is a religious life, a Life of Faith. Some
seek it in Profits, some in Honor, and some in Pleasures of Sin; but when all
is done, it is no where to be found, but in God. Faith draws comfort from God,
when sense can draw none from the Creature. There was a time, when David's
Mountain of Prosperity was removed, so that he could find no comforts in his
Wives, nor in his Children, nor in his Possessions, nor in any thing that was
formerly comfortable to him, for the Amalekites had swept all away: yet even
then he could comfort himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30.6. When there is
the greatest famine of Comforts upon earth, yet Gods People find bread enough
in their Fathers house; and it is Faith that opens the Cupboard door: when
unbelievers perish with hunger, Faith opens the Cupboard-door of their heavenly
Father. The just lives by Faith the Life of Consolation: O then learn to take
notice of the difference betwixt the godly and the ungodly, the believer and
the unbeliever, in this respect. Hear what God says, Isa. 65.13, 14. Therefore
thus says the Lord, Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye
shall cry for sorrow of heart, and bowl for vexation of spirit. Wicked men
indeed may have a counterfeit joy, as they have counterfeit grace: they may set
a good face on it, when they have a full sorrowful heart; Even in laughter the
heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness: Whereas true joy is
the upright man's portion; Psa. 32. last, Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye
righteous, and shout for joy, all ye that are upright in heart: Gal. ^2. But
the fruit of the Spirit is in love, joy, and peace.

Obj. But wicked men are very merry and cheerful without any such check; they
are so merry, they are the very Music of the company, as Job says of himself,
Job 17.6. He has made me also a byword of the people, and aforetime I was a
tabret. What he said as a Patient, (for they played upon him, as men play upon
Instruments) they may say as Agents, We are the Music of the company where we
go.

Ans. I answer, They may be so, upon a gross mistake of their own condition; as
a godly man may be sorrowful upon mistake of his condition, because he knows
not his own happiness: So a wicked man may be merry and cheerful, because he
knows not his own condition. Belshazzar was in a miserable condition, before he
saw the Handwriting upon the wall; but he was merry and jovial before, because
he knew it not: but so soon as he saw that intimation of Gods displeasure, his
guilty Conscience struck him, and he was all a-mort. So it is with all wicked
men, though they rejoice in sin at the first, though it be sweet in their
mouths, yet at last it shall prove the gall of Asps in their belly, Job 20.12,
13, 14. Though wickedness be sweet in the mouth, though he hide it under his
tongue, yet his meat in his bowels is turned into the gall of Asps within him.

Obj. Oh, but some may say, Faithful persons (experience tells us) they are
sometimes very uncomfortable, what should be the reason of this, or how comes
this to pass, that it is so with them?

Ans. It springs from themselves, Satan, or from God. Rise of the S^s.
heaviness.


From themselves.

1. Either from the Commission of some special Sin. 2. The inordinate
Aggravation of sin committed in some special case, from Natural Constitution,
or Spiritual C^^dition. 3. Ignorance of the right way to attain assurance of
forgiveness of sin. 4. Not Acting their Faith, though they have the habit of
it. 5. Their Forgetfulness of taking Christ on his own terms; or that they have
taken Christ upon such terms.
From themselves.
First, from the committing of some special and notable sin. 1. Sorrow from the
commission of some sin.
God will not frown upon his Children for every weakness; but if they commit
some scandalous wickedness, he will not only frown, but strike with the Rod
also, and make them cry Peccavi, as it was with Peter and David, and many of
Gods chosen. Such as will not be guided by the Light of the Sun of
Righteousness, shall not be warmed with the heat of it for the present; but God
will put his Face under a Cloud, till they know how to enjoy their Fathers
smiles: Isa. 17.18. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wrath, and smote
him; I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart.

Cause 2. Inordinate aggravation of sin.
Secondly, it falls out from the inordinate aggravation of sin committed. It is
the policy of Satan, before the Commission of sin, to lessen sin and magnify
mercy: but after the Commission, to magnify sin, and lessen mercy: As Cain
said, My sin is greater than can be forgiven. Yea, sometimes believers
themselves are over-taken with this Temptation, Fain I would believe, says a
poor Soul, but I am so sinful, so unworthy, I cannot lay hold on the Promise,
and so the comfort is suspended. But it were good for such to remember, the
grace of God is free: Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance; yea, the greatest of sinners, such as Paul, Manasses, Mary
Magdalen, etc. No matter what the disease be, if thou will come humbly to
Christ, the Physician of Souls: And tell me, when did he ever turn away any
diseased person without cure? He has one Medicine of sufficient virtue to cure
all diseases, 1 John 1.27. The Blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin.
Nothing but the Blood of Christ can cleanse from the least sin; and the Blood
of Christ can cleanse from the greatest: But this is the second stop-Cock to
the waters of Comfort, immoderate aggravation of sin, and too much poring upon
our own unworthiness.

The third is, Cause 3. Ignorance of forgiveness.
Ignorance of the right way to attain assurance of forgiveness of sin, and of
Gods favor; conceiving the promises are only made to such as do actually
believe; and thereupon they conclude against themselves, No Promise can belong
to them, because they do not believe; and upon that ground they should be kept
from believing as long as they live. Note.
For God does not make a Promise to a man, because he believes; but a man
believes, because God makes a Promise: Because we may believe, Promises are
laid as Foundations of Faith, and not Faith laid as Foundations of Promises.
Now the Ignorance of this, strips the Soul of comfort for a long time: So the
mistake of the Spirits witness, whilst men take it to be some vocal Testimony,
and so wanting that, they fall into no small perplexity, not knowing, that the
fruits of the Spirit are sufficient evidences, that we are led by the Spirit,
and are not under the Law, Psalm. 5 18.22. But the mistake of this evidence,
does much eclipse our Comfort.

The fourth Impediment of Comfort, is, Cause 4. Want o^ acting Faith.
their not acting of Faith, though they have the habit: They forget the
application of Gods faithful Word, or of his faithful Works according to his
Word, to their present condition, and then they must needs want comfort.

1. In application of Gods faithful Word.
1. The Application of his Faithful Word, Heb. 12. The believing Jews were apt
to faint in their minds, and to be weary in the time of trial; why so? ver. 5.
They had forgotten the word of Exhortation, which speaks to them as unto
children, Despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art
rebuked of him. They had forgot the word of Exhortation, and the word of
Promise, whereby God had engaged himself to be as a Father to them in their
greatest affliction, and therefore they wanted comfort.

2. In application of Gods faithful Works.
They forgot the Application of his Faithful Works, according to his Word, Mat.
16.17. The Disciples were very solicitous and careful about bread, it troubled
them much, they had no more provision: and what was the reason of it? They had
forgotten the application of his Faithful Works according to his word; v. 9. Do
ye not understand, neither remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and
how many baskets ye took up? Neither the seven loaves of the four thousand,
etc. So that the wanting of acting of our Faith in the Word and Works of God,
is the occasion of the the want of Comfort.

Cause 5. Overlooking the terms on which Christ is had.
Fifthly, Their forgetfulness to take Christ on his own terms, with the Cross;
and therefore when the Cross comes unlooked for, they are troubled, they are
troubled out of measure, and it may be they want inward comfort too: and why
so? because Christ will not speak peace to a Soul, till he makes it willing to
take him upon Gospelterms, and that is, with the Cross: Luke 14.26. If any man
come to me, and hate not Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brother
and Sister, yea, and his own Life too, he cannot be my Disciple: and whosoever
does not bear his Cross, and come after me, he cannot be my Disciple. These are
the Articles of Agreement betwixt Christ and the Soul; these must be signed and
observed, before we can have comfort; and we must remember them, as we desire
to retain our comfort: for in case we forget them, a little thing will offend
us, and throw our comforts off the hooks. And thus sometimes the want of
comfort in Gods People, springs from themselves.

At other times it springs from Satan, 2. From Satan.
who because he is miserable himself, would fain make all others like himself:
But because he cannot hinder the happiness of Gods people, therefore he will do
what he can, to hinder their comfort in the mean-time; and therefore so far as
God will give him leave, he will be sure to toss them in the Fan of Temptation,
and to throw at them many fiery darts of Opposition: he will be ready to inject
into their minds many hideous thoughts of Atheism and Blasphemy, the venom
whereof are ready to drink up their Spirits: and it is no marvel if they want
comfort at such times. Sometimes he prevails to tempt them to sin, Cast thy
self down. 1 Chronicles. 21.1. And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David
to number the people: Zech. 3.1. And he showed me Joshua the High Priest,
standing before the Angel of the Angel, and Satan standing at his right hand to
resist him.

This springs from God, 3. From God.
who is pleased to dispense himself in much wisdom and faithfulness, that
one-while his Saints shall have comfort, and another-while it shall be eclipsed
again: And why so?

1. To show, that he is the God of all our comforts; therefore he does sometime
withdraw our comforts, to make us know we are not Freeholders, but Tenants at
will: He turns his People out of their comforts, though he never wholly turns
them out of their possessions of grace: He creates darkness as well as light in
the Soul, that we may give him the glory of our light and comfort to all
Eternity. Isa. 45.67. I form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and
create evil.

2. God does this, Why God eclipseth his peoples comforts.
to fit them and frame them for some special work and service: He humbles them,
and proves them, Deu. 8.2, 3, 16
to do them good, and to do much good by them in the latter end. Amongst men,
such as we train up for some special employment, their Parents acquaint them
with all conditions; they are sent from School to the University; from
University to the Inns of Court; from thence to travel into remote places of
the World, and endure much hardship: So God, when he will mould a man for some
notable employment, he makes him travel through all conditions; he must go
through thick and thin, heighths and depths, and from thence he calls him out
to his service.

3. God withdraws his comforts for the present, to prepare them for the more
comforts afterward. The darkness of the night, makes the light of the day more
sweet and comfortable: So the sorrows of Gods People, do but prepare them for
more fullness of constant joy. As contraries opposed, makes both to shine the
brighter: And therefore it is said, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall
be comforted, Mat. 5.4. And why shall godly mourners be comforted? Note.
Because sorrow, like the rest of those declining Passions, it is not made for
it self, but for some higher use; As hatred for love, and fear for confidence;
so sorrow is made for joy, it is subservient to that very end. God will have
his People sorrow much at one time, that they may rejoice the more at another.
Those usually have most of heaven upon earth, that formerly have met with most
of hell upon earth: Psa. 116.3. The sorrows of death compassed me, the pains of
hell got hold upon me, I found trouble and sorrow: (As Jonas crying out of the
belly of Hell) But look upon him within two or three verses after, and you may
see him in an Ecstasy, as if he were in heaven; ver. 7. Return unto thy rest, O
my Soul, the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. And these are the causes in
which, and these are the causes for which God does sometimes withold comforts
from his servants. Other ways, and at other times, the only truly comfortable
life, is a Religious life, the Life of Faith: And that is the third Head of
Information.

The fourth follows, to let us see what we should desire and endeavor for our
best friends; yea, Inform. 4. What to desire for our best friends.
for such as are a part of our selves, our Children. We all desire they may
live long, according to the Promise of the fifth Commandment; and that they may
live a comfortable life, as well as a long life: And if so, then it should the
chief desire and endeavor of Parents, that their Children may inherit their
Faith, as well as their outward Possessions. For the just lives by Faith the
Life of Consolation: Oh then labor to make them partakers of the second Birth;
Let the same mind be in you, that was in the Apostle, when he said, My little
children, of whom I travail in birth, till Christ be formed in you. If Christ
be once formed in them by Faith, they shall be sure to live comfortably
themselves, and they will surely be the greatest comfort of their believing
Parents. Prove. 23.24, 25. The father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice;
and he that begets a wise child, shall have joy of him. Thy father and thy
mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice. They shall indeed,
if they be spiritual Parents as well as natural; they shall have double and
treble joy. The Apostle, that was but a spiritual Parent only, yet mark how
affectionately he writes to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.2, 3, 4. To Timothy my dearly
beloved Son, I thank God for thee, I greatly desire to see thee, that I may be
filled with joy. As if only a sight of Timothy would fill his heart full of
joy: How much more then, when Parents are both natural and spiritual Parents
both together? It must needs be a strong stream, where two such Rivers meet
together. Surely, the comforts of the Childrens Faith, will have a strong
reflection back again upon their Parents. Look as the children of wicked
Parents, that brought them up in Lying, and Swearing, and Stealing, shall rise
up and call them Cursed, Cursed be the father or mother that lays a stumbling
block before the poor child: so the children of believing Parents, that have
been instruments under God of their new birth, shall rise up and call them
blessed, Prove. 31.28. Her children rise up and call her blessed: And blessed be
those Parents, might Timothy say, who instructed me in their Faith, and prayed
me into that faith, wherein I greatly rejoice, even into that faith which dwelt
first in my grandmother Lois, and now through free grace dwells in me also. It
is a sweet thing, when faith and free grace descends, where corruption had
first descended: when Faith once acts, and by degrees draws out corruption,
both Parents and Children have just cause to rejoice. For the just lives by
Faith the Life of Consolation

Inform. 5. What happiness in the end of the faithful.
Information to inform us, If there be such happiness in the way, what happiness
then is there at the end of the journey? If there be such comfort in believing
the thing, before it be enjoyed, what is then in enjoying of the things, which
before were but believed? If that saying be true of the Life of Faith in the
state of grace, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, what god has prepared for
them that love him, how much more shall it be verified of the state of glory,
when Faith shall be turned into Fruition, and Hope into present Possession?
When we shall have cause to say with the Queen of Sheba, The one half has not
been told us. No doubt that Queen was much affected to hear of the Wisdom of
Solomon, she was much taken with it, or else would she never have taken so long
a journey: But how much joy more was she affected with, and admiration, when
she saw with her own eyes the glory of his house, and heard with her own ears
the rare expressions of his unparalleled wisdom? Before she saw with other
men's eyes, and heard with other men's ears, but now she heard with her own, and
therefore she was affected with much more delight and wonder, insomuch as there
was no more spirit left in her: which intimates the surpassing greatness of the
joy and comfort she took in it For great affections let loose, do even drink up
the spirit: she was fuller of affection than she could well hold. But in
heaven, there shall be an enlargement of the vessel, as well as the liquor of
heavenly joy; and therefore how great shall that joy be? If there be such joy
in believing, and that weakly too? What joy shall there be in a plenary
comprehension? If it revived the spirit of old Jacob to hear that Joseph was
alive, and to receive his tokens at such a distance, Genesis 45.27. how much more
do you think was the good old man revived, when he came to see, and to embrace
his Son? So, if it do revive the heart of a Christian so much, to understand by
Faith, that Jesus Christ, who was dead, is alive, and behold he lives for
evermore; and is ascended to give gifts unto men: how much more shall their
spirits be revived, when they come to be dissolved, and to be with Christ,
which is far better? Phil. 1.23. If the Sealing of the Conveyance be so
comfortable, what is the taking of the Possession? and what the enjoyment of
all, to all eternity? If the Espousals be so full of joy, what are the Nuptial
Rites or Solemnities upon the Marriage day? What Soul is there, thaa is truly
betrothed to Jesus Christ by Faith and Love, that would not make the Conclusion
of the Book of the Canticles, its own importunate and summary Love-shout, Make
haste my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the
Mountains of spices.

general Use, is for just Reproof of such as look at the life of Religious
persons, Reproof of mis-judging the life of the faithful.
as the most sad melancholy life in the world; yea, some are so deluded by
Satan, as to think Religion is nothing but the fruit and effect of a
melancholic disposition. And therefore by the way, Note.
let Religious persons take heed, how they carry themselves, and how they walk
toward them that are without, that they be neither so light and jocund in
their carriage, as thereby to confirm carnal men in their unlawful liberties:
Nor on the other side, so full of sadness and austerity, as to give them
occasion to imagine there is no manner of joy in the ways of God. But the truth
is, if there be comfort to be found in any way under heaven, certainly it is to
be found in the way of Faith. Faith being so powerful a hand to keep off such
things as are any ways uncomfortable, and to draw in also, all such things as
are truly comfortable to the Soul. David was a religious man, and yet a
comfortable man; yes, therefore cheerful, because religious. The sweet singer
was usually as comfortable as a Bird in May. Belshazzar was extremely sad in
the midst of his Cups; and therefore sad, because wicked: he looked as pale,
when he saw the handwriting upon the wall, as if there had been death in the
last Cup he drank. It is true, wicked men may be outwardly merry, as Gods
People may be sometimes sad: but look, as in a wicked man's joy there is always
the seed of sorrow; so in a godly man's sorrow, there is always the seed of joy.
Therefore says Christ to his Disciples, Luke 6.21. Blessed are ye that weep
now, for ye shall laugh: but he threatens the contrary to such as be of a
contrary spirit, ver. 25. Woe unto you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and
weep. He is a wise man, that will sorrow for a moment, that he may rejoice for
ever: But he is a mad man, that will purchase his joy at so dear a rate, as to
rejoice for a moment, although he pay for it in sorrow to all eternity. It is
the wise man's judgment of the fools mirth, Eccles. 2.2. I said of laughter, It
is madness, and of mirth, What do thou? A wise man may give his judgment of
a fools joy; but a fool is no competent judge of a wise man's joy. Prove. 14.10.
A stranger does not intermeddle with his joy. And therefore when a wicked man
speaks evil of the ways of God, he speaks evil of the things he knows not. For
the just lives by Faith the Life of Consolation.

The second Use Reproves the Papists, Repr. 2. Papists rob of comfort, while
they rob of faith.
who rob people of their Comfort, whilst (by their comfort) they rob them of
their Faith, or at least of any hope of full assurance of their faith: For that
is certainly proportionable to the assurance of a Christian. Where there can be
no assurance of the things promised, there can be no sound comfort: But the
Doctrine of Papists is, There can be no such assurance, therefore no sound
comfort. Their Doctrine therefore is an uncomfortable Doctrine. Note.
Therefore they that have received the Mark of the Beast, have no rest day nor
night, Revelat. 14.11. They sting the Consciences of men like Scorpions,
Revelat. 9.5. They can never be quiet in their minds, whilst they hang in
suspense; they know not whether they are in the way to Salvation or Damnation.

This serves to Reprove such as live not the Life of Consolation by Faith, but
by Sense: Repr. 3. To such as fetch comfort from sense.
They are all for sensual delights, such as warm themselves not at Gods fire,
but their own; They compass themselves with their own sparks, and therefore
this they shall have at Gods hands when they go to their graves, they shall lie
down in sorrow, Isai. 50. last. Such as these rejoice either in the comforts of
Sin, or in the comforts of the Creatures.

1. In the comforts of sin: When thou do evil, then thou rejoycest, Jer.
11.15. It is a dangerous thing to do evil, but it is the height of wickedness,
to rejoice in wickedness, Romans 1. ult. They not only do the same things, but
take pleasure in them that do them. What superlative degree of wickedness is
this, to make that the object of our joy, that should be the object of our
greatest sorrow? Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of tears run down mine eyes, because men
keep not thy law.

2. They rejoice in the comforts of the Creatures; not that it is unlawful to
rejoice in the Creature, but it is then unlawful, when it draws the Creature
further from God. When men so rejoice in Corn, Psalm. 4.
and Wine, and Oil, etc. that the light of Gods countenance, and the
consolations of God seems small, and of no account to them. In this case God
will either return and take away these comforts from them, or else will give
them no other portion in this life, which is worst of all.

Repr. 4. To such as refuse comfort upon the Promises.
It Reproves such as refuse to be comforted by a Promise, unless they may have
present performance. These live not by Faith the Life of Consolation, though
they have Gods Hand and Seal, and Oath for it too: All is little to their
esteem. Is it not a shame, that a covetous wretch can take so much comfort in
his Bonds and Bills, though he have little or no Money in his Coffers, because
he knows those Bonds and Bills will fetch in the Money it self in due time; and
yet a Believer, that has so strong a Bond from the God of Truth, sealed with
the Blood and Spirit of the Lord Jesus, should be so dejected, and only
because he wants the present possession of that which God has reserved for a
better time, and for which he has given all sufficient Security in the mean
time? The strong Obligations of God, should bring in the Souls of Believers
strong Consolation.

Repr. 5. To such as go for comfort to false Prophets.
Such are to be Reproved who in stead of living by Faith, which is ever grounded
on the word, comfort themselves in false Doctrine, and false Prophets: Ezekiel.
13.10, 17, 18. They have seduced my people, saying, Peace, and there was no
peace; (as affirming, That God sees no sin, and that there needs no sorrow for
sin) like them 1 Cor. 15.32. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die.
Such smooth words, smother men's Souls in a feather-bed of security.



Exhortation.
First, to live the Life of Spiritual Consolation, etc.

Secondly, To make much of Faith, because by the exercise of this grace, we
live this Life.

1. 1. To live this life of Comfort.
For Exhortation to live this life of Spiritual Consolation. One would think,
one should need no persuasions to this: But the truth is, Some make as much of
their sorrow, as some do of their joy; They think they do well to be sorrowful,
as Jonah thought he did well to be angry. But let such know, it is their duty
to labor to live the Life of Consolation. Shall I give you some Motives to
persuade to this?

Command: Son, be of good comfort, thy sins be forgiven thee. Mat. 9.^.
If a creature lives the Life of Justification, he is commanded to live the
Life of Consolation.

Q. Why do we exercise the affection of love, or hope, or fear, etc?

A. Because God commands us. By the same reason we should exercise the
affection of spiritual joy, because of Gods command: Rejoice in the Lord
evermore; and again I say, rejoice, Phil. 4.4.

End and Use of it. Spiritual joy is very useful, it is like oil to the wheels
in all duties; it makes a Christian strong and active in the work of the Lord:
Nehem. 8.10. The joy of the Lord is our strength. Therefore the Apostle puts [
Rejoice continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5.16, 17.
before Pray continually.

Properties of this heavenly joy, above all natural, worldly, The joy of a
believer excels all natural worldly sinful joy, in 10 properties.
or sinful joy. It is more Solid and Substantial, more Rational, it is more
Spiritual, it is Greater, it is Stronger, it lasts Longer, it is Pure, and it
is sure, it is Fresher, and Wholesomer, and therefore more desirable in every
respect.

It is more Solid and Substantial: A wicked man's joy is very overly vain and
vanishing; he sets a good face on it outwardly, when he has a full sorrowful
heart: Prove. 14.13. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful: But a godly man
sets the worst side outward, when his outside is full of afflictions, and
persecutions, and infirmities, his inside, his heart is full of joy. Carnal men
are Quasi gaudentes, they carry themselves so, as if they were the merriest men
in the world, and yet are truly sorrowful: But godly men are Quasi dolentes, As
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, 2 Cor. 6.10.

2. A rational joy.
A godly man's joy is more Rational. A carnal man, as he is unreasonable in his
rage and persecution, 2 Thessalonians 3.2. so he is unreasonable in his joy: The mirth
of such men (as Solomon speaks in his Book of Ecclesiastes) is no better than
madness. Is not he a madman, that rejoices to see his own house on fire, and
after that, to throw firebrarnds up and down the Town? So it is with every
sinner: Prove. 26.18, 19. As a man-man who casts firebrarnds, and arrows, and
death, so is the man that sins against his neighbor, and says, Am not I in
sport? It Is a most irrational and absurd joy. But a godly man's joy is a most
rational joy, his Affection is ruled by his Reason; and his Reason is
sanctified, and therefore regulated by Grace: God commands him to rejoice, bids
him w^lcome to all comforts, Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal, and therefore he
has good reason to rejoice. His joy is Rational.

3. A spiritual joy
It is most Spiritual. The joy of Carnal men must needs be carnal and sensual
like themselves; they can a little rejoice in corn, Psalm. 6, 7.
and wine, and oil, in Creature Comforts that affect the senses: But a godly
man rejoices in the light of Gods countenance, in the want of all other
things, which must needs be a more excellent joy, as the object is most
excellent. Spiritual joy is the joy of Angels, there is joy among the Angels in
heaven, over one sinner that repents, Luke 15.10) But sensual joy is common
with us to the very Beasts; they delight in meat, drink, and sensual pleasures.

4. A great joy.
It Is a Greater joy. A Carnal man, if he has any joy at all, it is very small,
it is like the joy of a man, that dreams he is Rich, and Honorable, and
Victorious, when indeed he is poor, and base, and servile: which joy, as it is
a false, so it is a slender joy, in comparison of his, who is truly rich,
honorable and victorious. God threatens the enemies of his Church, Isa. 29.8.
that it shall be with them, as with an hungry man, who dreams he is eating, but
when he awaketh, his soul is empty; or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and
behold he drinks, but when he awaketh, he is faint, and his appetite is not
satisfied: So is the joy of all Carnal men, its a faint and unsatisfactory joy.
But the joy of Gods people is full, and satisfying; and therefore, though it
cannot be set out to the full by any outward resemblance, yet it is compared to
those things, in which men use most of all to rejoice, as to the joy of
harvest, Isa. 9.3. To the joy of a marriage feast, Rev. 19. To the joy of a new
discovered treasure, Mat. 13.44. So it is a great joy, Behold (say the Angels)
we bring you tidings of great joy, Luke 2.10.

It a stronger joy, i.e. stronger in regard of its effects. 5. A strong joy.
The joy of Carnal men is but weak, because it is not able to hold out in a
storm. The terrors of God can easily drown the greatest of worldly comforts (as
we see in Belshazzar, Dan. 5.) But the terrors of the world cannot drown the
comforts of God; as we see in the noble Army of Martyrs, singing in the Prison,
triumphing at the Stake: So that we may say of True Joy, as Solomon says of
True Love, It Is strong as death, the coals thereof are as coals of fire, which
has a most vehement flame; many waters cannot quench it, neither can the
floods drown it, Cant. 8.6, 7. This joy of Gods people is therefore called
strong Coonsolation, Heb. 6.17. And indeed, the word ordinarily used, intimates
as much, Consolatio, quasi Consolidatio; q. d. a making one strong and solid,
against all opposite evils; which only the comforts of God can do: And
therefore they should not seem small to us, Job 15.11. For the comforts of God
are his peoples strength, Job 16.5.

It Is a more Durable joy; as it is stronger, 6. A durable joy.
so it lasts longer: The joy of Carnal men is like Jonah's gourd, it is born and
dies again within the compass of a day or two: The joy of an hypocrite is but
for a moment, Job 20.5. it is but for a flash, like the crackling of thorns
under a pot, though it makes a great noise, it is soon gone. But of all flashes,
it is most like a flash of Lightning, it continues but a while, and it sends
after it a Thunderclap of Judgment, and extreme Misery. -- But the joy of Gods
people, springing from an Immortal seed, abides for ever, it continues with
them all their life long; nay, it out-lives life, and is a comfort in death:
They that have it, shall never lose it. Everlasting joy shall be upon their
heads, Isa. 35.10.

7. A pure joy.
It Is a Purer joy. The joy of Carnal men is like a Pit of Puddle-water; They dig
unto themselves broken Cisterns, Jer. 2.13. Their comforts are not lasting, nor
clear, but puddle-water, full of many sinful admixtures of gross and
unmortified corruptions, which make them like a pot of honey, full of stings.
-- But the joys of Gods people are pure, they drink out of the fountain, Psa.
36.8. There is no mud in the bottom, no after-stings of a defiled and accusing
Conscience: they are sweet, serene, and pure joys.

8. A sure joy.
It Is a Surer joy. A Carnal man has his joy upon very uncertain Tenure: He is
not sure of it beforehand, and when he has it, he is not sure he shall hold
it, it depends upon many If's and And's: If I have my health, if such a
business succeeds well, if such a friend be as good as his word, I shall then
rejoice, says a Curnal man, therefore his joy rises and falls, as outward
Providence do ebb and flow: whereas he that lives by Faith upon a word of
God, has sure comfort; so long as the word holds, his joy holds. If for the
present he have it not, he is sure of it afterward; as sure, as that Harvest
follows Seed-time. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126.6. And
when he has it, he is sure to hold it (though there may be some intermissions
of the lively feeling of it) Your heart shall rejoice, and your joy shall no
man take from you, says our Savior to his Discples, John 16.22.

It Is a Fresher joy. 9. A fresh joy.
All other joys have but their Honey-Moons; and though they do not presently
sour, yet they grow flat and dull within a while: if they die not altogether,
yet ever and anon they come to the fall of the leaf. But the joys of Gods
people are as fresh and flourishing at the last, as at the first: His leaf also
shall not wither, Psalm. 1. The Bed of Jesus Christ is always green, Cant. 1.16.
The Poets fancy of a Continual Spring in the Golden Age of the World, is here a
Reality. The joys of Gods people are ever springing and budding forth new
comforts.

It Is a more Wholesome and Safe joy. 10. A safe joy.
The joy of Carnal men, it is a destructive joy: Destructive to Spiritual good.
How hardly is that man reclaimed, who makes sin the object of his joy? And it is
destructive even to Natural good There Is danger in excesses of joy, as well as
sorrow: And what the Apostle says of worldly sorrow, may be said of worldly
joy, It works death. How many men have lost their Wits, nay their Lives in
excessive joys? Such heights of joy have set the door of the heart so wide
open, that the Spirits have run out of a sudden, and returned no more. This is
sometime a fruit of Carnal joy. But Spiritual joy is safe and wholesome,
wholesome for the Soul: It Is a good means to concoct our knowledge, To love the
Truth, and rejoice in what we know; while otherwise, the sweetest Truths will
lie raw and indigested upon the stomach of the Soul. And, it is wholesome for
the Body: A cheerful spirit expels superfluities, helps concoction, quickens
the understanding, cheers the countenance, and in a word, Prove. 17.22.
A merry heart does good like a Medicine.

And now, who would not be persuaded to savor these Spiritual Comforts, and to
live in them, which have such excellent properties, that worldly joys are not
worthy to be named the same day with them; they are not meeet to be put into
the scales with these, which are so Solid, so Rational, so Pure, etc. as ye
have heard.

Qu. But you will say, What Means may we use to possess more of this Joy, (of
which I have given you but a little taste?) And yet as little as it is, methinks
every soul that has heard me, should cry out with the woman of Samaria, Joh.
4. Lord, evermore give me of this water, that I thirst not, neither go to the
worlds pits to draw any more comfort thence.

Means of joy.
Ans. I answer, Therefore learn the Composition of this best Cordial, better
then ever the World could make; it is not of my making, but of Gods prescribing:
It Is Laetificans-Christi.

Faith.
1. Then, Labor for Faith, and the increase of it. It Is the very Doctrine now
in hand; The just man lives by Faith the life of Consolation. Let us keep our
Faith then, and it will keep our Joy; Let us increase our Faith, and it will
increase our Joy: For Faith as it is the Mother, so its the Nurse also of Joy;
as it breeds it and brings it forth, so it feeds and maintains it till it comes
to a perfect age in Christ, so that as the Just goes on from Faith to Faith, so
he goes from Joy to Joy, till he comes into heaven it self. As his Faith grows
stronger, so his Joy is sweeter: All fruits the nearer to maturity, the sweeter
they are; and so is the fruit of Faith in Spiritual Joy, its sweeter in the ear
then in the blade. Exercise Faith therefore every Day as thou desire abiding,
and increasing Comforts. Would thou have the warmth of Spiritual joy abiding
in thy heart? and that holy fire never to go out? Actings of faith for the
increasing spiritual joy.
Be sure then to blow up the Gift of Faith by daily Exercise.

Qu. But how shall I make use of my Faith, to the best Increase of my Joy.

1. On the right object.
Ans. 1. Remember what was said in the Reasons, Be sure to lay hold on the right
Object of Consolation, God himself, and the Ordinances of God, with joy draw
water out of the wells of salvation, Isa. 12.3. Live the Life of Justification,
and Sanctification, and thou shall not fail to live the Life of Consolation:
whereas otherwise there can be comfort, no more than fruit upon a Tree without
a Root.

2. Act thy Faith in Prayer. Pray, 2. In Prayer.
that your joy may be full, Joh. 16 24. If joy be not worth asking, it is worth
nothing. No wonder, some have so little comfort, they pray so little: Ye have
not, because ye ask not, Jam. 4.2. Thou have (it may be) praid for Grace, not
for Comfort. Learn now of David, Psalm. 51.8. Make me to hear joy and gladness,
that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice: as if David had said, Lord,
I have had thy Messenger the Prophet Nathan speaking peace to me (for that is
the Title of the Psalm) and saying, The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall
not die: But Oh let me hear thy Spirit say so too, or else my heart cannot
rejoice. As I have heard therefore a comfortable message from thy Minister, let
me hear the same also from thy Spirit: Make thou me to hear joy and gladness.
If all the Ministers in the world should preach peace to a penitent Soul (as
they have cause) though it be in a safe, yet it cannot be in a comfortable
condition, till God by his Spirit speak peace also.

Q. To what purpose then should we attend upon the Ministry of the Word?

A. Because though the Ministry cannot do it without the Spirit, yet the
Spirit delights to work in the Ministry of the Word, or soon after. When the
Spouse in the Canticles, wanting comfort, inquired of the Watchmen, it was but
a little while, ere she found him whom her soul loved, Cant. 3.3, 4.

Q. But why does not the Soul find comfort in every Ordinance, at all times?

A. There may be many causes: Among the rest, this may be one, Lest we should
ascribe so much to the Ordinance, or to the Instrument dispensing it, as to
neglect looking up by Prayer to the God of the Ordinance: whereas, when we
experience the best Ordinance sometimes empty, and the best Instrument (without
the Spirit) a miserable comforter, This will quicken us to look above both to
God himself, saying, We will use both, but we will lift up our soul to God
alone: Rejoice the soul of thy servant, for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my
soul, Psalm. 86.4. and elsewhere, Psalm. 35.3. Say unto my soul, I am thy
salvation. That Is the second Means to act faith for Comfort in Prayer, -- Pray,
that your joy may be full, Joh. 16.24.

3. In crucifying worldly joy.
3. Act Faith in the Crucifying of worldly and Carnal joys, if you would profess
Spiritual and Heavenly. For the first of these do exceedingly quench the
latter, as water does fire: so that (as in the strife of fire and water) if
heavenly joys get not the Mastery, Worldly will. It Is true, God makes a feast
of joy, a feast of fat things to his people, Isa. 25.6. But remember what the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.21. Ye cannot be partakers of the Lords table, and the
Table of Devils. Now the delights of sin, are the several dishes with which the
Devils table is furnished; and he that is filled with these, has no stomach to
the consolations of God, nay he abhors them. Prove. 27.7. The full stomach
loathes the honeycomb: He loathes the honeycomb of the Word and Ways of God;
And what is the reason? He was never yet weaned from the Worlds Breast. David
indeed could say of Gods Word, Oh! it is sweeter than the honey, and the
honeycomb, Psalm. 19.10. And why so? Surely, because the same David could say
of all worldly delights, Surely I have behaved my self as a child that is
weaned of his mother, my soul is even as a weaned child, Psalm. 131.2. Wean thy
Soul therefore from worldly delights, and thou shall be the bettter prepared to
delight in the Lord, who is both willing and able to give thee thy hearts
desire. And that is the third Means.

4. 4. 1 Samuel 7.2. In spiritual mourning.
Act your Faith (in case you are in a mournful frame) to mourn after the Lord:
For certainly, as worldly joy ever ends in sorrow, so godly sorrow ever ends in
joy: Mat. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. God
can no more withhold his sweetest comforts from those that mourn after his
presence, as their chiefest good, than the tender Mother can withhold the Breast
from the crying child. Oh! every cry goes to her heart, and she cannot be
quiet her self, till she quiet the child. Isa. 49.14, 15. When Sion sits in
the dust (like a poor child lamenting the parents absence) saying, My God has
forsaken me, my God has forgotten me: What is Gods answer? Can a woman forget
her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the fruit of her
womb? yet will not I forget thee: Behold, I have graven thee on the Palms of my
hands -- As if God should say, So long as thou mournest after me, I may as soon
forget my self as thee, for I have graven thee on the palms of my hands. If
thou desire comfort then, mourn after the Lord, not after corn, and wine, and
oil; not after the harvest of the Lord, but the Lord of the harvest; and then
doubtless such as thus sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

5. 5. In raising spiritual affections.
Act Faith in digesting and bringing down Heavenly Notions into Holy
Affections, and Righteous Actions, then you will find them sweet in the taste
and swallow. It Is not the looking upon Divine Truths by a mere notional act of
the Understanding, but the chewing and digesting them by Faith and Love, that
makes them truly comfortable. [Thy words were found, and I did eat them -- And
thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart, Jer. 15.16.] Most
persons look upon Divine Truths, as people in a Market do on Commodities; they
pass by them, or taste a little, and cheapen them: they only have the true
comfort of them, who buy and eat, and are satisfied. And such are they, who
digest their knowledge into practice, to such it is the joy and rejoicing of
their heart. Joh. 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.
Knowledge to a wicked man, is as the morning light to a Thief; Job 24.17.
it is as terrible as the shadow of death. But to a godly man, it is like the
morning light to an honest Traveller or Watchman; it is most desired beforehand,
and its most welcome when it comes. And therefore the saving knowledge of God
is compared to such a light: Psalm. 130.3. [My soul waits for the Lord, more
than the watch for the morning; I say, more than they that watch for the
morning]. Act Faith therefore to the digesting of knowledge into love, and the
practice of it. Study Affections, more than Expressions or Notions.

6. In true prizing heavenly joy.
6. Act Faith to the true prizing of heavenly joy. Such as truly prize the joy
of the Spirit, shall have plenty of it. Now it is only Faith sets a true
estimate upon the joy of Gods people, Heb. 11.25, 26. The Spirit of God is a
Tender and delicate Guest, it loves to make its abode, and stay longest, where
it is most freely welcome. But if we check, damp, resist, quench, and grieve
that Spirit, how can we hope, that it should rejoice our spirits. But prize it,
make it heartily welcome, and thou shall have more of its sweet company and
communion. The truth is, we should prize one comfort from the Spirit, more than
all the world; and then, we should find more than a world of Comforts in that
single Comforter, who is therefore called The Comforter, by way of eminency.
Thou may have comfort indeed in a Friend, a Brother, a Child, a Yoke Fellow:
but what are all these to the comforts of the Spirit? The Spirit is able to
comfort without these; but these are not able to comfort without the Spirit.
Prize the comforts of the Spirit, and be thankful for them, and more shall be
given. The Primitive Saints prized the comforts of the Spirits so high, that
they would rather choose to endure any Tortures from men, than part with those
comforts from God, They were stoned, Heb. 11.37.
were sawn asunder, etc. Therefore God made them to rejoice the more, even with
Joy unspeakable, and full of glory -- which is not the ordinary lot of all
Christians, but of suffering Christians. They were filled with Heaven, when
they seemed to sense to be in Hell, as if Hell and Heaven were met together in
the same persons: An Hell of Torments from Satan and his Instruments; an Heaven
of Joys from God, even glorious joys, as if the God of this World, and the God
of the World to come, did strive, whether Torments or Comforts should get the
Victory in the Saints: But in conclusion, Comforts triumph over Torments, Love
and Joy is stronger than Death: while they die, they overcome, and are more
than Conquerors through Christ that has loved them. [They overcame by the
Blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their Testimony, and they loved not their
lives unto death] Rev. 12.11. Prize the joys of God in life, and thou shall
find such joy as will drown the sorrows of Death. That Is the fifth Means.

7. Act Faith to make right use of our Joy, 7. In right using joy, when had.
Isa. 2.11. Luke 8.15.
when we have it. Take heed of too much sail, and too little ballast, lest you
overturn all -- Rejoice with reverence -- And bring forth the fruit of joy with
patience, lest unfruitful joy be nipt in the bud, or turned into sorrow. God
comforts not his servants for nothing, Neb. 8.10.
but that the Joy of the Lord may strengthen them, and encourage them to
service; and that they may comfort others, 2 Cor. 1.4.
with the same comfort wherewith they have been comforted of God. And if we use
it not to these ends, we may soon suffer an eclipse in our comforts. Why does
God cause the Sun to shine upon the Moon, but that the Moon may bestow that
borrowed light on this Inferior World? Why does the Sun of Righteousness shine
with beams of comfort upon any Souls, but that they may communicate the same
comforts to others. Are ye then who were once darkness, made light in the Lord?
Ephesians. 5.8.
walk as children of light, lest God eclipse your comforts, Amos 8.9.
and make your Sun to set at noon. So long as the Cock runs, the Fountain
freely empties it self into the pipes. We are but the Conduit-pipes of Comfort,
God is the Fountain. The more we empty our selves into others (comforting
others) the more will God empty himself into us, comforting us -- The liberal
person shall have plenty, and he that scatters shall have rain, Prove. 11.25.
It Is true of spiritual, as well as corporal Alms, both are comfortable. And he
that comforts others, shall have the more himself. And that is the seventh and
last Means of acting of Faith, so as to live the Life of Consolation.

Thus the just man lives by Faith in regard of Spiritual Life.

Now thirdlly, He lives by Faith in regard of Eternal Life. Hab. 2.5, 6.
The Chaldean lays hold upon this present world, ver. 5, 6. He is all for the
body, and sins against his Soul, ver. 10. Hab. 2.10.
But Gods people lay hold on that knowledge which shall fill them with glory,
ver. 14. Even the knowledge of the Righteousness of God to Life Eternal: For so
the Apostle applies this Text to that very degree of Faith, Romans 1.16, 17.

Not that there is any need of Faith in Heaven, or the Means of Faith; for
these shall cease, 1 Cor. 13.8. But because in this life, by Faith, we lay hold
on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6.12. we have the seal and assurance of it: A carnal
man says, Seeing is Believing: but a spiritual man says, Believing is Seeing,
Heb. 11.1.

The work of faith about eternal life.
Now Faith grounded on the Word of God assures us of Three things about eternal
life.

1. That there is an eternal life of the Saints after this is ended.

2. What the Happiness of this life is, and wherein it consists.

3. It assures a Believer of his peculiar interest in this life.

1. Then, Faith assures a Believer, That there is an eternal life. Three
degrees of it.
That there is an eternal life.

There are diverse degrees of this Life. The first degree is here below in this
world, Joh. 5.24. Eternal life is begun here.

2. The second degree of it, is, in the end of this life, when the body of a
Saint rests in the Bed of the Grave, and the soul is with God in Paradise, Luke
23.43.

3. The third degree of it, is, After the day of general Judgment, when body
and soul being reunited, the whole person shall be wholly glorified to all
eternity, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10.

Now that there is such a life, Faith makes good.

1. By plain Testimonies of Scripture.

2. By necessary Consequence, and deduction from Scripture.

1. By evident Testimony of Scripture. Scripture.


In the Old Testament, Psalm. 16.11. At thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore. Dan. 12.2. Many of them that sleep shall awake, some to Everlasting
life.

In the New Testament. Mat. 25. ult. And the righteous into life eternal. Joh.
3.16. That whoever believes should not perish, but have [Everlasting life.]

2. By necessary Consequence from the Scriptures.

As,

End of man's Creation and Redemption. Man was made after Gods Image (Genesis 1.26,
27.) And renewed after it, Ephesians. 4.24. that he might have perpetual Communion
with God, 1 John 1.3. As God therefore lives for ever, so shall those who are
redeemed by Christ, live ever too, Joh. 14.19.

Kingdom and Headship of Christ, which are both eternal -- Of his Kingdom there
shall be no end, Luke 1.33. If Christ be a King for ever, he must have Subjects
throughout that Eternity. If Christ be an Head for ever, his Members must needs
live for ever; otherwise, Christ must be a King without Subjects, an Head
without Members: both which are Unreasonable, and Dishonorable to Christ.

Prayer, That all his may be with him for ever, to behold his glory, Joh.
17.24. Now the Father hears the Son always, Joh. 11.42.

Nature of the Soul: It Is immortal, Mat. 10.28. yea, it has in it sparks and
desires of Immortality, (Now Natura nihil dedit frustra) which have appeared,
not only in the life, but at the death of Saints, in which, God has been
pleased to give his people a sight of Heaven, and glorious apprehensions of the
life to come. Steven sees the heavens opened, Act. 7.56, 59. To which may be
added, the Devils design to gather Souls in Reversion; as in the stories of
Witches.

Ab absurdo. If there were no life after this, Christians would be of all men
most miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19. -- Here wicked men many times fare best, and Gods
people are chastened every morning, and have sorest Temptations on their
Deathbeds: So that it would be exceedingly derogatory from the Wisdom,
Holiness, and Justice of God, if there were not another life, wherein every man
shall rejoice according to his ways, Luke 16.25. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.7.

Thus Faith gathers Arguments from the Word, That there is an eternal Life.

2. What the happiness of eternal life is.
2. Faith informs a believer much of the Happiness of this life, and wherein it
consists in the main. For however it be true, that none of the Saints departed
which are gone to heaven, (as Enoch, Elias, etc.) have Commission to come down
and tell us what the joys of heaven are, yet we have Moses and the Prophets,
Luke 17. ult. Nay, though there were a man once caught up into heaven, and let
down again to the earth, yet it was not lawful for him to utter what he had
heard and seen, 2 Cor. 12. yet (for all that) Faith looks into heaven per
transennam, through the lattice, Cant. 2.9. and finds so much comfort therein,
that from thence it makes a strong Collection, That certainly the Happiness of
the Creature, must needs consist in the perfect Vision of God, which is to be
had in heaven, Vision of God fourfold.
and not before: for there is a fourfold Vision of God.

1. Natural, in things created: For the invisible things of God are clearly
seen from the Creation, etc. Romans 1.20.

2. Specular, or Symbolical; In the Word, and in the Signs of Gods love, we see
God. -- For these were appointed to be lively remembrances and representations
of Christ to the Soul. Gal. 3.1.


3. There Is the Vision of Faith, which looking through the Word and Sacraments
(as through a Perspective-glass) draws God nearer to the Soul.

4. But fourthly, There Is the Vision of Glory in the World to come. Here we see
God darkly, as in a glass, 2 Cor. 3.
but there face to face.

Now Faith does further assure us, Perfect Vision of God causes perfect
transformation.
That this perfect Vision of God shall perfectly transform us into the likeness
of God, so far as Creatures can be like God. For Faith argues thus; If the
Specular Vision of God, works some measure of this gracious Transformation, (as
it is said 2 Cor. 3. ult.) How much more shall the Perfect Vision of God in
glory, work a perfect change of a believer into the likeness of God. And so
indeed says the Apostle, -- We shall be like him, [For] we shall see him as he
is, 1 John 3.2. And this was David's comfort in his saddest hours, When I awake
(that is, out of the bed of the grave) I shall be satisfied with thy likeness,
Psalm. 17. last. Perfect Vision of God shall work perfect Transformation, and
this perfect Transformation shall work perfect Satisfaction.

Q. But wherein does this perfect Transformation consist?

A. Doubtless, in the Perfection of all graces: So Faith assures, that

1. Perfect knowledge.
There shall be a Perfection of the Knowledge of God. Here the best Scholar,
that learns most from Books, Sermons, Conference, Observation, or from the
Spirit it self, yet knows but in part: But when that which is perfect is come,
then shall that which is imperfect be done away, 1 Cor. 13.12. Then shall
nothing be hid from us, which we can desire to know. Now we know God in the
knowledge of other things; Then we shall know other things in the knowledge of
God, and therefore we shall know one another, Mat. 17.4.

Here we know things either by Sense, or by Reason and Argumentation, or by
Faith; In Heaven, there will be no need of these, there the clearness of the
object shall put All past all dispute. Here, things seen or known, are far
distant, the Medium dim, the Organ weak: But then, God shall be present, and
open-faced (as it were) and the eye of the Soul shall be fortified to behold
the King in his glory. Isa. 33.17. Eccl. 11.7.
Solomon tells us, that the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is to
behold the Sun. And yet as pleasant as it is, sometime the eye is offended by
looking on the Sun Could the eye look steadfastly and strongly on the Sun
without offense to it, what a glorious sight would it be? In Heaven, the Saints
shall behold the Sun of Righteousness, in the highest firmament, and the eye of
their Soul shall be strengthened to behold his glory to eternity. That Is the
first Perfection of knowledge.

2. Perfect love.
Faith assures, That in Heaven there shall be a Perfection of Love, both to God
and one another. Indeed this follows from the former; Perfect knowledge of God
begets Perfect Love: The Saints then shall love God beyond all measure, who is
infinitely lovely.

Here, it is the grief of a gracious heart, that it can love God no more, there
it shall be the joy of a glorious Soul that it shall love God above all, yea,
above it self, and both it self and all other things in God. And in this
respect, the Apostle gives Love the pre-eminence, 1 Cor. 13.
above Faith and Hope, that when Faith shall be turned into Vision, and Hope
into Comprehension, yet Love abides, or endures to eternity.

Faith assures, That in Heaven, 3. Perfect obedience.
Obedience to the will of God shall be perfect: and this follows likewise from
the former. Perfect Obedience springs from perfect Love: If ye love me, keep my
Commandments, Joh. 14.15. The Saints knowing God perfectly, shall perfectly
love him; and, perfectly loving God, shall perfectly keep his Commandments:
Rev. 22.3. His servants shall serve him; ver. 4. -- And they shall see his
face. Here, we see only the back parts of God; In Heaven, we shall see him
perfectly, and serve him perfectly.

Faith assures, 4. Perfect joy.
That in Heaven there shall be perfect Peace and Joy. The Kingdom of Heaven is
righteousness, [peace and joy] Romans 14.17. When our righteousness is perfect,
then is our Peace too. Here, indeed, imputed Righteousness is perfect; but
imparted inherent Righteousness is not to be perfected till the life to come,
and then shall be perfect peace, -- Peace with God, with our fellow-Citizens,
with our own Consciences: And perfect joy too; -- At thy right hand is fullness
of joy, Psalm. 16. ult. -- A full joy, and so a full reward, 2 John v. 8.

There is a double fullness Of the Object. Of the Subject.


Faith assures the Saints of both:

First, There shall be a fullness of the Subject. Fourfold fullness of the
subject in glory.
Every part of Soul and Body shall be filled.

1. The Understanding shall be full of light, that every question shall then be
put out of question.

2. The Will so full of subjection to the Will of God, that there shall be no
reluctance.

3. The Affections so full of harmony, there shall be no jarring.

4. The Body so full of glory, that it shall be made like to the glorious body
of Christ, Phil. 3. ult.

Fullness of the Object.
Secondly, there shall be a fullness of the Object. The Saints in glory shall
have whatever may make them happy, whatever they can desire. Joh. 14.8.
They shall see God, and so see the Father, as that it shall suffice them: They
shall have Rest, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. And that which has rest, has obtained its
perfection to the full.

In a word, 1. We shall be freed from whatever may annoy us. 2. We shall enjoy
whatever we can desire.


Fivefold freedom in heaven
We shall be freed, etc.

1. From all the labors of this life. Here, we are born to labor, Job 5.7.
as the sparks to fly upwards: There is rest.

2. From the Necessities of Nature. There is no need of Meat, 1 Cor. 15.28.
Drink, Physic, Clothing, Lodging. God shall be all in all.

3. From the filth and power of Sin. Here the best cry out, Oh wretched, etc.
Romans 7.24. There we shall never sin more.

4. From the company of sinners. Here is complaining, Woe is me, that I am
constrained to dwell in Meshech, Ps. 120.5. There shall be a perfect separation
without any mixture, Wheat with Wheat, and Tares with Tares, like to like, to
all eternity.

5. From all sorrows and pains, Rev. 21.4. The life of the best here is an
April-day, it has some gleams of comfort, but many showers: In Heaven shall be
constant Sunshine for evermore.

Secondly, We shall be possessed of whatever good can be desired. There we
shall enjoy the sweet society of God, Christ, Angels, Saints, and with all
these an eternal Sabbath.

And thus Faith (like Moses on the top of Mount Pisgah) discovers the promised
Land afar off; or (like the Spies) gathers up some Clusters of Canaan, and
brings them to a Believer here in the Wilderness.

Thirdly, 3. Faith assures, That eternal life is the Believers.
Faith assures a believer of his peculiar interest in this Life Eternal. And
indeed, this is the very life of this life, to know our right to this Tree of
Life in Jesus Christ. For as it is nothing so comfortable to a man that beholds
another man's Temporal Inheritance adorned with Woods, Orchards, Gardens,
Rivers, and goodly Buildings, as to be able to say with good warrant, All these
are mine, I have good Evidence to show for them: So is it nothing so
comfortable, to be able to discourse of the happiness of Heaven, as by the
certainty of Faith to say, By the grace of God, all this is mine, I have good
Evidence to show for it. Indeed otherwise, it is a punishment, nay it is a part
of Hell, (it is poena damni) to know that there is such a Glory in Heaven, while
himself has neither lot nor part in it. This is like Balaam's sight of Heaven,
or Dives his beholding Lazarus in the bosom of Abraham, while there was a great
gulf between them: This (I say) is part of the Torment of Hell. But this is the
Life of a Christians knowledge concerning Life Eternal, when he can upon good
grounds say, This is mine; The lines are fallen [unto me] in a pleasant place;
yea, I have a goodly heritage, [therefore] my heart is glad, my glory
rejoices, my flesh also shall rest in hope, Psalm. 16.6, -- 9. -- I know that
[my] Redeemer lives, etc. For [we] know, etc. 2 Cor. 4.1.

Now how is a Christian assured of this his interest in Eternal Life, but by
Faith? For, Eternal Life is the End or Ultimate Object of Faith: -- Receiving
the end of your faith, even the salvation of your Souls, 1 Pet. 1.9.

There are indeed many witnesses of it, Three in Heaven, and three in Earth, 1 John 5.7, 8, etc. And this witness of Faith is one of the Three on Earth: The
Spirit, and Water, and Blood; The Spirit witnesses to our Spirits, Rom 8.16.
By Water, is meant the Benefit of our Sanctification; By Blood, our
Justification by Faith in Christ, or Expiation by the Blood of Christ applied
by Faith; (and it may here be observed, That though Blood alone saves a
Christian, yet it does not alone witness his salvation: Sanctification goes not
into the matter of Salvation as a cause, yet it goes into the matter of
witness) But according to the former Exposition, Faith laying hold on the Blood
of Christ, witnesses to a Christian his salvation. So it is explained further,
1 John 5. ver. 10. He that believ^th on the Son of God, has the [Witness] in
himself. The Witness; of what? Of Eternal life, ver. 10, 11. This is the record
that God has given to us, [Eternal life] and this life is in his Son: He that
has the Son has life, and be that has not the Son has not life. And what is
it to Have or Receive the Son? But to believe on him, Joh. 1.12. To as many as
[received] him, etc. -- Even to as many as [believe] in his Name. To Receive
Christ, and to Believe in his Name, are both one. And those who believe on
Christ, are Sons; [He gave them power to become the Sons of God] and so Heirs
of Eternal life through Christ. So that Faith assures a Believer of his
interest in life Eternal

How Faith works assurance of heaven.
Q. How does Faith assure a Believer of his particular interest in life Eternal?

Ans. 1. By laying hold on the Promise of the faithful and unchangeable God; 1.
From the Promise.
In hope of eternal life, which God [that cannot lie] has promised, Tit. 1.2.
-- So, Joh. 10.18. And I give to them Eternal life. Aye! may a Christian say,
If I were one of Christ's sheep, I might be assured! The 26 ver answers, Ye
believe not, because ye are not of my sheep --. Such as believe then, are
sheep, and to them Christ gives Eternal life.

2. By arguing from the effect to the cause. 2. From the effects.
Faith is an infallible effect of Gods ordaining a person to life Eternal. Acts
13.48. As many as were ordained to Eternal life, believed -- But I believe,
(says a gracious Soul) therefore I know I am ordained to life.

Obj. But it is impossible for a man to know that he believes?

Ans. Not so: for then

1. The Apostle would not have said, I know whom I have believed, etc. 2 Timothy
1.12.

2. The Apostle would not exhort men to try whether they were in the faith, 2
Cor. 13.5.

3. By arguing from the first fruits to the Harvest, 3. From the earnest.
from the beginning to the perfection, from the seal and earnest to the full
possession.

1. Faith assures Gods people, That they have the first fruits of heaven upon
earth: Rom 8.23. We our selves, which have the first fruits of the Spirit, wait
for the Adoption. By the first fruits, Deuteronomy. 26.1.
the whole crop was sanctified and assured; Believers then, having the
first fruits by Christ, Faith tells them, That they shall have the harvest.
Do thou remember, what admirable joy thou have found in Prayer, Hearing,
Conference, in a Promise, at a Sacrament, so that thy heart did burn? That was
a glimpse of Heaven, and an assurance of it.

2. Faith assures a believer, That he has the beginnings of life Eternal, Joh.
5.24. and Joh. 6, 54. He that eats the flesh, and drinks the blood of Christ,
has Eternal life: This eating and drinking, is believing. Now, this beginning
does assure a Christian by Faith of Perfection, 1 Cor. 1.8, 9.
Deuteronomy. 32.4. His work is perfect. Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this, that he
that has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of Christ.

Obj. May not God repent, and change his mind?

Ans. No: The gifts and callings of God are without repentance, Romans 11.29.

3. Faith assures a Believer, That having the Seal and Earnest, 2 Cor. 1.22.
Ephesians. 1.13.
he shall have the full possession, Ephesians. 1.13, 14.

And Faith assures this upon a double ground:

1. Because the beginnings of saving grace, are special Love Tokens; and the
love of God is unchangeable, Jer. 31.3.

2. God is able and willing to make good what he has thus sealed: Faithful is
he that has called you, who also will do it, 1 Thessalonians. 5.24.

Obj. This were indeed good assurance, if I had saving grace: but how shall I
know that?

Ans. We may know whether Grace be saving:

1. By the Root of it, JESUS CHRIST, Gal. 2.20.

2. By the Extent of it, (the New man.)

3. By its Manner of working; True grace works love to all that is good,
because pleasing to God; and batred of all evil, because displeasing to God,
Psalm. 119.6.

4. From Sonship.
4. Faith assures a Believer of his interest in Life, by an argument drawn from
the Filiation of all Believers: They who have the first fruits, Seal, and
Earnest of Heaven (as before) are made the children of God, Romans 8.24. And what
of that? If children, then heirs, v. Right of Sonship, proves the Right of
Inheritance. By nature we are not the children of God, but of Wrath, Ephesians 2.3.
But Believers are the children of God by Adoption, v 15.16. Adoption (as it is
used in the Civil Law) is the free and voluntary act of a man, Adoption in the
Civil Law, how taken.
whereby he does choose any one that was a stranger before, to stand up in the
place of a Son.

Used in a threefold case.
This Adoption was wont to be 1. In case of Barenness. 2. Of Death of Children.
3. Of Degeneration, and Wickedness of Children.


And in this last case, we being all degenerate by the fall of our first
Parents, and so fallen from God, God chooses some of his free grace to be his
children in Christ, Jer. 3.19.

Obj. But God chooses as bad as those that are fallen from him, yea the very
same.

Ans. It Is most true: But yet he leaves them not in the same condition he found
them in: Double act of free grace in Adoption.
for there is a double Act of Gods free grace in Adoption.

1. The one is Acceptance in Christ, whereby he is pleased to call those his
Chosen People, which were not his Chosen; and those Beloved, which were not
beloved.

2. And the other is Regeneration, whereby they are born of God; and so not
only called Children, but made the Children of God, partakers of the Divine
Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.

And herein lies the great difference between Gods adopting a Child, and
Man's. Difference twixt divine and humane Adoption.
One man adopting another man's child, may accept him for his own, give him the
privilege of a Son in his Inheritance, and so in all Outward respects; but
when all this is done, he cannot give him the privileges of a natural Son in
Inward respects; that is, he cannot communicate his own Qualities and Nature to
him. But God adds both in Adoption, God gives the inheritance and the nature
of children.
he both gives the Inheritance of Children, and the Nature of Children; he fits
them for their Inheritance, as he fits the Inheritance for them. Thanks be to
God, who has made us [meet] to be partakers of the Inheritance, etc. Col. 1.12.

The Argument therefore is strong, If Sons, then Heirs. There is no power in
Heaven that will hinder it, none in Earth or Hell that can hinder it.

Other Heirs may spend all, Difference twixt heavenly and earthly heirs
may be cheated of their Inheritance, may have it violently wrested from them,
as Naboth (Ahab was sick for his Vineyard, before he had it, and as sick of it,
when he had it) Or if none of these happen, yet a Father may conceive
displeasure against a Son, and disinherit him: Or there may be so many Sons,
that all cannot inherit (as in Abraham's Family) But none of these can befall a
Child of God, in respect of his heavenly Inheritance.

1. Through Gods free grace, he cannot spend it: He is kept by the power of God
unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.

2. The Devil shall never cheat him of it, as he did our first Parents of the
first Paradise: The gates of Hell shall not prevail.

3. It can never be taken from them by force: As they are reserved for that, so
that is reserved for them in the heavens.

4. Their Father will never take up such a displeasure, as to disinherit them.
Gods Covenant is as the Waters of Noah; for, As I have sworn, (says the Lord)
that the waters of Noah should be no more on the earth, so I have sworn, that I
will be wroth with thee no more, nor rebuke thee, Isa. 54.9.

5. And God has blessings enough for all his children, Genesis 27.38. He has
more than One.

Thus, the more we look into the Scriptures, still the Argument appears
stronger and stronger; If Sons, then Heirs.

Quest. But how shall we know that we are Sons?

Romans 8.14, 15, 16, etc. Explained.
Ans. First, the Apostle resolves it, ver. 14. (of Romans 8.) If ye be led by the
Spirit, then are ye sons. The Spirits Manuduction, or leading, is an Argument
of our Manumission, or freedom from under the power of our first Master, Sin
and Satan. It Is a Metaphor taken from blind or weak persons, who are glad when
one leads them, and supports them in their way. Thus, Gal. 5.18. If ye be led
by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law: and Romans 6.16.

Secondly, in the 8 of the Romans ver. 15. Romans 8.15.
But ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, etc. Spirit of Adoption implies
two things.
Which implies two things.

1. The Sons of God have the Nature of children in them. As children naturally
run to their Parents, not to Strangers, so do Gods children. If you have a Lamb
in your arms, and seeing a company of Ewes about you, would know, which is its
Dam, set it down, and you will soon know: Nature will teach it to run to its
Dam. Do thou desire to know, whether thou art Gods child, or no? Observe the
Bent of thy Spirit, To whom do thou run on all occasions? especially in thy
wants? Wicked men run to the World, consult with Flesh and Blood, (it may be)
go to the Devil. A child of God runs to his Father.

2. The Sons of God have the Spirit of Prayer: Behold, he prays, Act. 9.11.
which is further intimated, Rom 8. ver. 26, 27.

Others may have the Gift of Prayer, but the Sons of God have the Spirit of
Prayer. He that has only the Gift of Prayer (it may be) says much, but prays
nothing; such as have the Spirit of Prayer (possibly) say nothing, but pray
much; as Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.

Thirdly, in the 16 ver. The Spirit it self, etc. Romans 8.16.
The Spirit witnesses our Sonship, by a more immediate work upon our Spirit.
The Apostle had spoken of the Fruit of the Spirit (before) in the 15 ver. Now
he speaks of the Testimony of the Spirit it self; which is an inward, Testimony
of the Spirit it self, what?
secret, and unspeakable Work of the Spirit, persuading a Believer of Gods
special love to him in Christ; Even of his love shed abroad in the heart by the
Holy Ghost, Romans 5.5.

Obj. But I feel not this Witness, though I feel the fruits of the Spirit.

Ans. The Lord will give it at one time or other: Wait for it, knowing, Note.
that God reserves the choicest comforts for the fittest time. When Daniel was
in the Lions Den, the Three Children in the furnace, Paul and Silas in the
stocks, then had they most of this Witness and Comfort. And so, doubtless, when
thou art plunged into distress, when persecuted by enemies, or forsaken by
friends, when sickness does arrest, and Death draw near, and so have most need
of these comforts, then thou shall have them: God, who has an appointed time
wherein to come, will come, and will not tarry.

Now if by these, or any of these, we are assured that we are Sons; then we may
conclude our selves Heirs too. Thus Faith assures by arguing from our Sonship.

5. From the Chain of salvation.
5. Faith argues from the Order and Inseperate Method of that Golden Chain, Romans
8.29, 30. [Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate, etc. and whom he did
predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified;
and whom he justified, them he also glorified] But says a Believer, I am
effectually called and justified, therefore I shall be glorified: All the men
in the world, or Devils in hell, cannot break or pull asunder the Chain which
God has thus coupled together.

6. From Christ's being in Heaven.
6. Faith argues from the present Possession of Heaven by our Elder Brother,
Joh. 14.1, 2. The elder Brother sometimes takes Possession of the whole Estate,
in the right of all the Family, 1. As our elder Brother.
though the rest do not come to possess their part a long while after. And this
Act is an Assurance to them all, as if they had their Estate present. Thus is a
Believer ascertained by Christ's possessing heaven: So that, as we are said to
be Risen again with Christ, Col. 3.1. So may we be said to be (in a manner)
Ascended with Christ; [He has raised us up, and made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ] Ephesians. 2.6. The Apostle speaks, as if Believers were
in heaven already, because Christ has taken Possession of heaven in their
behalf; and thereby offers strong assurance, That they also shall possess it in
due time.

Hence also is Christ called our Forerunner, Heb. 6. last, 2. As our
Forerunner.
In the 19 ver. All true Christians are compared to Seafaring men, and Christ
comes first to Haven, to take possession for all the rest.

So that, the World is as a Sea; An elegant Allegory.
The Church as a Ship (out of which there is no safety) Christ is the Pilot; All
true Believers are Passengers, that have a common Adventure; The Land it is
bound for, is the Kingdom of Heaven; the Card or Compass, is the Word of God;
the Wind that drives it along, is the Spirit of God. For the Materials: The
Bottom and Ballast of this Ship, is made of Humility; the Top, of open
Simplicity; the Sides, of Patience; the Sails and Banner, of Love; the Cords,
of Charity; the Rudder, of Faith; and the Anchor, of Hope. This Anchor is
described, Heb. 6. ver. 19. to be sure, and steadfast, such an Anchor as will
hold, till the storm be over, and till we come at Heaven.

Q. But how does he prove that?

Ans, By two Arguments:

1. Because this Anchor is entered within the veil; that is, Comfortable
inferences from Christ's being our forerunner.
into Heaven; (alluding to the Holy of Holies) therefore it has sure
Anchor-hold.

2. Because ver. 20. The (...), the forerunner is for us entered; that is,
Jesus Christ, the great Master-Pilot.

Where these Particulars may be noted:

1. Christ was once in the Ship of the Militant Church, tossed upon the waves of
Temptation, as much, nay more than any other, yet without sin.

2. Christ is now gone ashore; that is, to Heaven, where the Ship of the Church
desires to land.

3. Christ went ashore for us, as much as for himself; upon our business, as
much as his own. -- A Forerunner [for us] is entered:

And that in two Respects.

1. Christ assures our landing.
1. To assure our Landing: Christ's landing is an evidence of ours; He is, where
our Anchor is; and so, holds all fast by the hand of his Power.

2. He facilitates it.
2. To facilitate our landing: Christ's landing makes ours the more easy. Christ
went to heaven, as to prepare a place for us, (Joh. 14.2) so a passage for us.
Christ opens the door of heaven, Acts 7.56. He draws the ship to the shore. As
when he ascended the Cross, he drew all his to believe in him; so being
ascended into heaven, he draws all believers after him.

And this Ascension of Christ, is a certain assurance of ours; He possessing
heaven, assures, That we shall possess it in due time.

Q. But why do Believers possess life no sooner? Why do they live by Faith so
many years together? Why does not God give them full possession of it in this
life? It Is an Inheritance reserved, 1 Pet. 1.4. 2 Timothy 4.8. Col. 1.5. Why is it
thus?

Why believers are without possession so long.
Ans. A Believer lives without present possession of life Eternal in his own
person; Not for want of Power, Love, Care in God, but out of abundance of love
and fatherly care the Lord thus orders it.

good behavior, that they may know and acknowledge their beholdingness to God
all their days. It Is a wise expression of a Parents love, to do their children
good in such a manner, and by such degrees, that they may still remain sensible
of their dependence and wants. They give them not so much at first, but they
will have something left to give them at another time. Fond Parents dote so
much on their children, that they sometimes put them into too early possession
of all, which makes them forget their Parents, and slight them, as if they
could do well enough without them.

Now the Lord knows how apt we are to abuse privileges, and to be
dis-ingenuous to God. Popery is natural to every man: if he has a little more
grace, or does a little more good than others, he is ready to think of Merit
presently, as if he could live without God, or as if God were beholding to him:
And therefore God gives his people imperfect parcels, and first fruits only,
to cherish their dependence on him.

present condition of Believers: They are in this life, like children or heirs
under age. The greatest heirs have their Estate in Reversion; if they had it in
full possession, it might do them more hurt than good. Christians are not
capable of their whole possession; as Christ says, Joh. 16.12. I have many
things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now: so God has much glory to
communicate to his children, but they cannot bear it now. Therefore God drops
it into them here, (as we do water into narrow-mouthed vessels) as they are
able to receive, and not as he is able to give. God keeps them in their
Wardship, and puts them not into full possession, till they come to full age,
to a perfect man in Christ: The heir, as long as he is a child, differs not
from a servant, Gal. 4.1. It Is spoken, to show the difference between Law and
Gospel, but may be applied to the difference between Earth and Heaven.

Earth and Heaven. Had believers as much happiness here as there, there would
be no difference; and so no desires would be at work after heaven. Christians
would not be willing to leave this world, and go through the narrow passage of
Death, unless it were to obtain a better life. Therefore God will put a
difference in the degrees of their happiness, that there might be difference in
their affections, that their affections may be raised as much above the world,
as heaven is above the earth; that their hearts may be where their treasure is;
that whilst worldly men mind only earthly things, the conversation and
City-trade of Gods people may be in heaven, Phil. 3.20.

Exercise the Graces of his People.

Especially,

1. Faith. Though they have little in hand, they will trust God for the more.
God will try what credit he has with his servants. The Devil objects, Gods
People will serve him no longer than they have their pay in hand, Job 1. But
God makes it appear, they are willing to wait for the Reward, and will
therefore trust God, Job 13.15. and 19.25.

2. To Exercise Patience. Gods Word is called, The Word of his Patience, Rev.
3.10. because it requires submission to the Cross for the present, and reserves
the Crown till the Race be done: Therefore, says the Apostle, ye have need of
patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye may inherit the Promises,
Heb. 10.36. So Romans 8.23, 24, 25.

3. To Exercise Humility, and Self-denial, in as much as that we are not fit to
be trusted. In our Creation, God gave us our Pay beforehand: But what followed?
We soon grew proud, and disdainful, and so fooled away that precious
Inheritance, to satisfy a wanton Eye, and an intemperate Appetite. Therefore
God, to keep us humble, keeps our estate in his own hand: He will not trust us
with it any more, till we come to that place, where there shall be no Devil to
Tempt, or Flesh to Betray us.

Heaven indeed; That glory may become exceeding glorious. Prove. 13.12.
Prove. 13.12. [Hope deferred makes the heart sick; but when the desire comes,
it is a tree of life.] If we had our Heaven at first, without any preceding
Exercise, it would be nothing so sweet and precious to us. But then Canaan is
Canaan indeed, when People have gone through a Red Sea, and an howling
Wilderness. Contraries opposed, shine the brighter: The God of all grace [after
ye have suffered awhile] comfort, stablish, settle, and strengthen you, 1 Pet.
5.10. Perfection is most welcome, after a state of imperfection; strength,
after a state of weakness; establishment, after a state of shaking; and glory
in heaven, after a state of baseness and suffering in this world. A Mole upon
the face, sets forth the beauty of the face: So the blackish Mole of the Saints
infirmities and sufferings on earth, sets forth the beauty of the Church, and
the glorious Holiness and Happiness of Heaven. And this is one Reason why they
are afflicted here, before they are made happy hereafter.

Therefore the Just lives by Faith in regard of Eternal Life.

Use 1. Of Confutation.

deny Eternal Life. There are a number of such in the world. Confutation of
those that deny Eternal life.
As the knowledge of the chief Good, is much obscured by the Fall of Adam: so
is the desire of it also weakened; and so much the more, as men are taken
captives by Sin and Satan. That men may sin with the more liberty, Satan
persuades them there is no Eternal Death; and if no Eternal Death, then they
must believe withal, that there is no Eternal Life; and if he can but persuade
them, that there is no Reward or Punishment after this life, he knows he may
win them to sin with more freedom. When Elisha had blinded the eyes of the
Aramites, he might lead them to Samaria in stead of D^than: so when the Prince
of Darkness has so blinded the eyes of men that they cannot see, at least not
see afar off, not see so far, as to an Eternity after this life, he may easily
tempt them to commit all iniquity with greediness, and to run into all excess
of riot. He that says, There is no Eternal Life, does in effect say, There is
no God: for God says, that there is an Eternal Life; and he that denies the
Truth of God, denies God himself. Now when once the fool is persuaded to say in
his heart, There is no God: What follows? Corrupt are they, and become
abominable; there is none that does good, no not one, Psalm. 14.1.

Therefore the Devil tempts some to deny the Eternal Life of the Soul:

And some that hold this, yet deny it to the Body.

Either of both these Opinions, are very Dangerous and Destructive, and open a
gap to all licentiousness. If there be no Resurrection, (says the Apostle) let
us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. Yea, but (says Paul) certainly
there is a Resurrection of the Body, therefore let us take heed we be not
deceived by such evil words, which do necessarily corrupt good manners.

Now what has been said in the Doctrinal part, may confute both these Rotten
Opinions; Rotten in their Root, and Rotten in their Fruit also.

1. Of the Body.
1. Therefore, it confutes such as hold there is no Eternal Life of the Body:
For if we deny the Article of the Resurrection of the Body, how can we believe
the next Article of Life Everlasting, (especially in respect of the whole man?)
But the Scripture is as clear in this, as if the truth of it were written with
the Sunbeams, Isa. 26.19. [Thy dead men shall live; as my dead body shall they
arise: Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of
herbs, and the earth shall cast forth her dead] Which words are propounded by
the Prophet, as a strong consolation against the strength and violence of the
Churches affliction: for in the former verse, the Church is brought in as a
painful traveling Woman, that is in hope of a joyful deliverance: but when all
comes to all, she travels with the wind, or brings forth a dead child. Thus
may the Church complain, Not many of her Members are dead, but all: Some die in
the Prison, some upon the Rack, etc. Well, admit all this, says Jesus Christ,
yet they are not out of my reach; I can deliver them not only from the
greatest Dangers in this life, but from the very power of the Grave. [Thy dead
men shall live; as my dead body shall they arise] As if Christ should have
said, As sure as I raise my own body, I Will raise theirs; yea, I look at theirs,
as my own: I do not look at my self, or my Mystical Body as perfect, so long as
any particular Members do lie in the Grave: Therefore as [my] dead body shall
they arise. If they shall say, How can this be, seeing they are withered and
dead? Christ answers [My Almighty Power shall fall upon them, and revive them,
as the dew from Heaven, falling upon the withered and dead grass, does revive
and quicken it afresh again.] And that is added in the latter part of the
verse, For thy dew, etc. So that here you have a strong Argument, both from the
Scriptures and the Power of God, to prove the Resurrection.

What Is the Reason that either the Old or New Sadduces deny the Resurrection,
but for want of Faith in one of these two? Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures,
or the Power of God, Mat. 22.29. For thus does Faith reason; Why may not that
great God, who made all things of nothing, make this something being once
corrupted, that which it was before? He that with a Word of his Mouth gave a
Being to all Creatures, and with the Breath of his Nostrils can bring them to
naught again, what shall be impossible for this great God to effect? Shall not
He that made the glorious Heavens, bedecked and bespangled with such an
innumerable company of Glorious Bodies; that made this Mass of the Earth that
we tread upon, hanging like a Ball in the midst of the Air, and yet so fast,
that it cannot be moved at any time; that commands the Waters, and they will
not drown; the Fire, and it will not burn; That shuts up the mouth of Lions,
that they may not hurt his Servants; and opens the mouth of Ravens, that they
may feed them. I say, Why may not this great God, that can thus miraculously
invert and turn upside-down the whole course of Nature, why may not he Turn man
to destruction; and yet say, Return again, O ye children of men? Psalm. 90.3.
This therefore confutes such as hold there is no Eternal Life of the Body.

2. Of the Soul.
2. It confutes such as hold, That there is no Eternal Life of the Soul, or at
least doubt of it; as that Wicked Pope, Paul III. at the time of his death,
said, He should now be resolved of three Questions, Note.
that he had doubted of all his life: 1. Whether the Soul were Immortal? 2.
Whether there were a Hell, or no? 3. Whether there were a God, or no?


Indeed, he was like to be resolved to his Cost. But it is better to be resolved
beforehand, that we may prepare for the eternal good of our Souls.

Some think, The Soul dies with the Body, and is raised again at the Day of
Judgment; or that it is in a kind of sleeping condition in the mean time: But
the case of Lazarus, of the Thief upon the Cross, and the Souls under the
Altar, do declare That Opinion to be no better than a Dream: For (Number. 24.3.
and 23.10.) The man that had his eyes open, could say, Let me die the death of
the righteous, and let my last end be like his. Balaam was persuaded of that
truth. Rev. 14.13. [Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, even so says
the Spirit, that they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.]
Their Souls are in a blessed condition, as soon as they are separated from the
body. Indeed there shall be an addition to their glory in the last Day, when
Body and Soul shall be glorified both together: But they are in a blessed
condition in the mean time.

I shall say no more in Confutation of such persons as deny Eternal Life; but
only refer to what was said, in proof of the Point in the second Particular:
Where it was proved, That there is such an Eternal Life; 1. By plain
Testimonies of Scripture, out of the Old and New Testament. 2. By necessary
Consequence and Deduction.


As, 1. Five proofs of Eternal Life.
From the Fruit and End of Man's Creation and Redemption. 2. From the Kingdom
and Headship of Christ. 3. From the Prayer of Christ. 4. From the Nature of the
Soul, and the Devils desire to gain Souls in Reversion. 5. From the Absurdity
that would follow, if there were no Eternal Life, then were Gods people of all
other most miserable: which were most absurd to imagine.


All which Arguments are strong enough to convince gainsayers, and to stop the
mouth of Cavillers, unless they be such as the Apostle speaks of, (2 Thessalonians.
3.1, 2.) that will hear no Argument, because they are absurd and unreasonable
men; and then, Prayer is the best weapon to deal with such. If you cannot
subdue them by Reason, yet you may subdue them by Prayer. Finally, brethren,
pray for us, that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men; for all
men have not faith.

And so much for the first Use.

Use 2. Reproof of diverse sorts.

complain of Religion, as if it were a fruitless Profession. Reproof.
But certainly, the Profession is not fruitless, unless the Professors be
fruitless, Hos. 10.1. Without controversy, Religion no fruitless Profession.
as Great is the mystery of godliness: so Great is the gain of godliness. He
that casts any seed upon the waters, for Christ's sake, shall find it, shall
receive an hundredfold in this life: but greater is the gain in the world to
come, even Life everlasting; Joys that cannot be numbered, that cannot be
measured; that are above our Comprehension, above our Apprehension. And
therefore if men do highly prize an Earthly Inheritance, though it be but in
Reversion, when there is but one Life between them and the Inheritance; How
should we prize the Reversion of this Heavenly Inheritance, of this Heavenly
Kingdom, where there is but one poor short frail life betwixt us and it?
Doubtless, the Reversion of an Heavenly Kingdom, is better than the present
Possession of all the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them.

2. Reproof of Despair.
2. It Reproves such, as in stead of exercising their Faith for Life Eternal,
give way to Distrust and Despair of Mercy, as if nothing but Hell were their
Portion. It Is true, Naturally we are children of wrath, and can claim nothing
but Hell as our inheritance: But in Christ, through the free grace of God,
Eternal life is held forth as the gift of God, to every one that believes.
Therefore exercise thy Faith for Life Eternal.

Obj. But alas! I cannot believe that God should give Eternal Life to such a
vile wretch as I am, that have deserved nothing but Eternal Death.

Ans. 1. And such were all they to whom God gives Eternal Life. There is not
one Saint now in Heaven, but deserved to have been in Hell.

2. If thou can not believe, pray that thou may believe: Cry out with
tears, Lord, help my Unbelief.

Obj. But to what purpose is it for me to pray, when I find the very flashes
of Hell upon my Conscience already? Will God, or can God hear such a one?

Ans. Yes, God may hear such a one: Psalm. 116.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. The sorrows of
death compassed me, [The pains of hell gat hold upon me, etc.] Then called I
upon the Name of the Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee deliver my soul -- But what
follows? [Gracious is the Lord, etc. Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the
Lord has dealt bountifully with thee.

Therefore they are much to blame, that give way to despair, and do not
exercise their Faith in Prayer for Eternal Life.

3. 3. Against vain curiosity.
It Reproves such as exercise their Fancy more than their Faith about Eternal
Life; such as busy their heads about curious Questions concerning Heaven, in
stead of busying their hearts in making of it sure to themselves by Faith.

Enquiring.

1. Whether the Glory of the Saints shall be Equal in Heaven?

2. Whether there shall be any difference between Learned and Unlearned men,
when they come in Heaven?

3. Whether the Saints shall know one another in Heaven, or not? Though (for my
part) I think this a Question out of question: For how can it be supposed, that
we should have less knowledge of one another when we are made perfect, than we
have here in a state of imperfection?

4. Whether there shall be any use of speech there? or if there be, What that
language shall be?

5. Concerning the place, where this Life Eternal shall be?

6. Whether Paradise, Abraham's Bosom, and Heaven, be all one?

7. What are the Diversity of Mansions in Heaven?

8. Whether the Saints shall have liberty to come down on Earth? or, Whether
Earth it self shall not be turned into Heaven, or made as glorious as Heaven?
because God says, I create New Heavens, and a New Earth] Isa. 65. and 66.

And thus men busy their heads with these and the like Questions concerning
the Place, and yet all this while hardly ask their own hearts this serious
question, But art thou in the way thither, O my Soul? Art thou in the way to
Heaven? Have thou any thing to show for it, that Heaven is thine? Do thou
live by Faith, in regard of Eternal Life? There may be some profit in this
question, but little in the other. In all labor there is profit, but the talk
of the lips tends only to penury, Prove. 14.23. It Is not Talking of Heaven,
but Walking in the way (taking hold upon Christ) that must bring a man thither.
Simile.
Look as it is not a curious Paper of Verses, or an Eloquent Oration made in
the praise and Encomium of such a Manor or Lordship, that will give a man a
good Title to it, but a sound and plain Evidence in Law, from him that had
power to make a good Conveyance of it: So, it is not a curious Discourse, or a
bare speculation of Heaven which will bring a man thither; no more, then the
Reading of the History of such a Country, or the Beholding of it in a Map,
which will transport a man to the place it self: But there must be a sound and
full Conveyance of it to the Soul. And so the just must live by Faith in regard
of Eternal Life.

4. Reproof of not improving Eternal Life.
4. It Reproves such, who though they have somewhat to show for their
Inheritance, (Because they are Believers) yet they live besides their Means,
because they do not act their Faith; at least, so much as they should, in
respect of Life eternal. We say of many a worldly man because he does not enjoy
or improve his estate, He lives besides his Means. It Is one of the vanities
that Solomon discovered under the Sun, Eccl. 6.1, 2. A man to whom God has
given riches, wealth and honor, so that he wants nothing of all that he
desires, yet God gives him not power to eat hereof; This is vanity, (says
he) and an evil disease. And is it not a greater vanity, when God has given a
man heavenly riches and honor, and yet he lives not by Faith upon it, improves
it not to the best advantage? Such an one lives beside his means. How is it,
that Gods people are so cast down in Troubles, Wants, weaknesses, in
Reproaches, in Persecutions? Did they but act their Faith, to believe that they
shall one day as surely possess heaven, as they possess the very house they
dwell in upon earth, how would the Apprehension of future joys, drown and
swallow up the sense of present miseries? Why should the Kings Son be so lean
from day to day? Who has such an Inheritance at the last, and such a Father to
provide for him in the mean time. Luke 12.32. Fear not little flock, for it is
your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom.

5. This Reproves such as are Earthly-minded, 5. Reproof of Earthly-mindedness.
for such live not by Faith in respect of Heaven, or Eternal Life: They live as
if they were (Terrae filii) Sons of the earth, as if that curse of God were
fallen upon them Jer. 17.13. All that forsake thee shall be written in the
dust. The Church of the firstborn are said to be written in heaven, Hebrews
12.23. But these men, as if they had nothing to show, but only for the earth,
are said to be written in the earth: as if God should say, Go thy way thou art
an Earth-worm, and therefore Earth shall be all thy Portion. It may be, thou
have many writings to show for a piece of the earth, but nothing for heaven;
and therefore, says God, write him down, An Earthly-minded man, and An
Earthly-portion'd man. Psalm. 17.14. They are called, Men of this world, which
have their portion in this life. Give them but a fat portion in this life, on
this side Jordan: take Canaan, take Heaven who will for them. The Devil casts
so much dust in their eyes, they cannot see to live by Faith in respect of
Heaven.

Obj. But it may be, these men will say, [We are too uncharitable, for they are
professed Christians, and they well remember the two last Articles of their
Creed, Resurrection of the Body, and Life Everlasting.

Answer shall be made to this in a third Use.

3. Of Examination.

Examination of Faith in respect of life Eternal.
3. This is of use for Examination, to examine, whether we believe as we
profess, when we say, We believe the Resurrection of the Body, and Life
Everlasting.

And we may know this 1. By our carriage in Life. 2. By the respect we bear to
Death.


By our carriage in Life.
1. By our Carriage in life; and that in respect of our 1. Affections. 2.
Meditations. 3. Speeches. And 4. Conversation.


1. Our Affections.
1. By our Affections. A man that is far distant from his Native Country and
dear friends, he mingles many a Meal with his tears, when he thinks of the
distance of the place. But how does he rejoice, when he is once upon his
return? Especially when he comes within sight of land, his very heart leaps
within him, and he cannot hold from saluting the place, Oh my dear Country!
Blessed be God, that I have lived once again to see thee, and am so near to
enjoy my surest friends within thee.] Just thus is it with a man that is bound
for heaven, that lives by Faith in regard of Life Eternal: When he well
remembers his great distance from God, and Christ, the Saints departed, (for
whilst we are here at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord) I say,
when he remembers this, it fetches many a sigh, and tear, and groan from his
heart. Psalm. 137.1. By the waters of Babylon we sat down, and wept when we
remembered thee O Sion. See how they hang their heads, and they hang their harps
by the waterside, as if they neither took delight in themselves, nor any thing
else, whilst they are so far from their Native Country: So it is with a creature
that is Heaven-born, and Heaven-bound, he cries and sighs, and groans while he
is so far from home. 2 Cor. 5.4. For we that are in this tabernacle do groan,
being burdened, etc. And how glad are such, when they come near their journeys
end? See how Paul skips in his desires, like the Iron to the Lodestone: I
desire (says he) to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil. 8.
which is best of all. And old Simeon falls a singing, as if his Deaths-day
were his Birthday, Lord, now littest thou thy servant depart in peace, etc.
Therefore, Examine thy self well, what are thy chief Sorrows, and what are thy
chief Joys? Do thou sorrow most of all for thy distance from Christ, and thy
heavenly Country? Do thou rejoice when thou think of drawing near thy
journeys end? This is a good evidence, that thou have something to show for
Heaven. But on the other side, if all thy delight is in the World, in the
fleshpots of Egypt, and the remembrance of thy latter end is bitter to thee,
and thou art ready to say, as an Atheist once, [I know what I have here, Grand
Atheist
but I know not what I shall have hereafter.] That Is a shrewd sign, thou have
only thy portion in this life, and no faith at all for the Life to come.

2. Our Meditations.
2 We may know by our Meditations. For if we would flatter up our selves that we
have heavenly Affections, and yet want heavenly Meditations, we do but deceive
our own hearts, and bring our selves into a Fools-Paradise: for that is most
certain, look where our Affections are, there will our Meditations also be; we
cannot keep our thoughts off from what we love, and prize dearly: Where our
treasure is, Mat. 6.
there will our heart be also; there will our mind be; Vbi amat, non ubi
animat, where it loves, not where it lives. Is our Meditation therefore, and
Contemplation in Heaven? Its sweet indeed to contemplate the visible part of
the Heavens; Psalm. 19.1.
For, The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy
work: But it is far more sweet to a gracious soul to contemplate the Inside:
For the starry Vault is but the pavement of Gods house, and the Clouds are the
dust of his Feet: And if there be so much glory without, what is there within?
Oh! how sweet is it to a gracious Soul, to look into the Holy of Holies, to
take a turn with Christ every-day in his Banqueting House? For so is heaven
called, Cant. 2.4. And this is the property of a Soul espoused to Christ by
Faith: Rev. ult.
The Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And if Christ come not to her so soon as
she desires, she will be sure to go to him; at least, in her serious thoughts,
and heavenly Meditations: She lays out much of her Soul in Meditation; the
Meditation of Christ and heaven, is very sweet, Psalm. 104, 34. She says of
heaven, as David of Gods Law, O how do I love it, it is my meditation all the
day. Psalm. 119.

And this is a good sign we live by Faith in regard of eternal Life. But if on
the other side, we are mere strangers to all heavenly Meditations, we can think
of the world (as if we were possessed by the Spirit of the world) but seldom or
never have a serious thought of heaven. It may be we have a thousand thoughts
of the world, for one serious thought of heaven, Does not this proclaim to Men
and Angels, whatever we say, or profess about Heaven and the Resurrection, we
believe no such matter.

3. We may know it by our Speeches; I mean, 3. Our Speeches.
by our outward speeches, (For Meditation, is the speech of the heart by it
self) by our speeches to others. Where there is much of heaven in the heart,
there will be something of heaven in the tongue. Several Countrymen, have a
several dialect or language, and you may know what Country a man belongs to, by
his speech. As the damosel said to Peter, Even thy speech bewrays thee: So a
man's speech will bewray him, and show whether he belongs to heaven or earth: He
that is of the earth speaks of the earth, and he that is of heaven speaks
of heaven, Joh. 3.31. When God would show the sound conversion of the Egyptians
to the Faith, he says, Five cities in the land of Egypt shall speak the
language of Canaan, Isa. 19.18. that is, They shall have heavenly hearts, for
they shall have heavenly tongues. It Is true, a man may learn and counterfeit
the language of another country where he has never dwelt, and has nothing to
do in the privileges of it, (and there are too many such Beggarly, Canting
Christians.) And therefore we are to examine not only what we speak, but from
what Fountain and principle we speak: Psa. 45.1. My heart is inditing a good
matter; and then, My tongue is the pen of a ready writer. Pro. 16.23. The heart
of the wise teaches his mouth. So then, if we do but observe our selves, when
we speak out of the abundance of our hearts, our speech will certainly bewray
what country we belong to. Never say therefore, that thou live by Faith in
respect of heaven, so long as thy speeches are earthly, sensual, or devilish.

He that believes he has a great inheritance in another country, he loves to
be talking of it; and so does a Citizen of Heaven. 2 Cor. 4.15. We having the
same Spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore
have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore do we speak.

And however some may endeavor to counterfeit the language of Canaan, yet there
will be one Shibboleth or other that will discover them. At the best, they are
but like mongrel Jews, born of outlandish women, who had Jews for their
Fathers, and Ashdodites for their Mothers, and therefore they speak a mongrel
Language, half in the language of Canaan, and half in the language of Ashdod,
Neh. 13.23, 24. And so do these, one while their mouth is full of Blessing, and
holy speeches; another while they are full of Cursing, and Blasphemy, and
Ribaldry, according as their company suits their humor.

Obj. If you shall say, How is this possible? Can the same fountain (as S.
James speaks) send forth at the same place, sweet water and bitter, or salt and
fresh?

Ans. I answer, No, it cannot: And therefore only one of these kind of
speeches springs from the Fountain of the Heart; namely, Cursing, etc. Holy
speeches are but counterfeit. And therefore God abhors such gross and affected
mixture in men's speeches; and resolves to turn himself to a people of a pure
language, Zeph. 3.9. And this is that, which discovers a Citizen of Heaven,
when such a speech does naturally flow from the heart, (I mean, from a
principle of renewed nature) and so it is true, which Christ speaks, By thy
words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned, Mat.
12.37.

4. Our Actions.
4. We may know it by our Actions and Conversation. Our Meditations, our Words
may speak much, but our Actions speak more. He that has something to show for
Heaven within himself, has something also to show without himself. It Is not a
dark Lanthorn that conveys a man to heaven: Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine,
etc. that men may see your good works, and glorify [your Father which is in
heaven] So that, every one that sees such a man, may say, God is his Father,
Heaven is his Country.

Gods people look at themselves as strangers upon earth, and therefore they
fashion not themselves according to the world, but conform themselves according
to the manners of their own Country. Examine therefore, what hope thou have of
a better life: for, all true hope, Joh. 3.
is a purifying hope. Do thou as a stranger, abstain from fleshly lusts? Is
thy conversation in Heaven, from whence thou expectest the Lord Jesus Christ?
Phil. 3.20. That Is a good evidence, thou art in the way to heaven.

But if thou can live in known and gross sins, under the Power and Dominion
of them (I know the best have their failings, which they groan under as their
burden:) but, if thou can wittingly, willingly and constantly live under the
Power of any reigning lust, and yet for all that, thou say, Thou live by
Faith in respect of eternal Life; I say, Thy Faith is but a Fancy; it is a
strong Presumption, and therefore a strong Delusion. Thou art grossly deceived,
if thou think to get Heaven, or to inherit the Kingdom of God in such a way.

I deny not, but a Fornicator, an Adulterer, a Drunkard, being humbled, and so
laying hold upon Christ, and in the self-same act repenting and forsaking his
sin, may find mercy of God, and admittance into heaven of his free grace.

But if a man thinks himself already in Christ, and in the highway to Heaven,
and yet remains under the power and Dominion of these reigning lusts, he is
grossly deceived. They are the very words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye
not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not
deceived, neither Fornicators, etc.

And thus we may know how, whether we live by Faith in respect of Eternal Life,
-- By our Carriage in Life.

Mark 2. By the thoughts of Death.
We may know it, by our Respect we bear to Death; viz. as a passage to a better
life. For a faithful man looks at Death, as a conquered Enemy: Isa. 25.8. it is
said, He will swallow up Death in victory. Now there are Four Degrees of this
Victory of Jesus Christ over Death; Degrees of Christ's victory over Death.
The first is past and gone; the two next are present; and the fourth is yet to
come.

1. In his own death.
1. The first was performed by Christ (proprio Mart) in his own single combat
with Death and Hell. Christ taking upon him the sins of Gods people all the
world over, Death sets upon him most furiously, and seems at the first Bout, to
get the better; it kills him, and lays him in the grave. But behold the
glorious Victory of Jesus Christ; as Samson, when he was shut up in the City of
Gaza, Judge. 16. He arose in the night, ana carried away the gates of the City,
and bars and all: So Christ, our Spiritual Samson, was shut up in the Grave
with a great stone upon the Grave, and brake open the brazen gates, and iron
bars, and has carried them away to the top of the Mountain (of Mount Sion)
that they shall never hurt his people more.

Acts 2.24. He was raised up by the power of his Godhead, having loosed the
pains of Death, because it was not possible he should be holden of it. [Loosed
the pains of Death] It Is a word used in the birth of Children, as if the Grave
were pained (as a woman in childbirth) till it was delivered of him who was
the first-begotton from the dead, and so had the prerogative of the firstborn,
to be a Conqueror, even a Conqueror over Death. Therefore it is said, Rev.
1.18. I am he that lives, and was dead; and behold, I am alive for evermore,
Amen, and have the Keys of Hell and Death. [The Keys] What Is that? By the Keys,
is certainly meant the Conquest; as when a Town or City is subdued, the Keys
are presently delivered to the Conqueror, as acknowledgments, and Ensigns of
his Victory. So, the Keys of Hell and Death are delivered up into the hands of
Christ, to signify, that Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more,
Death has no more dominion over him, but he for ever has dominion over Death.

So that the first and chief part of the victory belongs to Christ in his own
person, as he was mightily declared to be the Son of God, by his Resurrection
from the Grave: Romans 1.4.
the other three belong to us.

The second Degree of Victory over Death, is, 2. In our Death.
The altering its nature to all Gods people. For no sooner had Death struck
Christ (like a furious Wasp) but it presently lost its Sting: For, the sting of
Death sticks in Sin, and therefore Christ having taken upon him the sins of his
people, Death strikes in her sting so deep, that she is forced to leave it
behind her: So that now the case is altered to Gods people, however they die
as well as others, yet to them, the sting of Death is taken out, and so the
nature of Death is quite and clean altered, as if it were not the same. Before
it was a passage into prison, [where the Spirits are now in prison] Now it is
made a passage out of Prison, [ Having a desire to be dissolved, Phil 1.23.]
Before it was a curse; now a Blessing, Blessed are the dead, which die in the
Lord, Rev. 14.13. Before it was an Enemy (a wicked man might say, Have thou
found me, 1 Kings 21.20
O mine enemy!) but now it is a Friend, and does many friendly offices. Before
it was loss; a man lost his friends, he lost his possessions, he lost his very
hopes, Eccles. 9.4. but now it is gain, Phil. 1.21. To die is gain: He gains
much access of glory for the present in his Soul, in regard of its communion
with God; and he has hopes of more, when his body shall be raised again from
the grave. Prove. 14.22. The wicked is driven away in his wickedness, but the
righteous has hope in his death. And this is the second part of Christ's
Victory over Death.

3. 3. In our judgments of death
The third (which most concerns the matter in hand) is in Altering our
Affections, Judgments, and Apprehensions concerning Death. A most excellent
Conquest! (2 Cor. 10.4, 5. -- Casting down imaginations. Prove. 16.32.) For
suppose the Nature of Death should be altered, so that of an enemy it should be
made a friend, yet if our judgments should not be altered, but we should look
at it still under the notion of an enemy, we could have little comfort in the
approach of it. And therefore here is both the Mercy and Power of Christ seen,
in altering the judgment of his people concerning Death, that now they can in
some measure look at ^t as a Friend, and as a Messenger sent from their
heavenly Captain, the Lord Jesus, to take them off from their hard service. How
glad is the poor Soldier, that has stood Sentinel a long cold night, when the
morning Watch comes? Or one that has been fighting against his Enemies as long
as he can well strike or stand, how glad is such a one, when his Captain sends
Relief to take him off, and bids him Welcome home, with a large Reward for all
his dangerous and difficult service? Now such, and no other, is the office of
this Messenger, Death: and therefore Gods people looking upon it under this
Notion, love the appearing of it, and rejoice in it, as the Apostle did, 2 Timothy
4 6, 7, 8. For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at
hand; I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc. Henceforth
there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous
Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but to them also that
love his appearing.] Mark: it is the property of a gra^ious ^oul, which Christ
comes to it, either in the particular, or general Judgment, to love his
Appearing. And this is the third Degree of Christ's Victory over Death: As it is
altered in it self, so its altered in his peoples Apprehensions of it. And this
is a double Mercy.

4. In the general Resurrection.
The fourth and last Degreee, (which I shall but name) is in the last and
general Resurrection. Look, as when Christ arose personally from the Grave, he
then obtained perfect Victory over Death for himself, he died no more; Death
had no more dominion over him. So when Christ Mystical, when we that are
believers, shall arise from the Grave, we shall obtain a perfect Victory over
Death, we shall die no more, etc. Then, even then, shall be brought to pass the
saying that is written, When once this corruptible shall have put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality; then shall be
brought to pass that saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory,
1 Cor. 15.54. And this is the fourth and last Degree of Christ's Victory and
Triumph over Death: after which, there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor
crying, nor pain, Rev. 21.4.

Well then, to bring all home to the present Use.

Would thou know whether thou live by Faith in regard of Life Eternal? Do
but tell me in earnest, or rather tell thine own Soul, what respect thou
bear to Death. Do thou indeed look at it as a conquered Enemy? or rather
such an one, as of an enemy is now become a friend.

Is thy judgment altered concerning Death, as the nature of Death it self is
altered? Then well and good: For thus it is with all Gods people in some
measure, Death and they are made friends, they look at Death as a sweet passage
to this Everlasting Life that we are speaking of; and therefore they bid it
welcome. What Heir would not be willing to come to his Inheritance, and
therefore as willing to welcome the Messenger, that had Power and Commission to
put him into present possession? This was the Apostles practice; His whole life
was a Meditation of Death, and a Preparation for Death: I profess, says he, by
our rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus, I die daily; that is, I am every
day prepared for death, 1 Cor. 15.31. Therefore you may see his judgment was
altered concerning the nature of death; he looked at it as an enemy before
conversion, but now he looks at it as a friend. He that is reconciled to God,
and God to him, he is reconciled to death, and death also to him: for, death is
but the Servant of Jesus Christ; and if Christ be yours, death is yours also, 1
Cor. 3.21, 22.

Obj. But may not Gods own people be afraid of death, and unfit to die?

About the fear of Death.
Ans. 1. They may be afraid, because every Christian man is a double man,
consisting of Flesh and Spirit; and therefore, though the Spirit is willing,
yet the Flesh is weak, Mat. 21.46. Therefore so far as he is natural, he is
afraid; and yet so far as he is spiritual, he overcomes that fear: So that here
is the difference between the fear of a wicked man, and a godly man: A wicked
man (when God opens his eyes) is swallowed up of fear; a godly man, though he
may have many conflicts and combats with the fear of death, yet at last he
overcomes his fear, by the exercise of his Faith; so that he is not in bondage
to his fear, as the other is. Heb 2.15. Christ came to deliver them, who
through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage.

2. A godly man is not at all times alike fit to die (though he be willing in
the main.) It may be, he has some work to do for God, or for his Church, that
yet is not done: It may be, he has weakened himself by some present distemper,
and has not strength of Faith sufficient for such a solemn and serious Work,
as is his passage to Eternity. And that was the cause of David's Prayer, Psalm.
39. last, O spare a little, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and
be no more. In such like cases as these, a godly man may be somewhat unfit, and
therefore somewhat unwilling to die; otherwise, I say, in the main, he looks at
death as his friend, because God in Christ is his friend; and therefore the
more he loves God, the less he fears death.

If love were perfect, it would cast out all fear. In the mean time, as the
love of God increases, the fear of death decreaseth from day to day. And that
is a good evidence the creature lives by Faith in regard of Life Eternal.

But now, if we look at Death as the greatest of Evils, of all terrible things,
the most terrible, as if it were the Annihilation of the Creature, or the
reducing of it into a far worse condition than it was in before. So that, when
a Man dies, his Hope dies with him too, Job 11. verse. the last. It is most
evident, That such a man lives not by Faith in regard of Life Eternal: for, if
he did, he would surely welcome that Death, which is no other than a passage to
that Life.

4. Of Exhortation.

Exhortations: Exhortation to live by Faith in respect of life Eternal.
To live by Faith in regard of Life Eternal. This is the most excellent Object
of them: Therefore, as one says of Prayer, Thou when thou prayest, pray for
great matters; pray not for Riches, for these are Snares; pray not for Honor,
it is but a vain Breath of Fame, pray not for Life Temporal, it is but a Bubble:
But thou, when thou prayest, pray for great matters; pray for Pardon of sin;
pray for Christ, Grace, Heaven; pray for Eternal Life. These things are worth
the praying for. So say I of Faith, Thou, when thou believe, exercise thy
Faith about great matters, (though it is not unlawful to believe in God, for a
seasonable supply of Temporal blessings) Yet above all, exercise thy faith
about Heaven, and Eternity; be sure to lay hold on Eternal Life; for, the best
of Temporal Blessings, at last will give thee the slip.

And what should be the reason, that God mixeth temporal comforts with so many
discomforts, but to knock off our fingers from laying too fast hold on them. As
if God should say to his People, Arise, this is not your rest: Get you up to
the top of the Mount, and by the eye of Faith take a view of your Spiritual
Canaan, as ever you desire to enter into that Promised Land of your Eternal
Rest. And if all the Crosses we meet withal in our Christian Pilgrimage, are
little enough to take off our hearts from the world, how should we love it, and
cleave to it, should we meet with no Crosses at all?

Motives.

Shall I give you some further Motives, why we should by Faith lay hold on
Eternal Life.

Consider,

Natural life. For if we have a part in natural life only, better it were to
live the life of Vermin, and Toads, than the life of Men: For those poor
creatures, when they die, there is an end of them and their Misery for ever.
But when a Man dies, if he has not laid hold on Eternal Life, he is sure to
die an Eternal Death, where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched,
Isa. the last and the last.

here, we shall never have it. He that believes, has everlasting life, Joh.
5.24. He does not say. He shall have it hereafter, but he has it already,
though not in so full a measure. Therefore get it now, or never. For a man to
think to go to heaven when he dies, that never cared for heaven all his life,
is a strong presumption.

property of Gods People, to look at heaven and happiness by the eye of Faith,
Heb. 11.13. And Unbelievers are blind, and cannot see afar off; they look on
present things, 2 Pet. 1.9. But a wise man has eyes in his head, Eccl. 2.14,
15. He looks as far as to Eternity, he sees that, which a natural man cannot
see. 2 Cor. 4. last. Whilst we look not at the things which are seen, (by the
eye of sense) but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are
seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.

this will bring down heaven to the earth. If the creature cannot go to heaven,
yet a lively Faith will bring heaven to the creature, and that both the grace
of heaven, and the joy of heaven.

1. The Grace of heaven. It will make a man of a heavenly conversation whilst
he lives upon earth, to consider what the company of heaven, and what the work
of heaven is:

1. The Company of heaven are, God and Christ, holy Angels, and the Spirits of
just men made perfect. And

2. The Work of heaven is, (without reluctance, without weariness) to praise
God for ever and ever. The belief of this, will bring down much of the grace of
heaven into the heart; and the creature will reason thus by Faith; Shall it be
a great part of my happiness in heaven, to enjoy perfection of holiness, and
shall I not then endeavor this work upon earth? Shall I not endeavor to perfect
holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.
and to do Gods will upon earth? Surely, if holiness becomes Gods house for
ever, holiness must needs become his houshold-servants, Psalm. 93.5.
so soon as ever they begin to wear his Livery of Christian Profession. Do we
believe we shall see the face of God without blushing? and shall serve him
without fainting? Seeing we look for such things, how diligent should we be,
that we may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless? Yea, what
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation; looking for, and
hasting unto the coming of the day of God, 2 Pet. 3.11.

2 It will bring down much of the joy of Heaven. And we might have added this,
by way of Reason, why God will have his Servants live by Faith in regard of
Eternal Life; viz. That the full assurance of it might be a present Comfort,
whilst the possession of it is deferred. But we will bring it in as a Motive:
For Christ being willing to cheer up the drooping Spirits of his Servants in
the absence of himself and heaven, seems to say of Faith, as he said of his
Spirit, (or, if ye will) of the Spirit of Faith, Joh. 14. I will not leave you
comfortless, I will pray to the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter. What is this Comforter? but the Spirit of Faith, or the Spirit in
the grace of Faith? Oh! there is strong consolation in Faith and Hope. It is
true, says Christ, I must leave you, Joh. 16.
I must go to Heaven; and, whither I go, you cannot come, as yet: but, I assure
you, I go to prepare a place for you, and to prepare you for the place: and so
soon as that is ready for you, and you are ready for that, Joh. 14.
I will come and receive you to my self in due time. And in the mean time, that
I may not leave you comfortless, I will give you something of the joy of
heaven, as a Pawn and a pledge in hand before you come thither. And what is
that? but the Grace of Faith, and the Joy of Faith! Let not your hearts be
troubled, says Christ, though I go to heaven before you, yet you shall be as
sure of heaven at the last, as if you had it for the present. And how assured?
but by Faith: 2 Pet. 1.5. You are kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time. And what of that? why, this
brings Joy in the mean time: For so it follows, Wherein ye greatly rejoice,
though now for a season (if need be) ye are in great heaviness through manifold
temptations. And speaking of Christ (who is gone to heaven) within a verse or
two after, he has this expression, Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom
(though now ye see him not) yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and
full of glory. As if he would have said, Though you cannot see Christ with your
bodily eye, with the eye of sense, (and so you are apt to be troubled, as the
People were when Paul said, Acts 20.
they should see his face no more) yet you shall see him, and do see him, by
the eye of Faith, and rejoice in that sight, as if that heaven it self were
come down into your hearts: You rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of
glory. For what is joy full of Glory? but joy full of heaven? Like the Vision
upon Mount Tabor, where God did bow the heavens, and came down in glory. And
that is the fourth Motive, that it will be heaven upon earth, to live by Faith
in respect of Eternal Life.

above the world. If it do not draw him quite into heaven, it will draw him a
great way above the earth. That, look as a Bladder, or a thin shell, that is
filled up with the pure Dew that comes down from heaven, do but lay it in the
Sun, and the power of the Sunbeams will draw it up from the earth
heaven-wards: So it is with the Soul that is filled with this heavenly dew of
grace, let it but look wistly upon the Sun of Righteousness by an eye of Faith,
and the powerful beams of his Love will draw it so far above the earth, and all
earthly respects, that it shall live above the world, above the pleasures of
the world, the profits and honors of the world, and above all the troubles of
the world. And is not this an admirable, is it not a desirable condition! If
you would be ambitious (lawfully ambitious) let this be your ambition, to be
thus exalted by the Grace of Faith.

1. It lifts a man up above the Troubles of the world. Faith lifts a man above
the troubles of the world.
If you could suppose a dwelling above the Clouds, above the Thundrings and
Lightnings, and terrible Storms, would it not be a peaceable, a comfortable
habitation? Such is the condition of a Christian, who lives by Faith in regard
of Eternal Life: He lives above the clouds of worldly Troubles. What if such a
Trouble should come, as may take away his life? Faith will smile in the face of
that Trouble: Alas poor Trouble, says Faith, thou think to do me a great
deal of mischief, when indeed thou do but set my Soul at liberty to go out of
an earthly Prison, into a heavenly Palace, Job 5.22. A man that lives by Faith
for Heaven, is above the clouds of the lower Region; Heb. 12. Act. 4.
he can endure the Cross, he can despise the shame, he can rejoice that he is
accounted worthy to suffer persecution for the Name of the Lord Jesus: He can
refuse to accept of life upon base terms; that so, he may obtain a better
Resurrection: Heb. 11.
He can set an higher esteem upon the very reproach of Christ, than upon all
the Treasures of Egypt; so long, as he has Faith enough to see him who is
invisible, and thereby to have respect to the Recompense of Reward. He lives
above the Troubles of the world.

2. He lives above the Pleasures, Profits, and Honors of the world. Let the
Devil show him all the Kingdoms of the world, Mat. 4.
and the glory of them, as he did to Christ himself; Faith in Christ, will
teach him to slight the proffer. Alas, says the believing Soul, what is all
this to the glory of Heaven? Through Gods Mercy I am above all these: I look at
these as flitting, fading, empty Nothings, gilded Pictures upon a rotten Post.
I know God has put all these in subjection under my feet; and therefore I will
not put them as a Crown upon my Head, or place them as a Treasure in my Heart,
but keep them there where God has set them, and that is under my feet. It Is
wonderful indeed, but it is not so strange as true. Rev. 12.1, 2. Thus the
Church, and every true believer, is clothed with the Sun of Righteousness,
whose powerful beams in the grace of Faith and Love, draw up his Soul so far
above the world, that he tramples the Moon, and all sublunary things under his
feet: He looks at all worldly excellencies of Pleasures, Profits and Honors,
as changeable as the Moon. On the other side, he looks at the Word of God, and
Gods love in Christ, and the fruits of that love in the glory of Heaven, as the
only unchangeable good things; and therefore these he wears as a Crown upon
his Head, but the other he puts as a Footstool under his feet. We use to
distinguish worldly things into Movables, and not movables; but we must go to
heaven to make good one part of the distinction, Heb. 12.27, 28.

Qu. But what means should I use, Means to assure Eternal Life.
that I may live by Faith in regard of Eternal Life; my sin hangs on so fast,
that I may as soon raise up by Body above the clouds, as raise up my Soul
heavenward?

Ans. 1. Lay hold on Christ, that is the way thither, and the meritorious
cause, and the Loadstone there, to draw thy Soul after him. Christ is the great
Engineer, who has a Pulley to draw thee to Heaven. Joh. 12.32. When I am lift
up, I will draw all men unto me. I have seen an artificial Instrument, a device
quo trahens trabitur. So the more we lay hold on Christ by Faith, the more
strongly are we drawn to Christ: so is fulfilled the Promise, Jam. 4.8. Draw
near to God, and he will draw near to you.

cleansing from the burden and filth of sin, Rev. 21. ult No unclean thing
shall enter. Therefore 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and Spirit. And some Promises God has made in special,
for that very work of cleansing the Soul. See Ezekiel. 36.25 etc. Like as Jeremy
lying in the Dungeon, when he took hold on the Cord that was let down, he was
drawn up by the men that stood aloft: So we, lying in the Dungeon of Sin and
Misery, whilst by the hand of Faith, we take hold of the Cord of Promise, which
is let down from Jesus Christ now sitting at the Right hand of God in heaven,
we are drawn in Soul and Spirit heavenward.

fruitful in good Works, if thou would be sure of heaven. 2 Pet. 1.5. Add to
your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, etc. for so ver. 11. An entrance
shall be administered unto you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom. Not that
good Works merit any thing, but because God will encourage his people in
well-doing, by showing to such the salvation of God, Ps. 50. last.

under Christ. Be careful to sanctify Gods Sabbath, which is a sign and a
pledge of heaven; and the resting of that day, a powerful means under Christ to
prepare Gods people for eternal rest. However, we are not tied to the
observation of the Jewish Sabbath, yet there remains a rest to the people of
God, Heb. 4 9. As the full rest and Sabbatism does remain and will remain, not
to be fully possessed by them, till the general Resurrection; so that percursory
Rest and Sabbath which is ordained to be a sign and a pledge of the other, must
needs remain, till we come to enjoy that, whereof this is a pledge. If this
Sabbath be a sign and pledge of heaven, and of Gods perfect sanctifying of his
people in Souls and Bodies (Exodus 31.13.) then it must be kept till we come
there: for if we lose the pledge of a Benefit, we lose the evidence of that
Benefit, whereof it is a Pledge.

Consider further, the Sabbath was not only ordained to be a pledge of Eternal
Rest, to assure us of it, but to be a Means also to fit us for it. The Sabbath
was made for man, for man's benefit; and that, not only for his bodily rest,
but especially for the rest of his Soul, that he might cease from the works of
sin, and learn to do the work of God. And experience shows, the right
sanctifying of the Sabbath, is a powerful means under Christ, to sanctify us,
to increase Faith, Love, Zeal, and all saving graces. It takes a man off from
the world (for such a man thinks not his own thoughts, speaks not his own
words, does not his own works.) I say, it takes a man off from the world and
puts him (as it were) into heaven for the time. As Paul was caught up into
heaven; so, such a man as is in the Spirit on the Lords day, Rev. 1.
(as it were) in heaven on the Lords day. You cannot have a more lively
resemblance of heaven on this side heaven, than is a Sabbath sanctified in an
heavenly manner. It only differs in degrees of glory and durance: for what is
heaven, but an Eternal Sabbath? and what is a Temporal Sabbath, but a short, a
little Heaven? Therefore be careful to sanctify the Sabbath, as thou desire
in a lively manner to live by Faith in regard of Life Eternal.

The great Cloud of Witnesses, in Gods manifold blessings temporal and
Spiritual upon such as carefully sanctify the Sabbath, and his many remarkable
judgments in both kinds, upon those that profane it or contemn it, does
proclaim a necessity of keeping this Rest, as ever we desire by Faith to enter
into that other Rest, Heb. 4.9.
which yet remains for the people of God. Our delighting to sanctify Gods
Sabbaths on earth, gives full assurance to our Faith grounded upon Gods
Promise, that we shall enter into Gods eternal Rest in Heaven. For so runs the
Promise, Isa. 58. last. If thou call the Sabbath a delight, etc. then shall
thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high
places of the earth; that is, in sure and safe places, (that is for earthly
blessings) and I will feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father (that is)
with a heavenly inheritance. For what is the heritage of Jacob, but Canaan in
the Type, and Heaven it self in the Antitype? Do thou desire then to be
assured of heaven by Faith, if God raise up thy heart to delight in the
sanctifying his Sabbath upon right grounds, I can assure thee from the mouth of
God, that heaven is thine. Thou shall certainly be fed with the heritage of
Jacob; for (as it follows in the very next words) The mouth of the Lord has
spoken it. And so much for Exhortation.

5. Of Comfort.

Comfort from our heavenly life.
5. Here is Comfort and Encouragement against the Evils and Temptations of this
present Life. As our days are few, so full of evil and tentation. There are
tentations on the right hand, as well as on the left: I mean, Temptations of
Prosperity, as well as of Adversity. The best things of this present life,
prove the worst without Gods special grace preserving the Soul. Now living by
Faith in respect of Life Eternal, is a singular means to preserve the Soul
under Temptations of both kinds.

Against Adversity.
First, under the Tentations of Adversity, which lie so sore and heavy upon the
poor creature, that if its hope were only in this life, it could not but
apprehend it self of all creatures most miserable. 1 Cor. 15.20.
Hear what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 4.11. Even unto this present hour, we both
hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain
dewlling place, and labor, working with our hands; being reviled, we entreat;
being persecuted, we suffer: we are made as the filth of the world, and the
offscouring of all things unto this day. This is the common Lot of Gods people
in this world; and therefore, if their hope were only in this life, they were
of all men most miserable. Yea, but the assured hope of a better life, bears up
their heads and hearts from sinking in the midst of all these waves. For thus,
he that lives by Faith in regard of Eteral Life, will reason; What though I
hunger and thirst here, and am pinched with famine, yet I shall come to such a
place, where I shall hunger and thirst no more. Rev. 7.16. Though I be ragged,
and naked here, I shall be clothed with Robes of Righteousness there: Though I
am buffeted here, yet those marks of the Lord Jesus, those scars I received for
his Names sake, shall appear like so many Stars of Glory: Though I labor here
even unto faintness and failing of spirits, yet I shall rest from all my
labors, when I come there. And though I have no certain dewlling place; or if
I have, I know not how soon I shall be turned out of doors by my earthly
Landlord, or by my heavenly Landlord, yet there I have a building of God, a
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 2 Cor. 5.1.
Though here I be reviled, and though I be defamed here, yet there God shall
wipe away all reproach from my name, as well as all tears from mine eyes: for,
Psa. 1 49.
Such honor have all his Saints. Though I be persecuted here, afflicted and
tormented, yet I know my sufferings for Christ have not so much abounded in
this life, but my consolation in Christ shall much more abound in the life to
come. If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. Though
I be here made the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things, yet
I know I shall have honor enough there, when I shall be glorified in Christ,
and Christ shall be glorified in me: When he shall come to be glorified in his
Saints, and admired in all them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. Though I am
ignorant here, and at the best, know but in part, yet I shall have fullness of
knowledge there, and shall know, as I my self am known. Though here I am
imperfect in all my graces, and in all my duties, so that there is more of sin
than of grace in every duty; yet there I shall never sin against God any more,
never grieve his Spirit more, dishonor his Name more: When that which is
perfect is come, 1 Cor. 13.10.
that which is imperfect shall be done away.

Now what a comfort and encouragement is this in the midst of all our Troubles,
either of sin or of affliction? Here we are sure to drink of a bitter cup, ( Ye
shall indeed drink of the cup which I drink of, says Christ) but the
Meditation and Application of Life Eternal by Faith, is a Christians Sugar,
which is fetched out of the Canaries of Heaven, to sweeten this bitter Cup. Here
we are sure of a troublesome Pilgrimage, we pass through the valley of Tears;
but the Meditation and Application of Life Eternal by Faith, will be like
Elijah^ Chariot, or like Jacobs Ladder in his troublesome journey to
Padan-Aram: When he slept upon the stone, he had a hard Pillow, but a sweet
Dream, whilst God made his Bed; he dreamed, and behold a Ladder, etc. And what
a refreshing was this to Jacob in his troublesome journey? As if the Lord had
said to him, Jacob, thou have a long journey to go, thou must not only go to
the remote parts of the earth, but thou must travel as far as heaven; how will
you ever get thither? where will you find a Ladder long enough, and strong
enough? If all the Ladders in the world were tied together, can they reach
thither? Can thou rear them up, or dare thou venture upon them? Should
thou join together all thy good desires, all thy good Prayers, and all thy good
Works, thy own Works, or other men's Works and Merits, dare thou venture upon
them? The Ladder will crack, and you must needs fall as low as Hell. But lo,
here is a Ladder (says God) that reaches from Earth to Heaven, and that is Jesus
Christ: His Humane Nature is upon Earth, and his Divine Nature especially
manifested in Heaven; Ephesians. 1.
in both, he reconciles all things in heaven and in earth, and makes a passage
for lost man to re-enter his heavenly Paradise. Now, I say, the Meditation and
Application of this by Faith, will be as great a refreshing to us in our
troublesome journey to heaven, as it was to Jacob in his tedious journey to
Padan-Aram. It is true indeed, no man must look to go to heaven in a
feather-bed, or in such a broad-way, that he may drive a Sumpter-horse before
him: Mat. 7.13.
for, straight is the gate, ana narrow is the way that leads to life, and few
there be that find it. As there is no way to heaven but by Christ: so there is
no way to heaven but by the Cross. Christ and his Cross are inseparable
Companions. This is the way that Christ himself, and all his Saints have gone
to heaven before us in, and we must not think of a smoother way, or of a
shorter cut. Only the happiness, the joy, the glory in the end of our journey,
are enough (if applied by us) to bear up our hearts under all the troubles and
temptations in the way. And so you see how the Life of Heaven,

1. Bears up the heart under the Temptation of Adversity.

2. It will bear up the heart, 2. Under Prosperity.
and preserve the Soul under Temptations of Prosperity.

And indeed the Temptations of Prosperity, are far more dangerous than the
Temptations of Adversity. Heaven upon earth, destroys more than Hell upon
earth: 1 Cor. 1.
Not many wise, not many mighty, not many noble or rich are called: Mat. 19.
O how hardly shall a rich man enter into the kingdom of Heaven! But Faith in
regard of Eternal Life will preserve the Soul under the Temptations of
Prosperity.

Quest. What are the Temptations of Prosperity?

Ans. Luke 12.19. Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry; take up thy
rest and thy portion, says the Devil, to flesh and blood in these sensual
delights: O no, says the believing Soul, that has Faith for heaven, I Will
never play the child so much, to sell my heavenly Inheritance for a Plum, for
a Counter, for a Rattle, for a Trifle; there is none but children will do so.
Moses made a manly choice: A wise man's choice is, when he chooses holy
sufferings before sinful pleasures. Heb. 11.
Should I not then choose heavenly pleasures before such as are sinful? nay,
before such as are otherwise lawful? Suppose thou have a goodly House, rich
Furniture, a full Table, sweet and faithful Friends, whom thou love as thine
own Soul. And now flesh and blood says, as Peter, Lord, it is good for us to
be here; Let us not only make a Tabernacle, but a Temple, or a Mansion House,
that we may not think of removing any more. O no, says Faith, these are sweet
blessings indeed, sweet mercies of God, but they are not Heaven: These are good
Inns by the way, but they are not Home: Home is home, be it never so homely;
much more when it is so rich and glorious as heaven is. Therefore says the
believing Soul, I cannot suffer my thoughts to rest upon any flowers of Content
by the way-side, having such a sweet Garden and Paradise of Delight to repose
themselves in at the end of the journey. And thus Faith for Eternal Life, will
preserve the Soul under Temptations of Prosperity. And thus was Moses
preserved, whilst he cast an eye of Faith upon the reward and recompense in the
heavenly Inheritance, he had power to stop his ears against the Egyptian Sirens
of worldly delights.

6. Of Admiration.

Admiration and Thankfulness for heavenly life.
6. Use of Admiration and Thankfulness. As we are to rejoice in hope, so also to
be thankeful in hope. A Christian has cause to be thankful, not only for
mercies past, but for mercies to come; as Jehosaphat was, 2 Chronicles. 20. who
sings Triumph, before he had the Victory: for Faith makes a believer as sure of
the Victory, as if he had it already; and as sure of heaven, as if he had it in
present possession. Therefore he has cause to look upon this expression of the
goodness of God, with Admiration and Thankefulness.

First, with Admiration. We have cause to admire the love of God to poor
sinners, that God should bestow Heaven and Salvation upon such as deserved
nothing but Hell and Condemnation. It is much that God should receive such as
we are into the condition of children. St. John admires it, 1 John 3.1. Behold,
what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the Sons of God! But this is much more to be admired, that God should bestow
upon such an Inheritance. If we may judge of Love by the Gifts, that Love must
needs be infinite, that bestows such an infinite Reward. It was a great
expression of love in Ahasuerus to Queen Esther, when he said, What is thy
petition, and what is thy request, and it shall be granted thee to the half of
the Kingdom? Esth. 7.2. How much greater expression is it of love in God to his
people, to give them a whole Kingdom, and that incorruptible, undefiled, that
fades not away. David was much taken with that expression of Gods love to him
and his, when God said, 2 Samuel 7.16. Thy House and thy Kingdom shall be
established for ever before thee: Thy Throne shall be established for ever.
Then (says the Text) went King David in, and sat before the Lord, and said,
Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my House, that thou have brought me hitherto?
And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord God: But thou have spoken
also of thy servants House for a great while to come: And is this the manner of
man, O Lord God? Do men use so freely and bountifully to do good to their
Inferiors and to their Enemies? Thus he admires the goodness of God to him and
his; and so may every faithful Soul, when he looks upon his present possession
of grace, he may well say, with David, Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my
Fathers house, that thou have brought me hitherto? First, that thou have done
so much for me, as thou have done already. But when he looks by the eye of
Faith upon his future possession of glory, he may well hold up his hands, and
stand and wonder at the goodness of God to a poor worthless Creature, and say,
How great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for such as fear thee, etc?
(Psalm. 31.19.) Lord! as if the gift of grace were a small thing in thy sight,
thou have spoken of thy Servants glory and happiness for a great while to come,
even as far as to Eternity. And is this the manner of man, O Lord God? Can any
man in the world, or all the men in the world, if they would lay their heads,
and hearts, and hands together, to exalt a poor Creature, can they do this? Can
they redeem their brothers Soul from Hell? Ps. 49.6, 7, 8, 9.
or can they make him happy to Eternity? No, no, they must let this work alone
for a God to perform; all the world can never do it. And therefore admire this
unparalleled expression of Gods goodness to a poor Creature.

And

Secondly, be Thankful for it. If we be bound to be thankful for the least
mercy, for the least mercy of this present life, how should we be thankful for
the greatest gift, the gift of Eternal Life: Romans 6. last. The wages of sin is
death, but the gift of God is Eternal Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord:
Therefore be thankful for it. And indeed, the excellency of it, the excellency
of Life Eternal, should raise up our hearts to thankfulness.

The excellency of Heaven set out,
Which excellency appears, 1. By the excellent Names and Epithetes that are
given to it 2. By the excellent Properties of it. 3. By the excellent Price
given for it. 4. By the excellent Causes of it. 5. By the excellent Effects of
it.


1. By its Names
First, By the excellent Names and Epithets given to it. It is called, An
Everlasting Kingdom; The Kingdom of Heaven; A House; The Fathers House, not
made with hands; A Mansion; The Presence Chamber of God -- Abraham's Bosom,
where Gods people are safe, as children in their Parents bosom -- Paradise,
Luke 23.24. in comparison of which, the Garden of Eden was but a dunghill;
(Lords Joy) Matthew. 25.21. -- The New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.10. and Gal. 4.16.
Jerusalem which is above: All the glory of the Old Jerusalem in Solomon's
Temple, was but a Type of this -- The Immortal Inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4. -- The
glory of God -- Rest, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. -- Refreshing, Acts 3.19. -- Peace, Isa.
57.2. And what is more desirable than these things? Therefore be thankful for
it,

Secondly, 2. By its Properties.
the excellency appears by the excellent Properties of it. For

1. of all, the happiness of heaven is most pure, Rev. 22 1. It is called A
pure river of water of life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of
God and of the Lamb. All earthly Pleasures have their admixtures of the mud of
Sin and Misery, but this is pure.

2. It is most sure and secure, because out of the reach of Satan and all
enemies. Rev. 20.10. The devil that deceived them was cast into the Lake of
fire and brimstone, where the Beast and the false Prophet are and shall be
tormented day and night, for ever and ever. In this world, the greatest
comforts are upon a very uncertain tenure; but there, all is sure and secure.

3. It is most Satisfactory. The River of Life must needs quench your thirst:
Rev. 7.16. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; there shall be
no want of any thing their Souls can desire, Psalm. 17. last.

4. All this shall be Eternal. When thou have lived so many thousand years as
there are little sands on the shore, piles of grass on the ground, stars in the
Sky, thy happiness shall be as new to begin, as at thy very first entrance. As
long as there is a God, and a Christ, thy life shall last. O then, be thankful
for it.

Thirdly, the excellency appears, 3. By its Price.
by the excellent Price given for it. We judge the worth of things by the
value: Would you not be thankful, if one should give you an Inheritance should
cost so many hundred thousand pounds? but heaven is such an Inheritance, that
cannot be bought with all the Silver and Gold in the world. For neither we, nor
our inheritance, were redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but
with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled, and without
spot, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. That must needs be a precious Inheritance, that cost
such a precious price. Therefore be thankful for it.

4. By its Causes.
Fourthly, the excellency of it appears from the excellent Causes of it: As,

1. The primary Efficient Cause, is, God the Father, and his free love from all
Eternity.

2. The Meritorious Cause, is Christ, his Son: 1 John 5.11. And this is the
Witness, that God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.

3. The Instrumental Cause offering and holding forth Eternal Life is the
Everlasting Gospel, Romans 1.16, 17. The Instrumental Cause receiving, is, The
precious grace of Faith, Ephesians. 2.8. Ye are saved through faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the gift of God.

4. The Sealing Cause, is, The Holy Ghost. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. In whom, etc.

5. The Final Cause, is, Gods Glory, and our Glory: Gods Glory in glorifying
his Servants; his Servants Glory, in the glorifying of God: Whilst they do
behold the glory of God, they glorify God to all eternity, and are glorified
by God; (Joh. 17.24. Behold my glory) and so glorify God, and receive glory
from God. For in beholding Gods glory, we are transformed, 2 Cor. 3.18.
Therefore, Rev. 5.13. Blessing and honor are to him. O who would not praise
God for such a life? Why do you not begin your Heaven upon Earth? which will be
strong assurance to you, that you shall go to Heaven when you die. As wicked
men begin Hell upon Earth, whilst they curse God, and blaspheme God, and
dishonor God by their wicked words and actions: So do you begin your Heaven
upon Earth, in praising God for your living by Faith in regard of Life Eternal.

5. By Effects.
Fifthly, the excellency of Life Eternal, appears as from the Causes, so from
the Effects also, which are admirable and glorious; viz. Man's being made like
to the very Angels, Matthew. 22.30. yea, as like to Christ himself as may be. As
we have been like him in sufferings, so like him also in glory. He that is
willing to conform to Christ in the former, shall be made conformable to Christ
in the latter. Phil. 3. last, He shall change our vile body, that it might be
made like his glorious body, etc. And as in Body, so in Soul also; in the
whole man. Was Christ a King, Priest, and Prophet? so are they that are
Christ's. Revel. 1.6. He has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father:
What follows? Therefore to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
If all Gods Saints have such honor, how should they honor Him who thus
honors them of his free grace, and will honor them to all Eternity? If
Eternal Life be so excellent a gift, as appears by the Epithetes that are given
to it, by the excellent Properties of it, by the excellent Price given for it,
by the excellent Causes of it, and by the excellent Effects of it: Then surely,
as we have cause to admire the unparalleled expressions of Gods goodness to us
herein; So have we cause to break forth into thankfulness, as often as we think
of it, and act our Faith for it. No sooner did the Apostle Peter think of that
heavenly Inheritance, but he must needs break forth into blessing of God,
before he can tell how to speak of it, or to utter what he had conceived about
it: 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance
incorruptible, etc. Mark, he cannot think of the inheritance, but he is forced
to break forth into blessing. What though we have not reaped our full harvest?
yet you know Gods People were commanded to bring their Oblation of
Thanksgiving, when they received their first fruits, because the first fruits
were a Pawn and Pledge of the whole Harvest, Deuteronomy. 26. So we are bound to be
thankful to God, when we have but received the first fruits of grace, (when we
have but so much grace, as to live by Faith for Life Eternal) because the
first fruits of grace do ascertain us of a full Harvest of glory in due time.
What though we have not yet a perfect victory over all our enemies, Sin, Satan,
and Death? yet as Moses, when God had delivered him and his People from the
danger of the Sea, and Pharoabs host, he sings a Song of Thanksgiving to the
Lord (Exodus 15.1.) though the perils of the Wilderness, and other evils were
still behind; yet, I say, he is thankful, because these first victories were a
Pawn and a Pledge to them of a full and plenary Conquest; and that God would
never leave them, till he had planted them in Canaan it self: yea, in that
Celestial Canaan, where God reigns for ever and ever. And this was the ground
of Moses his thankfulness, ver. 14. The People shall hear, and be afraid, etc.
ver. 16, 17, 18. Fear and dread shall fall upon them by the greatness of thine
Arm, they shall be as still as a stone, till thy people pass over, (O Lord)
till thy people pass over which thou have purchased: Thou shall bring them in,
and plant them in the Mountain of thine Inheritance; in the place, O Lord,
which thou have made for thee to dwell in; in the Sanctuary, O Lord, which thy
hands have established. The Lord shall reign for ever and ever. Thus Gods
People (like Moses) are thankful for Victories, not only present and past, but
future also. Though Gods People are yet upon the Sea of this world, and not
past the Wilderness, they have, cause to be thankful, as Moses was, because
they have both a Promise and a Pledge of Canaan, as he had. Therefore it is
observable, that Gods people under the New Testament, standing upon the glassie
Sea of this world, are said to sing the Song of Moses, and of the Lamb, Rev.
15.2, 3. And I saw as it were a Sea of glass, etc. They sing the Song of Moses
the Servant of God, and the Song of the Lamb, that is. They sing such a Song as
Moses did sing, both for Mercies past, and also in assured hope of Mercies to
come. And this Song is taught by the Lamb, (that is, by the Lamb of God) to all
such as are redeemed by him, and none can sing this Song, but such as are
redeemed. A man cannot be thankful for that which he has nothing to show for:
he that has nothing to show for Heaven, how is it possible such a man should
be thankful for it? And therefore such as have the White Stone, and the New
Name, and the Name of Christ and his Father written in their Foreheads, are
such as sing this Song of Thankfulness: Rev. 14.1, 3. And they sing (as it
were) a new Song before the Throne, and before the four Beasts, and the Elders,
and no man could learn that Song, but the hundred forty four thousand, which
were redeemed from the earth. None but holy Men, and holy Angels, are fit for
this work; none can give hearty praise to God for victory over Sin, Satan, and
Antichrist, or for the Comforts of another World, but they that have a part and
a lot in that Inheritance. As a stranger intermeddles not with the joy of Gods
people: so neither with that Praise which is only comely in their mouths,
Therefore let the redeemed of the Lord praise him, and be thankful to him.

Quest. How should they express and prove their Thankfulness?

Ans. First, In the hatred and forsaking of all sin.

Secondly, In the practice of all holy duties, and good works.

First, In the hatred and forsaking of all sin (at least, 1. Thankfulness
showed by forsaking sin.
in regard of the Dominion of it) And why so? Because by Sin 1. A man
dishonours the Donor of this great Gift. 2. He wrongs his own Soul.


1. He dishonours the Donor execedingly: Romans 2.24. Sin dishonors God.
The Name of God is blasphemed and dishonored among the Gentiles through you;
You, for such as you, who have received so much Light, and so much Mercy from
God, to walk thus, O what a shame is it, for you thus to dishonor God! God
loves you so dearly, that he has kept nothing from you (no, not heaven it
self) I say, he has kept nothing from you, but his own glory: And will you be
so unthankful, as to rob him of that by your sinful carriage? A gracious Soul,
when he is tempted to sin, and thereby to commit Spiritual Adultery against
God, and to stain his Glory; should answer, as Joseph did, Genesis 39.8, 9. My
Lord and Master has committed all that he has to my hand, there is none
greater in all the house than I; neither has he kept any thing back from me,
but thee, because thou art dear to him; (Gods glory is dear to him, as the
woman who is the glory of the man is dear to him) how then can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God? It was a great sin in Absalom, 2 Samuel 15. when
David had received him into favor, after his three months banishment, and
upwards, and he was now declared his Reconciled Child, and Heir Apparent to
the Kingdom, in due time; I say, it was a great sin in him, in stead of being
thankful to his Father, that he should presently prepare himself, Horses and
Chariots, and a strong Guard, endeavoring to steal away the hearts of the men
of Israel, and his Crown also from his Father, both at once. And surely, it is
a great expression of unthankfulness in any, after God has once received them
into favor, and by Faith assured them of Eternal Life, for such to return
again to folly, and walk crossly, and to rob God of the Crown of his Glory by
their sins. God took it very unkindly at David's hands, that he of all other men
should so dishonor God, after he had bestowed a Temporal Kingdom upon him, 2 Samuel 12.7. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, I anointed thee King over Israel,
and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, and I gave thee thy Masters
house, and thy Masters wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel,
and of Judah; and if that had been too little, I would moreover have given thee
such and such things: Wherefore have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord,
to do evil in his sight? As if the Lord should say, O David, do thou use me
thus? Did I ever deserve this at thy hand? Is this thy kindness to thy friend?
And if the Lord took it so unkindly from David's hands, because he had bestowed
a Temporal Kingdom upon him; how much more unkindely may God take it from your
hands, whom by the grace of Faith he has assured of an Eternal Kingdom? Deuteronomy.
32.6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, ah foolish people, and unwise? Is not he thy
Father that has bought thee, etc? And is it not he that has bought Heaven it
self for thee, and will thou thus dishonor him by thy sins. By Sin a man
dishonours the Donor of this great Gift.

And secondly, He wrongs his own Soul: for, Sin wrongs the Soul.
he blots the Evidence or Conveyance which God has given him, to assure him of
this heavenly Kingdom. What says Christ, Luke 10.20. Rejoice, that your Names
are written in Heaven, or in the Book of Life. First, that you know this, that
you have this Evidence; God has a threefold Book:

1. Of Providence: God has a threefold Book.
which is Gods Foreknowledge and Disposing all things in the world. Of this
David speaks, Psalm. 139.16. Thine eyes did see my substance yet being
imperfect, and in thy book (first in the Book of Providence) were all my
members written.

2 A Book of Men's Works and Ways, Rev. 20.12. And I saw the dead small and
great stand before the Lord, and the Books were opened, and the dead were
judged out of those things which were written in the Books, according to their
Works.

The third is the Book of Men's Ends and Rewards, which is called, The Book of
Life, Dan. 12.1. At that time thy people shall be saved, every one that shall
be found written in the Book. Now this Book is either in the Original, which is
Gods Calendar of such as are appointed to Life and Salvation in his own
Foreknowledge and Decree: for, The Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. Or
else the Counterpane of it, in the Hearts and Consciences of such as do
believe: 1 John 5.10. He that believes, has the witness in himself. Now
howsoever it is true, He that is once written in Gods Book of Life, (if we take
it for Gods Foreknowledge and Decree) can never be blotted out again; (The
foundation of God stands sure) yet, if we take it for that Witness that is
written in the Heart and Conscience, it may be much blotted and blurred, and
obscured by our wilful sinning against God. It is true, God will speak peace
and pardon to his people, but let them not turn again to folly. For if they do,
though they lose not their pardon, yet they may lose their peace; so far, that
they shall not be able to read their Pardon or their Assurance for Heaven.
Therefore such a man, as he dishonours the Giver: so he sins against his own
Soul. Therefore let him declare his Thankfulness by the hating and forsaking
all sin.

And,

Thankfulness to be shown by performance of all duties.
Secondly, By the Practice of all holy Duties and good Works. If God be so
abundant in Reward (to assure us by Faith of Eternal Life) it calls upon us
very strongly to be so much the more abundant in our work. It is the Apostles
Argument, 1 Cor. 15. last, (having discoursed at large of the glorious
condition of Gods People after the Resurrection) Therefore my beloved Brethren,
be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch
as you know, that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. O that we would often
consider, there is an Eternity for Reward, but a short time for work! and when
the time of this Life is once past, there is not a second opportunity, there is
no returning back again, there is no doing of any thing in the Grave: Therefore
let us work, Joh. 9.4.
while we have the light of Life; the night of death comes, wherein no man can
work; no man can then believe, or repent, or bring forth the fruits of
repentance: There is no repentance in Hell to any purpose; and if we repent of
any thing in heaven, it shall be of this, that we did God no more and no better
service upon earth. And therefore so often as we cast an eye upon the Eternity of
Reward, and the short time of our work, let us bestir our selves in our places.
Take the counsel of the Wise man, Eccles 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to
do, (either for God, or for the Church of God, or for thy own Soul) do it with
all thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor Wisdom in
the grave, whither thou art going: He that thinks seriously of his Eternal
condition after death, cannot be an unprofitable Servant in his life.

And so much for the seventh Particular, what Manner of Life the Just lives by
Faith. All that is worth the Name of Life, Natural, Spiritual, and Eternal
Life: Faith is the Key that opens to us the Kingdom of Heaven: So says Calvin
in his third Sermon on Genesis 15, 6.

THE EIGHTH GENERAL HEAD.
QUEST. VIII. What are the Reasons for living by Faith?
WE come now to the Eighth Particular, the Reasons why God will have the Just
to live by Faith. We have given particular Reasons to the particular Branches
before, (as, Why the Just lives by Faith the Life of Justification,
Sanctification, Renovation, Fructification, Mortification, and Vivification,
etc.) We shall now give the general Reasons, which reach to all in general; Why
God will have the Just to live by Faith. It is true, God is not bound to give
us a Reason, or give us an account of any of his Matters, Job 33.13. It is the
folly of vain man, to call Gods Wisdom to the Bar of his shallow Reason But
Romans 9.20. Who art, etc. Gods Will may well stand for a Reason. And yet, God is
pleased in this particular, to give us a Reason of his Will. Wicked men, in the
Scripture, are said to be unreasonable men, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. they do a thing,
because they will do it, though they have no good Reason for it. But God,
though he is most Absolute and Independent, is pleased in this matter of Faith
to give us a Reason of his Will, That man might not dispute and wrangle with
God, and say, What Reason have I to live by Faith, seeing I have little or
nothing in hand. Therefore God tells us, There is all the Reason in the world,
a man should live by Faith. Therefore unreasonable men are said to be such as
have no faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. because there is great reason a Christian man
should live by Faith. So, though Faith be above Reason in some sense, to wit,
above carnal, corrupt Reason: yet it is not above enlightened and rectified
Reason.

There is manifold reason, Reasons for living by faith
why a Christian should be willing to live by Faith. All may be reduced to
three Heads.

1. From a Believers Condition in the Flesh. 2. From the Relation between
Christ and a Believer. First sort of Reasons.
3. From the Nature and Use of Faith.
First, From a Believers Condition in the Flesh. From our condition in the
flesh.
For distance of place between the person that makes the Promise, and the
person to whom it is made, requires the Evidence of Faith to assure of the
Performance.

Now first, The Believer is absent from the Lord, 1. Absence from the Lord.
and from the Presence of Jesus Christ. Though he do enjoy in some measure the
presence of his Grace, yet so long as he lives here below, he cannot enjoy the
presence of his Glory. He that is far distant from him that makes a Promise,
had need have some good Evidence and Obligation of his faithfulness and
ability. 2 Cor. 5.6. Whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the
Lord, from our last home. What of that? (therefore says the Apostle in the
next words) we walk by faith, and not by sight. As if he should have said, He
that has not the Evidence of Sense, had need have the Evidence of Faith from a
sure Word of God. But Gods People in this life have not the Evidence of Sense
or Sight in their highest degree; therefore they had need have the Evidence of
Faith for their Security. Their life is a Life of Faith: for, Faith is the
evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. And that is the first Reason.

2. Distance of time.
The second Reason, is drawn from the great distance of time betwixt Gods
Promise, and the Performance of the thing promised. Sometimes some scores, some
hundreds, some thousands of years; therefore Gods People stand in need of some
Security in the mean time, to assure them that God will make good his Word at
the last. Now this security is Faith; and therefore observe the connection of
the Text, to the former verse, The just lives by his faith: Why so? because,
says the third verse, the Vision is for an appointed time. Gods Promise
(manifested by Vision to the Prophet) shall not presently be fulfilled, but in
its appointed time. Therefore, in the mean time, the just man lives by his
Faith, he takes Gods bare Word for it, he believes it shall be so: The Spirit
of God working by the Promise, assures him it shall be so; and this puts life
into the Promise, and life into him that apprehends the Promise.

Faith is a Christians Security, till God pay in that which he is bound for in
the Covenant of Free Grace. It is just like the Witness and Seal to the Bond;
as, He that believes, sets to his Seal that God is true, Joh. 3.30. So God
himself, by giving Faith, sets to his Seal and Witness, that he means truly and
faithfully to perform his Promise: 1 John 5.10. He that believes, has the
witness in himself. Now I say, This Witness and Seal is very needful for the
support of poor weak creatures, because there is so great a time betwixt the
Promise and the Performance. It is nothing so much to rejoice in the things
promised, when we see them fulfilled by the eye of Sense. Luke 2.
As old Simeon falls a singing, when he saw Christ with his bodily eyes, and
embraced him in his very Arms, he might well say, with S. John, That which we
have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled
of the Word of life, even that declare we unto you: and therefore he could not
but rejoice. But it was much more in old Father Abraham, Ioh. 8.
when he did so much rejoice to see Christ and his day, so many thousand years
before he came into the world; when he could see him no otherways, but by the
eye of Faith, and yet he rejoiced, as if he had been in Simeons condition: as
if Christ had been present with him at that very time, because Faith assured
him it should be so. And in this respect all Believers stand in need of Faith,
because usually there is some good distance of time betwixt the Promise and the
Performance, and Faith is their Security in the mean time. And that is the
second Reason.

The third Reason is this, 3. Need of Humility.
To keep us in a continual frame of Humility. God will have us to live by Faith
as long as we live in this life. For the truth is, The best of Gods Servants
(in regard of remaining corruption) when they possess much in hand, they are
apt to to be puffed up with pride and self-confidence, as Hezekiah was. Isa. 39.
Therefore to that end, that no flesh might glory in his presence, look as God
chooses the weak, and base, and despised things of the world, in their first
conversion; so he keeps them in such a manner of condition all their life long,
that by Faith they might be fain to go to him for every thing they want in
Temporals and in Spirituals. In Temporals they must live like Beggars, they
must beg of him their daily Bread; and so in Spirituals also, Mat. 6.
they must go to God for new supplies of Grace, and for new strength, upon the
performance of every new duty. The most eminent Christian has not grace
beforehand in the stock for one year, or day, or hour; not enough to perform
the next Duty, or to resist the next Tentation from Satan or the World. 2 Cor.
3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves, but all our sufficiency is of God: Phil 4.13. I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me: But will Christ strengthen those to do any
great matter, whom he does not strengthen to believe? No surely, According to
thy faith be it unto thee, Mat. 8.13. and 9.29. Therefore a Christian lives by
Faith every day, and in every duty. He fetches strength from Christ, as well as
sight. (Isa. 45.24. Surely, etc.) Sight, for the acceptance of my person;
Strength, for the performance of my duty. God feeds them, and supplies them but
only from hand to mouth, lest they should be exalted above measure. 2 Cor. 12.
And the hand that receives (to wit, the hand of Faith) is an empty hand too:
It brings nothing to God, but it receives all from God; but yet it receives not
presently, but tarries his leisure. Nay, God gives not only the Gift it self,
but the very hand that receives the gift, lest any man should boast. For, Faith
is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. And all this, to keep us humble.

Faith is the Christians Caterer, or Purveyor, or Petitioner. It is like a
little poor Boy, that is sent out of doors, and so goes up and down to beg a
living for his old decrepit father, who lies bedrid at home: I say, We, like
poor creatures, can earn nothing of our selves by the merit of our own works,
toward our living. Now Faith, like the little Boy, it goes a begging to God
for a living: For Faith sets Prayer a work, and Prayer sets God himself a work
for our good: And so the Just lives by his Faith. Now he that lives upon Alms,
upon his mere dependence upon another good will, he has great cause to be
humble. There is nothing more odious and absurd, than a proud Beggar: But he
that lives by Faith, lives merely upon the good will and free grace of God in
Christ; and therefore has great cause to be humble. And that is the third
Reason under the first general Head, drawn from a Believers Condition in the
flesh.

The fourth Reason under the first general Head, 4. End of the Word and
Ministry.
is from the End of Gods giving the Word and the Ministry of it to his People
in a state of imperfection; viz. For their direction, and for their support in
all conditions, till they come to a state of perfection. Ephesians. 4.11. He gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of faith, and
of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ: Till we come where there is no need of Temple, no need of
Temporal and Spiritual light by a Medium, as it is Rev. 21.22, 23 Well then, as
long as we live in this life, the Word is written for our direction, and for
our support. But how shall we be directed or supported by it, if we do not
apprehend it by faith? Heb. 4.2. The Word profits not, not being mixed with
faith. And indeed, the very End why God gives us his written Word, is, That we
might lay hold of it by faith, for our comfort in our worst condition. Joh. 20.
last, These things are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God; and that believing, ye might have life through his
Name. And if this be the main End of the Scriptures writing, then there is all
the reason in the world, we should live by Faith in it: Otherwise, we do what
we can, to frustrate the Scriptures end, and to make it vain. Yea, we take Gods
Name in vain, if we believe not: for, the Word of God, is the greatest part of
Gods Name, by which he makes himself and his good Will known to us, (as men are
known by their Names) Psalm. 138.2. Thou have magnified thy Word above all thy
Name. But he that believes not, vilifies this Word; he looks at it as a vain
word, and so he takes Gods Name in vain.

Obj. But it may be you will say, How do you know the Scriptures to be the Word
of God? If I knew it to be the Word of God indeed, I would not only l^ve by
Faith in it, but I would say and profess (as you do) There was all the reason
in the world that men should believe it, and live by Faith in it: As it is
written, Let God be true, and every man a liar, Romans 3.4.]

Ans. I will not at this time undertake to handle this subject at large, as I
hope to do hereafter, if God please to continue life and opportunity: For, I
conceive, it is one of the most necessary foundations to be laid. And for want
of settling and ramming down this Truth, men become foolish builders, they are
loose in the whole fabric of Religion, they are loose in their Faith, and as
loose in their Practice.

Arguments of four sorts.
There are four sorts of Arguments, (besides the witness of the Spirit, which is
the greatest of all to them that have it) to prove the Scriptures to be of God:
Whereof some are drawn from the Scriptures themselves; Some from the Penmen
thereof; That the Scriptures are the Word of God.
Some from the Opposites or Enemies of the Scriptures; and last of all, Some
from God himself, bearing witness from Heaven to the Word of his Truth. I shall
only speak a little of the first.

1. Some Arguments from the Scriptures themselves; and that, The Scriptures
excellency.
Whether we respect the Antiquity of the Scriptures, or the excellency of the
Matter therein contained, it will plainly evince, they are of God: Had we but
time, and were it so pertinent to this present subject, to run over all the
Particulars.

The excellency of the Matter appears, in the Sublimity, Majesty, Purity,
Verity, and powerful Efficacy of the Scriptures. It will be too long to speak
of all. I will only pitch upon one; and that is, The infallible Truth and
Verity of the Scriptures, Verity.
which prove them to be of God: And this Truth will appear, both by the Consent
of all parts generally, and more particularly by the fulfilling of the
Prophecies.

First, by the Consent of all the parts generally. Consent of parts.
For does not Joshua confirm Moses? Do not the Judges confirm Joshua? Samuel
the Judges? And so we might run through all the rest, to the end of the Bible.
Do but consider a little what several Authors have ever writ of the same
subject in any humane Art or Science, which have not differed in some
particular, and brought probable Arguments on both sides? Whereas the
Scriptures, though written by several men, in several Ages, and several Parts
of the World, do never cross one another, or call in question what formerly had
been delivered.

It is true, I confess, Unlearned and unstable men, throughout all Ages, have
wrested the Scriptures to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. But where did
ever any one holy Penman of God, Correct what another of them had written? And
the reason is, Because however several men wrote several parts of the
Scriptures, yet they being all acted by one and the same Spirit, they had all
but one and the same Heart; and, as I may so say, one and the same Mouth. And I
may well say so, Because the Scriptures says it before me, Luke 1.10. As God
spoke by the mouth of the Prophets, which have been since the world began.
Observe, There is Prophets in the Plural Number, and Mouth in the Singular. All
the Prophets had but one Mouth; because they all spoke one and the same Truth,
without contradiction of one another. Thus there is a Consent of all the parts
of Scripture generally, which proves them to be of God.

Secondly, This Consent will yet more particularly appear, in the fulfilling of
each Prophecy therein contained. There has indeed hardly fallen out any matter
of moment from the beginning of the World set down in the Scriptures, but has
been foretold before the Accomplishment; that so, when it came to pass, men
might know and believe, that God is the God of Truth, and his Word the Word of
Truth. To omit the great Promise of the Messiah, and those other also,
concerning the calling in of the Gentiles to be of the Church and People of
God, (which was as unlikely and unprobable to Humane Reason in those days, as
the calling back of the Jews to the acknowledgement of Christ in these days.)
And yet, that God that has so wonderfully and miraculously fulfilled the
former (and is fulfilling of it to this day, in the Conversion of poor Indians)
will ere long as gloriously fulfill the other; and, it may be, some of you that
stand here shall not taste of death, till you see these things fulfilled: Isa.
66.8. Who has heard such a thing, who has seen such things? Shall the Earth
be made to bring forth in one day, or shall a Nation be born at once? This is a
wonder indeed, and shall be for a wonder! And yet, so it was in the first
Coming of Christ; whole Nations of the Gentiles were converted all of a sudden,
and so it shall be at the second Coming of Christ, or a little before, the
Nation of the Jews shall be reconverted to God, and grafted in again. Romans 11.
And the Lord prepare that woman for the day of her Travel.

But not to insist any longer upon these, let us for more particular instance,
cast our eyes upon that Remarkable Prophecy, 1 King. 13.2. when Jeroboam had
erected an Idolatrous Altar in Bethel, for the worship of his golden Calf, God
sends presently a Prophet to him, with this Message, That there should be a
Child born unto the house of David, Josiah by Name, and that he should
sacrifice or burn upon that very Altar, the bones of his Idolatrous Priests;
which was fulfilled a matter of three hundred years after, 2 King. 23.15, 16.
It is most admirable to consider, that not only the Judgment it self, but the
very Name of the Man should be foretold, by which it was to be put in
execution, and that so many years before his Birth.

Consider, in the next place, how punctually the Prophet Isaiah, Jeremy, and
others, do speak of the Babylonish Captivity, of the number of the years it
should continue, and in the conclusion, of the means of their freedom thence;
yea, they set down also the very Name of the man (Cyrus) whom God had raised up
accordingly for their deliverance, Isa. 44.28. and 45.1, 4.

And last of all, (to instance no further) take but a view of the Prophecy of
Daniel, and he may serve in stead of all: For he foretells what should fall out
for the space of Six hundred years, in the four great Monarchies of the World,
the Babylonian, the Persian, the Grecian, and the Roman; and that, so
punctually and exactly, that he might seem rather to have writtten a History,
than a Prophecy. Therefore the Scriptures are certainly of God.

Obj. Now if any man shall object, and say, But who knows whether these things
were so foretold before they came to pass? It may be, when such things fell
out, a Prophecy was afterward fained, and fathered upon them, to gain more
credit to their Writings?

Ans. I answer, That Is a thing altogether impossible. For, first of all, That
Prophecy of the Man of God against the Altar in Bethel, it must needs be really
extant so many years before the birth of Josiah: For it is most manifest, (as
well by the Custom of the Jews, as of all other Nations in the World) That the
History of the Kings and Chronicles were written, and set down from year to
year, the self-same time, that, the things therein specified, were acted and
performed.

And as for the Prophecy of the Captivity, with their return by the help of
Cyrus, it is as impossible, it should be feigned after the Event, as the other:
And my reason is this, Because the People going into Captivity, the Scriptures
also (the Law and the Prophets) went along with them, and from thence were
dispersed almost into all Regions of the World. So that, if any such Prophecy
had been thrust in afterward, the discovery would soon have shown the vanity
of such a policy.

And so the Prophet Daniel's History tells us, That he lived under the first of
these Monarchies: And therefore it is not possible the Prophecy should be
feigned after the things were fulfilled. Yea, and we read of Alexander the
Great, that he read at Jerusalem in the Book of Daniel, the things which
himself had achieved.

And it is without all Controversy, That when Ptolomy King of Egypt, (who was
styled Ptolomeus Philadelphus) I say, when he caused the Scripture (and so, the
Prophecy of Daniel among the rest) to be Translated into Greek by the Seventy
Interpreters, there were then many things in that Prophecy, which were not yet
accomplished, neither could there be the least suspicion of alteration
afterward, in respect of the great account was made of it. For howsoever, that
Learning loving King had in his Library a matter of Fifty thousand Books, yet
this of the Scriptures, he esteemed the greatest Treasure of all the rest;
showing no less care in the Preservation, than he had before manifested both
care and cost in the Translation of it.

All these things therefore being laid together, it must needs follow, That the
Prophecies were revealed and set forth by the God of Truth; and so the Event
confirming the Prediction, it does plainly declare there was no juggling, no
deceit, no cunning device of man, but that the Original was of God.

If therefore the Scriptures be of God (as appears by the infallible Truth and
Verity of them) there is all the reason in the world, we should believe them.
If the Scripture speaks nothing in vain, Jam. 4.5. we should hear and receive
nothing of it in vain, but live by Faith on every word that God speaks in the
Scripture. And that is the fourth Reason under the first general Head.

5. The fifth Reason is this, Because Gods People, 5. Experiments of past
things.
whilst they live here below, have had (both they and their Fore fathers)
manifold Experiments of Gods goodness and faithfulness for the time past, in
fulfilling his Word: I mean, the Word of his Promise; not only in fulfilling
the Word of Prophecy in general, (as was proved in the former Reason) but also
in fulfilling the Word of Promise, as shall be made out in this. And has God
made good his Promise to so many generations for the time past? And have we not
then great reason to live by Faith in the Promise of such a God for the time to
come? Remember what Joshua said to the People, Josh. 21. last, and 23.14. You
know in all your hearts, and in all your souls, that not one thing has failed
of all the good things which the Lord your God spoke concerning you; all are
come to pass unto you, not one thing has failed thereof. And this he speaks
to this end, that he might persuade them to live by Faith, and to trust in the
same God for the time to come. Therefore, Deuteronomy. 7.17. To cure the peoples
diffidence and distrust, God puts them in mind of former experiences, If thou
shall say in thine heart, These Nations are more than I, how can I dispossess
them? Thou shall not be afraid of them, but shall well remember what the Lord
thy God did unto Pharaoh and all Egypt; So shall the Lord thy God do unto all
the people, of whom thou art afraid. As if he should say, That God who has
made good his promise in his peoples deliverance for the time past, he will do
it for the time to come also. This was David's gracious Logic; both Reason
rectified, and Grace taught him to argue thus, 1 Samuel 17.37. The Lord that
delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, he
will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistim. Paul fetches such another
Argument from his deliverance out of the paw or mouth of the Lion: And what of
that? 2 Timothy 4.
Mark his Argument; The Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will
preserve me to his heavenly Kingdom, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
Observe: all these holy men of God, by their former experience, were built up
in future confidence, and so should we be.

Obj. If you shall say, Where lies the strength of this Reason? viz. Because
God makes good his Word and Promise at one time, to such as trust in him, are
we therefore sure he will make it good at another?

Ans I answer, We may well be assured of it, and that upon these grounds:

First, from the Nature of Gods Covenant and Promise: His Covenant is an
everlasting Covenant, Jer. 32.40. His Promise is very comprehensive, it
reaches to all persons that are heirs of the Promise, it belongs to all
Saints, Ephesians 3.18. To all places where ere those persons come, 1 Kings 20 28. To
all times, Heb. 13.5. Isa. 40.8 The Word of God stands for ever. Therefore,
whom God once delivers in a way of Covenant-mercy, he will for ever deliver.

Secondly, We may argue from the Nature of God: For, were the Covenant made
never so sure (like the Laws of the Medes and Persians) that it should not be
changed, yet if God were of a changeable Nature, all were as good as nothing.
As we see in the Covenants of vain and changeable men, (they snap them asunder
as Samson did his cords) But God is an Unchangeable God, and this puts life
into that unchangeable Covenant, Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not:
therefore you Sons of Jacob are not consumed. He is unchangeable in all his
Attributes, Unchangeable in his Love, Jer. 31.3. In his Truth, Psalm. 117.2. In
his Power, Isa. 59.1, 2. And therefore by the same reason that we trust in God
once, we have cause to trust in him for ever. Isa. 26.4. Trust in the Lord for
ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.

Thirdly, The third and the last Argument, is drawn from the Nature of the
Price paid by Jesus Christ to his Father, for all the good things that he has
promised. The price of his own Blood, which Blood of his (in the Merit and
Value of it) is ever pleading and speaking better things than that of Abel,
Heb. 12.25. By virtue of his blood, Christ pleads thus for each believing Soul,
Father, bestow this Mercy on such a man, for I have paid for that Mercy also:
And, Father, bestow such a Deliverance upon him, for I have paid the price for
that Deliverance also; and so for a Thousand Mercies and Deliverances one after
another. As when the Price o^ Ransom is paid for one in Prison, when one or two
doors are opened, it is an assurance to the poor Prisoner, that the rest will
soon be opened, because the price is paid for the opening of all: So in this
case, upon these grounds and experiences of Gods goodness and faithfulness for
time past, do we and ought we to strengthen Faith for the time to come.

The second sort of Reasons, Second sort of Reasons for living by faith viz.
The relation betwixt Christ and a Believer.
is drawn from that Relation which is betwixt Christ and a Believer.

1. Christ is the Fountain, and out of his fullness we do all receive grace for
grace. 2. Christ is our Lord and Master, and therefore we are bound to give
unto him the honor that is due to his Name.
But we can do neither the one nor the other without Faith; we can neither
receive from Christ what we want, nor give unto Christ what is his due, without
Faith.

Christ is the Fountain of Grace.
1. Christ is the Fountain, and out of his fullness we all receive grace for
grace: but without Faith, we cannot be united to this Fountain, nor draw any
thing from him. The Water-Cock is in the house, but the Springhead is in the
field: So the Water-Cock of Grace is in the Soul, but the Springhead that
feeds this, is in Christ I am the life, says Christ, Joh. 14.6. Life is
radically in Jesus Christ: [Psal. 36.9. For with thee is the fountain of life.

Now then, there must be some Conduit-pipe to convey this Water of Life to the
Soul, and that is Faith: Joh. 7.38. He that believes in me, (as the Scripture
ha^h said) out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. And thus a
believer lives by a Principle out of himself, namely, in Jesus Christ. Gal
2.20. I live by the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me, etc. 1 John
5.12. He that has the Son, has life: and what is it to have the Son, but to
believe in the Son? to be united to him by Faith? As the the Water-Cock is
united to the Fountain by the Conduit-pipe. As the Heads of those Rivers that
water the Garden of Paradise, were out of Paradise: So the Head and Spring of
those Streams of Grace that water the Soul, are out of the Soul, even in Christ
the Fountain: All my fresh springs are in thee, Psalm. 87.7. Though some
understand it of the Church of God, it is more eminently true of God himself:
Therefore a gracious Soul lives by Faith, because by Faith he is united to
Christ the Fountain of all Grace.

Christ is our Lord, and we cannot honor him without Faith.
Secondly, As Christ is our Lord and Master, we are bound to give to him the
honor due to his Name. Mal. 1.6. If I be a Lord and Master, where is my fear
and honor? But we cannot honor him without Faith: Faith brings a great deal
of Honor to God and Jesus Christ; therefore he will have the just to live by
his Faith.

1. Faith honors the grace of God.
First, it puts a great deal of Honor upon the free grace of God, as we shall
hear afterward: Romans 4.16. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by
grace. For the act of Faith does necessarily exclude Merit: It is an act of
self denial, a holy despair of any thing in our selves; and a firm reliance
only upon the Merit and Free Grace of Jesus Christ. As a full hand receives
nothing, but the hand that is empty is fit to receive any thing: So Faith is an
empty hand, laying hold upon Jesus Christ, and of his fullness receiving grace
for grace, Joh. 1.16. Luke 1.53. He fills the hungry with good things.

Secondly, it puts honor upon the faithfulness of God. 2. Faith honors the
faithfulness of God.
^uppose God speaks a word of Promise for such or such a thing and we see no
likelihood of its performance, in the order of Nature, or second Causes, yet
says the believing Soul, I Will trust God upon his word, upon his naked word,
though I have nothing in hand; I Will trust him, though his Providence cross his
Promises; I Will trust him, I am sure he is faithful, he cannot deny himself. 2 Timothy 2.13.
This puts a great deal of Honor upon God. Look as it is the greatest
dishonor can be done to God, when we will not trust him upon his Word (as it
is a dishonor to a man, when he cannot be trusted) and much more to the Most
High God, for, He that believes not, 1 John 5.10.
makes God a liar:) So on the other side, he puts a great deal of Honor upon
God, that relies upon the truth and faithfulness of God, 1 Thessalonians. 5.24.
Therefore God is of some Credit with his own People: Whereas the wicked will
trust him no further than they see him. A Believer puts honor upon the
Faithfulness of God.

Thirdly, 3. Faith honors the power of God.
he puts honor upon the Power and All Sufficiency of God. Though we are never
so weak and impotent to procure to our selves what God holds out in a Promise,
yet when by Faith we look at God as a God All-sufficient, and Omnipotent, to
give a Being to his own Word, this puts much honor upon God. And thus did
Abraham glorify God by his Faith, Romans 4.18, 19, 20, 21. And so do all such as
tread in the steps of faithful Abraham, they glorify the free grace, and power
and faithfulness of God: therefore God will have the Just live by his Faith.
God will put much honor upon that grace, that puts so much honor upon God.

Third sort of Reasons from the nature and use of Faith.
The third sort of Reasons are drawn from the Nature and Use of Faith.

1. It Is our livelihood.
First therefore, a Believer lives by Faith, because a Believes lays hold upon
the Word of Life, (as has been partly showed already) the Word of Promise, the
Promise of free grace: for, By every word that proceeds out of the mouth of
God, does man live, Matthew. 4.4. (yet not upon the Word of Promise, separated
from the thing promised.) It Is true, once God said, Do this, and live: Now he
says, Believe this, and live. When God said, Do this, and live, suppose man
had done what God required, yet he had not lived by Merit of his Obedience,
Romans 4.7. (as Calvin well observes in his Sermon of Abraham's Faith) But by
virtue of Gods gracious Promise annexed to his believing; If thou believe this
(says God) which I promise, thou shall live: And so, by every Word that God
speaks, Difference of faith in both Covenants.
does man live. In both Covenants God required Faith, but yet with a great deal
of difference, both in respect of the Object and Principle of Faith.

First, in respect of the Object of Faith. The first Covenant required no more
but to Believe the Truth of God, which promised, Do this, and thou shall live:
but in the latter, God requires Faith in Christ, and in Christ crucified, and
in all the Promises of free grace, which are Yea and Amen in Christ.

Secondly, they differ in respect of the Principle of Faith. For the first
kind of Faith, man had by the grace of Creation (viz. Power to give credit to
God in what he spoke) But the second kind of Faith a man has not, but by the
grace of Regeneration. It is the gift of God to believe in a crucified Savior;
and so the Covenant still savoureth of more grace, because the just lives by
this latter kind of Faith, laying hold upon the Word of Life, upon the Promise
of free grace: For this is the proper act of justifying Faith. Now by Promise
God makes himself a Debtor (though he was none before) and Faith puts the
Promise in Suit; thereupon, God pays his Debts, and this is the creatures
livelihood: And therefore the Just must needs live by his Faith.

Secondly, God will have his People live by Faith, 2. We fell by unbelief.
because we first fell away, and departed from God by Unbelief and Distrust.
Our first Parents would not give credit to God, when he said, Genesis 3.
In the day thou eatest of the forbidden fruit, thou shall surely die; but gave
more credit to the Devil, when he said, Ye shall not die: And so they fell (I
say) by Unbelief and Distrust; therefore now God so orders the matter, that
whosoever will be saved, must be saved by Faith. God will recover his honor in
a way of Faith, as he was first dishonored in the world by Unbelief.

Thirdly, That their Salvation might be, as upon freer, That salvation might be
on free and sure grounds.
so upon surer grounds, Romans 4.17. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be
sure to the seed.

1. Upon freer ground, upon a ground of free grace: for, What is Faith, but a
casting away our own Righteousness, and putting on of the Righteousness of
Christ? As a poor Beggar is content to cast away all his filthy Rags, so that
he may put on a good Suit, that is freely bestowed upon him: So the Apostle,
Phil. 3.8, 9. Yea doubtless, and I do count all things but loss, etc. The
Righteousness which is of God by Faith, that is the Righteousness which Faith
receives, not the Righteousness which is wrought by Faith: For, Faith has a
twofold Property; the one, To act for God; the other, To receive from God. It
acts for God, while it purifies the heart, and the life, and works by love:
but so it does not justify. It receives from God, whilst it lays hold on the
Merits and Righteousness of Jesus Christ: and so it does justify. Thus the
Just lives by his Faith, that his Justification and Salvation might be upon the
freer grounds.

2. That it be upon surer grounds, that it might be sure to all the seed. Romans
4.16.
Man's life and salvation depending upon his Obedience, was not sure before the
Fall: for, as he was created in a possibility of standing; so he was created in
a possibility of falling also: and fall he did, as is manifest to all the world
by woeful experience. Much less then would there be any certainty of this
Salvation after the Fall, should it depend upon the perfection of his own
Righteousness, Isa. 64.6.
for all our Righteousness is as filthy Rags. But when nothing else is required
of us (in point of Justification) but the renouncing our own Righteousness, and
the accepting of that, which was performed by Jesus Christ, who has fulfilled
all Righteousness, to the utmost demand of the Law. When once God gives us
grace to do this, (as this is done by the grace of Faith) we may be sure the
gates of Hell shall never prevail against us. Therefore God would have the Just
live by Faith, that his Salvation might be upon surer grounds.

General USES.
Use. I. Of Information.
First, see the happy Condition of Believers, Joh. 6.29. Information in 7
things.
It is comfort against all discomforts.

What is thy Discomfort? What troubles thee? The happy condition of believers.

They have comfort

1. Against self-condemnation.


Is this thy discomfort, when thou lookst into thy Self, thou see nothing but
the Sentence of Death and condemnation in regard of thy sinfulness of Nature
and Life? yet thou may say, (though I see nothing but Death it self) By Faith
I live.

1. Does the Law condemn thee? Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things which are written in the book of the Law, to do them.

2. Does thine own Conscience condemn thee, taking part with the Law, which is
written there? Conscience is a Practical Syllogism: The Law affords the Major,
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the Law, to do them: Conscience affords the Minor, But I have not
continued in all things written in the book of the Law, to do them; Therefore I
am cursed.

3. Does the Devil condemn thee, who sails with wind and tide, making use of
the Law and Conscience? As the Devil is called, The Accuser of the Brethren.

4. Do other Men condemn thee, with whom thou have sinned by counsel, consent,
or encouragement? Thou have been partaker of other men's sins, and these come to
rise up in Judgment against thee.

5. Does the Gospel it self condemn thee? At least, for the time that is past?
Thou have outstood many thousand sweet proffers of Grace and Mercy, therefore
thou art afraid that Sentence belongs to thee: Prove. 1.24. Because I have
called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded, etc.

6. Do thou fear sometimes condemnation from the Mouth of the Judge, who
shall judge men according to the things that are written in the Books, Rev.
20.12. yet, here is thy comfort, if thou believe, thou art in an estate of
Life. The Just shall live by Faith: Faith unites him to an everlasting
Principle of Life. And, There is no condemnation to them that by faith are
implanted into Christ, Romans 8.1. They are freed from condemnation, Joh 5.24.

1. Of the Law, Romans 7.6. We are delivered from the Law, in regard of Exaction,
Curse, and Malediction, Romans 8.2, 3. We are not under the Law as a Covenant,
but only as a Rule. Romans 10.14. Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness, to every one who believes.

2. Of Conscience: Heb. 9 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your
consciences from dead works, to serve the living God. This blood is sprinkled
by Faith, which purifies the heart, Act. 15.9. and as it purifies, so it
pacifies, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God.

3. Of Satan: Rev. 12.10. For the accuser of our brethren is cast down which
accused them before God day and night. His accusations are cast out of the
Court, like the Accusations of some troublesome Informer, or busy Promoter.
And how are we freed from his Accusations, but by Faith? 1 Pet. 5.9. Whom
resist, steadfast in the faith: Repel his Accusation of God, as if he did not
love you, because he afflicts you: For of such an Accusation he there speaks,
as appears by the Means which there is fitted to that kind of resistance, Whom
resist, steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are
accomplished in your brethren.

4. Of Men: Romans 8.33, 34. The Apostle challenges Men and Devils. If the
Superior Judge will absolve and justify, what has the Inferior Judge or
Witness to say against the party?

5. Of the Gospel. Indeed, if they who believe, had stood out to the end, the
Sentence had belonged to them But because they did by Faith receive the Gospel
at the last, all their former rejecting of it, shall not so much as be
mentioned: Rev. 3.20. Christ stands at the door and knocks, and makes a
gracious Promise, If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in
to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. But alas, who hears at the first
knock! Christ stands there many a day, it may be many years, before the poor
creature opens and believes; yet if he opens at last, Christ comes in, and
makes good his Promise.

6. Of the Judge: for, God shall judge the secrets of men according to the
Gospel, Romans 2.16. Believers shall hear a Sentence of Absolution, Come ye
blessed: So, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Rom 8.1.

Secondly, is this thy Discomfort; 2. Comfort against absence from the Lord.
Thou art absent from the Lord: O when shall I come and appear before God?
Faith draws God near to the Soul in the Promise, and in the Seal of the
Promise: Thou see the face of God in a lively picture, in a clear glass, in
the glass of the Word and Sacrament; and that is a great comfort. As it is some
comfort to have the lively Picture of an absent friend; but no picture can draw
one friend so near to another, as these lively pictures do draw God to the
Soul: Therefore, when we act our Faith, we are said to draw near to God, Heb.
10.22.

3. Against distance of things promised
Thirdly, is this our Discomfort, The distance of the thing promised? yet this
is our Comfort, Faith gives us such Security, as if the thing had a present
subsistence. Heb. 11.1. Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the
evidence of things not seen.

4. Against Temporal and Spiritual wants.
Fourthly, is this thy Discomfort, That thy Wants are many in Temporals and
Spirituals? and thou know not how to get them supplied? yet, this is thy
Comfort, Christ is a Fountain, and the Word a Treasure: and as long as there is
any thing left in the Word, or in Christ, in whom all fullness dwells, thou
can never want; Thou may go to the Springhead upon all occasions: Psa.
23.1. The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want.

5. Against Spiritual pride.
Fifthly, is this thy Discomfort, Thou art afraid thou shall be exalted above
measure? yea, but here is thy Comfort, Faith will keep thee humble; Faith tells
thee, Thou live upon Alms, upon a Principle without thy self.

6. Against fear of not honoring God.
Sixthly, is this thy Discomfort, Thou art afraid thou shall not honor God as
thou art bound? yet, this is thy Comfort, Faith will help thee to honor his
Free Grace, Faithfulness, and All Sufficiency: As Abraham by believing gave
glory to God, Romans 4 20.

Information, See the Misery of all Unbelievers; they are no better then dead
men, Misery of Unbelievers, in fix respects.
or condemned men. Joh. 3. last, He that believes not the Son, shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abides on him. The wrath of a King is as the
roaring of a Lion, as the messengers of death, Prove. 16.14. and 19.12. O what
is the wrath of the King of kings! Who is able to stand under the burden of
it! Who among us is able to dwell with everlasting burnings! Isa. 33.
O remember the dangerous condition of all Unbelievers, who are

1. Not purified [Tit. 1.15. Unto the pure all things are pure; but unto them
that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their mind and
conscience is defiled.

2. Unbelievers are not pacified. Isa. 57.19, 20.21. I create the fruit of the
lips, Peace, peace, to him that is afar off, and to him that is near, says the
Lord; and I will heal him: But the wicked are like the troubled Sea, they
cannot rest; whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, says my
God, to the wicked: They are no better than condemned men.

Respect 1. First, they are condemned by the first Covenant, viz. by the Law of
Works, Gal 3.10. And the Gospel helps none against the first Covenant, but such
as receive the Gospel by Faith.

Resp. 2. Secondly, they are condemned by their own Conscience, not being
purged by Faith. An Unbeliever commonly has either a dead Conscience, or a
raging furious Conscience, that, like Zimri, slays his own Master, and yet has
never the more peace after it. An Unbelievers Conscience is his own Accuser,
Witness, Judge, Condemner, and Executioner: it is that, that puts a man into
Hell upon Earth.

Resp. 3. Thirdly, he is condemned by Satan, the great Accuser; first a
Tempter, then a Tormentor; yea, he is under the power of this Jailer, who as he
binds, Luke 13.16. Act. 26.18. so blinds the minds of them that believe not, 2
Cor. 4.4. As the poor Prisoner is blindfold a little before his Execution,
Psalm. 109.6, 7.

Resp. 4. Fourthly, he is condemned by men, not only good men shall rise up in
Judgment against him, such as repented and believed at the Preaching of the
Prophets; but even wicked men shall rise up in Judgment one against another:
Though they were never such good-fellows in sin together, yet, when once God
calls them to account; as the man laid the blame upon the woman, and the woman
upon the Serpent (though they were all in fault:) So shall one sinner accuse
and condemn another, and say, Woe worth the time that ever I saw thy face; if
it had not been for thee, I had never committed such a sin; if thou had not
made the motion, I had never yielded: And the other shall say, If thou had
not yielded, the motion had never been put in execution. Indeed, where there is
Faith, the Accusation is easily answered, we can send the Accuser to our
Surety; but the Unbeliever sinks under the weight of the Accusation, and must
bear it off by head and shoulders, both his own and his other men's sins.

Resp. 5. Fifthly, he is a dead man by the Sentence of the Gospel: for though
the Gospel be the Power of God unto salvation, yet it is only to the Salvation
of them that believe, Romans 1.16. The Gospel condemns the unbeliever as much as
the Law, and more too. Joh. 3.18, 19. He that believes not, is condemned
already, because he has not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of
God: Joh. 3.
and, This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds swear evil. There is no
condemnation like this; This is the condemnation, by way of eminency. As the
sharpest Vinegar is made of the sweetest Wine: So the sharpest Judgments
spring from the abuse of the sweetest Mercies: And who are they that abuse
sweet Gospel-mercies, but Unbelievers?

Resp. 6. Sixthly, he shall be condemned from the mouth of the Judge himself:
for if the Gospel do condemn him, Mercy himself cannot save him; (for God is
only merciful in a Gospel-way) if the Gospel do condemn him, the Judge must
needs condemn him: for, As many as have sinned under the Gospel, shall be
judged by the Gospel; as those that have sinned under the Law, shall be judged
by the Law: Romans 2.12. For as many as have sinned without law, shall also
perish without law; and as many as have sinned in the law, shall be judged by
the law. Therefore, all unbelievers shall hear the Sentence of Condemnation, Go
ye cursed, etc. This is the Gospel Rule, the standing Rule of the everlasting
Gospel, He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be
damned, Mark 16.16. As the Just lives by Faith; so the Unbeliever dies by his
Unbelief. He is subject to the first death in the most terrible manner, the
sting was never yet pulled out by such a man; and he is subject to the second
death, viz. Death of the Body and Soul to all eternity, where the worm dies
not, and the fire is not quenched. O who would continue in such a condition!
Why do we not cry out of our unbelief to God! Why do we not mourn and weep
under the burden of it! We can weep over our dying friends; O that we could
weep over our own and friends dead Hearts and Souls! For he that has no Faith,
has no Christ he that has no Christ, has no Life: The Unbeliever is in a
dead condition, he dies by his Unbelief, as the Just lives by his Faith.

Secondly, see the misery of all Unbelievers, 2. Their dead condition.
they are in a dead condition: If the Just lives by Faith, they must needs be
dead who have no Faith; and that, because they want that which should unite
them to him who is the Principle of Life: 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son
has life; he that has not the Son has not life. Alas poor creature! he is
dead while he seems to live; he is dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1. He is
active indeed, to that which is evil, and that is his misery: but he is dead to
all that is good. As Faith works by love, and so sets love and all other Graces
on work: So Unbelief sets all manner of sin on work; and sin when it is
finished, Jam. 1.
brings forth death. Unbelief is the cause of all sin and misery. As the Just
lives by his Faith; so the wicked man dies by his Unbelief. All sins are
pardonable to him that believes; but Unbelief binds all other sins upon the
Soul to condemnation. O the miserable condition of all unbelievers! and such
are we all in our natural condition! Let us confess it, and bewail it at the
Throne of Grace, That God may give us this excellent gift of Faith, that we may
live by Faith upon the living God.

Reason of Satan's enmity against Faith.
Because by it (under God) the creature lives. Now Satan is an utter enemy to
the creatures life and happiness, he was a Murderer from the beginning, and
therefore an enemy to Faith from the beginning. He was an enemy to that Faith
that was proper to the first Covenant. Genesis 3.1. Now the Serpent was more
subtle than any beast of the field which the Lord God had made: and he said
unto the woman, Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the
Garden? His great Temptation was to persuade Eve, not to trust God upon his
Word; Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the Garden? And he
is as great an enemy to that Faith which is proper to the second Covenant,
whereby a poor sinner casts himself into the arms of Gods Mercy through Christ,
held out to him in a promise of Free Grace. Luke 22.31, 32. you may see, Satan
was an enemy to Peter's faith, and so to the faith of every believer. How do you
know this Word (says the Devil) to be the Word of God? or if it be so) how
do thou know it belongs to thee? Do thou think God will ever make good
his Promise to such a vile creature as thou art? and a thousand such
Objections! No marvel Satan is such an enemy to Faith, seeing the Just lives by
his Faith. Faith is that which puts life into our Zeal, our Courage, our
Prayers, all our Christian duties: The Devil knows, if he can but ham-string
our Faith, we shall halt and go lame all our days, and in all our duties. As
our Faith is weakened, our Zeal is cooled, our Courage daunted, our Prayers
infeebled, our Graces languishing, and our Duties decaying from day to day.
Therefore as the Devil strikes most of all at our Shield of faith, let us be
persuaded to hold it so much the faster: Ephesians. 6.16. Above all, taking the
shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of
the wicked one. If thou would know, how a Christian does? Ask him, How his
faith does; if thou would have him a thriving Christian, persuade him to look
well to his Faith. 1 Thessalonians. 3.5. For this cause when I could no longer forbear,
I sent to know your faith, lest by some means the Tempter has tempted you, and
our labor be in vain. The Tempter fights neither against small nor great, but
against our Faith. If he robs us of that, 2 Pet. 1.1.
he robs us of our greatest Treasure. Saving Faith is precious Faith; and it is
that which maintains the most precious life. Therefore it is no marvel, Satan
is so great an enemy to our Faith.

Difference between the life of Christ and ours.
This informs us of the difference betwixt the life of Christ and ours. Christ
has life of himself, as the Father has life of himself, Joh. 5.26. He is the
Principle of Life to himself, he receives it from no other. But our life is a
derivative life, we derive our life from him who is the Fountain of life, and
the Fountain of light too: Psalm. 36.9. For with thee is the fountain of life,
and in thy light shall we see light. Therefore, as this puts us in mind of the
glorious Dignity of Jesus Christ, who is as the Sea to all living creatures,
(especially such as live the Life of Grace) to whom he is the Fountain of light
and life. So it should reminde us of the Humility which befits creatures in
such a condition as we are. As we should have high thoughts of Christ; so, vile
and mean thoughts of our Selves: For, though Christ could live well enough
without us (as he did, before we had any Being) yet we cannot live without him;
he is the main Object of our Faith, and therefore the very Principle of our
Life: for the Just does live by his Faith.

why there are so many dead creatures in the world: As Christ says, Why so
many dead. Mat. 8.22.
Let the dead bury the dead; let such as are dead in sins and trespasses, bury
such as are naturally dead. How manymen in the world have no life to any thing
that is good; dead-hearted creatures, and yet insensible of their deadness;
alive unto sin, but dead unto all gracious performances. The very reason is,
They want Faith. Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes, shall he find Faith
upon the earth. Luke 18.8.
There is little Faith in the world, and therefore little Life in the world:
Nay, many of those who have a Name to live, are dead, (Rev. 3.1.) because many
who make Profession of Faith, do want the Faith which they do profess. They are
not by Faith united to Christ the only Principle of all Spiritual Life, and of
all living actions; and therefore their most specious good works (such as are
materially good) are no better than dead works, and so sinful works, because
formally evil, as not springing from a living Principle, to wit, from the
Spirit of Grace dwelling in the creature, and uniting him by Faith to Jesus
Christ, who is the Fountain of Life. I confess, a wicked man may perform many
excellent works, and that by the help of Gods Spirit too, and yet have no life
in him for all that: for, There is a twofold help from the Spirit of God; the
one, from the inhabiting Spirit of God, dwelling in the heart, and changing the
nature of the creature; the other, springing only from some common work of the
Spirit, strengthening a man to this or that particular action, by the Elevation
of his natural parts, and the improvement of them in outward Expressions. There
is a great deal of difference betwixt a creature that is moved by a Spirit that
dwells in it, and informs it, (That is forma informans, and so, acts it from an
inward Principle) and that which is moved by a Spirit that dwells not in it,
but does only make use of it, or assist it pro tempore, that is, but forma
assistens, as the Angel, that made use of a body in appearing and speaking to
Manoah and his Wife. Thus it is with men of most eminent parts (if they have
not Faith) though they may have a Name to live, yet in truth they are but dead,
dead in their persons, and dead in their works; for, without Faith, there is no
true life, either in this man, or in any thing that comes from him. For the
Just lives by his Faith.

unsoundness of their opinion, who say there may be life in a creature, No life
until Faith.
and Christ in a creature, before there be Faith in the creature: as if Faith
did only give Evidence of that life which was in the Soul before Faith. But
the Text is plain, The just lives by his faith: Therefore, as Christ and Life,
so Faith and Life come both together; and Faith is an Instrument of applying
Christ for the maintaining and acting of Spiritual Life.

So that Faith is not only an evidence to show that we are alive; but it is an
Instrument (under Jesus Christ) of Spiritual Life. Therefore look as when it is
said, By faith the walls of Jericho fell down; it is not only meant, that by
Faith they saw when they were down (for they could see that with the eye of
sense) but the meaning is, Faith was the Instrument or Engine, laying hold of
the Virtue, Truth and Power of Christ, who stood upon the top of the wall, and
bid them compass the City six days, and blow with Rams-horns, and give a shout
the seventh day, and the walls of Jericho should fall down. Now they doing this
in Faith, and believing God, would make good his Promise,

It is said, By faith the walls of Jericho fell down; their faith was an
Instrument of their falling, and not only an evidence that they were fallen:
So I say, Faith is an Instrument of Spiritual Life, and not only an evidence,
that the Creature does live. The Just shall live by his Faith.

The Ministers chief work.
and what people principally should desire to hear; and that is, the Word of
Faith, because this is indeed the Word of Life. The Just shall live by his
Faith; and therefore we make bold to be the longer upon this subject. It is
true indeed, we are bound to preach of Good Works also, and of Duties to God
and Men: but these are to be set in their due place and order, to be brought
in, as fruits and effects of Faith and Repentance, and not as the causes.

Simile.
To speak altogether of Good Works, and Good Duties without Faith, is all one,
as if one should make Roof of a House, without any Walls or Foundation. To
speak altogether of Faith, without the fruits of it in Good Works, is all one,
as if one should lay a Foundation and build the Walls, but never set on the
Roof. The one of these ought to be done, and the other not to be left undone.
Howsoever, the chief of these is Faith: In order to the Foundation, it lays
hold upon Christ; He is the only sure Foundation of all our building, and
therefore the Word we preach, is called the Word of Faith, Romans 10.18. As if
Faith should be the principal subject of our Preaching (as indeed it should)
For the end of all Preaching, The End of all Preaching.
is either to beget Spiritual Life, or else to maintain it and increase it
where it is begotten; and this is done in a way of Faith. For the Just shall
live by his Faith.

II. Of Reproof.
Reproof to 3 sorts.
To Reprove diverse sorts of men.

1. Such as live by other things, in stead of living by Faith.

2. Such as profess Faith, but live not by it; like a man that makes Profession
of such a Calling, but never works upon his Trade.

3. Such as not only profess Faith, but have the habit of it, and yet act it
not: They live not by it, like a rich man that has wealth enough, and yet is
ready to starve himself for want of making use of that which God has bestowed
upon him.

First, It Reproves such as live upon other things, First sort Reproved.
in stead of living by Faith: And the world swarms with such kind of men. It is
hard to name the several sorts of them; every man has something or other to
live upon, but few live by Faith. For,

1. Some live upon their very sins; 1. Such as live upon their sins.
they account that their life, which is no better indeed than their Death: How
many make a living of Theft, of Deceit in Bargaining, of Oppression, or of
keeping such Houses of Filthiness, as are no better than Lark-Nets to catch the
simple fool, as Solomon faith. The truth is, there is no sinner (under the
power of sin) but he loves his sin as his very life; he had as lieve part with
his life as with his lust. O he hugs it, and makes much of it, he keeps it as a
sweet bit under his Tongue! Joh. 20.12. Though he has poisoned himself with
the Devils Sweetmeats (as he spoke within a verse or two) His meat within him
is turned into the gall and poison of Asps. Some Poisons do not work in many
days or years after they are received; and such are the Devils Poison: you
shall not, it may be, perceive the deadly operation of them in many years after
you have taken them; and yet at the last, they will certainly prove the bane of
your Souls, without Repentance. O do not live upon that, which will certainly
prove your Death.

2. Some live upon their Pleasures and Recreations. 2. Upon pleasures
O they account them the very life of their life, they spend more time in
Hunting, and Gaming, and Sporting, than in the lawful works of their Calling.
Such a life as this, deserves the name of death rather than life: They are dead
whilst they live, who live in pleasures, 1 Timothy 5.6. There is nothing more
opposite to the Life of Faith, which chooses rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11.25.
Such as live upon Pleasures, Simile.
are just like foolish Children or Women that are taken with the Green
Sickness, who feed upon dust and ashes, and such like trash, in stead of
wholesome food, till they are again ready to be turned into dust and ashes
themselves: So do those who feed upon Pleasures, Isa. 44.20. They do but feed
upon ashes, because a deceitful heart has turned them aside. How well might
they live, if they would live by Faith? but how poorly do they live, who live
upon Pleasures? They do but live upon ashes, they lay out their money for that
which is not bread, Isa. 55.

3. Upon creatures
3. Others live upon the Creatures, without them, in stead of living upon God by
Faith: They put those things in their hearts, and upon their head, which God by
Creation and Ordination has placed under their feet. The body of man lives not
by bread, without a word from God, how much less the Soul? The Creature is
vain, therefore it is vain to live upon the Creature: It Is vain in its nature,
vain in its strength and efficacy, if God withdraws his influence, and vain in
its duration, having in it self a Principle of its own corruption; and why
should Immortal Souls offer to live upon Mortal Creatures? and yet, thus do
most men; in stead of living by Faith upon God, they live upon the Creature.

1. As Riches.
1. Some live upon their Riches, though God has put in a Caveat to the
contrary: If riches increase, set not your heart upon them: with a special
charge, 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they trust
not in uncertain riches, but in the living God. The living God, Note.
is the godly man's living: but he is a dead-hearted creature, that lives upon
creatures as dead as himself. It was the speech of a very fool, Luke 12.19.
Soul, eat, drink, and be merry; thou have many goods laid up for thee, etc.

2. Or Friends.
2. Others live upon their Friends: O they have such a friend that supplies all
their wants from year to year; or such a friend that has engaged both his
fidelity and ability for their preferment, or for their maintenance; he has
made a faithful Promise, and they dare take his word, and trust to it. Alas,
poor deceived Soul, dare thou lean upon the Word and Promise of a Creature,
of a Mortal Creature, a vain and vanishing Creature, (for every man at his best
estate is altogether vanity) and dare thou not lean upon the Word and Promise
of the All-sufficient Jehovah? Out of thy own mouth, and out of thy own
practice thou shall be condemned: Thou can live by Faith in the Creature, and
yet wilt not live by Faith in God: and therefore hear thy doom, Jer. 17.5. God
has spoken it, and the Creature shall find it; Thus says the Lord, Cursed be
the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart
departs from the Lord. Mark ye: where there is a trust and confidence in the
Creature, there is always a distrust and diffidence in respect of God. And
therefore in this case, no help or blessing a man can find among the
Creatures, can save him from the Curse and Judgment of God.

4. Others live upon the Creature within themselves, 4. Upon themselves.
in stead of living upon God by Faith. For the Creature is apt to live upon the
Creature within it self, as well as to live upon the Creature without it self.
Nay, he that scorns to live upon another (either God or Man) yet he prides
himself in this, That he can live (as he thinks) of himself. And indeed,
nothing is more contrary to the Life of Faith, than this. The Life of Faith is
a Life of Self-denial; and the setting up of Self, is the denying of the Faith,
and a denying of God: Yet most men live upon themselves, they set up sinful
Self, or natural Self, or artificial Self, or moral Self, or religious Self.

1. Some set up Sinful Self: for their sins are themselves, 1. Sinful Self.
and the forsaking of sin is the forsaking of Self. But of this we have spoken
already.

2. Some set up Natural Self, 2. Natural Self.
in stead of living by their Faith.

1. They live by their Wits, and Cunning Shifts: but this is a poor shift in
conclusion; for God takes the wise in their own craftiness, Joh. 5.12.

2. Some live by their own Reason, and will believe no more, nor do no more,
than corrupt Reason gives assent to. As for Example: Let God command kindness
to strangers, such as a man never saw before, and is never like to see again:
In this case, Natural Self disputes, quarrels and reasons the case; 1 Samuel
25.11. Shall I take my bread, my water, and my flesh, and give it unto men who
I know not whence they be?

3. Again, suppose God threatens downfall to sinners in the greatest height of
Prosperity, Natural Self will not believe it, so long as it sees no visible
means. Tush, says Babylon, the words of the Prophet are but wind; I sit as a
Queen, and shall never be moved.

4. Let God promise deliverance out of the lowest Dungeon of Adversity, Natural
Reason will never believe it, unless it sees visible means of relief. If God
should make windows in heaven, could this thing be? Can God prepare a Table in
the Wilderness? What? in the Wilderness? where there is neither Corn, nor
Roots, nor Fish, nor Fowl, nor any beasts that they can lay their hands upon?
The beasts of the Wilderness may devour them, but they can never feed upon the
beasts. Therefore whatever God promise, they will believe nothing, unless they
see a Reason for it, because they set up Natural Self.

3. Artificial Self.
3. Some live upon Artificial Self: A man's Art and Trade is called his living;
(and so it is indeed under God) but when we set it above God, that is dangerous.
When men make a Diana of their Trade, because by that craft they get their
living: this is to thrust out the true God, and to make an Idol of their Art
and Skill; and so to Sacrifice to their Net, or to their Plough, or to their
Pen, or to their Trade, or to their Merchandise. Woe be to such men! Habak. 1.
last. Haggai 1.6. They put what they have into a broken bag, a bag with
holes.

4. Some live upon Moral Self, 4. Moral Self.
because they are fairer conditioned toward men, and have committed (as they
think) no gross enormous actual sin against God. O they think, all is well,
they are in the way to life and salvation, before they come to understand the
breadth of Gods Commandments, and the Spiritual meaning of the Law. They make
no question, but they are in the way to life and salvation, Romans 7.9. For I was
alive without the Law, says the Apostle, but when the commandment came, sin
revived, and I died. Before the Commandment came home to my Conscience, I was
alive, I thought my self in a good condition, sin never troubled me; but after
it came home to the purpose, I saw my self in a dead condition, without a
Savior: for, Rom 3.20. By the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified in
his sight.

5. Some live upon Religious Self, besides Moral Self. 5. Religious Self.
O they have received such and such Graces, they perform such and such Duties,
far beyond an ordinary Moralist. Luke 18.12. The Pharisee was not only eminent
in Moral Duties to men, but in Religious Duties, yea, and extraordinary
Religious Duties to God; for he fasted no less than twice every week. Now this
puts life into his heart, that he dare plead with God himself for acceptance;
he made no question but he was in the state of life: But he was grossly
mistaken, Whilst he goes about to establish his own Righteousness, he cannot
submit to the Righteousness of God, and so he falls short of the Life of
Justification. For the poor Self-denying Publican went down to his house
justified rather than the other. Note.
Whoever sets up Religious self in point of Justification, he stands in his own
light; he sets up himself betwixt Christ and his own Soul, For he is the true
light, who lightens every one that comes into the world: And the Just shall
live by Faith in him. And therefore he that sets up Religious Self in the room
of Christ, he sins against his own Soul. And thus some live upon other things,
in stead of living by Faith.

2. Second sort reproved. Such as profess Faith, but live not by it.
Secondly, It Reproves such as profess Faith, but live not by it; like a man,
that makes profession of such a Calling, but never works upon his Trade. So
multitudes make a Profession of Faith, and say, I believe in God, the Father
Almighty, etc. and in Jesus Christ, etc. But when they have made this
Profession, they live not by this faith, which they so solemnly profess.
Indeed, many talk of it, but few walk by it: Many swear by it, few live by it.
It is a rare thing to find a man that makes use of his Faith in all his
dealing. Many make use of their carnal Reason, and many make use of Sense, but
few make use of Faith in those things which are above the grasp of Sense and
Reason. Our Savior Christ might well say, Luke 18.8. Nevertheless, when the
Son of Man comes, shall he find Faith upon the Earth? Look upon the vast
Globe of the Earth, into what narrow compass they are brought, that make any
Profession of the Faith. Does not the Turk possess the greatest part of the
Eastern World? Amongst those that do profess the Faith (for Name sake) how many
do fulfill that sad Prophecy of Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.1. Now the Scripture
speaks expressly, In the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving
heed to seducing Spirits, and doctrines of Devils (or Demons) speaking lies in
hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared with a hot iron, forbidding to
marry, and commanding to abstrain from meats. Is not this as lively a
description of their Popish Doctrine, as if the Apostle had been alive to see
what they do, and to hear what they speak at this day? And does not this
Doctrine overspread the greatest part of the Western World? Besides whole
Clouds of Errors and gross Opinions arising daily out of the Bottomless Pit,
and obscuring, for the present, the bright Beams of the Sun of Righteousness.
Is there not in these days a Resurrection of Hymeneus and Philetus, (or at
least a Resurrection of loose Opinions) who deny the Resurrection, and say it
is past already, and by this means overthrow the faith of some, 2 Timothy 2 17, 18.

Again, amongst those who do profess the true Faith for the Doctrinal part, and
are well principled in it, how few are there that walk up to their Principles,
and so live by Faith in the practical part of their life? That saying is
fulfilled which is written. Tit. 1 last, They profess they know God, (and so
they profess they believe in God) but in works they deny him, being abominable
and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. Though they make
Profession of Faith, look upon them in their eating, and drinking, and buying,
and selling, and discoursing, and (in a word) in the whole Series of their
conversing with men, you shall see no more of Faith in them, (saving the bare
Profession) than if they were very heathens. And these are the second sort to
be Reproved, such as make Profession of the Faith, but they live not by it.

Thirdly, The third sort are such, 3. Third sort Reproved. Such as duly act not
their Faith.
who not only profess Faith, but have the habit of it, and yet act it not;
they live not by it. As a rich man, that has wealth enough, and yet is ready
to starve himself for want of improving what he has: So do some men in a
Spiritual sense: It may be God has enriched them with the grace of Faith, and
yet at some times, and in some cases they live as if they had no faith at all,
as in difficult duties, especially in great and sudden Trials: Like a young
Fencer, Simile.
when he meets with an unwonted stroke, he is put besides his skill, and
besides his ordinary guard, and throws down his weapons: So did the Disciples
upon the sudden storm, Luke 8.24. Insomuch as Christ says, Where is your faith?
Faith they had indeed, but there was none to be seen at that time. And
therefore in the other Evangelist, Mark 4.40. Christ says upon the same
occasion, How is it that ye have not faith? What? had they no faith at all?
were the Disciples Unbelievers? No, certainly, there is no question but they had
the habit of Faith, but there was no apparent act of Faith, and therefore they
were justly reproved by their Master. And so are all such, who having the grace
of Faith, do not labor upon all occasions to make use of it, and to improve it
for their own and others best advantage. For this is properly to live by Faith.
But many are too blame in this particular; they suffer their Faith to lie
asleep: And we may say to such, as Christ to the Disciples, Where is your
faith? They act not their faith in the Precept or Promise, upon all occasions
living upon a Word from God, as they ought to do: and therefore we may say,
Where is your faith? For as Faith is the life of the Soul: so the Word is the
life of Faith, and God is the life of the Word. And therefore, such as live not
by Faith, upon a Word from God, upon particular emergent occasions, we may say,
Where is your faith? To instance a little in some particular, in regard of our
1. Actions, 2 Passions, and 3. Elections.


Whether in 1. Actions.
1. For our Actions: Does God call for Obedience as a necessary fruit of Faith
in such plain and known Duties, and thou stand with a stiff neck, and wilt
not bow or buckle to the serious Performance thereof: May we not say in this
case, Where is thy faith? Is not the Word plain? Faith works by love: and, If
ye love me, keep my Commandments?

Again, does God call for Mercy and Almsdeeds, with Promise of a large
Retribution, and thou hardenest thy heart, and knittest thy fist, and bendest
thy brows against the Poor? Where is thy faith? Have thou not a plain Promise
to ground thy faith upon, Prove. 19.17.
He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, and the Lord will recompense
him that which he has given.

2. Art thou in a prosperous Condition, 2. Conditions. Psalm. 62.10.
and do thou trust to thy Mountain of Prosperity; O where is thy faith? Have
thou not a plain Word? If riches increase, set not your heart upon them. Art
thou in a troublous condition, and do not pour out thy Soul to God in Prayer?
O where is thy faith? Have thou not a plain Word, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in
the time of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Art
thou cast into Poverty, or do thou fear straights for want of Maintenance? O
where is thy faith? Have thou not a plain Word for it, Mat 6.25, 31. Take no
thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, etc? Or if
thou say, How if such a Frind should die, or such a Bond be lost? Where is
thy faith? Have thou not a plain Word, Heb 13.5. I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee, Indeed, if thou can say, How if Christ should die, or the
Covenant fail? it were something.

So 3. in point of Elections, there is to be Faith in them, 3. Elections.
Heb. 11.25. Art thou to make choice of the place of thy Habitation, and thou,
with Lot, choosest to dwell there, where thou may have many advantages for
Worldly riches, rather than for Heavenly treasure? O where is thy faith? Have
thou not a plain Word, Psalm 27.5. One thing have I desired of the Lord, and
that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days
of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. And
again, Psalm. 84.
I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the
Tents of wickedness. Art thou to choose a Servant? is thy main enquiry to know
what skill or ability he has to do thy Work, and thou never inquire how well
he is fitted to do the Work and Service of God? O where is thy faith? Have thou
not a plain Word, Psalm. 101.6, 7. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the
land, that they may dwell with me: he that walks in a perfect way, he shall
serve me: He that works deceit, shall not dwell within my house; he that
tells lies shall not tarry in my sight? Art thou to choose a Friend, and thou
inquire how witty how wealthy, how pleasant? but never, how Religious, how
faithful? Where is thy faith in the mean time? Have thou not a plain Word,
Prove. 25.19. Confidence in an unfaithful man, is like a broken tooth, and a
foot out of joint? Such a friend will fail thee, when thou do most stand in
need of him. The more thou leanest upon him, the more he will vex thee. Art
thou to choose a Yoke Fellow, thou inquire what Portion, and what Proportion,
how rich, how beautiful, but not how good, how gracious, how rich heavenward?
Where is thy faith? Have thou not a plain Word, 2 Cor. 6.14. Be ye not
unequally yoked together with unblievers? for what fellowship has
Righteousness with Unrighteousness? and what communion has light with darkness?

Digression upon Election of the Town-Magistrates.
To come home to the Work of this Day. Art thou to choose a Magistrate or
Inferior officer? Do thou enquire whether such a man be thy Friend, or thy
Kinsman, or thy Customer, or one that has bespoke thy Voice? and do thou
never enquire, How just he is, and faithful to men, or how Religious in his
carriage to God? O where is thy faith? Have thou not a plain Word, Exodus 18.21.
Moreover, thou shall provide out of all the People, able men, such as fear God,
men of truth, and hating covetousness? And have thou not a gracious Promise,
Isr. 1.26. I will restore thy Judges as at first, etc. afterward thou shall be
called, The City of Righteousness, The faithful City.

O that you would live by Faith in this Word of God, in the Work of this Day!
Do not judge Gods Messengers as busybodies in other men's matters, whilst they
give Magistrates their Charge from God, and People their Charge also in the
Choice of Magistrates: for the Text before-cited will bear us out in both. I
shall not descend to particulars, only in general: Be sure to discharge your
Oaths, and a good Conscience therein, both as Freemen of this Town, and as
Freemen of Jesus Christ; keep to your Charter, and you shall not do amiss. As I
take it, you have a Double Charter; one, from the highest Power upon earth; the
other, from Jesus Christ, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth. I suppose,
the first of your Charters will direct you to choose honest and just Men, in
regard of Communicative and Distributive Justice: I am sure your second Charter
(by virtue whereof you are the Freemen of Jesus Christ, and of that Jerusalem
which is above, which is the Mother of us all) I am sure this Charter does
charge you (as near as you can) to choose men fearing God, Religious men, such
as you apprehend to be really so. I know we all profess Religion, but all do
not walk answerably to their Profession. I would there were not some public
Contemners of the Means of grace, and such as commonly and ordinarily walk
contrary to the Rule of the Gospel. You know, it is a Gospel-Rule given to us
Ministers, Preach the Word, be instant in season, out of season; and therefore
you might well say, Woe be to us, if we preach not the Gospel accordingly. And
surely, upon the same ground, People are bound to hear in season and out of
season, in case extraordinary occasions take them not off. I need not tell you,
(unless it be in way of acknowledgement) the great Charges you are and have
been at, for a long time, in maintaining the Public Ordinance, twice in the
Week, upon your ordinary days. I have heard it has been one of the most
Ancient Lectures in the Kingdom. But I fear, if you well observe one another in
this particular, though there are many constant and willing Auditors, yet there
are some that hear me this day upon this Civil occasion, whose faces you saw
not here of many days before; no, I am afraid, many a week together. For my
part, I do not see how such as are faithful to their Heavenly Charter, and have
to do in Election of Officers, can show any countenance to such persons as do
usually discountenance and slight the Public Ordinance. If they judge the
Ordinance not worthy of their Presence, me thinks others should judge them not
worthy of Public Trust. I confess, for my own particular, I have not desired,
in satifying a curious ear, to speak to you in the enticing words of man's
wisdom; yet, I hope, I may say with the Apostle, I have endeavored to approve
my self to every man's conscience in the sight of God. I desire to speak nothing
but the truth of God in the pattern of wholesome words; and that word of Faith,
by which every one of you shall be judged in the latter day. And in this case,
whosoever despises the weakest Messenger of Jesus Christ, he despises Christ
himself; and whosoever despises Christ, you know his doom: My hearts desire;
and prayer to God, is for the contrary. I hope I may say with Job, My Record is
in heaven, that my principal aim is the good of your Souls; and next to that
the Public good of this Town, which is not likely to be advanced by such as
despise and undervalue the Ordinances of Christ: Such as render not unto God
the things that are Gods, are not likely to render unto Men the things that are
theirs. And therefore, I beseech you, exercise Faith in matter of your
Election, not only of your Chief Magistrates amongst you, (for I hope there
will be no scruple in that) but of Inferior Officers. Simile.
A man that would have a good Orchard, has the greatest care of his first
Plantation, and so I hope will you, I must needs say, your last years Work, and
some other passages of Providence, do give grounds of hope, that God intends
yet further good to this Town. For the present, do that which is your Duty, and
leave the Success to God.

I shall forbear to speak further for this time, desiring to second that by
Prayer, that has been said already.

[The end of this Sermon.]
Use III. Of Examination. Examination.

Use of Examination and Trial:

First, Of Persons.

Secondly, Of Doctrines and Religions.

1. Of Persons, whether we are Just, 1. For trial of Persons.
and in a state of Life, of Spiritual Life, or no? for then we have Faith. For
the Just lives by his Faith. There is no other Life, there is no other
Righteousness to be attained unto, but that which is by Faith: Even as David
also describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes the
Righteousness of Faith without Works, Romans 4 6. Well then, that we may know
whether we have Life or no, or whether we have Righteousness or no, the main
Quaere will be, Whether we have Faith, or no? And this is worthy the enquiring
after, and worth the trying. The more precious any thing is in the true nature
and quality of it, the more exact we use to be in the trial of it, lest we
should be cozened with that which is false and counterfeit, in stead of that
which is right and good. We do not use to be so exact in the trial of things of
lesser moment, but mavelous exact and accurate in the trial of Gold and
Precious Stones; and that which makes us so accurate in the trial of them, is,
because they are so precious. Now Faith in the Scripture, is called precious
Faith: Now, for what is it precious, but for the rarity and excellency of it?
and so the trial of Faith is called Precious Trial, whether it be tried by the
Word of God, or whether it be tried by the Works of God in the Furnace of
affliction, it is a precious trial, 1 Pet 1.7. At this time we shall endeavor
to try it by the Word of God, which is the Touchstone of Faith: And this Trial,
if well applied, may be very precious to us, and of singular use. For in case
upon trial we find (through Mercy) we have true Faith, we shall have great
cause to be thankful, to rejoice in the God of our Salvation. But in case we
find we have not Faith, as we shall have great cause to be humbled, so as
great cause to seek God in the use of means for this excellent grace of Faith:
for it is our very Life. The Just shall live by his Faith.

Marks of true Faith from feigned.
But how shall we know, whether we have Faith or no? For as there is Faith
unfeigned. 1 Timothy 1.5. so there is feigned and counterfeit Faith also.

Quest. How shall we know the one from the other?

It loves to be cried.
Ans. 1. First, to be sure this is one remarkable note of Distinction, That
Faith which is true, loves to be tried; that which is false, cannot endure to
come to the Trial. In this case, it is just as it is betwixt a True man and a
Thief: The true man, if he chance to be suspected, he loves to come to the
Trial, that he may clear himself; but the Thief declines it all that he may,
because he knows himself guilty. A man that has false and counterfeit Faith,
he loves to take all for granted that he does believe, he cannot endure to put
himself to further trouble; he does not like these Uses of Trial and
Examination: Like a man that is false upon his Accounts, he cannot endure his
Books should be examined; but he that has true faith, he desires nothing more
than the through Trial of his faith: O he would not for all the world be
mistaken in a matter of so great concernment; and therefore he likes that
Ministry best, that is most searching. And when the Ministry has done all it
can do, such a Soul goes to God by Prayer, and says, Lord, give me grace
impartially to apply the searching Word; I have heard this day, nay do thou thy
self search me, O Lord, examine me, and prove me, try my reins and my heart,
Psalm. 26.2. And that is the first Discovery of true Faith and true Grace; It
loves to be tried.

But how shall it be tried?

2. It is tried both by the Cause and by the Effect, 2. It is known by the
Cause.
which are the best means to come to the knowledge of any thing.

First, by the cause Instrumental. It is wrought by the Word, Romans 10.17. Faith
comes by hearing: Though other means may help to Faith, (The conversation of
the Wife) 1 Pet. 3.1. (And the Samaritans believed, because of the Woman, Joh.
4.42.) Yet, the Word of God is the only ground of Faith.

And this Word works in the whole man.

1. It works in the Understanding a clear sight of our Misery by Nature, and of
the Remedy in Christ dying for sinners.

2. It works in the Affection a godly sorrow to Repentance, and a longing
desire after Christ, Act. 2.37. They were pricked in their hearts, and said,
Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be saved?

3. It works upon the Will a closing with the Promise, and Christ in the
Promise, (suppose, 1 Pet. 2.6. or Joh. 1.12, etc.) grounding upon his
willingness to receive all such as come to him, upon his ability also, and
faithfulness to make his Word good. It receives whole Christ (Prophet, Priest,
and King) into the whole man.

Secondly, it is tried by the Fruits and Effects, And by the Effects.
which are,

1. A high prizing of the Word, which is the Instrument of Faith: 1 Pet. 2.2.
As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby: If ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. An Unbeliever does not so
prize the Word, he can set a humane Testimony Cheek by Jaw with the Word of God.

2. A high prizing of Christ, who is the Object of Faith, 1 Pet. 2.7. Unto you
that believe he is precious, especially the Righteousness of Christ is very
precious. All other things, Persons and Performances, are vile in comparison,
Phil. 3.8. An Unbeliever cannot thus prize Christ, but says, We see no form or
comeliness in him, that we should desire him, Isa 53.2.

Effect 3.
3. A high prizing of the Image and likeness of Christ, the inseparable
Concomitant of Faith. The Vision of Christ by Faith, works a strong desire of
Transformation into the likeness of Christ. It is the height of such a Souls
ambition, to have the Image of the Lord Jesus stamped upon it, both in inward
impressions of Grace upon the heart, (to be humble and meek as he was) and in
outward expressions of Holiness and Righteousness in their conversation, Psalm.
17. last. When I awake, says David, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. We
are now indeed the Sons of God, says S. John; but it does not yet appear what
we shall be: but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for
we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. As if they should say, We esteem this
our very Heaven and Happiness, to be made like to Christ. A formal Professor
may desire to be saved by Christ, but he does not seriously desire to be made
like to Christ: So a real Believer loves Gods Image in others, 1 John 5.1.

4. Other effects and fruits of Faith: You have in the fruits of the Spirit set
down, Gal. 5.22.
Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the Spirit is love, with peace, long-suffering, etc.
And though Faith it self be a fruit of the Spirit, yet those other Graces
coupled with it, are also fruits of Faith in order of working.

As for Example:

1. When a Soul is once Reconciled to God by Faith, it cannot choose but love
him: Faith works by Love. So far as we have any saving light from the Spirit,
we do also receive heat from the Spirit: He shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost and with fire. Why so? because the Holy Ghost is like fire, comes with
heat, as well as with light: Nay, of the two, the heat of our love to God, is
more sensible than the light of our Reconcilement. Many a Soul that is much in
the dark concerning Justification, yet cannot but confess they love God; yea,
should God hide his face from them, yet they cannot choose but love him, for his
Holiness, Truth, Goodness, Justice, and such other Perfections. And indeed the
soundest way to comfort a weak Believer, is, First to convince them of their
love to God: For upon the manifestation of love, in due time, follows Joy:
That Is the second fruit of the Spirit and of Faith.

2. Joy: for the proof of our love to God, does most infallibly prove his love
to us; 1 John 4.9. We love him, because he first loved us. And so far as Gods
love is cleared to us, we must needs rejoice, Luke 1.47. My Spirit has
rejoiced in God my Savior: So that our Joy in God is weaker or stronger, not
as Gods love to us is weaker or stronger, but as the Manifestation of it is
weaker or stronger: And what we say of Joy, we may also say of Peace, which is
the third fruit of the Spirit and of Faith.

3. Peace: for being justified by Faith, we have peace with God through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Romans 5.1. But this Joy and Peace does not always immediately
follow upon believing, but (as the Sun rising follows the dawning of the day)
some good distance after. However, so soon as ever we believe we have the
groundwork and seed of Peace, Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown for the righteous,
and joyful gladness for the upright in heart.

4. A fourth fruit is long-suffering, not only in regard of Men, but in
respect of God himself: when God carries himself as if he were an enemy to us,
yet we will be friends with him, we will make the best constructions of Gods
Corrections, Isa. 8.17.
and we will wait for the manifestation of his love, who hides his face from
the house of Jacob. As Jacob himself waited many a year, and endured much
hardship for the love which he did bear to Rachel: So will a believing Soul be
content to wait with long-suffering for the love he bears to Jesus Christ:
whereas an unbeliever flings away in a chafe, and says, What should I wait for
the Lord any longer, seeing this evil is of the Lord, 2 King. 6.33.

More Evidences of true Faith.
Many other evidences there are, to distinguish true faith from that which is
counterfeit: I will name but three.

The first is in regard of evil Actions. The second in regard of good Actions.
The third in respect of both.
1. In point of sins.
1. For evil and sinful Actions: Though it is possible a Believer may fall into
such, through the violence of Temptation; yet this is the property of true
Faith, it never gives quiet possession to sin long together. This is part of
the good fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. though it may be foiled by the flesh, yet
it is never so overcome, but there is a rising again, and a lusting of the
Spirit against the flesh, Gal 5.17. David and Peter, and other of Gods Saints,
were miserably foiled for the present, but yet they rose again by a renewed act
of Repentance and Faith; and soon after recovered their former strength:
Whereas an Unbeliever, though he may sometimes have some strivings and
struglings in his natural Conscience; yet at last he gives quiet possession to
Sin and Satan, being resolved to put himself to no further trouble: Luke 11.21.
When a strong man armed keeps his palace, his goods are in peace: An
unbelievers peace is his rest in sin, Prove. 4.16. But a believers peace is his
rest in Christ, Psalm. 116.11. and not in sin, Psalm. 77.4. and 19 last. Job
8.34. Romans 6.20. He never gives quiet possession long together, he will not do
the least evil, that good may come of it; nor omit the least good, for fear
evil should come of it.

2. In point of good actions.
2. For good Actions. A believer (so far as he is himself) he does all he does
in the strength of Christ: Therefore the very first act of Faith, is called a
laying hold on Gods strength, Isa. 27.5. Let him take hold of my strength, that
he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me. An Unbeliever,
while he sins against God, lifts up his strength against God, and like a si^ly
Briar and Thorn, he fights against a consuming fire. Or if he chance to perform
some good Duties, yet he does all in his own strength, as he does all to his
own ends: All is done in the strength of his own parts and preparation: for he
perceives not that he is weak, and poor, and blind, and miserable, and naked.
But a Believer, as he lives upon God, so he does all he does in the strength of
God: I say, so far as he is himself, he does so. And if at any time, or in any
duty, he be overtaken with self-confidence, to rely upon the Mountain of his
created strength, or created Grace, he is never well, till he has deeply
humbled himself for it, as David did, Psalm. 30.6. And therefore, I say, a
Believer, so far as he is himself, does all he does in the strength of God. If
he be to preach, if he be to pray, whatever he be to do, he dares venture upon
nothing in his own strength, lest God should blast his endeavors in stead of
blessing them [2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think
any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God] Phil. 4.13. I can do
all things (says the Apostle) through Christ that strengthens me: yea, bear
all things in the strength of Christ, but nothing in his own strength. This is
an infallible symptom of the Life of Faith, Psalm. 84.5. Blessed is the man
whose strength is in thee.

3. The third and last Evidence, has respect to both: 3. In point of both.
for whether a Believer be to resist that which is evil, or to perform that
which is good, as he goes out in Gods strength: so he goes to God by Prayer in
both respects; for prayer is a calling in of the strength of God: and a
believing creature is ever a praying creature, unless under Tentation; and
therefore, true Prayer is called the Prayer of Faith: and indeed, Prayer is one
of the first evidences of Faith; I do not mean, the Gift of Prayer, whereby we
can express our selves in good words. But the Spirit of Prayer and
Supplications, whereby we express our selves in good and child-like affections.
No sooner has a man Faith, but together with his Faith, he receives the Spirit
of Adoption, whereby he cries Abba Father, Romans 8.15. therefore as the same
Apostle says, Romans 10.14. How shall they call on him, in whom they have not
believed, (they are but poor formal Prayers, without Faith) So we may say on
the other side, How shall they not call on him, on whom they have believed [2
Cor. 4 13. We having the same Spirit of faith (according as it is written, I
believe, therefore have I spoken) we also believe, and therefore we speak] none
of Gods children are born tongue-ty'd: I am sure, not so hard tied, but there
will be inward sighs and groans, and wrestlings with God, when there are no
outward expressions at all. The Spirit of Faith is ever attended with a Spirit
of Prayer and Supplication. And this is the last Evidence, by which we may
judge of unfeigned Faith, from that which is feigned and counterfeit.

Branch II. Of Examination.
Living by faith is the touchstone to try all Doctrines and Religions, whether
they be true or false.
And as this serves for the Trial of Persons, so also of Doctrines and
Religions. That Religion which teaches us to live by Faith, and to lay hold on
the Righteousness of Christ, who was made sin for us, that we through him might
be made the righteousness of God to life Eternal; that is undoubtedly the true
Religion. But that Religion which slanders the Life of Faith, as if it were
absurd to be justified by the Righteousness of another; That which teaches we
have no Original Sin remaining in us, but that all is washed away in Baptism,
contrary to that of the Apostle, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death! That which teaches inherent
Righteousness necessary to Justification; and that it is possible also, a man
may so fulfill the Law of God, as to Merit at Gods hand, yea, that he is able
not only to do what the Law requires, but to over-do, even to do so much, as
to spare of his oil for others. This is a Doctrine and Religion, savouring of
horrible Pride and Presumption, and therefore false. But that which teaches us
to go out of our selves, and to give the Glory of Salvation to Free Grace, and
so to live by Faith; this is true, and there is no unrighteousness in it.

Now in case we find upon search, That we do believe, we have infinite cause
to be thankful. In case we find we believe not, we have as great cause to be
humbled, and to seek out for Faith.

Use IV. Of Thankfulness.
Thankfulness for Faith.
Thankfulness for our selves, for our Friends. Yoke-fellows, and Children; as
the Apostle is thankful, Ephesians. 1.15. Phil. 1.3. Col. 1.3, 4. What? has God
given them Faith? he has given them an excellent livelihood. We rejoice when
great Lands and Livings fall to us or our friends: but what is all this to
Faith, which is the very life of our lives, our living to Eternity? All the
blessings of Natural, Spiritual, and Eternal Life, are wrapped up in Faith.
Indeed, there are many quickening Considerations should stir us up to be
thankful to God with all our Souls; Grounds of our Thankfulness.
That we should say as David, Psalm. 103.1, 2. Bless the Lord, O my Soul; and
all that is within me, bless, etc.

First. For first of all, 1. It Is Gods gift.
Faith (as the Scripture says) is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. If we could
obtain Heaven by our own Workmanship, or Faith it self as a particular work of
our own to fit us for Heaven, we might have some cause to boast, and so the
less cause to be thankful. But neither the works which the Law requires in
general, nor this work which the Gospel requires in particular, is of our own
working, or springs out of the liberty of our own Will, but it is the gift of
God. Look as Christ fulfilled for us all that Righteousness which the Law
requires: So he bestows upon us that very Faith which the Gospel requires also.
And Faith is like an empty hand, or an empty Beggars Dish, and such a Dish as
is given, together with the Alms it self, that all the glory may be given to
God, and none at all to the Creature. And as we are bound to be Thankful to God
for the very first Faith he works in us: So also, for all the degrees and
increases of our Faith. Luke 17.7.
The Apostles pray, Lord, increase our Faith; to intimate, That all the growth
and increase of Faith is from God, as well as the first seed of Faith. For, The
Righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith; as it is written, The
just shall live by his faith, Romans 1.17. As God is the first Author, so he is
the carrier on, and Finisher of our Faith, Phil. 2.6.
Heb. 12.2. And when he begins, he will also make an end: therefore be thankful
for Faith from first to last. It is his Gift, it is his free Gift, without the
least desert on our part; therefore let him have the praise of it.

2. It Is a gift necessary to our being: 1 Thessalonians. 5.8.
Secondly, It is such a Gift, as is absolutely necessary to our very being in
the state of Grace. If it were a Gift of less consequence, we ought to be
thankful for it (because a Gift) In all things give thanks, says the Apostle.
But this is such a Gift as is all in all: It is absolutely necessary to the
very being of a Christian: others are necessary to their well-being, but this
to their very being. Therefore we have the more cause to be thankful. What
says the Scripture? Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible to please God:
and so, Without faith it is impossible to be saved. Ephesians. 2.8. Ye are saved by
faith. [Mark 16.16. He that believes shall be saved; he that believes not shall
be damned. So that Faith in grown persons, is absolutely necessary to
Salvation: you cannot be saved without it; you may be Rich, and you may be
Beautiful, and you may be Strong, and you may be Nobly descended, and you may
be Learned, without Faith, but without Faith you can never be saved.

Obj. You will say, So, without Hope, and Love, and Zeal for Gods Glory, we
cannot be saved.

Ans. That is true; yet there is something more in Faith than in all the rest,
in tendency to Salvation: For Faith (in order of working) is the very Root of
all other Graces: Our Hope, and Love, and Zeal, and all the rest, do spring
from our Faith, Romans 12.3. So far as we believe, we hope; so far as we believe,
we love; so far as we believe, we are zealous for God: and so of the rest.
Therefore Faith is in a special manner necessary to Salvation, being the only
instrument of laying hold upon Christ. And therefore in a special manner are we
bound to be thankful for it.

Thirdly, It is such a Gift, 3. Such a gift as none else can give.
as is impossible for any other to give, but God alone: Therefore it is called,
The faith of the operation of God, Col 2.12. as if God alone could work it. If
an Angel from Heaven should persuade you to believe this or that, yet if God do
not persuade you by his Spirit, you cannot believe. You read Luke 1.20. the
Angel tells Zacharias, he should be struck dumb, because he believed not the
words of the Angel. If all the Angels in Heaven should preach to us, if God
himself does not preach to us by his Spirit, we cannot believe. And if all the
Angels upon Earth (I mean, all the Ministers; for they are called the Angels of
the Churches) if all these one after another should preach to one particular
Soul, yet that Soul would not believe, unless God open the heart of it (as he
did the heart of Lydia) to believe.

Obj. You will say, But Experience shows, such and such have been Converted by
such and such Ministers.

Ans. It is granted: but it was not the man without God, but God in the man
that did it; else why is one man converted rather than another? Why the same
man at one time, rather than at another, and by means more improbable, but to
show it is God in the man? That (as the Apostle says) the faith of Gods people
might not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2.5. that
so he might have all the praise and glory. Therefore the Apostle in this
respect makes nothing of the Min^ster, that God may be all in all in all his
Ministers, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7. Who then is Paul, and who is Apollo, but Ministers
by whom ye believe?

And as none can help (as to Faith) but God alone: So we cannot help our
selves, we cannot work up our own hearts to believe; we are not only like sick
men naturally, but as dead men in the grave, shut up under the gravestone of
Unbelief; [Rom. 11.32. He has shut up all in unbelief, that he may have mercy
upon all] That is, that Gods mercy might be the more magnified in bestowing
Faith upon them, that were as unable to believe of themselves, as a dead man is
unable by his own power to arise out of his grave. The wonders of Faith.
All the steps of Faith are wondrous difficult to a poor Creature; yet know,
all things are possible with God.

As for Example:

1. To see and believe what God requires of us in the first Covenant: For till
we know this, we think our selves in a good condition, and alive without the
Law, Romans 7.9. And we cannot see and believe this, till God himself open our
eyes, 1 Cor. 2.14.

2. To see and believe how far we come short of the Law, naturally how sinful
we are, and cursed by sin: For we are like the young man that said, All these
have I kept from my youth upward: But till we see our selves sinners, and feel
the weight of sin, we shall never look out after a Savior. The whole need not
a Physician, but the sick, Mat. 9.12.

3. To see and believe, that not only our gross sins, but our best
Righteousnesses do leave us in a miserable condition without a Savior. This is
wondrous difficult: for no sooner do we attain to some parts, and the
performance of some Duties, but we are ready to say, with the Church of
Laodicea, I am rich, and increased with goods, and stand in need of nothing;
and perceive not that we are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked: and it is nothing but Eye salve from Jesus Christ, that can make us
perceive this, Rev. 3.17, 18. that can make us believe and confess, that All
our Righteousnesses are as filthy polluted rags, Isa 64.6. This is wondrous
hard. Naturally we are full of Self-love, and Self-admiration; but a Soul that
comes to Christ is full of Self-loathing, and Self-detestation: Job 42.6. I
abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

4. To see and believe the perfect Righteousness, and surpassing Excellency of
Jesus Christ. For a Natural eye sees no beauty in him, Isa. 53.2. and yet
before we can desire him, we must see the beauty that is in him.

5. To see and believe the Necessity and the Duty of the poor Souls coming to
Christ, Psalm 2 12. Leaning upon him for Righteousness and Salvation; and that
so doing, it shall never be cast out: For naturally we are ready to think and
to say, There is no need of coming to Christ, or not need of us and our coming.
Though God will be merciful to others. I am afraid he will not be merciful to
me; Though he do not cast out others who came to him, I am afraid he will cast
out me. Therefore it is the wonderful Work of the Spirit of Christ, to persuade
the sin-repenting Soul to come to Christ, Joh. 6.44. and when it is come, to
persuade it, that Christ will not cast it out again. And so the Spirit fastens
the Promise upon the Soul, Joh. 6.36. It is the wonderful Work of the Spirit,
to persuade enemies to become friends; to persuade strangers to draw nigh, and
be acquainted with Christ. This is such a difficult Work, that it is the Work
of a God, and not of a Creature: All the Ministers in the World cannot do it
without the Spirit; and therefore it is said, Genesis 9.27. God enlarge, or God
persuade Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem. The Jews came of Shem, and were
the first Church; of Japhet came the Gentiles, and they were strangers to the
Commonwealth of Israel. Now it must be the Work of an Almighty God, to
persuade them to believe, and so to dwell in the Tents of Shem. We are all
naturally so imprisoned and locked up under Unbelief, that in case our hearts
are once set at liberty to embrace the Promise, and Christ in the Promise, we
may well say, as Peter said when he came to himself, and found that he was
delivered out of Prison, Acts 12.11. Now I know of a surety, that the Lord has
sent his Angel, and has delivered me out of the hand of Herod, etc. So may a
Believer say, who is awakened out of his dead sleep, (as Peter was) Now I know
of a surety that God has sent his Spirit, and has deliverd me out of the hand
of the spiritual Herod, out of the hand of Satan: It is he that has delivered
me out of the prison of Sin: It is he that has caused the Iron-gates of my
unbelieving heart to fly open of its own accord: It is he, that by the Power of
his Spirit has loosed and shaken off all the Chains and Bolts of natural
Corruptions and sinful Customs; what was impossible to me, God has made
feasible and easy: and therefore to Him be all the praise and glory, who has
fulfilled the work of faith with power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. Thus it was with David,
who naturally being the servant of Sin, and perceiving himself redeemed, and
manu-mitted by the Power of Gods Grace, he does freely, in a way of
Thankfulness, offer up himself to the Service of God, as if it were his perfect
freedom, Psalm. 116.16. O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and
the son of thine handmaid, thou have loosed my bonds: What follows? I will
offer to thee the sacrifice of Thanksgiving. And this is the third
Consideration that should move us to be thankful.

Fourthly, It is such a Gift as is very precious, 4. Faith is a most precious
gift.
and therefore we should be very thankful for it. It is true indeed, Christ is
very precious, he is so in himself, whether we believe or no: But he is not so
to us, unless we embrace him by faith, 1 Pet. 2.7. This sets a price upon him
to the purpose. Therefore we should account that faith precious, that makes
Christ himself so precious to our Souls. Men use to be thankful for precious
gifts.

Now there are three things in Scripture accounted precious. Three things very
precious.


First, The Pearl it self.

Secondly, The Cabinet that holds it.

Thirdly, The skilful Hand, that has Right and Power to open the Cabinet, and
lay hold upon it.

1. The Pearl it self, viz Jesus Christ, he is (...) precious, Mat. 13.45, 46.
so precious, that the Merchant-man is content to sell all that he has, so he
may but compass this Pearl. Farewell Profits, farewell Pleasures, farewell
Honors, farewell Sin, so I may but enjoy Christ, I am willing to part with all.

2. The Cabinet that holds the Pearl, is precious, 2 Pet. 1.4. There are given
unto us exceeding great and precious Promises, whereby we are made partakers of
the Divine Nature. One Promise is more worth than all the world. How should we
know where to find the Pearl, if God had not laid it up in such a precious
Cabinet! Therefore the Cabinet also is precious.

3. The skilful Hand, which has Right and Power to open the Cabinet, and lay
hold upon the Pearl; that is (...) precious hand. Were the Cabinet and the
Pearl never so precious, yet if we had no hand to open the Cabinet, or lay hold
on the Pearl, what were we the better? But Faith has skill and power from God
to open the Cabinet, and to lay hold upon the Pearl, and to say, This is mine;
and therefore this Faith must needs be precious Faith, The preciousness of
Faith in 4 respects.
2 Pet. 1.1. It is a precious hand in four respects.

1. Because it lays hold upon precious things, Precious Christ, Precious
Promises, Precious Righteousness, and Precious Holiness: For we are justified
by Faith, and sanctified by Faith, as we have already proved at large.

2. Because in case it lays hold on things not precious, it makes them
precious. As it makes difficult things easy (all things are possible to him
that believes) so it makes vile things become precious, Romans 8.28. And this we
know (says the Apostle) that all things work together for good to them that
love God: It Is all one, as if he had said, To them that believe in God. For
Faith works by love, it turns Iron-fetters into Golden chains. There is
much talk of the Philosphers Stone, what great wonders it would do, if it could
be found out: But this is true of Faith, It turns all that it touches into
that, which is most precious. It was fabled of Midas, That it was his desire,
whatever he touched might be turned into Gold: he had his desire; and yet he
repented himself when he had done, (say they) Because his very meat was turned
into gold, that should have preserved his life. But, whatever a Believer
touches by Faith, if it be not turned into Gold, it is turned into that which
is more precious than Gold. Suppose he meet with Poverty, or with Bonds, and
Imprisonment, I know, says the Apostle, that this shall turn to my salvation,
through your prayers, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.19.
And thus Faith is precious, for it makes even vile things become precious.

3. Because it lays hold on precious things for it self. The Master of a Ship
may carry abundance of Treasure for another man: But whatever precious things
Faith lays hold on, it makes them its own. My God, and my Lord, says Thomas: I
live by the faith of the Son of God, says Paul, who has loved me, and given
himself for me. My beloved is mine, and I am his; My Christ, My Promise, My
Heaven: All is mine, says Faith. All things are yours, and you are Christ's,
and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.23.

4. Because it lays fast hold, it lays hold for ever on those precious things.
If a Believer should lay hold, and let go again, his Faith were not so
precious. Nay, the more happy a man esteems himself in the enjoyment of a good
thing the more miserable he apprehends himself to be in the loss of it. But
Faith lays hold upon Christ for ever: Once thine, and for ever thine: for, The
Just lives by Faith the Life of Conservation or Perseverance. It may be, thou
art afraid thou should let thy hold go of Christ. But to be sure, Christ will
never let his hold go of thee; yea, he will establish and confirm thy hold of
him. Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a
good work in you, will perform or finish it, until the day of Jesus Christ. 1
Pet. 1.5. Ye are kept by the power of God through faith unto Salvation. Job
17.9. The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall
grow stronger and stronger. Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear into their hearts,
that they shall not depart from me.

This is the fourth respect, wherein Faith is such a precious Gift, viz. Faith
lays hold on Christ, and consequently on whatsoever is precious, so as never to
let go its hold: which Consideration ought to excite our Thankfulness for so
rich a Jewel as Faith. which everlastingly entails all the Privileges of the
Covenant.

5. and lastly, We should be Thankful for Faith, 5. Faith is rare.
because it is so rare, and scarce to be found: This Flower grows not in every
Garden. We should indeed be Thankful for good things, though they are common:
but I know not how it comes to pass, we take little notice of such Mercies.
Among outward things, what more precious than the Sun, the Air, and the Water?
and yet because they are common, how few are affected with Gods goodness in
these things, as they ought to be? But what is scarce and hard to be found, we
are usually much taken with such a thing, and can prize the Donor of it. Now
such a thing is true Faith, its very hard to be found: When the Son of Man
comes, Luke 18.8.
shall he find Faith upon the earth? Doubtless, many may be found that have
the Profession of Faith in their mouths, but few that have the Grace of Faith
in their hearts, or the Fruit of Faith in their lives: As there are few that
shall be saved, so there are few that do truly believe: for, He that believes
shall be saved, Mark 16.16. Now of those few, there are very few wise, and
mighty, and noble, upon whom God bestows this precious Gift of Faith. A poor
despicable creature, that has obtained Faith at Gods hands, may say, Blessed
be God, though I have but little in the world, yet God has given me that which
he has denied to many wise, and mighty, and noble men in the world. Therefore
such a man has great cause to be thankful, to be thankful, I say, even to
admiration: Joh. 14.22. Lord, how is it that thou do manifest thy self unto
us, and not unto the world? This is that, for which Jesus Christ himself is so
thankful to his heavenly Father, Mat. 11.25. At that timt Jesus answered and
said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes; even
so, Father, because it seemed good in thy sight. Here is something very
remarkable in the speech of Christ, which we shall take notice of in the
Resolution of two questions.

Quest. 1. Why it is said, At that time Jesus answered, when we read not any
body said any thing to him before?

Ans. I answer, S. Luke will resolve this question, Luke 10.21. In that hour
Jesus rejoiced in the Spirit, and said, I thank thee, etc. Observe: God spoke
joy to his Soul inwardly, though nothing was spoken outwardly, even such joy as
makes men exult or leap for joy (as the word signifies) And in answer to this
inward work of joy, Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, etc.

Quest. 2. But then secondly, it may be questioned, Why an inward answer of
Thankfulness, might not serve the turn to an inward voice of joy?

Ans. For this, we must know, Christ does return his answer in an audible
voice, for their sakes that stood by, (as he said in another case, Joh. 11.42.)
viz. To stir up the Disciples, and all Gods People, to be the more thankful for
such a choice and singular Mercy; He sets before us a pattern of Thankfulness;
he tells us what we should be thankful for, above all other things, namely,
That God has revealed to us the great Mystery of Salvation: And how is this
revealed, but by Faith? and why should we be so thankful for the revelation of
this Mystery by Faith? even because there are so few that do believe, it is a
Mystery that is hid from the wise and prudent, and revealed to a few babes,
that have no more knowledge of heavenly things by nature, than if they were
babes. It is kept secret from the wisest part of the world, and from the
greatest part of the world: And therefore if Faith be so rare and scarce, as
well as precious, we have the greater cause to be thankful. Each true Believer
may stand and wonder, and say, Lord, who am I, that whilst so many Millions go
in the broad way that leads to destruction, who am I, that I should be one of
those few that do believe, to the saving of the soul, Heb. 10.39.

Use V. Of Humiliation.
Humiliation for Unbelief.
we have great cause to be humbled for our Unbelief: for, as the just lives by
his Faith; so, the Unbeliever dies by his Unbelief, as we have heard.

We should look at Unbelief, as the most deadly and dangerous of all other
sins, and therefore be humbled for it. When Christ says, His Spirit should
convince the world of sin; Joh. 16.9.
he says no more but thus, It shall convince the world, because they believe
not on me; as if Unbelief were the greatest of all other sins. O that we could
conceive it so! We startle at Murder, Adultery, Theft, etc. and good reason we
should do so: in the mean time, it may be, we are little troubled that we do
not believe; nay, it may be we think we do well to doubt of the Promise, as
Jonah thought he did well to be angry.

The evil of Unbelief.
And yet this sin of Unbelief exceeds all other sins in some respect.

For,

1. It dishonours God.
First, it is a sin that does exceedingly dishonor God. Indeed, it calls the
Divinity it self in question: for if God be not a God of Unchangeable Truth,
and of Infinite Power, he is as good as no God: But Unbelief questions the
Truth of God. God says, He that trusts in him, shall not be confounded: But
says the Soul, Though I should cast my self upon his Promise, I question
whether it should be made good to me: Thus, 1 John 5.10. He that believes not
God, has made him a liar. So Unbelief another while questions the Power of
God: Can God prepare a Table in the Wilderness? and the like: Can God forgive,
or can God subdue such sins? Now what a dishonout is this to God?

2. It grieves the Spirit of God.
Secondly, it is a sin that does exceedingly grieve the Spirit of God. When King
Ahaz would not believe the comfortable Promise that was brought to him from God
by the Prophet Isaiah, what says the Scripture? Isa. 7.13. Is it a small thing
for you to weary or grieve men, but ye will weary my God also? And with whom
was God grieved forty years in the Wilderness? was it not with them that
sinned through Unbelief, Heb. 3.17. Suppose a rich man should freely invite all
the Poor of such a Town to a feast, with Promise of kind and hearty welcome, if
they will but come, etc. Upon the Invitation, first one, and then another
should begin to make exceptions against themselves, and say, Surely he did not
intend that I should come, etc. If I do, I Will be sure to eat nothing: I cannot
think he should bid me welcome; or if he do, that he means as he says: I am so
unworthy, I have nothing to pay for my entertainment. Would not this grieve the
Master of the Feast, and displease him? Might not his displeasure turn into
wrath? Luke 14.21, 24. The Master of the house was angry, and said, None of
those men which were bidden shall taste of my Supper. Does God say, Whosoever
will, let him eat of the bread, and drink freely of the water of life, Isa. 55
1. Rev. 22.17. and shall any of us say, Though I hunger and thirst also, I
cannot believe the Promise belongs to me? How do we quench and grieve the
Spirit of God by our Unbelief?

Thirdly, 3. It pleases the Devil.
it is a sin that does exceedingly please the Devil: It was the very first sin
he tempted our first Parents to, and it is the main of all his Temptations to
this day. Let the Word be preached never so powerfully; yea, But is this true,
says the Devil? The Devil does what he can to bring God out of credit with his
People. Luke 8.12. These by the highway are they that hear; then comes the
Devil, and takes the Word out of their hearts, lest they should believe and be
saved. Mark: the Devil knows that without Faith there is no Salvation:
therefore he that is an enemy to the Salvation of People, is as great an enemy
to Faith. Thou can not do a greater pleasure to the Devil, than to say, I
question whether this be true or no: or whether God will make this Promise good
to me, though I should cast my self upon the Word of his Free Grace. O
Christians! think of this, think seriously of this, how you rejoice that wicked
Spirit (The Father of Lies) and how you grieve and vex the holy Spirit of God
(The Spirit of Truth) by your Unbelief.

Fourthly, consider the sin of Unbelief, it is a Mother Sin. As the Devil is the
Father: so Unbelief is the Mother of all other sins. The brood of Unbelief.
Unbelief was first the Devils Bastard, and then he makes it his Concubine; and
by his incubation upon an unbelieving heart, he begets a world of other sins.

As,

1. Ignorance.
First of all, Wilful and affected Ignorance: For if the Devil can but persuade
a Soul, either that the Word is not of God, or that it belongs not to it self
in particular; then the next Temptation is, To what purpose should thou
labor for the knowledge of such a Word that concerns thee not? And therefore
Unbelief and Ignorance are coupled together, and both proceeding from the
Devil: 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. But if, etc. in whom the god of this world has blinded
the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them: Whereby it comes to
pass, that so many are ignorant, in the midst of so much light.

2. Security.
Secondly, another dangerous sin (the offspring of the Devil and of Unbelief)
is, Sinful Security. The Devil begets this sin upon an Unbelievers heart, and
when he has done, he rocks the Cradle. When God threatens, and the awakened
Conscience begins to cry; then, Peace, peace, Genesis 3.1.
says the Devil: Yea, has God said, Ye shall die, if ye eat of the forbidden
fruit? I say, Ye shall not die; The words of the Prophets are but wind: Jer.
5.13.
what need ye regard or fear the threatening. Indeed God has said, The Drunkard
shall be clothed with rags; Prove. 33.21. Isa. 33.1.
The spoiler shall be spoiled; and, The flying Roll of Gods curse shall enter
into the house of the Thief, and of him that swears falsely by the Name of
God, Zech. 5.4. But do you not see, threatened folk live long, says the Devil?
Does not many a Drunkard, Oppressor, Thief, and Swearer, live many a fair day?
And thus the poor Soul is presently rocked asleep again in its Unbelief, and
becomes resolute in an evil way. Eccl. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil
work is not speedily executed, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully
set in them to do evil. They are secure in the midst of danger, they fall
asleep upon the top of the Mast.

Thirdly, 3. Worldliness.
another dangerous sin springing from Unbelief, is Worldly-mindedness: for if
we believe not what is promised concerning Heaven, or what is threatened in
regard of Hell; why then, says Demas, let us embrace this present world. Let
Noah preach of Judgment to the old World, and righteous Lot to the Sodomites,
so long as their words seem to them as idle tales, there is no care to prevent
the imminent Judgment, but all their care is how they shall live another day,
when it may be they have not a day to live: They ate, they drank, they bought,
they sold, they planted, they builded: they were all for the world, even to the
very day that those dreadful Waters upon the one, and that terrible Fire upon
the other, came down from the Lord out of Heaven: And all this because of their
Unbelief.

Fourthly, 4. Hypocrisy.
another dangerous sin (the fruit of such a cursed Parent) is, Gross
Hypocrisy. Counterfeit Faith ever springs from real Unbelief: for durst a man
make show of Religion to serve his own turn, and to serve his own lusts, (as
many men do) if he did believe that God was a God searching the heart and the
reins, and such an one as would smite all painted walls, and whited sepulchers,
he durst as well eat fire as do such a thing. O, says many a vile wretch, I
carried my self like a Saint, whilst I was in their company; and yet it may be
the same man at another time, and in another company, carries himself more like
a Devil incarnate, than a Saint: And why so? from whence springs this gross
Hypocrisy, but from gross Unbelief? For had he but Faith to believe the
Omnipresence of God, he would labor to be the same at all times, and in all
companies.

Fifthly, 5. Heresy.
another dangerous sin (the Daughter both of Unbelief and Hypocrisy) is,
Heresy; a departing from the Faith in some Points of Religion, for a man's own
outward advantage. For if a man believe not what he professes, to be true, he
will be soon ready either to lay down or to take up Opinions, as he may best
serve the present time for his own interest. In this respect an Unbeliever is a
Time-server: 1 Timothy 4.2. He speaks lies in hypocrisy. If any new Doctrine may
but swell the man up in his own Name, or in his Estate, he makes no bones of
it, to speak lies in hypocrisy.

6. Apostasy.
Sixthly, another dangerous sin (the fruit of Unbelief and of Heresy) is,
Apostasy, or falling off from the Truth. For by the same reason that an
Unbeliever may fall from one Article of his professed Faith, he may come in
time to fall from all. For if his Religion be no more but a State-Profession;
then, in case the State changes Religion where he lives, his Religion is
changed also. And such is the Religion of all such People as are either
extremely simple, or extremely wise, (I mean) worldly wise, they know no other
Religion than the State owns, and that is as good as no Religion at all; because
the State owns it, it is vain to him: For though that be supposed to be true
which the State owns; yet when a man owns it not, because it is true, but
because the State owns it, Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.9.
it is vain to him In vain, says God, do they worship me, whilst their fear
toward me is taught by the precepts of men.

7. Atheism.
The seventh and the last dangerous sin, is downright Atheism, when men grow to
that height of Profaneness, to deny God and his Word. Lo, here is descensus
Averni, those slippery and dangerous stairs of Unbelief, Prove. 5.5.
by which men depart from the living God, and go down to Hell. Heb. 3.12. Take
heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God. And thus you see this sin of Unbelief its a
Mother sin, its exceeding prolifical in a dangerous brood of Vipers, that
without Repentance will sting the sinner to death.

And further, as Unbelief is a fertile Mother to all sin: so it is a cruel
Stepmother to all Grace. Unbelief a Stepmother to Grace.
An Unbeliever cannot love God, because he cannot cast himself upon the love of
God. Joh. 5.42. Christ says to the unbelieving Jews, But I know you, that ye
have not the love of God in you. An Unbeliever cannot submit with patience to
the afflicting hand of God; and therefore Unbelief and Murmuring against God,
are ever joined together. An Unbeliever cannot pray for what he wants: Prayer
is the daughter of Faith; How shall they call on him, on whom they have not
believed? Romans 10. An Unbeliever cannot be thankful for any mercy received:
unless by Faith a man sees his interest in the Giver, he can never be thankful
for the Gift. Psalm. 118.28. Thou art my God, and I will praise thee; thou art
my God, I will exalt thee: As if he should have said, Lord, thou have bestowed
thy self, as well as thy Benefits upon me; and therefore I have found in my
heart to praise thy Name In a word, an unbeliever cannot perform any acceptable
service to God; you must make the tree good, before the fruit can be good, Mat.
7 18. and we are only made good trees by Faith: For by Faith we are grafted or
planted into Christ, without whose powerful influence we can bring forth no
acceptable fruit to God. Joh. 15.3. Abide in me, and I in you: as the branch
cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye,
except ye abide in me. We may indeed bring forth wild grapes, and sour grapes
of our selves; but the sweet grapes of New Obedience, and such as may be
pleasant to Gods own palate, we can never bring forth, till we are planted into
Christ by Faith: For without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.

Add to this, in the sixth place, 6. Unbelief the Nurse of sin.
That as unbelief is the Mother of all sins: so it is the Nurse that maintains
and keeps life in every sin, it binds every sin upon the Soul, both in the
guilt and power of it. Where there is no Faith, there can be no true evidence
of forgiveness of sins: for, Men receive forgiveness of sins by faith in
Christ, Acts 26.18.

7. Judgments on unbelievers.
Seventhly, and lastly, consider the Judgment that hangs over the heads of
unbelievers, if it be but partial unbelief, I mean, the distrusting of God in
any particular Promise (though we have Faith in the main to believe the
reconcilement of our persons to God) yet even that partial unbelief may deprive
us of many sweet mercies on this side heaven. Isa. 30.15. In quietness and
confidence shall be your strength. A man of an unquiet and unbelieving Spirit,
may create much trouble to himself in this present life. Moses was a man in the
state of Grace yea, and in so great favor with God, that the Scripture gives
this testimony of him, Deuteronomy. 34.10. There arose not a Prophet since in Israel
like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face. Yet this Moses for a
particular passage of unbelief, in speaking hastily to the people, Number. 20.8,
11.12.
when he should have spoke to the Rock; and in striking the Rock, when he
should but only have spoke to it; I say, for this particular passage of
unbelief, he was shut out of the Land of Canaan, though he was not shut out of
Heaven: yea, though he had a strong desire to enter in, and expressed this desire
by an earnest Prayer; Deuteronomy. 3.25, etc. I pray thee let me go over, and see the
good land that is beyond Jordan, that goodly Mountain, and Lebanon. Lo, this
was his last and great request to God; yea, but for all that, he must not go
over: for so it followed in the Text, But the Lord was wroth with me for your
sakes, and would not hear me; and the Lord said unto me, Let it suffice thee,
speak no more unto me of this matter, thou shall not go over this Jordan. And
Moses may thank his unbelief for all this: Numb. 20.12. The Lord spoke unto
Moses and Aaron, Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the
children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this Congregation into the
land which I have given them. And thus you see, that even partial unbelief may
deprive us of many sweet mercies on this side Heaven. How many thousands, as
well as Moses and Aaron, were cut short of Canaan for their unbelief, and
murmuring against God? And the Lord forgive the sin of this present Generation
in this respect, who are even ready to run back into Egypt, because God has
brought them into the Wilderness, in the present Dispensations of Providence.

O the danger of unbelief, though it be but in some particular Promise! O how
dangerous then is that total and universally reigning Unbelief, when we believe
nothing at all, when we have not so much as laid hold of any Promise to make
peace with God! Partial unbelief deprives us of many Mercies on this side
Heaven; but total unbelief deprives men of Heaven it self: Mark 16.16. He that
believes not shall be damned. O the misery of that poor Soul, that never yet
believed one Promise! O that we could even with Soul-bleeding tears bewail our
unbelief! O that God would give to each of us a heart to get into a corner, and
to weep in secret over our unbelief, each man bemoaning himself as Ephraim did,
Jer. 31.18. O that I should have such a stiff neck, such a base hard
unbelieving heart! O that I should spend so much time to so little purpose, for
death has possessed all that part of my life wherein I was an unbeliever. The
heathen man could say, O Friends, we have lost a day! but many of us may say, O
Friends, we have lost many days, and many years, wherein we have done God
little or no service; nay, a great deal of disservice by our unbelief! O that I
should be so foolish and slow of heart to believe all that Lord has spoke by
his Prophets and Apostles! Luke 24.25.
O how justly may God upbraid me for my unbelief, Mark 16.14.
etc. that I should be so backward to believe the God of Truth, and so forward
to believe the Father of Lies! Blessed Savior, lay not this great sin, this
Mother-sin, to my charge, which is the Mother of Abominations. Thus should we
pray: Consider not how often I have dishonored thy Majesty, and grieved thy
holy Spirit by my unbelief? But, O thou Mirror of Patience and Pity, who did
sometimes mourn over the People, because of the hardness of their hearts, Mar.
3.5. I beseech thee, let that be the object of thy Pity, which might be the
object of thy Fury! O pity, and heal mine unbelieving heart! Doubtless, if we
can but thus bemoan and bewail our selves in our unbelief, that God, who made
good that gracious Promise to him that went on frowardly in the way of his
heart, I have seen his ways, and I will heal him, Isa. 57.18. will much more
make it good to such an one as with all his heart, and with all his soul,
bewails his own frowardness and backwardness to believe; I will restore comfort
to him and his mourners.

Use VI. Of Exhortation.
Of Exhortation.
The next Use, is for Exhortation: 1. For our selves. 2. For others.


For our selves:

1. To persuade us to labor to get Faith: As Solomon says of Wisdom, with all
thy getting, get wisdom: So with all thy getting, get Faith, for it is thy life.

2. To keep it when we have it, Non minor est virtus, etc. It is no less a
piece of Spiritual good husbandry, to keep our stock of Faith when we have it,
than to get it at the first.

3. To live by it, or use it, as well as to keep it. Its far better to put our
Faith to use, than our Money to use. The Just makes a living of his Faith,
whilst he puts it to use.

4. So to live by it, as not to live barely and poorly, but so as to increase
the stock of our Faith. Faith is such an excellent grace, we can never have too
much of it; he that increases his Faith, increases his livelihood: For the
just shall live by his Faith.

First therefore, labor to get Faith. Branch I. To get faith.
There are many things that men labor to obtain in the world: Some are all for
their Profits, others for their Pleasures, others for their Preferment; and so
every man as his Principle leads him. But when all is done, nothing is so
worthy of our diligence and best endeavors, as is the getting of Faith. Should
a man gain all other things, and lose this, he makes a hard bargain: Mat. 16.^6.
For what shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own soul.
Should a man lose all the rest, and gain this, he makes a wise bargain: Job 2.4.
Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life. Now Faith is
the very life of the Soul; For the just shall live by his faith: and therefore,
with all thy getting, get Faith; it is thy life. Should a man hear of such a
Medicine as would certainly preserve his life, and cure all manner of Diseases,
whither would he not travel? what would he not give, to procure such a
Medicine? And such a Medicine is Faith, commended unto us from the hand of our
heavenly Physician; Be of good comfort, says Christ, Luke 7.50. and 17.19.
thy faith has saved thee; and, Thy faith has healed thee. Faith is a Remedy
against all diseases: yea, suppose a faithful man dies of his disease, yet his
Faith is a Remedy against death it self. Woe is me, says the natural man,
there is no friend against death: But blessed be God, says the true believer,
for to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. Phil. 1.21.
The greatest of evils, is turned into the greatest good by Faith; even death
it self is made advantage. Who would not labor for such a Grace? What should I
say, to raise the price of Faith in your esteem: What do we esteem instead of
Faith? Certainly the best of men, and the best of blessings, are but dead
things without Faith: Faith puts life into a man, and into all that a man
enjoys; Without faith, men of high degree are a lie; Psalm. 62.9.
and so are all those things which make them so high: Honors, Profits,
Pleasures, all these promise much; O say they, we'll make thee a happy man, if
thou will set thy heart on us: But they lie when they say so. Jon. 2.8. They
that follow after lying vanities, forsake their own mercy. If thou would not
forsake thine own mercies, labor for Faith. He is merciful to the purpose,
that is merciful to his own Soul, Prove. 11.17. and that man is the most
desperate Self-murtherer, that is willing to live and die in his unbelief. I
beseech you, I beseech you Friends, listen to the voice of your Immortal Souls:
Methinks every man now and then should hear the voice of his precious Soul,
crying out in this manner, Am I not the most excellent piece of Gods
Workmanship? And did God make me so for nothing? Is not my being to continue to
everlasting? Do I not feel in my self the very spark of Immortality? Must I not
be either happy or miserable to all Eternity? Is there but one means under
Heaven to make me happy, which is to get Faith; and shall I neglect that? Is
this the great Work that God has given me in charge, that I should believe in
him whom he has sent, Joh. 6.29. and shall I do evething else before I do
this? Is my life but as a day in this world, and the night of death coming on
so fast, wherein no man can work this great Work of God, Joh. 9.4.
and shall I trifle away my time, and dally with Eternity, and be cruel to my
self, where Charity should begin? Shall the blood of this Immortal Soul cry out
against me to all Eternity, because I would not hear the cry of it in time? And
I pray you, what is the cry of the Soul when it is most it self? O give me
Christ, says the enlightened Soul, or else I die! Give me Faith to apply him,
or I am undone for ever! I beseech you in this case, do not stop the mouth of
your Souls with Profits and Pleasures, and such kind of Trash, which is not
fit meat for an Immortal Soul to feed upon, but labor to get that which thy
Soul cries for, that thou may say, Psa. 116.7.
Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee. That Is without all question, there can be no comfortable life in thy
Soul, till there be Faith in the Soul: without Faith thou art but a dead man,
and all thy works no better than dead works: for, The just shall live by his
faith.

O consider it, friends, in time; if you get Faith, you are made for ever; if
you live and die without it, you have undone your selves to all Eternity. The
Heathen wondered to see how much one man excelled another. It Is most true in
regard of Faith; How much does a Believer excel an Unbeliever! When God weighs
men in the Balance, he weighs their Spirits, Prove. 16.2. and when he weighs
their Spirits, he ponders how much Faith is in their Spirits: O woman, great is
thy faith; great is thy Faith in me, and so great is my esteem of thee, Be it
unto thee, even as thou will, Mat. 15.28. If you can say, Such a man is a
Believer in sincerity, you say all that can be said: What is of worth, or what
is of true price in all the world, The excellencies of believing.
but you may find it in a true Believer?

To instance in some Particulars:

1. Do we prize Strength? If you speak of strength, 1. Strength. Job 9.19.
he is strong indeed; as Job says, for he is clothed with the strength of God:
As a Prince he has a power with God and with men, to prevail in his
undertakings, Genesis 32.28. The actings of Gods Power toward us, are answerable
to the actings of our Faith toward him: Mat. 9.29.
According to your faith, be it unto you, says Christ, when he was about to
open the eyes of the blind men. Faithful men, are wonder-working men in the
world; these are the people that do the great exploits (as Daniel speaks.) Look
into Heb. 11. there you shall see a Catalogue of their famous achievements: By
Faith Abel, and Noah, and Abraham, and the rest of those renowned Worthies, did
thus and thus: The greatest Exploits of the most daring Heathens, are but empty
vapors to these. O beloved, there is a kind of Omnipotency in Faith. Mark.
9.23.
All things are possible to him that believes, because faith in the promise
believing the truth of God, it also sets the power of God on work in way of
providence. It engages God according to his promife to take part with a weak
believing Creature, and so it does things above created strength in the power
of God. As that witty child sometimes said he could rule all Athens; for,
says he, I can rule my Mother, and my Mother can rule my Father, and my Father
can rule Athens: So Faith can go as far as the Promises, and the Promise can go
as far as we can ask or think, and farther too, and that is as much as is any
ways needful for the good of the Church, or of any particular Member thereof in
any condition they can be cast into: And what can we desire more, than to have
whatever we desire, that may be for Gods glory, or our own good. And hence it
is that Faith is so powerful in Prayers for the obtaining of good, and for the
removing of evil, and for the subduing of enemies. Men that are strong in the
Faith, are mighty in Prayer: The Prayer of Faith draws near with holy boldness
to the Throne of Grace, Ephesians. 3.12. And it will have no nay; Let me go, says
God; I will not let you go, says Faith, except you bless me, Genesis 32.26. It is
a mavelous large Promise, that Christ makes to a believing Prayer: Mark
11.24. What things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them,
and ye shall have them. We read of Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.15. that he made strong
Towers, and upon those Towers he planted Engines invented by cunning men, to
shoot Arrows and great stones upon his enemies. And thus the Name of the Lord
is a strong Tower, Prove. 18.10. Faith is like a mighty Engine, planted upon the
top of this Tower, which laying hold of the Promise of God, sends forth such a
volley of shot, such a volley of Prayers, that it fires the power of God
against the enemies, and discomfits mighty, Armies. The Devil himself cannot
stand before a Prayer of Faith; Whom resist, steadfast in the faith: 1 Pet. 5.9.
Jam. 4.7.
Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you. And although we have that within
us, that is worse than the Devil (our own corruptions) for all the Devils in
Hell could not hurt us, had they not intelligence from, and compliance with our
own corrupt and deceitful hearts within us) yet even those strong corruptions
of ours, like the mighty walls of Jericho, shall fall down by degrees before
the Prayer of Faith. Hebrews 11.30. By faith the walls of Jericho fell, after
they were compassed about seven days. And what if in stead of so many days, it
proves so many years, or so many weeks of years, yet down they shall, as sure
as God has spoken it, if we can but believe it: Mic. 7.19. He will subdue our
iniquities. Corruption is not so strong to resist Faith, but Faith is stronger
for the subduing of Corruption. If you speak of strength, a true Believer is
strong indeed, he triumphs over Sin, over Satan, over the World This is the
victory that overcomes the world, even our faith, 1 John 5 4. In a word,
Tantum possumus, quantum credimus: The Christian can do as much as he can
believe upon good grounds; Romans 8.37.
He is more than a Conqueror through Faith in Christ Jesus: Whereas an
unbeliever is a poor weak creature; Ezekiel. 16.30. How weak is thy heart? says
God to Jerusalem, in the state of her Apostasy and Unbelief. Unbelief cuts the
very sinews of the Soul; it enervates the strongest Arm of created strength;
nay, it weakens the Arm of Christ himself. It is a strange passage that you
read, Mark 6.5, 6. He could there do no mighty work, because of their
unbelief. As unbelief binds our hands from doing service to Christ: so unbelief
binds Christ's hands from doing good to us, till such time as he is pleased to
set us at liberty to believe. An unbeliever is a poor weak creature; but a
believer is strong in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.10.
and in the power of his might.

Secondly, Do we prize Wisdom? 2. Wisdom.
If you speak of wisdom, he is wise indeed, who puts his trust in the Lord, and
lives by Faith in him. Solomon tells us of a wise man, who under God, lives by
his wisdom, and preserves the life of others, Eccles. 9.15. And so the Just
lives, etc. And of four despicable creatures, that yet are admirable for
wisdom, Prove. 30.23, etc. There be four things (says he) which be little upon
the earth, but they are exceeding wise; amongst the rest, he tells us the
Conies (or as some read it) the Mice of the Mountains) are a feeble people,
yet they make their houses in the Rocks; that so the strength of the Rock may
supply the defect of strength in themselves. And indeed, there is the wisdom of
a true believer, he is a wise builder, that builds his house upon the Rock,
Mat. 7.24. and that Rock is Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. And he that believes in him,
builds upon him; and he that builds upon him, shall never fall, The gates of
Hell shall never prevail against him, and therefore he is a wise builder: Psalm
125. They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, which cannot be
removed, but abides for ever: whereas he is a fool with a witness, who
despising this Rock by his unbelief, builds Castles in the Air, trusting to his
Wit, or Wealth, or created Strength in time of need. Behold, says the former
part of the Verse, his Soul which is lifted up, in Arce, as in a Tower of
created Confidence, his Soul is not right, he is not right in his wits indeed:
But the just shall live by his faith, because he is so wise to build upon the
true Rock; the other is a Fool, he is Chronicled for a Fool, that trusts to his
wealth, Luke 12.20. And the wise man sets out the folly of such persons, who
trusts in any thing but the Name of the Lord, which is the only strong Tower
of Safety; and therefore in the very next words he has this expression, Prove.
18.11. The rich man's wealth is his strong City, and an high wall in his own
conceit. Mark those words, in his own conceit: as if he should say, What a mad
conceit is this, for a man to trust to his wealth; there is no man would ever do
so: he is a very conceited fool, that puts his trust in his wealth; but he is a
wise man, that lives by faith, and puts his trust in the Name of the Lord: This
man builds upon the Rock indeed, but the other is a foolish builder, for he
lays his foundation in the Sands, in the quicksands of worldly Comforts, that
are here to day, and gone to morrow. Do we prize Wisdom? Then, O let us prize
Faith. Remember, the wise Virgins were the believing Virgins; the foolish
Virgins were the unbelieving Virgins: They had Lamps indeed, but they had no
Oil; they made Profession of Faith in their lives, but they had no truth of
Faith in their hearts. Wicked men indeed account Gods people very fools,
because they live all upon Promise from God, and refuse the present Profits and
Pleasures of sin. But let them say what they will, you must give losers leave
to talk, they shall one day befool themselves. When all is done, the believer
will prove the wise man in the end: for when he that is so wise, to make
himself ready beforehand to go in with the Bridegroom, such as are unprepared
shall be shut out, like fools as they are. No question but Noah was accounted
the veriest fool in all the world all the time the Ark was preparing, 2 Pet.
3.3, 4, 5. But when the Flood came in earnest and the Scoffers being put to
their shifts upon the tops of the Mountains and Trees, begin to cry out to
Noah, For the Lords sake receive us into your Ark, might he not justly have
repl^ed, Who is the fool now? O beloved, when Poverty, and Sickness, and Death
it self, comes like an armed man upon your jolly Scoffers at Religion, who will
prove the fools then? Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings; be instructed, Psalm.
2. last.
ye Judges of the Earth: Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish in the
way; when his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are they that put their
trust in him. Doubtless, he will prove the wisest man in the conclusion, that
lives by Faith in God. This is the man that has protection from God in
dangerous times; This is the man that has direction from God in dark and
obscure times. And surely, he is a wise man, that leans not to his own carnal
wisdom, but trusts in the Lord for guidance and direction: And thus does every
true believer, whilst unbelievers are wise in their own conceit, and consult
with flesh and blood upon Principles of Profit, Credit, and the like, and so
the threatening takes hold upon them: Isa. 5.21. Woe unto them that are wise in
their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight; for such shall be sure to fall
by their own counsels. On the other side, such as live by Faith in God, as they
deny themselves in other things: so by Faith they are taught to deny their own
wisdom, and to lay hold upon Jesus Christ for direction in all their ways, and
so the Promise is made good to them: Christ is made unto them Wisdom. As he is
made their Righteousness, Strength and Redemption: So he is made their Wisdom,
1 Cor. 1.3. He is made their Counselor in all their doubts, that is his Name,
Isa. 9 6. Beloved, as there are certain special times, wherein God will let us
see our need of him for other things; he brings us sometimes into sickness,
that we may cry to him, who is the God of our health and salvation; he brings
us into poverty, that we may acknowledge him to be the God of our Plenty; he
brings us into thraldom, that we may see in how much need we stand of him for
our liberty; he brings us into great dangers, that we may see how much need we
stand of his Power for our protection and preservation: So he brings us
sometimes into the dark, or into some inextricable wilderness, that we may see
how much we stand in need of his Wisdom for our direction. As God does many
times Nonplus the Power of the creature: So he does Nonplus the wisdom of the
creature, that it may live by Faith in him for direction and counsel. As the
Mother leaves the child in the dark, or steps aside at a cross way, that the
child may cry after her, and acknowledge its beholdingness to her for guidance
and direction: So deals God with his children in dark and difficult times. And
if ever Gods People had need to live by Faith in him for direction, surely in
these times, wherein many things are very obscure, and the wisest of men are at
a stand. How does it concern us, at such times as these to improve our Faith in
God by Prayer, grounded upon his Promises for our direction? A believer acting
his Faith, has great advantage of an unbeliever; an unbeliever is froward and
passionate, and heady and hasty, when he is put to plunge, he waits not for the
Counsel of God, Psalm. 106.13. He leaps before he looks, before he has eyes to
see his way; but a believer is quiet and confident, and silent and patient, and
prayerful, Psa. 113.2.
and standing upon his Watchtower, to see what God will answer at such a time.
Never did the eye of a servant look with more intention to the hand of his
Master, nor the eyes of a maiden to the hand of her Mistress, observing every
little cast of their eye, every little beck of their finger, than the eyes of
the faithful look to the hand and eye of God for their direction in difficult
times: They look to the Promise of God, for direction from the Word of God.
Psa. 119.105.
This Word is a lamp unto their feet, and a light unto their paths; and if the
Word be dark in any thing, they look to the Promise of the Spirit, for the
right understanding of the word: Isa. 30 21. Thine ears shall hear a word
behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it: when ye turn to the right
hand, and when ye turn to the left. Now this Promise is made good by Faith;
Psa. 119.98. Ibid. 24.
so that a Believer is made wiser than his enemies, because Gods Testimonies
are his Counselors. He must needs be wise, who has the God of all Wisdom to
be his Counselor. And this is the Portion of a true believer. If you speak of
Wisdom, HE is wise.

Thirdly, Do we prize Riches? 3. Riches of Faith.
(for I dare not oppose a believer to a rich man, as if they were incompatible;
though I oppose him to such an one as trusts in his riches) If we speak of
Riches, HE is rich indeed. As a man lives upon his Riches under God: so the
Just lives by his Faith: Hearken, my beloved brethren, Jam. 2.5. has not God
chosen the poor of this world rich in faith? A man may be a rich man, though he
be a poor man; rich heavenward, though poor in respect of this world, so long
as he is rich in Faith; that man can want nothing, that wants not Faith: Faith
is the golden Key that opens the good Treasury of God to his Children upon
all occasions, they can but ask and have. O the preciousness of Faith, that is
able to procure the most precious things at the hand of God! Worldly men use to
say, A man well stored with Money, can want nothing, and Solomon has something
to that purpose, Eccles. 10.19. Money answers all things. A man may have most
things for money, Meat, Drink, Clothes, House, Land: and what not? But a
gracious heart can more truly say, A man well stored with Faith, can want
nothing; Faith answers all things: as Adonijah said to Bathsheba, The King
cannot say thee nay in any thing, 1 King. 2.17. So may I say to a faithful man,
The King of Heaven cannot say thee nay in any thing. It is very observable,
that Abraham (when he interceded in the behalf of Sodom) did cease to act his
Faith in Prayer, before God did cease to gratify Abraham in the thing praid
for. Praying believers, they are or may be the richest beggars in the world, As
having nothing, and yet possessing all things, 2 Cor. 6.10. It may seem a
strange Paradox, and yet it is good sense: Extreme Poverty, and sublime Plenty,
may concur: His poverty is but comparative, as having nothing; but his riches
are absolute, without a quasi, and yet possessing all things: All things are
yours, says the Apostle to believers, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods,
1 Cor. 3.21. A believer is a rich man indeed, he is rich in present possession,
but he is richer in reversion: All the Promises of God are entailed upon
believers; these are the Saints Legacies, none can lay claim to them, but such
as do believe: for, All the promises of God are Yea and Amen in Christ, they
are only made good to such as do believe in him, 2 Cor. 1.20. That man that is
a stranger to Christ, is also a stranger to the Covenant of Promise, Ephesians. 2.12.
and he that has right in Christ, has right also to the Promises through him.
There are great riches above-ground, but they say there are greater
underground, in the rich Mines of Silver and Gold, that lie still within the
bowels of the Earth. So it is true, the people of God are rich in what they do
already enjoy through Faith, but they are far richer in those inestimable
Treasures that are locked up within the bowels of so many precious Promises; one
Promise is more worth than a thousand worlds: And Faith is ever digging in
these Mines, and making new discoveries of the richest Mercies; it is ever
putting some Promise or other in Suit, or God is ever discharging some Bond or
other, for the enriching of his poor creatures.

Fourthly, Do we prize Beauty and Comeliness? 4. Beauty of Faith.
If you speak of Beauty, a true believer is truly Beautiful; all external
beauty is but deformity without this: Like as a Jewel in a Swines snow^, so is
a creature externally beautiful without Grace and without Faith; it is Faith
only that makes the creature beautiful; it is Faith that puts upon the deformed
creature the rich and glorious Robes of the Righteousness of Christ; it is Faith
that puts upon the creature the very Image and Likeness of Christ, and
therefore they that do believe in Christ, are said to put on Christ, Gal. 3.26,
27. And they must needs be beautiful and glorious, that are clothed with the
Sun of Righteousness: Mal. 4.2.
Ezekiel. 16.13, 14. Thou wast exceeding beautiful, thy beauty was perfect through
my comeliness which I put upon thee, says the Lord. Yea, mark those words,
says the Lord, whose judgment is always according to Truth. The blind world
can no more judge of Beauties, than a blind man can judge of Colors; but a
believer is beautiful in his sight, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, and can
see when the Kings daughter is all glorious within. Psa. 48.
This is a beauty that takes the eye, and ravisheth the heart of Christ
himself: Cant. 4.1, 7. Behold, thou art fair my love, behold thou art fair,
thou have Doves eyes; there is no spot or blemish in thee. The Believer is
truly beautiful.

5. Honor.
Fifthly, Do we prize Honor? If we speak of Honor, a believer is honorable
indeed. We may call believers Right Honorable, Psa. 149.9. Phil. 3.
without flattery, as it is written, Such Honor have all the Saints. The glory
of others, many times, proves their shame; but that which may seem to be the
shame of a Christian, Faith turns it into glory: Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I
should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world: 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye be reproached for
the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests
upon you. And if there be so much glory in the very sufferings and reproach of
a believer, what is the glory then which they shall receive after their
sufferings, and in a gracious recompense of their sufferings: for, If we suffer
with him, we shall also be glorified together with him, Romans 8.17. O the glory
of a true believer! Where ever there is Christ in a creature, there is glory in
a creature: Christ in you the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. and not only the hope,
but by the vision of Faith there is a present Transformation from glory to
glory, as by the Spirit of our God, 2 Cor. 3.18. Thus a believer is truly
honorable. Isa. 43.4. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been
honorable.

6. Faith honors God.
Sixthly, Do thou desire to honor God in thy Place and Calling? (for a
gracious heart is not so careful of his own glory, as of the glory of God) O
that I could but honor God in my Place, says a gracious heart, I should then
be the less careful in other things! Why this is the only way to put honor
upon God, upon the Truth, upon the Power, upon the All Sufficiency of God. He
that is strong in the faith, gives much glory to God, Romans 4.18. And this is
that which the Saints prefer before their own Salvation: Joh. 12.28.
Whatever become of us, they say (as Christ said) Father, glorify thy Name.
It Is true, Faith is highly to be prized, because it is an instrument of our
Salvation: Ephesians. 2.8. Ye are saved by faith; but it is much more to be esteemed,
as being such a special instrument of the glory of God. Joh. 11.40. Said I not
unto thee, that if thou would believe, thou should see the glory of God?
They that believe, as they bring more glory to God than other men do; so they
see more of Gods glory than others can see. And that is a sixth Consideration
that should move us to labor for Faith, it brings abundance of glory to God.
Many other Considerations might be added.

Seventhly, Without this we are but dead men: 7. Dead without Faith.
Faith and Life come into the Soul both at once. All other Life will soon
decay; our very natural Life is but a continued drawing on to Death; but our
spiritual Life, the longer it continues, the stronger it grows.

Eighthly, 8. Faith makes to prosper.
This is the only way to prosper in all we possess, and in all we take in
hand. 2 Chronicles. 20.20. Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established;
believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper. It Is true, wicked men and
unbelievers may prosper after a sort, they may prosper as fatted Beasts in the
stall prosper against the day of slaughter: The prosperity of fools shall slay
them, Prove. 1.32. They are cursed in their very Blessings: But a true believer
does prosper in Soul, Joh. Ep. 3.
as well as in his Body or Estate, his Prosperity is sanctified, and all that
he possesses is pure and clean to him, but to the defiled and unbelieving is
nothing pure, but even their meat and drink, yea even their mind and
conscience is defiled, Tit. 1.15. If a believer be cast into straits, Faith is
that which brings submission to the Will of God, and a sweet contentation with
the present condition. Phil. 4.11. it was the speech of a believer, I have
learned in whatsoever state I am therewith to be content. Faith lets the
believer see the present condition is best for him; and therefore he is the
better content with it. On the other side, where there is want of Faith, there
are perpetual discontents, every little thing troubles such a creature. A
galled back is soon hurt. Number. 14.11. How long will it be ere this people
believe me, (says God) of the murmuring Israelites in the Wilderness? An
unbelieving heart is evermore an unquiet, and a discontented heart. He that
does not enjoy God by Faith, how is it possible he should be satisfied with
Creature-enjoyments, especially in the midst of Creature-discontents? Faith is
that which sweetens our very Natural Life; how much more then that which is
Spiritual and Supernatural? Would thou be assured that Christ is thine? Faith
in due time will give thee this assurance: for, Christ dwells in the heart by
faith, Ephesians. 3.17. Would thou be assured thou art a Child of God, and may
come in for a Child's Portion? Faith will give thee this assurance also: Joh.
1.12. To as many as received him, he gave power to be the Sons of God, even to
as many as believe on his Name. Would thou receive more abundance of the
Spirit of Christ Jesus? Faith is a Conduit-pipe, in which this heavenly water
delights to run: Joh. 7.38. He that believes on me (says Christ) out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water: This spoke he of the Spirit, which
they that believe on him should receive. Certainly, the Life of Faith is the
most excellent Life that any Creature can live upon the face of the Earth.

Note.
In a word, Remember what you have heard in many Sermons. Do you desire to be
presented Just and Righteous before the Throne of God? you must labor to get
Faith then; for, by Faith a Creature lives the Life of Justification. Do you
desire to be sanctified throughout in Body, Soul, and Spirit? you must learn
then to get Faith: without doubt, the more Faith the more Holiness: for, The
Just lives by Faith the Life of Sanctification. Do you desire to be more
abundant in Good Works than ever you have been? Learn then to get Faith: for,
By Faith the Just lives the Life of Fructification. Do you desire to have your
Corruptions subdued, and your sinful lusts (that fight against the Soul)
mortified? Learn then to get Faith: for, By Faith the Just lives the Life of
Mortification. Do you complain of the Dullness and Deadness of your hearts in
holy Duties, and do you desire above all things to be more quick and lively in
the Service of God? Learn then to live by Faith: for, By Faith the Just lives
the Life of Vivification. The more Faith, the more Life in all holy Duties. Do
you bewail your Leanness, and Vnprofitableness, and Unthriving disposition
under the plentiful means of Grace, and is it the desire of your Souls to
increase and grow up, as the Calves of the stall? Mal. 4.2.
Learn then to get Faith: for, By Faith the Just lives the Life of
Augmentation. Gal. 3.3.
Are you afraid lest you should fall off from God, and having begun in the
Spirit, should at the last end in the flesh, and do you earnestly desire to be
settled, stablish'd and confirmed, that the gates of Hell may not prevail
against you? Labor then to live by Faith? for, By Faith the Just lives the
Life of Conservation. Again, Does sorrow possess and oppress your spirits? O
you are burdened with such and such afflictions or temptations, and you would
fain live a comfortable life! Learn then to get Faith: for, By Faith the Just
lives the Life of Consolation. Again, are you troubled when you begin to think
of Death? O how shall I do to walk through the valley of the shadow of Death!
Psalm. 23.4.
would you fain be armed against the Terror of it? O learn then to get Faith:
for, By Faith the Just finds Life in the midst of Death. He that lives in
Faith, shall undoubtedly die in Faith; Heb. 11.13. All these died in the faith.
Again, Does the shortness and uncertainty of this life afflict the Spirit, and
thou would fain be assured of a better life, before thou partest with this
present life; thou would fain know if thou shall go to heaven when thou
die? O learn then to live by Faith; for, By Faith the just lives in regard of
Eternal Life. O let the excellency of the Life of Faith, move us to seek the
grace of Faith with all diligence. The life of a faithful man is as far above
the Life of a Rational man, as the life of a Rational man is above the life of
a Sensual Epicure. Some men indeed are merely led by Sense, and ever like Swine
rooting in the dunghill of Earthly Profits and Pleasures; others mount higher
into the Middle Region of Reason and Humane Learning: but a Believer soars
above them all in the Highest Region of Faith, Phil. 3.20.
and has his conversation in heaven, from whence he expects the Lord Jesus
Certainly, all the enemies of our Salvation cannot make that man miserable,
that has once obtained this precious grace of Faith: Psalm. 2.12. Blessed are
all they that put their trust in him. And therefore what Solomon says of
Wisdom, Prove. 3.13, 14, 15.
we may say of Faith, Happy is the man that finds Faith, for the merchandise
thereof is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof is
better than gold: she is more precious than pearls, and all the things thou
can desire, are not to be compared unto her.

Obj. But it may be some will be ready to say, I am sufficiently persuaded of
the excellency of Faith, and I would fain get it, How to get Faith.
if I knew how or where to find it: but may we not also say of Faith, as Job
says of Wisdom, Job 28.12. Where shall it be found, and where is the place of
it? The Depth says, It is not in me; and the Sea says, It is not with me:
neither is it to be found in the Land of the living. No creature in Heaven or
Earth can bestow Faith upon its fellow creature: O where then is it to be found?

Ans. I answer as Job does in the the 23 Verse of that Chapter, God
understands the way thereof, and he knows the place thereof. And therefore
if we be careful to make use of such means as he does direct, we shall
undoubtedly find out this precious Pearl of Faith.

Means. You will say, What are those Means, that we may use them?

Negat. 1. First of all, as Builders use to do, God would have us to remove the
Rubbish of all the Hindrances of Faith; and then to make use of all those
Spiritual Helps and Furtherances that God has appointed for the begetting of
Faith, that we may lay a sure Foundation.

The Lets and Hindrances of Faith, are many, Lets and hindrances of Faith.
which we must take notice of and labor to remove out of the way. What Is the
reason so much is daily spoken of Faith, and we are it may be convinced of the
necessity and excellency of it, and yet very few, in comparison, attain to it,
or improve it to any purpose? What Is the reason of this? O there are many
Hindrances of Faith, which were never yet removed! O beloved, we are naturally
dead in sins and trespasses, and there is many a heavy stone lies upon the
mouth of the Grave: and we may say, with those good women, Mark 16.3. Who shall
roll us away the stone from the door of the Sepulcher? All those several
Impediments of Faith, are as so many great stones upon the mouth of the Grave,
which must be removed by the mighty power of the Angel of the Covenant, Mal.
3.1.
before we can believe. Have you not heard many a poor Creature complain (nay,
do you not hear those complaints in your own bosom?) Alas! alas! I have heard
of Faith by the hearing of the ear many a time and often; how many days, and
how many years has the Word of Faith, and the Doctrine of Faith sounded and
resounded in mine ears? and yet alas! to this very day I am not able to
believe, or at least to act and exercise my Faith as I ought to do. O that I
could meet with some good Messenger from God, one of a thousand that could tell
me where the stop lies, and how I should remove it! that would do for me, as
Jacob did for Rachel, Genesis 29.10. Help me to roll away the stone from the mouth
of the Well, that my thirsty Soul might drink of the water of life freely, Rev.
22.17.

Come we therefore to the Particular Impediments or Hindrances of Faith, and
the way to remove them.

1 Let. Self.
The first and the greatest Impediment is thy Self. Self is the greatest enemy
to Self in point of believing; the heaviest stone that lies upon the mouth of
the grave, is thy stony heart: for a stony heart is an unbelieving heart; and
an unbelieving heart must needs be the greatest enemy to Faith. Darkness is not
more opposite to light, than an unbelieving heart is opposite to Faith: and
such hearts are in all the Sons and Daughters of Adam by Nature. Adam indeed in
the state of Innocence, had power to believe whatsoever God spoke and to live
upon the Word of his Promise: but after the Fall, both he and his Posterity
lost this ability. Our very birth, in this respect, is no better than a death;
we are born in the very grave of unbelief, we are all shut up under the power
of it, Romans 11.32. O beloved, a hard, stout, proud heart, will not endure to
lay down Self, Self-wisdom, Self-righteousness, Self-greatness; but Faith is
nothing else but a laying down of Self-righteousness, with an humble submission
to accept of the Righteousness of God in Christ, Romans 10.3. O this goes
against the hair to a natural man! He cannot endure to strip himself of
Himself, and to become a poor empty nothing, that he may be filled with the
fullness of God in Christ.

And yet thus it must be if ever we believe: He that is wise in his own
conceit, 1 Cor. 3.18.
must become a fool, that he may be wise; and he that is rich, and increased
with spiritual goods in his own conceit, Rev. 3.17. Mat. 11.5, 6.
he must become poor, that he may be made rich. Unto the poor (says Christ)
the Gospel is preached, and blessed is he that shall not be offended in me. 2
Cor. 8.9.
O this offends a carnal heart, that he must become poor for Christ's sake, as
Christ became poor for his sake! that death is become the way to life, if ever
he mean to live, he must believe in a poor, despised, crucified Savior. Now
this a proud, perverse, unbelieving heart knows not how to stoop to; and such
a heart have all men by nature. And this is the first Impediment.

Well, but who shall remove this Impediment? how shall we roll away this stone
of an unbelieving heart?

I answer, If we would remove it, Cure.
we must labor to find it out, to confess it, to bewail it, and to pray
against it: And thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, Mat. 6. Psa. 4.
and shut the door; Commune with thine own heart, and be still: Make thy
complaint to God in private, pour out thy Soul before him, and say, O thou
blessed God of Truth, how have I wronged thee by my base, false and unbelieving
heart? What a heart have I, that can rely upon a great man, or a good man, if
I have his Word or his Bond, and yet cannot rely upon the great and the good
God, who keeps Mercy and Truth for ever, Psa. 146.
with them that are in Covenant with him; and has bound himself by Promise, by
Oath, by Seal, to be good and faithful to such as put their trust in him. O
that I should have such a base heart, to trust more to the Means, than to that
God who has ordained the Means, puts life into the Means! And yet such is the
baseness of my heart, that when I see any visible means for the producing of
such an effect, I am secure and confident: and when the outward means fail
(though God be ever the same) I am as fearful and diffident, as if I had no
hope at all! Is not this to trust to the Means, and to trust to the Creature,
in stead of trusting to God? Now when we have thus found out the unbelief of
our hearts, and bewailed it, we should pray to God that he would forgive it,
and subdue it for us. Just as the Parents of the Rebellious Son brought him to
the Magistrate: so should we bring our Rebellions and unbelieving hearts to
God, praying him to subdue them for us: We should pray him to roll away this
stone, even to take away our stony hearts, and to give us hearts of flesh, that
we may believe (according to his Promise, Ezekiel. 36.26.) and doubtless God will
remember his Word, for such as put his Promise in suit. And so much for the
first Impediment, and the Means to remove it.

2. Impediment of Faith. Satan.
The second Impediment is from Satan: He sails with the Wind and Tide of an
unbelieving heart, and labors, if it be possible, to keep us still under the
power of unbelief; he knows well enough they are under his power also. When
once they begin to believe, they are turned from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan to God, Acts 26.18. And therefore no sooner does the Soul
lay hold of the Promise, but Satan is forced to let his hold go: and therefore
the Devil fights neither against small nor great, 2 Chro. 18.30.
but against the grace of Faith above all the rest. If he can but strike the
Shield out of our hands, he will soon hit us, and wound us where he list. Nay, if
it be possible, he will prevent the very making and forming of this Shield.
Either thou shall have no Minister to preach of Faith, as 'twas the Policy of
the Philistims, they might have no Smith in Israel to frame their Weapons of
War, 1 Samuel 13.19.
that they might the better keep them in subjection: So it is the Policy of
Satan, we should have no Spiritual Smiths in Israel to help to frame this
Weapon of War, this Shield of Faith, Ephesians. 6.
that he may the better keep us under his power. Or if thou have such Ministers
as preach of Faith, if it be possible, he will raise up Prejudice in thy heart
against them, and against the Word which they preach. Therefore, Acts 13.8.
Elymas the Sorcerer (who is called a child of the Devil for that very thing)
he withstood the Apostles in the Work of their Ministry, seeking to turn away
the Deputy from the faith. Mark ye: why was the Devil so great an enemy to the
Preaching of the Word? because he was an enemy to the Faith of the Deputy. And
this is the second Impediment or Hindrance; The Devil he is an enemy to the
Faith of Gods People; he does what he can to persuade people to continue in
Ignorance and Unbelief.

2 Relief.
But well, How should we remove this Impediment? How should we roll away this
stone?

Why, Fly to him by Prayer, who by death destroyed him that had power of Death,
that is, the Devil, Heb. 2.14. who is able to cast out the strong man armed,
and is willing also, because he has promised, to tread down Satan under your
feet, Romans 16.20. Pray God, to rebuke Satan, when he casts into thy heart
thoughts of Blasphemy, or Unbelief, and say, Lord, are not these things
grievous to thy Spirit, as well as to mine? Does not Satan aim as much at thy
dishonor, as at my destruction? and therefore, if not for thy poor Creatures
sake (who is as a hunted Partridge upon the Mountains) yet for thy Names sake,
and for thy Honors sake, rebuke him. 1 Samuel 26.20.
If thou can but lift up thy heart to God in this or the like manner
doubtless God will answer thee in mercy, and he will answer Satan in fury, as
he does in the like case, Zech. 3.2. And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord
rebuke thee, O Satan; even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee: Is
not this a Brand snatched out of the fire? So will the Lord say, Is not this
poor Soul that waits upon mine Ordinance, as a Brand snatched out of the fire,
out of the fire of Hell, and the flames of an accusing Conscience? Have I
forewarned it by these Terrors to fly from the wrath to come, and to make peace
with me by Faith, Mat. 3.
and art thou so cruel and ma^^^ous to put it into the fire again, by holding
it under the power of Unbelief? The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, the Lord rebuke
thee; Even he that has chosen the Soul of the poor creature to Life and
Salvation, rebuke thee. And this is the second Impediment of Faith, and the
Means to remove it.

The third is from the World. 3. Impediment. The World.
The World and Faith are opposites; and either Faith must overcome the World,
or the World will overcome Faith. The World has profits, pleasures,
preferments, honors, on the one side, to allure thee; and reproaches, racks,
faggots, fire, on the other side, to terrify thee: The World tries both fair
means and soul means, to draw thee, or to drive thee from the Faith. Besides,
if either the Multitude, or the Pomp and Magnificence of such as reject the
Faith, may prevail with thee, the World will be sure to propound both, as a
scotch in the Wheel, and a clog to thy Faith: Joh. 7.48. Have any of the Rulers
or the Pharisees believed on him? As if they should say, Are you so mad to
believe on him, and to go in a singular way? Look about you in the world, and
you shall see there are not many men at least not many great and learned men,
that are so forward: Methinks you should be willing to do as the most do, and
then you shall be sure the fewest will blame you. Why should you be so foolish
to expose your self to the shame and hatred of the multitude? And this is the
third Discouragement and Hindrance of Faith, the World.

Well, but how should we remove this Impediment, how should we do to roll away
this stone?

3 Relief.
I answer, The best way to remove this stone, and Rock of Offense, is, To
remember that the Church of God is but a little Flock; Mat. 6.
and that the greatest number of men run headlong in the broad way that leads
to destruction: The multitude of offenders does no whit lessen, but rather
aggravate the offense. Remember the solemn charge of God, Thou shall not follow
a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2. He that sins with the multitude ^ust look
to suffer with the multitude: He that sins after the example of great men,
shall be greatly tormented. Its a sad thing to go to Hell for company: Its a
doleful Welcome, when Hell from beneath is moved for thee; for thee, I say, that
did sin after the example of the most of men, or the greatest of men. Hell
from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming, says the Prophet,
Isa. 14.9. It stirs up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones (or great
men) of the earth: All they shall speak, and say unto thee, Are you also become
weak as we, are you become like unto us? or as one of us. Mark ye: if there be
any triumph among damned Spirits, it is this, Even to insult over those, that
at last prove as miserable as themselves. You shall sometimes see such a
hellish disposition in wicked men, whilst they live upon earth: if they can but
do their Neighbors a mischief, they care not to do twice as much to themselves.
O how they triumph, if they can but drink and swagger others into the like
shame with themselves; and rail and revile others into the same passion, and
play and game others into the same poverty! O what is this wicked practice, but
even Hell above-ground! For this is the language of Hell, Art thou become like
one of us, etc! especially when they can draw a Professor into sin, and by sin
into judgment. Oh! how they triumph at such a prize, What, art thou become as
one of us! Thou that did walk like a Saint upon earth; thou that did shine
like Lucifer the bright Morning Star; thou that were eminent in the Profession,
and it may be in the preaching of the Faith, how art thou fallen from thy
heavenly condition? How art thou fallen from thy professed Faith into Unbelief,
and by Unbelief into the Bottom of Hell? Lo, this is the triumph of the damned
Spirits. Look as there is Joy in Heaven among the blessed Angels over one
sinner that r^penteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, Luke 15.
which need no amendment of life: So there is triumph in Hell amongst Apostate
Angels over one eminent Professor that falls from the Faith into the
condemnation of Unbelievers, more than over ninety and nine wicked persons,
that never made any such hopeful Profession. O remember how Hell it self will
laugh thee to scorn, if thou shall follow a multitude to do evil! This is the
shameful welcome those Infernal Spirits shall give to their new guests, when a
poor deluded Soul, following the steps of the multitude, goes down into the
Chambers of Eternal Death. This is that scornful language, Art thou also become
like one of us? Did thou follow us in Sin and Unbelief, and now do thou
follow us into Torments? If thou would not be the shame of Devils and damned
Spirits, let not the example of the World persuade thee to continue in
Unbelief. And this is the third Impediment of Faith, and the Means to remove it.

4. Impediment of Faith. Gods hardening
The fourth is from God. That Is a most observable passage, which you read, Joh.
12.39, 40. Therefore they could not believe, because Isaiah had said again, He
has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not see
with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, and be converted, and I
should heal them. These things said Isaiah, when he saw his glory, and spoke of
him. As if he should say, These are such things as did not only concern the
Prophets own time, and the men of his generation, but they are such things as
are to be fulfilled under the Gospel in the Kingdom of Christ, for the Prophet
foretold them, when he saw the glory of Christ, and did Prophecy his Kingdom.
Now both the Vision, and the particular Prophecy, you have in the 6. of Isaiah.

Obj. But you will say, This is wonderful: How can these things be? How is it
possible, that the same God which commands all men every where to repent and
believe, Acts 17.
where the Gospel comes, should nevertheless blind the eyes, and harden the
hearts of some, lest they should repent and believe? Alas! you will say, What can
the poor creature do, if God shut their eyes, who can open them? if God harden
the heart, who can soften it?

Ans. I answer, Therefore you are carefully to look to the meaning of the
Prophecy, which is nothing else but a denunciation of Spiritual Judgment
against the people, for their former contempt of his Word and Means of grace.
As if God should say, Are you so obstinate? will nothing work upon you,
notwithstanding so many gracious proffers of Mercy? will nothing move you to
believe? Then you shall not believe. Will nothing move you to repent? Then you
shall not repent: Will nothing move you to cleanse your selves from all
filthiness of Flesh and Spirit? Then you shall not be cleansed: He that is
filthy, let him be filthy still, Rev. 22. And that this is the very meaning of
the words, you may see by the same Prophecy, cited by S. Matthew, Chap. 13.
First, he sets down Gods blinding their eyes, and hardening their hearts, in the
14 Verse; and then he sets down the peoples wilful shutting of their own eyes,
and hardening of their own hearts, in the 15 Verse, as the very cause of the
former: for, says he, This peoples heart is waxed gross, and their eyes have
they closed, etc. Because they wilfully closed their own eyes, and would not
see so much as they might have seen by the improvement of the means, therefore
God gave them up to further blindness; because they wilfully hardened their own
hearts against Judgments and Mercies, therefore God gave them up to further
hardness. It Is true indeed, we are all naturally blind, and hard-hearted: but
when unto this natural blindness and hardness of heart, we do add an affected
voluntary wilful blindness of mind, and hardness of heart: Then at the last,
after the exercise of a great deal of patience and long-suffering (for it is
observable, this very Prophet was Preaching to them, and proffering mercy upon
their Repentance, above threescore years together) I say, at the last, after
the abuse of so many precious Means, Mercies, and Motions of his Holy Spirit;
at last, when Gods patience is tired out, so that he can bear and forbear no
longer ( I am weary with repenting, says God, Jer. 15.6. therefore at the last
God gives up to judicial blindness of mind, and hardness of heart. Their
affected, voluntary, and wilful blindness, is at the last ( after so long a
time, as the Author to the Hebrews speaks) it is punished with judicial
blindness and hardness of heart: and this is the sorest blindness on this side
Hell, to be given up to this judicial blindness and unbelief. As Jacob said of
his Vision, Genesis 28.17. This is none other but the House of God, and this is
the gate of Heaven: So may we say on the other side, of this Judgment of the
Prophets Vision, This is none other, but the very house of the strong man
armed, and this is the gate of Hell.

But you will say, How then should we remove this Impediment, and who shall be
found able to roll away this stone?

I confess, Hic labor, hoc opus est, This is a work which all the Angels in
Heaven, and Men upon Earth, are not able to do. It is possible, judicial
hardness and unbelief may come to such a height, that there is no remedy; as
God himself says, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. But they mocked the messengers of God, and
despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose
against his people, there was no remedy. O who is able to roll away this stone!
Note.
And therefore my advice is rather to prevent this Impediment, than to be put
to the removing of it; for it is far easier to prevent it, than to remove it.
As thou love thine own Soul, take heed of wilful and obstinate blindness and
hardness of heart, lest God lay it upon thee, so as at the last thy very sin be
turned into thy Judgment.

4 Relief.
O take heed of Disputing, Quarrelling, Cavilling and Mocking, when the Word
shines bright upon thee: For what is this, but to shut the door of thine eyes,
ear and heart, lest the light should come in upon thee? And in this case, God
may justly clap a Lock, and a Chain, and a Bolt upon the Door, and say, It
shall never be opened more. Isa 28.22. Be ye not mockers, lest your bands be
made strong. O remember that fiery Thunderbolt of Gods Threatening, and let it
be as a Warning-piece to thee, Ezekiel. 24.13. I would have purged thee, and thou
wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I
have caused my fury to rest upon thee: So may God say, 1 Pet. 3.
Time was, when once my long-suffering waited for thee (as in the days of Noah)
Time was, when I would have gathered thee as a Hen gathers her Chickens under
her wings; Mat. 23.37.
Time was, that I would have pacified thy heart and life by Faith, but thou
would not believe: yea, thou have despised the riches of my goodness, Romans
2.4, 5.
and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God
leads thee to repentance: but after thy hardness, and impenitent heart, that
cannot repent, thou treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath,
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. And therefore I say once
again, as thou love thy own Soul, take heed of wilful blindness, lest God
deliever thee up to judicial blindness, and to the power of Unbelief.

Quest. But you will say, Is there no remedy, is there no hope in Israel
concerning this thing?

Ans. I answer, Though it is possible for a creature to come to that pass,
there is no remedy (as I said before) yet for all that, I must tell you, there
is a lower degree of judicial or probational hardness, which God sometimes
lays upon his own deer Children, as a just Correction of their former
negligence, and as a means to heal it also: and so this may be removed.

Quest. But you will say, How shall it be removed? how shall we roll away this
stone?

Ans. I answer, It is done by Humiliation and Prayer, and laying hold of Gods
Covenant of Free Grace afresh. Take this for thy comfort, though thou art
troubled with much remaining hardness of heart, yet that hardness of heart
which is to thy grief, shall never be to thy ruin. That which works kindly to
thy Humiliation, shall never be to thy Condemnation: as in the case of Ephraim,
Jer. 31.18. And therefore plead Covenant, plead with God in Prayer, as his
People do in this very case, Isa. 63.17. Lord, why have thou hardened our hearts
from thy fear? If we can but thus pray, and thus be humbled, there is hope in
Israel concerning this thing; nay, there is certain assurance. If we judge our
selves, we shall not be judged; The mouth of the Lord has spoken it, 1 Cor.
11.31. Thus much for the fourth Impediment of Faith, and the Means to remove it.

Obj. But against this that has been spoken concerning this fourth Impediment,
it may be objected. Why should God punish any with judicial hardness and
blindness, for that which we cannot help? Our hearts are so hard they cannot
repent or believe.

Ans. As that Reverend Fenner in his Book of Self-murder, It is not so much a
wicked man's cannot, as his will not, that condemns him; he will not understand,
repent, believe, therefore he is justly condemned.

Obj. There is a fallacy in that, for his will not, and cannot, are both one:
There Is impotency in his Will, as well as in his Understanding and other
Faculties; his Will is not free to that which is good, he cannot will as he
ought to do, therefore to what end is it either to persuade natural men to will
what is good, or blame them if they do not?

For Ans. Diverse things; though that (Romans 9.18.) might satisfy.

1. Gods hardening cleared.
1. If God had never given us ability, it were something: but he gave ability in
Adam to obey him in all his Commandments, to believe him in all his words.
Therefore when thou say, By Nature our hearts are so hard, etc. I answer,
Not by our first Nature (Natura integra) but corrupt nature: Therefore thank
our Selves, our Parents, blame not God. Simile.
Suppose a Master command his Servant to go a Journey of ten miles; he by
Drunkenness and quarrelling spends so much of his time and strength, that he
cannot finish his Journey in such a space; whose fault is this? Has the Master
lost his Power to command, because the Servant has lost his Power to obey.

Ans. 2. I say, a natural man does not so much as he might do, therefore God
may justly strike him with judicial blindness: If he would do that, great hopes
God would help him to do more. Simile.
If a Father or a Master should say to his Servant, Take up all these burdens,
some lighter, and some heavier, and when you cannot lift them your self, I will
help you; and the Child or Servant should say, I Will take up none at all,
because I am sure there are some I cannot stir: Might not the Father or Master
justly punish such a slothful and wilful Child or Servant? So God commands all
men every where, where the Gospel comes, to attend upon the Means of Grace, to
Repent and Believe. Now though they cannot Repent and Believe, (these are
beyond their power) yet they may attend upon the Means. Why may they not go to
a Sermon as well as to a Tavern, or sit at home? Why may they not read the
Scriptures, as well as a Play-book or an idle Pamphlet? Why may they not pray
as they are able, as well as smother the very work of their natural Conscience?
Acts 8.22. Pray God, if perhaps, etc. Indeed, to put natural men to duties, and
not to preach Christ to them withal, were harsh; but the Apostle does both. As
if he should say, Simon, thou art in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity, do not sit still and despair, but use the means for all that, and it
may be God will show mercy to thee. What if thou can not do so much as thou
should, yet do as much as thou can, and God will help thee to do the rest:
otherwise, this destruction is of thy self, and who will pity thee?

Ans. 3. I answer, This hardness of heart falls not only upon the Children of
Perdition, but upon Gods own People: Therefore when we speak to a promiscuous
multitude, we know not which of them God may be pleased to heal and cure;
however, the rest shall be left without excuse.

Ans. 4. Persuasions from the Word to that which is good, to Repent and
Believe, are not in vain, because it is the triumphing Chariot in which the
Spirit of God delights to ride along conquering and to conquer, 2 Cor. 2.14. Do
not say, Alas! what do you speak to us to repent and believe, and take heed of
hardening our hearts, you had as good speak to a company of dead men. Within the
compass of these walls, are many dead men under ground, and there possibly are
many dead men above ground. I answer, What do we know but the Spirit of God may
join with the Word, whilst we are speaking of it, or soon after: Acts 10.44.
Whilst Peter yet spoke, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the Word.

Obj. We have often preached in vain, no Repentance no Faith, etc.

Ans. Yes, in some; possibly, in many: And for others, wait, proving if God at
any time shall give repentance, etc. There is a time, an hour, wherein the Word
shall be powerful: Joh. 5.25. The dead shall hear, etc. Not, as if we could
cause this; Psa. 119.32.
but, When God shall enlarge the heart, they shall run the ways of his
Commandments. What do we know, but this may be the day and hour, and so I
beseech you in the Name of Christ, Heb. 3.
To day if you will hear his voice, harden not, etc? Lest God give you up to
this fourth Impediment of Faith, Judicial blindeness of heart.

Fifth general Impediment, contains seven mixed Impediments of faith.
Fifthly, Thrre are other Impediments which are of a mixed nature, and do spring
partly from our own corrupt Hearts, and partly from Satan, and partly from the
World.

1. False trust.
1. Our trusting to the Mountain of some created strength, our living upon our
own stock, in stead of living upon God, whether it be in Temporal things,
Health, Wealth, Friends; or in Spirituals, when we trust to the Grace we have
received already. O we think we have so much knowledge, and so much love to
God, and so much zeal for his Glory, that we are confident, though all men
should deny Christ, we'll never deny him, we trust to grace received, and so we
live not by Faith on God, but we live upon our own stock.

But how shall we remove this Impediment? how shall we roll away this stone?
Cure of false Trust.


I answer, 1. By considering the greatness of the Sin: For Blessings received,
and Graces received, are but Creatures: and so to trust to them, what is it,
but flat Idolatry? To give that Worship and Service to the Creature, which is
due to the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Romans 1.25.

2. By considering the greatness of the Punishment, it is that which causes
God to hide his face, and to withdraw the manifestation of his favor from his
dearest Servants, Psalm. 30.6, 7. And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be
removed; Lord, by thy favor thou have made my Mountain to stand strong: But
what follows? Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled. O remember,
Friends, how by trusting to the Mountain of any created strength, either in
Temporal or Spiritual things: we wrong God, we wrong our Selves, we weaken our
Faith, and we cause God to withdraw his wonted influence.

3. Pray God to deliver thee from trusting in any thing else, as God has
directed his People to pray in the like case, Hos. 14.3. Ashur shall not save
us, etc.

2. A second particular Impediment of Faith is this; 2. Limiting of God.
Our measuring of God by our selves, by our own strength, or by our own Reason
or Understanding. Suppose God promise this or that, and we presently consulting
with Flesh and Blood, cry out, It is impossible, or at least improbable, and so
we'll never believe it. Thus it was with Nicodemus at the first, when Christ
spoke to him of a second birth, Joh. 3. How can these things be? (says he) How
can a man be born, when he is old? Can he enter a second time into his Mothers
womb, and be born? And it was so with Mary the Mother of our Lord, when the
Angel told her she should conceive the Savior of the World, How shall this be
(says she) seeing I know not a man? Luke 1.34. And thus it was with that
incredulous Lord, when God foretold the plentiful relief of poor besieged
Samaria, within the compass of a day, Behold (says he) if the Lord would make
windows in heaven, might this thing be? 2 Kings 7.2. And thus when God
promises deliverance to his People in their greatest straights, when there is
no apparent or visible means to be seen, when God promises the Resurrection of
the body from the Grave, and many such like things, I Will never believe it,
says a natural man: Why so? It is altogether unlikely, it is above the reach
of Reason, it is above the reach of all created strength. And this is the
second particular Impediment of Faith.

Well, but how shall we remove it? how shall we roll away this stone?

Cure.
I answer, By considering the infinite disproportion betwixt God and us? What if
the thing promised be above the grasp of our wisdom and strength? is it
therefore above the wisdom and strength of God? It is the silliest thing in the
world to measure God by our selves. Hear what the Lord says, Zech. 8.6. If it
be mavelous in your eyes, should it be also mavelous in my eyes, says the
Lord of Hosts? Those things that are impossible with men, are possible, yea,
most facile and easy with God. Note.
And therefore it is the proper work of Faith, to lay hold upon the Power of
God, as well as upon the Truth and Mercy of God. If God does but speak a thing,
Faith doubts not of the Power of God to make his Word good. When carnal reason
says, How is it possible? How can this be? Faith gets aloft upon the head of
Reason, and sees quite beyond it: when Reason can see no further, Faith says,
It is so, it is so, and claps the hands, as if it had the thing in present
possession: and so it is an evidence of things not seen by the eye of carnal
Reason. Heb. 11.1. Romans 4.19, 20, 21.
Thus Abraham believes against all common Reason that he should have a Son,
because God had said it, although he and his wife were as good as dead in the
course of Nature. Thus Joshua believed that the walls of Jericho should fall
down at the blast of Rams-horns, Heb. 11.30.
which was against all reason. Judge. 7.19, 20, 21, 22.
Gideon, against all reason, believes that he and his poor three hundred men
should overcome the invincible Host of the Midianites with nothing but lamps
and earthen pitchers in stead of better weapons. These Worthies of God did not
measure God by themselves, but they considered the faithfulness and power of
him that had promised, and so should we. And so much for the second particular
Impediment of Faith, and the way to remove it.

The third is the harboring of some beloved sin, 3. Harboring some Lust.
which we are loath to part with. For Faith, when it comes into the heart, will
come as a purifying Faith, or else it will not come at all. Now if a man
prefers the satisfying of his lust, before the satisfying of his Faith, there is
the stop, and there is the check in the work of Faith. Therefore says Christ to
those that were carried away with the lust of ambition, How can ye believe,
which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes from
God only? Joh. 5.44.

Now to remove this Impediment, Cure.
and to roll away this stone, Remember, all fleshly lusts, though they flatter
us, and make fair as if they were our intimate friends, yet are our deadly
enemies, and underhand they fight against us: Dearly beloved (says Peter) I
beseech you as pilgrims and strangers, abstain from fleshly lusts, 1 Pet. 3.11.
which fight against the Soul; against the grace of it, against the peace of
it, against the very life of it, the spiritual and eternal life of the Soul.
And therefore suppose the lust be never so dear, yet let thy Salvation be
dearer: Suppose it be an adulterous eye, or suppose it be a deceitful hand, a
hand that brings in so much profit by the year, and were it not for this,
thou could find in thine heart to believe, and to become a Christian in
earnest. O remember what this lust must cost thee, that justles out thy Faith;
it will cost thee the precious life of thy immortal Soul: and therefore were it
as dear to thee as thy right eye, or thy right hand, away with it, and cast it
from thee. Remember what Christ says, Mat. 5.29, 30. It is better for thee
that one of thy members should perish, than that thy whole body should be cast
into hell. And so much for the third particular Impediment, and the way to
remove it.

4. Our own unworthiness pleaded against the Promise.
The 4. Impediment, Is the sight and sense of our own unworthiness. O, says
many a poor creature! do you persuade me to believe? What me? you know not what
a vile wretch I am; you little think what sins I have committed, what precious
means and mercies I have abused; and were it not high presumption in such a one
as I am, to offer to believe, ot to lay hold of a Promise? Thus men are apt to
strain courtesy with God, and to put a bar in their own way.

Cure.
But to remove this Impediment, and to roll this Stone out of the way; I beseech
you to consider: Was it presumption in Manasses, or in Mary Magdalen to
believe, out of whom he cast seven Devils? Is not the grace of God Free? else
it were no grace. As no man is accepted for his own worthiness: so no man is
rejected, simply, for his unworthiness: It is no hindrance, but a furtherance
to thy Faith; for the Son of man came to seek and to save that which was lost:
Mat. 9.
Thou art never like to find him, till thou come to be at a loss in thy self.
And this is the fourth Impediment, and the way to remove it.

5. Laying much stress on the depth of humiliation.
The 5. Is this: O but I have not been humbled to this very day, at least so far
as I ought to be humbled! It may be I have grieved a little for my sins, but
not so much as I ought to do, or as such sins call for at my hands, and
therefore, why should I believe, till I be further humbled? To remove this
Impediment, Cure.
and to roll away this Stone, we must know,

1. God makes not a promise of Mercy to such a degree of Godly sorrow, but to
the truth of it, Matthew. 5.4.

2. God accepts of the Will for the Deed, if we would be further humbled, and
yet cannot.

And 3. Nothing humbles and breaks the heart more, then the laying hold upon
Christ in a promise of Free Grace. Note.
It is impossible there should be through humiliation without Faith. The Flinty
heart of a sinnner is broken upon the Feather-bed of Gods Mercy. One look from
Christ, or one look toward Christ by the eye of Faith, melts the heart more
then a thousand strokes of the hammer. Zech. 12.10. I will pour upon the house
of David and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication; and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son. Observe, nothing melts
the heart so kindly, as looking upon Christ crucified, by the eye of Faith. O
says the believing Soul, that Christ should deal so kindly with me, that have
dealt so unkindly with him! O that he should overcome my evil with his
exceeding goodness! O that he should die for me, who once did hate him to the
very death! O these are melting arguments that come from faith! Remember thou
can never be thoroughly humbled, till thou beginnest to believe. Other
Arguments may Batter the heart, but Arguments drawn from Faith do only Break
it, and melt it. And therefore let not this consideration keep thee from
believing, to say, I have not yet been humbled enough; for by that reason we
should never believe as long as the world stands. For where is the man that can
say, He is humbled enough? especially before such time as he begins to believe.
But so much for the fifth particular Impediment, and the way to remove it.

The 6. Is this, They want the sense of Gods love, nay, 6. Want of Feeling.
they feel the sense of his wrath and displeasure, and therefore why should
they believe?

Now to remove this Impediment, Cure.
and to roll this Stone out of the way, we must know it is impossible to have
the sense and feeling of Gods love, till we begin to believe: For being
justified by Faith we have Peace with God, Romans 5.1.
and not before. God sometimes carries strange to his own children, as Joseph
to his brethren, and Christ to the woman of Canaan. Yea, whom the Lord loves he
corrects, and scourges every son whom he receives, Heb. 12.6. The father
knows how to frown, and how to strike with the Rod too, and yet he is a
father still. His chastisements are Castigatory, Probatory, and Purgatory; they
purge out the remainders of sinful Corruption. And if we have but grace to
carry toward him, as Children under the Rod, we may be sure by that, that God
offers himself to us as a Father. Therefore be not discouraged, though God seem
to frown, but say as Job, If God should kill me, yet will I trust in him: I am
sure to die if I fly from him; (Whither shall I fly from thy presence? Psalm.
139.
) and I can but die, if I fly to him: nay, I am sure I shall not die, if I can
do so, for he has said it, and he will perform it: Joh. 6.37. He that comes
unto me, I will in no wise cast out. And therefore do not reason against thy
self, and say, Oh, God is a terrible and a furious God, he will never be at
peace with such an one as I am. True indeed, if thou stand out in opposition
against him, he is a furious God; but if thou layest down thy weapons of War,
and yieldest up thy strongholds of Carnal Reason and Self-will into his hands;
in this case, mark what God says, Isa. 27.4. Fury is not in me. As if he
should say, Thou think I am a furious God, there is no dealing with me; but if
thou will submit, thou shall find fury is not in me. Indeed, if thou set
thy self still in battle against me, I will be as a consuming fire unto thee;
but if thou have a real desire to submit, and to make peace, take my Word for
it, Thou can not be so forward to make peace with me, but I am as forward to
make peace with thee: And therefore be not afraid, for so runs the Promise,
Fury is not in me; who would set the briars and thorns against me in battle, I
would go through them, I would burn them together: Or let him take hold of my
strength, that he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me. O
what a gracious Promise is this! How should it overcome all the hard thoughts
and jealousies we are apt to entertain of God!

O but in the seventh place, 7. Doubt of Election.
I am afraid the Promise belongs not unto me, for I fear I am not Elected, and
therefore why should I believe? This is another great Impediment and an heavy
stone upon the mouth of the Sepulcher, and how should this be removed?

Thus: Who tells thee so? not God, if any body, Cure.
the Devil. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those
things which are revealed, belong unto us and to our children for ever.
Election of this or that particular person, is a secret thing, and cannot be
known, by any thing a priori that goes before, but a posteriori, from the
latter it may be known by our Faith and effectual calling, we may know we are
Elected, and not before, 2 These. 1.3, 4. But here is the Devils policy to puzzel
men's heads and hearts in Election, when they should busy their heads and
hearts about Believing; in thirsting after Jesus Christ, in being willing to
make peace with him, and wholly to receive him. And if God has given thee such
a Will, I am sure the Promise belongs to thee: Rev. 22.17. Let him that is a
thirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of Life freely. And so
much for the seventh particular Impediment, and the way to remove it.

The Sixth Hindrance, Sixth General Impediment of Faith; viz. Neglect of Means.
Is a wicked and sinful neglect of the Means which God uses for the begetting
of Faith. (Of which, by Gods assistance, we are to speak in due time) If
Christ, and Heaven, and Faith, will drop into their mouth at unawares, so it
is; but under pretense that God does call in the working of Faith, they are
resolved to use no means under God, but cast off all Ordinances as if they were
to no purpose. Now so long as a man neglects the means, he is never like to
attain the end. Now of this neglect of the Means, there are diverse subordinate
causes, especially these five, Prejudice, Pride, Sloth, Five Causes of Neglect
of Means.
Presumption and Despondency of Spirit: We shall speak of them particularly,
and the way to remember them.

1. Prejudice Quarrels the Means of Faith
The 1. Is a strong and strange Prejudice against the Means of begetting Faith,
or against the Instruments dispensing the Means. Tush, says one, this
Preaching, this foolish preaching, it is but a light kind of food (as they said
of the Manna) and how should this do me any good? I Will never believe this
foolish Preaching can be a means to save my soul. And for these preachers,
says the poor deluded soul, what are they, but a company of infirmous men,
whose bodily presence is weak, and their speech contemptible? men that show
much passion, but little learning or discretion, and therefore why should I
give any heed to them, or believe what they say?

Cure of Prejudice.
Now to remove this Impediment, and to roll away this Stone; Let all be granted
(though it is a thousand to one the Devil is a lier in most that is suggested,
yet) let all be granted, you must not expect a Minister without infirmities.
What say the Apostles themselves, Acts 14.15? We also are men of like passions
with you: As if they should say, Lift us not up too high, nor put us not down
too low, but bless God for us, and pray for us, for we also are men of like
passions with you. And for our Preaching, God would not have us come in the
Excellency of words, or of man's Wisdom, but in the Demonstration of the Spirit
and of Power. That our Faith should not stand in the Wisdom of men, but in the
Power of God, 1 Cor. 2.4.5. What though the world account plain preaching
foolishness? yet it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor. 1
to save them that believe.

Therefore take heed thou do not Wit thy self into hell; Caution.
take heed thy sinful prejudice against the plain preaching of the Word, cost
thee not the life of thy soul. O say not as Naaman the Syrian! because he was a
noble Captain, and a brave Courtier, when the Prophet directed him (for the
cure of his Leprosy) to wash seven times in the common and plain water of
Jordan; Are not Abana and Pharphar Rivers of Damascus, better then all the
waters of Israel? may I not wash in them and be clean, 2 Kin. 5.1, 2? Are not
the excellent and elegant expressions of many Moralists and humane Authors,
better then the Scriptures, and the plain preaching of them, for the rectifying
of my judgment, and reforming of my manners? O be better advised (as Naaman was
at the length) be sure to wash in the poor despised Fountain of the Scriptures,
even those holy and healing waters that run from under the Threshold of the
Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47.1. That Christ may say unto thy Soul purified by Faith, Now
art thou clean through the Word that I have spoken unto thee, Joh. 15.3. And
this is the First Subordinate cause of the neglect of the Means, and the way to
remove it.

The 2. Is Pride: Pride I say, which is the mother of sinful Shamefastness, as
sometimes it is the Mother of sinful boldness. 2. Pride Contems the Means of
Faith.
It may be thou art ignorant of the Scriptures, and as ignorant of the state of
thine own Soul; as little read in the one as in the other. And what should
thou do in this case, but enquire at the Ministers lips, which should preserve
knowledge? Yea, but it may be thou art as much ashamed to beg, as thou art
unable to dig in those heavenly mines, ashamed to beg Counsel and Direction.
Thou art ashamed to say, Acts 8
I pray you of whom speaks the Prophet this, or that; of himself, or of some
other man? I pray you, show me the meaning of this or that place of Scripture,
I pray you show me the state and condition of my Soul, that I may know upon
what terms I stand with God. O this we think will argue ignorance, it will
bewray our weakness! What? (says the poor creature) shall I that have gone
for somebody in the world, and might have been a teacher of others, at least
within the compass of my own family? Shall I show what need I have to be taught
my self, which be the first principles of the Oracles of God? Heb. 5
Shall I be instructed and Catechized like a child? I Will never stoop so low to
shame my self in this fashion. Prove. 15 12. The scorner will not go unto the
wise.

Now then to remove this Impediment, and to roll away this Stone: Cure.
It Is good to remember, it is better to shame our selves now before two or
three, then to shame our selves before men and Angels in the last day; and to
have our folly proclaimed to all the world, when Christ shall come in flaming
fire to render vengeance on them that know not God, 2 These. 1.8. Do not say it
is a foolish and a childish thing for a man to discover his own weakness in
Knowledge or Faith. Remember what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3.18. Humility the
Cure of Pride.
If any man among you seems to be wise in this world, let him become a fool
that he may be wise. Remember what our Savior says, Mat. 18.3. Except ye
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. That
is, Humble, Teacheable, and Tractable as children are. And this is the second
Subordinate cause of the neglect of the Means, and the way to remove it.

3. Sloth Recoyls from the Means of Faith.
The 3. Is Sloth and Laziness. Though a man be convinced in his conscience of
the Necessity and Excellency of the Means of Grace, yet when he considers what
a deal of pains it must cost him, in Hearing, and Praying, and Practicing, and
Denying of himself, he is even scared at the sight of the work, and starts back
again. What? (says he) Must the Kingdom of Heaven suffer violence? and must
the violent take it by force? Then take it whosoever will for me, says the
lazy person; I had as live be as I am, as take such a deal of pains: Just like
a Sluggard when he lies in bed, and sees a great deal of work before him, and
the weather is cold, and he puts out his hands, and by and by pulls them in
again; it is death to arise, to a lazy person. And so it is to a lazy professor,
when God calls upon him to awake, and to arise out of the bed of security, and
to be diligent in the use of Means, as ever he desires Faith and the comfort of
it. Joh. 6.
O this is a hard saying, and he cannot bear it! if God will save him without
his own endeavors, well and good; but he is resolved to go to his journeys end
in a Feather-bed, if ever he come there.

Now then to remove this Impediment, Cure.
and to roll away this Stone: Remember the danger of Spiritual sloth and
security. Prove. 21.25. The desire of the slothful kills him; for his hands
refuse to labor. If a man did but know the house were on fire over his head,
it would startle the arrantest Sluggard in a Country. Gods Ministers are
commanded to cry, Fire, fire, Hellfire, as the portion of all slothful
persons, Mat. 25.30. Cast ye the slothful and unprofitable servant into utter
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. O think of this
beforehand, that ye may be awakened! Jude 23. And others save with fear,
pulling them out of the fire. O do not talk like a Sluggard, Yet a little
sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep, lest thy
spiritual poverty come as a traveller, and thy want as an armed man, Pro.
24.33, 34. Besides, Christ can make difficult things easy, Mat. 11.30. My yoke
is easy. Isa. 26.12. Thou have wrought all our works in us. Phil. 2.13. It is
God that works to will and to do. And this is the third Subordinate cause of
the neglect of the Means, and the way to remove it.

The 4. Is Presumption: 4. Presumption Post dates the use of Means. Cure.
Presuming we may use the Means soon enough many days or years after. They
think they may repent and believe when they list.

But to remove this Impediment, and to roll away this Stone; It is good to
remember, that not so much as our natural life is in our own power, Eccl. 8 8.
Much less that which is Spiritual and Supernaturul; it is possible we may have
but a little space of time to live, and it may be less space of time to
repent. Rev. 2 21. I gave her a space to repent of her fornicateon, and she
repented not (says God of Jezabel.) God gives a space of time to particular
Persons, Cities, and Nations, which is called the Accepted Time, and the Day of
Salvation; 2 Cor. 6.2
and if we come not in the space of this Time, the Door may be Shut, and we may
Knock too late: Mat. 25, 10. Whilst the foolish Virgins went to buy oil, the
Bridegroom came, and they that were ready went in with him to the Marriage, and
the door was shut. And this is the fourth Subordinate cause of neglect of the
Means, and the way to remove it.

5. Despondency quits the use of Means.
The 5. Is Despondency of Spirit: Through an extreme fear that the time of Grace
is past. It may be we have used the Means of Grace long, and we conceive we are
never the better; and therefore we fear it is to no purpose to attend upon the
Means for the time to come.

Cure.
Now to remove this Impediment, to roll this Stone out of the way, Let us
remember, It is not for us to know the Times and the Seasons which the Father
has placed in his own power, Acts 1.7. Let us continue to do our duty in
seeking, and we may be sure God will be found at the last, though he hide
himself very long to our apprehension, Isa. 38.18. Blessed are all they that
wait for him. Have thou waited twenty or thirty years for Grace or Comfort?
resolve to wait still. Joh. 5.5. There was an impotent man, who had waited
thirty eight years for healing, and yet by a word of Free Grace from Christ
himself, he was healed at the last. There Is no time past, but God may heal thee
for all this, though thou have waited many a year. And therefore resolve to
stand it out to the last man, He that continues to the end shall be saved,
Mat. 24.13. And thus have we spoken of the sixth grand Impediment, which is a
sinful neglect of the Means of Grace, and also of the way to remove it.

7. Supposition of having Faith already.
The Seventh Impediment, Is a vain Supposition that we have Faith, when we have
it not, or else a supposition that we have it not, when we have it; the one
hinders the obtaining of Faith, and the other hinders the actings of it, and we
are apt to swear on both sides, Pro. 37.7. There is that makes himself rich,
and yet he is poor; and there is that makes himself poor, yet has great
riches. First, There is that makes himself Rich when he is poor; there is a
supposition that a man has Faith, when he has it not. Now hear's the mischief
of this Conceit; He that presumes he has a thing, when he has it not, it
takes off all endeavors for the obtaining of it: So he that presumes he has
Faith, when he has it not, it takes him off from the use of Means for the
obtaining of it.

Now for the removing of this Impediment, Cure.
and for the rolling away of this Stone; There Is no better way then to bring
our Faith to the Test, or Touchstone, that we do not bless our selves in
giving entertainment to a bold-fac'd presumption, in stead of a true Faith.

Quest. How shall I be able to distinguish between Presumption and true Faith?
For as the Harlot laid her dead child, in the room of the true mothers living
child, 1 Kin. 3.20. So the Devil pops men off with a dead Faith (which is no
better then presumption) in stead of a true and Living Faith. How therefore
shall we know the one from the other, the dead child from the other?

I Answer. Differences of Presumption and Faith.
(Besides what has been said already in the use of trial) You may know
Presumption from true Faith, by its Conception, Birth, Growth, and Issue or
fruits.

1. By its Conception: 1 In the Conception.
Presumption is nothing but our own Conceit, the Brat of our own brain; a
strong imagination without any real Foundation upon the Word of God, whereas
true Faith is ever grounded upon the Promise, it is Begotten by the
incorruptible seed of the Word, 1 Pet. 1 23.

Only let me add this by way of Caution: Caution.
There may be a false application of a promise, as well as a true and saving; a
promise may be presented to the Soul by Satan, as well as by the Holy Spirit of
God.

Quest. How shall we know the difference?

Answ. That when ever Satan presents a promise to the Soul, he presents it in a
Wrested sense; or he presents it for a Wrong end, as Mat. 4.6. It Is written, He
shall keep thee, etc. This promise is presented in a Wrested Sense, so as the
meaning of it could not stand with that other Scripture, Thou shall not tempt,
etc. God does promise to protect in such dangers as his providence casts us
into, in the way of our calling, but not in such dangers as our own folly and
presumption casts us into, when we forsake our way. And therefore the Devil
cunningly, and wickedly leaves out that part of the Word, In all thy ways,
Psa. 91.11, 12.

2. It is presented for a Wrong End, To separate Justification from
Sanctification, and so to make us bold to sin against God; as here, see Jude 4.
Turning the grace of God (i. e. Gracious promises of Mercy) into wantonness.
But (now) when the Promise of God, is presented and applied by the Spirit of
God, it is presented in a true sense, such as may well stand with all other
parts of holy Scripture; for the Spirit does never contradict it self. And it
is presented for a Right and Good End; Even for the furtherance of our
Sanctification, as well as of our Justification, and so the promise is made a
Transforming Promise, 2 Cor. 3.18. And a Cleansing Promise, so as to make the
Soul willing to be purged from every sin. Consider seriously of these
Scriptures, 1 John 3.2, 3. ( Perfect Vision, perfect Transformation. In the
mean time, so much as we see of God, so much we shall desire to be like him)
Joh. 15.3. Now are ye clean, etc. 2 Cor. 7.1. Having such Promises, Let us
cleanse, etc.

2 In the Birth
2. In the Birth: The Birth of Presumption is very easy and speedy.
Presumptuous persons think it is the easiest matter in the world to Believe;
they meet with no opposition, either from their own hearts, or from Satan; A
sign it is no good Faith, when the Devil is so good a friend to it. But the
Birth of true Faith is very difficult, it meets with many Pangs of unbelief
from Satan and from the flesh; for even in this, as well as in other graces,
The flesh lusts against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. I confess, He is an unwise
child that stays long in the place of bringing forth children, Hos. 13.13. Yet
some pain there is in Self-denial.

Thirdly, they may be differenced by their Growth. 3. In the growth.
Presumption is a Monster, it is born as big and as tall as ever it will be;
like Jonah's Gourd, it springs up in a night, and it withers as soon as the Sun
of affliction and persecution beats hot upon it. But true Faith grows up by
degrees, like the grain of Mustard Seed; the new Creature is a Babe in faith,
before he becomes a strong man: The righteousness of God is revealed from faith
to faith, Romans 1.17. Some say they are as much assured at the first, as ever
they shall be, their faith is as strong as ever it will be; but let them take
heed in the mean time, they do not presume in stead of believing, for true
faith is of a growing nature.

Fourthly, 4. In the fruit.
They may be differenced by their Issue and Fruits: It may be said of the
Presumptuous, as Deuteronomy. 32.32. Their vine is the vine of Sodom, -- their
clusters are bitter. The fruit of Presumption, is carelessness in the use of the
means of Grace. Tush, says the Presumptuous person, what need we hear so much,
and read so much, and pray so much? away with Duties. The fruit of true Faith,
is carefulness herein; I believed, 2 Cor. 4.13.
therefore have I spoken, therefore have I heard, therefore have I read,
therefore have I prayed, etc. The fruit of Presumption, is Licentious liberty
to sin against God: Tush, says the Presumptuous person, Christ died for
sinners, what need we care, let us sin, that grace may abound. Romans 6.1. Ver.
18.
The fruit of true faith, is a holy liberty to serve God, and a holy fear to
sin against God. Be not deceived, (says Faith) neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor effeminate, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of
God, 1 Cor. 6.10. And thus you see there is that makes himself rich in faith,
when he is poor; and this is a great Impediment to the obtaining of faith, and
therefore we must labor to remove it. Impediments of faith in the second
branch of false supposition.


And secondly, There is that makes himself poor, when he is rich. There may be
a supposition that we have not faith, when we have it: and this will hinder
both the actings and increasings of our faith. Some are afraid they have no
faith at all, because they have not the highest degree of faith, which is full
Assurance; or because they want the comfort which others attain to, 1 Pet. 1.8.
even joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Cure
But for the removing of this Impediment, and for the rolling of this stone out
of the way, we must remember there are several degrees of faith, as we have
already proved; therefore it is possible thou may have faith, though thou have
not the highest degree of faith, and so joy of the Spirit, that is rather a
fruit of faith, than faith it self. It is indeed, Note.
to speak properly, rather a living by sense, than a living by faith, when we
are cheered up with continual Cordials: Such a life is more like heaven than
earth, where faith shall cease. A stronger faith is required to live upon God
without comfort, than when God shines in upon our Spirits with abundance of
joy. Its nothing for the Child to believe the Mother loves it, whilst she
sets it upon the knee, kisseth it, and feeds it with sweet meats; but to see
the Mother love through the twigs of the Rod, and through all the clouds of her
frownings and hidings, this argues no small strength of love, and of natural
affection in the Child. I know your thoughts outrun me in the Application, so
that there may be strong faith, where there is little comfort: Therefore let
every man prove his faith, that he may not be to seek in the acting of it. And
so much for the several Impediments of Faith, and the way to remove them.

From whence we may deduce these Corollaries or Conclusions.

Corollaries.
First, there is no Faith without a great deal of opposition. Opposition from
Self, opposition from Satan, opposition from World, opposition from professed
Enemies, opposition from Friends, A man's enemies shall be those of his own
house; these shall oppose him, these shall judge him, not only for his outward
actions of Faith, but for the very intentions of his heart in the exercise of
Faith: as David's brethren said unto him, I know the pride of thy heart; this is
nothing but a spice of vain glory and ostentation. Paul was opposed in the
preaching of Faith, and in the practice of Faith, and no way in the world left
to apologize for himself, but to appeal to the Searcher of hearts, 1 Cor 4.3.
With me it is a very small thing, that I should be judged of you, or of man's
judgment, etc. But thus true faith meets with opposition, both from those
without, and from those within the Church. True faith in the saving knowledge
of the Son of God, is as the very door and entrance into Gods Kingdom; but you
must look to meet with opposition at the very threshold. Mat. 23.13. Woe unto
you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye shut up, etc. The Lord grant none
of us may be found amongst the number of opposers, making sad the hearts of
those God would not have made sad, but rather be found helpers of one another
faith: For all is little enough, in regard of the opposition we shall meet
withal from without.

Secondly, it is no easy matter to believe: all things are easy to him that
believes, but it is no easy matter to believe.

Thirdly, The exceeding greatness of Gods power is seen in all them that do
believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in
Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in
the heavenly places, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. No wonder so few believe; it is a Miracle of
Mercy that there are so many.

Fourthly, He that would believe, must be resolved to break through all
Impediments; as David's Worthies brake through the Host of the Philistims:
Armies of oppositions are against us, yet be resolute, If God be for us, who
shall be against us? The beginnings of faith will remove all these Mountains
that lie in the way, by laying hold of the Promises: Isa. 54.14. Cast ye up,
cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling block out of the way of my
people. See Isa. 40.3. and 42.16. and 62.10.

But we pass from the Lets and Impediments, to the Helps and Furtherances of
Faith, which are the second sort of Means to be used for the obtaining of this
precious Grace of Faith.

2. Positive means of Faith.
We have already removed the Rubbish, we come now to such helps as may tend
(through Gods blessing) to the advancing of the Building: Only take it with
this Caution, Caution.
Nothing that we can do, either by way of preparation, or otherwise, can be
effectual (as from any power in our selves) either to the begetting, or to the
increasing of Faith: Romans 9.16. It is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs, but in God that has mercy. And hence it is sometimes, that Gods
Spirit delights to grapple with the most opposite gainsayers of his Word and
Ways. A man comes to the Congregation with all the prejudice that may be, both
against the Ordinance it self, and the dispensers of it: Well (says he) I Will
go hear what this prating Preacher, what this babbler can say, if it be but to
make my self merry, or to see if I can entangle him in something that is
delivered: and yet it may be God meets this man in the full career of his
opposition, as he met Paul when he was a Saul, Acts 9.
and tells him, It Is hard for him to kick against the pricks. One of Christ's
arrows shot out from the mouth of the Minister, wounds him to the very heart,
and he cannot be quiet, till the same hand that wounded him, do heal him again:
I kill, and I give life; I wound, and make whole, (says the Lord) which is as
true of the Soul, as of the Body, Deuteronomy. 32.39. Now all this plainly shows the
work is wholly of God, and not of our selves, nor in the power of second Means.
But yet for all this, I say means are to be used, by way of Gods Ordinance,
though the efficacy of the means depends wholly upon God, and not upon our
selves. And therefore it is very observable in that most miraculous Conversion
of the Apostle in the 9th of the Acts, when God met him, and unhors'd him, and
astonished him, and struck him into a trembling Fit, and whilst he was
breathing out threatenings against the People of God, he so tamed his proud
spirit, that he is glad to say, Lord, what will thou have me to do? yet I say,
it is very observable, that however God begun the work of his Conversion by his
own immediate hand, yet he would not finish it without second means, without
the hand of an Instrument. And therefore when Paul said, What will thou have me
to do, Lord? Christ does not say, I would have thee do this or that, neither
does he restore his sight to him for the present, but he bids him go to the
City, and there Ananias must be an instrument under Jesus Christ to restore his
sight, and to give him in charge what God would have him do. Much more then, in
the ordinary way of Gods working, are we bound to the use of second means, as
ever we desire the recovery of our Spiritual sight, or the obtaining of this
precious grace of faith.

What are those means then that we must use and attend upon?

Answ. 1. Is the Word of God, Means.
the Preaching of the Word? The Scripture is very clear in this. 1. Word of God.
Rom 10.14 How shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard? and ver.
17. So then Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. Therefore
as Faith is the Life of the Soul, under God; so the Word is the Life of Faith.
As the Just lives by Faith, so Faith lives upon the Word. No Humane Testimony
(though great respect and reverence is to be had to the Church, and Godly
writers) yet I say, No humane Testimony can be the ground of Divine Faith. It Is
true indeed, the Word cannot work Faith without the Spirit; I will not say, The
Spirit cannot work Faith without the Word: But this I say, That Ordinarily the
Spirit does not work Faith without the Word. Though the Spirit be not
absolutely bound to the use of Means, yet we are bound to the use of them, as
ever we expect the Spirit: Here will I meet with thee, says the Spirit.
Therefore it is very observable, Where God makes a Promise of the Spirit; in
the same place also he makes a Promise of the Word, to continue with his Church
to the end of the World. Isa. 59. last. As for me, this is my Covenant with
them, says the Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee, and my Words which I have
put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of
thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth and for ever.

The Word and the Spirit you see go hand in hand, therefore we are not to
expect the Spirit without the Word; neither are we to expect Fath, which is
wrought by thy Spirit, unless it be also wrought by the Word, as the Organ or
Instrument of the Spirit. And hence also the Word of God is called the Word of
Faith, Romans 10.8. Because Faith in grown persons is wrought by the Word, and so
the Word is both the Object, and the Instrument of Faith. It is Verbum quod
creditur, and Verbum quo creditur, the Word that is believed, and the Word by
which we are moved to believe this or that. And how should we then with all
care and conscience attend upon the Ministry of the Word, as ever we desire
faith, as ever we desire life. Would we live for ever, O hear, says God, and
your soul shall live; and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even
the sure mercies of David, Isa. 55.3. Mark that: Hear, and your soul shall
live; no hearing, no life; because, no hearing, no faith: for, The just lives
by his faith, and his faith lives by the Word. And therefore such as live above
Ordinances, and above the Word, I know not what to make of them; they are such
as live not by faith, but above faith: They must either be in Heaven, or nearer
to Hell than they are aware; for all the true Members of the Church upon earth
do live by Faith, and that faith upon the Word. And therefore such persons as
live above Ordinances in that sense, so as to be content to live without them,
are of a strange temper. They are like such conceited persons who in a
distemper of melancholy do think they can live without meat: and indeed as
well may the body live its natural life without meat, as the Soul live its
Spiritual and Supernatural life without the Word: Job 23.12. I have desired the
words of his mouth, mo^e than my appointed food: the Word of God is the food of
the Soul. Faith is both begotten and increased by the Word, by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God does man live, Mat. 4.4. The Word of God is
like blood in the natural Body, Vehiculum Spiritus.

The Word, The Word the ordinary mean of Faith.
is the power of God to Salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1.16. This
is the main end of that great Ordinance of the Ministry which was given for
the begetting and for the increasing faith, till we all come in the unity of
the faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. And therefore I say, attend upon
this Ordinance: as ever thou desire Faith, make use of these despicable
Rams-horns, as ever thou desire the mighty walls of Jericho should fall down;
for the weapons of the Ministry are mighty through God to the pulling down of
all the strong holds of sin and Satan, all the Opposites and Impediments of
Faith: Wait at the Pool of Bethesda, Joh. 5.2, 5.
as ever thou desire to be cured of thy Spiritual Maladies. A Miracle, yea a
Million of Miracles will not beget faith in thee, if that Word do not beget it,
which was at the first confirmed by Miracles. If ordinary and living Preachers
do thee no good, neither would thou believe, if an extraordinary and
miraculous Messengers should arise from the dead and preach to thee. Luke 16.31.
Therefore such as look for faith by Revelation, without and beyond the Word,
certainly this persuasion comes not of him that calls: Gal. 5.8.
Such a persuasion, and such a revelation is of Satan, and not from God. For
God says, To the Word, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
this Word, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20. Therefore as
ever thou desire true Light, and true Faith, attend upon the ministry of the
Word.

Object. But you will say, What part of the Word should we attend upon, that we
may attain this Promise of Grace?

Every Word an Object of Faith.
Answ. I Answer in general, Every part of the Word of God, both Precept, and
Promise; where ever God has a tongue to speak, we should be sure to have an
ear to hear.

Especially the Promise. Gal. 3.24
Especially, we are bound to attend upon the Promise of the Gospel. As for the
Ceremonial Law, it is abolished, it was our Schoolmaster unto Christ, but no
longer; As for the Moral Law, though it be abolished as a Covenant, Do this and
thou shall live; Romans 10.5
if thou do it not, thou shall die, so it is abolisht: Yet the Apostle tells us
in Romans 7. there is still, even under the Gospel this use of the Law, To
convince us of sin, and so to show us our need of Christ.

Object. If it be Objected, The Spirit of Christ does this, John 16.8. and
therefore, what need of the Law? How the Spirit Convinces of sin.


Ans. I Answer, The Spirit does it indeed, but by opening and applying the Rule
of the Law; for so says the Apostle who himself was guided by the Spirit when
he uttered those words, Romans 7.7. I had not known sin, but by the Law, for I
had not known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not Covet.

Thus the Spirit convinces by the Law, and that so powerfully and effectually,
when God is pleased to set it home upon any particular soul, that he apprehends
the Minister speaks so, as if he knew his very heart, or so as if the Minister
spoke to none but him in all the Congregation.

Now the word thus apprehended, does usually work some measure of humiliation
with fear and terror in some more, in some less. (for we prescribe not a
certain measure to any) Now this (though it be but a common work in it self,
yet) where God is pleased to sanctify it, and to set it home, it is a means to
drive the Soul nearer to Jesus Christ, and that by reasoning in this manner, O
that I should be such a vile wretch, to transgress a law, so Holy, so Just, so
Good! I confess if God should look upon me in the first Covenant, he might
justly set open all the Floodgates of his wrath, he might even rain down Hell
out of Heaven upon such a vile wretch as I am.

But What? Is there no remedy, says the perplexed Soul? Is there no Balm in
Gilead? Jer. 8.22
Is there no Physician there that is able to cure a sick and a sinful Soul?

O yes, says Christ, I am that Physician of greatest value, The whole need not
the Physician, but the sick, Mat. 19.2
for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. The Spirit
of God is upon me, Luke 4.18
because he has anointed me (on purpose) to preach good tidings unto the meek,
he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, etc. and therefore fear not
poor soul, I am sent to thee in a special manner, my errand is to thee, and
therefore do not thou run from me, but come to me: Mat. 11.28
O come to me thou that art weary and heavy laden, and I will give rest unto
thee.

What, to me? says the poor dejected soul? Is it possible God should intend
any mercy to such a dead dog as I am? Yes, even to thee, says Christ, do but
come to me, and thou shall be welcome. I have paid all thy debt, pacified Gods
wrath for all that are willing to receive me, and believer in me; whateve their
sins have been. O this now melts the heart of a sinner! and now he can mourn
for sin, as it is sin, that ever he should offend such a gracious God. Hereupon
he comes to be meekly content to use any means that God shall prescribe for his
Souls good; To wait in hope, To hunger and thirst after Christ, To sell all
that he has (though his all is worth nothing at all, yet highly prized by him)
but this he is well content to part withal, even with all his lusts and
darlings, yea all his best works and self-righteousness, Phil. 3.7, 8
so he may win Christ and be found in him, he is willing to part with all, and
to count it as dross and dung. Now when God of his Free Grace, has brought the
Soul to this pass, then after that, he is pleased to reveal himself in a
gracious manner, Genesis 45.3
as Joseph revealed himself to his brethren, I am Joseph your brother: So says
God, Jer. 31.3
I am thy God and Father, Lo I have loved thee with an everlasting love: and
therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee. And thus God seals him by
his Spirit, and lets him see his right to the promise of his Free Grace, and so
the soul lays hold upon Christ in the Promise, and rests upon him for
Righteousness and Salvation.

Quest. If you shall say, Why does God usually thus humble men, more, or less,
and stir up in them strong desires after Christ, before they come so fully and
so clearly to lay hold of the Promise? (This question is needful to clear up
the manner of the working of the Word, or (at least of the laying hold of it.)

Reasons why Humiliation must go before Faith.
Answ. I answer, First, Because there must be a renouncing of our own
righteousness, wrought in us by the Spirit of God, before there can be a
submitting to the righteousness of God. Romans 10.3. For they being ignorant of
Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have
not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God. Now it is impossible to
suppose a man to be brought to that pass, to renounce his own righteousness,
but he must be humbled. 2 Chr. 12.6. Whereupon the Princes of Israel and the
King humbled themselves, and they said, The Lord is righteous. Luke 18.10, etc.
to 15. See the example.

Secondly, Because God has joined Repentance and Faith together in the Gospel,
Mark. 1.15. Repent ye and believe the Gospel. Now it is impossible to suppose
true repentance without some measure of humility and godly sorrow for sin, as
the Apostle describes it, 2 Cor. 7.8, 9, 10, 11. v. 9. Now I rejoice, not that
ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance, for ye were made sorry
after a godly manner. v. 11. For behold the self-same thing that ye sorrowed
after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you? yea what clearing of
your selves? yea what indignation? yea what fear? yea what vehement desire? yea
what zeal? ye what revenge? In all things ye have approved your selves to be
clear in this matter.

Thirdly, God does humble them that they may hear and receive the message of
the Gospel with the more meekness and readiness, Jer. 13.15. Hear ye, and
give ear, be not proud, for the Lord has spoken. And in this Text, tell a
proud unhumbled sinner of Mercy, of Faith, and of a Savior; What need of a
Savior, or Mercy (says he) unless I were in misery? But when God has taken
him down a peg lower, Psa. 141.6
and he is overthrown (as it were) in stony places, O then he will hear the
words of reconciliation, for they are sweet! O then if a Messenger, or an
Interpreter, Job 33.23
one of a thousand shall show to this man his righteousness, that it is in
Christ, and not in himself, he is very willing to hear on that ear, it is the
sweetest message that ever came to his ears. And that is the third reason, why,
God humbles men more or less, before they come so fully to apprehend his love
in Christ.

Fourth reason is, That they may be more thankful afterward, Prove. 27.7. The
full soul loatheth the honeycomb, but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is
sweet. This is Gods usual method; he is wont to hunger-bite the Soul, and then
to fill it. Luke 1.53
He fills the hungry soul with good things: Why so? Because a hungry beggar
will be thankful for every crust and crum, and so will a hungry Soul. Psalm.
66.16.
O come, says such a one, I will tell you what the Lord has done for my Soul.
I will tell you something, but I cannot tell you all, what is wanting in
expression shall be made up in admiration of the goodness of God to all
eternity.

I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee,
wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes; and that not only a
sight of Gods Power and Justice, but even the least glimpse of his Mercy in
Christ. Believing in Christ, is said to be looking upon Christ by faith, Joh.
3.14, 15. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness; even so must
the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have eternal life. Now this look does break the heart, and humble
the heart above all other means whatsoever. Zech. 12.10. And I will pour upon
the house of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of Grace
and Supplication, and they shall look on me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only Son, and shall be in
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. See this
in that great Convert, Luke 7.47. Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins which are
many, are forgiven, for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the
same little: because she loved much, she mourned much.

Likewise ye younger submit your selves unto the elder: yea, all of you be
subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble:

Grace in the 1. Inchoation. 2. Augmentation. 3. Conservation. 4. Perfection.


1. Grace in the Inchoation; Humility in all the periods of grace.
not as if a man could be truly humble before he has grace, but to intimate he
has no grace till he be humble: for, he that has one grace, has all graces;
and therefore he that has faith, has also humility. The new man has all his
parts and members, so soon as ever there is a new birth in the Soul: He has
therefore humility as well as other graces. Yea poverty of Spirit is made the
beginning of all grace. Mat 5.3. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
the Kingdom of heaven. Thus in the inchoation or beginning of grace.

2. In the Augmentation or increase of grace. Jam. 4.6. But he gives more
grace, wherefore he says, God resists the proud, but gives grace unto the
humble. He gives more grace to the humble: As a Tree, the deeper it roots, the
more it spreads in its branches, and increases in its fruits: so the deeper
the creature is rooted in humility, the more abundant it is in the fruits of
Piety: the high Mountains are barren, when the lowly Valleys are very fruitful.

3. In the Conservation or establishing of Grace received, he g^ves to such the
grace of Perseverance. Spiritual Pride will certainly have a fall; but he that
stands low in his own apprehension, he stands sure: When we are weak, that is,
sensible of our own weakness, then are we strong, 2 Cor. 12.10. Such are like
to stand, when others are offended and fall away.

4. God gives grace to the humble in the perfection of it, which is attained in
glory. Therefore it is said of the Heavenly Courtiers, Rev. 4.10, 11. The four
and twenty Elders fall down before him that sat on the Throne, and worship him
that lives for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns before the Throne, saying,
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. Mark ye: as
dejection in the bottom of the nethermost Pit cannot strip the devil and wicked
men of their Pride (for they will blaspheme the name of God) they may be
humbled, Rev. 16.11.
but they will not be truly humble to all Eternity: So on the other side,
exaltation to the highest degree of glory, does no ways divest the Saints of
God of their former humility. Nay, the more glorious, the more gracious, and
therefore the more humble.

Thus God gives grace to the humble in the Inchoation, Augmentation,
Conservation, and Perfection. Therefore there is no Soul brought home to
Christ, but must needs be humbled.

Thus you see Gods manner of working Faith by the Word, and why God does
usually humble men more or less, and stir up in them strong desires after
Christ before they come so fully and clearly to lay hold of the Promise, or at
least in their very first apprehension and laying hold of it. It is impossible
to suppose Faith in a Soul that was never humbled.

Thus, I say, you see the ground of Gods method, and the matter of humiliation,
as the forerunner of Peace and Consolation.

I shall only add this, before I have done with the first Means of begetting
Faith.

Direction in applying the Promises.
If thou would believe, apply to thy self in particular, what Promises God
makes in general and indefinitely: As for Example, in the Scripture, when
Christ says, Joh. 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me, and
him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out. Apply this to thy self.
Therefore if I come to Christ by virtue of this Word, I am sure he will not
cast me out.

So when the Scripture says, Joh. 1.12. But as many as received him, to them
gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name;
to as many as receive him, he gives the power or privilege to become the Sons
of God. Apply this to thy self. Therefore since God has made me willing to
receive him (for my King and Savior) I am sure I have this privilege, 2 Cor.
6.18.
to be the Son or Daughter of the Lord God Almighty.

So when the Scripture says, in that notable Proclamation of Christ in the
great day of the Feast, Joh. 7.37. If any man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink: Apply this to thy self. Therefore since God has given me grace to
hunger and thirst after the Righteousness of Christ. I am sure I have as good
warrant to take of the water of life as any other in the world: Rev. 22.17. --
And let him that is a thirst, come; and whosoever will, let him take the water
of life freely. Therefore says the thirsty Soul, It Is as free for me, as for
any other in the world. And thus is Faith begotten in the Soul, by a particular
application of a general Promise. And so much for the first Means of begetting
Faith, and that is the Word.

The second is Prayer: Second Mean of begetting Faith by prayer.
Pray that God would bless the Word, and all other Means: For the Word has no
Power to beget Faith of it self, without the powerful concurrence of the
Spirit, by which the Word was breathed forth at the first. Neither have we
power in our own will to make the Word effectual. Those that talk so much of
Free will, it is a shame then they believe no more, and do no more, if they had
that freedom they boast of: but indeed, the very practice of such men, is
enough to confute their Opinions. I Will never believe a man would be willing to
lie in a nasty Dungeon all his life, if he had liberty and power to go out at
his own pleasure.

O be much in Prayer to God therefore, that he would set thy imprisoned Soul at
liberty, that thou may have power to believe. Thus did David, Psalm. 142.7.
Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name, etc. As if he should
say, O Lord, I confess I am a poor prisoner to sin and Satan, I would fain be
set at liberty to believe thy Word and to do thy will but alas I cannot! I find
many a door fast shut upon me in this prison, and many a lock upon the doors,
many lets and impediments which I am never able to remove; and therefore
gracious Lord, do that for me, which neither I my self, nor all the friends I
can make, are ever able to do for me; pay the debts of thy poor prisoner in my
blessed surety, and set open the prison doors, O bring my soul out of prison,
(O Lord) that I may praise thy name!

Thus should we pray for Faith, as ever we desire the Word should be made
effectual for our good. Col. 4.3 1 Cor. 16.9
The Ministers should beg the prayers of the people (as Paul did (that he may
have a door of utterance, and the people should beg the prayers of the
Minister, that they may have a door of entrance, that the immortal seed may be
made an instrument of spiritual life, and the Just may live by Faith.

If ever we have Faith, if ever we be born again, the power of the Holy Ghost
must overshadow our souls, John 3.18 Expounded.
and put life into the seed of the Word, Joh. 1.13. Gods people are born not of
bloods, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

First, Not of bloods: What Is that? You know a man that comes of such a parent,
is said to come of such a blood. Now then put all the parents in the world
together, and you shall find, grace runs not in any blood, they are not born of
Bloods.

Secondly, Not of the Will of the flesh: What Is that? A fleshly carnal man
cannot convert himself, he cannot keep alive his own soul, Psalm. 22.29.

Thirdly, Not of the Will of man: What is that? Take a Regenerate man, the best
man in the world, yet he has not power to convert another unless God be with
him in the work, and so the truth is clear, Gods people are born not of Bloods,
nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of man, but of God. Remember what
Christ says, Joh. 6 44. No man can come to me, except the Father which has
sent me draw him. And therefore the Church prays, Cant. 1 4. Draw me, we will
run after thee. Plead thus with God, and say, Lord thou command to believe,
but I find I am shut up under unbelief: O thou that let me see my own
weakness and inab^lity to believe let me also see thy power in creating this
grace of Faith in my heart. And this is that other powerful means for the
begetting of Faith. Remember Preaching is the First,

Prayer is the Second.

Let not Preaching justle out Prayer, nor let Prayer justle out Preaching; as
some would have the Ordinances quarrel one with another, whereas all lend their
hands, and their natural help to give a lift at Faith. It is not the Word
without the Spirit can do it: Therefore do thou pray the Spirit may speak to
thy heart, while the Minister Preaches to the ear. That is a remarkable
passage, Act. 11 21. And the hand of the Lord was with them, (with the
Preachers) and a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord. Mark that,
The hand of the Lord was with them: We may preach long enough before we convert
one soul, if the hand of the Lord be not with us; till the bellows be burnt,
Jer. 6.29.

Therefore as Ministers should spend time beforehand in praying, as well as in
studying: So should people also in praying for the Minister, as well as in
hearing of him. Before thou go to the Congregation, lift up thy heart to God
in this or the like manner: Lord, let thy powerful hand go along with the
Minister this day. O let thy hand go along with his tongue, that I may have
grace to believe what he speaks to my Soul in thy Name! whilst he knocks at the
door of my heart, let thy Spirit unlock it for me; as the heart of Lydia was
unlocked, Act. 16.14. Whose heart the Lord opened, whilst Paul was preaching to
her. To conclude, Ephesians. 2.2
Remember Faith is the gift of God; and therefore good reason that we should
pray God to give us Faith.

Prayer of a Natural man.
It is Objected, We cannot pray without Faith, and therefore how can we pray for
Faith before we have it? This is to put a natural man upon duty before he be
come to Christ, and what fruit can we expect from this?

I Answer, 1 God has no where freed a natural man from his duty, though he
has lost his power to perfom it.

2. As we tell natural men their duty, so we are to let them know from whom
they may have power to perform it, namely, from Christ, if they be willing to
close with him.

3. It is evident, natural men are called upon to perform some duties before
they do believe: As for hearing, the case is plain. Romans 10.17
Faith comes by hearing, therefore we must hear, before we can believe; and so
for Prayer. Act. 8.22, 23. Peter calls upon Simon Magus to pray, though he was
in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity.

Object. But may not such prayer justly be abominable to God, whilst we are
strangers to God and Christ? If I were a friend indeed, then I might hope to
speed; according to that expression of Christ, Joh. 15.15. Henceforth I call
you not servants, -- but friends, etc. And therefore in the next verse, he
says, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, he shall give it you. Friends may
look to speed, but strangers may ask and go without.

Ans. I answer, It is true the prayers of such as are strangers to Jesus
Christ, may justly be abominable: But yet if we observe it, God gives some
encouragement a loof off, that such as are strangers may not utterly be
discouraged to cry to God for the bread of Life, for the Scripture tells us, an
importunate suitor may be heard, though not as a friend; yet for his
Importunity sake, Luke 11.8.

Object. But where do you find, that God has heard the prayer of a natural
man, or unconverted?

Ans. I answer, 1. The Scripture says nothing in vain, Jam 4 5. But Act. 8.22.
Such a one is exhorted to pray to God.

2. Though God threatens wicked men that are resolved to go on in their sins,
that he will stop his ears to their prayers; yet sometimes when they are deeply
humbled (though not wholly converted) God has heard their prayers, that this
his goodness might lead them to through repentance. He heard the prayer of
Abimilech, Genesis 20.4. and of the heathenish Mariners, Jonah 1.5, 14. Of Ahab,
when he humbled himself, 1 Kin. 21. last. And of Jehoahaz, 2 Kin. 13.3, 4. And
Jehoahaz besought the Lord, and the Lord hearkened unto him, etc.

Yet this is observable, Caution.
that the prayers of the righteous man avails much more, Jam. 5.16. The
encouragement of Simon Magus was but, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may
be forgiven thee, Acts 8.22.

And God threatens such as afflict any widow, or fatherless child. Exodus 22.22,
23. If thou afflict them in any wise, as if he should say, Take heed thou do
not. Why? If they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry.

Object. But these prayers are for temporal mercies, and not spiritual.

Answ. If God will hear the prayers of such for temporal mercies, then much
more for spiritual mercies, because those prayers are more agreeable to Gods
will, to seek the things of his Kingdom: When Solomon asked wisdom, 1 King. 3
6, etc. 10. And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing.
Jam. 1.5. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not: and it shall be given him.

Object. But a natural man cannot discern, nor yet desire the things of God, 1
Cor. 2.14. Rom 8 7.

Answ. We must distinguish of natural men,

1. Some left wholly to themselves.

2. Some are stirred up and enlightened in a great measure, though not wholly
converted: Of such Christ speaks, they are not far from the Kingdom of God,
Mar. 12.34.

Though all natural men be infinitely distant by Nature, yet God brings some
nearer and nearer by degrees, till they enter in: Although others may be near
and never enter; of such also speaks the Author to the Hebrews, 6.4. For it is
impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly
gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word
of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew
them again unto repentance.

Now though some such fall away, yet others in the use of Means come at last to
be fully converted, and Prayer is one Means among the rest. Look upon Manasses,
2 Chro 33.12, etc. When he was in affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and
humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers, and prayed unto him, and
he was entreated of him, and heard his supplication. Look upon Paul, Act. 9.11.
-- behold he prays. Yet his Conversion was not wholly perfected, (though his
conscience was stirred, and he was much humbled) for as yet he was not
instructed by Ananias, he had not received his sight, (a pledge of the cure of
his Spiritual blindness) he had not received the holy Ghost, (for that he
received after the preaching of Ananias, ver. 17.)

To conclude, Let all men (as God shall assist) lift up their hearts to God in
Prayer, that they may have grace to believe the Gospel; for who knows, but that
the Spirit of Supplication and Faith may be poured upon them both together:
Zech. 12.10. I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and of Supplications, etc. Luke 19.3 -- 9.
Zacheus his strong desires after Christ, were answered with grace. If they have
strong desires, it argues there are the seeds of Faith, and therefore such are
encouraged to pray: Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be filled. Therefore pray that thou may
believe; and believe, that thou may pray.

4. If thou can not pray thy self, yet beg the prayers of others in thy
behalf; as Simon Magus begged the prayers of the Apostles, apprehending their
prayers to be more prevalent than his own. It is possible God may hear the
prayers of Job for his friends, Job 42.8, 9.
when he will not hear them for themselves. However, pray thy self, and be sure
to beg the prayers of others; that the new creature in thy Soul, may be as
Samuel, which signifies, 1 Samuel 1.20.
One that is begged of God: That the prayers of thy faithful friends may be as
the Spiritual Midwives of thy new Birth.

How did Paul travel in the Spiritual birth of others? sometimes by Preaching,
and sometimes by Prayers; sometimes by one means, and sometimes by another:
Gal. 4.19. My little children, of whom I travel in birth again, until Christ be
formed in you.

The Jaylors Conversion, Act. 16.25. is set down as the consequent of the
Apostles prayers; not only their deliverance out of his Prison, but his
deliverance out of the Devils Prison, is set down as a fruit of their Prayers.

Pray therefore thy self, and beg the Prayers of others, that the heavy grave
stones, and all those other Impediments we have spoken of, may be rolled out of
the way, that thou may have power to believe, and so power to become the Son
of God by Faith. And so much for the second Means, which is Prayer.

The third is Society, Third mean of begetting faith, Good Society.
and frequent converse with faithful men. Remember what Solomon says, Prove.
13.20. He that walks with wise men shall be wise; but a companion of fools
shall be destroyed.

There is much power in Company to make a man either very bad, or very good.
But beside the Moral Efficacy of Vices and Virtues held out by way of Example,
(for we are apt to conceive, as Labans sheep, according to the patterns that
lie before us) I say, besides the Moral Efficacy, there is much more power in
the threatening, taking hold upon a wicked Company-keeper. If God say a wicked
company shall be destroyed, it were desperate presumption to expect Salvation
in such a way: And there is much power in the Promise on the other side; If God
say, a Companion of wise and faithful men shall be made wise and faithful
himself, we may well expect a blessing in that way, when God once gives us a
heart to desire, and to delight in the company of such persons.

As for vain Companions, you must never look to get good by them; the more they
warm you with their outward comforts, the colder will your hearts be to Jesus
Christ, (as it was with Peter in the Highpriests Hall) their Reproaches, their
Mocks, their rotten and corrupt Communication, is like cold water cast upon
smoak^ng flax.

But now in the company of gracious persons, there is some good to be gotten,
they are like Lanthorns, they disperse their light round about; it is good
walking by such a light, whilst we are in the dark our selves. They are like
Precious Stones, they do in a very lively manner hold forth the virtues of him,
who has called them out of darkness into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. If
thou be much in their company, thou shall see much of Christ, and hear much
of Christ, and it may be at the last their discourse will warm thy heart: Did
not our hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he
opened to us the Scriptures, Luk 24.32. Agrippa was almost persuaded to be a
Christian, whilst he was talking with Paul; and the Eunuch in the 8 of the
Acts, was not only almost, but altogether persuaded, whilst he was talking
with Philip.

If thou do frequently and conscionably converse with such as these, thou
shall hear them discoursing, one while of man's misery by Nature, another while
of the excellency of Jesus Christ, another while of the manner and means of
the^r own Conversion, another while of Gods dealing with them since they were
converted, in removing their fears, in answering their prayers, in satisfying
their desires, and the like: O come, say they, Psa. 34.
and we will tell you what the Lord has done for our souls. And thus, like the
good and faithful Spies, they tell such good news of the Land of Canaan, and
present such goodly Clusters of the first fruits to the view of others, that
their mouths also fall a watering, and their Souls fall a longing to be in the
same condition. That was the fruit of the gracious discourse that passed
between the Spouse and the Daughters of Jerasalem, Cant. 6 1. Whither is thy
beloved gone, O thou fairest among Women, whither is thy beloved turned aside?
that we may seek him with thee. And thus is many a poor ignorant Soul stirred
up to enquire after God, by conversing with godly persons. O friend, says such
a one, I perceive you are in love with Jesus Christ, and have received precious
Love Tokens from him, you have Truth of Faith, and Truth of Grace; but alas, I
am a stranger to Jesus Christ, I pray then tell me how and where I should find
him, and what is the readiest way to believe in him, that my Soul also may seek
him with yours. And thus is the poor creature drawn after Jesus Christ.

As the Devil has his Coy-birds (Black-Birds of Hell) to draw others into his
Net to their destruction: So God has his Coy-Birds also (Birds of Paradise) to
draw others into his Net to their Salvation. God makes his Ministers both
Fowlers and Fishers of men, (and private Christians in their places must
endeavor to draw and allure others to come within the compass of the Net) to
prove if God peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of
the truth, and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil,
who are taken captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2. the two last verses. And
thus of the third Means and Furtherance of Faith, namely, Society, and frequent
converse with faithful men.

Fourth mean of begetting Faith, Meditation of Gods Name.
The fourth, is the consideration of Gods glorious Name: Exodus 34 6, 7. The
Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and
transgression, and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty, etc.
Especially the consideration of his mercy, and readiness to receive sinners
when they come to him for mercy: This will encourage a poor worthless creature
to believe in him. For naturally it is otherwise with us in regard of our own
guilty Consciences, we have hard thoughts of God, as if he were a very cruel
and austere Master, reaping where he has not sowed, and gathering where he
has not strowed, Mat. 25 24. expecting to reap the fruits of Obedience, where
he never did sow abilities of Grace for the producing of such fruits: Though
this be utterly false, if we look as far as to our first Parents. But these, I
say, are those hard thoughts of God, that naturally spring up in our wicked
hearts; and these thoughts are many times heightened and improved by Temptation
from the Devil, who, as he represents God made all of Mercy to a presumptuous
sinner, without any consideration of his Justice; so on the other side, he
represents God made all of Justice to an humbled sinner, without any
consideration of his Mercy: And doubtless, he that in the state of Innocence
durst be so bold to accuse God to our first Parents, as if he envied their
happy condition, will much more accuse God of severity to men lying in a state
of guilt and corruption, who are much more inclinable to suck in the
Temptation. This is that envious person, that is evermore sowing the seeds of
Contention:

Accusing Man to Man, Ephesians. 4.26, 27. Man to God; as Job 1.9. God to Man, Genesis
3.5.
That, if it be possible, there may be no Reconciliation, no Mercy held forth
on Gods part, and no Faith to receive that Mercy on our part.

Now therefore God on the other side, that he may encourage poor guilty
creatures to believe and come in. He holds forth in the Gospel, the glorious
Riches of his Free grace, professes his unfeigned willingness to receive all
such as are willing to receive him, and his Son Jesus Christ upon Gospel-terms,
that is, to receive Christ wholly to be their Prophet, Priest, and King. God is
so willing to receive poor Creatures, that he causes these glad tidings of the
Gospel to be published, makes Proclamation of Pardon to all that are willing to
lay down their arms, and come in. Nay, he inviteth, persuades, entreats,
wooeth, beseeches, (Mercy upon her bended knees, becomes a suitor to Misery to
accept of Mercy) and if this be not enough, he Commands poor lost creatures
to believe on his Son Jesus Christ.

Now the serious consideration of this, is a special Means, under God, to make
the Creature willing to believe.

Object. But I know not whether God commands me to believe, or no? Or whether
the death of Christ shall ever be effectual for my good?

Answ. Thou can not know whether the death of Christ shall be effectual for
thy everlasting good, till thou do believe: For he that believes on the Son
of God, has the witness in himself, 1 John 5.10. And he that believes not the
Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3. last.

But this thou may be sure of, God Commands thee to believe: Because in the
season of Grace, God commands the Gospel to be preached to every creature, Mar.
16.15, 16. And what is the sum of the Gospel but this, 1 John 3.23. This is his
Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ.

And what is it to believe in him, but to receive him to be our Prophet,
Priest, and King: Joh. 1.12. But as many as received him, to them gave he power
to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. The one
expounds the other; Believing in Christ, is Receiving of Christ; and Receiving
of Christ, is Believing in Christ; and he that thus Receives Christ, and thus
believes in Christ, shall never perish. The death of Christ shall certainly be
effectual for the good of all such, and for none else. And so much for the
fourth Means, The consideration of Gods readiness to receive sinners that fly
to him for Mercy.

Attributes of God special Means to beget Faith.
I might add other Attributes of God besides his Mercy, as special Means to
beget and strengthen Faith:

As,

1. Power of God.
First, the Power of God in making good his Promise, all the Devils in Hell, and
wicked Men upon Earth, cannot hinder him. And this was that which encouraged
Abraham to believe, Romans 4.20, 21. He staggered not at the promise of God
through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God; and being fully
persuaded, that what he had promised he was able also to perform.

2. Truth of God.
Secondly, the Truth and Faithfulness of God: 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. Faithful is he that
calls you, who also will do it. It is better to trust God upon his Word, than
all the men in the world upon the strongest Bonds and Engagement that can be
devised. Judge. 16.11.
Samson told Dalilah, how she might bind him with strong cords that he could
not go from her; but he told her false: But God tells us how we may bind him
to our selves, by the Word of his Promise that he cannot get from us; and he
tells us true: Mat. 5.18.
Heaven and earth shall pass, but one jot or tittle of the Word shall never
fall to the ground. The Truth of God is a special Foundation of Faith.

Thirdly, the Unchangeableness of God. 3. Unchangeableness of God.
He is the Unchangeable God, and so there is no occasion why God should in the
least alter his Word, because he does never alter his mind, he is an
Unchangeable God, Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not, therefore ye sons of
Jacob are not consumed.

Now, I say, the consideration of these Attributes of God, that he is Merciful,
Powerful, Faithful, and Unchangeable, the self-same God from Generation to
Generation, without the least shadow of Change: Jam. 1.17.
The consideration of all these, will be a special Means to strengthen Faith.

But Fifthly, if thou would believe, Fifth Mean of begetting faith, Sight of
treasure in Christ. Col. 1.19. and 2.3. Joh. 1.16
labor to see thy own Wants and Weaknesses, on the one side; and those
infinite Treasures of all good that are laid up in Christ, on the other side:
to that end, that going out of our selves into him by Faith, we might out of
his fullness receive grace for grace. For indeed, as unbelief is nothing else,
but going out of God into our selves: So Faith is nothing but a going out of
our selves into God through Christ. O labor therefore to see thy own wants and
weaknesses; thy want of Wisdom, want of Righteousness, want of Grace, want of
Strength: and labor to see Treasures of Wisdom in Christ to make thee wise; of
Righteousness, to cover thy sins; of Grace, to supply all thy defects; of
Strength, to enable to all holy service: and this will quicken thee to believe
in him.

Doubtless, vain and ignorant men think they see an emptiness in Christ, and
the ways of Christ, and a fullness in themselves, and in the Creature: Therefore
they leave Christ, and embrace the Creature; Rev. 3.17. Thou say I am rich,
and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and know not that thou
art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.

But Gods People see an emptiness in themselves, and all other creatures, but a
fullness in Christ.

In Christ there is (...), (...), (...).


Self-sufficiency, All Sufficiency, Sole-sufficiency.
1. He is Self-sufficiency, he is Jehovah, he has a being of himself, without
any dependence upon any other, and therefore only to be trusted to: for that
which depends upon another, may fall, as the greatest of men: Psalm. 146.3, 4,
5. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the Sons of men, in whom there is no
help: His breath goes forth, he turns to his earth, in that very day his
thoughts perish. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose
hope is in the LORD his God.

2. All Sufficiency: Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be
thou perfect. All good is to be found in God: This or that creature has but a
particular good; Meat is good against hunger, clothes against nakedness; but
clothes will not satisfy hunger, nor meat cover the nakedness: but God is
All-sufficient.

3. Sole-Sufficiency: That is, he is only sufficient, all without him is but
vanity. He is God only good, as God only wise. He fills all in all; every ways
able to supply all our wants, and therefore a most suitable object of our
Faith. It was that which drew the Prodigal home to his fathers house. Luke
15.17. viz. A sense of his own wants, (I perish with hunger) and apprehension
of his fathers fullness, (in my fathers house is bread enough.) What follows
upon that? A gracious Act of repentance, and faith, ver. 18. I will arise, and
go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven,
and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son, etc. And this is
the fifth means; labor to see thy own wants and weaknesses on the one side,
and those infinite treasures that are laid up in Christ, on the other side.

Sixthly, and last of all, 6 Last Mean. Mat. 11.12 Diligence in all Means.
As we must seek Christ and Faith in the use of Means, so we must use the Means
with all diligence, if we desire to speed. 2 Pet. 1.5, 10. The Apostle calls
upon us, Giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue, etc. And, give
diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. Now this Diligence implies
three things.

1. A very high Esteem of the Means: For a man will never use diligence in that
which he values not. Psalm. 119.71. The Law of thy mouth is dearer to me than
thousands of gold and silver.

2. A great deal of Prayers and Labor in the use of the Means: (a diligent man
is ever laborious in his way) Pro. 2.4, 5. If thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her as for hid treasures; Then shall thou understand the fear of
the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. You know what pains they take who
labor in silver mines, and such pains should they take who seek after Faith.

3. This Diligence implies the use of all Means with Perseverance: We do not
account him diligent that works but by fits and by starts, and when he does
work, he will be sure to pick and choose, to take that he likes and leave the
rest. Neither is that soul diligent in the use of the Means that takes up one
ordinance and lays down another; or takes it up at one time, and lays it down
at another, though God calls for it at both alike. He that wilfully contemns God
in one thing contemns him in all. Therefore, remember to seek God in the use of
all Means, with Perseverance; The blessing and promise is intailed to such,
Prove. 8 34. There is the blessing: Blessed is the man that hears me, (says
Wisdom,) watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors: Jer.
29.13. There is the promise: And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall
search for me with all your heart. Therefore be sure to use all means with all
diligence, as ever we desire to find the precious pearl of saving Faith.

And hitherto of the first Branch of the Exhortation, If the Just lives by
Faith; if Faith be such an excellent Grace labor to get it: With all getting
get Faith.

We come now to the Second.

2. Branch of Exhortation to keep Faith.
2. Labor to keep it when thou have it: It is no less piece of Spiritual good
husbandry to keep our stock of Faith when we have it, then to get it at the
first. It is not enough that once we have believed and laid hold of the
promise, but we must keep our Faith, and keep our hold, as we desire to keep
our Grace, and to keep our Peace; and indeed to keep our God. And therefore
observe how the Apostle cites this Text, Heb. 10.38. Now the just shall live by
his Faith: but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him: As
if he should say, It is to little purpose to believe for a time, and in the
hour of temptation to fall away; For as such a soul takes little or no pleasure
in God, so God takes as little pleasure in him. It is the precept of the
Apostle, Heb. 10.23. Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith, without
wavering, to the end. Now the profession of our faith, and faith it self, is
all one with God, and should be all one with us; because there ought to be no
profession of faith without the Grace of Faith. And this we are to hold fast
without wavering to the end.

It was the ordinary practice of the Apostles, not only to beget many to the
Faith, but when they had done, they went up and down to visit those places and
persons on purpose to establish and confirm them in the Faith, Act. 14.22.
Confirming the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the
Faith, etc. Act. 16.4, 5. It was the Apostles exhortation to the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 16.13. Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit you like men; be strong. It
is not enough that we have faith, but we must endeavor to keep it, and to
stand fast in it when we have it. Therefore he persuades the Colossians, to be
settled and grounded in the faith, Col. 1.23. If ye continue in the faith
grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, etc.
Settled and grounded, is a Metaphor taken from Buildings set upon a sure
foundation. And in the second chapter, the seventh verse, he perswads them to
be well rooted, and established in the faith. A Metaphor taken from trees, that
are planted with good and sufficient roots. A tree (especially at the first
planting) had better want branches then roots, branches will never beget roots,
but good roots will soon beget branches. And therefore the Apostle persuades
them to be well rooted and established in the faith; Both in the Doctrine of
faith, and in the Grace of faith. And what he holds forth to the people by way
of precept, that he holds forth also in his own practice, 2 Timothy 4 7, 8. I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith:
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day. Mark he does not say, I am sure of
a Crown of righteousness because I have received the faith, but because I have
kept the faith. For no man is crowned except he strives lawfully, and no man
strives lawfully but he who keeps his faith to the end.

Be sure therefore to keep it when thou have it: Will not an artificer keep his
tools and instruments? Will not a Scholar keep his books? A Traveller his bills
of direction? A Mariner keep his compass? A wise man keep his friend? A good
houswife keep her keys? Will not a purchaser keep his evidences for house and
land?

The general usefulness of Faith.
Now all this, and much more also, is Faith to a gracious soul: It is the
Instrument he works by, the Book he learns by, the Letter he is directed by,
the Compass he sails by, the Friend he lives upon, the Key that opens all the
good treasures of God, and the main Evidence he has to show both for this life
and for that which is to come: And therefore keep thy faith as thou would
keep thy life, For the Just shall live by his Faith. Reasons why we should look
to the keeping of our Faith.


Keep thy Faith, and thy Faith will keep thee: As Solomon speaks, Pro. 4.6.
Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee; love her, and she shall keep
thee. Keep faith alive and Faith will keep thy life, 1. The Benefit of keeping
Faith.
as it is in ver. 13. -- Keep her for she is thy life.

You know a Soldier so long as he keeps his shield, his shield keeps him;
Ephesians. 6.16
but if once he lose his shield, he may soon lose his life. So it is with the
shield of Faith, keep that, and thou keep thy Life, lose that, and thou
losest all. Isa. 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is staid
on thee; because he trusts in thee. Observe, so long as we have Grace and
Faith to keep our God, Our God by the grace of Faith will keep us.

Object. But you will say, Cannot God keep us without Faith?

I Answer, I will not dispute about the absolute power of God, it is our duty
to look to his revealed will: Now the Scripture tells us, 1 Pet. 1.5. We are
kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. We are kept indeed by
the power of God, but the power of God puts forth it self in giving power to
our Faith. Therefore keep thy Faith as thou would keep thy life.

2 Reas. Enemies that oppose Faith.
Remember, Secondly, Thou have many enemies that do oppose thy Faith, and pull
hard to twitch it from thee, and therefore thou had need be the more careful
to keep it, and to hold it fast.

First, 1. Corruption.
if we look into the Corruption of our own Natures, there is a world of
Unbelief fighting against our Faith: we are like men that row against the
stream, and therefore if we intermit a few strokes, if we ply not our Oars, we
are presently carried down the stream, more than we can regain of a long time.

Secondly, 2. Temptation.
if we look upon the Tentations of Satan this is like a strong wind, that goes
along with the Tide of our own corruption, and all to overturn this poor
Vessel, 1 Timothy 1.19.
that we might make shipwreck of our faith. When Satan desires that Peter may
fail, it is his great desire that his faith may fail: Luk 22.31, 32. And the
Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he may
sift you as wheat: But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.

Thirdly, 3. Troubles.
if we look upon the Troubles and Persecutions of the World, here is still
stronger opposition against Faith. Therefore in the midst of Troubles and
Persecutions, the Apostle was jealous over the Thessalonians lest Satan should
take an advantage to shake their faith at such a time as this. 1 Thessalonians. 3.5.
For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your faith, lest
by some means the Tempter have tempted you, and our labor be in vain.
Therefore, as a violent storm does but make a man girt his garment faster about
him, so should it be in this case: The more violently the World and the Devil
rages against our Faith, the faster should we girt our Spiritual Armor, and
labor to keep our faith when we have it.

Obj. But you will say, If once we have justifying faith, Faith cannot be lost.
we shall never lose it; and therefore, what need you persuade us to keep it?

Answ. 1. I answer, First, because God works by means, and so he is pleased to
keep his people sound in the faith, by setting before their eyes the danger of
Apostasy, Heb. 3.12. Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil
heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God.

Answ. 2. Secondly, because, however Gods people can never lose Faith totally
and finally, yet they may lose the comfort of it, and the actins of it without
a great deal of circumspection; and therefore it will be our wisdom, not only
to keep faith when we have it, but to keep it in its power and vigor, that it
may not be like those things that are not the better, but the worse for keeping.

Therefore keep thy Faith, as thou art charged to keep thy heart, Prove. 4.23.
with all diligence: Or as men keep their Orchards and Gardens, with good
Fences about them: Or so as thou would keep thy dwelling house, wind-tight
and water-tight: Or so as thou would thy lodging-room, or the bed wherein
thou sleep; nay, the bed wherein Christ and the Church sleeps, Cant. 3.7.
Behold the bed which is Solomon's, guarded with threescore valiant men of
Israel: Or so as thou would keep thy Treasure under Lock and Key; for Faith
is a precious Treasure: Or so as thou would keep thy bodily health; 3 John 2.
Beloved, I wish above all things, that thou may prosper, and be in health,
even as thy soul prospers: Or so as thou would keep the Apple of thine Eye
from the least mote or mite of offense: Or so as thou would keep thy very
life; for Faith, under God, is the very life of the Soul. Solomon tells us,
Prove. 13.3.
that he that keeps his mouth, keeps his life: we may as truly say, He that
keeps his Faith, keeps his life: for, The just shall live by his faith.

Other things a man may be careful to keep, and it may be they will prove of
very little use when all is done. The time will certainly come, when thy best
friends cannot help thee, thy Meat and Drink cannot nourish thee, Physicians
cannot cure thee, thy large Possessions cannot comfort thee; yet even at such a
time as this, if thou can but lay hold of a Promise, thou may live upon the
Word which God has spoken, when thou can not live upon thy Revenues, nor
live upon thy Calling, nor live upon thy Friends, nor live upon the Creatures
of Meat and Drink; yet even then may thou live upon thy Faith: when the just
man can live upon nothing else, he can still live upon his Faith. Keep Faith
therefore, for it is thy life: Now skin for skin, Job 2.4.
and all that a man has will he give for his life. If one should deliver a
very precious thing into the hand of a Friend, with this or the like charge, Be
sure to keep this about you wheresoever you come, and nothing shall be able to
hurt you, no ill savor or pestilential air shall be able to infect you.

O how careful would a man be to keep such a Receipt! he would keep it as his
very life. And such a Receipt, Faith a spiritual Charm.
such a Spiritual Charm is Faith: he gives this solemn charge, Keep your Faith
as you would keep your life; keep your Faith, and nothing shall be able to hurt
you: Luke 10.19. Behold, I give you power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions,
and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall by any means hurt you.

As this was true of the Faith of Miracles in those days: so it is as true of
saving Faith, in a sound and saving sense at this day. Such as keep their Faith
in safety, shall keep themselves in safety, and shall tread down Satan, that
old Serpent, under their feet, and nothing shall be able to offend them.

And therefore, where the Holy Ghost makes mention of the greatest troubles
that befell the Church, he makes mention also of their guard; Here is the
patience and the faith of the Saints, Rev. 13.10. and 14.12. Keep thy Faith
therefore, and thy Patience, as ever thou desire to be kept in the great hour
of Temptation: Rev. 3.10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I
will also keep thee from the hour of Temptation, which shall come upon all the
world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. O remember, this will be the
comfort, It is the glory of a Christian to be found in the faith.
and the glory of a Christian, to be found in the Faith, when Christ comes to
make a scrutiny either of death, or at the general Judgment: 1 Pet. 1.7. That
the trial of your faith being much more precious than of gold that perishes,
though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and honor, and
glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. It is nothing to say, Such a man had
Faith; or, Such a man once made a glorious Profession of the Faith: but this is
the glory of Christians, to be found in the Faith when Christ comes to
Judgment. This was the height of Paul's ambition, to be found in Christ when he
came to give up his account. Phil. 3.8, 9. That I may win Christ, and be found
in him, not having my own righteousness, which is of the law, but the
righteousness of God by faith.

Now he that keeps the Faith, and endures steadfast to the end, is sure to be
found in him, and none else.

Quest. But you will say, What should I do, that I may keep Faith safely, and
be found in the Faith in the most dangerous times?

Means of preserving faith. 1. Soundness.
I answer, First, if thou would be found in the faith, be sure to be sound in
the faith; for unsound things do not use to last long. An Apple that is rotten
at the Core, will soon be gone. Apostasy is the usual Catastrophe of
Hypocrisy: He that would deceive in his Profession, is justly deceived of his
Salvation. That Is the reason the Apostle so often persuades them to be sound in
the faith, Tit. 1.13. and 2 2. Let us build our Faith upon good ground, upon
Gods Word; and so, let us build our hearts upon Faith, and not build Faith upon
our own deceitful hearts: Prove. 28.26. He that trusts in his own heart is a
fool; but whosoever walks wisely, he shall be delivered. That is the first Rule,
Be sound in the Faith.

2. Trial of it.
Secondly, if thou would keep thy Faith, and be sound in it, be sure to bring
it to the Testimony, and examine it to the bottom. How do we know things to be
sound or unsound, but upon their trial: Therefore be sure to try thy Faith, if
thou would have it lasting Faith. Some take it for granted, their Faith is
good and sound: whereas if they should but feel the Pulse of it, they would
find it very sick and weak. It is said of Joseph and Mary, Luke 1.41.
they went a days journey, supposing Jesus Christ to have been in their
company; but when they came to a through scrutiny, they perceived they had lost
him, and were fain to go back again to seek him. It is to be feared, many a
professed Christian plods on many a days, and many a years journey, supposing
Faith, and Christ by Faith to be in their company; when, if they would make a
diligent search, they should find themselves at a loss, and such as had need
go back again, and begin all their work afresh: and indeed, a man had better
begin twenty times, than be once mistaken in a matter of that moment. Therefore
be sure to examine thy Faith at the first, as thou desire to keep thy credit
with God or Man. A wise Merchant, that would keep his credit and keep his
estate, is often casting up his Books of Accounts, but he is like to keep
neither of the former, that is careless in the latter. Be thou therefore this
wise Merchant, if thou would keep thy Faith to the last, be sure to make
trial of it at the first. How it ought to be tried, I shall not now stand to
show you, but refer you to that which was said in the particular Use to that
purpose.

Thirdly, he that would be kept sound in the Faith, 3. Love of the Truth.
must be sure to love the Truth, and to hate every false doctrine: for,
Corruption in judgment will soon weaken our faith. 2 Pet. 3.17. Ye therefore,
beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also being led away
with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. An unconstant
man, that halts between two Opinions, will soon prove an unstedfast man: Jam.
1.8. A double minded man is unstable in all his ways. 1 Timothy 4.1. Now the Spirit
speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith,
giving heed to seducing spirits, and Doctrines of Devils.

4. A good conscience.
Fourthly, he that would keep his Faith, must keep a good Conscience in all
things; and he keeps a good Conscience, that walks up to his light: Faith loves
to dwell in a sweet lodging; 1 Timothy 3.9. Holding the mystery of faith in a pure
conscience The Mystery of Faith is kept in a pure conscience, if once the
chamber of Conscience be sluttish and nasty, farewell Faith. To be sure, Faith
and a good Conscience come and go both together: He that makes shipwreck of the
one, cannot long preserve the other from sinking; 1 Timothy 1.19. Holding faith
and a good conscience, which some having put away, concerning faith have made
shipwreck. A good conscience, as we told you, is available to the holding both
the Doctrine of Faith, and the Grace of Faith. And though these words are
primarily meant of the Doctrine of Faith, as we showed you, when we spoke of
living by Faith the Life of Preservation, or Conservation, in answer to the
Arguments of the Papists from this place: yet the Argument is good by necessary
consequence, a fortiori, from this Scripture. If a good conscience be so
available for the keeping of the Doctrine of Faith; then much more for keeping
the Grace of Faith: forasmuch as an evil conscience is more inconsistent with
the Grace of Faith, than with the Doctrine of Faith. For howsoever, an evil
conscience is a very ready way to bribe and corrupt a man's judgment: yet many
for a time have taught sound Doctrine, who have been very unsound in their
practice. Mat. 23.3. All therefore that they bid you observe, that observe and
do; but do not ye after their works, for they say, and do not. But an habitual
corruption of conscience and conversation, cannot stand with the soundness of
the grace of Faith. Joh. 1.6. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and
walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. And 2.4. He that says, I know
him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.
Therefore, 1 Timothy 1.5. he couples the grace of Faith and a good Conscience
together: Now the end of the Commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of
a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. Be sure therefore to keep a good
conscience, as thou would keep thy faith.

Fifthly, if thou would keep thy Faith, 5. Right bottom.
build it not upon false Promises; that is, when thou make a Promise to thy
self, over and above that Promise which God has made in his Word. Many a man,
when he first begins to make Profession of the Faith, he promises to himself a
great deal of ease, and riches, and credit in the world; whereas he should
expect the contrary, a great deal of trouble, and Persecution, and Poverty, and
Disgrace, etc. Now when such a man's End fails him, his Faith also will fail
him, and he is ashamed of the very Profession of it. Such low and carnal ends,
are just like the weights that hang upon a Clock, so long as the weights move,
the Clock moves, but when the weights are once at ground, the Clock stands
still: So it is with such men, so long as their carnal ends move them in
Religious ways, they are moved; but when once their ends fail, they stand stark
still, and will move no further. Therefore beware of false ends in the
Profession of the Faith. Promise to thy self no more than God has promised,
lest failing of thy expectation, thy faith fail thee also. He is a wise and
sure builder, that sits down and counts the cost at the first: but he is a
fool, and his building like to come to nothing, that after he has laid the
foundation, repents him of his work, and says, I never thought it would have
cost me half so much, Luke 14.28.

Sixthly, if thou would keep thy Faith, 6. Commit it to God.
commit it to Gods keeping; whatsoever we commit to his trust, is put into a
safe hand: 2 Timothy 1.12. For the which cause I also suffer these things:
nevertheless, I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have believed, and I am
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against
that day. Therefore be sure not only to commit other things to God by faith,
but even thy faith it self, commit that to his keeping, pray him to keep it for
thee. You know what Christ said to Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith fail not, Luke 22.32. Now Christ's Prayer is as good as a Promise, Joh. 11.
for we know that his Father heard him always. Therefore ground thy Prayer upon
his Prayer, and say, Lord, hear me in that Prayer which I have taken out of my
Saviors own mouth: O let not my Faith fail! That which thou have committed to
my trust, Lord, I desire to re-commit to thy trust (for I dare not trust my
self) Therefore as David says of his mouth, Psalm. 141.3. Set a watch (O Lord)
before my mouth, and keep thou the door of my lips: So should every true
Believer pray in relation to his heart; Set a watch (O Lord) before my heart,
and keep thou the door of my Faith. That as the Lord is the keeper of thy
person, Psalm. 121.5. The Lord is thy keeper: So he may be the Lord Keeper of
thy faith also. And that is the sixth Means, Look unto him by Prayer, who is
the Author and Finisher of thy faith, Heb. 12.2.

7. The free Spirit.
Seventhly, if thou would be established in faith, pray God to give thee his
Free Spirit, for that is an establishing Spirit: Psalm. 51.12. Establish me with
thy free Spirit: With thy free Spirit? what is that?

1. The Spirit of God is not only a free Spirit in it self, (for we may say of
the Spirit of God, as the Apostle speaks of the Word of God, 2 Timothy 2.4. It is
not bound.)

2. Yea, and it is free in the Donation of it, it is most freely bestowed,
where God gives it. Joh. 3.8. The wind blows where it lists, and thou
hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, nor whether it
goes. So is every one that is born of the Spirit. God is as free in the work
of the Spirit, as in the work of the Mind: All the men in the world cannot
command the Wind; no, nor the Devil himself (though he be called, Ephesians. 2.
The Prince of the Air) he cannot command the Wind without a Commission from
God; as we see in the case of Job: so, no man can command the Spirit.

3. Yea, but the Spirit is not only free in the Nature of it, and in the
Donation of it: But it is also free in the Effects and Operations of it, that
is to say, It makes those free that receive it: Joh. 8.36. If the Son shall
make you free, ye shall be free indeed. And how does he make men free, but by
his Spirit? The Spirit of liberty is opposed to the Spirit of bondage: 2 Cor.
3.17. -- and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. And this Spirit
is an establishing Spirit. Establish me with thy free Spirit.

If you shall demand,

Q. What this Free and ingenuous Spirit is? and how it does Establish?

Ans. It is a Spirit Free,

First, Because it Frees us in some measure, What the Free Spirit of God sets
Believers Free from.
from that which might occasion Backsliding and Apostasy from the Faith.

Secondly, In particular, it frees a man,

1. From the Bondage and Power of his own Lusts, that sin reigns not in him.

2. It frees him from Bondage and slavery to the Lusts of other men. 1 Cor.
7.23. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men.

3. It frees him from the Bondage and slavery of the World: The world gets not
the victory over him. It is a base Spirit that stoops to the worlds lure, as
Demas did. He is not in Bondage to the pleasures or profits of the world:
Therefore the Spirit of the world, and the Spirit of God are opposed. 1 Cor.
2.12. Now we have received, not the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit which
is of God, etc.

4. He is free from the Exaction, Curse, and Malediction of the Law, of the
Moral Law; and free from the burden of the Ceremonial Law.

5. He is free from that which is the fruit of that curse, a Slavish and a
Servile Fear: Either of God, or man, which makes men weary of their lives, and
yet extremely afraid to dye.

The Free Spirit of Christ, by degrees, does set his servants at liberty from
these fears. Heb. 2 15. He came to deliver them, who through fear of death were
all their life time subject to bondage. 2 Timothy 1.7. For God has not given us
the Spirit of fear, but of power, of love, and of a sound mind.

How the Free Spirit of God Establishes.
Thus you see what this free and ingenious Spirit is, and how it does free us
from those things which might occasion apostasy from the Faith; and by that
means it becomes an establishing spirit to us. For in case the Spirit of God do
not free men from these fears and burdens, the sinful flesh will soon lighten
it self; it will purchase to it self a carnal liberty by rebellion and
apostasy, if the Spirit of God do not administer a Spiritual liberty by which
the yoke of Christ is made easy, and so the poor creature is confirmed in the
Faith. Therefore pray God to establish thee with his free Spirit.

We have given many Motives before, I shall add but this one, and so conclude.

Motive to pray for the Free Spirit.
As the right use of Christian liberty is a special means to preserve Faith: So
Faith also in the right use of it, is a special means to preserve Christian
Liberty, (which was purchased by the blood of Christ) as one hand helps
another, and one leg supports another, so it is in this case, betwixt Faith and
Christian liberty; Faith and Christian Liberty supports each other.
they do mutually strengthen and support one another. There are certain graces
that are Custodes libertatis Christianae. (The Lord give us the thing, as well
as the name.)

Faith an excellent means to preserve Christian Liberty in many Respects.
Now Faith is one of these graces, and a principal one; lose thy Faith, and lose
thy Liberty, keep thy Faith and keep thy Liberty.

As for Example:

First, Such as believe in Christ, are free from the Law of sin and death. Romans
8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from
the Law of sin and death.

Some indeed professing the Faith, account it their liberty to sin against God,
and are never troubled for it. But they are men of corrupt minds, and destitute
of the truth of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.5. For the liberty that Christ has purchased,
is not to be free from his service, (as in other manumissions of servants) but
free to his service: His service is perfect liberty. He has set us at liberty
from other service, (from the service of sin and satan.) That we might serve
him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all our days, Luke
1.74. Now I say, He that keeps his Faith, keeps his Freedom; he that loses his
Faith, loses his Charter, or at the least the Evidence of his Charter for his
Spiritual Freedom.

Secondly, He that is strong in the Faith stands fast in exercise of the
liberty wherewith Christ has made him free, Gal. 6.1. But he that is weak in
the Faith, is also weak in the use of his Christian liberty. Romans 14.1. Him
that is weak in the faith receive you, but not to doubtful disputations; viz.
in the use of things indifferent: And so we may say of other parts of our
Freedom from other bondages.

As First, From the Bondage of Sin. The stronger is thy Faith, the weaker is
thy Lust; for Faith purifieth the heart. Acts 15.9. And put no difference
between us and them, purifying their hearts by Faith.

And Secondly, from the bondage of Inordinate Fear: The more Faith, the less
fear; and on the other side, the less Faith, the more fear, Mat. 8.26. Why are
ye fearful, O ye of little Faith? Keep thy Faith therefore, as thou desire to
keep thy Christian Liberty, which is the most excellent Freedom in the world.
And so much for the second Branch of the Use.

The First was to exhort to get Faith, (if it be so excellent a grace.)

The second is to keep it when we have it.

Now the Third is,

3 Branch of Exhortation to Act Faith.
3. To act it, and to live by it, as well as to keep it: It is far better to put
our Faith to use, then our Money to use: The just makes a living out of his
Faith, whilst he puts it to use. O lay not up this precious treasure in a
Napkin, for then it will rust for want of using! And we may say of our
spiritual treasure, as the Apostle James speaks of temporal treasure, Jam. 5.2,
3. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments moth-eaten: Your gold and
silver is cankred, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you. O let
not our Faith Rust for want of using.

Object. But you will say, Is it possible to have Faith and not to use it?

Ans. I answer, It is possible at some times, and upon some occasions: A man
may have the Habit of Faith and not act it as he ought to do, unless he be
very careful to stir up the grace of God that is in him. 2 Timothy 1
Moses had the habit of faith, and yet he failed in not acting of it at the
waters of Meribah.

The disciples of Christ had the habit of faith, yet they failed in acting of
it in the time of danger, insomuch that Christ says, Where is your Faith?

Let us not therefore content our selves that we believe in Christ, and we have
the habit of faith, but let us be sure to reduce this Habit into Act upon all
occasions.

We say all, The excellency of an instrument consists in the use. That is a
good Knife, or Spade, or Sword, or Shield that is good for use. So ^t is with
the Shield of faith, that is the most excellent faith that is good for use.

Motives to Act Faith.

First, It is the most Lively Faith; when we Act it, so that we live by it. As
we say, an active man, is a lively man: whereas a sluggard, or unactive
creature, is counted a dead creature, one that is all amort. So an active
Faith, is a Lively Faith; whereas a fruitless and unactive faith, is called a
dead Faith, Jam. 2.
and a dead faith is as good as no faith at all. We love other things and
persons that are Active and Lively. O let us love a Lively Faith!

Secondly, Consider the Acting of our faith: when we have it, it is that which
brings most Honor to God.

When we trust God with everything we possess, both for the Keeping and the
Using
of it. we take in hand: So that we dare do nothing without craving his Advice,
Blessing.



This puts a great deal of honor upon God. As the natural son honors his
natural father by this means: So Gods children much more honor their heavenly
father when they thus by faith do acknowledge him in all their ways. Prove. 3.


Thirdly, This is that which brings no less Comfort and Hearts ease to our
selves, then honor to God; therefore faith is called a casting our burden upon
the Lord, Psalm 37.5 Roll thy way upon the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall
bring it to pass. Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall
sustain thee: he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved. Oh! what an
ease? what a comfort is this? when we have burdens that are ready to break our
backs, and our hearts too, and we go to God by faith and prayer, and so find
ease and comfort.

When the perplexed Soul says, O how shall I do to subdue such a Corruption, to
get such a Grace, to conquer such an Enemy, to dispatch such a business, to
hold out to the end! In this case faith takes off the burden of fear and care:
Take no thought, says faith, but go to God by Prayer, Isa. 26.
for he has promised to work all thy works for thee, and he will be as good as
his word: And therefore put thy faith to use in these particulars, and you
shall find abundance of ease and comfort. Take a man that has but little
business (in comparison) yet if he has no faith, but rely merely upon his own
wit or strength, let this man be never so little crossed in his designs, he is
presently at his wits end, it breaks his sleep, and he can have no quiet. Take
another man that has business of the greatest importance in the world, yet
suppose this man by faith to have committed the work to God, he sleeps as
quietly, and lives as comfortably, as if he had nothing at all to trouble him.
And is not this a most sweet and comfortable life? He that acts his faith upon
the Promise, may have more troubles than another man without, but certainly he
has more peace and quiet within. He is just like a candle in a close Lanthorn,
that burns clear and fair in the midst of a Tempest.

Mot. 4. Fourthly, as this acting of faith does marvellously comfort and
support the Spirit in the mean time: so it is that which infallibly brings in
the greatest advantage in the latter end. When all is done, we shall find
living by Faith will bring in the best living to the creature at the last.

This is a sure Rule, Gods outward actings for us, are usually proportionable
to his inward actings upon our Spirits: He first sets our Faith on work, and
then our Faith sets his Hand on work for us. You know the usual expression in
the Gospel, According to your faith be it unto you; according to our faith,
such and such Promises are made good to us: As if God should say, I am able to
do enough, if you are able to believe enough. Unbelief shuts the door, but
faith acted and excited, is that which turns the key, and opens the door of all
the good Treasures of God, to be drawn out for our seasonable supply. Could we
but act faith, nothing could make us miserable.

Suppose we be afflicted and persecuted, yet afflictions and persecutions are
so far from making us miserable, that they are a special gift and love tokens
from God, when he is pleased to give faith in the first place: Phil. 1.29. For
unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but
also to suffer for his sake.

Mot. 5. In a word, to conclude, This is that for which the Saints of God have
been commended, and left upon Record with an honorable Remembrance to all
Posterity, not so much for that they had the habit of faith, as that they acted
their faith in such and such noble Exploits, as are eternized to their
everlasting praise, in the 11th to the Hebrews, By Faith Abel and Enoch, Noah
and Abraham did thus and thus; their faith was very active and operative, and
so should ours be, if we desire to obtain the like good report, which they
obtained: for by it, by faith, yea, by the acting of their faith in the several
particulars there mentioned, the Elders obtained a good report, Hebr. 11.2.

What a dishonor is it to a faithful man, The not acting of faith foils and
shames a Christian.
(on the other side) when his strength goes from him, and he becomes weak like
another man: He is no more able to perform a duty, no more able to resist a
temptation, than another ordinary man. O what a shame is this! And yet thus it
is with a faithful man, if he do not act his faith, and keep close to his
Covenant.

Obs. He is as Samson was, when his hair was cut off, he becomes weak like
another man. Insomuch, that carnal men uncircumcised Philistims begin to
reproach him, and say, Lo! this is one of our Professors, this is the man that
lives by faith! Lo! this is the man that trusted in God, that he would deliver
him; let him deliver him if he will have him, etc. And thus they reproach and
speak evil of the ways of God, when in truth, the fault is neither in God, nor
in the grace of Faith, but in our own slothfulness: we act not our faith when
we have it.

Quest. But you will say, What should we do, that we may act our faith?

Helps for the acting of faith.
Answ. I answer, First, be sure to clear up thy interest in Christ. 1. Clearing
up interest in Christ.
Receive Christ on Gospel-terms:

1. Wholly.

2. Renouncing thy sins: Isa. 59.20. And the Redeemer shall come to Sion, and
unto them that turn from transgressions in Jacob, says the Lord.

3. Renounce thy own Righteousness: Romans 10.3. For they being ignorant of Gods
righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the righteousness of God.

4. Take Christ with his Cross. Mat. 16.24. Then said Jesus unto his disciples,
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and
follow me. And by thy interest in Christ, clear up thy interest in the Covenant
of free Grace. Isa. 42.6. I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and
will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the
people, for a light of the Gentiles, Isa 49.8. And by the Covenant, thy
interest in all the precious Promises of God; For all the Promises of God in
him are Yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us, 2 Cor. 1.20. Once
prove thy self in Christ, and thou may prove thy interest to all the Promises
of God: for, if in Christ, then a Son; if a Son, then an Heir; if an Heir, then
an heir of the promises, Heb. 6.17. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show
unto the heirs of Promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an
oath. This is the first and great thing that is to be done.

But yet this is not enough: for,

Secondly, Help. 2. Application of the Promises.
next to the clearing up of thy interest in Christ, and in the promises: Thou
must give all diligence not only to acquaint thy self with the promises, and
rich Legacies of thy heavenly father, but thou must also endeavor seasonably to
apply them to thy particular occasions and conditions, as also to put the
promises in suit by prayers, and so make use of them by faith, (in drawing out
virtue from Christ) as a rich man makes use of his money, or stock and store
when he improves it and imploys it for the supply of his particular wants, to
feed him, to clothe him, etc. What a shame and a vanity is it (as Solomon
speaks) for a man to have abundance of wealth, and yet not to have a heart to
make use of it for the supply of his wants? And the like shame it is to a
Christian to have a stock of Faith and precious promises, and yet not to have a
heart to make use of them for the supply of his daily wants. So that to live by
Faith (then) is to act our Faith in the promise, and to go to them upon all
occasions, as a man goes to his treasury for the supply of all his wants.

For faith is nothing else but a believing of Gods promise, and a trusting to
it, through Christ for supply in the time of need.

As for Example.

First, Art thou in doubt, or, do thou want wisdom, Several cases wherein
Faith is to be exercised.
for the ordering of thy temporal, or spiritual affairs, then act thy faith in
that promise? Jam. 1.5. If any lack wisdom let him ask of God that gives to
all men liberally; and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

Secondly, Suppose thou art in outward troubles, and see no visible means for
thy escape, act thy faith in that promise, Job 5.19. He shall deliver thee in
six troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil touch thee.

Thirdly, Art thou in inward trouble of spirit, for want of the light of Gods
countenance, Live by faith in that promise, Psalm. 85.8 --. He will speak peace
unto his people, and to his Saints, etc.

Fourthly, Suppose thou art afflicted in this: Thy corruptions are strong, and
thy graces weak. O live by faith in that promise. Mica. 7.19. He will turn
again, he will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea. Or that 2 Cor. 9 8. God is
able to make all grace abound toward you, that ye always having all sufficiency
in all things, may abound to every good work.

Fifthly, Art thou afraid of enemies, act thy faith in that promise, Isa. 54.
Last --. No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, etc.

Sixthly, Art thou afraid of Satan, or any in league with him. Away with that
fear, act thy says in that promise. Numb. 23.23. Surely, there is no
enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel.

Seventhly, Art thou afraid of the fury of the oppression, act thy faith in
that promise, Psalm. 9.9. The Lord will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge
in times of trouble.

Eighthly, Art thou afraid of want in thy estate. Act thy faith in that
promise, Psalm. 34.10 --. They that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing.

Ninthly, Art thou afraid of disgrace upon thy name, act thy faith in that
promise, Zeph. 3.20. I will make you a name, and a praise among all the people
of the earth -- says the Lord.

Tenthly, Art thou afraid of bodily sickness, or death, Act thy faith in such
promises, where God engages himself either to prevent sickness, or to support
thee under it, or to make death a passage to a better life.

Eleventhly, Art thou afraid thy labors and endeavors in thy calling will
prove fruitless? Act thy faith in that promise, Psalm. 1.3. Whatsoevor he does
shall prosper. Which is still to be understood with subordination to Gods glory
and our own salvation.

Twelthly, Art thou afraid what may become of thy children, when thou art dead
and gone, Trust God with them, and act thy faith upon that promise, Psalm. 112.2
--. The generation of the upright shall be blessed.

13. Art thou troubled to see the present differences among Gods people? Live
by faith in that promise, Jer. 32.39. I will give them one heart, and one way,
that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children
after them.

14. Art thou afraid of unprofitableness under Gods ordinances, because thou
find much backwardness to them, and much deadness under them, apply that
promise, Isa. 12.3. Ye shall with joy draw water out of the wells of salvation.

And that, Isa. 48.17. I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to profit,
which leads thee by the way that thou should go.

15. If thou be afraid of the hardness of thy beart, and thy want of love to
the Lord, act faith in that promise, Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the Lord thy God will
circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live.

And thus might we instance in other cases, and other promises, but these may
suffice to give light to the rest.

Let us thus carefully make use of the talent of our faith, in trading with God
upon all occasions that our one or two talents may gain more. Simile.
God is the first fountain of all grace and comfort, the promises are as
several spring-heads, our acting faith upon the promises, is like the
conveiance of waters in pipes to the several rooms in a house for the best
service of the inhabitants. Let us therefore act our faith that we may live
comfortably upon the promises, those heavenly wells of salvation. And if God
answer not presently, we must act our faith in tarrying the lords leisure, if
the vision be for an appointed time, the just shall live by his faith.

And that is the last branch of the exhortation, (respecting our selves) if
faith be so excellent a grace, even the very life of the soul.

Then.

First, as we should labor to get it, and,

Secondly, to keep it, when we have it.

Thirdly, to live by it, and act it, as well as keep it.

Branch IV. Of Exhortation.

So fourthly, we should labor to increase the stock of our faith.

Increase of Faith.
Faith is such an excellent grace we can never have too much of it. He that
increases his faith increases his livelihood: For the just shall live by his
faith.

It was the high commendation of those poor Christians, Jam. 2.5. That however
they were poor in other things, yet they were rich in faith. The Thessalonians
are commended for this, that their faith was on the growing hand, their faith
grew exceedingly, 2 These. 1.3. Paul gives the like commendable testimony of the
Corinthians that they abounded in faith, 2 Cor. 8.7.

What should I say more, this is recorded to the everlasting praise of him that
is styled the father of the faithful, that he was strong in the faith, Romans
4.20.

Let us all labor therefore that profess the same faith to attain (as near as
we can) to the same growth, that we may be strong in the faith, giving glory to
God as he did.

And the rather should we be persuaded to grow, because.

Motives to increase in Faith.

First, there are degrees of faith, 1. Faith has degrees.
and no man attains to the highest degree at the first; faith is like a grain
of mustard seed before it comes to be a goodly tree, and the faithful are first
babes in Christ, then young men, then strong men, 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. The
Disciples are often reproved for their little faith, and the good woman is
commended for her great faith. Mat. 15.28. Jesus answered and said unto her, O
woman great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will, it seems therefore
there is little faith, and there is great faith; there is weak faith, and there
is strong faith, and yet he that is stronger may grow still: Paul was a strong
and valiant champion in the faith (no whit inferior to the very chief of the
Apostles) and yet he speaks of himself as if he had little or nothing in
comparison of that which he desired and endeavored after, Psalm. 3.9.
in the third to the Philippians he tells us, that he counts all things loss
and dung that he may know Christ, and the power of his Resurrection. Why? Did
he not know him already, and believe in him already? doubtless, he did, but in
comparison of what was to come, and what he aimed at, he accounted that which
he had already, but very little. And therefore says he in the very next words,
Not as though I had already attained, or were already perfect, but I follow
after, if that I may apprehend that, for which also I am apprehended of Christ
Jesus. And therefore still he desires to know more, and to believe more, he
never thought he had faith enough. And therefore beloved, if such a strong man
in the faith as Paul was, desires still to be upon the growing hand, how much
more should such as are new beginners and but weak in the faith, desire to grow
from strength to strength according to that gracious promise. Job 17.9. The
righteous shall hold on his way, and that has clean hands shall be stronger
and stronger, In other things men desire to grow: In things natural, no child
but desires to grow till it be a man: In things artificial, no scholar,
apprentice, but desires to grow, till he become a perfect artist: In the things
of the world, no man of mean estate, but desires to grow, till he be rich,
only in grace men are content to be poor still. Where we should be covetous,
there we are well contented with a little. 1 Cor. 12.31. Covet earnestly the
best gifts. And where we should be content, there we are covetous, as in
outward things.

Mot. 2. Growth of faith an evidence of its truth.
And this puts me in mind of a second Motive to quicken our growth in faith.
None have truth of faith but only such as desire to grow in faith. and
therefore when a professor shall presently grow secure, and say, So, now I
believe, all is well, I have as much faith as will carry me to heaven, and what
need I care for any more, it is a shrewd sign, such a man has no true faith
at all, a painted child grows not; but a living child grows taller, and taller
from year to year. For in case a man had had truly tasted, how gracious the
Lord is by the mouth of faith, he must needs say as they did of that bread and
water of life: Lord evermore give us of this bread, evermore give us of this
water. A man thinks he can never have enough of it* True faith is never content
to stand at a stay: And the reason is because it springs up of immortal seed,
if the seed of faith could rot and die then it might cease to grow, 1 Pet. 1.
but because the seed of it is immortal and incorruptible, therefore it must
needs be up on the grownig hand. It may be nipt a little for a time like winter
corn, but even then it grows in the root, and will grow the faster for it,
afterward in the blade also. What shall we say then of those, that are always
standing at a stay, that are children in the faith, for the space of forty or
fifty years together, these are monsters in the life of faith. It is confessed,
every thing must have a beginning both in nature and grace, but it is a shame
to be always beginning, and never carrying on a work, to be a beginner from
first to last is very strange, and inconsistent with the grace of faith.

Thirdly, consider the faster our faith grows, Mot. 3. Faith makes all graces
grow.
the faster all other graces do grow, and the fruits of those graces also in
all manner of good works. It is a sweet thing for a Christian to be full of
grace and full of good works. 2 Pet. 3.16. But grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ --. As it is said of Dorcas, Act.
9.36. This woman was full of good works, and alms deeds which she did. But a
man can never be full of these, unless he be full of faith, for faith is a
radical grace, all graces and good works spring from faith as from a root, and
are therefore called the fruits of faith. Christ is the master-root, but faith
is a subservient root. Now you know, the faster the root grows, the faster the
branches grow and the fruits also.

So the faster our faith grows, the faster our love, our patience, our zeal for
God and all other graces grow, and the faster our good works also do grow and
multiply all good works (if good works indeed) do spring from faith. In vain do
Christians heap up precepts for a holy life, if in the mean time they neglect
their faith, which draws power from Christ, which inables them to walk with God
in the performance of those good works, for without me says Christ, ye can do
nothing. Joh. 5.5.

Fourthly, consider, as more faith, more grace, Mot. 4. More Faith more Peace.
so the more faith the more peace, in ordinary course of dispensation. Romans
5.1. Being justified by faith we have peace with God through the Lord Jesus
Christ. So the stronger is our faith, the stronger our joy and consolation,
therefore the Apostles joins both together. Romans 15.13. Now the God of hope
fill you with all joy and peace in believing, fullness of faith brings fullness
of joy and peace. And the reason is, because faith is the bond of union that
knits Christ and the soul together: Now the stronger and nearer our union is
unto Christ, the sweeter and fuller is our communion with Christ. It is true, a
weak faith may be sufficient to salvation, but it is not sufficient (in all
cases) to consolation. A weak believer crawls to heaven with much ado, but a
strong believer runs his race to heaven with much joy, even in the midst of
afflictions and persecution. Such a one has an humble boldness at the throne
of grace in all conditions. And as he prays with more confidence, so he can
wait with more patience, till God is pleased to answer his prayer. Therefore
get good store of faith as thou desire good store of peace and joy.

Fifthly, consider, we should labor for much faith, because the troubles of
believers are many, and their enemies are many, that fish for them in those
troubled waters.

Mot. 5. Troubles of believers are many.
First, there troubles are many, Psalm. 34.19: Many are the troubles of the
righteous: sometimes outward troubles, and sometimes inward troubles, they are
seldom without some or other: And sometimes they are more then the hairs of
their head, as David speaks. Psalm. 40.12.

And secondly, their enemies are many, that fish for them in these troubled
waters, and as they are many, fo they are strong:

Corruptions are strong, and the Devil is strong, he is called, the strong man
armed; And the world is a strong enemy. Now how shall a weak faith stand up
against so many strong enemies, and against so many stout temptations.
Therefore, Ephesians 6.10, 16. we are bidden, be strong in the Lord, and in the
poor of his might: And above all, taking the shield of faith, which is needful
to quench the fiery darts of the wicked.

3. Besides, these enemies put forth their strength against us when we are at
the weakest, they come upon us (as Simeon and Levi upon the Shechemties) when
we are sore, oppressed with sore and heavy troubles; Gen 34.25.
Then Corruptions are most impetuous and violent, then they tempt us to
inordinate care, fear sorrow, and sometimes to despair, or to fretting and
murmuring against the Lord: Then Satan tempts strongly to cast off God, and his
service.

It was the Devil that spoke in Jobs wife (for, all that Job had, was delivered
into his hand, Chap. 1.12.) when she said, Do thou still retain thine
integrity? Curse God and die. Then the World strikes in with a word of
opposition: It will smile upon thee, it may be, in a time of prosperity, [
Riches (says Solomon) gather many friends; yea, but the poor is separated from
his Neighbour] It will frown in time of adversity. Now, I say, how shall a man
be able to stand up with a weak faith in the midst of so many troubles and
enemies. Who mould venture into a rough and a boisterous Sea, in a weak and
slender Vessel? In strong Temptations, a weak faith is ready to betray us to
inordinate fears. Mat. 8.26. Jesus said to the Disciples, Why are ye fearful, O
ye of little faith? Plainly intimating, That the greatness of their fears did
spring not so much from the greatness of their troubles and dangers, as from
the weakness of their faith. And therefore because we know not what troubles or
oppositions we may meet withal before we come to die, or at least in that
hour. It is good wisdom to lay up store of faith beforehand: Time may soon come
we may need all we have, and it may be, desire we had more; however, store is
no sore, especially in things of this nature.

Besides that, as the night of your troubles may come sooner than you look for,
(it is possible your Sun may set at Noon) so it may be, that night may prove
longer than you are aware of, and therefore it is wisdom to prepare good store
of light to carry you through the darkness of the night; whether that darkness
do spring from outward troubles: for, The withdrawing of the Presence of Christ
makes the saddest night of all, (He is the Sun of Righteousness, therefore his
Presence makes day in the Soul, and his Absence makes night) and this night (I
say) may prove longer than we are aware of; therefore get good store of faith,
for faith is your light, which being nourished by the sure word of prophecy
and promise shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise
in your hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19.

Suppose a man were to go a great and difficult way in a very dark night, and
had but a little piece of a candles-end to direct him over narrow Bridges and
dangerous Passages, where the least error might cost him his life, how
uncomfortable would his condition be, when that little piece of candle was
burnt out: So it is in this case; therefore be sure to get good store of faith,
and good store of oil in your Lamps. As you desire to be found amongst the
number of the Wise Virgins, when the Bridegroom comes.

Lastly, consider, a great Profession, and a little Faith, do not hang well
together. 6. A great profession and a little faith agree not well.
Most men indeed love to be accounted rich in faith, rather than to be so; but
a solid Christian says, I had rather be rich in faith than to be accounted so:
for in case thy faith grow not as fast as thy Profession of it, thou will be
just like a Ship that has more Sails than Ballast; like a Bird that flies out
of her nest, before she has wings to carry her: Like that foolish King, who
going to make war with ten thousand, Luke 14.
provokes him that comes against him with twenty thousand. For the very
Profession of the faith may provoke an Adversary, as well as if we had really,
as much as we do profess. And how shall such a man endure the stroke, that
provokes much, and can resist or bear nothing? Or he is like an Apprentice,
that buys out his time, before he has either sufficiency of Stock to set up
withal, or sufficiency of Skill to manage his Stock: So it is with men that
set up the Trade of godliness, with as great show upon the Stall, as most men
do, and yet have but little stock of Faith within doors to bear it out; they
soon either prove Bankrupts, or take a sore fall, either into some foul error
in judgment, or into some foul sin in their practice.

All these Considerations should persuade us to increase and grow strong in the
faith:

Quest. But how should I know whether I do increase or decrease? whether my
faith be strong or weak?

Answ. It appears to be weak, Signs of a weak faith.
by the frequency of doubtings and fears; therefore little faith, 1. Frequency
of doubtings.
and much fear or doubting, are usually joined together in Scripture, as S.
John says of Love, 1 John 3.18. Perfect love casts out fear; he that
fears, is not made perfect in love: So we may say of Faith, Perfect faith
casts out fear; he that fears, is not perfect in faith. It is true, there
is none so perfect upon earth, but he may fear sometimes: But yet this holds
true, The more faith, the less fear; and the more fear, the less faith.

Secondly, 2. Unsetledness in Gods truth.
a weak faith is soon discovered by a man's inconstancy and unsetledness in the
Truths of God. You know a strong man (in regard of bodily strength) is not
easily turned about, and staggered at every twitch: but a child is weak, you
may turn him this way and that way at your pleasure, with one of your fingers:
So it is in grace, a strong man in the faith is not easily moved by every new
upstart and ungrounded Opinion, but a Novice in the faith, as he is soon lifted
up by pride: so he is as soon cast down by the wind of Error; therefore, says
the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.14. Let us be no more children tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

3. Carefulness in worldly things.
Thirdly, weak faith is discovered by a man's extraordinary care about worldly
things. He that has strong faith, will trust God for the things of this life,
as well as of that which is to come; Heb. 13.5.
his conversation is without covetousness, and he is well content with such
things as he has, because God has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee: So that he can boldly say, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what
flesh can do unto me, Heb. 13.5.

But a man of a weak faith, as his heart is more full of worldly fears and
cares: so his mouth is more full of distrustful (or at least, doubtful)
expressions: What shall we eat? Mat. 6.
what shall we drink? and, what shall we put on? all which do spring either
from want of faith, or at least from the weakness of it: As Christ says, Mat.
6.30. Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and
to morrow is cast into the oven; shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of
little faith? Plainly intimating, the reason why they had so much worldliness
in their hearts, was, Because they had so little faith there. Faith and the
World are Combatants. 1 John 5.4. -- This is the victory that overcomes the
world, even our faith. Therefore when Faith gets above the World, it argues
Faith is strong; but when the World gets above Faith, it argues, Faith is weak.

4. Backwardness to holy duties, and remissness in them.
Fourthly, a weak faith is discovered by a man's backwardness to holy duties
beforehand, and by his remissness in them afterward. The Watch stands still,
when the Spring is down; and it moves but slowly, when the Spring is weak. Now
faith is (as it were) the Spring of the Soul, it sets all a work in Prayer, in
Hearing, in Practice. Therefore where the Spring of faith is weak, the Soul
moves weakly and slowly, toward and in those holy duties; but where the Spring
grows stronger and stronger, it moves more strongly and vigorously from day to
day: I believed, and therefore have I spoken, says David. We having the same
Spirit of faith, we also believe, and therefore we have spoken, says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.13. Strong Faith is like strong wine, it must have a vent in
gracious speeches, and holy actions, Job. 32.18. For I am full of matter, the
Spirit within me constrains me; Behold, my belly is as wine which has no
vent, it is ready to burst like new bottles. I will speak that I may be
refreshed, I will open my lips and answer. Look as strength of love to Jesus
Christ constrains to holy duties, 2 Cor. 5.14. ( For faith works by love, Gal.
5.6.) So the more faith, the more work the creature does for God; the less
faith, the less work. Only take it with this Caution, that the work springs
from a principle of Love to Jesus Christ.

Otherwise he that has less faith (or no faith at all) may yet, do more work
seemingly for God, more external work, springing from a principle of Self-love,
and Self-seeking in praise or profit. But such a man carries not his work
before him, he does it but to the halves; he serves God with bodily exercise,
but he serves him not in Spirit and truth.

Fifthly, 5. Sign, Yielding to Temptations.
A weak Faith is discovered by a man's easy yielding to the temptations of sin:
A weak soldier is soon overcome, but a valiant champion stands it out stoutly,
and bears many a blow before he yields. Therefore a weak faith is soon overcome
by any little temptation of profit or pleasure, and the like; whereas a strong
faith stands out manfully as Moses did, who by Faith refused to enjoy the
pleasures of sin, Choosing rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God,
Heb. 11.25. So also by yielding under temptations of trial, Joh. 6.6. And this
he said to prove him; viz. Philip in the miracle of multiplying the loaves, for
he himself knew what he would do. As also the rest of the Disciples in the
tempest at sea. Consider Abraham, Genesis 22.. And the woman of Canaan, Matthew.
15.28. Both were patterns of strong faith in two very eminent trials.

By these therefore and the like rules we may examine our faith, whether it be
upon the growing, or decaying hand.

Quest. But some will say, Suppose my faith be weak and feeble, what means
should I use, that I may increase it?

Means for the increase of Faith.
Answ. The first is, by an assiduous and diligent attendance upon the Word of
God: which in general is called the word of Faith; 1. Attendance on the Word.
not only because it begets faith at first, but because it does nourish it
afterward, till a believer comes to his full growth. Ex eisdem nutrimur, ex
quibus constamus: We are nourished by the same means by which we are begotten
at the first. The Word is the immortal seed, to beget our faith. 1 Pet. 1.23.
Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of
God, which lives and abides for ever: And the Word is the heavenly Milk to
nourish it, 1 Pet. 2.2. As new born babes, desire the sincere milk of the word,
that ye may grow thereby. It is observed, Thomas was but once absent, and he
lost much of the confirmation of his faith, Joh. 20.24, 25. Remember the
charge, 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the word, be instant in season, out of season,
reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine: And the Promise,
Prove. 8.34, 35. Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates,
waiting at the posts of my doors: For who so finds me, finds life, and
shall obtain favor of the Lord. Therefore the Apostle professes, what great
desire he had to see the Thessalonians, and to preach to them, to that end,
that he might perfect that which was lacking in their faith, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. And
it was his last farewell to the Ephesians, when he told them they should see his
face no more, Acts 20.32. And now brethren (says he) I commend you to God, and
to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance among all them that are sanctified. As if he had said, Look as by
the preaching of the Word of God, I laid the first foundation of Faith amongst
you; so now I commend you in my prayers to the same God, and to the guidance of
the same Word, which God, and which Word, or which God by his Word, is able to
build you up in the Faith, till you come to your journeys end, even till you
come to enter upon the possession of your heavenly inheritance, among all them
that are sanctified. And this is the first Means.

The second, is, the Promise, 2. Promises of the increase of faith
an especial part of the Word: for, Faith lives by the Promise, as the just man
lives by Faith.

Obj. Some say, Where have you any Promise that Gods People shall believe? Or
if they do believe, where is any Promise that they shall grow and increase in
the Faith?

Ans. To satisfy these men, they may look upon both, in one Promise: Romans
1.17. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: as
it is written, The just shall live by his faith. The Apostle in these words
affirms two things:

1. That Gods People are made righteousness in the sight of God, not by any
inherent righteousness of their own; but by the righteousness of God
supernaturally revealed by the Word and Spirit of God, and applied by Faith.

2. He affirms, That this Faith is ever upon the growing hand: And so God will
show himself righteous in making good his Promise for the increase of faith.
The righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith; that is, in causing
Gods People to grow from one degree of faith to another.

The like phrase is used, Psalm. 84.7. They all go from strength to strength,
that is; from one degree of strength to another. So 2 Cor. 3.18. We are changed
into the same image from glory to glory, that is, from one degree of glory to
another.

Note.
God is righteous in causing his People to grow in faith, according to his
Promise.

It is true, that by faith we are first grafted and planted into Christ, as the
Gospel speaks. And it is as true, that the Psalmist speaks, They that are once
planted in the house of the Lord, shall grow and flourish in the Courts of our
God, Psalm. 92.13, 14. And why so? what is the Reason of this growth in Faith
and Grace? It follows in the very next words, ver. 15. To show that the Lord is
upright, and that there is no unrighteousness in him.

The very same, in effect, with that expression of Paul, The righteousness of
God is revealed from faith to faith: Romans 1.17.
and therefore the next way to increase faith, is to act faith, in these and
the like Promises, which God has purposely made for the increase thereof.

3. The Sacrament.
The third Means is the Sacrament, especially the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
This is the Sacrament of Confirmation: for the Word begets Faith, and the
Sacrament is the Seal of the Word, and the Seal of the Covenant, or the visible
Word; Romans 4.11.
and so it confirms Faith.

Men do not use to set a Seal to a Writing or to a Covenant, before the Parties
be agreed, or to make them agree, but to stand as a sure Testimony of their
former agreement or stipulation each to other, and that they may the better
trust one another for the real performance of the Covenant on both sides: So
God does not ordain this Seal to be set to a blank, before there be any
Covenant made (for what is that, but to mock God, and to tell a real lie to
seal to a Covenant, when there is no such matter betwixt God and the Soul?) but
God ordained it to confirm our Faith in the Covenant already made.

And we may say of Gods Seal, what the Scriptures speak of Gods Oath, it is for
Confirmation, Heb. 6.18, 19. Would thou have thy Faith confirmed and
strengthened? O come in faith! If God ordain Rams-horns for the pulling down the
Walls of Jericho, Josh. 6.5. Lamps for the overthrow of the Midianites, Judge.
7.20. Jordan for the curing of Naamans Leprosy, 2 King. 5.10. Pulse for the
nourishing of the three young men, Dan. 1.12. These means shall be effectual;
and so shall the Sacrament: Only let a man examine himself, and so let him eat
of that bread, and drink of that cup.

Examine? you will say: What should he examine? Examine two things in order to
the Sacrament.
Let him examine his Meat, and let him examine his Mouth and his Stomach.

1. Let him examine his Meat, whether he can see and discern the Lords, body
under those Elements, or no: for he that does not so, 1 Cor. 11.
stands guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, in profaning that holy
Ordinance, which is a Seal of the same.

2. Let him examine his Mouth and his Stomach, Joh. 6 53. Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. The best
meat in the world can do no good, where the creature has neither Mouth nor
stomach to feed upon it.

Now what is this Mouth, but Faiths believing in Christ, and feeding upon
Christ, are both one (as he often explains himself in the same Chapter) Therefore
let a man examine his Mouth and his Stomach, as well as his Meat, 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith, prove your own selves.

Not that this excludes the Minister, who is bound to know the state of his
Flock.

If this be good at all times, surely it is best of all at the Sacrament, where
the Apostle calls for examination in a special manner: Let him examine his
Mouth as well as his Meat. We do not use to put meat into a dead man's mouth.

The Council of Carthage condemned it as an abuse of the Sacrament, to give it
to a dead Body, Sacrament not to be given to dead-hearted unbelievers.
because Christ says, Take, and Eat; but a dead Body can neither take nor eat.
The same reason reaches to an Unbeliever (if we could as easily discern the
one as the other) who is yet dead in sins and trespasses, and therefore has
neither the Mouth of Faith, nor a Spiritual Stomach to feed upon Christ; but
where God of his mercy has given both, this breast of the Church is of singular
use to nutse up her children, 2 Pet. 3.18.
and to make them grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. For God has appointed no Ordinance in vain. The greater surely
is the want of this Breast in these days, and the cause of so much leanness
amongst Gods own Children in most places.

Complaint of the interruption of the Sacrament, and the corruption of it as
the cause.
I know not whether I should complain more of the Nurses or of the Children, or
whether it were not better to turn our Complaints into Compassions, and both
complaints and compassions into Prayers, that God would direct both Ministers
and People to seek him in due order, and to restore that Ordinance in a better
manner than formerly; that he may not make any farther breach upon us; that
children may not fast so long, till they lose their stomachs for want of
sucking, and Nurses may not disuse and withhold the Breast so long, till it be
dried quite up for want of drawing. And this is the third Means which God has
appointed for the increase of Faith, The Sacrament.

4. Prayer.
The fourth is Prayer: for this puts the Promises in suit, and sanctifies both
the Word and the Seal of the Word for the increase of Faith.

The Scriptures tell us, That God is both the Author and the Finisher of our
Faith, Heb. 12.2. If he be the Author, we are bound to pray to him for the
beginnings of Faith (as in any poor measure we are able) but if he be the
Finisher of our Faith, we are much more bound to pray for the increasing of it
afterward, because our encouragements and abilities are far greater. For it is
impossible a man should pray in Faith for the obtaining of Faith, before he
has it: but he may pray in faith for the increasing of faith, when once he
has received a beginning of it.

If therefore a Natural man be bound to pray for Faith before he has it,
(though he be very unable to pray as he ought to pray) how much more is a
Spiritual man bound to pray for increase of Faith, when he has already tasted
how gracious the Lord is, 1 Pet. 2.3.
in bestowing that grace upon him, and has in some measure received the Spirit
of Prayer and Supplication, whereby he is enabled to go to God for the supply
of all his wants?

The man that to his own apprehension had but a little Faith, and much
Unbelief, cries out with tears, Lord, I believe: help mine unbelief, Mar. 9.24.
Yea, the Disciples themselves had not so much Faith, but still finding the want
of more, they put up this great Request to the Lord, Increase our faith, Luke
17.5. and if such as they had need, much more have we to pray to God for the
increase of Faith.

The fifth Mean, 5. Christian communion.
is Christian Communion of Gods people one with another. This is a singular
Mean to strengthen Faith; the very sight of the Brethren does embolden and
encourage in the Faith, Act. 28.15. How much more the mutual Instruction and
Exhortation one of another? Job 4.3, 4. Eliphaz says thus to Job, Behold, thou
have instructed many, and thou have strengthened the weak hands: Thy words have
upholden him that was falling, and thou have strengthened the feeble knees. You
see, Christian Communion is a Mean to strengthen in the Faith.

God in his Wisdom communicates special strength diversely to diverse Members of
the Body of Christ, to some more, to some less; to that end that the strong may
support the weak, and comfort the feeble-minded. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. 1 Cor. 14.26.


It is the Rule of the Apostle, Let all things be done to edification; that is,
to the building up of one another in the Faith. And this is to be aimed at, not
only in public Ordinances, but in private converse of Christians one with
another, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. Wherefore comfort your selves together, and exhort one
another, and edify one another, even as also ye do. Stones of the same
building, do uphold and strengthen one another; and so should living and
Spiritual stones in the holy Temple of the Church. This is a special and
powerful means to strengthen in the Faith. In this respect Aquila and Priscilla
are called fellow-helpers of the Apostle, Romans 16.3.
because they confirmed the Faith in those in whom the Apostle had formerly
planted it, by the preaching of the Gospel, Romans 16.3. And thus all of us
should be helpers one of another faith, and one of another joy: And indeed it
is the main end, why God does convert us at the first, and why he does help us
up again when we are fallen, that we may convert others, and strengthen them
also in the Faith when they are converted. Luke 22.32. Thou being converted
(says Christ to Peter) strengthen thy brethren. And this is the fifth Means of
growth.

6. Love to God.
The sixth Means, is, to prove our Love to God: for this will prove his Love to
us. 1 John 4.19. We love him, because he first loved us; and the assurance of
Gods love toward us, will marvellously strengthen our faith toward God.
Therefore our faith in him, and the manifestation of his love to us, are
coupled together: Gal. 2.20. I live by the faith of the Son of God, which has
loved me, and given himself for me. Now what better way is there to manifest
Gods love to us, than by the manifestation of our love to him; for our love to
him, is no other than a reflection of his love to us.

Labor therefore to prove thy love to God, that if Jesus Christ should ask
thee the same question he asked Peter, Joh. 21.15. Love thou me? thou may
answer as he did, Yea, 2 Cor. 8.8.
Lord, thou know that I love thee. And if Jesus Christ should answer again,
How do thou prove the sincerity of thy love? Thou may answer again, Lord, I
prove it by my love to thy sheep, and by my love to thy lambs; though I cannot
feed them in every respect as Peter did, yet I desire to feed them as I am
able: I do not love them for my own ends, because I would feed upon them, and
clothe my self with their fleece, but that I may clothe them and feed them as
their necessities do require. And this is that which in the judgment of Jesus
Christ himself (published in the face of all the world in the last day) does
publish the sincerity of our love to him: Mat. 25.^0. Inasmuch as ye have done
it to one of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Prove therefore thy
love to God, and that will strengthen thy faith in God: for, as faith works by
love, Gal 5.6. so the works of love do strengthen faith. Faith as the occasion
of its exercise, and an evidence of its being, but faith is not perfected in
its essence and nature by Works, but by the Promises.

The seventh and last Mean, is, 7. Experiences.
To stir up the manifold Experiences of Gods goodness and faithfulness to us
for the time that is past: for this is a special Mean to strengthen our faith
for the time to come. Former Experiences may, and ought to build us up in
future Confidences. If God has delivered for the time past, and does deliver
for the present, we are bound the more firmly to believe, that he will yet
deliver for that which is to come, 2 Cor. 1.9, 10. For when God fulfils with
his hand, what he speaks with his mouth, 1 King 8.15. such a Providence being a
further Seal of his Promise, ought to confirm our Faith. For why? we know God
is still the same God, and changes not; the Covenant is the same everlasting
Covenant; the Mediator of the Covenant is the same, Jesus Christ, yesterday,
and to day, and for ever: why should not our faith be the same also, and more
abundant? If a Christian may say, God has delivered, and does deliver, and
will yet deliver; why may he not also say, I have trusted in this God, and do
trust in him, and I will trust in him for the time to come? Come what can come,
I am resolved to trust in him. Job 13.15. Though he should slay me, yet will I
trust in him. I have ever found him a faithful Master to me, and why should not
I continue a faithful Servant to him? His Word reports him to be a faithful
God, and his Works also do speak the same: I know this (may a gracious Soul
say) by my own experience, and therefore they that know thy Name, will put
their trust in thee; for thou Lord have never failed them that seek thee, Psalm.
9.10. Be sure therefore to keep a Catalogue of Gods merciful Providence, in
answer to thy Prayers. This was David's Cordial in a fainting Fit, I remember
the years that are past, Psalm. 77.5. and 143.5. It was that which encouraged
him against the Philistim, when he remembered how God had took his part against
the Lion and the Bear: 1 Samuel 17.37. The Lord that delivered me out of the paw
of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand
of this Philistim.

And it is that, which may exceedingly strengthen the faith of a poor creature,
when it is able to say, I prayed to God at such a time, and he heard me
graciously; I was in a Soul-straight, and he spoke peace to my Soul; I had such
an enemy rose up against me, and he changed his heart, that he would not hurt
me; or he withered his hand, that he could not hurt me; I was in doubt, and he
made my way plain before me; I was in woeful perplexity, and he said to my
heart, Fear not; yea, I never sought him in sincerity, but he was ever found of
me in mercy. And therefore if I should now begin to distrust this God, after
all this experience, he may justly say to me, as one faithful friend says to
another, when he begins to grow jealous or suspicious, What, will you not take
my word? did I ever fail you? was I ever false to you? what iniquity have thou
or thy Fathers found in me, that thou should now begin to suspect me? O (may
God say to an experienced Christian) of all men in the world, thou have the
least cause to stagger at the Promise: If thou doubtest of the Word, yet at the
least, thou should believe me for the works sake, Joh. 14.11.

And thus you see former experience may, and ought to build up in future
confidence. And these are the Means by which a weak Faith may be strengthened.
And so have we now dispatched the first general Branch of the Exhortative part
of the Application relating to our selves.

If Faith be our Life under God, then should we labor, 1. To get it. 2. To
keep it when we have it. 3. To act it, and live by it, as well as keep it. 4.
So to live by it, as to increase the stock of our Faith from day to day.


The poorest Cottager lives as truly as the richest man in the world, but not
so comfortably nor so fully: he is faint to pinch himself both back and belly,
he goes to bed with many a hungry meal, and the like! And so it is with him
that is weak and poor in the faith; he lives indeed by faith, but not so fully
and comfortably as he that is rich in the faith: His Comforts are fewer, and
his Fears are more.

All these things should persuade us to increase our faith. Second Branch of
Exhortation, Of Converting others to the Faith.
But we leave that Branch of Exhortation that concerns our selves, and come now
to that which relates to others; and in concluding this, by Gods Assistance, we
shall conclude the whole subject of Faith.

For if Faith be such an excellent Grace, (then, as in other good things, so
also in this) the more common it is, the better it is. It is an excellent thing
to be instrumental in the propagating the common Faith, Tit. 1.4. Jude 3.
and the common Salvation.

Look as a Father or Governor that lives comfortably upon his outward means
himself, thinks himself bound in conscience to maintain his Family, and to lay
up for his Children, and so do good to the poor, that they may live the better
by his means, as well as himself: So that man that lives by Faith himself, and
finds the sweetness of it, should desire to communicate this life to others,
and to endeavor that they also may live by it as well as himself.

If the Life of Faith be such an excellent Life, who would not labor to
convert others to the Faith?

Methinks I hear God by his Spirit speaking to the Soul of each faithful man,
Behold, thou art converted thy self, Have thou here any besides (as the Angel
said to Lot, Genesis 19 12.) Son in law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, that are
still in Sodom, still in the state of Nature? O bring them out of this
condition, that they may learn to live by Faith also, as well as thy self.

This is (indeed) the great Work of the Ministers, and ought to be the endeavor
of every private Christian in their private Admonitions and Exhortations, to
convert others to the Faith.

Do thou desire thy Children, thy Friends, thy Neighbors may live
comfortably as well as thy self, O labor to convert them to the Faith, and
labor that they may live by Faith when they are converted. There Is no Life
under heaven to be compared with this Life.

But to press home farther and more effectually what I intend in this Point, I
shall refer most of that I have to say, to that notable place in Daniel, which
I shall add as an Appendex to this Subject of Faith.

AN APPENDIX Concerning The Converting of others TO THE FAITH.
They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they
that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.
WHere the Prophet Daniel foretelling the greatest troubles that ever befell
Gods People from the beginning of the World (which some understand of the great
Persecution under Antiochus Epiphanes; and others of the last and great
Persecution under Antichrist; and others understand it of both: and indeed, the
first was a Type of the latter) I say, the Prophet foretelling the greatest
troubles that ever befell Gods People, he foretells also (as was needful for
their support at such a time) the greatest comforts and encouragements that
could be.

First, in the very time of their troubles.

And secondly, in the issue and fruit of their troubles.

First, in the time of their troubles: and that is, in the glorious appearance
and assistance of the great General of the Field, the Lord Jesus Christ, the
Angel of the Covenant, pleading the Cause, and fighting the Battles of his
Servants. Here Is the comfort; though there be no troubles like their troubles,
yet there is no Savior like their Savior, ver. 1. And at that time shall
Michael stand up, the great Prince, which stands for the children of thy
people, and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was
a nation.

Secondly, in the issue and fruit of their troubles: As no troubles like their
troubles, so no deliverance like their deliverance.

Which is set forth,

1. In the glorious Resurrection of all the faithful to life Eternal, in these
words, viz. And at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that
shall be found written in the Book: and many of them that sleep in the dust,
shall awake, some to everlasting life.

2. In the special glory that is promised to those that lay forth themselves in
a special work; viz. in the Conversion of others to the Faith, v. 3. And they
that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn
many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.

Explication.

They that be wise] Some read it, that make others wise, or cause them to
understand.

So, They that turn many unto righteousness] i. e. they that turn men to the
righteousness of faith, (as Interpreters do expound it) they that are
instruments of others Conversion, they shall shine as the stars for ever and
ever. As if the Prophet had said, It Is possible the rage of Antichrist in the
night of Persecution, may burn hottest of all against the Teachers of the Word,
and such as draw others to the knowledge of Christ, because they stand as it
were in the forefront of the Battle: yet let them be no whit discouraged, for
as the stars shine brightest in the darkest night, so shall they shine, that
are called Stars, Rev. 1.20. and all such as labor in Conversion of others,
they shall shine as the stars for ever and ever.

You may behold in the words, 1. The Description and Commendation of the most
excellent Work: 2. The Intimation or Proposal of the most excellent Reward; and
the latter set down as an encouragement to the former.

1. The Description of the most excellent Work; They that turn many unto
righteousness.

2. The Intimation or Proposal of the most excellent Reward; They shall shine
As the Firmament As the Stars
for ever and ever.

Take the result of both in this one Proposition: The turning of men unto
Righteousness, Doctr.
or the Conversion of Souls to the Faith, as it is the most excellent Work, so
it shall certainly be crowned with the most excellent Reward. They that be
wise, etc.

I. Branch. It Is an excellent Work.

1. The turning of men unto Righteousness, the Conversion of Souls to God, is
the most excellent Work.

It is an excellent Work indeed, by Prayer and other means to heal a sick body:
Jam. 5.15. The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise
him up. Yea, but it is a far more excellent Work to heal a sick and sinful
Soul, ver. 19. Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert
him, let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his
way, shall save a soul from death, and shall cover a multitude of sins. This is
an excellent Work indeed; and it is that excellent Work that was so much in
David's eye, he was mavelous earnest with God, to help him in the work of his
own Conversion, or in the renewal of his Repentance* and why so? that he might
be the better fitted to convert others to God. Psalm. 51.13. Then will I teach
transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto thee. This was the
great and noble design of David, the Conversion of Souls: He desired, though he
could not make God amends, yet to take a holy Revenge upon Satan, by drawing
Subjects from him to God. And indeed, it appears to be a most excellent Work in
many respects.

For,

difficult Work, and all excellent things are difficult. It is a difficult work.
Its an easy matter to damn a Soul: Facilis descensus averni: We go down the
hill, and so down to Hell, fast enough; but it is the hardest matter in the
world to save a Soul.

Psalm. 22.29.
It Is too hard for a man to convert himself: No man can keep alive, or quicken
his own Soul. It Is too hard for a man (by his own power) to convert another;
it is too hard for the Parent to convert the Child; it is too hard for a
gracious man to infuse grace into another: There Is no party within to join in
the carrying on of that work. Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God.
And there is Satan without, opposing and withstanding, Act. 13.8. Suppose any
Soul to be born again, certainly it is born not of blood, nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, Joh. 1.13. There is God in the
work, if ever it be done. All the Ministers under heaven cannot convert a Soul,
without the help of God: and therefore it is a difficult work, and therefore it
is an excellent work also.

Work of great skill and wisdom, It is a Work of great skill. 1 Cor. 2.4. Col.
4.4.
and therefore an excellent Work. The most skilful works, are accounted the
most excellent works: But this is a work of the greatest skill and wisdom in
the world; and therefore it is said, They that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament. And others read it, They that make others wise:
and it may well be read both ways, for they that make others wise, are truly
wise themselves, especially such as are best fitted for the work: and therefore
Solomon tells you, He that wins souls, is wise, Prove. 11.30. Or, he that
catches Souls out of the snares of the Devil, and its own deceitful heart, and
fetches them within the compass of Gods Net, he is a wise fisher of men, he is
a wise man indeed.

Every fool can cast away a Soul, but he is a wise man that wins a Soul. As it
was said of Daniel, (so it may be said of such) Excellent wisdom was found in
him, Dan. 2.12.

The world indeed judges them fools, Note,
and their preaching foolishness, (1 Cor. 4.10. We are fools for Christ's sake)
but the God of wisdom pronounces them wise: and of the two, it is far better
to be Gods wise man, and the worlds fool, than to be the worlds wise man, and
Gods fool: For not he whom man, but whom the Lord commends shall be approved,
2 Cor. 10.18.

He is wise that wins Souls, and they that are wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament.

greatest Love and Compassion, and therefore an excellent Work. It Is true, It
is a Work of greatest love,
the Gift of Miracles, and the Gift of Tongues, are excellent Gifts: but what
are these to the Gift of Charity. 1 Cor. 13.1. Though I speak with the tongues
of Men and Angels, and have not Charity, I am become as sounding brass, and as
a tinkling cymbal. And of all other Charity, that is most excellent, that is
exercised toward the Souls of poor Creatures. It Is true, it is a good thing to
be charitable toward the bodies of the needy, to deal out bread to the hungry,
and to clothe the naked, Isa. 38.7. But when all is done, that is the most
excellent Charity, that is bestowed upon the most excellent part, the Soul.
Otherwise, a man may give all his goods away to the poor, and yet have no
Charity for all that, 1 Cor. 13.3. And therefore, look as God commends his love
to us in this, that his principal care was for the good of our immortal Souls,
so should we also in this particular commend our love one to another.

That Is most certain, Soul-friends are the best and truest friends in the
world; and Soul-compassion is the best compassion that can be showed. Jude ver.
22. And of some have compassion, making a difference, and others save with
fear, pulling them out of the fire. It is an act of the greatest compassion
that can be imagined, to pull a Soul out of Hellfire, whether it be by fair
means or by foul: Is not such a Soul as a brand snatched out of the fire? Zech.
3.2. O blessed! for ever blessed be that hand, that snatches any such brand out
of the flames of eternal fire! It is a work of the greatest love and
compassion, and therefore the most excellent Work.

excellent End (and we know it is the End that crowns the Action. It aims at
the most excellent End.
) But the winning of Souls to God, aims at the most excellent End. For it is
such a work as brings most glory to God, and most good to the Creature, and
therefore must needs be a most excellent Work.

1. It brings most glory to God.
1. It brings most glory to God: and this is the great end of all ends. Prove.
16.4. The Lord has made all things for himself, or for his own glory. Now this
blessed End is the main issue of this blessed Work.

It Is true, God will have glory even in the perdition of ungodly men; and
therefore it is added in the same place, Yea, even the wicked for the day of
evil. The Lord has made all things for himself; yea, even the wicked for the
day of evil. But the Argument is very strong: If God have glory even in the
destruction of some men, how much more has be glory in the Salvation of
others? Romans 9.23. He makes known the riches of his glory in the vessels of
mercy. O the admirable riches of Free Grace shining forth in this work of God,
in the Conversion of Souls! It glorifies all Gods Attributes, and magnifies
every part of his Name.

It glorifies his Love, it discovers the breadth, and length, It glorifies his
Love.
and depth, and height of the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, Ephesians.
3.18, 19.

2. It glorifies his Power. The Psalmist says, His Power.
Who knows the power of thy wrath? Psalm. 90.11. But we may say, Who knows the
power of thy Grace? God puts forth as great power in the Conversion of a Soul,
as in the Raising of a dead body, as raising the body of Jesus Christ, Ephesians.
1.19, 20. as great a power as in the making the World: and therefore the Work
of Regeneration is called a Work of Creation: Ephesians. 10. For we are his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works.

3. It glorifies his Wisdom, His Wisdom.
the manifold Wisdom of God: Though we preach Christ to some a stumbling block,
and to others foolishness, yet unto all such as are called and converted, as
Christ becomes the Power of God, so also the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 23.24.

4. It glorifies the Word of his Grace. The Word of his Grace.
Though the Word of the Lord be reproached, whilst people slight both the
threatenings and the Promises of it (as if God would do neither good nor evil)
yet it is marvellously glorified in the Conversion of Souls, whilst the weapons
of our warfare are mighty through God, in pulling down strong holds of Satan,
in the unsanctified wit and will of man. In this respect we are to pray, that
the Word of the Lord may run and be glorified, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. Thus God glorifies
his Word.

His Kingdom.
5. God glorifies his Kingdom: for what is the honor of a King, but the
multitude of his Subjects? Prove. 14.28. Now the Conversion of Souls, is nothing
else but the addition of so many Souls to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and this
makes much for the honor of it. Thy Kingdom come, is the next Petition to
Hallowed be thy Name, to signify, that Gods Name is then most hallowed, when
his Kingdom is most enlarged. David (we know) took not a little content in
numbering of his People (and surely, the sin lay not so much in the bare
numbering of them, as in his carnal confidence in them.) We are sure Jesus
Christ takes a great deal of content in the numbering of his Subjects, he keeps
a List and Roll of their Names. No sooner is a Soul converted, but presently
his Name must be entered into the Church-book in the best sense: Psalm. 87.4, 5,
6. This man was born there; and of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was
born in her, and the Highest himself shall stablish her (her Charter is sealed
by the King of Heaven) The Lord shall count when he writes up the people, that
this man was born there. Selah. Thus God glorifies his Kingdom. The Conversion
of Souls is such a Work as brings most glory to God.

2. It brings most good to the Creature.
Secondly, it is such a Work as brings most good to the Creature; and that not
only to the creature converted, but to many others also that have cause to
rejoice in their conversion

1. To the converted.
1. To the Creature converted: His Conversion is a means of his Salvation; and
that not of his Body only, but of his precious Soul also. He that knows not
how to prize a Soul, let him weigh the price of a Soul in the Blood of Jesus
Christ; let him look upon Christ crying, sweating, bleeding, dying, and all to
save Souls. Now he that converts a sinner saves a soul, says S. James: and he
saves it from death, from the first Death, and from the second Death also, Jam.
Chap. 5. ver. 20.

Nay, he restores such a Soul to life, to a better life than ever the Creature
enjoyed before: and therefore it is said. Prove. 11.30. The fruit of the
righteous is as the Tree of Life, and he that wins Souls is wise: Comparing
such a man as makes it his work to convert Souls, to the Tree of Life planted
in the Garden of Paradise; and that in many Particulars.

1. Because it was Gods planting, and grew not out of the Earth of its own
accord: So is a righteous man a piece of Gods special husbandry; for true Grace
grows not up in any by natural Propagation, but is of Gods particular
Plantation.

2. Because it was more excellent than other Trees, and therefore placed in the
midst of the Garden: So is the righteous more excellent than his neighbor,
Prove, 12.26. whatever the world accounts of him.

3. In regard of the fruit of it.

For,

1. As that one Tree bare diverse kinds of Fruits, and bare those Fruits at all
times of the year, Rev. 22.2. So does a righteous man, he bears diverse kinds of
Fruits, and that at all times, Psalm. 106.3.

2. As the Fruit of that Tree was a special means to preserve the life of those
that took it (therefore called, The Tree of Life) So is a righteous man a
special means, under God, to preserve the Life of others, and therefore also
called a Tree of Life; Vt supra.
The fruit of the Righteous is as the Tree of Life. Nay, in some respect it is
more excellent than the Tree of Life in Paradise: for that did but preserve a
man from death, so long as he continued in his uprightness: but this has power
(in the strength of Christ) to raise up a sinner from the dead. The dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live, Joh. 5.25.
They shall live the most excellent life, they shall so live, as never to taste
of the second death: and therefore it is such a Work as brings most good to the
creature converted. Yea, and

Conversion brings good to others that see the Conversion It rejoices 1. The
Minister.
Secondly, it brings good to many others also, that have cause to rejoice in
their Conversion.

As,

1. How does it rejoice him that (under God) is made an instrument of that
happy work. Solomon tells us no less than three or four times in the Proverbs,
that a wise Son makes a glad Father, Prove. 10.1. and 15.20. and 23.24, 25. And
if this be true in some sense of natural Parents, and natural Wisdom, how much
more is it true of Spiritual Parents, and Spiritual Wisdom? If the natural
Parent so soon forgets all her sorrow, Joh. 16.21.
for joy that a man-child is born into the world; how much more do Spiritual
Parents (whom God makes Instruments of the New Birth) forget all their sorrow,
whilst they were laboring and wrestling with God by Prayers and Tears many
years together, for the Conversion of such a poor Soul? I say, how much more
does such an one forget all his sorrow, and rejoice with exceeding great
gladness, for joy that a Spiritual child is born and brought forth into the
Kingdom of God?

How does the Apostle rejoice to call Timothy his natural Son in the faith? and
to call the converted Philippians his dearly beloved, and longed for, his joy,
and crown of rejoicing in the Lord, Phil. 4.1. Never did natural Parents
rejoice more in their natural children, than Spiritual Parents do rejoice in
their Spiritual children. And if God would please so to bless my Labors this
day, as to make me a poor Instrument of begetting one Soul to Jesus Christ, I
should think it an hour well spent: I should have cause to bless God to all
Eternity for this days work. O remember, I beseech you remember! whilst you
stout it, and stand it out against God, as you grieve the Spirit of God: so you
grieve the Spirits of your Ministers, that desire to be faithful; you compel
them to give up their accounts with grief, and not with joy. Heb. 13.17.
But when you come in, and believe and obey, they can say with S. John, in Ep.
3. v. 4. I have no greater joy, than to hear that my children walk in the
Truth; to hear that such an one that was awhile ago an enemy to God and all
goodness, is now made a friend, a favorite, a child.

For indeed, Conversion brings a great blessing to the instrument.
this is such a work as brings a great Blessing along with it: And that,

1. From God, Mat. 5.9. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called
the children of God: and surely, if they that make peace betwixt man and man,
much more they that make peace betwixt God and man (betwixt God and the Souls
of poor sinners) may well be accounted and called Blessed.

2. There Is a blessing also from Man. If the children of natural Parents, how
much more shall the children of Spiritual Parents rise up and call them
blessed, Prove. 31.28. O blessed be God (says a poor Soul) that ever I heard
such a man preach and dispense the Word of Life. I was before in the very gall
of bitterness, and bond of iniquity; but blessed be God for such an Instrument,
that under Jesus Christ was a means to work upon my heart, and to draw me out
of that wretched condition. And thus the blessing of him that was ready to
perish comes upon the Spiritual Parent (as Job speaks) and therefore it is
great ground of joy. Job 29.13.


Secondly, 2. The Church of God.
This is that which does exceedingly rejoice the Church of God in general: for
whoever be the particular Father, under God, of any man's Conversion, that is
most certain, the Church of God is the true Mother. Zion is daily travailing in
pain for the bringing forth of Gods elected ones. And never had any Mother in
the world more joy in the birth of a child, than the Church of God: Jerusalem
which is above, and is free, and is the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. has joy
in the happy birth of new converted Souls. Oh! how she hugs them in her arms,
and dandles them upon her knees, suckles them at her breasts, as the Lord
speaks, Isa 66.11, 12. Then shall ye suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of
her Consolation: -- ye shall suck, ye shall be born upon her sides, and be
dandled upon her knees: As one whom his mother comfort, so will I comfort
you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. It Is a comfort to the children,
it is a comfort to the Mother: no doubt it is a great joy to both.

3. The particu^ar Society.
3. It Is joy to the particular Society and place where they live (if they
understand themselves) the Family, the Town, the City, the Kingdom where they
live, fares the better for such.

It Is most true, impenitent sinners are very evil Instruments in any Society
wherever they come: They are the Jonas's, the Achan's, the Ahab's, the
troublers of Israel wherever they live; they bring plagues and judgments upon
others, as well as upon themselves: One sinner destroys much good, Eccl. 9.18.
But it is as true on the other side, an humble gracious converted Soul brings a
blessing with him wherever he comes: Laban is blessed for Jacobs sake; Potiphar
is blessed for Joseph's sake; and Zoar is spared for Lots sake; and Sodom had been
spared too for ten righteous persons (if they had been found there:) The poor
godly wise man delivers the City, Eccl. 9.15. The innocent deliver the island,
and it is delivered by the pureness of his hands, Job 22.30. and therefore it is
joy to the particular society and place where they live.

4. The Angels.
4. It Is joy to the blessed Angels of Heaven. As it is joy to the Terrestrial
Angels, the Ministers of the Churches: so it is joy to the Celestial Angels,
those blessed ministering Spirits, who are sent forth to minister for them that
shall be heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. last. Those glorious creatures, as they
delight to pry into the Mystery of Christ, and to preach the Gospel (for the
first Sermon that was ever preached after the birth of Christ, was preached by
an Angel, Luke 20.10.) So they do no less delight in the conversion of Souls by
that Ordinance. Luke 15.7. So likewise I say unto you, there is joy in heaven
in the presence of the Angels of God, over one sinner that repents. Would
thou rejoice Heaven and Earth at once? Oh be converted thy self, and travail in
the Conversion of others.

Look as those damned Spirits (the Angels of Darkness) rejoice in the
destruction of Souls ( Your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks
about, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet 5.8.) O how Hell it self is moved, and
enlarges her self at the approach of such new-comers as these? Isa. 5.14. and
14.9. So those blessed Angels of Light do no less rejoice in the Conversion of
Souls.

5. Nay, Fifthly, 5. Inferior Creatures.
it is that which after a sort does rejoice the very inferior Creatures; they
do far more readily and cheerfully serve the godly than the wicked: For however
they do (indeed) serve the lusts of wicked men, yet it is but a kind of
ravishment, and forced service. They are made subject to vanity in it, Romans
8.20.
because impropriated from their first institution in the state of Integrity:
For they were appointed at first to serve the Sons of God by Creation; Note.
and therefore (in this kind) they do rejoice to serve the Sons of God by
Regeneration: yea, they do even groan to be made partakers of that liberty,
that being delivered out of the former bondage of serving the lusts of sinful
men, they might serve no other but the Sons of God, Romans 8.19. And thus we see
it is a most excellent Work, because it aims at the most excellent End.

It is most pleasing to Jesus Christ.
that is the most excellent Work, that is most excellent in the account of
Jesus Christ.

And I pray, why was Christ content to be born in a Stable among the Beasts,
and to live as a servant and a slave, and to die amongst the most notorious
Malefactors? Nay, why did he rise again from the Grave, and ascend on High? but
that he might give gifts unto men, for the work of the Ministry, for the
Conversion of Souls, for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.12? And when
Christ once sees this Work going forward, it does him good at the very heart. O
now (says Christ) I have enough, now that I see of my Spiritual seed, now that
I see of the travail of my Soul, I am satisfied, Isa, 53.11. O now I judge all
my pains and cost well bestowed: I do not repent me of one drop of my Blood,
that was shed for the Redemption of my dearest People. For why did Christ
neglect his own Body and Soul? but to save the Bodies and Souls of others.
Simile.
Writers report of the Pelican, that she sprinkles of her own blood upon her
young ones when they are dead, whereby they revive and recover their former
life. Whether this be true or no, I know not: But this I am sure of, He that
compares himself to the Pelican, Psalm. 102.6. he does so, he revives his
people by his own blood, by the blood of sprinkling; and when they are thus
revived, O this life of theirs is (as it were) the life of Christ himself! Now
I live, (says Christ) if ye live, if ye stand fast in the Life of Faith.

Honorable Work; It is the most honorable Work.
and it is the most Honorable Work,

1. Because in this Work a man has the most honorable fellow laborers; not
only the Angels of Heaven, (as we heard before) but the God of Heaven: Jesus
Christ himself was a Minister and Preacher (as well as a Purchaser) of the
New Covenant. Hence we are said in this great Work to be fellow laborers, and
fellow-workmen together with God himself, 1 Cor. 3.9.

2. It Is an honorable Work, because it is conversant about the most excellent
Object, The Souls of men (one Soul being more worth than all the world.)

They that are employed in securing the Estates of men, as Lawyers and
Magistrates) or in preserving the Bodies of men (as Physicians are) or in
preserving the Honors of men (as Heralds and Historians are) I dare not say,
but they have a lawful and an excellent Calling: yea, but not so excellent as
those that are specially employed in the conversion and salvation of the Souls
of men.

Look as those men that were employed in the Tabernacle in all cunning work of
Silk, and Purple, and fine-twined Linen, of Silver and Gold and Precious
Stones, they had a more honorable service, than such as were employed in
Goats-hair, in Rams-skins, and Badgers-skins: So such as are employed for the
good of Souls, have a more honorable service, than such as are employed for
the good of men's Estates, Bodies, or Names. That Is the most excellent Work,
that is employed about the most excellent Object.

What is the Body, or what is the outward Estate of a man, in comparison of his
Soul? Nay, what are all the goods in the world, to be laid in the Balance with
the Soul? the whole Globe of the Earth, with all the glory of it (in comparison
of this) is lighter than vanity. He that well knew the worth of both, has said
it, What shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?
Mat. 16.26. And if the loss of a Soul be so great a loss, then the gain of a
Soul must needs be as great a gain.

Doubtless, the Salvation of Souls is the most excellent Work, because it has
the most excellent Object.

3. It is the most excellent Work, because it works the most excellent Changes,
converting from sin to righteousness, from hell to heaven, Act. 26.18.

II. Branch. It has the most honorable Reward.

It has the most excellent Reward.
)

The Doctrine was this:

The turning of men unto Righteousness; or, The Conversion of Souls, as it is
the most excellent Work, so it shall certainly be crowned with the most
excellent Reward.

And what is the Reward? To shine as the firmament, and as the stars for ever
and ever. And this proves it to be the most excellent Work: for God shall
reward men according to their works; though not according to the merit of their
work, yet (of his Free Grace) according to the nature of their works.

Such is Gods method of Retribution, that as you may read men's sins in their
punishment: so you may behold the excellency of the work in the glory of their
Reward. As works of darkness shall be punished in the place of utter darkness:
so such as have been (as John Baptist was) burning and shining lights in the
work of the Ministry, they shall shine as the glorious lights of Heaven for
ever and ever. They did shine as stars here, Rev. 1.20 and 12.1. therefore they
shall shine as stars hereafter.

O how should the consideration of this great Reward, quicken us up in the
performance of the Work (for to that end doubtless it is spoken.)

It Is true, we should labor in the Conversion of Souls, were there no reward
at all: how much more then, when it brings so great advantage every ways? not
only to the person converted, but to him also that is the Instrument of his
Conversion? They shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as the
stars for ever and ever.

O what a garland of Glory is put upon the Head of these Conquerours! Beloved,
such as conquer but a Kingdom or two, they think they gain much; and sometimes
they are so lifted up, they know not what ground they stand upon (though the
Word tells us, they are set in slippery places) But (how do you think) they
would glory, if they should conquer all the world? And yet for my own part, if
I could but conquer one Soul, and bring it home to Jesus Christ, I should think
I had cause (in the strength of God) to out-glory all such men: one single Soul
(as we heard) being more worth than all the world: When all is done,
Soul-Converters are the greatest Conquerors under Heaven. Thanks be to God,
which always, and in every place, causes us to triumph in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.14.

He is the best Conqueror indeed, that brings the most Subjects unto Jesus
Christ, and he shall have the best Reward: His head shall be compassed with a
Crown of Glory. And thus have we seen the Truth of this Doctrine, The turning
of men, etc.

Use 1. Of Information.
The first Use, Information of the dignity of the Ministry.
is to Inform us of the Dignity of that Calling, whose proper work it is to
convert Souls; I mean, the Calling of the Ministry. If the Life of Faith be
such an excellent Life, then that Calling, whose special work is to convert
others to the Faith, must needs be an excellent and honorable Calling.

I confess, I could willingly have spared this Use (wherein Ministers may seem
to seek themselves) were not God himself despised in the contempt of his
Servants.

And Oh that we could bewail it with tears of blood, Note.
that even some of those that cannot deny (if they have any grace at all) but
that God wrought upon their hearts by the Ministry of the Word, should now go
about to disclaim their Parents, contemning both the Ministry of the Word, and
the word of those Ministers, whom sometimes they received as Angels of God;
yea, even as Christ Jesus! Gal. 4.14. living above Ordinances, contemning the
Word and Messengers of God, under pretense of magnifying the Spirit of God.

But this is no new thing. It was just thus in the Apostles time, he was fain
to use this very Argument, 1 Cor. 9.2. If I be not an Apostle to others, yet
doubtless I am to you: for the seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord. As
if he should say, If you be true Converts, I am a true Minister: for you had no
other Conversion, but by the Ministry of that Word which I preached to you.

I will therefore press this Use, with that solemn Charge of same the Apostle,
1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the Mysteries of God.

I confess, there is a respect and honor due to all those that labor in the
Conversion of Souls (as private Christians, by their private Admonitions
Exhortations, Counsels, Prayers, etc. wherein they may be singularly helpful to
the Ministers of God:) But principally this is due to those whose peculiar work
and calling it is to convert Souls, to turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan to God. He therefore that despises, despises not man
but God, who has given unto us his holy Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 4 8.

2. of Reproof.
Reproof of
Secondly, this Reproves many. If the Conversion of Souls be such an excellent
Work: then it Reproves

1: Them that slight this work
First, Such as slight this Work, and make no account of it, as if it were not
worth the while to Convert Souls.

1 Sort.
1. Such as Cloister up themselves in a solitary Monastical life, as a state of
greater perfection. Though they profess the Faith, yet they bring forth little
fruits of it, they are all for Contemplation, little for Action; all for
themselves, little for others, in the propagation of the Faith. Let others sink
or swim, all is one to them: So they may save their own Souls, they care little
what becomes of others. Genesis 4.
But this is not the voice of Faith, to say, Am I my Brothers keeper?

2 Sort.
2. Such are to blame, who though they have many opportunities, in regard of
their frequent converse with men: yet they take not those advantages to win
Souls.

They can compass Sea and Land, and take all possible advantages to win
Proselytes, and to win disciples to themselves, to win men to their Opinions,
but not to win them to the Faith; to win wealth, and to win friends, and to win
credit and honor, but not to win Souls.

How many of these, whilst they seem to lay siege against a sinner, make use
only of such carnal weapons of humane Eloquence and fleshly Wisdom, whereby
they take only the outworks of men's fancies to win them to themselves, but
never use such weapons as strike to the heart and conscience, and are mighty
through God, 2 Cor. 10.2.
to the pulling down of strong holds, and to the taking of the Castle of their
Hearts, to win them to Jesus Christ.

All that labor is but vain, that tends not to the Conversion of Souls.

Secondly, 2. Them that strive not to win Souls by such means as God has
appointed.
it Reproves such as strive not to win others to the Faith by fair means (or by
such means as God has appointed) Genesis 9.27. but force them to the Faith by
fear and terror. Indeed, they rather force them from the Faith, than to the
Faith: Fides non cogitur; Faith cannot be forced, when we have done all we can.
Fire and Faggot are Arguments from Rome, and Argumets from Hell, rather than
from Heaven. To devote Heretics (as They call them) to destruction, because
they believe not, is an argument of a strange spirit.

You read, Luke 9.54. because the Samaritans would not receive Jesus Christ,
presently the Disciples ( James and John) were fire and towe against them;
nothing will serve their turn, but that fire must immediately come down from
heaven to consume them: But in stead of encouragement, they meet with a check
from Christ, ver. 55. But he turned and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not
what manner of spirit ye are of; for the Son of Man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them.

Certainly, they are of strange spirits, that would send men quick to Hell,
because they will not be persuaded to go in their way to heaven. But this is
the way to destroy Souls, and not to save them.

3. Them that neglect this duty.
Thirdly, It Reproves such as do utterly neglect this great duty of winning
Souls unto God. And surely, if they are wise that labor to win Souls, they
must needs be fools that do wittingly and willingly neglect it. And yet many
such there are in the world, such as never speak a word from one end of the
year to another to their Neighbors, or to their Friends; nay, hardly to their
Children, Servants or Yoke-fellows, to draw their Souls to the saving knowledge
of Jesus Christ.

O cruel Husbands, and cruel Fathers! may such Wives and such Children say; as
Zipporah said to Moses, A bloody husband have thou been to me. And surely, if
he that has power to save a man from temporal death, and does not, is no
better than a murderer; Then he that (for ought be knows) might save a man
from Spiritual and Eternal death, and does not use the means (in the compass of
his Calling) he is no better than a Soul-murtherer in the sight of God: His
blood (says God) will I require at thy hands; thy life shall go for his life,
and thy soul for his soul, Ezekiel. 33.7, 8.

4. Them that pervert from the Faith.
Fourthly and lastly, Much more then are they to be Reproved, who are so far
from converting others to the Faith, that they do what they can to pervert
them. In stead of drawing others to God, they drive them from God; and if they
draw them any ways, they draw them farther into sin: Such men as they, do the
very office of the Devil himself.

Look as those that win Souls to God, are fellow-workers with God: so those
that destroy Souls, are no better than fellow-workers with the Devil; they are
Tempters under him, and act the Devils part: Prove. 1.11. Come, say they, let us
lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without a cause, etc.
Cast in thy lot among us, and let us all have one purse.

Such men as these think it not enough to be Thieves, and Drunkards, and
Adulterers, and Blasphemers, and Contemners of Gods Ordinances, themselves; but
do what they can to draw others to the same sins, and to make them sevenfold
more the children of Satan than themselves.

What? are your own sins too light, that you do thus cry for more weight? not
to ease your pain, but to increase it? for such as are partakers of other men's
sins, shall certainly be partakers of other men's judgments, Rev. 18.4.

Oh! that there should be such an itch in this Spiritual Plague Sore, to infect
others to make them as sinful and as miserable as themselves.

O hear, and fear and tremble, thou that make it thy work to tempt others so
sin against God. For if they shall not escape, that have not furthered the
Salvation of others, where shall thou appear, that have furthered the damnation
of others, and sent them post to Hell? I say, where shall thou appear, unless
thou repent and be deeply humbled for this thy superlative wickedness? And
surely, if ever thou do repent, thou will be ready to admonish thy
fellow-Drunkard, or Adulterer, or Blasphemer, that they may become partners
with thee in thy Repentance, that have been partners with thee in thy sin.

The penitent Thief upon the Cross had but a little time to turn him in; and
yet a good part of that little, Note.
he spent in laboring to gain the Soul of his fellow-Thief: Luke 23.40. Do
not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation?

Be assured of this, that as the gain of Souls is the best of all gains: So the
blood of Souls, of all other blood, will lie the heaviest upon the Conscience
of such as are guilty of it.

3. Of Exhortation.
Exhortation to convert Souls.
The third Use may be for Exhortation.

1. To all sorts of Christians in general: and then

2. In special, to those whose Office and Function calls upon them more
importunately to labor in the Conversion of Souls.

Branch. 1. In general to all.
First, To all in general (for we must not think it is the Ministers work alone)
For what know thou, O wife, whether thou shall save thy husband? or how
know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife? 1 Cor. 7.16. And what
know thou, O Christian, whether thou shall save thy Neighbor? Do what thou
can in a wise way, it may be God may second thy endeavors, thy Reproof, or
thy Exhortation, by his own Spirit.

The poor Woman of Samaria was an Instrument, under God, of drawing on her
Neighbors to the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, Joh. 4. And what do thou
know, but God may bless thy endeavors with the like success?

And therefore, whilst others spend time in idle discourse (for he that is of
the earth, Joh. 3.31.
speaks of the earth) let Christians spend their time in Exhorting, and
Comforting, and Edifying one another, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11.

Branch. 2. In particular to Ministers.
And if all in general, then surely Ministers of all others. Ministers in a
special manner should aim at the Salvation of Souls, because the great end of
their Commission from God, is to take Curam animarum, the Care of Souls, to
turn men from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God, Act. 26.18.

Note.
It was an excellent saying of him that was in this place before me (and
deserved to be so in every respect) in his Book of the Loadstone, Chap. 8. says
he, If God would give a Christian his wish, especially a Minister of the
Gospel, and say to him, as sometime he said to Solomon, when he offered a
thousand burnt-offerings at Gibeon, Ask what I shall give thee, 2 Chronicles. 1.7.
what should he desire either before, or more than this, viz. than that he might
receive a large portion of that Magnetical virtue from God, which was bestowed
upon Peter and Paul, and other Primitive Preachers, whereby they drew many
thousand Souls to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and the world went after him.

Therefore let all sorts of Christians (in their place and sphere) especially
Ministers of the Gospel, labor in the Conversion of Souls.

The excellency of Converting Souls.
and men generally delight to be employed in excellent works. Men will do and
dare any thing, to become great in the world: but this is the only way to
become great in the sight of the Lord. Luke 1.15. He shall be great in the
sight of the Lord, (says the Angel, speaking of John the Baptist) And why
great? Mark! ver. 16. Many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord
their God. Conversion of Souls to God, makes men of great account in the sight
of the Lord.

The end of the Ministry.
and of all those Ministerial Gifts we receive from Jesus Christ, for the
better discharge of our Calling. He gave all for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians.
4.12, etc. He gave not these Gifts, that we might gain profit or applause to
our selves, but that we might gain Souls to him.

Souls cost the blood of Christ
and that is the blood of Jesus Christ. Therefore should Ministers take special
heed in feeding of their flock, and in the Salvation of those Souls which
Christ has purchased with his own blood, Act. 20.24.

Else it will cost our blood.
If we neglect our duty (our duty) they may die in their iniquity, but their
blood shall be required at the Ministers hands, Ezekiel. 33.8, 9.

Example of Christ.
does press us to this duty of Conversion of Souls. He was a diligent and
constant Preacher himself, and it was his very meat and drink to take occasion
of converting Souls, Joh. 4.

He is the good Shepherd, that seeks up his lost sheep, and when he has found
it, he lays it on his shoulders rejoicing, and brings it home, that others
also may rejoice with him, Luke 15. Nay, it was the very last work that Christ
commended to us by his Example, when he took his leave of us, and left the
world. He converted the poor Thief at the last gasp; as if Christ had said,
This work is the very end of my Death, that poor sinners might live and be
converted. And this work I commend upon my death to all my friends, if you love
me, do as I have done in my last farewell: Let this be your work, to convert
Souls to God; I have given you an example, that you should do as I have done
before you.

Best sign of love to Christ.
Joh. 21.15, 16, 17.

Upon Christ's threefold Interrogation, Love thou me? and Peter's threefold
Profession of his love to Christ; you have Christ's threefold Injunction: Feed
my Lambs, Feed my Sheep, Feed my Sheep:
As if the feeding of Souls, the saving of Souls, were the truest testimony of
our love to Jesus Christ.

Testimony of our thankfulness to Christ.
when we endeavor the conversion of others. It was that which David promised to
God in a grateful acknowledgement of Gods mercy in the pardon of his own sins,
Psalm. 51.13. Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee: As if he should say, Lord, if thou will convert me, I will
endeavor also the conversion of others unto thee.

Israel. Remembrance of our own condition.


God commands his People to pity strangers, because themselves were sometimes
strangers in the Land of Egypt: So, should we not pity such as are strangers to
God, because we our selves were sometimes so?

I have heard of many a Drunkard and loose liver, who being once converted,
would ever after pity those in the same condition, admonishing of them, and
visiting them in their sickness, and saying, Well, what do I know but such an
one may belong to God as well as I? What do I know but God may change his heart
as well as mine? This is the Apostles Argument, Tit. 3.2, 3. Showing all
meekness to all men, for we our selves also were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, etc. But afterward
the kindness and love of God our Savior toward us appeared, etc. As if he
should say, Let us therefore be pitiful to the Souls of others, as God showed
mercy to us, who sometimes were as vile and sinful as any others. And these are
the Motives.

Quest. But some may say, What means should I use for the Conversion of Souls?

Answ. I answer, First, make sure thy own conversion. Means for the conversion
of others. 1. Being converted a man's self.
Luke 22.23. And when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.

Then the Word comes in a lively manner.

That that comes from the heart, is most likely to go to the heart: Every life
begets like to it self.

Propagation of kind, is natural to every Creature; and so it is in Spiritual
Life: They that have this new Life, desire to beget others to God.

I will not deny, but an unconverted man may convert another, but it is very
rare: God usually delights to make use of such as are converted themselves; and
they have as great a delight to do the work, Phil. 2.20. Tim thy -- who will
naturally care for your estate: And why so? because Timothy was his natural son
in the faith.

Word: for that is the power of God to salvation, Make use of the Word.
Romans 1.16. and the incorruptible seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. The sword of the Spirit,
which is the Word of God, Ephesians. 6.17. God delights not to work by other means,
though men be never so eloquent; and therefore say of that, as David of the
Sword of Golias, 1 Samuel 21.9. There Is none like that: So may we say of the
two-edged Sword of the Word of God, that Sword, There Is none like that, in the
cutting down of sin, and the stone out of the heart.

out in Gods strength: 2 Cor. 10.4. The weapons of our warfare are mighty
through God, Go in Gods strength.
to the pulling down of the strong holds of Sin and Satan.

Therefore be as diligent in Prayer, as in Preaching, if thou would convert
Souls. It Is our duty to labor, but when all is done, the success is from God;
He that planteth is nothing, 1 Cor. 3.
nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase. Therefore be as
earnest for Spiritual children, as Rachel was for the children of her Womb,
Genesis 30.

He only can help Ministers to teach profitably, Ephesians. 6.19. And for me, that
utterance may be given me, that I may speak, etc.

He only can help People to hear with profit: Psalm 48.17. I am the Lord thy
God, which teaches thee to profit.

Teach by Life.
1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed unto thy self, and to thy Doctrine, for in so doing,
etc. People observe what a man's hand speaks, as well as what his tongue speaks.
Surely, say they, if this man were in earnest, he would do as he speaks.

become all things to all men, Observe dispositions. 1 Cor. 9.22.
so far as thou can with a good conscience, that thou may win some, 1 Cor.
9.19, etc. As Fishers bait their hook according to the season and kind of the
fish they are to take.

For Ministers are called Fishers of men, and in that respect had need beg
wisdom of God, that we may so cast forth the hook, and the Net of the Word,
that we catch men.

Convincing of sin.
labor first to convince them of sin: that is Christ's method, Joh. 16.8. that
they may be wounded for their sins; for, the whole have no need of the
Physician, but the sick.

Hold forth Christ in the Promise.
with all the freeness and openness of heart that may be, to all that are
willing to receive him wholly and entirely: Joh. 1.12. To as many as received
him, he gave power to be called the children of God, etc. Rev. 22.17. Let him
that will, come, and take of the water of life freely.

What do thou know, but whilst thou art speaking to the ear, God may speak to
the heart by his Spirit? Act. 10.44. While Peter yet spoke these words, the
Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the Word.

Work the word on thine own heart.
but work it into thy heart: Ezekiel. 3.1. Son of Man, eat that thou find, eat
this roll, and go speak, etc. As Nurses put into their own mouths first.

Use 4. Of Exhortation. Exhortation to Ministers to preach in a Soul-saving way.

Exhortation to Ministers to preach in such a way, as is most fit to win Souls;
to preach in a Soul-saving way: not to stroke the ear, but to strike the heart.
O thirst for Salvation of Souls!

Teach in such a way, as is most suitable to the opening and unfolding of
heavenly Mysteries.

Christ finds fault with the Scribes and Pharisees, that they shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven before men: Mat. 23.13.
So do they that either preach not at all, or preach above the ordinary
capacity of ordinary people (who have Souls to save as well as other men) we
shall be no better than Barbarians to them, 1 Cor: 14.
if we preach in a Language they understand not, which may be as well in some
kind of English, as in Latin or other Language.

Therefore we should remember, the use of Language is just like the use of a
Key, which is nothing else, but aperire quod clausum est, to open that which is
shut: and therefore we do not esteem that the most excellent Key, which is made
of the most excellent Metal, but that which is made of the best and fittest
form, in reference to the opening of the Lock: So we should not esteem that the
most excellent preaching, that is made up of the finest and bravest style, but
that which is fittest for the opening of the understanding, by convincing the
judgment; and also for the opening of the heart, by working upon the
affections.

5. Exhortation to the People.
To People, twofold.
1. To be willing to be wrought upon, and to be converted.

2. To be willing to attend upon such means, as is most proper for the
effecting of that great Work.

1. To be willing to be wrought upon.
First, To be willing to be wrought upon, and to be converted.

For if it be such an excellent thing to be an Instrument of others Conversion,
then it must needs be excellent to be converted.

O remember the vast difference betwixt a man in the state of Nature, and in
the state of Grace; betwixt a man converted and unconverted. O remember, whilst
you are unconverted, you are in a state of Darkness, Enmity, Death.


But when once converted, in a state of Light, Peace, Life.


Motives.

1. When ye are unconverted, ye are in a state of Darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. Once
darkness, etc.

1. Darkness of Ignorance, Ephesians. 4.18.

Alas! they know nothing, 1. Of themselves and their miserable condition by
nature, Rev 3.17. I counsel thee to buy of me eye salve, etc. 2. Of Christ, in
a Soul-saving way, Ephesians. 2.12. Without Christ, etc.


2. Darkness of Sorrow: at least when unconverted persons lie down in the
Grave. Isa. 50. last. They shall lie down in sorrow.

2. In a state of Enmity, Ephesians. 2.3. Children of wrath as well as others, Joh.
3.36. God is an enemy to unbelievers, and to be sure they are enemies to God.
Romans 8.6, 7. The carnal mind is enmity against God, etc. O what a dangerous
condition this is! It were better to have all the world enemies to us, than
God. Remember what God says, Ezekiel. 22.14. Can thy heart endure, or thy hands
be strong in the day that I shall deal with thee?

3. In a state of Death: Ephesians. 2.1. Dead in sin, and liable to death for sin;
to a first death, and a second death: and this of all terribles is the most
terrible.

But secondly, when once converted, thou art in a state of Light, Peace, Life.


Mal. 4.2.
1. In a state of Light. Ephesians. 5 8. Ye were once darkness, but now are ye light
in the Lord. The Sun of righteousness does arise with healing in his wings:
Healing the darkness of Ignorance, and Sorrow.


True Light and Heat come both together.

2. In a state of Peace. Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with
God: It is better to have God to be our friend, than to have all the world
beside.

3. In a state of Life. Luke 15. last, This thy brother was dead and is alive.
And thus the just lives by his Faith the most excellent life that can be
desired. Therefore come in, and be willing to be wrought upon, etc.

Obj. If you shall say (as they in Jeremy) There is no hope, I am so great a
sinner, God will never show mercy to me: It were presumption for me to offer to
lay hold on the Promise.

Answ. Look to the Pattern of great sinners, converted on purpose to encourage
others to come in to Christ. Did Manasses, or Mary Magdalen, or Paul, presume
when they did believe? 1 Timothy 1.13. I was a blasphemer, a persecutor,
injurious, etc. and v. 16. How be it for this cause I obtained mercy, that in
me first Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to
them that should hereafter believe.

Only be humbled for thy sins, and accept of Christ's Righteousness; go not
about to establish thine own, Romans 10.3.

Remember, As no man is accepted for his own Righteousness, but Christ's: So no
man is rejected for his own unrighteousness, but for his final impenitency and
unbelief. Therefore be persuaded to come in.

Accept of mercy while God offers mercy: Do not draw back, when God is drawing
of you. I hope you have some good thoughts, Act. 26.
some good desires in your hearts. You are almost persuaded: O be not only
almost, but altogether.

Perhaps some of you are even upon the very pangs of the New Birth: O let not
Spiritual difficulties cause you to draw back, as Ephraim did, Hos. 13.13.

O strive! O pray! The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence. O be earnest with
God, and bemoan your backwardness! Jer. 31.18. I have surely heard Ephaim
bemoaning himself thus, Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised as a
Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, etc.

Pray God to open the everlasting doors, etc. Psalm. 24 ult. O yield to God when
he persuades, when he beseeches! When Christ and Satan are Suitors and
Competitors, do not put off Christ, and yield to Satan. Be not cruel to your
own flesh, and enemies to your own Souls,

Remember how you rejoice Angels, The Churches, Christ himself, Your own Hearts.


Therefore be persuaded, etc.

Secondly, 2. To be willing to attend upon such means as are proper.
Be willing to attend upon such means as are most proper for the effecting of
that great Work: To attend upon a Soul-saving Ministry. God complains by the
Prophet Jeremy, that as the false Prophets did Prophecy smooth things, and
false things; so his People did love to have it so, Jer. 5 last.

That same Athenian itch in the people, to hear some new strange thing, Act. 17.
does too often draw forth an Athenian scratch from the speaker, to tell what
they so much desire to hear, Act. 17.21. But it is wisdom in both, to be
conversant in the pattern of wholesome words: To give and receive that Spiritual
food, which may not so much please the palate, as nourish the person to Life
Eternal.

Doubtless, he preaches best, and he hears best, that preaches and hears to the
Salvation of the Soul. Many thousand Souls in heaven shall bless God for ever
for the plain and powerful preaching of the Word. And many thousand Souls in
hell shall complain to all Eternity, that their hurt was soon healed and
skinned over with silken language, and soft words, as the Prophet Jeremy speaks.

6. Of Thankfulness.
Of Thankfulness.
Of Thankfulness, in case

1. We our selves are converted.

2. If any by us or by our means be converted.

1. If we be converted our selves.
First, if the conversion of Souls be such an excellent Work; Be thankful if we
our selves be converted. 1 Timothy 1.13, 17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal,
invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory for ever. This shout of
Praise follows upon the acknowledgement of Paul's Conversion: and it were easy
to show, how those Attributes have an influence on Conversion. Eternity is
little enough to praise God for such a Mercy. Luke 10.20. Rejoice not in this,
that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, that your Names are
written in heaven. Psalm. 33.34. Sing unto him a new song; play skilfully with a
loud noise, for the word of the Lord is right, and all his works are done in
truth. (This for Converting of thy Soul.)

The life of heaven, is nothing else but a life of Thankfulness for this
unspeakable mercy. God might have rejected us as firebrarnds of Hell for ever.

Quest. But how shall I know that I am converted, and effectually called, that
I may be thankful?

Answ. If thou art turned to righteousness, thou art turned from sin, Act.
26.18. Perfecta contrarietas nullum medium admittit.

Ob. There is sin in the best.

Answ. True, there is sin in the best, but not with allowance.

Observe: Sin is cast out of its Throne, though not out of the Man in a
regenerate person: Romans 6.18. Being made free from sin, ye became the servants
of righteousness. There Is no sin with peaceable possession: The strong man
armed is cast out.

Secondly, There is a love of, and endeavor after Righteousness and Holiness: 1 John 3.3. Every one that has this hope, purifieth himself, even as he is pure.
We were redeemed, Luke 1.75. that we should serve him in holiness and
righteousness all our days.

It is in fieri, though not fully perfected.

Thirdly, By resolved reliance upon God. Job 13.15. Though he kill me, yet will
I trust in him; at least earnestly desire so to do.

Fourthly, By renouncing all other Confidences. He that lays hold on God, lets
go all his other holds: God has knocked off his hands and his heart from other
things. Psalm. 44.5, 6. Through thee will we push down our enemies, through thy
Name will we tread them under, that rise up against us: for I will not trust in
my bow, neither shall my sword save me. Hos. 14.3. Ashur shall not save us, we
will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our
hands, Ye are our God: for in thee the fatherless find mercy. He that turns to
God, renounceth all other confidence; yea, even his own Righteousness: Rom
10.3. They that establish their own righteousness, have not embraced the
righteousness of God. So they that are turned to Gods Righteousness, are turned
from their own, i.e. from trusting to it in point of Justification.

Fifthly, By the Testimony of Gods Spirit, and our own regenerate Spirit: Romans
8.16. For the Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirits, that we are the
Sons of God; at least testifying to us in point of Holiness, if not in point of
Comfort.

Sixthly, By the Spirit of Prayer, and Supplication, and Adoption: Romans 8.15.
Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. None of
Gods children are born tongue-ty'd.

Seventhly, By our Love, or working of our love to a threefold object: for Gods
People partake of Divine Nature. 2 Pet. 1.4. and this Divine Nature is
discovered in nothing more than in a way of love, 1 John 4.16.

1. To God and Jesus Christ as our chief portion. Psalm. 119.57. Thou art my
portion, O Lord, I have said that I would keep thy words: 1 Pet. 2.7. Unto you
which believe, he is precious.

2. To the Word of God, which was an instrument to beget us to God: 1 Pet.
1.23. Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible seed by
the Word of God, 1 Pet. 2.2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the
word that ye may grow thereby.

3. to our fellow brethren, that are begotten with us as children of the same
womb and loins, that have Father and mother the same. 1 John 5.1. Every one
that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him. 1 John
3.14. We knew that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the
brethren. If we see these marks of our conversion, and spiritual cleansing we
are commanded as the leper upon the like discovery of their cleansing to
present our offering of praise as a testimony of our unfeigned thankfulness.

If he has cause to be thankful that receives a change from sickness to
health, Mat. 8.4.
from poverty to riches; how much more is he bound to be thankful that is
changed from sin to righteousness, and from death to life.

Secondly, not only so, 2. Thankf. If we have bin instruments of others
conversion.
but we should be very thankful also if God has made us instruments of others
conversion: for they that turn men unto Righteousness, etc. Is the work such an
excellent work that the angels admire it? And is the reward such an excellent
reward that the very luster of the heavens is little enough to resemble it? How
should we then be thankful, if God has made us instruments of others
conversion! If God has blessed our Admonitions, Exhortations, Examples, Prayers,
as private men: Especially Ministers.
Or if God has blessed any of our endeavors in the public ministry to that
happy end.

1. We should be thankful that God has let us in such a calling. We deserved
not to be so much as door-keepers in his house.

2. Thankful that Christ has in any measure gifted us for the discharge of our
calling: for it was he that did ascend to give gifts unto men: Ephesians. 4.12.

3. Thinkful, especially, that God does bless our endeavors in the exercise of
those gifts to the conversion of souls: for, how many men of great gifts and
parts do fish all night and all day too, yea many days and years and catch
nothing, though they cast out the net of the word many thousand times?

Therefore be thankful, that God should vouchsafe to employ any of us, in so
honorable work and service who deserved not to wash the feet of his servants.
That God should crown our poor weak endeavors with the conversion of souls.

If God has so honored us, Give God in Christ the honor of conversion.
let us put the honor back upon him, yet not we, but Jesus Christ may be
admired among the people.

As they said of their bodily cure, Act. 3.12. So should we of the conversion
of a soul; Why look ye so earnestly on us? as though by our own power or
holiness we had made this man to walk? No: The God of Abraham Isaac and Jacob
has glorified his son Jesus Christ, -- and his name, through faith in his
name, has made this man strong, whom ye see and know. Yea the faith which is
by him has given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all.

Ministers are but Trumpets.
Alas, we are but trumpets (Isai 58.1. Lift up thy voice like a trumpet) and
therefore if God breath not in us, we are as dead as others are, neither can we
raise others from the dead.

It Is true indeed the dead shall be raised in the last day by the sound of the
trumpet; but not by the power of the trumpet it self, but by the power of him
that ordained it. So those that are dead in sin shall be raised in the mean
time by the trumpet of the gospel, but not by the power of the gospel it self,
or of the publisher of it but by the power of that God who appointed the
foolishness of preaching for the conversion of souls, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6. Who is
Paul? and who is Apollo, but the ministers b^y whom ye believe; Paul may plant,
and Apollo may water, but it is God along that gives the increase.

If God therefore be the strength of his servants in the conversion of souls,
there is good reason he should be their Praise, we have cause to bless God, if
any rise up and call us blessed we might have been so far left, to partake in
other men's sins, that others might have risen up and called us cursed.

I thank Christ Jesus our Lord who has enabled me, for that he has counted me
faithful putting me into the ministry.

Of comforts to them that are Instruments of others Conversion.
Use 7. Of Comfort.
Comfort to those that are instruments of others conversion in the midst of all
discomforts they meet withal from the world for to that end (as we told you in
the beginning) is this argument brought: Be it so, that those that perform this
Spiritual piece of service for God and the Church in the conversion of Souls,
do meet with more than ordinary opposition and contempt from the world: yet let
this be their comfort, their reward and encouragement from God is more than
ordinary. What if stones fly about Stevens ears upon earth, so long as heaven
is opened to him, and he can see the glory of God, Acts 7.56.
and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, this makes amends for all.

And truly, this Text is as the opening of Heaven to those that labor in the
conversion of Souls.

It may be the lot of such to be made with the Apostles, the very filth of the
world, and the offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4.13.

But what of that? the more they suffer, the more they shall be glorified. The
adversaries Reproaches shall be turned into Crowns of Glory; and therefore they
may say with Job, 31.31. If mine adversary should write a book against me, yet
would I take it and bind it as a Crown upon my head.

This therefore (I say) may be matter of comfort against all that discomfort
which the Ministers of God meet withal. I plead not for all that are called by
that Name, who wear a garment, or a name to deceive, who prophecy of wine and
strong drink; who seek themselves, and seek the fleece more than the good of
the flock: Let such bear their own burden. But I speak of such as are
faithful, and seek the things of Jesus Christ.

Let wicked men spit out their gall and spleen against Gods faithful
Messengers: Let them rail and revile, and cast dirt upon their faces, etc. God
himself shall undertake to wipe away all reproaches and all their tears; when
shame, everlasting shame shall cover their adversaries: Then, they that be wise
shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to
righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.

THE EPILOGUE: OR, A Pathetical Conclusion of the whole Work.
THus you see how such as live by Faith themselves, should labor to convert
others to the Faith. And thus have we done (through Gods grace assisting) with
this whole Subject of Faith, I have now but two Requests to make unto you by
way of Conclusion: the one is, that I may obtain the help of your Prayers, that
I may be enabled from God to hold forth by Pattern, what I have so long held
forth by Precept in the Life of Faith, whatever Trials should come.

And the other is, That you would be persuaded to follow after, in walking
according to the Rule that has been set before you; That what has been
spoken, may be pressed and imprinted upon your hearts by the Spirit of the living
God.

You have heard much of Faith in my Reverend Predecessors time, as appears by
what is left upon Record; and God has directed me to strike upon the same
Nail; I may say, as many years together, as I intended days at the first. But
he that multiplied the barley loaves, and the broken meat, was pleased in the
dividing and distributing of this Subject of Faith, to multiply my Meditations
far beyond my first intentions

I heartily desire this (...) be the fruit of my poor labors, That when I have
done preaching of this Subject, you may so begin and continue to practice what
has been taught, that your life may be a living by Faith, and a perpetual
Commentary upon the Text.

And Oh that I could persuade you to live this Life of Faith, before you lay
down this Life of Nature, or else you die, and die for ever. And do not say
thus within your selves. I Will do it the next Year, Month, Day.
How many Scores yea, hundreds have been cut off by Death, since we began to
speak of this Life of Faith. And it may be many of them thought themselves as
likely to live as any of us, and it may be they were so indeed, in the course
of Nature. But remember, our Times are in Gods hands, and not in our own. And
therefore let us put our hearts into his hands also, that he may fit us for our
times, how long or how short soever our lives may prove.

Some have said, I have been too long upon this matter of Faith: but I confess
they were some such as heard me not; and therefore I do the less respect what
they say, because they speak evil of the things they heard not, and therefore
of the things they know not. It has been some encouragement (and an Argument
of Blessing) that such as were usual hearers, have not been tired out (as has
appeared by these days assemblies, compared with the other Lecture-day.)

But I beseech you, be you Believers and doers of this word, and not hearers
only, deceiving your own selves. Jam. 1.
Else I shall have cause to complain, I have not stood long enough upon this
Subject: For that is never sufficiently taught, that is not sufficiently learnt
and put in practice.

My hearts desire and Prayer to God for Ipswich is. That as they have heard
much of Faith: so they might live by it as much; that whilst our Neighbors look
upon us, and mark our steps, they may not see in this Town, here a company
living by Sense; and there another living by Wits, Shifts and Projects; and a
third living upon their Lusts; and a fourth upon their unrighteous Mammon; and
a fifth upon their Self-righteousness: and so the rest. But we might so
generally live by Faith (through the grace of God) that I might have cause to
glory of you, as the Apostle does of the Romans, Chap. 1.8. I thank my God
through Jesus Christ, that your Faith is spoken of in all places.

However, in the mean time I bless God, that I have found some fruits of my
weak endeavors, in helping any to set their faces Sion-ward, who have
acknowledged the moving of the Spirit upon the waters; and that God has drawn
out the desire of their souls to the remembrance of his name. I have great
cause to be confident, That where God has begun this good work of Faith
amongst you, he will perfect it unto the day of Jesus Christ. And therefore
grounding upon this good Word of Promise, I shall conclude my Preaching of this
Subject, in that Prayer of the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 5.10, 11. Now the God of
all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after
that ye have suffered awhile, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle
you. To him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE Of the Principal CONTENTS.
A
Abstinence. ABstinence from sin is far from Mortification, Page 158
Accusation. Satan accuses God of envy and severity, to hinder reconciliation
'twixt God and Man, p 536, 537
Acting. Activity. Activity of faith is the excellency of it, 556 The acting of
faith most honors God, 557 It brings most comfort and hearts-ease to us, ibid.
Acting of faith brings advantage and advance, 558, 559 The not acting of faith
foils and shames Christians, 559 Gods outward actings for us, carry proportion
to his inward actings upon us, 558 Could we but act faith, nothing could make
us miserable, 559 Helps for the acting of faith, 560 See living by faith.
Adoption. See Heirship. It proves our right to a heavenly Inheritance, 344
Adoption in the Civil Law, how taken, 344 Adoption used in a threefold case,
ibid. Double act of free grace in Adoption, 345 Difference 'twixt Divine and
Humane Adoption, ibid. The Spirit of Adoption implies two things, 347 The
Spirits testimony of our Adoption, what it is, ibid
Adversity. The just live by faith in Adversity, 49 In relation to inward and
outward troubles, 50, 51 See Troubles. Motives to live by faith in Adversity,
65, 66 Reproof to such who do not so, 66 It argues a threefold evil, 67
Affliction. Faith makes a right use of Afflictions for growth in
Sanctification, 131
Antipodes. The discovery of Antipodes in the new world, from 429 to 434
Apostasy. See Backsliding. Confutation of the Doctrine of the Saints Apostasy,
241, 242, 243 See Perseverance. Examples of Gods Judgments on Apostates, 250,
251 Apostasy is the fruit of Unbelief, Hypocrisy, Heresy, 464 Apostates
triumphed over be damned spirits, 491
Arraignment. The process of faith in the Arraignment of sin, 152, 153, 154 The
Arraignment of Unbelief, 467
Ascension. Christ's Ascension a pledge of believers glorification, 348
Assurance of Justification. Faith uses 12 means to attain it, from 92, to 97
Four Reasons for the trial of the truth of assurance, 97 Three Marks of true
assurance, 97, 98 Faith answers all objections which may cloud assurance, 99,
100, 101 The just live by faith in expectation of assurance, 101, 102 Five Uses
of living by faith in order to assurance, 103, 104 One in a state of grace may
be assured of Salvation, 247 How faith assures of heaven, from 342, to 351
Motives to get assurance of Eternal life, 374, to 379 Want of assurance and joy
may consist with strong faith, 514 Divine Attributes rightly apprehended and
applied, breed assurance, 96
Atheism. Atheist. Instances of two grand Atheists, 356, 363 Living upon Self,
is a high degree of Atheism, 432 Atheism is the fruit of Unbelief, 464
Attributes of God. They are special means to beget faith, 538, 539 Rightly
apprehended and applied they breed assurance, 96
Augmentation. See Growth. The just by faith draw increasing virtue from
Christ, 190, 191 Reasons of spiritual Augmentation, 192, to 195 Augmentation in
grace is by faith, 195, to 199 See Growth in grace.

B
Backsliding. Difference 'twixt a believer and a hypocrite in this, 215 It is a
great dishonor to backslide, 250 See Apostasy.
Beauty, or Compleatness. Believers are the most beautiful persons, 479
Believers. Their description and condition, 1 They lead a super-excellent life
in seven particulars, 8, 9, 10, 11 They only can have comfort against a sixfold
condemnation, 417, 418, 419 Christ is the Principle and End of their duties,
447 The believing creature is a praying creature, 448 The complicated
excellencies of a believer, from 471, to 481
Benefit: How far one man's faith may benefit another, 38
Blessings. Seven belong to the natural life, for which the Saints live by
faith, 70, 71, 72, 73
Blindness of mind. Gods judicial inflicting of it, justified, 496, 497
Book. God has a threefold Book, 395, 396

C
Carefulness, In worldly things, a sign of weak faith, 572 Carriage. See
Conversation. Care of our carriage in this life, is a sign of right to heaven,
362
Censure. The wicked censure Religion to breed Melancholy, 319, 320
Certainty. True grace is certain, and durable above all things, 247, 248
Charter. The believers Charter for Eternal Life, 341, 342
Chastisement Gods, is castigatory probatory Purgatory, 504
Christ His Merit, Intercession and Spirit, is a cause of Perseverance, 239
Christ was an Example of Perseverance, 256 See Perseverance. Overlooking the
terms on which Christ is to be had, viz. the Cross, is a cause of unexpected
sadness, 314 Difference 'twixt the life of Christ and a believers, 425 What it
is to receive Christ on Gospel-terms, 560 To clear up our interest in Christ,
is a means to act faith, ibid.
Church. Church of Christ compared to a Ship, 349
Circumspection. It ought to be seen in our affections, meditations, speeches,
actions, 362, 363, 364
Civility. See Morality. It is dangerous to rest in it, and trust to it, 119
Difference 'twixt Civility and Sanctification, ibid.
Combat. Differences 'twixt a true and false combat with sin, 160
Comfort. See Consolation. Sound comfort flows from proving our own faith, 43
The Comforter abides for ever, though not the act of Comfort, 272
Communion. Christian Communion is a means to increase faith, 579
Compassion. The Just live by faith in point of Compassion, and how, 54
Condemnation. Believers are set free from a sixfold condemnation, 111, 112 The
intailment of Condemnation on Unbelievers, 417 418, 419, 421
Confession. Resolute confession of Christ, is a means of assurance, 95
Confidence. See Pride. Self-confidence hinders growth in grace, 231 Sinful
confidence, how manifold and dangerous, 6 Carnal confidence in spiritual
friends, 41
Conscience Renewed by faith, it acquits and quiets, 299 The testimony of a
renewed Conscience, is nothing else but a reflex act of faith, 301 Conscience
purified, makes the believer cheerful, 308 A good Conscience is a means to keep
faith, 550
Consolation. Vide Comfort. Vide Joy. The just live by faith the life of
Consolation, 278 Consolation is the Saints complete Commencement, 279 The
suburbs of heaven in the consolations of faith, 280, 281 Christ's best reserve
in the Wine of Joy, 282 Proofs from Scripture, that the just live the life of
Consolation, 282 The just live the life of Consolation by faith, 283 Faiths
activity the magazine of Comfort, 284 Gods design in promoting the Saints
Comfort, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288 The influence of faith into Consolation, 288,
to 292 Consolation, what properly, 292 Consolation from the touch of faith,
292, 293 The Word and Sacraments, are the Breasts of Consolation, 393, 394, 395
Reasons why Consolation comes by faith, 298, 299, 305, 306 We must try our
Comforts by our Graces, and not our Graces by our Comforts: See why 300, to 304
It is easier to be deceived in our Comforts than Graces, 301 See Joy. Papists
rob of Comfort, while of faith, 321 Comfort from sense and sensual delights,
ends in sorrow, 321 To refuse to be comforted by the Promises, dishonors God,
322 Comfort in false Doctrine and Prophets, dangerous, 322 Motives to live by
faith the life of Comfort, 323 Consolation brings activity of Obedience, 323
There may be strong faith where little comfort, 514
Constancy. See Perseverance. Gods constancy in his love, a motive to
perseverance, 249
Conversation. See Carriage. Unnecessarily embraced with wicked ones, hinders
growth in grace, 230
Conversion, Unbelievers rarely Convert others; if they do, they take no joy in
it, 39 The method of converting grace, how it gradually proceeds from
conviction of sin to a closing with Christ, 521, 522 Its not the Word without
the Spirit, which can convert, 529 Conversion of Souls is a most excellent
work, for seven Reasons, from 585, to 600 Such reproved who slight the
converting of others, 602, 603, 604 Exhortation to convert souls, 606 Eight
Motives to convert others, from 607, to 610 Means for the conversion of others,
from 610, to 612 Exhortation to People to be willing to be converted, and to
attend on such means as are proper for it, 612, 613, 614, 615, 616 The misery
of such who are not converted, 613 The happiness of converted ones, 614
Objections of Discouragement answered, 614, 615 Thankfulness for our own and
others Conversion, 616
Conviction. It is an act of the comforting Spirit, though not an act of
Comfort, 272 The Spirit convinces of sin by opening and applying the Law, 520,
521
Covenant of Grace. This is a cause of the Saints perseverance, 238
Creature-inconstancy. Faith triumphs over it, 261, 262
Curiosity. Vain curiosity concerning heaven, condemned, 359

D
Deadness of Spirit. Gods Children subject to it, 172 Causes of spiritual
deadness, which is fourfold, 173 Sinful deadness springs from four privative
causes, and from four positive causes, 173 Penal and probational deadness, 174
Saints recover by faith out of deadness, 174, 175 Reasons why faith recovers
out of deadness, 175, 176 Four Arguments or Meditations whereby faith quickens,
177 Motives to quicken under deadness, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183 Means to quicken
under deadness, 184, 185, 186, 187 Vide Vivification.
Death. Die. Faith in death, 58 469 Six Reasons why believers die in faith, 59,
60 No need of faith after death, 61, 62 Christ's death applied by faith, a means
of Sanctification, 126 Greater happiness in the death, than life of Believers,
318, 319 Degrees of Christ's Conquest over Death, from 368, to 373 Believers
conquer Death in rectified opinion of it, 370 Reasons why true Believers are
loath to die, 372
Desertion. The just live by faith under desertion, 50 Faith triumphs over fear
of Divine desertion, from 267, to 275 Desertion in appearance only, 267, 268
269 Desertion in respect of temporals only, 270 Desertion in respect of
Spiritual means, 271 Desertion in respect of Spiritual comforts, 271, 272 God
deserts his people only in accessory graces, 273, 274 Vide Forsaking.
Despair. It is Reproved, 358, 359 It quits the Use of the Ordinances, 510
Desires. Strong desires after Christ are the seeds of faith, 533
Diligence. It leads to assurance in the use of holy means, 95 What it implies,
and how it breeds faith, 541
Discipline. Holy discipline and strictness, the sphere of Comfort, 297, to 300
Discouragement. Faiths triumph over five main discouragements, 261
Doctrines. These are to be judged true or false, as they slander or advance
the life of faith, 448, 449
Doubting. Frequency of it, a sign of weak faith, 571
Duration. Faith must be acted as long as we live, yet love excels it in
duration, 60, 61
Duties. Backwardness to holy duties, and remissness in them, is a sign of a
weak faith, 572

E
Election. It is a cause of perseverance, 237 Doubting of Election hinders
believing, 505
Envy. It is an Impediment of growth in grace, 230
Establishment in Faith. Reasons why we should labor to be established both in
the Doctrine and Grace of faith, 544 The benefit of Establishment in the faith,
ibid. Enemies which oppose the establishment of faith, 545 Though faith cannot
be lost, yet God establishes in the use of means, 545 Seven Means of
establishing faith, 548, to 556 See Keeping of Faith.
Eternal. See Life. Examination. See Trial. Evidence of grace upon examination
brings comfort, 300 Examine two things in order to the Sacrament, 577
Excellency. Faiths excellency in two respects, 62, 63 The complicated
excellencies of a believer, 477
Example. Examples of crowned Saints a means of perseverance, 255
Experiences. These called to mind breed assurance, 96 They are a firm ground
for future faith, 409 Reasons for the deduction of faith from experiences 410
They are a means to increase faith 581

F
Faith. Its definition in eight branches 19, 20 What it is to live by faith, in
five particulars 21, 22 Faith, Life and Christ come all together, yet in order
23 Faith described in seven faculties of spiritual life 23, to 28 Why Saints
live by faith rather then any other grace, 28, 29, 30 Why no man can live, but
by his own faith, 33, 34 Caution in four particulars amplifying that truth, 35,
36, 37 Restriction of it in four Considerations, 38, 39 Make much of faith as
your life in troubles, 64, 65 True faith is known by its renewing and
fructifying virtue 141 Faith is the root of holiness and fruitfulness, 144
Faith resembles the expulsive faculty in the body 150 Faiths triumph over
personal weaknesses, 263 Its triumph over sinful distempers, 264 Faiths triumph
over uncertain events, 264, 265 Its triumph over fear of sinning or suffering,
266, 267 Its triumph over fear of divine desertion, 267, 268 See Desertion.
Faith reflects on Sanctity and Sincerity to comfort, 299 Faith produces
comfort, as it makes future good things to be (as it were) present, 305 306
Want of acting faith in Gods Word and Works, though there be the habit, is a
great cause of sadness, 313, 314 Faith is the mother and nurse of spiritual joy
328 Faith to be acted seven ways for the increase of joy, 328 to 334 Faith
assures that eternal life is the Believers 341 How faith assures a Believer of
heaven, 342 to 351 Examination of true faith as it respects eternal life, 362
Faith lifts up a man above the troubles of the world, 377 382 383 Faiths manly
choice, or charm against prosperity 385 What are the Reasons why the Just must
live by faith 398 to 417 Living by faith a very reasonable duty 399 Faith puts
life into the Promises 400 Faith is a Saints security for all his hopes 400,
401 The exercise of faith keeps the soul humble 401 Faith makes up the match
'twixt Christ and the soul, 411 Faith is the Conduit-pipe to convey spiritual
life 412 Faith brings in a revenue of honor to God 413 In both Covenants God
required faith, but with a large difference; what that is. see 414 415 Faith
establishes salvation on freer and surer grounds then the first Covenant did or
could 415 Faith discovers life in the midst of death 417 The triumph of faith
over a sixfold condemnation 418 Faith a Cordial against fainting fears 420
Faith not an Evidence, but an instrument of spiritual life 427 Faith not
improved, exposes to reproach 436 Faith seems extinct where it is not exercised
437 The conduct of faith in every action, condition and choice, 436, 437, 438
The Touchstone of true justifying faith 442, 443 The Fruits and Effects of
saving faith 444, 445 Faith never gives quiet possession to sin 446 Living by
faith the touchstone to try all Doctrines and Religions, whether they be true
448, 449 The life of gratitude for the life of faith 449 Faith such a gift as
is all in all Faith in order of working is the root of other graces 451 Faith
cannot be implanted by any creature 452 The wonders of faith in its several
steps 453 Faiths rarity or scarcity, 458 Exhortation to get faith, 469 The
notable exploits of faith 472 True faith is omnipotent faith 473 Faiths safety
is grounded on the promise 475 Faith consults with God in the Word 476 Faith is
the Christians Al-sufficiency 478 Faith honors God 480 Faith and Life come into
the soul both at once 481 Faith makes to prosper 481 Faith a sweet companion
from first to last 483 Means how to get Faith. Impediments and Hindrances of
faith, together with Directions to remove them, 486 to 515 Faith no easy
matter, though it makes all things easy 515 Positive means of faith to beget
it 517 to 543 Exhortation to keep faith 543 Faith a Treasure to be secured
ibid. The general usefulness of faith 544 Reasons why we should look to the
preserving of our faith, 544 to 548 Comparisons to excite chariness over faith
546 Faith is a spiritual charm or antidote 547 Means of preserving faith, 548
to 556 Exhortation to act faith, and to live by it 556 Far better to put faith
then money to use ibid. Motives to act faith, 556 to 560 Means to act faith, 566
to 564 Six Motives to increase in faith 565 to 571 Signs of a weak faith 571
Means for the increase of faith 574
Fear. Filial fear of God assures of his love 95 Difference 'twixt true and
false fear of God 304
Forgiveness. We must imitate God in forgiving others, yet this overthrowes not
Civil Courts of Judicature 108, 109 Ignorance of Gods forgiveness causes great
sadness 313
Forsaking. See Desertion. God only forsakes his people gradually, and for a
time 274 Reasons of Gods forsaking his people 275 to 278 It confirms a
fivefold good 276, 277
Free Spirit of God. How many ways said to be free 552, 553 What the free
Spirit of God sets believers free from, 553 Gods free Spirit establishes in
freedom 554 See Christian Liberty.
Friends. What to desire for our best friend 317, 3^8
Fructification. Or New Obedience. How faith has influence into spiritual
fructification, 135 Faith makes sinners become good trees 136 Faith discovers
what is good fruit, 137 Faith excites the soul to be fruitful two ways, ibid.
Faith suits our fruit to the seasons of grace, 137, 138 Faith ripens the fruits
of new obedience 139 Faith procures acceptance of our fruitfulness, 139, 140
Motives to be fruitful in season, 147, 148
Fullness. There is a fullness of the subject and object in heaven, 339, 340
Sight of Christ's fullness, is a means to beget faith, 539 540

G
Gift. Faith is Gods gift 449 Faith is a gift necessary to the very being of a
Christian, Faith is such a gift which none but God can give, 451 Faith is a
most precious gift, 455, 456, 457 Faith is a rare gift, 457
Glory. The more we aim at Gods glory, the more we grow in grace, 212 There is
much glory in the sufferings and reproaches of Believers, 480
Gospel. Gospel revelation requires solemn gratulation, 459
Grace. See Growth in Grace An elegant description of its nature in a Metaphor,
302 How to distinguish common grace from saving, 303, 304 An hypocrite cannot
desire grace as grace 304
Growth in Grace. See Augmentation. Just live the life of spiritual growth 191,
192 Reasons of spiritual growth, 192, 193, 194, 195 The influence of faith into
spiritual growth, 195, 196 Four Reasons why the growth of grace depends on
faith, 196, 197, 198, 199 Life of grace is always on the growing hand, 199, 200
There are degrees in grace, ergo aspire to increase, 201 Reproof for want of
due growth 202 Reproof of such as think themselves perfect, 202, 263 Reproof of
such who decline in grace, 203 Reproof of such who hinder growth in others, but
grow in sin themselves, 204, 205 The touchstone of true spiritual growth, 205
to 217 Vide Strength. Vide increase What to judge in the sense of want of
growth, 214, 215 Humiliation for want of growth 217, 218 Thankfulness for
growth, against opposition, 218, 219 Motives to grow in grace, 220 to 226 Means
of spiritual growth, 226 to 231 Seven Impediments of spiritual growth, 229, 230
Comfort to young beginners in grace, 231 232 How strong grown Saints should
carry themselves toward the weak, 232

H
Hagiography, Or spiritual boundaries to the loose professing world, 434 435
Hardness of Heart. Gods judicial hardening of the heart, is an Impediment of
faith, 492 Divine justice justified in adding judicial hardness to wilful and
affected, 493, 496 Partial hardness mourned over, is probational, 495
Health. How the just live by faith for it 70
Heaven See Life Eternal. A fourfold fullness of the subject in heaven 439, 340
A fivefold freedom in heaven 340 Christ's being in heaven assures believing of
glory 348 Heaven a reserved inheritance, why? 350, 351, 352 Curious Questions
concerning Heaven, condemned 359 The meditation of heaven is to be improved,
360, 361 The excellency of heaven in five respects 388, 389 Citizens of heaven
known by their Language 365 Degrees of Glory in heaven 221
Heaviness. Rise of the Saints heaviness from 312 to 317 See Sadness
Heirships. Difference twixt heavenly and earthly heirs 345, 346 See Adoption
Heresy. It is the daughter of unbelief and hypocrisy 463, 464
Holy. Holy life is a sign of Right to Heaven 366, 367
Honor. It is a Christians honor to persevere 249 250 Believers are the only
right honorable ones 480
Hope. The touchstone of sound celestial hope 362 to 373 Hope of heaven is a
buckler against fear of adversity, 382 Hope of heaven is a charm against
prosperity 385
Humility. Humiliation. It is a means to attain assurance, 95 Feigned humility
is the root of licentiousness, 143 Laying too much stress on the depth of
humiliation is a great hindrance of Believing, 502, 503 Reasons why humiliation
must Precede faith, 522, 523 524 Humility in all the periods or degrees of
grace, 525
Hypocrisy. It is an impediment of spiritual growth 230 How far an Hypocrite
may go, 257 Wherein an Hypocrite comes short, 258 An hypocrite cannot rejoice
in the whole word of God, 302, 303 Hypocrisy springs from unbelief, 463

I
Ignorance. Unbelief is the root and parent of it, 462
Increase. There is a divine and diabolical increase, 213 How the increase of
the natural man in moral virtues, differs from the increase of God in saving
graces, 213, 214 See growth, See strength
Enjoyment. Believers have the firmest tenure and sweetest enjoyment of earthly
blessings, 77, 78
Interest. Interest in Christ clears up interest in the covenant of grace; and
this, an interest to all the promises, of which sons in Christ are heirs, 560
Joy see Consolation. How to discern the joy of a hypocrite from that of a
Saint 302, 303 The joy of a Believer excells all natural worldly sinful Joy in
10. Properties, from 323, to 328 Means to breed, Spiritual Joy 328, to 344
Judgment. Faith applies the last judgment as a means of sanctification, 127,
128 Judgments on unbelievers, 466 Examples of Gods judgments on apostates, 250,
251
Just. Who are such, and why said to live by faith, not by their justice 31
None are just or justified till thy believe 32
Justification. The life of Faith in justification 80 The definition of it;
which contains, the act, object, and application of both, and its fourfold
causality, 81 to 85 Faith puts forth a fourfold act upon the conscience and
heart of a sinner to fit him for pardon 86, 87 Faith how it acts in the
continuance of justification 88 Faith how it fetches in assurance of
justification Faith moves a man to desire more faith, in order to assurance of
his justification, and uses 11 Motives 89 to 92 Uses of the Doctrine of faith
in justification 105 Justification by free grace breeds humiliation 105 106
Four Marks of true justification 107 We must not justify sinners, or condemn
Saints 108 Motives to seek for the fivefold benefit of justification 110, 111
Justification and sanctification are inseparable twins, 141, 142 The first and
second evidence of justification, what? 301

K
Keep. See Establish. Exhortation to keep faith, 543 Reasons why we should look
to the keeping of our faith. 544 Seven Means whereby to keep faith 548 to 552
See Free Spirit. See Perseverance.

L
Libertinisme. The root of it is feigned humility and laziness 143
Liberty. Faith and Christian Liberty support each other 554 Many account it
their liberty to sin 555 See Free Spirit.
Life Spiritual. Gods People are in a state of life by way of eminency 8 The
excellency of the Saints Life in seven particulars, 8, 9, 10, 11 Saints Life is
a hidden life, and why 12 Spiritual life proved to be existent in believers 12
Spiritual life very desirable 13 Signs of Spiritual life 14 15, 16
Life Natural. Five evil and troublesome concomitants of it 60 Believers enjoy
it by faith upon different grounds from unbelievers 67, 68 Saints live a
natural life by faith in seven respects 68, to 76
Life Spiritual Is twofold, either the life of Justification or Sanctification;
the just life by faith in both, 79, 80 Four differences twixt true living
Spiritual actions and false 187, 188 Spiritual life is always increasing 199,
200 The comeliness and pleasantness, profit, equity, safety, and necessity of
such a life as it increases, 200 to 226 Vide growth.
Life Eternal. See heaven. The work of faith about eternal life 334 It assures,
that there is an eternal life from scripture and reason, with the degrees of it
335, 336 What the happiness of eternal life is 336 337 Wherein it consists,
from 337 to 341 Confutation of those who deny eternal life, 353, 354 Motives to
get assurance of eternal life, from 374 to 379 Means to get this assurance The
believers homage-penny for eternal life 386 The excellency of eternal life,
from 388 to 391
Life of unbelievers. They live on their lusts, pleasures, upon Creatures, and
upon a fivefold undoing self 429 to 434
Limiting of God. It is a great impediment of faith, how cured 499 500
Logic. Faiths holy logic 348, 349,
Love of God. It is a reason why the Saints persevere, 237, 238 The want of
feeling it should not hinder believing, 503 Love to God, is a means to increase
faith, 580
Love to the Saints. Difference 'twixt that which is true and false, 304, 305
Lust. Love of lust is the life of a sinner, 429 Lusts haboured oppose faith,
with considerations how to abandon them, 501

M
Marriage. How Saints live by faith in it, and in single estate, 73
Means. In the conservation of the natural life, must be used in faith, 68, 69
Meditation. It is the fruit of holy affection 364 Meditation on Gods
Attributes, especially mercy, is a good means to beget faith 536
Melancholy. It is a scandal to Christian profession, 319, 320
Mercy. Gods mercy becomes a suitor to man's misery 537
Ministry. See Preaching What the chief work of a Minister is 427, 428 The
dignity of the Ministry, 601 Exhortation to Ministers to preach in a
soul-saving way, 611, 612 God usually blesses a settled proper Ministry 42
Merry. Merry madness 311
Morality. Difference 'twixt morality and Sanctification in nine respects, 119,
120, 121
Mortification. The influence of faith into the life of mortification, 149 The
art of faith in mortifying of lusts, 151 to 154 Reasons why faith will have sin
to be mortified, 155, 156 Error of such who refuse to believe till sin he
mortified 158 Marks of true mortification 159, 160 Enemies unto, and juglers in
mortification reproved, 161 Alarm to Mortification, 163 Motives to
Mortification, 164 165 Means of Mortification, 166, 167, 168, 169
Murder. Soul Murder, is the worst kind 17, 470

N
Natural men. They are distingusht into two ranks 532
Necessity Of faith in Adversity 64 New Obedience. See Fructification.
Nourishment. Strong desires after Spiritual nourishment, are a sign of Growth
is Grace, with three Cautions in this particular 206, 207, 208, 209
Nursery Spiritual. Faith lays hold on Christ in the Ordinances, as breasts of
Consolation, and thence draws strength 293, 294, 295

O
Opposition. There is no true faith without Opposition, 514, 515 He that would
believe, must break through opposition 515, 516 Gods Spirit delights to grapple
with the greatest opposers of his word and ways that he may convert them 516
Ordinances. See Word. Despising of them, is an impediment of Spiritual growth
230 Neglect of the ordinances hinders believing 505 Five causes why men neglect
the ordinances 505 to 511 Though it be not in the Power of the ordinances, to
beget or increase faith, yet they are to be used 516, 517 They who live above,
that is, without ordinances are absurd 518, 519

P
Papists, and carnal Professors. These make Sanctification and justification
devour each other 141, 142 Papists faith is cobled up of pride and ignorance 40
Pardon. A pardoned state is a peaceable state 296
Passion. How faith moderates and subdues the Passions of Cares, fear and
sorrows 52, 53 477
Patience. Faith in adversity teaches and exercises patience 64
Peace. Saints live by faith for it, in two respects 71 The golden chain and
order of righteousness, peace and Joy 296
Perfection. Conceit of perfection is an impediment of spiritual growth 229
Knowledge, Love, Obedience, and Joy, are perfect in Glory 338, 339
Perseverance. Faith triumphs in the life of Perseverance 233, 234 Proofs from
scripture that the just does persevere 235 Perseverance is by virtue of faith
236 Reasons why the just shall persevere 237 to 240 Reasons why perseverance is
through faith 240, 241 Confutation of the doctrines of falling from grace 241
Five concessions wherein there may be a falling away 242 Exception to 7
particulars which can never be lost 243 244 Objections against perseverance
answered 245, 246 Motives to perseverance from 249 to 253 Means of perseveranee
from 253 to 257 Truth of grace demonstrated by perseverance 257 Thankfulness
for perseverance 259, 260 Faiths encouragement to persevere amidst all
discouragements 261 Vide establishment in faith.
Posterity. Saints live by faith for blessings on posterity 73
Power of God. It is a cause of the Saints perseverance 239
Praise. It is due from Saints for their spiritual life 11, 12
Prayer. The exercise of it, is a means of assurance 94 As also observation
how God hears our prayers 94 The prayer of faith, is a means of sanctification
131, 132, 133 Prayer is a means of spiritual growth 226, 227 Prayer is a means
to increase spiritual Joy 3^9 Prayer may subdue heretics when reason cannot,
357 Prayer and preaching must not justle out each other, 529 Prayer a means to
beget faith 527, 529 Natural men ought to pray, though they cannot pray
acceptably without faith, 530, 531 Pray, that thou may believe and believe
that thou may pray with acceptance, 533 Prayers of others, helpful to
conversion, 533 Whether a natural man ought to pray? The question stated
affirmatively, and all objections answered, 530, 531, 532 Prayer is a good
means to preserve faith 551, 552 Prayer is a means to increase faith 578
Preaching. See Ministry. The right Art of successful preaching, 427, 428
Precious. Three things very precious, 455 The precious touch of faith in four
respects, 456, 457
Prejudice. It quarrels the means of faith its cure 506, 507
Presumption It postdates the use of means which should beget faith, 509 510
Presumption of having faith already hinders believing, together with its cure,
510, 511 Differences 'twixt presumption and true faith in the conception,
birth, growth, issue or fruits, 511, 512 Presumption is a Monster of pride and
security, 513
Pride. Pride in the reason and will subdued in Sanctification, 117, 118 It is
an hindrance of spiritual growth 231 Pride and unbelief are associates 2, 3
Proud persons are neither obedient nor safe 3 Pride how manifold, and how
dangerous 5, 6 Rank pride is the root of Popish Sanctity 143 Pride contemns the
means of faith 507, 508
Profession. Multitudes make a profession of faith, who live not by it, 434,
435
Promises. Three-sorts of them all tending to assurance 92, 93 Apply the
promises of growth for growth in grace, 228 229 Promises applied are a
believers livelihood 414, 415 Our own unworthyness pleaded against the promises
is a main hindrance of believing, its Cure 502 Direction in applying of the
promises 526 Faith built on false promises of our own, will fail 551 Promises
to increase faith, are a means to increase it 575
Prosperity. How the just live by faith in Prosperity 46, 47, 48 The
temptations of prosperity 385
Protestants. Their Apology against papists in point of work 144
Purchase. The wisest purchase, is faith in Christ 468, 469

Q
Questions. Curious vain questions concerning the state of glory, busy men's
fancies, when as their faith should be acted to make sure their interest in
that shate 359

R
Rainbow. How grace is like it, as a sign of sparing mercy 301, 302
Rarity. Faith is the greatest Rarity in the world 458
Receive. What it is to receive, Christ on Gospel terms 560 Regeneration. See
Unregeration. Love to God, his word, Saints, holiness, an effect of it, 98
Difficulty of the new birth, it is not without doubting, 98 We are not born
again of bloods nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man; how this
is to be understood, See 528 See Sanctification.
Rejoice. See Joy. It is the height of wickedness to rejoice in it 321 To
rejoice in the creature as it draws from God, is sinful 321
Relations. See Friends Religious. Religious life, is the only comfortable life
310, 311 Religious persons must neither be jovial nor austere 320 Religion no
fruitless Profession 358
Renunciation Of self, a reliance only on free grace, brings assurance 96
Resurrection. Christ's Resurrection is a means of Sanctification, 126, 127
Resurrection of the Body, proved 354, 355
Riches. A Believers Riches are inexhaustible 477, 478
Righteousness. That of Sanctification is not to be confounded with that of
Justification, yet they are inseparable 32, 33

S
Sabbath Rightly sanctified, it is a short and little heaven, 381
Sacrament. Faith applies Christ in the Sacraments for Sanctification 130 A
complaint for neglect of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper 294 Sacraments are a
means to increase faith 576 Sacrament not to be given to dead-hearted
unbelievers, 577 Complaint for interruption of the Sacrament, and the
corruption of it as the cause, 578
Sadness. See Heaviness. Unbelief is the spring of sadness 307, 308, 309 Why
the Lord suffers his Saints to fall into sadness 315, 316 See Consolation.
Sanctification. Vide Regeneration. The submitting to the Spirit in this Work,
is a means of assurance 94 The life of faith in Sanctification 113 There is a
life of Sanctification in Believers, besides that which is inherent in Christ
himself, proved by four Arguments, 114, 115 How Sanctification and
Justification differ, in four respects, 116 What Sanctification is, and wherein
it consists, 116, 117 It works an holy change on the whole man, 118 Difference
'twixt Sanctification and Morality, in nine respects 119, 120, 121 Means
whereby Sanctificacation is wrought 122 Faith applies Christ for union as the
root of Sanctification 123 Faith applies Christ's death for Sanctification and
his Resurrection 126, 127 Faith applies Christ's second appearing and the last
Judgment for Sanctification 127, 128 Faith applies the Word of Christ for
Sanctification, 128, 129 Faith makes use of the Sacraments for increase of
Sanctification 130 Faith rightly uses and applies affliction for Sanctification
131 The Prayer of Faith is a means to sanctify, 131, 132, 133 Reasons of the
necessity of Sanctification (five) 134, 135 Five Motives to the life of
Sanctification, 145, 146 There are degrees in Sanctification 201, 202 Vide
Growth. Sanctification not the meritorious ground of comfort, yet a necessary
qualification evidencing our right to comfort 297, 298
Satan. Satan's rage should be a motive to perseverance 252 Satan is a great
enemy to the comfort of the Saints, 315 Reasons why Satan is such an enemy to
faith, 424, 488, 489 Satan presents and applies the Promises in a wrested sense
and for licentious ends, 511, 512
Scriptures. They are a staff to believing Pilgrims 403 Arguments to prove
their Divine Authority, 404, 405 Accomplishment of Scripture-Prophecies, is a
wh^tstone to sharpen our assent to their Divine Authority, 406, 407 There is
all the reason in the world why we should believe the Scriptures, 408, 409
Sealing of the Spirit. It is a consequent privilege of believing 93
Security. It is the offspring of the Devil and Unbelief, 462 Security
twofold, Spiritual and Carnal 246, 247 The Saints Security for a sevenfold
treasure 243. 244 The best security for the best purchase 380
Seducers. Their sleights to beguile unstable Souls 254 Seducers are the Devils
Factors 604
Self. Shifting self is shiftless folly, 433 Self a great Impediment of faith
486 Its Cure 487
Self-love. The blessing of it is a sign of growth in grace, 205, 206 There is
a fivefold self contrary to the life of faith, 431, 432, 433
Sense. Living by Sense is a great impediment of faith, 503, 514
Sin. It dishonours God and wrongs the Soul, forsake it as the highest
demonstration of ingratitude 393, 395 Sins great defilement in five respects
155 Believers have sin remaining to be mortified 157 Life of sin lies in the
will; ergo subdue desires, 158 Sin may revive where it is mortified 159 Comfort
against the vigor and rigor of sin, 169, 170 Scandalous sins cause great
sadness 312 Inordinate aggravation of sin sinks into sadness, 312, 313
Sincerity. The excellency of sincere grace, in that it is durable, 247, 248
Sloth. It recoils from the means of faith. Its Cure, 508, 509
Society. Good society is a means of begetting faith, 533, 534, 535
Soul. Eternal life of the Soul proved 356, 357 See Life Eternal
Speech. Our speeches either condemn or justify us 365
Spirit of God. What its testimony and witness is 347 The Spirits testimony may
be separated from its fruits 347, 348 Difference 'twixt the Spirits in dwelling
in Believers, and common assistance in hypocrites 426, 427 The Spirits
persuasion outweighs and quickens all means and motives in drawing to Christ
454, 455 We must pray for Gods free establishing Spirit 552 What Gods free
Spirit is, from what he sets believers free, and how he establishes, 552, 553,
554, 555 See Free Spirit. See Establishment.
Strength. A believers strength, 471, 472, 473 Strength to do duties and resist
temptations, a sign of growth 209, 210 Strength to bear afflictions and
injuries, a sign of growth 210, 211 Strength to bear others infirmities, as
also to shake off Ceremonies, a sign of growth 211 Its part of our strength to
be sensible of weakness 212
Success. This in the improvement of natural life, is fetched in by faith, and
that in six respects 71, 72
Sufficiency. All- sufficiency, Self- sufficiency, Sole- sufficiency in Christ
540

T
Temptation. The just live by faith in temptation 50 Satan tempts sinners to
conceit God to be either all Mercy or all Justice, 536 Yielding to temptations
is a sign of weak faith 573 Such who tempt others to sin, are Satan's factors,
and shall have deep condemnation, 604, 605
Thankfulness. Be thankful for the life of Justification 109, 110 The Saints
thankfulness for the blossomings of Eternal life 391, 392, 393 How that
thankfulness is expressed 393 to 397 Thankfulness for faith, with the grounds of
it 449
Time. The Just live by faith in respect of all the parts of Time 44, 45.
Tradition. Traditional faith is unsound, 40, 41
Trial. True faith is tried by undergoing adversity 63 We must try our comforts
by our graces, and not our graces by our comforts, 300 to 304
Triumph. The triumph of damned Spirits over unbelievers, 491
Troubles. These are various, yet the Saints live by faith in them 51 Manner of
living by faith in troubles, nine ways, 55, 56 Means of living by faith in
troubles, five ways, 57, 58
Trust. Such reproved who say they trust God with their souls, and yet cannot
trust him for temporals 75, 76 False trust on Creatures or Grace received,
hinders faith, together with its Cure 498, 499

V
Valuation. See Precious. A Believer neither over nor under-values his natural
life 74
Vision. Vision of God fourfold 337 Perfect Vision causes perfect
transformation ibid
Vivification. The liveliness of faith in the cure of spiritual deadness, 171
What meant by Vivification, 172 Reasons why the Just live by faith the life of
Vivification 175, 176 Four Arguments or Meditations whereby faith quickens 177
Reproof of such who act not faith for Vivification, 178, 179 Motives to
Vivification, 179, 180 Means to live the life of Vivification, 184, 185, 186,
187 Trial of true faith by its vivifying power, 187, 188, 189 Vide Deadness.
Unbelief. Unbelievers. Unbelief is a piece of pride, 3 It makes the heart and
condition not right 4, 5 Unbelievers lead a sordid life, 8 Unbelief is the
spring of sadness 307, 308, 309 Unbelief was the root of man's first Apostasy
415 Their dead condition 423 Humiliation for Unbelief, 459 Unbelief is the
Goliah-sin, 460 Unbelief grieves the Spirit, but pleases the Devil, 461 The
monstrous brood of Unbelief 462 The Unbeliever is the greatest Time-server 464
Unbelief is a Stepmother to grace 465 Unbelief is the Nurse that maintains life
in every sin, and which binds it on the Soul 465, 466 Unbelief is a merciless
Sequestrator 466 The Arraignment of Unbelief 467 Unbelief is the greatest
Self-murder 470 The contrariety of presumption and despair unite in the
Unbelievers ruin, 510 Naturally we have hard unbelieving thoughts of God 536
Unbelief is a going out from God into our selves, 539
Unchangeable. Gods unchangeable nature is the cause of the Saints perseverance
239
Union. Signs of spiritual actions flowing from Union with Christ 124, 125
Union with God is unchangeable 50
Unregenerate. Their Soul is no fit soil for comfort 309, 310 See Regeneration
Unsetledness In Gods truth its a sign of weak faith 571

W
Watching. Watching over one another, is a means of perseverance 255
Wealth. How the Just shall live by faith for it 70
Wisdom. The believer is the only wise builder 474 The believer is never at a
stand, because Christ is his Wisdom, 475, 476, 477
Word. See Ordinances. Faith applies the Word of Christ for Sanctification,
128, 129 The Word mixed with faith is a means of growth, 227, 228 The Word is
one of Christ's Breasts 293 How the Word works faith; 443 Cavilling and mocking
at the Word is the Seal of Unbelief 494 The Word is the life of faith 517 The
Word and Spirit go hand in hand 518 The Word both the object and instrument of
faith 518 Living above the Word, is living by a deluded fancy, and not by
faith, such are nearer Hell 518 The Word is appointed to work faith, not
miracles 519 Every divine Word is an object of faith, especially the Promise
520 Attendance on the Word, a means to increase faith 574
Worldly. World. Worldly-mindedness reproved 361, 362 Worldly-mindedness
springs from unbelief 464 The World tries fair means and foul to hinder faith
489 Wordly examples of the multitude not to be followed, 490

FINIS.

