St PAVLS CHALLENGE, OR THE CHVRCHES TRIVMPH: In a Sermon, Preached at the
FORT-ROYAL March 3. 1643.

By Jer: Leech.

And now published at the request both of the generous; and his much honored
friend Captain George Dipsort.

EZEKIEL. 22.14. Can thy heart endure, or can thy head be strong in the day that I
shall deal with thee?

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Pain, and are to be sold by Francis Eglesfield at
the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

St. PAVLS CHALLENGE, OR The Churches Triumph.
ROMANS 8 v. 31. If GOD be for us, who can be against us?


THE Triumphant Challenge of a Victorious Champion, against all the Churches
enemies, bodily and ghostly. It was daringly done of Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.10.
when he challenged the whole Host of Israel. Lo here, all the Host of the
earth are challenged, with all the Armies of Hell to boot, and though they
should all join in one, here is one that defies them all. The Triumph is first
more general, in this verse and in the next. Then more particular, in the
verses that come after; which I shall touch upon anon. In this verse, the
Apostle triumphs, that nothing can befortun a Christian to do him any hurt.
The reason, because God is of his side, God is for him. If God be for us, who
can be against us? In the next verse, he triumphs again, that nothing can be
wanting to a Christian that shall do him any good. The reason, because he has
Christ given him; and Christ being given him, what can be denied him? He that
has given us Christ, how shall he not with him give us all things?

Nothing against us? All for us? (...) says the Apostle? what shall we say to
these things? These are such things, as if all were reckoned up, that can be
reckoned up, nothing could be more said. He sums up all here that he had said
before. Before, he had enumerated and reckoned up, the several, and singular
privileges, that Christians have an interest in. He begins with the lowest
of them, Deliverance from condemnation. In de first verse of the chap. There is
no condemnation to them that are in Christ. And then he goes on, till he comes
to the highest; from the state of condemnation, out of which we are delivered,
to the state of glorification, unto which we are exalted. He has
praedestinated us, (he says) He has called us, He has justified us, He has
glorified us; So in the v. immediately before going. But there he stays, he
makes a stop at that, as if when he had said that, he had said all; He had gone
so high as he could go no higher. And therefore here, by way of
recapitulation, he breaks forth into this triumphant acclamation, (...); what
shall we say to these things? As if he should say, This is all that can be
said. More then this cannot be spoken; greater comfort then this, cannot be
given. You may understand it three ways. Either by way of thankful
acknowledgement; What shall we say to these things? They be such excellent
things, as we can never be sufficiently thankful to God for them. Or by way
of admiration and wonderment: what shall we say to these things! They be such
wonderful things, as we cannot but admire and be astonished, so often as we
think of them. Or last of all, by way of triumph and challenge What shall we
say to these things? They be such high and mighty things, as we dare challenge
all Creatures, Men and Devils, to say or do what ever they can against them;
we are confidently resolved, and peremptorily we conclude, that nothing can be
against us, as long as God is for us. If God be for us, who can be against us?

The words, as they lie, consist of two parts.

1. A Supposition. 2. An Interrogation.
The Supposition in the first words. Si Deus pro nobis, If God be for us.

The Interrogation, in the next: Quis contra nos? who can be against us?

If God be for us, says the Apostle. The word If, is not to be doubtfully, but
affirmatively taken. Though it have but a suppositive form, yet it has a
positive force. Commonly it is spoken, I know, of things that are questionable:
yet sometime of things that are impossible; sometime of things that are
indubitable Things that are impossible. So Gal 4.8. If an Angel from heaven
preach any other Gospel, then that which we have preached, let him be accursed.
The Apostle knew it was impossible that an Angel from heaven should preach any
other Doctrine; yet he supposes a possibility, therefore expresses it by an If.

And as things impossible thus; so thus, things indubitable and certain. They
are expressed by an If too, which sometime carries the force of an Etsi,
although. Sometime of a Quoniam, Because. If thus; That is, Although thus. As 1
John 2.1. If any man sin. The Apostle knew there was not any man but did sin:
But his meaning was, that Though a man did, yet he had an Advocate to the
Father, etc.

Or again, If thus; That is, Seeing thus, or Because thus: As here in my Text,
Si Deus pro nobis, If God be for us; That is, Quoniam Deus pro nobis; Because
God is for us, Or Seeing God is for us.

And so for the Interrogation that follows; The quis contra nos? who can be
against us? The Apostle meant not to grant, that some might be, but rather
concluded that none could be. Who can? As much to say, as None can. Like that
of David, Psalm. 130.3. If thou Lord shall mark our iniquities, Quis feret? who
can abide it? Ille quis, nullus; says St. Austin. That Is as much to say, as
None can abide it.

So here, If God be for us, Quis contra nos? who can be against us? Ille quis
nullus; The meaning of that is, None can be against us. As the supposition
before, had the force of a Concession, implying that Gods being for us, was not
a thing to be supposed only, but granted: so this Interrogation here has the
force of a Negative; implying that because God is for us, that there can be any
thing against us, is not a thing to be questioned, but flatly denied.

In a word; That which the Apostle would say here, is plainly this. Nothing can
be against those; nothing can hurt those, with whom, or for whom God is. The
words are argumentative; and the Apostles argument in them, is Syllogistically
framed. We have an enthymeme here, a contracted Syllogism. God is for us: Ergo,
none can be against us. Or if you will, a Hypotheticall Syllogism; the Major
only expressed: The Minor and Conclusion conceald. Fully thus. If God be for us,
none can be against us. This is the Mayor part of the Syllogism, and this you
see is expressed. Then comes in the Minor, though conceald in in the text, but
God is for us. Thereupon the Conclusion necessarily follows, Therefore none can
be against us.

This being the scope of the words, the parts shall be these. Not a Supposition
and a Question, as before; but a Proposition and a Proof: Or if you please a
Doctrine, and a Reason. 1. You have here a Proposition or Doctrine; In effect
this; None can be against those that are Gods. 2. You have the Reason or Proof
of it, Because God is on their side, God is for them. Both these we shall
discourse upon; upon the Doctrine first; then upon the Reason; and having done
with the explication of them, we will conclude with the use and application.

If God be for us, who can be against us? Who can be against us, does the
Apostle ask? He needed not ask that, you will say. If we compare number with
number, we shall find more against us then for us. We have those that are
openly against us; and we have those that are secretly against us; enemies
against us from without, and enemies against us from within; as many against us
as Christ had against him. Look how many wicked men there be in the world, so
many we have against us. Look how many Devils there be in hell, so many we
have against us. And yet does the Apostle ask, who can be against us?

Who knows not, that there has been enmity from the beginning, between the
seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent? Genesis 3.15.
Who knows not, how he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was
borne after the spirit? And even so it is now, says the Apostle, Gal. 4.29. As
it was then, so is it now* It was then so, and it is now so. Now to this day
the matter is not mended a whit; nor the world is no Changeling, but still the
old quarrel is renewed and maintained. They that were against Christ then, are
against Christ still; They that persecuted the Church then, persecute it still.
In the infancy of it, it was persecuted by Tyrants; In the growth of it, it was
persecuted by Heretics; Bernard
Now in the peaceable times of it, it has been persecuted by false brethren,
and hypocritical Professors. Even in our own days a sort that have seemed to
be greatly for the Church, they have been shamefully against it; against the
spiritual glory of it, against the sincere worship of God in it, against the
power of the Gospel, and the purity of the ordinances, (more for Innovation
then for Reformation) though for outward splendor and ceremony, zealous beyond
measure, to advance the pomp of it. Of her being persecuted by these three
enemies, the Church may complain as Jacob did, when he feared to be deprived
of his three sons: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, Genesis 42.36.
and now they will take Benjamin away too; All these things are against me. So
the poor Church of Christ may complain; Tyrants have persecuted me, and
Heretics have persecuted me; and now false brethren and hypocrites persecute
me: What Rocks am I cast upon? what straites am I driven to? All these things
are against me. And yet does the Apostle ask, Who can be against us?

Out of question, as long as there is a Christ in heaven, and a Church on
earth; there will be a Devil in hell, and a faction in the world, that will
maintain war against both. Unless Christ and the Devil could be
reconciled, the world and the Church will never be at peace; They are strangers
one to another. Christians are strangers in the world: Therefore they must
look for no friendly entertainment in it, but to be used as strangers. Nay
they are enemies, hating and hated one of another. The world hates me, says
our Savior, and therefore it will hate you: And it is well it does so. It Is a
good providence of God that the world should hate us, that so we might learn
to be out of love with the world. How were the Prophets hated and persecuted in
it? Joh. 15.18.
How were the Apostles hated and persecuted in it? Even this our Apostle, St.
Paul himself after he had once taken upon him the name of a Christian, he
never went without the badge of a Christian, but carried the cross about with
him ever-after, Gal. 6.17.
bore the marks of it in his flesh to his dying day. What ever place he came
into, he met with one or other, that was against him; 1. Cor. 15.32. Act. 19.24.
with Beasts at Ephesus that fought against him; with Demetrius the
Silver-smith that raised the City in uproare against him; with Alexander the
Copper-smith, that did all the mischief he could to him; 2. Tim. 4.13. 2. Tim.
4.10. Act. 13.8. Act. 14.19. Act. 16.22.
with Alexander the Copper-smith, that did all the mischief he could to him;
with Demas that revolted from him; with Elymas at Paphos, that withstood him;
with the Jews at Lystra, that stoned him; with the Magistrates at Philippi,
that whipped and imprisoned him; with multitudes at Jerusalem, that charged heavy
and false accusations upon him; and at Rome last of all, Act. 21.28.
with a Nero that beheaded him; and yet does this Man ask, who can be against
us?

Yes; He might ask it well enough. Take St Paul's meaning with St Paul's words,
and we may confidently resolve this Interrogative, into a Negative; None can
be against us: That is to say, None can be so against us, as ever to prevail
against us. They may Assault, but they cannot overcome: They may oppose, but
they cannot overthrow; They may fight, but they cannot foil; They may shake,
but they cannot shiver: They may wound, but they cannot kill; or they may kill,
but they cannot hurt; kill the body, but not kill the soul: In a word, They
may beleaguer, but they cannot conquer; Traitor-like undermine us, but not blow
us up.

Premimur, non opprimimur, it is the Churches Motto; the word that she carries
in her Flag and Ensign. As 2 Cor. 4.8. We are troubled on every side, but yet
we are not distressed; we are perplexed, but yet we do not despair; we are
persecuted, but yet we are not forsaken; we are cast down, but yet we are not
destroyed. So Psalm. 129.1. Many a time they have afflicted me from my youth,
may Israel now say: Many a time they have afflicted me from my youth; Sed non
praevaluerunt, but they have not prevailed against me. No, they shall never do
that: It is the Apostles Challenge here in my text. (...)? who can be against
us? That is, who so, as to prevail against us?

Three things you may be pleased to take notice of, in the words.

1. The Persons to whom. 2. The Persons for whom. 3. The matter about what.
1. To whom, or against whom, the Apostle makes this challenge. I answer, To
all the Enemies of the Church, be they who they will be. The word Tie, who, is
a comprehensive word; takes in all, excepts none; neither spiritual enemies,
nor bodily. Not spiritual; such as would accuse, verse 33. such as would
condemn, verse 34. such as would separate us from God, verse 35. None shall be
able, either to do the one of these, or the other; not sin, not Satan, not the
Law, not our own consciences. Let them attempt what they will, what they can;
none of them shall prevail against us. No nor any bodily enemies neither:
Those that he afterward musters up. Tribulation, distress, persecution,
famine, Nakedness, peril, sword. These though they may infest and endanger
the body, threaten to make conquest of us that way; yet when they have done all
they can do, in stead of conquering us, we shall conquer them; nay, we shall
be more then conquerours over them, says the Apostle, through him that loves
us; in the 37. verse of the chapter.

He goes a step higher yet; joins bodily and ghostly both together; bids
defiance to them all, heroically resolves that none of them all shall prevail;
neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to com, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature; let
them make what confederacies they can, join all their counsels, and forces
together; yet they shall never be able to separate us from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus. Thus you see, who they are, against whom the Apostle
makes his challenge.

2. Observe for whom, or in whose behalf he makes it. That Is in the word (...)
Us; who against us? Which you may either understand to be generally meant, of
the whole Church; or particularly, of every Member of the Church.

Against the whole Church first of all, Mat. 7.25. Psalm. 125.1.
none shall ever prevail. It is a house built upon a rock. Let the rain fall,
let the winds blow, let the floods rise, her foundation is impregnable, and
(as the Psalmist of Mount-Zion) shall never be moved. It Is true. The Church is
sometime like a Ship upon the Sea, Isai. 54.11.
afflicted and tossed with tempests. Like the Ship that the Disciples sailed
in, filled with water, and covered with waves, and the passengers, Mat. 8.26.
all ready to cry out, Lord save us, we perish. We have had the sad and woeful
experience of it, in all ages. And even of late days, what pressures the
Church has suffered, in most places of Christendom, how the ploughers have
ploughed long furrows upon their backs, how her fields have been sown with the
bodies, and watered with blood of Gods Saints, the Goshens and Edens of it,
that were sometimes as the Gardens of God, turned now into Aceldemaes and
Golgothaes, (I would I could say that we in our own land had not been made to
drink deep of this cup) whose heart bleeds not to think of it? Certainly in
many places, the Enemies have mightily prevailed. I, but yet for all this,
though they have prevailed over some part of the Church; over the whole Church
they shall never prevail; though over the persons, yet never over the cause.
She shall have an Vbi still, a hiding place to rest in, though it be in the
wilderness. God will still reserve a remnant to himself, even in the worst
times, that shall worship him in sincerity, and not kiss the Calves in Bethel,
nor bow the knee to Baal.

Again, Though the Churches Enemies may now and then prevail in some places;
yet like the Sea (as one says) what they gain in one place, they lose in
another. And so the Church for her part, what she loses in one place, she
gains in another. As what she lost among the Jews, when they rejected the
Gospel of Christ, she gained among the Gentiles, when they received it. So
what she lost in the Eastern parts of the world, she gained in the Western;
what she lost in Garmany, she gained in the Netherlands; what in Italy and
Spain; she gained in France and England. God still so provides, that what her
Enemies do against her in one place, he does for her in another; and though
they prevail against some part of the Church, yet against the whole Church (as
I said) they shall never prevail.

Nay; they shall never prevail neither against any one member of the Church.
Every child shall inherit the same blessing with the Mother. What Christ said
unto Peter, is shall be verified upon every Disciple of Christ, Luke 22.31.
Satan has desired to winnow thee, as wheat is winnowed, but I have prayed for
thee, that thy faith may not fail. Peter's Faith never utterly faild; It Is true,
It was shaken indeed, but though concussa, yet not excussa, as Theophylact
says, though it were shaken, it was not shivered; Mota, sed non amota, moved
it was, but it was not removed: Coepit arescere, sed non exaruit; It withered
at the top, but it dyed not at the root. In 2. Tim. 4.8. St. Paul speaks of a
Crown of righteousness, that he says he knew the Lord would give him. Mark
what he adds; He says he would not give it to him only, but to every one that
loved his appearing. Had not every Christian this privilege, his condition
were uncomfortable. But our happiness is, that what ever God or nature has
intended for the safety and conservation of the whole, shall be communicated
and distributed to every part. If therefore no Enemy shall ever prevail
against the whole Church; I being a member of the Church, my confidence and
comfort is, that none shall ever finally prevail against me. Let Us assure our
selves, they shall not. Though they may prevail over our lives, they shall not
prevail over our spirits. Though they may reproach our names, and plunder our
estates, and mangle our bodies; they shall never do any violence to our
souls. No, the Devil himself shall never lay hand upon them, unless he
could pluck them out of Gods hand. He may bruise them with tentation, but he
shall never bring them to destruction. God has made us invincible, though he
have not made us invulnerable. So thus you see the second point; For whom, or
in whose behalf the Apostle makes this challenge.

In the third and last place; Observe the matter about which he makes it. About
the enemies being against the Church. Who can be against us? says the Apostle.
That Is the challenge he makes. And how against us, he specifies in three
particulars. 1. In the 33. verse. Quis accusabit? Who shall accuse Gods elect?
or who shall lay any thing to their charge? None shall be able to do that. He
tells you why. Because it is God that justisies us. God is the Judge of all,
and it is in the Judges power to pronounce those that are accused, either
guilty or innocent. If God being the Judge, therefore will justify us to be
innocent, no accuser can make us guilty.

Then in the 34. verse. Quis condemnabit? Who shall condemn? None shall be able
to do that neither: He tells you why. Because Christ is dead and ris^n again
for us. Christ by his death and resurrection has acquitted us from the sentence
of condemnation. He became surety for us, and paid the debt that we owed. The
death that we deserved he suffered, and being suffered by him, it cannot be
charged upon us. What ever debt I owe, my Creditour cannot condemn me in it,
if he that undertakes to be my surety, have paid and discharged it.

Thirdly and lastly, in the 35. verse, Quis separabit? says the Apostle. Who
shall separate us from the love of God? Nor shall any be able to do that
either. He tells you why. Because Gods love in Christ is unchangeable,
therefore nothing can separate from it. Many occasions may separate friends
here, and cause a diversion of their love. John. 13.1. Jam. 1.17.
But whom God loves, he loves to the end: His love is as Himself is, subject to
no variation. I am persuaded nothing can separate us from the love of God to us
in Christ, as the Apostle sweetly in the cloze of this chapter. If then there
be none that can accuse us, none that can condemn us; none that can separate
us from God, or God from us; we may boldly make the challenge that the Apostle
here makes; (...); Who can be against us? Afflicted the poor Church may be (as
you heard before) but who ever afflicts her, none can overcome her. Enemies may
rise up against her, but none of the shall prevail against her. That is, they
shall never so prevail, as either to pervert her, or subvert her. They shall
neither scare her from her profession, nor supplant her from her peace. They
shall neither bereave her of her Faith, nor deprive her of the reward of her
Faith. They shall neither strip her of Grace, nor spoil her of Glory.

I may go one step higher yet. So far shall the Enemies of the Church be from
doing any thing against her, as in seeking to do against her, the shall rather
do for her. In striving to be her Enemies, they shall (though against their
wills) prove her best friends. What ever they intend to her hurt, it shall
turn to her good. As Joseph to his brethren, Genesis 50.20.
When you thought evil against me, God meant it to my good. So God will turn
that to the good of his Church, which her Enemies intend to her for evil. The
plot that Haman laid for Mordecai, and the lot that he cast for the rooting out
of the Jews, beside the mischief he brought upon himself by it, (it was like
an Arrow shot upright, that fell down upon his own head) it turned in the end
to Mordecai's greater advancement, and to the Jews greater enlargement. And so
shall every thing turn, that the Enemy plots and practices, to ruin any of
Gods children, it shall turn to their greater good and glory in the end. It
may for the time help to let out some of their corrupt blood; but they shall
afterward be the sounder for it. As it was with Phereus Jason in the story; one
that had an Aposthem growing within his body; Cic^ nature deor: l. 3.
when an Enemy of his that thought to have killed him ran at him with his
sword, it so happened in the thrust, that the sword did only prick the
Apostheme; and by that means profuit hostis, his Enemy did him a better turn,
then all his Chirurgions could do him. Gladio vomicam aperuit; He opened the
ulcer he had within him, and by opening it cured it.

They say vines bear the better, when they are watered with blood: So does the
vine of Gods Church. The blood that has been shed in it* has been a deaw to
water it. The more the Church has been persecuted, the more she has flourisht.
Like the Camomill, the more you tread upon it, the thicker it grows; Nitit^r
in pondus palma et consurgit in altum.
like the Palm; the more weight you lay upon it, the broader it spreads. Non
minuitur, sed augetur, says Leo. The Church lessens not with persecution, but
increases. Therefore Tertullian to the Gentiles, when they were so cruel in
persecuting the poor Christians. What gain you by all your cruelty? says he.
It is no such Bugbeare to scare us, it is rather a Bait to allure us. Quoties
metimur, plures efficimur; the oftener we are mowen down, the thicker we come
up. Pharaoh found it so, when he oppressed and afflicted the Israelites; The more
he afflicted them, says the text, the more they multiplied and grew. Exodus
1.12. And Herod found it so after his beheadding of James, and imprisoning of
Peter. The fiercer he waxt, the fertiler the Church waxt, for (says the story)
the word multiplied and grew after it. Act. 12.24. We need not wonder at this
beloved. No wonder that nothing can prevail against the elect of God; nothing
to accuse; nothing to condemn; nothing to separate them from his love. The
Apostle gives a satisfactory reason for it here in my text: It is because God
is on their side; God is for them. Which brings me to the proof of the
Proposition; the second general part that I propounded to speak of. Si deus
pro nobis; If God be for us; that is, Quoniam Deus pro nobis; Because God is
for us; therefore none can be against us.

That none can be against us, because God is for us, is a reason irrefragable.
All power save Gods, is but a created power, therefore but finite and limited;
Only Gods is infinite and un-limited, be-because un-created: (...), says
Damascen, The God that we have is above all Gods. And (...), says Cyril, The
power that God has, is above all power. Now if that power be for us, that is
above all power; and if the God be for us, who is above all Gods, impossible it
is, that as long as we have him for us, any thing can be against us.

It was part of Moses his (...), the song of triumph that he sung after Pharaoh
and his host were discomfited in the Red sea; Who is like unto thee oh Lord
among the Gods, who is like unto thee? Exodus 15.11. They say the Machabees had
it afterward for their Motto, and put it upon their banner when they went out
to their wars. (...)
Mi Camocha, Baelim Jehova. Who is like unto thee oh Lord among the Gods? And
thence it was, as the Hewrews report, that they had their name given them;
namely from the initiall letters of the four words in that sentence, Mem,
Caph, Beth, Jod, which are just the initiall letters of the four syllables of
their name, Machabaei. Sufficient it is that God has called himself
El-shaddai; a God all-sufficient. So to Abraham, Genesis 17.1. Eni, El-shaddai, I
am the Almighty God; or I am God all-sufficient. All-sufficient to himself.
All-sufficient to his Creatures. All-sufficient to save. All-sufficient to
destroy. All-sufficient to do what he will. All-sufficient to do how he will.
All-sufficient to do more then he will. Having therefore such a God for us; a
God almighty, a God all-sufficient; a God like unto whom there is no God; none
like him in wisdom, none like him in holiness, none like him in justice,
none like him in mercy, none like him in truth, none like him in power; in
defiance to all enemies, bodily and ghostly, secret and open. Traitors and
Rebels, Heretics and Tyrants, Jesuits and Devils, we may confidently make
it our triumph and our challenge, If God be for us, who can be against us?

St. Austin observes, out of the verse before-going, De verbis Apostoli. Sermon.
16.
that God may be said to be for us four ways. For us in predestinating us;
For us, in calling us; For us in justifying us; For us in glorifying us. And
these four ways, by which God is said to be for us, he opposes to those four
Enemies that rise up against us. The first, our inferior Enemies; (as he calls
him) that is Man. The second our exterior; that is the World. The third our
Interior; that is the Flesh. The fourth our superior; that is the Devil. That
man cannot prevail against us, he argues; because of Gods predestinating us.
Nor the world; because of Gods calling us. Nor the flesh; because of Gods
justifying us. Nor the Devil; because of Gods glorifying us. None of all these
can be against us, if God be for us.

In stead of, If God be for us; some read, Si deus nobiscum; If God be with
us. And being so read, it may seem to have special reference to Christ. For
Immanuel you know is Christ's name; and that is as much to say as Deus nobiscum;
God with us. And indeed, it is most certain, that Gods being for us, it does
properly and primarily come from Gods being with us. It comes originally from
Christ. It is in and through Christ, that God does all those things for us,
that you heard of, that he predestinates, and calls, and iustifies, and
glorifies. It is in and for Christ's sake, that none can accuse us, condemn us,
separate us from his love. He is the fountain of all that love, with which it
pleases God to embrace us. And as all the promises, so all the blessings we
enjoy, they are all as streams flowing from that fountain. All our liberties,
privileges, comforts, graces; all our safety, strength, peace, joy; all our
preservations from dangers, supportations in dangers, deliverances out of
dangers; In a word, all the good that God has done us; all the good that he
intends to do us, all must be acknowledged to come by Christ; and by him,
praise to God must be rendered for all; even by him that is our Immanuel, God
with us; and by his being with us, so for us, as that nothing can be against us.

All we have now to examine is no more but this; wherein God has so declared
himself to be for his Church, as in times of fear and danger, she may be bold
to secure her self under his protection, and confidently resolve, while he is
with her, and for her, none can be against her.

I answer: God has abundantly done it several ways; and those both ordinary,
and extraordinary. Ordinarily he has done it vires suppeditando, by supplying
her with such a proportionable measure of power and strength, as she has been
able to deal upon equal terms with the strongest of her Enemies, and to make
her part good with them, in their hottest conflicts and assaults, for policy,
for puissance, for number, for power, it has many times fallen out, that the
Churches provision, have not been a whit inferior to any of her Enemies.

But his extraordinary ways are more remarkable. God has many times uncouth
and extraordinary ways, such as none could ever have expected, invented,
imagined, to bring his work and purpose about, as for the peace and safety of
his Church, so for the dissipation and confusion of those that have been her
Adversaries.

1. He has done it, animos conciliando; by meekning the hearts of her
Adversaries, and by sweetly attempering them to a placid and peaceable
disposition. Pro. 16.7.
When the ways of a man please the Lord, says Solomon, he will make his
Enemies his friends. Esau, though he carry the heart of an Enemy toward Jacob,
yet he shall look upon him when he meets him, with the face of a friend. The
strokes and wounds that perhaps he intended, and threatened, they shall be
turned into kisses and smiles. You see what a strange way he brought the
Children of Israel out of their Babylonian captivity. Psalm. 126.4.
The Psalmist says, He turned their captivity like the water of the South. And
how was that? That was by the thawing of the Snow that had lain all the winter
frozen and congeald upon the tops of the Icie mountains. When at the return
of the Spring, the heat of the Sun had melted and dissolved it, it brought
store of waters down into the dry places of the South, so turned the barren
deserts of it into standing pooles. Thus God turned the captivity of his
people. He caused the hearts of those heathen Princes, Cyrus, and Artaxerxes,
and the rest under whom they had been held Captives, to relent and melt toward
them, so as they licenced them to depart, and to return peaceably into their
own land. And no less strangely by the Christians, in the times of the
primitive Church, when they had suffered long persecution under truculent and
bloody Tyrants; God at last mollifyed their hearts, made them of Wolves to
become Lambs, inclined diverse of those persecuting Emperors, Adrian, and
Traian, and Severus, and others, out of tender compassion to recall those
cruel edicts, that they had published against the poor Christians, not
suffering them to be executed with such rigor, as formerly they had been, and
in the end restored peace to his Church. Pro. 21.1.
He that has the hearts of all men in his hand, can turn them, as he pleases,
like rivers of waters.

2. He does it, terrorem incutiendo, by striking terror and fear into the
hearts of the enemy, that they dare not drive on, to do the mischief they
would do. In Exodus 23.28. I will send the hornet before thee, says the Lord,
that shall drive out before thee the Hivite and the Canaanite. What Hornet was
it that he meant? See the verse before going; I will send my fear before thee,
and will destroy all the people to whom thou shall com^. The terror and fear
with which God often strikes the hearts of his enemies it is like the sting of
a Hornet, that takes away their spirit and courage from them, and makes them
flee when none pursues them. Thus in Jehorams time, when the Syrians with a
huge Army came to make war against Israel, 2 Reg. 7.6.
God made them hear a noise of Chariots, and a noise of Horses: and the very
fear of this so amazed them, as they left all they had in their tents, and
fled for their lives. 1 Samuel 18.2.
Thus Saul was restrained from doing any hurt unto David, by reason of the
fear that God struck his heart withal. He was afraid of David, says the
text, because he saw that the Lord was with him. And thus the Jews were
restrained, Luke 19.47.
even for f^^re of the people, from laying hands upon Christ, when they would
have apprehended, and put him to death. Strange to see, how great ones do many
times stand in fear of those that are meaner then themselves, those who, one
would think, should rather stand in fear of them; and how few in number God
can make to disperse exceeding great multitudes. As Jonathan said to his
Armor-bearer, when they two, and no more, creeping upon their hands and knees,
between the teeth of those two rocks, that were in Bozez and Seneh,
discomfited a Garrison of the Philistims; There is no restraint to the Lord to
save by many, or by few. 1. Sam. 14.6.
God promised his people that it should be so; that he would strike such fear
into the hearts of their enemies, that five of them should chase a hundred, and
a hundred of them put ten thousand to flight. Levit. 26.8.

3. He does it poenam infligendo; by inflicting some remarkable judgment upon
the enemy. Sometime, for the present disabling of them; as it was with Jeroboam
when he stretched forth his hand against the Prophet at Bethel, commanding to
lay hold on him, his hand withered and dried up by and by, so that he was not
able to put it in again. And so Theodor. hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 17.
Valens the Emperor, when he came to sign the writ for the banishment of
Saint Basil, his fingers shook and shrunk up that he was not able to hold the
pen. Sometime again to the utter cutting off, 1. Reg. 13.4.
and destroying of them. So when Pharaoh and his host of uncircumcised
Egyptians, Exodus 14.25.
pursued the Israelites at the red Sea; 2 Reg. 19.35.
God struck off their Chariot wheels, and the Sea closed her mouth upon them,
that they sunk as lead into the mighty waters. So Senacherib, and his
Assyrian Army, a hundred and five thousand of them, when they came to fight
against Hezekiah, they were by an Angel of God all slain in one night, and
all found in the morning so many dead corpses. Many examples you shall meet
with in the Ecclesiastical Histories, of the prodigious and fearful
judgments that almighty God sent upon persecuting Tyrants, and of the
miserable ends that they came unto; by means whereof the Church enjoyed
tranquillity and peace.

4. He does it cursum divertendo; by diverting the courses of the enemy, and
putting them upon new occasions, to stay the present violence of their furious
proceedings. Thus when Saul was pursuing David, 2 S^m. 23.27.
hunting him up and down like a Partrich upon the mountains; God sprung up a
new game for him (as one says) set the Philistines upon the back of him, so as
he was feign to leave chasing of David, and to bend his forces against them.
We want not those in our own times that may in this example read their own
story; men that have been hot in the pursuing of others, others that have
been as innocent perhaps as ever David was, and by them as much hated (I dare
say) as ever Saul hated David, when by all the projects and practices they
could devise, they have endeavored the treading of them down, and the rooting
of them up; suddenly the wheel has turned about, and while they have been
undermining others, others have countermined against them, so as they have been
forced to leave the game they were following, and to shift for the saving of
their own skins. I need not instance in those of the Popish faction. It Is
notoriously well known, how active they have always been, specially of late
years, how industriously, how indefatigably they have bestir'd themselves, for
the strengthening of their confederacy and advancing of their cause, making
no-bodies of the Protestants or worse then no-bodies. But I hope there is a
Western wind now blowing, that will turn their weather cocks another way.

5. He does it machinas detegendo; by detecting and disclosing the machinations
and plots of the enemy; and so strangely bringing them to light, that they have
been defeated, before they could be accomplished. Thus the plots of the Aramites
were discovered, even their bedchamber secrets to the Prophet Elisha. 2 Reg.
6.12.
Thus the conspiracy of Bigthan and Teresh, two of the Kings Chamberlains was
discovered by Mordecai to King Ahashuerus. Ester 2.22.
Thus the plot that Haman had laid against Mordecai, and the lot he had
prepared to destroy the whole nation of the Jews, was discovered to Queen
Esther, and by a strange providence prevented. Thus the conspiracy against
Paul, Act. 23.12.
by above forty men that had bound themselves with an oath and a curse, neither
to eat nor drink till they had killed him, was discovered to the Chief
Captains by his Sisters Son. And thus the plot of our Gunpowder Traitors
(the like whereof heaven never saw, hell never forged, earth never heard of)
was discovered by the writing of a letter, I know not whether more strangely
penned, or strangely interpreted; but pen and tongue both guided by a Divine
providence, to bring those dark things to light which (had they been
otherwise) our light had been covered under perpetual darkness.

6. Consilia infatuando, by infatuating the counsels of the enemy, and turning
their devises into foolishness. Thus the Lord infatuated the counsel of
Achitophel, which he had so politiquely and so pestilently contrived against
David. Certainly, had that pernicious piece of Counsel succeeded, the field
had been half won before a blow had been given. But God that guided the
tongue of Hushai, guided also the heart of Absalom, 2 Samuel 17.14.
and made Hushais counsel to prevail with Absalom, that Absaloms treason
might not prevail against David. So what he intended for a snare to David, it
proved in the conclusion a halter to himself.

All these ways it pleases Almighty God so to declare himself for the defense
and protection of his Church, as while he appears for her, she may boldly bid
defiance to any enemies that can come in against her.

And thus I have given you the Explication of my text as well as I am able. I
shall now only crave leave, to wind up what remains in a word or two of
application; and then dismiss you with a blessing.

1. If it be so, that while God is for us, none can be against us; all that are
Gods have here a strong foundation of comfort to build upon: Let who will be
against thee; the world against thee, the Devil against thee, all against
thee, as long as thou have God with thee, thou need not be dismayed; Thou
have more with thee then against thee, as Elisha said to his servant, 2 King.
6.16. be confide^t that unless they can overcome God, they can never overcome
thee. When Caesar was at Sea in a great tempest, the Master of the ship began
to be afraid; The Emperor bad him not be afraid; Caesarem vehis, says he
remember thou have Caesar in the Ship with thee: Wheresoever we are, so long as
we have God with us, there is nothing we have cause to be afraid of indeed. Pone
me juxta te; so the vulgar reads that text Joh. 17.3. Set me beside thee, and
let any man's hand fight against me. The Prophet David heroically, Psalm. 46.1.
God is our refuge and our strength, therefore I will not fear though the earth
be moved, though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea: So Psalm.
27.3. Though an host should encample against me my heart should not fear,
though war should rise up against me, yet in this I would be confident. In
this? In what? He tells you in the first verse; The Lord is my light and my
salvation, therefore whom should I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life,
therefore of whom should J be afraid? Say a thousand dangers compass thee
about: Mill mali species, mill salutis erunt.

As thou have a thousand dangers to environ thee, so God has a thousand ways
to deliver thee. What could Luther say? If all the houses in Worms were tyled
with Devils, I would not be afraid to go thither; because he was confident he
had God to go along with him. Deus meus et omnia, as he said, God mine, and
all mine. Let me but make that sure, and wheresoever I become I am safe. If I
can but be so happy as to apprehend that I have a propriety and interest in
God, and to be assured that God is mine; though it be the nature of fear to
betray all succors, that will succor me against all fears. God is a Rock to
his children; what ever else we build upon, is but sand; The Salvation of those
that trust in him; Therefore David joins them together, My God and my
salvation, Salvation is mine, if God be mine. But then I must be able to say,
he is Mine, Toll meum, toll Deum; take my away, as good take God away. Were
it not for that possessive My, the Devil might say the Creed, to as good
purpose as thou. For the Devil believes there is a God; the Devil believes
there is a Christ; but that which torments him is this, that he cannot say My to
any one article. Who ever can say that, and say it in Faith, he shall have that
comfort given him that all the world cannot take from him; even that spirit of
comfort that shall abide with him to the end, and make him victorious in all
his encounters. Nothing shall be forcible enough to bereave him of it. Sicut
non vincitur qui dat, ita nec aufertur quod dat. As he that gives cannot be
overcome, so that which he gives cannot be taken away. I remember it was the
comfort that Moses gave the Israelites when they were to have war with the
Canaanites; Numb. 14 Fear not, God is with us. And Vegetius says, Veget. lib.
3. cap. 3.
it was the word, that the Roman Soldiers afterward cheat'd up one another
with in their wars; Deus nobiscum; God is with us. Let it be your word also,
when you go forth into the field, and while you lie here in your Fort: Where
ever you are, learn to do by this text as Chytraeus reports the Emperor
Maximilian to have done. Chytraeus in Itinerario.
He says, he was so taken with it, and so exceedingly admired it, as he caused
it to be set in letters of Checquer-worke, upon a table that he commonly dined
and supt at, that having it always in his eye, he might always have it in his
mind; Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos? If God be for us, who can be against
us?

2. A here is a great deal of comfort, for them that are Gods, so for them
that have no assurance of God, no propriety nor interest in God, here is a great
deal of terror.

1. They can have no peace within themselves. 2. They can have no hope to
prevail against those whom they count their Enemies.
1. No peace within themselves. For granting this to be true on the the one
side, that If God be for us, none can be against us; the contrary must needs be
true on the other side, that if God be against us, none can be for us. Such the
condition of all wicked men. They have God against them: And what can be more
fearful? Psalm. 102.2.
Hide not thy face from me, says David, nor absent thy self in a time of
trouble. For God to do that, to hide his face from us at any time, or (though
a friend) to absent himself from us, we shall find that bad enough. But for
God to look at us with angry face, that will be ten thousand times worse. If
to absent himself from us, be uncomfortable; to set himself against us,
that is a great deal more terrible. As we can have no friend like God, so we
can have no Enemy like God. As it is no matter whom we have against us, if God
be for us; so no matter whom we have for us, if God be against us. To say
truth, all will be against us, if God be against us. Men against us, Angels
against us, Devils against us, our own consciences against us, all Creatures
in Heaven and Earth against us, and all too potent, too strong for us: Mice
were too strong for the Philistims; Lice too strong for the Egyptians, when
God had once set himself against them. So that is one part of wicked men's
misery, They can have no peace within themselves.

A second is; They can have no hope to prevail against those, whom they count
to be their Enemies. The wicked count all their Enemies that are Gods friends.
Therefore as they set themselves against God, so they set themselves against
them. But all in vain, and without hope of success: Psalm. 2.1.
Why do the heathen rage, says the Psalmist? Or why do the rulers of the
earth combine and take counsel together? They do but imagine a vain thing.
And mark the reason that he gives; They do it against the Lord, and against
his anointed. The Lord will be too hard for them, and they will but kick
against a throne, when they rise up against him. So the Prophet, in Esaias 8.9.
Associate your selves oh you people, yet you shall be broken to pieces; and
gird your selves, yet you shall be broken to pieces; Take counsel together,
yet it shall come to naught, speak the word, yet it shall not stand: and it is
the same reason he gives for it; Quia Deus nobiscum, because Gods is with us.
God that sits in heaven is always with his Church, and when he sees how
actively her Enemies bestirre themselves, how they bend their bow, Psalm. 11.2.
and make their arrow ready upon the string, to shoot at them, that be upright
in heart, videt, et ridet, He sees them and laughs at them, breaks their snares
asunder, cuts their cords to pieces, many times catches them in their own net,
and makes them fall into the pit that themselves have dug. How often falls
it out, that the Churches deliverance and her Enemies destruction meet both
together? How often that the plots which are laid for Gods children, are not
only disappointed, but the wicked themselves undone by the plots that they have
laid? Thence those two phrases of the Scripture, they weave the spiders web,
and hatch the Cockatrices egg. They weave the spiders web: Isa. 59.5.
that shows how vain their attempts are. For how soon is the spiders web
swept away, though never so cunningly and curiously spun? So all the stratagems
and attempts of the Churches wicked Enemies, though never so cunningly
contrived, yet they are quickly defeated, scattered and swept away on the
sudden, even like a spiders web. But that is not all; It Is worse then so. They
hatch the Cockatrices egg: That shows, how pernicious their attempts are,
pernicious to their own selves. For out of the egg they hatch, there springs
a Viper that stings them to death. Their own counsails and devices work to
their own ruin. So it is a double evil that attends them, enough one would
think, to cure them of their madness, and to take them off from prosecuting
their malicious purposes, when they begin to set their hearts upon mischief;
First that they are vain in what they do; then that they are cursed in what
they do. First they shall be disappointed in the circumventing of others; then
the ruin that they study and meditate, shall fall upon their own heads. In
brief; Those for whom God is, nothing shall be against them; Those against
whom God is, nothing shall be for them.

3. Thirdly and lastly. Seeing while God is for us, nothing can be against us;
Beloved, it we desire to have God for us, we must resolve to be for God. We
must be on his side, if we will have him on ours. What said the Prophet Azariah
to the men of Benjamin and Judah? 2 Chro. 25.2.
The Lord is with you, while you are with the Lord. Shall we think the Lord
will be for us, if we be not for him? Nay, shall we think the Lord will be for
us, when we are against him? while we side with the Devil and the world and
the flesh, can we be so unreasonable as to presume that God will side with us?
No. Remember what David's words were to Solomon; 1 Chro. 28.9. If thou seek the
Lord, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off
for ever. I would this lesson were well remembered and well learnd. Sure I am;
no people under Heaven have more cause to remember it and learn it then we.
Never was God more for any people, then for us in this land. How many eminent
tokens and seals of his favor has he printed upon us? How many mercies have
we been compast about withal? What plenty have we enjoyed? What days of
peace have we seen? What a happy government have we lived under? What a
flourishing state have we had? What a flourishing Church have we had? What a
sort of mighty preservations, and miraculous deliverances have we had? It were
easy for me to lose my self in this field, but it is too late to wander far.
I shall only exhort you to be mindful of the duty we all stand engaged in.
Seeing God has been so gracious to us, let us be as zealous for him. Seeing he
has appeared on our side, let us appear on his. And remember we cannot be
rightly for God, if we be not against those, that are against God. Gods friends
must be our friends, and Gods Enemies must be our Enemies. Enemies they are to
God, that are Enemies to his Church, Enemies to his cause, Enemies to his
Gospel, Enemies to the sincerity of his worship and to the purity of his
Ordinances. None more malevolent, and bitter then those of the popish faction,
those that are Romes fav^^rites; therefore none that we should set our selves
against, more then against them. We have been faulty this way. We have
complied too much with Rome, and connived too much at Popery. Like those of
Thyatira (St. John. blames them for it) we have suffered the woman Jezabel,
Revel. 2.20.
which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and to deceive many of Gods
servants; and to make them drunk with the cup of her spiritual fornication.
It is time to un-deceive them if we can; to pluck the cup from their mouths,
and to pluck down her from her throne. All that are on Gods side will do it.
Who is on my side there? 2 Reg. 9.33.
says John, Who? He that is on my side, let him cast down Jezabel: So, who
ever is on Gods side, let him down with that Jezabel of Rome, down with her
Idolatries and superstitions; down with her trumperies and vanities; down
with her Altars and Images; down with her rags and relics. They be but
Jezabels fragments, and let them be used, as Jezabel was used; It Is time they
were trodden under foot, and that Dogs-meate were made of them. Help Royal
Sovereign to throw her down; Help more and more to throw her down, You of
the honorable court of Parliament. Every one that loves the Lord Jesus Christ,
help to throw her down. Never let us halt (as we have done) between God and
Baal, away with such halting. Never let us mingle languages as we have done,
the Language of Ashdod, with the language of Canaan. Away with such canting.
Let Us speak our selves what we are, and be no more ashamed of our livery then
we are of out service. If we be ashamed of Christ now, he will be ashamed of us
another day; but he will not refuse to own us, if we be not afraid to own
him. Ours he is, and ours he will be. He will be for us, he will be with us;
with us in health and with us in sickness, with us at home and with us abroad,
with us in the City and with us in the field, with us in peace and with us in
war, with us in life and with us in death. And we at last shall be with him
(if we contineu to be for him) in that glory and blessedness which shall
endure to all eternity.

FINIS.

