Sir PHILLIP STAPLETON Dead of the Sickness at CALLICE: AND The Names of
others of the 11 Impeached Members that went over with him.

AND Their Truncks, Chests, and Boxes of Moneys, and Jewels, found in the Ship
by Captain BATTEN.

ALSO Several PROPOSALLS which they had to make to the Queen of England and to
the State of FRANCE: Whither they are not now admitted to come AND Of their
going to FLVSHEN, and the reasons thereof, Certified by a Letter FROM DOVER.

Aug: 26 Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, 1647

Sir Philip Stapleton DEAD Of the Sickness at CALLICE; AND The Names of others
of the Eleven IMPEACHED MEMBERS THAT Went Over with Him. AND Their Truncks,
Chests, and Boxes of Moneys and Jewels, found in the ship by Captain Batten.
Noble Colonel,
THE present accident suting with this opportunity, invites me to communicate
our intelligence (by a few lines) to you, concerning Sir Phillip Stapleton, Sir
William Waller, Sir Will. Lewis, and Sir John Clotworthy; with their retinue,
who (since their leaving London) have been much crossed in their Designs.

I am informed that their design was to pass into France and to St. Jermins
to the Queens Court, and Prince Charles, carried on upon their old Principles,
to advance the old design, by a new way, thus.

These Oracles (in their eloquency) to labor by set speeches (upon advice
amongst themselves) to address themselves first to the Queen of Great
Britain, to work a good opinion in Her Majesty of them, and their
intentions, and on what they have done, and (in like manner) to visit the
Prince his Highness.

Then if possibly they could prevail, to make the Queen, and the Prince,
Instruments to the State of France to carry on their intended design; And by
Her Majesty to be entertained as Agents in Her behalf to carry on this work
by a Treaty with the State of France, And by solicitations with the King, and
the Queen Regent, His Majesty's Mother.

These Gentlmen, had hired a Ship, and were passing over, but about three
Leagues from Callis, they were taken by Captain Peirson, and Captain Lamming,
and were carried before Captain Batten, Viz-Admirall of the English Navy at Sea

Captain Batten, being acquainted with the taking of these Gentlemen, and they
being brought to them, he went aside with them, and afterward examined by what
Authority they stayed them, They answered that they were impeached by the Army
of high misdemeanors, since which they would have raised a new War against
them, and were now running away, because they, and their power are subdued: And
that they were stayed that Justice might be done upon them.

Captain Batten said they had the Speakers pass, and they could not stay them,
because of that: They replied that Mr. Nichols one of the eleven was stayed by
the Army, and that the Army do require that they be all stayed, and secured,
where ever they are found

But Captain Batten told them that they had done that which they could not
answer and that they should be questioned for it, and charged them to be gone,
giving them a dismission,

Some search was made by command from Captain Batten what was in their Chests
Truncks, and Boxes, where were found moneys Clothes, Jewels, Papers, Books, and
other necessaries, but nothing meddled with. Captain Batten had them aboard his
ship, and to Dinner with him, Mr. Keme (Chaplain to the Viz-admirall said
Grace.)

But Sir Phillip Stapleton was sick, which did again much trouble them, yet
they all desired, Sir Phillip Stapleton although so ill, to pass over to
Callis with all speed.

And accordingly a Vessel was dismissed with them, and a pass form Captain
Batten the Viz-Admirall, in which they were transported over.

Sir Phillip Stapleton, Sir William Waller, Sir William Lewis, Sir John
Clotworthy, and some ten Gentlemen, whereof some are of the City of London,
were landed safe at Callice in France: But Sir Phillip Stapleton continued very
sick and vomited often, and grew worse and worse, insomuch that they were much
cast down about him, for afterward he was come into Callice he was much worse
then he was before.

And the sickness being something hot in Callice they feared much least it
might not turn to the Plague, Doctors wete sent for, and all possible means
that could be had to help him.

But Sir Phillip Stapleton is since dead there, and it is given out to be of
the sickness, so that the rest of his Company are much dejected about it.

And hereby their Designs are totally thwarted, so that, by reason of his
dying of the sickness, they cannot be admitted neither to come to the Court of
France, nor to the Queen of England, or Prince Charles

Surely the Hand of God is mighty in these things, had we but eyes to see it,
and hearts to believe the power of God in it.

And Sir William Waller, Sir William Lewis Sir John Clotworthy and the rest
(seeing their intentions thus prevented) are gone to Flushen, where it is
believed that they will put in for some Command if they can have employment
suitable to their desires, as now being utterly out of hopes to carry on their
former Designs any further.

I am glad to hear of the good accord between the Parliament, the Army, and
the City, God grant a settled and sure Peace.

So prays.

Dover this 23. of August. 1647. Your humble Servant, WILL. LAWCEY.

FINIS.

