To the Honorable, the Referrees of his Highness most Honorable Council, in
the Cause between Sir John Stowell and the Purchasers.
The Petition of William Lawrence of Edinburgh, Esquire
Humbly shows,
THat whereas your Petitioner is employed in his Highness service in Scotland,
which requires his personal attendance there; And he being one of the said
Purchasers, as he is informed, the said Sir John Stowel in his absence, without
summons or other legal notice, has, and does endeavor by surprise to pursue
your Petitioner, and work diverse things against him prejudicial to his right.
And whereas your Petitioners purchase was before he left England, confirmed by
Act of Parliament, and in confidence thereof, your Petitioner suspecting
nothing, left no provision nor order against any suits, not doubting the same.
And your Petitioner in the present condition he is in, is now deprived of all
counsel, intelligence, Agents writings, evidences, proofs, and other things
necessary to maintain a Title, and of all fit means to make use of them.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays that no proceedings be suffered
against him otherwise then is by Law allowable against a person not summoned,
and out of the Nation, and who has besides the warrant of an Act of
Parliament, which if permitted to be questioned, there can be no end of
controversy. And that for the farther security of your Petitioner, the present
Petition and Reasons annexed, may be read or inspected, and rest with the
papers of other Purchasers before your Honors to prevent any misinformation
from the said Sir John Stowell.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
Reasons that the Petitioners purchase ought not to be questioned by Sir John
Stowell.
I. Your Petitioner says that such members of the Committee of Articles as
have acted for the said Sir John Stowell, against Purchasers, are parties, and
not Judges, and their Orders and Certificates ought to have no credit or
authority. And your Petitioner says they have mistated the Case, transgressed
the duty of an inferior jurisdiction and presumed on Acts of Sovereigne power,
they have wrongfully indebted the Commonwealth in vast sums of money to the
said Sir John Stowel, they have occasioned false scandal on it of infringing
his Articles, and have not been indifferent or equal in their proceedings,
either as to public or private rights, all which your Petitioner will be ready
to prove.

II. Your Petitioner says, that diverse Purchasers, some through fear, and
others by conspiracy with the said Sir John Stowell, have, and do put in diverse
feigned and feeble Petitions and pleas, part of which the said Sir John Stowell
to delude the vulgar, has put in print, and the same purchasers have and do
endeavor to betray the Cause of the Commonwealth, and are companions, your
Petitioner therefore desires that no proceeding be made against him in gross,
but his cause heard patiently and particularly.

III. Your Petitioner says that it has been already decided and adjudged by
Parliament, that the said Sir John Stowell has forfeited his Articles. And
thereupon the Act of sale of his estate was made, and that judgment being
given by Parliament, to whose proceedings Purchasers neither could or ought to
be privy, and so much time since past, That though the Evidence and proofs
were then never so clear, yet the memory may be now lost; The Members witnesses
proofs dead, removed, unknown, or taken off. It would be unreasonable to put
Purchasers now to prove over again what has been adjudged, and would not
only question Sir John Stowels, but most part of all the lands the Parliament
ever sold or shall sell.

IV. Your Petitioner says, notwithstanding that if he shall be enforced, he
will prove that the said Sir John Stowell never submitted to composition
according to Articles, and that he has both omitted and committed diverse Acts
then and since which have clearly forfeited them.

V. There is sufficient publicly and vulgarly known of the said Sir John
Stowell, as none needs admire at the judgment passed against him, for he
offered nothing but insolences and affronts to the Parliament it self, when
brought before them, he reviled the Committee for compounding, charging them to
be delinquents themselves. He charged the Judges at the Upper Bench that they
sat by a countefeit Seal, and that they were mock-Judges, and the Jury a pack
of Knaves; he openly denied and defied the Supreme authority, and charged the
Court and Attorney General with high Treason for acting by it, publicly, and
to their faces. He declared for the Scots in Arms against this Commonwealth,
and till all was lost; he made only a show and pretense to desire to compound,
but really resolved and declared against it, and derided and scorned all those
who submitted to it. All which was besides many others.

1. No fit language or behavior to demand a Composition with.

2. A breach of the peace within the Parliaments quarters.

3. An incensing of the people to rebel, and adhere to the enemy.

4 The highest prejudice to the Parliaments quarters a prisoner could do,
though he knew by his Articles he was not to prejudice the same, and had given
security to that end.

5. Diverse of the same Acts have been made treasonable by Ordinance of
Parliament.

6. If any innocent person had presumed on half so much, it had been his ruin.

VI. The said Sir John Stowell refused to acknowledge himself a Delinquent, and
thereby wilfully refused his Composition.

1. It was the command of the Parliament, and the Commissioners for compounding
could not justify composition on any other terms.

2. The house of Lords being part of the Parliament, had not then confirmed his
Articles.

3. The Parliament had considerately designed that all Delinquency should
remain of Record, that both in the disposing of offices of trust and power,
and other future Acts relating to the Commonwealth, they might the more
readily guide themselves.

4. A dishonor might have been aspersed upon them, That it had been
Latrocinium, and not Bellum, a robbery, and no just war, if together with the
penalties a confession or trial of the offense had not likewise appeared.

5. Both Commissioners and Sequestrators might have been otherwise liable to
future actions and suits from the said Sir John Stowell and his heirs.

6. The Parliament had appointed other Courts, as namely the Commissioners of
Appeals, and those of the Common Law for relief of persons sequestered, being
not Delinquents, which were open unto him for trial, if he would stand on that
point: But by standing on it with the Commissioners for compounding, it is clear
he ousted them of jurisdiction to meddle with him

7. His refusal was not out of error, or mistake, but advisedly, and
obstinately, and after he was told of it.

8. Both before, and at time of making his Articles, it was known that by the
usual course of submitting to composition; the first point was acknowledgement
of Delinquency, and therefore if the said Sir John Stowell had not liked it, he
might have chosen whether he would have taken Articles without an express
dispensation of that very point.

VII. Your Petitioner says that the interest of the land in question does not
totally belong to the said Sir John Stowell; But there are diverse charges upon
it, and diverse transactions have been made touching the same to other persons,
making no pretense to Articles, who never made claim, and therefore bound by
the sale which your Petitioner ought to have liberty to examine, as well by the
oath of the said Sir John Stowell, as other persons, and to have a Production
of the Deeds, Titles, and Evidences of the said land in Court, if there be
cause.

VIII. Your Petitioner says that Purchasers were commanded to pay in their
second moieties by act of Council at White Hall, and their Estates were
thereupon confirmed by Act of Parliament called by his Highness, which is the
deepest fundamental of property can be laid, and the highest assurance the Law
can give, and ought not to be questioned.

IX. His Highness has been pleased likewise by his oath in the Instrument
Government, to confirm the securing property, and to Govern therein according
to the Laws, and Statutes, the benefit whereof your Petitioner does claim.

X. Your Petitioner acknowledges Laws may be repeall'd, Judgments reversed,
and Authorities countermanded, but humbly says, That buying and selling binds
Supreme power it self: And that in the particular sale the full price, both of
money and blood has been received. And therefore neither God nor man can
revoke their own bargain, and sales, and the whole Christian Religion it self
has no other foundation but a bargain and sale.

XI. Your Petitioner says, his Purchase being a reversion, he was necessitated
to drown, and extinguish his old Lease, for which old Lease the said Sir John
Stowel received of this Petitioners father far more then the whole Inheritance
was worth. And your Petitioners occasions have likewise since his Purchase
compelled him to commit acts of forfeiture of his said old Lease by Feoffments,
and otherwise, and to charge the mixed interest of old and new Purchase, part
with a jointure, part in tail to an infant, part with debts, part orphans
money, part others. And upon such transacting and charging, the same has bound
himself in many penal Covenants, and Bonds, to warranty, so that if Justice be
not done to your Petitioner in maintenance of his Right, your Petitioner is
utterly destroyed and made incapable of other Indemnity or Reperation.

XII. Your petitioner was totally ignorant of the Articles of Exeter, or any
pretense of the said Sir John Stowel to the same, and the same Sir John Stowel
might and ought to have given him notice of the same, and was earnestly
requested and solicited to give your petitioner notice and directions of his
desires touching his intended purchase. And the said Sir John Stowel did
notwithstanding purposely and fraudulently conceal the same from your
petitioner, which point, though your petitioner had nothing else to say is
unanswerable both in the laws of peace and war.

XIII. Your petitioner says, that the said Sir John Stowel might, and ought
further to have given notice to the Trustees for sale, the Committee of
obstructions, the Terretenants of the Land, who had preemption, as it is the
course, and other persons have done, though inacted to be sold, and their
claims taken away; as the said Sir John Stowel's was, but he did not; And
therefore by his own wilful defaults he lost the benefit of stopping sales
which others in the like condition obtained.

Your petitioner says, that the said Sir John Stowel is a subject, and the
Land in question English Land, and the said Sir John Stowel neither does nor
can clame by his Articles to be in better condition then the residue of the
Subjects of England. And they, if their Estates happen to be sold by mistake
in Parliament or erroneous Judgment at Common Law, or their claims have been
unjustly refused, or there be a trust or title of Equity in Chancery on the
Land whereof Purchasers have no notice, must take in lieu thereof that
expedient which the Law allows, namely reparation in value as far as is
proper. And for the residue damage by way of Action, which legal expedient is
made good by the said Articles, and without them he can have no benefit of the
same.

By the Act for settlement of Ireland, the Parliament declared in a far
stronger case, and though no sale were made to necessitate it; that persons
there might be transplanted from their own Estates of equal value,
notwithstanding they had been adjudged comprised within Articles.

Sir John Stowel has measured the same, and far worse measure to others; For
the whole Parish of Cothelstone in Somerset has been by him miserably and
totally depopulated. And not awaiting the expiring of their Estates, he by
force, fraud, and terror expelled them, their wives children, and families to
swim through their own tears to new Plantations. Here therefore as the Law
warrants, and necessity commands; so the Finger of God seems to direct, and
Justice it self to cry aloud for Retaliation.

It would be a very great cruelty and injustice by not making good public
sales to sacrifice to his rage and revenge all the well-affected people of
fifteen or sixteen great Mannours, who have incurred his hatred merely out of
service to the public, and have the faith and honor, both of military and
civil power engaged to protect them: which if not performed unto them, he will
in point of Estate neither give quarter to man, woman, or child, but will
totally extirpate and destroy them.

The said Sir John Stowel himself is in no such case as he pretends. For as
your petitioner is informed, his principal place of Residence being a
Magnificent seat is purchased by his Lady for his use, and besides he has left
him unsold and purchased by his Ladies assigns, and friends, fifteen hundred
pounds per annum more. And if he has the residue of his Rents filled up with
Rents of State Land, the money whereof is as good as his own; he has nothing
to object but that he scorns the title, and desires only to deal in
Merchandise, will swim best if the ship of the Commonwealth, and Government
sink together. But certainly cannot say, but as touching his poor depopulated
Tenants, whom he t^rn'd out like snailes from their only houses, to which
their lives were tied. But he is far better dealt with, then he dealt with
them, or intends to deal with the residue, if ever delivered into his hands.


