A REMONSTRANCE Humbly presented To the High and Honorable COURT OF
PARLIAMENT: Touching the insupportable miseries of the poor of the Land,
especially at this time, and in this great City of London, within the Line of
Communication, and Bill of mortality; and the causes thereof.

Together with the Cure and remedy; and the great care which the Princes of
other Nations, States, Countries and Cities have taken therein.

BY LEONARD LEE, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for John Rothwell, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the sign of the Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

TO THE HIGH AND HONORABLE Court of PARLIAMENT.
AMongst the many and miserable pressures in this Kingdom, especially in this
renowned City of London, idleness and want of employment has been the
destruction of many, and as a pestilent malady it daily increases. For
prevention whereof, at the special instance and importunity of some Noble and
Reverend friends, I heretofore presented some propositions to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty for setting the poor aworke throughout the Kingdom; whereby
all sorts of people, men, women, and children, aged and impotent, might be
employed, and relieved. Which His Majesty, together with the Lords of His Privy
Council commiserated, and ordered a speedy prosecution thereof. But by reason
of the weighty and troublesome affairs of the State, at that time all such
public businesses were neglected.

And now again, upon the like importunity, and in a desire of the good of the
Kingdom, and of this City, seeing the poor and their miseries increasing
together in these disasterous and tradelesse times, I have here presumed humbly
to present some propositions and reasons conducing to the relief and
employment of the poor, which if they find (acceptance to execution) it will
bring a blessing to your selves, a benefit to the people, a relief to the
distressed, and an honor to the Nation, which is the petition and prayer of

Your Honors Orator and Servant, Leonard Lee.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the Lord Major of the City of London, the Right
Worshipful the Aldermen and the rest of the Common Council.
THe Character set upon our English Nation by Strangers is, To have excellent
Laws, but no execution; like Pictures curiously drawn, well faced, and lim'd,
but want life, and motion: They say likewise we have good materials, but bad
orders; little care, and abundance of idle and lewd people; few Cities, and
those ruinous, basely built, thin of Inhabitants, and most of them poor; and
all caused through idleness and want of employment.

And now since these unnatural Wars begun, the miseries of the poor do much
more abound, wherefore upon the earnest desire of some Charitable and well
affected friends, I have here presented some Propositions to the high Court of
Parliament, and likewise here unto you in whose power the promoting of so
wonderful necessary a work does lie. It is a saving of the Souls and lives
of many thousands, which through want of employment fall to lewdness, and so
perish: for there is no vice, villainy, murder, or mischief, drunkenesse and
disorder, but Idleness does contract it, nor is there any way to cure it but
by employment.

It is a work never yet paralleled nor begun by any your predecessors, and
will render you famous to posterity; It is pleasing to God, an honor and
benefit to the City, and will be a pattern for the whole Kingdom, nay for all
the Kings Dominions to follow, which is the great desire of

Your friend and servant, LEONARD LEE.

To the Charitable and Tenderhearted Reader.
Good friend,
SVch is the commiseration of the great Chancellors and Judges of this Land,
that if a poor man have suit at Law in any Court, those Judges assigns
learned council to plead, and able Atturnies to prosecute their cause without
money; And such council are soonest heard upon any motion, first for their
poor Clients and afterward for themselves, which otherwise might wait longer.

Here then is the greatest suite in the Christian World that ever was presented
to the power of Magistracy (in forma pauperis) It is the bleeding condition of
the insupportable miseries of many thousand poor hunger-bit, almost starved
creatures.

Therefore as you have already received and hope for the continuance of mercies
from the great Judge of all the World, who in a moment can blow an emptiness
upon your Estates and make you as miserable as any, have pity upon these
distressed ones, be all counselors, advise, plead and prosecute their now
depending suit with your Heads, Hearts, Purses, Pains, do all you can to
promote it, thereby you will find some contentment in your minds, that you
have been instruments of any good, a benefit to your purses to be eased of
collections, security to your estates to have lewd persons well employed, and
the loins of the poor will bless you, besides your reward from Heaven.

Farewell.
A REMONSTRANCE of the sufferings of the Kingdom by reason of the poor and
lend people, and of their misery; how the same is caused, and how cured.
MAny things there are which do tend to the good and flourishing of a
Kingdom; and many things to the ruin and destruction thereof: Amongst which,
idleness, and want of employment is one of the greatest; for what vice and
villainy is there committed, or liksome poverty endured, that is not generally
occasioned thereby: and such persons as live idly out of any calling (...)
ulcers in a Commonwealth, oppressors of a State, and impoverishers of a
Kingdom. And herein is this great City mightily oppressed: for many years
since the number of the poor was exceeding great; and now of late, especially
since these unnatural wars began, there are multitudes of poor lately
sprung up, whose miseries are many: therefore the things that I shall here
tender to your great judgments, are only these five:

To show 1. Who these poor are. To show 2. Wherein the evil does consist. To
show 3. The causes thereof. To show 4. The cure and remedy. To show 5. And
chiefly bow this cure is to be applied.
And first, who these poor are.

THey are the indigent, distressed, and helpless creatures, such as have not
means to supply their present wants, whereby they endure much in their
persons, and often endanger souls, bodies, lives, and all to get it. And
therefore it is that Plato calls poverty, theevish, filthy, sacrilegious, wicked
and dangerous; for it makes many that would live honestly to cheat, lie,
steal, kill, turn Turk, or any thing. According to that saying of the
Wiseman, Because of poverty, the Land has sinned.

And for the additionall poor lately sprung up; these are of diverse sorts: 1.
All such whose trades, and employment, by reason of these troublesome times,
are wholly taken away. 2. Such as are stripped out of their estates, in several
Countries, here in England, and likewise in Ireland, and fled to this great
City for refuge. 3. Such whose husbands are slain in these wars, and left
destitute with many children, unprovided for. 4. Such maimed and lame Soldiers
as are recovered of their wounds, but not of their limbs; able to go abroad,
but not to work, whereby to maintain their families, or themselves, with
their labor. 5. The great number of Soldiers, and others of the enemies
party, which have been taken in the wars, and are now in prison, and have not
means to subsist of themselves, but are maintained by the State.


All which, together with the former sort of poor, will make the number almost
innumerable; yet, all these must be provided for.

The second thing is, wherein the evil does consist.

IF we look to the event of things, we shall find the miseries of the poor,
the sufferings of the Kingdom, but chiefly in this City, to be wonderful
great, and all occasioned through idleness; which, as Lycurgus in Plutarch
calls it, morbus reipublicae, the evils of a Commonwealth, the mother of
mischief, the nurse of all naughtiness, the causer of drunkenness, begetter
of all vice and villainy, of thieves, rogues, robberies, murders, and the root
from whence the multitudes of beggars do proceed and spring. We may truly say
of them, as Aristotle speaks of melancholy, they are commune malum, a general
evil. And these are of three sorts.

The 1. Insolent. The 2. Impudent. The 3. Indigent.
First, the insolent and sturdy sort of poor, such as have no calling or
profession, nor scarce any constant place of abode: like the Apodes a Bird in
India, of whom Juvenall speaks, that has no feet to rest on, but is always
flying: so these have no settled habitation or employment to be maintained by,
but live by cheating, theeving, cut-pursing, and such like villainies, lurking
and shifting up and down in secret places, of which there are multitudes.

Secondly, the impudent poor. And such are the common beggars, common private
lewd persons, and prostitutes, and common street night-walkers; all which, like
so many plague-sores infect and poison this City; yet all these are maintained,
not by their own labors, or any livelihood of their own, nor their
illegitimate children put to nurse, or maintained by any parishes; for then
this great, wise, and religious City would long since have sought for redress.

Thirdly, the indigent, miserable, and distressed poor, which rise up early,
sit up late, and eat the bread of carfulness, when they can get it, moyle
and toil at the basest and sordids^ work, do any thing, endure any thing,
and all for a small reward, which will scarce hold life and soul together; and
their greatest sorrow is, their wives and chidren lie at home idly, full of
misery, and have no employment, but forced to commit almost any villainy to
keep them from perishing: Yet let these complain they want work; and bewail
their distresses, and as Solomon says, speak with prayers, they are not
regarded, nor employed.

And were it possibe that an estimat could be given of the number of all these
insolent, impudent, and indigent creatures, men, women, and children, together
with such as are of late increased, and such as are in all the prisons about
the Town, we should find the number inconceivable.

For heretofore upon this occasion, about employment for the poor, upon
enquiry it was found, that St. Olaves Parish in Southwarke had above eight and
twenty hundred families which never paid Subsidy, or taxations, besides Lodgers
and other lewd people.

And in each Family there could be no less then three or four persons, which
amounts to ten thousand poor people at the least in that Parish; yet suppose
there should be but four thousand poor in that Parish, the total number
within the Line of Communication and bills of Mortality, would amount to more
then forty thousand poor.

And for the charges to maintain all these, we may well reckon for
House-rent, Clothes, Victuals, Firing and good Ale, which many of them full
dearly love, and other necessaries; to be no less then righteen pence a week
four pound a year for each person, which amounts to one hundred and threescore
thousand pounds per annum, which these people wast and consume, and use no
employment toward the getting of any part thereof, but merely exhaust it from
the State.

Nay, if all these should spend but one hundred thousand pound per unnum, it is
more I believe then this City would willingly spare to be consumed in
Idleness, Drunkenness and Villainy.

And to all these may be added the additionall poor lately sprung up, which
makes the charges and the oppression to be far greater.

Where as if all these people were forced to get their own livings, less
villainy would be daily committed, and more English wares made to supply the
Kingdom to further exportations, and abate importations, to the advance of the
State, and relief of the poor.

To show the cause of all this evil and misery.

THe cause in a word is idleness, want of employment; which, as one observes,
is the Malus genius of a Nation: for if the subject should be prohibited from
their employment but one quarter of a year, many thousands that now live well
would beg, and as many starve and perish; which does infallibly and
unanswerably show, that the employment of the subject is both the supporting of
a Kingdom, and the supplying of men's present wants.

For what causes a decay of all Arts, Trades, Mysteries, Professions; and what
brings poverty, beggary and misery, but idleness?

What Is the reason that this Metropolitan City, and the Suburbs are the only
nests and harbors for Cutpurses and capital offenders, and the grand Nursery
for lewd persons and illegitimate children, but idleness? that all commodities
and provision is inhanced in the City, but that many thousands of idle people,
like Catter-pillers in a Commonwealth, eat up the fruits and labors of
others; And Taphouses so abundantly frequented, whereby thousands of quarters
of malt is spent in excess and Drunkenness? all which would exceedingly
refresh the poor, and bring down the prices of Corn and Bread.

What Is the cause that our Kingdom affords not as brave Cities, Towns and
Villages as France, Italy, the Low Countries and other places? because, as some
writers say, in those parts they are more politic, circumspect and
industrious, and as Polydore reports of us here in England, that our Cities and
Towns are small, ruinous, basely built, thin of Inhabitants, and the greatest
part of those poor, and all through want of employment.

What Is the cause that our Gaoles are so full, and every year so many hundred
of people condemned and Executed, and others for small matters of theft
imprisoned a long time, the Houses of correction so pestered, so much abuse and
disorder daily committed? is it not want of employment? they can get no work.

What a most pitious thing is it to see a poor man cast in prison, and in
danger to be hanged for stealing a sheep, a lamb or such like thing of small
value, which a lawless necessity constrained him to do to get food for his
poor hunger-bitten Family, his Wife and Children, ready to starve and perish
for want of work?

What Is the cause many fall to cheating, turn robbers, rebels, common
Villains, and Women cutpurses, curtizans, prostitutes, attempt and commit
almost any thing, make their children poor abortives, or strangle them as
soon as they are borne, and others make away themselves, is it not poverty? as
Gasper the Jesuit reports of the Women of Iapon, if poor they would stifle
their children, because they should not suffer irksome poverty; and Riccius
affirms as much of the women of China, and daily examples may testify as much
a among us.

To conclude, what is the general complaint of all sorts of people, Beggars,
Prisoners, the confession of condemned men at the Gallows? they could get no
work: and is it not great pity to see thousands of people able bodies and
dejected spirits clothed in rags, ready to be starved, when employment may
amend and cure all?

The fourth thing is the cure and remedy thereof.

NOw if the cause of all this evil be idleness, want of employment, the cure
and remedy is by applying the contrary, which is industry, setting of the poor
aworke, and although Aristotle defines riches to be either natural or
artificial, natural riches are fertile Lands, rich mines; artificial riches
are Coins, Trades and manufactures; yet what avayles all or any of these
without art and industry? for fertile Lands will bring weeds, rich mines or good
trades no profit without Art and Industry.

Art to invent, contrive and regular, and Industry to undergo and endure the
coil, trouble, and labor of it as Josephus reports of the sons of Seth, that
they were ingenions to invent many pretty things, which showed their Art, and
then engraved them upon pillars of Stone and marble that neither inundations of
water, nor consumings of fire might deface them, that they might remain to
after Ages, which showed their Industry: so that Art and Industry is said to
be more durable then riches, for what causes Countries, Cities and Towns
that are very barren and populous to grow rich, but Art and Industry?

For Countries, both the Chinaes populous places, yet grow Rich and flourish by
their industry, there is not an idle person nor Beggar amongst them.

Zeland and Holland flourishing Countries, and in general have almost three
Cities to one of ours, full of Inhabitants and those Rich, Industrious,
Ingenious and politic.

For Cities, the Low Countries have them Fair, Rich, and populous, and all
caused by their great industry and skilfulnesse in Trades and Manufactures, by
which they maintain Wars, continue and increase comerce and traffic.

And Florance in Italy by making cloth of Gold and Silver Arras, for fair and
dainty hangings; Corinth in Greece for its riches and industry, that is called
the glory of that Country, and Norrembridge in Germany a City seted in a barren
soil, yet Rich, Wealthy and flourishing, and all caused by Art and Industry,
as one notes of them, they are so ingenious and laborious as if (faith he)
their soul or intellectus agens was placed in their fingers ends; many other
places might be named, and all flourish by their industry.

But if we look here in England we shall find our Cities few, ruinous and
most of the Inhabitants very poor, and many of our Towns depopulated and
destroyed; for what Town almost throughout the Kingdom, that can produce at
this day so many substantial, and able men, as has been 30 or 40 years
since, yet every Town much increased with a number of poor and miserable
creatures, whereby our Trades are much decayed, which causes our importations
to be great, and our exportations small, to the impovershing of the land.

Now if any demand, wherefore England that is so rich a Country, both in
fertile Grounds, good Mines and excellent materials; yet notwithstanding very
poor and full of Beggars, Boterius gives the reason, and says that fertilty
and good meterialls is not enough, unless Art and industry be joined with it,
but chiefly industry which undergoes the work, for as it increases or
decreases, ebs or flows, so is the strength, power and ability of a Kingdom
increased or abated.

If then the matter of Industry be so weighty of such great importance, it most
necessarily behooves all Nations, Princes, Counsels of State, Judges,
Majestrates, Cities, Towns, Corporate bodies politic, all sorts of people of
all estates and conditions whatsoever, to advance and further so great a work,
which supports and supplies all.

And such was the care of King Solomon in building the house of God, he sent to
Hyram King of Tyrus for stusse and workmen.

So Selym the first Turkish Emperor, as Valerius notes procured a thousand
good Artificers to be brought to Constantionople.

And James the first of Scotland, as Buchanan relates sent for the best
Artificers he could get in all Europ, and gave them great rewards, to instruct
his people.

And Edward the third a most renowned Prince, amongst his Kingly Acts, is
memorized for bringing that great Trade of clothing first unto this Land, by
sending over such Tradesmen from Gaunt hither.

And the ancient Massilians and many other places held a course, not to admit
any man unto their Cities that had not some trade or profession; And Plato made
a Law not to have a beggar not an idle person amongst them: all which do most
evidently show the necessity of industry, and employment of the subject.

It is a work of Piety, of Charity, of Justice, of Honor, of Health, of
Wealth, of Strength, of Peace, and Safety, and of the flowrishing a Kingdom.

It will be a means to save the souls and lives of many thousand, 1. Of Piety.
which otherwise through a lawless necessity, are constrained to commit almost
any villainy, to the danger of both.

It will relieve many thousand hunger-bitten, 2. Of Charity.
almost starved families, that would work but cannot get it, are ashamed to beg
and afraid to steal, and so languish under the burden of intolerable wants,
and poor children idly bred, which through want of employment fall to lewdness.

For there is a cheating lewd insolentidle sturdy sort of poor, 3. Of Justice.
that can work, but will not; infected with the same disease, as one reports
of a Beggar that came to some Gentlemen at Bruges with show of weeping, and
pretending himself a miserable creature, troubled with a terrible secret
disease, they pitied him and gave him money; but one of them seeing the beggar
fat and well colored, caused his servant to make after him, and know his
malady. To whom the Beggar replied, my disease is spread all over my body,
ransa^ks my very bones, so that I can stir never a limb to do any work; and I
have heard that this disease is called lasinesse, which is a shameful thing to
discover.

And multitudes of people there are in this City miserably afflicted with this
disease, and nothing but the authority of justice can cure it.

And so it is of all the rest, employment is an honor, a health, a wealth, a
peace, a safety to a Kingdom, the particulars whereof for brevity I will omit.

Thus having in short remonstrated the sufferings of the Kingdom, especially
of this City, and the miseries of the poor, and the cause, idleness and want
of employment; together with the cure by art and industry; And how it has
caused Kingdoms, Countries, and Cities to flourish; and what great care
Princes, States, all of all sorts, have always had, and ought to have, to
suppress idleness, and support employment, which supplies and supports all.

The fifth and last thing is, how this cure is to be applied.

THe applying of this cure is by employing of the poor, by setting them to
work: wherein these three things are carefully to be done in every Parish,
Town, Hamlet, Precinct, Prison, and House of correction.

1. To raise a stock. 2. To provide materials. 3. How to order the work.
But before we fall upon the applying of the cure, it is requisite to clear
some objections which may be cast in.

1. Object. If the number of the poor be so great as is suggested, it is
almost impossible that any course can be taken to employ and relieve them all.

Answ. If the disease be now almost past cure few years more will make it
altogether incurable; therefore the longer deferred the more difficult,
troublesome, and chargable, and more behooveful speedily to be prevented.

2. Obj. That a stock of an hundred thousand pounds will scarce serve to set
all these poor upon employment, to provide magazines, materials,
working-instruments, etc. And in regard of the great troubles and taxations
upon this City at this time, and the want of trading, so great stock will not
be raised.

Ans. If the power of Majestracy, and the great Council of the City approve
the work, and resolve the prosecution thereof, and a Committee be selected for
that end; some whereof of this City, some of Westminster, Middlesex,
Southwarke, etc. whose aid will be very useful, in regard in those parts most
of the poor do live.

Then it shall be made appear, that the raising of a stock for employment of
the poor will be an advantage to the City, and no damage; besides such a
groundwork may be laid:

1. The stock may be raised with little charge to the City. 2. The materials
may be provided at easy rates. 3. The work regulated with much facility.
To conclude, this business is of such consequence, that it requires great
care to lay a sure foundation at the first, lest all miscarry; for if after the
stock be raised, materials provided, and the work set on foot, that it once
fall to the ground, then farewell employment of the poor for ever.

FINIS.

