CONSIDERATIONS Concerning COMMON FIELDS, AND INCLOSVRES, DIALOGVEWISE,
Digested into a deliberative Discourse between two supposed Friends,
Philopeustus and Parrhesiastes. AND TENDING Partly to state and determine the
question of lawfulness or unlawfulness between Enclosures, and Common Fields,
Partly to answer some passages, which may be thought to make against Enclosure
in general, in another discourse lately published by Mr JOHN MOORE, under this
Title, The crying sin of England, of not caring for the poor.

Mat. 7.3, 4. Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how will thou say to thy
brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye, and behold, a beam is in
thine own eye?

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, and are to be sold at the sign of the Sun,
over against St Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1654.

PSEUDOMISUS to PHILORTHUS; OR, The Author to his Friend.
SIR,
IF you chance to see in print (as peradventure you may do) a little discourse
under this Title, Considerations concerning Common Fields and Enclosures, and
conceive (as I suppose you will do) that it was penned by me, I shall owe you
an account of one thing, and entreat another of you, both which I think it not
amiss to acquaint you with now. That which I shall owe you an account of, is,
the concealing of my name; and, to deal clearly with you, I do it, partly
because I am not willing yet to relinquish an old resolution, which I put on
long ago, never to permit my name to be printed with any work of my own; partly
because I now conceive it somewhat necessary to do so, to the end that neither
the Author, nor the Book may speed the worse for one another. I know what
briers and thorns are with me, and amongst what Scorpions I dwell, whose words
though I may not be afraid of, nor dismayed at their looks, which God forbad
his Prophet, Ezekiel. 2.6. Yet I must not forget, that our Savior himself, Mat.
10.16.28. at the same time when he said unto his Disciples, Fear not them
which kill the body, said likewise, be ye wise as serpents; whose ways upon
rocks, as Agur observes, Pro. 30.18, etc. were amongst those things, which he
knew not. And for him, that would endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ, a Breast Plate of Innocence, and a Shield of Patience, will not always
be defensive armor enough, without an Headpiece of prudent circumspection;
which sometimes is seen in a purposely concealed secrecy, as well as in any
thing else; especially then, when it may be a question, whether of the two is
most commendable, to be eminently virtuous, or obscurely innocent. Having thus
given you an account of the reasons, why I conceal my name my self, that which
I shall entreat of you is, that you will do the like for me; and though you
may imagine who I am, yet I pray you lock up that thought within your own
breast, and do not lend the key to any one, except it be unto my self. So you
shall further oblige me to be still, as I am,

Entirely yours.

The Publisher to all ingenious, and judicious, unprejudicate, and impartial
Readers, wishes outward prosperity in all things, together with the inward
peace of a good Conscience.
GEntlemen, to you, as the only competent judges in matters of controversy, I
make my address, desiring you, before you pass any censure at all upon it,
thoroughly to examine this ensuing discourse, which briefly and plainly, in a
moderate way, discovering the difference of Common fields and Enclosures, the
evil of the one, and advantage of the other, may serve as an Antidote against
that misunderstanding, which may be raised in the minds of some men, by those
suggestions which are offered unto them, in another discourse, lately published
under this Title, The crying sin of England of not caring for the poor, and
dedicated to the supreme Authority of this Nation, The Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, by John Moor, Minister of the Church of Knaptost in
Leicestershire. I confess this discourse was not written by my self, but it
came to me with this intimation, that the Author would not be offended to see
it in print, either without any name at all, or with any name, except his own:
His opinion being, that it is a symptom of too much distemper in the minds of
men, when truths are not well digested, or tasted, without sauces of names; and
his resolution to rejoice in private, when he sees any good cause get the
victory, although he himself be no public partaker in the triumph. And now to
follow his example therein, I am content to tender his discourse to all men, to
whom it may be beneficial, whether they will give me thanks for it, or no.

The Contents.
THe Authors Epistle to his Friend. The Publishers Epistle to the Reader. Sect.
1. An Introduction to the ensuing discourse, applying that which Mr. Moor has
said of those that care not for the poor, to them, that by hindering Enclosure
prevent the reformation of those abuses in Common fields, which are means to
make, and keep men poor. page 1. Sect. 2. Six considerations of important
concernment in this case. page 3. Sect. 3. Injurious dealing of neighbors with
one another in Common fields an ordinary means of making and keeping men poor.
page 4. Sect. 4. Enclosures rightly ordered the means to redress the abuse of
injurious dealing in common fields, without depopulation, page 8. Sect. 5.
Decay of Tillage no proper adjunct, or necessary effect of Enclosure, but
rather the contrary. page 10. Sect. 6. Manuring of land in common fields by the
folding of sheep not so beneficial as is commonly conceived. page 11. Sect. 7.
Fewer cattle kept in grounds enclosed may yield greater profit then more in
common fields. page 12. Sect. 8. Other inconveniences in common fields, as
want of good husbandry, etc. page 14. Sect. 9. Answers to that which Mr. Moor
has said, page 7. concerning Make-beggars, and the woe denounced by the
Prophet, Isaiah 5.8. page 15. Sect. 10. Answers to that which Mr. Moor has
said, page 8. concerning depopulation. page 17. Sect. 11. Answers to that which
Mr. Moor has said, page 9. concerning decay of Tillage. page 18. Sect. 12.
Answers to that which Mr. Moor has said, page 10. concerning the misery of
Tenants and Cottiers by means of Enclosure. page 21. Sect. 13. Answers to that
which Mr. Moor has said page 11. concerning filthy lucre as the main
inducement to enclosure. page 24. Sect. 14. Answers to that which Mr. Moor has
said page 12. concerning depopulation coming by degrees. page 25. Sect. 15.
Answers to that which Mr. Moor has said page 13. concerning famine by means of
Enclosure. page 26. Sect. 16. Answers to that which Mr. Moor has said page 13,
14. concerning Lawsuits for not consenting to Enclosure. page 27. Sect. 17.
Answers to that which Mr. Moor has said page 14. concerning the price of land
trebled upon Enclosure. page 29. Sect. 18. Answers to that which Mr. Moor has
said page 19. concerning worldlings, greedy gripes, delighting to converse with
beasts. page 30. Sect. 19. Answers to that which Mr. Moor has said page 22,
23. concerning a curse following Enclosure. page 32. Sect. 20. Answers to that
which sometimes is objected concerning the Churches right unto Tithes, and
wrong done to Ministers by Enclosure. page 35. Sect. 21. Answers to that which
is sometimes objected, that Enclosure is a thing of evil report. page 36.
Sect. 22. The conclusion of the precedent discourse, with a proposal of four
questions to be answered by them that are adversaries to Enclosure, and a
quotation out of Mr. Fullers description of a good Landlord. page 37.
CONSIDERATIONS concerning common FIELDS and INCLOSVRES, Dialoguewise digested
into a deliberative discourse, between two supposed friends, PHILOPEUSTUS and
PARRHESIASTES.
Section 1.
Philo. SIR, have you seen a little discourse lately published under this
Title, The crying sin of England, of not caring for the poor, and dedicated
to the supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, by John Moore Minister of the Church of Knaptost in Liecestershire?


Par. Yes, I have seen it, and not seen it only, but likewise seriously
considered of it, having purposely perused it diverse times.


Phil. I pray you then tell me your opinion of it. Has the Author therein
approved himself such an unanswerable advocate for common Fields against
Enclosures, as by report it is pretended that he has?


Par. What others may do I cannot tell: but for my part I do not perceive,
that he has spoken any thing at all to that purpose It is true, that in the
pathetick part of his discourse he appears very zealous in behalf of the
poor, and bitter enough against those that oppress them, or do not take care
for them: but the rational part of his discourse, wherein he pretends that he
has set forth those oppressors to the life, is not indifferently extended unto
all Enclosures, but expressly limited and restrained unto such as unpeople towns
and uncorne Fields, in the Title page: to the unsociable, covetous, cruel brood
of those wretches, that by their Enclosure do unpeople towns and uncorne
Fields, page 7. And in sundry other places of his discourse he speaks
reservedly of these Enclosures, and such Enclosures, but never, that I can
observe of Enclosure in general, as if he understood all to be unlawful. Nay
rather he seems to take it for granted, that Enclosure is not unlawful, if it
be not such as he complains of, which I the rather conceive to be so,
because I have heard, that Mr Moore himself was once very earnest for an
enclosure, if he could have had it effected according to his own desire. Yea
more, my opinion of that discourse is, that from the Doctrine, the prosecution
whereof he propounds to himself, as much may be inferred against common
Fields, as can be against Enclosures in general, and in particular more
reasonably against the abuses of common fields then of Enclosures, by how much,
it is easier to reform all the abuses of Enclosures, without turning the
ground into common again, then those of common Feilds, without enclosing them.
And to prove, not the lawfulness alone, but even the necessity of Enclosure,
for the benefit of the Commonwealth and prevention of poverty; there, needs,
I think, no better argument, then may be gathered out of that discourse. So
that the adversaries of Enclosure in general, I think, will give Mr Moore but
little thanks for it, when they truly understand the consequents thereof. Page
2. His doctrine is, That they are not ordinary sinners, but Judas-like sinners,
that care not for the poor. It is no little sin, but a wrath-provoking sin,
not to care for the poor: yea, God and Christ (says he) care not for those
Nations, those places, those persons, that care not for the poor. If to this
Proposition you add this Assumption, but they care not for the poor
(understand it as they ought to do) who by hindering those Enclosures, whereby
the evils and abuses of common Fields may be reformed, are means either to
make or continue men poor, the conclusion will be, therefore, they are not
ordinary sinners, but Judas-like sinners, that hinder these Enclosures. It is
no little sin, but a wrath-provoking sin, to hinder those enclosures: yea,
God and Christ care not for those Nations, those places, those persons, that
hinder those Enclosures, and thereby prevent the reformation of those evils and
abuses in common Fields, which are means either to make or continue men poor.


Phil. This me thinks is somewhat strange: and yet, if you can make good the
Assumption, I do not see how the conclusion can be any way avoided.


Par. The Assumption I believe may be easily made good, by instancing the many
particular evils and abuses, which abound, where the Fields lying open are used
in common, and cannot be reformed, but by Enclosure rightly ordered as it
ought to be, or no way else so well.


Phil. I pray you then do me the favor to mention some of those particulars.


Sect. 2
Par. I will, But first I think it not amiss to premise some general
considerations, which are of much importance in this case.

One is, that sin is always an accursed thing: especially then, when it is
most generally practiced, with the least regret of conscience, and there, where
the reformation of it is, not only not endeavored, but purposely opposed, when
it is sought.

Another is, that as sin is always the proper cause, so most an end it is,
the special occasion, as of other miseries amongst men, so of poverty in
particular.

A third is, that the most effectual means to prevent and to remove as other
miseries amongst men, so poverty in particular, is to put an end to sinful
courses.

A fourth that then the best care is taken for the poor, when the most
effectual means is used to prevent, or to remove their poverty.

A fifth, that it is a duty incumbent upon all that are members of a
Commonwealth, as they have means and opportunity, to the best of their
understandings and abilities, to endeavor the advancement of the public
benefit, which is but the summa totalis of all particular Items:

A sixth, that the greatest advantage to the Commonwealth, that can be raised
out of land, is then, when it is employed unto that use especially, for which
it is fittest, and in such manner, that the greatest proportion of profit may
be raised, with the least expense of charge.


Sect. 3.
These things premised, and taken for granted, which I think in reason cannot
be denied: The first particular instance that I will give you, of the evils and
abuses in Common-fields, is the injurious dealing of neighbors one with
another, trespassing upon, and intruding into that which is not theirs, either
carelessly, or wilfully. This, besides the curse which hangs over the head of
the wrong doer himself, is a great hinderance to the owner, whose right is
taken by another, without any recompense to him. Thus, where fields lie open,
and the land is used in Common, he that is rich, and full stocked, eats, with
his cattle, not his own part only, but likewise his neighbors, who is poor,
and out of stock. Besides that it is an ordinary practice with unconscionable
people to keep above their just proportion, until they think there will be
notice taken of it, and then to remove their cattle out of sight, that they may
not be observed. And with some, not only to encroach upon other men's lands,
and upon the Common by plowing further then they ought to do, in balks and
hades, but likewise to remove mere stones, to deface the marks of other men's
lands, and where they find leas not marked at all, to mark them as their own.
And I believe it may be observed, that for the most part, the greatest
complainers against, and opposers of Enclosure, either in general or upon
equal and indifferent terms, are such as have been accustomed unto, or desire
they may have liberty to practice such licentious courses.


Phil. But some of this methinks is not so much to be complained of, as you
seem to conceive: For the poor man, that has not stock of his own to store his
Commons with, may set them unto other men, and so not be deprived of his right.


Par. It is true that sometimes he may do so, but not without much
disadvantage to himself: For the benefit which he should have, if the stock
were his own, accrews unto him, to whom he sets his Commons; who will be sure
not to take them, but at such an under rate, as that he may make advantage to
himself thereby. Which if it be not damnum emergens, an increase of loss, must
of necessity be lucrum cessans, an abatement of profit to the owner. And by
this means in Common-fields many times, not Tenants alone, but even
Freeholders also are eaten out of all, and reduced to beggary. But what means
of redress can you imagine may be had in Common-fields, for the rich man's
eating up the poor man's Commons in case he can neither stock them himself, nor
set them unto others?


Phil. As much I suppose, as if his land were enclosed, and that he could not
have a Tenant for that part which he could not stock himself.


Par. No, therein you are deceived: For, in a ground inlosed, that grass which
he has not cattle of his own to eat, if he cannot, or be not minded to set it
to another, he may either mow, if it be fit for hay, or else preserve for his
own use against another time, when he can get stock to put upon it, or if he
cannot so soon as he would, yet the land at the least would be improved by it
against another time; whereas in a Common-field it would be eaten bare by
others, without any recompense at all to the owner. So the two great rules of
Moral righteousness, Suum cuique, Render to all their dues, Romans 13.7. and,
Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris, All things whatsoever ye would that
men should do to you, do ye even so to them, Mat. 7.12. are both
transgressed, by means of this one unremediable evil, which fields lying
open, and used in common, are subject unto. And why should not all that Master
Moor in his discourse has said against oppression and wrong-doing, be applied
as well to oppression and wrong-doing in common fields, as in grounds that are
enclosed?


Phil. But why should you pretend a breach of those rules of moral
righteousness, by the rich man's eating up the poor man's Commons, when the rich
man Commoneth no more, then his proportion comes to? For although it
happens so, that the poor man's Commons not being stored, the rich man's cattle
do feed upon them, yet it is not the rich man's intent, or desire that it
should be so.


Par. If that were always true, and you could likewise add, that he took no
content or pleasure in it, but were sorry for it, you should say something to
free the rich man from being guilty of approving himself in doing wrong, though
not to repair the poor man's loss. But then, why do not such rich men, where
the fields lie open, and are used in common, show their care of the poor, by
recompencing them for those their Commons, according unto the proportion of the
profit, that accrews unto themselves thereby? Is not neglect of the poor in
this, which is a means both to make, and to keep them poor, as crying a sin
in Commonfields as it is in Enclosure not to relieve them out of a man's own,
wherein they can challenge no interest or right at all, but of charity?
Meethinkes it should not be denied by any man, that pretends care of the
poor. But what do you say to trespasses and intrusions in Common fields?


Phil. I say they are not proper unto Common-fields alone, but the like
objection may be made against Enclosures, also. He that has the conscience
to put cattle upon Commons, either more then he has right to do, or where he
has no right at all, it is very like, will make little scruple to do so in
ground enclosed also, if he can find a fit opportunity to serve his turn.


Par. You do well to say so, if he can find a fit opportunity to serve his
turn: for that indeed makes a very great difference between common Fields and
grounds enclosed, namely, that ill conditioned unconsiderable people have not
the like opportunities to serve their turns in these, as they have in those.
If the fences about enclosed grounds be good, and the gates kept fast, other
men's cattle cannot easily be turned in, or if they be, may quickly be
observed. But all the wrong in this kind is not done with loose cattle alone.
It is a thing too usual in common Fields for one man to trespass upon
another, when ground, either for grasing, or for mowing, is severally lotted
out: those who have consciences large enough to do it, will lengthen their
ropes, or stake them down so, that their horses may reach into other men's
lotts, and either in mowing or in making their hey, will add unto their own by
taking from another man's. And for the removing or altering of land marks, the
abuse is so gross, that no man I think can be so shameless, as to offer any
excuse for it, though many be neither ashamed nor afraid to practice it. Now
all unrighteousness is sin, 1 John 5.17. And God is the avenger of all such
as go beyond or defraud (the margin of our bibles has it, oppress, or
overreach) their brethren in any matter. 1 These. 4.7. So that, if it were but
for this one thing alone, enclosure rightly ordered, would be necessary to
deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, that he may do
no wrong, Jer. 22.3. Yea to deliver them out of the hand of the Lord, who
otherwise would commit a trespass against him by wronging other men, Josh.
22.31.


Phil. It is true as you say; these evils are great, and such, as for which men
may be justly punished by God himself, yea peradventure sometimes are. But
there may be other means of redress then by Enclosure only. The parties that
are wronged may be righted by law, and trespassers taught to take heed of doing
wrong, by being made to pay dearly for it.


Par. It is true, they may be so, when the wrong done, is not only taken notice
of, but also may be proved against him that has done it: and were it not for
that, there were no living for honest men, where the Fields lying open are used
in common. But would it not be better that the evil it self should be
prevented, then honest men be necessitated, either to have recourse to that
remedy, or suffer perpetually without redress? Bonum est cauterium, sed quo
mihi vulnus ut indigeam canterio. Physic is good, but not to have need of it
is better. Besides that, the wrong done is not the less, nor will the
punishment from God be the lighter, when it is done so secretly and subtly,
that either it is not taken notice of at all, or cannot be proved. Are not law
suits, and actions of trespass, particularly complained of by Mr Moore, as
means to make men beggars, and undo them? page 13. If causa causae, be causa
causati, if effects must be attributed, not only to the next immediately
preceding, but likewise to remote antecedent causes, then keeping Feilds in
common, which gives opportunity to trespasses, and consequently occasion to
law suits, cannot but be in some sort guilty of that poverty, which follows
upon such suits. And therefore they that will not permit the prevention of
those suits, and so of that poverty, by giving way unto the removal of the
occasion, by Enclosure rightly ordered, sure care not for the poor, so as they
ought to do. And yet this it not all the wrong, that usually is done in common
Fields. In all, or most towns where the Fields lie open and are used in
common, besides houses of husbandry, and ancient cottages, that have right of
common, there is a new brood of upstart intruders, as inmates, and the
inhabitants of unlawful cottages erected contrary unto law; who live upon the
spoil of other men, without making difference of any, rich or poor, whether
they are able to bear it or no, they are sure to suffer by them. And if they be
found with that, which any man may tell is not their own, because all men may
be sure they should have nothing there: yet no man in particular can challenge
them for it, unless he take them in the very act upon his own ground, not that
which he has right unto in common with others, but that which is distinctly
known to be his: and then if they be but threatened that they shall be legally
questioned, and punished for it, they on the otherside threaten to leave their
charge, their wives and children, on the town to be provided for. So that in
most places, the old stocks are not able to maintain the new sprung branches,
except they can draw more nourishment unto themselves, by preventing those
disorders, which drain it away from them. When the best living in a town is
hardly sufficient to find maintenance and employment for one family, how
shall three or four, as sometimes it hapeneth, be sustained upon it? And those
for the most part not of laborers, but of loyterers, who will not usually be
got to work, unless they may have such excessive wages, as they themselves
desire, but choose rather to be idle, if not worse employed. Can any man in
reason, and with a good conscience pretend, that to suffer such people to go
on in their sins, without reformation, or restraint is to have care of the
poor? unless men may be said to have care of the poor then, when they take a
course, that they may continue always poor, and never be otherwise.


Sect. 4.
Phil. But do you think that by Enclosure this may be remedied?


Par. Yes, very easily. Let every man that has right unto any land, either as
a freeholder, or as a tenant, have the same proportion of land allotted him to
occupy in several, as before he had, or should have had, in common: and then,
by raising greater profit to himself, he shall be better able, both to pay
weekly contribution for the relief of the impotent poor, and to bear his part
in the raising of a stock to set the able poor on work: which are the only two
courses, which the law has provided, whereby care is to be taken of the poor,
and would be fully sufficient to that purpose, if duly put in practice, as
they ought to be: and both of them may be as well put in practice, where lands
are enclosed, as where they lie open, and are used in common if not better.


Phil. It seems then, when the land belonging to a town is enclosed, you would
not have any of the inhabitants turned out, or the houses pulled down.


Par. No, by no means, nor would they be at all, if conscionable care were
taken for the due execution of that, which the law has sufficiently provided
for, namely, that houses of husbandry be not decayed, nor cottages unlawfully
erected, or inmates entertained. But, where houses of habitation have been
erected, or inmates entertained contrary unto law, as I would not have them
presently pulled down, or the inhabitants turned out, so neither would I have
them continued any longer, then of necessity they must be, that is, until
they grow empty of inhabitants: unless that the continuance of them by
entertaining other inhabitants, may be found convenient for the town in
general, as well as for the owners in particular: and then I would have some
land laid unto them; at least so much, as is required by the law. For ancient
cottages, which are not houses of husbandry, in the interpretation of the law,
as the law has made no provision for them, so I would have them left to the
owners discretion, when they grow void, either by the decease, or voluntary
departure of the present inhabitants, to take them down, or to employ them
otherwise, or to take in new Tenants, if they see good; So that be it not to
the wrong of their neighbors, or to the prejudice of the other poor; who the
fewer they are in any place, the better they may be there relieved, or
otherwise provided for. And yet their madness is such many times, that they
will bitterly exclaim against those men that will not give way to the increase
of their numbers, by the bringing in of others amongst them; or that would have
all idle Beggars, Rogues, and Vagrants, that wander up and down without a
calling, to be restrained; to whom in most country towns there is commonly
given by the inhabitants, almost every day, as much as might serve in a
competent manner to relieve their own poor.


Phil. Although you may be of this mind as you pretend, yet it should seem that
few Inclosers heretofore have been, or yet are so; as may appear by those
complaints, which Mr. Moor has mentioned page 9, 10, 11. of Tenants and
Cottiers discharged of their Tenements, and turned out of their houses.


Par. That such complaints are commonly made, and not without cause sometimes,
is very likely to be true. But I can hardly believe that all, who make such
complaints, have always such cause as they pretend. For it is certain, that
some have been pretended to be discharged, and turned out, who voluntarily did
choose to be gone, and might have tarryed, if they would. But as those who have
been bred and brought up to be wandering beggars, will not be content with good
entertainment in honest men's houses, especially if they be constantly put to
any good employment: So those that have been used to wrong doing, and
trespassing upon others in common fields, cannot endure to live where they must
be restrained of that liberty, and will be sure to pretend themselves wronged,
if they be not permitted to do wrong to others. But in case not one of all the
complaints in that kind, which Master Moore has heard, were causless, and
unjust; yet this is certain, there have been Enclosures made which have not
unpeopled Towns, where none, either Tenants, or Cottiers have been discharged
or turned out; and so may be again, without giving just occasion to any such
complaints. Therefore to urge those complaints as an argument against all
Enclosure, to prove it unlawful, were to infer an universal conclusion upon
particular premises; which no good disputant will do.


Sect. 5.
Phil. This which you have said may be something, perhaps, in respect of
Depopulation, or un-peopling of towns, but what will you say to the decay of
Tillage, or un-corning of fields by Enclosure?


Par. I say it is no necessary effect of Enclosure in general, nor any effect
of Enclosure at all, if it be rightly ordered, as it should be; but rather the
contrary. More Grain may be raised, and with less charge, in grounds enclosed,
then in Common fields; if that which has been tilled out of heart, and is
weary of bearing, be laid down to rest, and that which is resty be broke up and
tilled. Which may well be done in grounds that are enclosed, but cannot be
done in Common fields, where land must be used as has been accustomed, and
cannot be otherwise, without a joint consent: which commonly is as hard to be
obtained, as agreement to Enclosure. By this means in common fields much land
is continued in tillage, which for the present is not fit for it, but after a
reasonable time of rest would be: And much is continued in Grasing, which for a
time were fitter to be Corned, and afterward, being laid down again, would
bear better Grass then formerly it did. Thus to the great prejudice of the
Commonwealth in general, as well as of the owners in particular, the land in
common fields is not employed to the use that it is fittest for, nor so much
Corn as might be raised. For it is well known by experience, that a few Acres
of resty ground enclosed, with one plowing only, and less seed, will
ordinarily yield a greater increase then more Acres, and a greater proportion
of seed, are wont to do in common fields with diverse plowings. Besides that,
in common fields, where diverse men's lands lie intermixed, and every man's lands
dispersed so, that many parcels in many places, and sometimes far asunder, go
to make up one Acre, there is occasion of great inconvenience, and charge to
the owners diverse ways. Many days works are cast away, and much labor is
lost in the plowing of the land, in the carriage of Manure, and inning of the
crop, which might be spared, if the land lay all together, as it does in
Enclosures. Besides the wrong that is many times done to other men by carting
over, and turning, and winding upon their lands; and so in the Meddows by
treading down, and driving over one another Grass.

Again, where the fields lying open are used in common, for the most part in
the winter time cattle of all sorts, both small and great, are suffered at
their pleasures to go over the fields, where Corn is sown, and do more hurt
with their feet then with their mouths, especially when the weather is wet:
and in the summer time, much cost and spoil is made in the corn, both whilst
it is growing, and when it is cut, by horses breaking loose, and by the great
herds of cattle, that are daily driven up and down between the furlongs,
sometimes in narrow passages: so that usually the lands lying, next to those
passages on either side, or butting on the common grounds, have little or
nothing left upon them at harvest, to the prejudice of the owners in
particular, and of the Commonwealth in general, which proportionably suffers in
every man's loss.

Again, in common Fields the land is much impoverished, not only by being
continually kept in tillage without rest, which in its kind is as necessary for
it, as for living creatures, but likewise by the burning of dung, and of straw,
for want of other fuel, with which the land might be manured. But usually the
hedges upon grounds that are enclosed, serve in a good measure, if not
altogether, to supply that want: and besides the profit of fruit trees, if they
be planted there, they likewise afford good shade and shelter for cattle, which
in common Fields they cannot have, though it be many times almost as necessary
for them as their meat.


Sect. 6.
Phil. The supply that arises out of hedges for fuel I confess is a good
convenience, where wood is scarce, and coal not to be had, or only at excessive
rates: but for the manuring of the arable land with dung and straw, that want
is well supplied in common Fields by the folding of sheep.


Par It may be not so well as you think: nor would it appear to be so, if all
things should be well considered. For, first, The manuring of land with the
fold serves only for one year: and after the first croppe the land is left as
barren as before. The reason whereof I conceive to be, because the strength of
the dung is much exhaled, spent and wasted by the weather, it lying long on the
face of the earth not plowed in, and so being turned, either to dust in a dry,
or unto dirt in a wet season. Secondly the manuring of land with the fold is
many times dearly paid for, with the loss of the flock by the rot. Thirdly, in
case the sheep escape the rot, yet neither in their bodies, nor in their
fleeces, do they yield so much profit, as they might do in grounds enclosed.
Whereof the later, the fleece in grounds enclosed is usually fit to be combed
for jersey, which in common Fields it is not: and combing of wool for jersey
is likely, by the new manufactures, to prove a far greater benefit to the
Commonwealth, then clothing along, either is or can be. And yet, if manuring of
land with the fold be any way advantageous, it may be practiced as well in
grounds enclosed, as in common Fields, or rather better: because, when the
season is not fit for folding, the sheep may be left at large in the pasture,
without any danger of trespassing in the meddowes, or on the corn, which in
common Fields they cannot be.


Sect. 7.
Phil. But in grounds enclosed there cannot be kept so many cattle either great
or small, as usually are kept in common Fields.


Par. It may be so: and yet fewer cattle kept in pasture grounds may yield the
owners greater profit, then more cattle of the same sorts kept in common Fields
can do: and that in diverse respects.

As first, they require less attendance, and so put the owner to less charge.

Secondly, they are not subject to so much hazard. Sheep that are naturally
quiet cattle, being hunted and hurried with dogs (as usually they are in
common Fields, to keep them within their compass) are apt to get heats, to
grow scabbed and break, which is not so in grounds enclosed: besides that which
was observed before, concerning the loss of sheep in common Fields by rotts:
which many times is as great as the yearly rent of the whole Lordship would
amount unto. And amongst great cattle in the common Fields, the weaker are wont
to be hurt by the stronger, when they are driven together in a throng, by
fighting, rushing, goaring, and the like: and are apt to be tainted by one
another in times of infection: all which in conveniences are much prevented by
Enclosure.

Thirdly, where the Fields lying open are used in common, which kine being in
the summer time kept fasting all night, and lodged on the hard stones, and in
the day time driven up and down from place to place, their milk is not only
less in quantity, but likewise worse in quality, being often so heated in
their udders, that it cannot be so good for use in butter, and cheese, as
otherwise it might be, and is in grounds that are enclosed.

Fourthly, where the fields lying open are used in common, when the weather is
wet, the cattle, by driving to and fro, make foul the ways, and having therein
first dirtied themselves, then stain the ground, and make the grass unholsome:
which is not so in grounds enclosed.

Fifthly, where the fields lying open are used in common both greater and lesser
cattle, contrary to their natures, are constrained to rest, when they would
feed, and feed when they would rest: yea sometimes are not suffered to be
quiet, even while they are feeding, but kept going and eating together; which
is not so in grounds enclosed.

Sixthly, where grounds are enclosed, both the grounds and the cattle may be
severally used, as is fittest for each: store cattle may be put upon grounds
that are fittest for store, and feeding cattle upon feeding grounds. The owners
may put off, or put on, either fewer, or more, from time to time, as they find
it most convenient, and wait the best times both for selling, and buying again
with the greatest advantage, their grounds in the mean time gathering head, so
long as they are not fully stockt: whereas in common Fields, all sheep by
themselves, and other cattle by themselves, go together, young and old, sick
and sound, fat and lean: and when ever any are taken off, others must be
presently put on in their steed or else the commons, in the mean time, will be
lost from the owner, and eaten up by other men's cattle, as was said before. So
usually after maths in common Fields are never let grow to any good head: but,
all being eaten bare before hand, long and hard winters make lean and hungry
cattle, and poor distressed husbandmen. And, as it is generally to be observed,
that the richest countries in the land are those that are enclosed, so in
particular towns ir may be seen, that not freeholders only, but even tenants
also, thrive better there, where their lands are enclosed, though they pay
far greater rents for them, then they do in common fields, though the rents,
which they pay, be less by much. Yea, in some places it is certainly known,
that the enclosure of their meddowes only, though the rest of the land were
still left open, has been a great benefit to the inhabitants, and a means to
redeem them from a poor unto a rich condition: much more might it have been so,
if their pasture grounds also, as well as their meadows had been so enclosed:
and yet more, if their tillage likewise had been laid together, each man's by it
self, whether they had enclosed it, or no, so that they had only put an end
unto their custom of common: which is the great occasion of many disorders,
where the fields lie open, and which without enclosure are never likely to be
redressed. But, if all places were enclosed, upon equal and indifferent terms
for all that have right there, and with due respect unto provision for the
poor, the scandal, I believe, would quickly cease, and all occasions of
complaint be taken away.


Sect. 8.
Phil. That may be your opinion perhaps; but notwithstanding all that you have
said, there are diverse passages in Master Moors discourse, which some men
(those that would have it so at least) will think do make against enclosure in
general, even that which is ordered in the best sort that can be devised, and
not only against that, which alone (as you observed) it seems he did intend
to speak of, viz. such as does un-people towns, and un-corn fields. I pray you
let me hear what you can say concerning them.


Par. I easily believe, it may be so: For commonly things appear to men's eyes,
as if they were of the same color with the glasses, thorough which they are
looked upon; and usually such glasses, to the minds of men likewise, are
prejudice, and partiality: with which that those passages, which you speak of,
in Master Moors discourse, may not be discolored, when you repeat the words,
I shall quickly tell you what I think of them.

But first I have something more to say, concerning the inconveniences. or
mischiefs rather, which they are subject to, who live where the fields lying
open are used in common. As this, that there is a great deal of land in common
fields, which formerly has been good, and might be so again, utterly spoiled
for want of good husbandry. I know a place, where by this means the Commons
were so impaired, that the inhabitants agreed to abate of their ancient usual
stint one sheep in six, and one cow in three, and yet did confess, that
formerly their cattle had fared better at the long stint, then afterward they
did at the short; but they would not be persuaded to bestow better husbandry
upon their land, though they thought it necessary to make a greater abatement
in the number of the cattle which they kept upon it. And so by degrees, through
the neglect of good husbandry, their Commons in time must needs have come to be
but little worth: and yet they pretended, that they lived on their Commons
only, and that their tillage did not quit their cost.


Phil. But they might have bestowed better husbandry on the land if they would,
and so the cause of that complaint might have been taken away.


Par. By a general agreement of all to that purpose they might; otherwise they
could not, unless some alone should have been at the charge for all. And that
is one great evil in common fields, that they who would be good husbands
cannot, when other perverse conditioned people are not minded to permit them.
But where grounds are enclosed, if any man will be a good husband on the land
which he holds, he may, if he will not, he hurts himself alone, and not his
neighbors, nor needs to be hurt by them, unless it be through his own
default. Another thing, which in common fields is a great means of making and
keeping men poor, and more of late then heretofore, is, that all public
paiments, as taxes and the like, are laid according to the number of the yard
lands as they are usually accounted, and valewed alike, though some times there
is scarce half so much profit made of one as of another. A poor man for a
small yard land, and peradventure not half stocked, shall pay as much as a
rich man does for a great one stocked to the full: and so the poorer that a man
is already, the poorer, and poorer still it is like he shall be.


Phil. This might easily be prevented in common fields, as well as in grounds
enclosed, if all payments were proportioned according unto the pound rent for
the land, and the stocks valued severally.


Per. Peradventure not so easily as you imagine. For in common fields although
the yard lands be not equal, either in quantity, or in quality, yet because
they have like proportions of commons appertaining unto them, whether they be
furnished with stock or no, the inhabitants will never be persuaded to charge
them otherwise then equally; as they have been accustomed. Whereas in grounds
enclosed there is commonly consideration had, in the valuation of them, both to
the quantity and to the quality: or if unto the quantity only, yet it is upon
supposition, that one with another there is no much considerable difference in
the quality: And for the valuation of stocks, it is an endless piece of work
to examine whose they are, and a means to set all men at variance. Another
thing is, that where grounds are enclosed, cattle cannot easily go away of
themselves, or be driven out, but that they may quickly be missed, and
tracked: whereas in common fiields they may wander of themselves, or be driven
away by others, long before the owners can tell, either whether they be there,
or whether they be gone: and sometimes they are long in looking far for that,
which at last they must find either near at hand, or not at all. But, to
trouble you no further now in this kind, let me hear, if you please, what it is
in Mr Moors discourse, which you think may be suspected to make against
enclosure in general.


Sect. 9.
Phil. Page 7 he says, How great a shame is it for a Gospel magistracy not to
suppress make-beggers, which make such swarms of beggars in countries,
Cities, and Towns? That care not how many beggars they make, so themselves may
be gentlemen; nor how many poor they make, so themselves may be rich. I mean
the unsociable covetous cruel brood of those wretches that by their enclosure
do unpeople towns, and uncorne fields: who fall under the Prophets woe, Isa
5.8. That join house to house, and field to field, till there be no place, that
they may be placed alone in the middle, of the earth, and be ridd of all the
poor. What say you to this?


Par. To this Isay, 1. that for the general it answers it self, as was
before observed, in that it is expressly limited and restrained unto those,
that by their enclosure do unpeople towns, and uncorne fields; making no more
against all enclosures, then the woe denounced against drunkards, in the 21
verse of the same chapter does prove all drinking to be unlawful. 2. That it
is as great a shame for a Gospel magistracy not to suppress make-beggers,
which make such swarms of beggars in Countries, Cities, and Towns, where the
Fields lying open are used in common, as where they are enclosed: and so much
the more, by how much the evil is more general, and of longer continuance, and
people make less conscience of those courses there, which produce such
effects: I mean, as before, disorder, unjust dealing, and the like. 3. That for
the text alleged in particular, Isay, 5.8. it is a wonder unto me, how Mr
Moore, or any man of an ordinary capacity, can imagine, that the holy Ghost,
who knows very well, and better then men, how to express himself, by laying
field to field, till there be no place, should mean the enclosing of common
fields, rather then the throwing open of enclosures: whereas indeed to throw
open enclosures, and to lay those grounds common, which before were several,
that so there may be no place for any man to enjoy his own with peace and
quietness, must needs be laying field to field, rather then to enclose those
grounds, which before lay in common, that so, fields being orderly divided,
every man may enjoy that which is his own in several to himself with peace and
quietness, and that there may be place for others also to do the like by
theirs. But the truth is, as the word in the original translated field, does
indifferently signify any ground, whether open or enclosed, that lies about an
house, or a town, as belonging unto it: so the purpose of the holy Ghost is, to
denounce a woe against all those, whether rich or poor, that either out of
ambition or covetousnes enlarge their own, either houses or lands by adding
unto them those of other men wrongfully wrested from the right owners, whether
poor or rich, by fraud or by force, that there may be no place there lest for
any, but only for themselves, though others have as much, or more, right unto
it: parallel whereunto is that of Jer. 22.13, etc. and Habak. 2.6, etc.
But such unjust dealing may be, and is, for ought I know, as often practiced
there, where the fields lying open, are used in common, as where they are
enclosed, if not oftener, as was before observed: And out of question
make-beggers, be they what they will be in common fields fall under the
Prophets woe, Isay 5.8. as well as there, where the grounds are enclosed.


Sect. 10.
Phil. Page 8. he says, question many of our beggars, that go from door to
door, with wife and children after them, where they dwell, and why they go a
begging. Alas, master (say they) we were forced out of such a town, when it was
enclosed, and since we have continued a generation of beggars.


Par. For the truth of this relation, we must take it upon the credit of Mr
Moors own testimony: and I will not deny, but that it may be he has heard
some beggars sometimes say so. Yet I believe there are thousands in England,
that in their own particulars are as charitably affected, and have given as
much unto the poor as Mr Moore, who never heard such expressions from any of
them: It is like that Mr Moore, thus publicly declaring himself against
enclosure, although it be but reservedly, such as he mentions, shall not want
those that will furnish him with such suggestions: but whether all that they
tell him in that kind be true, or no, he may do well to enquire, and not take
it upon trust. Haudrecte facit, qui facile credit. It is not the property of a
wise man to believe all that he hears, Prove. 14.15. And if it be granted the
complaint was just, yet nothing can be inferred upon it, but the particular
fault of those parties only, by whom the occasion of it was given.


Phil. In the same page he further says. When we take a view of the multitude
of poor in market towns and fielden towns, we see how these poor wretches
were driven out of their hive, their honey taken away, I mean their trade of
plowing by such enclosure, and glad were they to find an old house any where to
put their heads in, where they might have any imploiment to keep themselves and
family alive.


Par. This is largely spoken: and I believe, if Mr. Moore were put to prove it
true, by an induction of particulars, he could not name two Market Towns,
wherein, I will not say all, but only the greater part of the poor are such as
he speaks of, Bees that were driven out of their hives, and had their honey
taken away, and not rather, either idle Drones, or angry Wasps, such as suck
the sweet of other men's labors, and sting them with bitter words at the least,
from whom they have their greatest relief. Howsoever, if that which Master Moor
has there said, were certainly true in every particular, yet to conclude from
thence, that all Enclosure is unlawful, would but be still the same fallacious
way of arguing, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter.


Sect. 11.
Phil. Page 9. he says. For a groundwork we must lay this undeniable truth,
viz. That the great Manufacture and Trade of Leicestershire, and many, if not
most, of the inland Counties, is Tillage. It is the Plow whereby Tenants
Cottiers, and their children were set a work, and lived very happily and
comfortably before there was so much of such Enclosure.


Par. That [such] does make this argument also just such another as the former
was, guilty of the like inconsequence, as to the proving of all Enclosure to be
unlawful; and therefore I should pass it over lightly, with the rest of the
same nature, but that I have something to say concerning that which he terms
an undeniable truth, viz. That the great Manufacture, and Trade of
Leicestershire, and many (if not most) of the inland Countries, is Tillage,
etc. First. Suppose it be so, yet Enclosure, as was said before, may be so
ordered, that the Trade of Tillage shall not be decayed by it, but rather
advanced: Yea that Tenants Cottiers, and their children may be set a work, and
live more happily and comfortably after such Enclosure then they did before.
Secondly. Suppose it be so now, or has heretofore been so, it it therefore
necessary that it must be so always? May not those Counties hereafter have
other Manufactures and Tradings, of as great or greater advantage, for the
commonalty, yea for the Commonwealth, as well, as Master Moore confesses,
other Counties have? Must Leicestershire, and other inland Counties only, by
being kept open, and used in common, be condemned unto a perpetual expense of
greater pains and charge, for the raising of less profit and advantage, when if
they were enclosed, as other Counties are, they might, as they do, raise
greater advantage and profit, with less expense of charge and pains? Master
Moore says it is the Plow whereby Tenants Cottiers, and their children were
set on work. We must understand him in those places, where the fields lying
open are used in common. But he does not tell us how many Tenants Cottiers, and
their children, yea even Freeholders also, in those places, through disorder
and unjust dealing, have been utterly undone, and reduced to beggary. He does
not say, how many have there been trained up to idleness; and taught to do
almost nothing else, but to wait advantages of doing wrong to others. He does
not boast, how many of those, that in such places have been employed about
Husbandry in the summer time, in the winter time are turned off, either to beg,
or steal, or starve; or, that if they continue still with the same Masters,
their Winters maintenance, to do little or nothing, brings greater charge with
it then their summers work was worth; so that many times the poor husbandman in
his estate is fed upon, and eaten out of all, by them whose bodies he does feed.



Phil In the same page he further says. Other Counties have other Manufactures
and Trading for the Commonalty, we Tillage, and the Plough, whereby we breed
multitudes of hardy men, and horses for the service of the Commonwealth, if
need be; whereby we also send forth abundance of all manner of Corn and Grain,
and pease-fed cattle to the City, to victual our Shipping at Sea, and to
countries round about us: all fed with the Plow in the Common fields.


Var. What its fed with the Plow in common fields, may as well, yea and better
he fed with the Plow in grounds enclosed, as was said before. And if we should
appeal unto the City to say from whence the greatest abundance of provision
both for sea and land does come, whether from those countries, where the fields
lying open are used in common, or from those, where grounds are enclosed, the
question, I believe, would be quickly determined in the behalf of the countries
enclosed, without any doubt or disputation about it. And for the multitudes of
hardy men, which he speaks of, if there could be seen a List of all that
have served in the late Wars on every side, and that yet are in Arms, I
believe there would be found but few that have come from the Plow to that
employment, in comparison of other Trades. Many horses indeed are used, or
abused rather, where the fields lying open are used in common, but few bred
there that are fit for good service any where, even then when they are most set
forth to show. Hardly in any other thing, or in any other place, but where the
fields lie open, and are used in common, is there more, or so much cheating,
cousenage, and deceitful dealing used. And, if question may be made concerning
hardy men, for which I know no reason way it should, yet horses out of doubt
may better be bred in grounds enclosed then in common fields; whereof
experience is sufficient evidence.


Phil. Master Moor adds further in the same page. They make beggars of Tenants
upon such Enclosure: For the Tenant forthwith is discharged of Tillage and
Farm to seek a living he knows not where -- And in some Towns there is
fourteen, sixteen, or twenty Tenants discharged of plowing, all in this sad
condition, besides many other teams and farms of Freeholders laid down in the
same Towns. What say you to this?


Par. I say these restrictive terms of limitation, such, and some, [upon such
Enclosure, in some Townes] make it needless for me to say any thins, more then
I have said, to disable it from doing any service against Enclosure in
general; because, with those restrictive terms that which is so said is
nothing to the purpose, and without them would be false. Yet this let me tell
you, that for Tenants to be discharged of Tillage, and of their Farms, and for
Teams to be laid down, as it is no necessary effect, so neither is it any
proper adjunct of Enclosure. It does neither convenire omni, nor soli, nor
semper. Not omni; for Enclosures may be, yea have been, made, and Tenants
neither discharged of Tillage, nor of Farms. Not soli; for Tenants have been,
and may be, discharged of Tillage, and Farms, and Teames laid down, in
Common-fields. Not semper; for even in grounds enclosed, there where Tillage
and Teames have been laid down, and Tenants discharged, at some times, at other
times Tenants have been entertained, and Tillage, and Teames set up again. But
whether the fields lying open are used in common, or be enclosed, why should
not the Landlord have liberty to discharge the Tenant, when his time is
expired, and come himself to live upon his own land, or take in another
Tenant? If a Tenant so discharged complain, will Master Moore think the
Landlord deserves to be condemned for it? Sure, it is not sufficient for
Master Moors or for any man else, out of charity to the Tenant, to take notice
of his complaint alone, but he must likewise, out of justice to the Landlord,
duly consider whether the cause of his complaint is just; Lest he fall under
the woe denounced by the Prophet, Isa. 5.22. against them that justify the
wicked, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him. What find
you next in Master Moore discourse, that you think may carry any color of an
argument against Enclosure in general?


Sect. 12.
Phil. Page 10 he says, Herein is the misery of the Tenant the greater, Those
that have thus uncorned the said towns, and turned all into Pasture, and
discharged their Tenants, these thus enclosed wretches become Tenants
themselves, and rent land in the open fields round about them, or near unto
them, to maintain their own families with corns, and their horses, with
feeding, for which land they give (being able to pay for it out of their
enclosed grounds) excessive rates, which if the poor Tenant should give, he and
his must forthwith come to beggary. So that they do not only turn those poor
tenants out of enclosed towns, but also rent those Farms, and that land in the
common fields, which the poor tenants else might have rented at an easier rate;
so that in the conclusion most of these tenants become Cottiers.


Par. The like complaint maybe made in behalf of Tenants that live upon lands
that are enclosed. Those that live where the fields lying open are used in
common become tenants themselves, and rent enclosed grounds round about them,
or near unto them, that they may be better able to maintain their own
families, and manage their tillage in the common fields with more advantage;
for which enclosed grounds, in that respect, they can afford to give greater
rents, then they that live only upon enclosure can do. So that this, as the
other arguments urged against Enclosures, has (the misfortune it may be some
men would think it, but I say rather) the good hap to conclude as much against
common fields: If Enclosure make land in common fields scarcer, common fields
make grounds enclosed dearer. And therefore the wonder is less, that those,
who live where the fields are enclosed, endeavor to hinder the enclosure of
the common fields about them. They know very will their advantage would be
less, if all men besides had the like opportunity to make it, that they have:
And, if there were not so much help, as there is, from them, who live when the
fields lying open are used in common, from enclosed grounds in other places,
they would the sooner find themselves necessitated to enclose: And then, those
that live where the grounds are all enclosed, would find it more profitable
tilling some, then grasing all, so that there would need no law at all to
compel them to it. When tillage is more profitable then pasturage, men will
break up their pastures to till: And why should they not have liberty then to
lay down their Arable land for grass, when pasturage is more profitable then
tillage: I mean, as before, when the land is fitter for it. And so I make no
question but they have, if the Statutes concerning Husbandry and Tillage were
rightly understood, and well observed. Nor needs any man in reason to desire
greater freedom for laying down any land, which bath been used to tillage
before, then is granted him by the Proviso's in those statutes. But it maybe
the rate of the rents is the main matter that is stumbled at: which yet comes
all to the same pass, whether the fields be enclosed or no: save that there is
not so much casualty in grounds enclosed, as in common fields, as was before
observed. Tenants may be oppressed and beggered by rents over-rated in common
fields, as well as Enclosures, and I believe more often are: the over-rating of
rents being not the inequality of them unto other rents, either in other places
at the same time, or at other times in the same place, but the disproportion of
them unto the profit, which ordinarily communibus annis, may be raised of the
land that is rented, over and above the necessary charge of the labor and
stock, that is to be employed upon it. And for tenants becoming cottiers, I
believe, if any man will examine his own experience impartially, he may
observe as many not tenants only, who always paid great rents, but even
freeholders also, who sometimes paid but little rent, or none at all, to have
become cottiers, where the fields lying open are used in common, as where they
have been enclosed. But some men, whom our savior calls hypocrites. Mat. 7.5.
will sooner observe and reprove a few small faults in others, then acknowledge
and reform many greater in themselves. And I do not think Mr Moore can show
so many common fields without disorders, as another man may do enclosures
without pulling down houses, and turning out tenants. What have you yet more?


Phil. In the same 10 page, and so forward in the it he says. In these
enclosed towns in laying down the plow, and taking away the crop of corn, how
many crops do they rob the poor cottier of? This poor man had a crop and
income of every tilth of the plow, in the following tilth, in the stirring
tilth, in the arring tilth, in the sowing tilth: he had his income in the
manuring, weeding, mowing, inning, gleaning, and threshing of the corn. And
now alas, says the poor cottier, there is no work for me; I need not be
thrust out of the town, I must be gone where I may get my living; and if I can
get no house elsewhere, I and mine must stare. And hence it comes to pass that
the open fielden towns have above double the number of cottiers they had wont
to have, so that they not live one by another, and so put the fielden towns to
vast expenses in caring for those poor that these enclosures have made. And
what enquiring everywhere is there of these poor cottiers (after the town is
enclosed) to get an house in any place where they may have work?


Par. All this goes still upon the same false ground, that unpeopling towns and
uncorning fields is the proper and necessary fruit and effect of enclosure:
which experience shows to be otherwise. I could instance a place, where within
a short time after the fields were enclosed, more houses were built and
repaired, then had been in many years before: where they that caled themselves
the poor, yet thought they were able enough to take land out of other men's
hands, and to offer more for it then other men paid: and even then, when they
did complain that they could not get work, the other inhabitants complained
that they could not get workmen. So that you must not always so much take heed
to what such people say, as to the cause which they have to say so, which is
not always such as they pretend. For the incomes which Mr Moore says that the
poor cottier had in every tilth of the plow, in the manuring, weeding, mowing,
inning, and threshing of the corn, if the husbandman (as usually it is in
common fields, more then enclosures) had children and servants of his own to
do his work, it is like the poor cottiers part was very little. And I believe
it may be observed, that when towns are enclosed, although there be not so
much use of household servants, as formerly there was, yet of day-labourers
there is, or more,


Phil. But that Mr Moore in the next words has complained of, when he says,
such enclosure makes beggars of the children both of tenants and cottiers; the
children of both usually become servants to the husbandman, and brought up at
the plow etc. But now in such in closed towns where there were kept 30, 40, 50,
servants, there is not above three or four. Hence the droves of poor children,
when they are reproved for begging, are complaining, we would willingly work,
if any would fet us on work.


Par. It is well if Mr Moore has had the good hap to meet with no poor
children, but such as are willing to work; I wish that all men else could say
so. But rather I fear the most of those, which come out of commonfields, have
been so inured to idleness there, that they will not easily be brought to take
any good pains any where. And if this objection drawn from the great
disproportion in the number of servants usually kept there where the fields
lying open are used in common, and where they are enclosed, carry any
consequence with it against enclosure in general (as I confess in my
apprehension it seems to do more then any of the rest) it must be upon this
supposed principle, that all land in every place is to be used in such sort, as
may occasion the employment of most people; which for all the fair show that it
makes, is false.

For 1. it is contrary to that general rule, Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri
potest per pauciora. It is a needless, fruitless vanity (at least, if it be
no worse) to use many means for effecting of that, which may as well be done
with few. 2. It is not a practice agreeable to the pattern and example which
both God and Nature have set; Deus and Natura nihil agunt frustra; God and
Nature do nothing in vain. They are followers of neither, that purposely choose
to do things in such sort, as that more men must be employed in doing them,
then is either necessary, or convenient. 3. It is a great hinderance of the
common good, when all those people are needlessly employed in one place, whereof
some might be more profitably employed elsewhere. 4. If that principle were
true, the practice accordingly must be to put down teames, and instead of
plowing, and harrowing, and carting, to dig, and rake, and carry on men's backs;
which if it be absurd to do, that rule, according unto which it is done,
cannot be reasonable. What follows next?



Sect. 13.
Phil. A blow made at the root of all such Enclosure, as Master Moor does speak
against. In brief, says he, is it not palpable, that the main inducement unto
such Enclosure is filthy lucre, and to be rid of Tenants, poor, and servants?
So far are they from caring for the poor, and instead of bringing them into
their houses, to rid them of their houses. As for example, they being hot upon
such enclosure in a town I am well acquainted with, one of the inhabitants gave
this reason why they must do it, in these words, viz. The poor increase like
Fleas, and live, and these vermin will eat us up, unless we enclose. And sure
it was plain dealing; for without question he spoke the sense of most of the
rest. What can you say to this?


Par. To this I can say;

1. That all men who endeavor to provide for the prevention of a mischief, or
of an inconvenience, before it come, or for the removal of it when it is come,
are not induced thereunto by filthy lucre. Some men, for ought that Master Moor
can tell to the contrary, do it out of conscience of that duty which they owe
to God, themselves, and others.

2. By this example, which Mr. Moor has produced, it appears, that poverty,
in the town which speaks of, was not the follower, but the forerunner of
Enclosure. And by that it should seem, that whether care were taken of the poor
there, or no, yet care was not taken to prevent their poverty, whilst the
fields lying open were used in common; or if it were, it had proved
ineffectuall till then, and so was like to have done still without enclosure.

3. Charity thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13.5. and if Master Moore be so
charitable minded, as he makes show, why could he not take that speech,
which he relates, in the best sense, and think that he by whom it was spoken,
had a charitable intent to see the poor better provided for then they were, or
could have been, if the future increase of them should not have been prevented?
Is there no mean between eating up the poor, and being eaten up by them? Cannot
those that are poor already be relieved, or maintained, unless that others
also may be added to increase the number? If the man's comparing those poor,
concerning whom he spoke, to fleas and lice, and calling them vermin, be that
which Master Moore took offense at, I will not go about to justify it. But I
wish, that as it is better to prevent the increase of Fleas, and Lice, by
cleanliness and diligence, then to catch them, and kill them; so none that
pretend they have care of the poor, may strengthen their hands, or give them
encouragement in any of those evil courses, from whence occasion may be taken
to think that they deserve such a comparison.


Section 14.
Phil. Page 12. He says, Depopulation comes by degrees, and the next
generation usually knows neither Tenant nor Cottier in such enclosed places;
for towns we must call them no longer.


Par. I think it will be hard for Master Moor to give instance of any such
place, where towns have been un-peopled in another generation, that were not at
the first time of Enclosure. But in case he can, is there any necessity
therefore that in all it must be so? Especially considering what excellent
Laws have been provided for redress of such abuses. Or, if such a thing might
be feared indeed, for which the Law had not provided a remedy, in case it
should happen, must present mischiefs, such as the abuses of common fields are,
be perpetually continued without redress, because there is a possibility of an
after inconvenience? Hicrogonon furor est ne mo iare mori? Does any thing look
more like the madness of despair then this? Not much unlike that of a simple
Idiot in the days of Queen Elizabeth, when the Wars in Ireland were on foot:
Who being in waggery told by one, that the Rebels were coming, made all the
haste home that he could; and begged of his aged Mother, that she would let him
kill her himself, saying, he would do it handsomely, that she might not be killed
by the Rebels; and was so earnestly intent upon it, that the poor woman had
much ado by creeping under a bed to hide her self. Thus it seems, for fear of
having Tenants and Cottiers turned out of a Town, he knows not when, Mr. Moor
is so charitably affected to them, that he would not have Enclosure brought in
to prevent the continuance of those abuses, whereby they run headlong into
present poverty.


Sect. 15.
Phil. Page 13 he says, If the Lord should slack his hand but a little, and
withhold his more then usual increase of corn from us, it is such, Enclosure
would make a flat Famine: as within these few years, what crying for bread, and
complaining in our streets of such Enclosure? If then, what will become of us
now? since when there has been so much enclosed; and even at this present they
are so mad upon it, as though it was their project one time or other to ruin
the poor.


Par. For this, I told you before, that decay of Tillage and uncorning of
fields, is no necessary effect of enclosure in general, nor any effect of
enclosure at all, if it be rightly ordered as it should be; but rather the
contrary. And now I will add, that our prudent forefathers were of this mind:
In whose stead we are risen up a generation of men made as it were in the
afternoon of nature, in whom weakness of judgment, and strength of passion
strive for the mastery, upon such equal terms as it is not easy to determine,
whether of the two we are, more witless, or more wilful. Our prudent
forethers, I say, knew this so well, that when they set themselves of purpose to
prevent the decay of Tillage, and to provide for the increase of Corn, they
never prohibited Enclosure at all, but rather gave encouragement unto it, by
providing that for the better, and more commodious occupying of husbandry, of
any the lands, meddows, or pastures, which shall be allotted, or belonging to
any house of husbandry, it shall be lawful for any Lord to make exchange with
any his tenants; or any tenant, or other person, with the assent of the Lord,
to change the one with the other. An. 39 Eliz. cap. 1. Yea, how necessary they
esteemed some Enclosure to be, for the maintenance husbandry and tillage, may
appear by the Statute made to that purpose, in the behalf of certain particular
places in the County of Hereford, an. 4 Jacobi cap. 11. And when they studied
to reform the abuses committed contrary to the Law by depopulation and decay of
tillage, they never commanded the laying open again of Enclosures, as if hedges
and ditches had been any either causes or occasions of such abuses, but made as
strict Laws, with as severe penalties, for the punishment of those riotous
persons that go about to pull down enclosures, as of others, 1 Eliz. cap. 16.
Yea, if my memory deceive me not (for I cannot now tell where to find it) I
have long ago read a provision made by Law, that if an Enclosure were pulled
down, and the parties that did it could not be found, it should be made good
again by the inhabitants of the next adjoining town: And I cannot but wonder,
that any man, who pretends so highly to honor the present Parliament, as Mr.
Moor does, should imagine that the Members thereof will forget themselves so
much, as to suffer the solid wisdom of their predecessors to be (overweighed I
will not say, but) overswayed, or rather cried down by the empty noise of
hollow heads. Far be it from me to harbor so poor an opinion of them. If my
discretion did not, yet my charity would teach me better.


Sect. 16.
Phil. In the next words, page 13, he says, I proceed to the fourth sort,
which they make beggars, and they are those honest hearts, who out of a tender
conscience take such care for the poor, as they dare not comply with them in
their uncharitable designs, nor consent to such enclosure. Against these they
fret and storm, and tell them in plain terms they will undo them, and make
them beggars: And so they do indeed, in bringing multiplicity of Law suits,
Actions of Trespass for nothing, or at least for trifles, as for coming over
their ground, etc. and vex them all with long tedious suits in Chancery, to
force them to do against their consciences --. Alas how many amongst us are
now persecuted in this manner, because they would keep faith and a good
conscience, pure and unspotted, both before God and man?


Par. Here Master Moor would have us believe, that all those who withstand and
refuse to consent unto such enclosure, as he speaks of, are honest hearted,
and tender conscienced men, such as have a care of the poor, and because they
desire to keep faith and a good conscience, pure and unspotted, will not comply
with uncharitable designs, although they be vexed and presented for it.
Concerning all which I would I could say, as the Apostle does, Tit. 1.13. This
witness is true. But the contrary is so apparently evident, that if some of
the men, whom Master Moor does mean, be the same that it is conceived they are,
should I name them only, those that know them would wonder, how Mr. Moor could
be so much mistaken in them. But leaving the men, let us come to the matter,
and setting aside Master Moors restrictive terms, of uncharitable designs,
and such Enclosure, let us consider whether it be such a cruel oppression, and
not to be suffered in the land of uprightness, as he pretends, that some men
should be forced by suits in Chancery to consent to enclosure, I mean when it
may be done upon equal and indifferent terms for all that have right, and
with due respect unto provision for the poor: And whether such men refusing to
give such consent; may not without transgression of the rules of
righteousness, or breach of charity, have law suits, or actions of trespass
brought against them.

For the former we know, that the most important affairs both of Church and
Commonwealth are always determined in public assemblies, as Parliaments, and
the like, by the major part, although many times in number but little exceeding
the other. And can it then be reasonable, that in particular towns, when the
far greater number of those that are interested do agree upon a course (as of
enclosure) for the general good of them all, upon equal and indifferent terms
for every one of them, and with due respect unto the poor, who have no interest
of right amongst them, one or two, or but a few in comparison of the rest,
should have liberty to withstand and hinder all? Especially, if it may appear
that they do it merely of perverseness, or for evil ends? For a court of
Conscience (as the Chancery) to take cognizance of such a case, and force the
refractory to conformity, when Courts of Law cannot, I conceive to be not only
lawful, but likewise very convenient, if not necessary, in respect of that
interest, which the Commonwealth in general has in the welfare and prosperity
of all its members in particular; and therefore has great cause to take care,
that the wel-being, or well-doing of many may not be needlessly hindered by the
wilfulness only of a few. For the later, as it is a transgression of the rule
of righteousness to bring suits and actions at Law against any man for
nothing, and a breach of charity to multiply such suits and actions for trifles
only, so, in determining whether the ground of the suit or action be nothing,
or a trifle only, not the substance of the matter it self alone, but the
circumstances also are to be considered. As for example, If your neighbor have
an horse to sell you, and you offer him his full price, if he refuse to let you
have him, it is but a matter of unkindnesse, nothing to ground a suit or action
at law upon. But if he promise you shall have his horse at such a time for such
a price, and you trust upon him, having occasion at the time appointed to ride
a journey upon business of importance, if in the mean time he sell the horse
unto another man, at a greater price, although he be willing to give you the
overplus, so that you shall not need to sustain any loss that way; yet being
by that means disappointed of your journey, and so damnified in the business,
which you should have gone upon, in that respect you have just cause of action
against your neighbor. So your neighbors coming over your ground is in it
self but a trifle, but if he practice it ordinarily, and will not take
warning, intending to entitle himself to a way there without leave, where of
right he has none, it may be a just ground of a law suit, and action of
Trespass. Therefore that, which Master Moore has added, concerning the evil
consequences of Law suits, and suits in Chancery, that some parties have grown
distracted, and others have never lived a comfortable hour after all the days
of their lives, is such as I can say nothing to, nor any man else to the
purpose, unless I were acquainted with the particular cases, and the
circumstances of them.


Sect. 17.
Phil. Page 14. he says, They usually upon such enclosure treble the price of
their land: and this they get by flaying the skin off the poor.


Par. If any man impose a greater rent upon his land, then it is worth, I will
not go about either to justify or to excuse him: but that may be done upon
land in common fields, as well as enclosure: and therefore this objection can
be of no force against enclosure in general. Land may be enclosed, and yet no
rent put upon it more then it is worth. And, if after enclosure, the profit of
the land to the tenant be raised, to what proportion soever it be, double or
treble, what wrong can it be unto him if his rent be raised accordingly? But,
if the profit to the tenant be not raised, it is in vain for the Landlord to
expect that he should raise his rent, any more in grounds enclosed, then in
common fields.

I told you before, in answer unto that which you alleged out of page 10.
that the over-rating of rents is not the inequality of them, but their
disproportion to the profit that may be raised of the land: and so I say now.
Besides that this objection makes nothing against enclosure there, where there
are no tenants, but all men freeholders, that live upon their own lands. And
more then that, to serve Master Moors purpose, it must presuppose all
Landlords rich men, and all Landlords of enclosed grounds, not Landlords of
those that lie in common fields, such as pant, thirst, and are enflamed, as he
speaks, with covetousness; and all tenants poor, yea such as have nothing but
skin left upon them, that is, according to his own interpretation, page, 26.
very poor: none of all which is always so. For tenants may be, and sometimes
are, richer then their Landlords, and Landlords in common fields may pant,
thirst, and be inflamed with covetousness, when Landlords of enclosed grounds
may be pitiful and compassionate, yea bountiful and liberal unto the poor.
And therefore that which he adds page 15. I must tell these that thus sell
the poor for trifles, that I am suspicious they will sell their God for gold,
and Judas-like their Christ to fill the bag: their profession is nothing, if
they care not for the poor. A Gospel spirit is a giving spirit etc. let him
bestow upon covetous oppressors, wheresoever he finds them, either in common
fields, or grounds enclosed: so that he be careful not to mistake them, for
fear he mark the sheep, with the brand that was made for none but for goats.
Howsoever let this be observed, as given for granted by Master Moore, that upon
such enclosure the price of the land may be trebled, which I confess is
sometimes true, although not always, and then it will follow, that by hindering
such enclosure, a double benefit to the owner in particular, and consequently
in proportion unto the Commonwealth in general, is hindered: for upon such
enclosure the price of the land could not be trebled, unless a treble profit
might be raised. And this, for as much as concerns the Commonwealth in
general, is evident by experience, because upon enclosure, the proportion of
the taxes is accordingly raised above the rate, which they were formerly at,
when the fields lay open, and the land was used in common.


Sect. 18.
Phil. Page 19. he says, These worldlings are the unprofitable burdens of the
earth, in whom there is no charity, liberality, hospitality nor humanity; such
are greedy gripes, which by their enclosure would have no poor to live with
them, nor by them, but delight to converse with beasts, and to this purpose
turn corn into grass, and men into beasts.


Par. Such worldlings, as Master Moore there describes (if there be any such)
he may well call unprofitable burdens of the earth: but that all inclosers are
such greedy gripes, as would have no poor to live with them, or by them, he
has not yet proved, not ever will do. And yet to say, that some of them would
have no poor to live with them, or by them, may be so understood, that it would
be no disparagement at all, but an high commendation: I mean so, that they
would have the poor, who live with them, to live by them, that is, by their
means, so that they may in time outlive their poverty, and be no more poor:
which would be the best course of caring for the poor, that they could take.
But, why does Master Moore describe such greedy gripes, such worldlings, as he
there speaks of, by delighting to converse with beasts, and say, that to this
purpose they turn corn into grass, and men into beasts, Are oxen, kine, and
sheep beasts, any more then horses are? Or do not plowmen delight to converse
with horses, as much as Shepherds, or heardsmen, do to converse with other
cattle? Or are not horses for the plowmans use maintained with grass, as well
as oxen, kine and sheep? and, more then they, even with corn it self also?
does Master Moore conceive, that a plowman, as a plowman, is, or may be, more
spiritual, then a shepherd, or an heardsman? and a shepherd, or an
heardsman, as a shepherd, or an heardsman, more carnal, then a plowman? much
good, if it can, may his conceit do him. But yet if he please, for the further
satisfaction of others, let him tell them, which of the two it was, Abel a
keeper of sheep, or Cain a tiller of the ground, unto whom the Lord had
respect, and unto his offering, and unto which of the two he had not, Genesis 4.2.
etc. And which does he think were heardsmen and shepherds, which were plowmen
and tillers of land, the Israelites in the land of Goshen, or the Egyptians in
the land of Egypt? whether it was from the sheepfolds, or from the threshing
floores, from following the ewes great with young, or from holding the plow,
that God took David, a man after his own heart, to feed Jacob his people, and
Israel his inheritance? Ps. 78.70. etc. Though page 22 Master Moore, is pleased
to say, that flesh is but sauce as it were, to make our bread relish better,
and go down the glibber: yet he may observe, that Moses, Genesis 4.2. does first
make mention of Abels keeping sheep, although he were but the younger brother,
before he speaks of the elder brother Cains tilling the ground: and meat is not
wont to be an after additament to sauce, but sauce to meat; yet all this is but
little to the purpose, because, as I told you before, decay of tillage is no
necessary effect, nor any proper adjunct of enclosure, but rather the contrary.

I pray you proceed: for I believe there is something yet behind unspoken to,
which some men, if they can, will make a great matter of.


Sect. 19.
Phil. It is true: for page 22. he says, How nigh are they to a curse, that
use such means, that there may be no corn, nor seed time, nor harvest, in the
places where they inhabit? These break our staff of bread. This argument
prevails much with a carnal mind, and the natural conscience does much perplex
these oppressors. Oh (say they) though we have a good mind to this business,
yet the curse that follows such enclosure! And none of us here can be ignorant
how visibly God has pursued such enclosure with his several judgments, having
written this very sin in the ludgement. I shall be sparing of the particular
vengeances that have followed this sin: only thus much I shall say, that the
prophecy of Isaiah 5.9. is fulfilled on them, Many houses are desolate, even
great and fair, without inhabitants: so that we may say usually of them, as
the Psalmist speaks of such. Ps. 37.35, 36. I have seen him in great power, and
spreading himself like a green bay tree, yet he passed away, and lo he was
not, yea I sought him, but he could not be found. His house and land has
vomited him out and his posterity. Seldom the third generation can call those
enclosed grounds his own.

This natural conscience dot so terrify them, when they are upon such cursed
designs, that they can go on with no complacency of spirit in it. When they
are agreed upon Articles of such enclosure, how every one trembles to set his
hand first to them, or to set the first spade in the ground of such enclosure,
because God many times so visibly meets with the ringleaders. In one town being
upon such enclosure, and to set their hands to the Articles, so terrible was
the business, that no body would begin: at last one snatched the pen,
subscribed his name, and bid them follow him all in the devils name. When they
have thus enclosed, you shall hardly find who was the author of it, none will
acknowledge themselves to be principal agents in it, though they have all done
it. I have this one word to speak to these Mammonists that thus dare to stifle
conscience, 1 John 3.20. If thy heart condemn thee, God is greater then thine
heart, and knows all things.


Par. I thank you, that you have repeated Mr. Moors words so at large: I hope
to make some good use of them: For 1 His frequent inserting of those
restrictive terms, such means, these oppressors, such enclosure, this sin,
those enclosed grounds, such cursed designs, and the like, show plainly that
he had no desire, that all men should understand him so, as it seems you
conceive some men may do, namely, as speaking of enclosure in general. And
therefore I say, as well as he, if any man whosoever be conscious to himself,
that he has an heart exercised with covetous practices, that have made, or
would make use of oppressive, unjust, uncharitable actions for enclosure, or of
enclosure for oppressive, unjust, uncharitable ends, let him tremble at the
expectation of a curse, and if it conic let him not stick to charge the
particular vengeance that follows him, upon his own particular sin that went
before. But what I say of enclosure I will in like manner say of land in
common, If any man be conscious to himself of an heart excercised with covetous
practices, that he has made, or would make use of oppressive, unjust,
uncharitable actions to hinder enclosure; for oppressive, unjust, uncharitable
ends, let him tremble at the expectation of a curse, and if it come, let him
not stick to charge the particular vengeance that follows him, upon his own
particular sin that went before. But, when Master Moor and I have said all
this, we have said nothing at all against enclosure in general, or against
common fields, but only so far forth as in common fields there is greater
opportunity of covetous, unconscionable, oppressive, unjust, uncharitable
practices, then there is in grounds enclosed. 2. When Mr. Moor says of a
covetous, unconscionable, oppressing, unjust, uncharitable incloser, his house
and land has vomited him out, seldom the third generation can call those
enclosed grounds his own, either Mastes Moor must suppose him unblameable in
other respects, or else he cannot certainly tell, that such a particular
judgment was inflicted for that particular sin. If besides that he were
likewise an idolater, a blasphemer, a murderer, an adulterer, a drunkard, or
the like, that particular judgment, for ought that Master Moor can tell, might
be brought upon him for some of those particular sins, as well, as for that,
which he is minded to ascribe it to. Yea it might be for some antecedent sin
of his Ancestors, as well as for his own. So uncertain a thing it is, as well
as presumptuous, and therefore the more presumptuous, because it is uncertain,
without special revelation from God himself to meddle with his secret
counsels, and take upon us to design the particular occasions of those things
which are ordered and disposed of by his either operative, or permissive
providence. You know what our Savior answered his disciples concerning the man
that was blind from his birth, John 9.2, 3. Who, say they, did sin, this man,
or his parents, that he was born blind? Neither has this man sinned, says
he, nor his parents, but that the works of God should be made manifest in him.
And that general rule of Solomon may serve to give answer unto a thousand such
arguments as this. No man knows either love or hatred by all that is before
them: All things come alike to all, etc. Eccles. 9.1, 2, 3, and chap. 8.14.
There be just men, unto whom it happens according to the work of the wicked:
Again there be wicked men, to whom it happens according to the work of the
righteous. Therefore the Apostles either precept or advice is, Judge nothing
before the time, until the Lord come, who will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts. 1 Cor.
4.5. 3. When men of competent, yea of plentiful estates, who have not only
opposed, but likewise hindered enclosure in the places where they lived, have
afterward been known to run out of all, so that not the third, nor the second
generation, only, but not themselves in their own life time could call those
common grounds their own, which they had been the means to hinder the enclosure
of: would Master Moor think it charity in me, or in any man else, to say their
houses and their lands had vomited them out, and their posterity, because out
of cursed designs of their own they had hindered enclosure? If not, then let
him call to mind that of our Savior, Mat. 7.1, 2. Judge not, that ye be not
judged: For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what
measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again: And that of the Apostle
Romans 2.1. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that
judge, etc. 4. Complacency of spirit, or a trembling perplexity of
conscience, in the things which men do, or go about, are not always
necessary evidences of lawfulness or unlawfulness in the things themselves:
And there may be other reasons, without stifling of their consciences, or
because their own hearts do condemn them, that some men sometimes are not
willing to own some actions (though lawful and laudable) or to acknowledge
themselves to be principal agents in them. I could give you instances enough
to this purpose, but that I am loath to be too tedious, and the matter is so
plain of it self, that it needs no proof. 5. I think it might not be amiss
for Master Moor, and other men of his mind, to examine their own experiences
concerning those Inclosers, whom they think God has visibly pursued with this
particular judgment, to be vomited out by their houses and lands, which they
have enclosed, whether they are not decayed in their estates before, if not
run out of all, or so deeply indebted, that without such improvement, as they
made of their estates by enclosure, they could not have been able to fatisfie
their creditors, and reserve any thing to be a means of future subsistence to
themselves, and their posterity. If all, or some, or any of them, were such,
the parting with that estate afterward, which before was enclosed, may rather
seem to have been a blessing, then a curse, as a means of the creditors better
satisfaction, and the owners future freedom from a former intanglement at
least, if not bondage also. But I spend too many words upon a matter manifest
enough of it self, if the prejudicate opinions and passions of men did not fiel
up the eyes of their understandings, or render them resolute not to acknowledge
even what they cannot choose but know. Yet one thing seems a little strange
unto me.



Phil. What is that?


Sect. 20.
Par. Master Moor, that has filled his discourse in some places with froth
that has fallen from the mouths of other men, has not once that I remember
made mention of one thing, more material, and more nearly concerning himself,
then most of the rest, if not all, and that which I think has been one of the
most effectual means to hinder Enclosures, where they have been opposed. I
mean the Churches right unto Tithes, and the wrong that is pretended would be
done unto Ministers, if fields lying open, and used in common should be
enclosed. I wonder how Master Moor could miss this? Were the poor so much in
his heart, that they put the Church quite out of his head?


Phil. Whether Master Moor did purposely omit that particular, or no, I cannot
tell. But, if he did, I think he deserves to be commended for it. Having
spoken so plainly, as he has done, page 17. against selfishnesse, which he
calls sowing to the flesh, and having said expressly, page 27, that Ministers
must not onley preach, but likewise practice this duty of charity, to beware of
covetousness, and to be of a giving spirit: methinks it was well done of him
to forbear this argument, wherein he himself is so nearly concerned, lest
that, if he should have urged it, as he has done others, some might have
taken occasion thereupon to have retorted this Text, and said of him, as St.
John did of Judas, This he said, not that he cared for the poor. And indeed to
what purpose should an argument against Enclosure be urged now from Tithes,
and the right of the Church to them, when not only the right of the Church to
tithes is questioned, but likewise tithes themselves cried down by some, as not
Jewish only, but Antichristian also. So that some men peradventure might
suspect the urging of an argument against enclosure from tithes to be a design
for the continuance of tithes, as a necessary means for the preservation of
common fields from enclosure, which usually those that have interest in tithes
are great opposers of. But what ever was the reason of Master Moors omitting
it, I pray you let me hear, what answer you would have given unto it, if he
had urged it.


Par. The same that I have done before, namely, that enclosure rightly ordered
cannot be prejudicial to the right of the Church in tithes, or to any man, unto
whom that right of tithes does appertain.

For first, If as I said before, decay of tillage be no proper or necessary
adjunct, fruit and effect of enclosure rightly ordered, but rather the
contrary: if more corn may be raised in grounds enclosed then in common
fields, the tiths may be bettered, rather then impaired by enclosure. Secondly,
In case those that have right to tithes are doubtful of an uncertainty, in
that whether men will do what they might do in that kind or no, their
interest, as well as other men's, may be provided for in the agreement, and the
tithes compounded for, either in money, or in land. Thirdly, If no agreement at
all be made, yet if the tiths be all duly paid in kind, as they should be, what
ever value they be of, the right is preserved, and there is no wrong done; and
that they may be in grounds enclosed, as well as in common fields.



Phil. Since you are so willing to tell me your mind in that particular,
although it be not mentioned by Master Moore, I pray you do the like in one
other thing.


Par. What it that?


Sect. 21.
Phil. The Apostles rule is, Abstain from all appearance of evil. 1 These. 5.22.
and Philip. 4.8. amongst the properties of the things that must be thought
upon, one is, that they be of good report. But against enclosure generally it
is objected by some men, that it is of evil report, that it has an appearance
of evil in it, and therefore must not be thought upon, but abstained from. What
do you say to this?


Par. To this I say, First, That an appearance of evil, and an evil report, are
just occasions for men to suspend their resolutions of doing those things,
wherein there is such an appearance, concerning which there is such a report,
until they have seriously considered of the matter, and thoroughly tried whether
the things themselves be such indeed as they appear, and whether they ought to
be so reported of. But when they come to set up their rest, which side they
will sit down upon, and settle their resolution what to do indeed, it must not
be according unto that which does appear, but that which is, not according unto
that which is reported, but according unto that which ought to be. It is the
Apostles rule, 1 These. 5, 21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.
and our Saviors, John 7.24. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge
righteous judgment. 2. That as evil indeed and the appearance of evil are two
distinct things, so it is one thing to be ill reported of, and another thing to
be of evil report. Those things alone are of evil report, which are evil
indeed, and ought to be so reported of. But many things are ill reported of,
which only appears to be evil, and are not. Multa videntur, quae non sunt. So
the way of Christian religion it self, the way wherein Paul professed to
worship the God of his fathers, by his own confession, was called heresy,
Acts, 24.14. and, by the testimony of the Jews, was every where spoken
against, Acts 28, 22. yea our savior says to his disciples, Mat. 5.11.
Blessed are ye when men revile you, and shall say all manner of evil against
you falsely for sake. 3. That although in some enclosure there may be, and too
often is, not an appearance only of evil, but evil indeed, though some
enclosures have been indeed of evil report, that is, such as deserve to be evil
reported of; Yet all enclosures neither have been are, or need to be such. 4.
That even in this particular also, as much may be said of commonfields, as of
Enclosures; that in some at least, if not in all commonfields, there is not
only appearance of evil, but evil indeed, and that they are not only it
reported of, but likewise deserve to be so: as I think may sufficiently appear
by that, which has been said already. Is there any thing else in Master Moors
discourse, which you make question of?



Sect. 22.
Phil. Not that I remember now. But I shall thankfully acknowledge it a further
favor, if you will be pleased to answer my desire in one thing more.


Par. What may that be?


Phil. I hear that now Master Moor does intend to procure a Petition against
enclosure generally subscribed by the inhabitants of diverse Counties, to be
presented to the Parliament: which may peradventure give occasion to others to
procure an Anti-petition in behalf of enclosure subscribed in the same
Counties. By which means it may truly appear, who they are, and of what
condition, that stand for common fields, or for enclosure. In case such a
course should be taken, what form of Petition do you think fit to be
presented in behalf of enclosure?


Par. For that you shall pardon me, I will not presume to take upon me so
much, as to think of the form of such a Petition, but leave it to men of more
ability, and experience, better acquainted with such courses. And for the
matter of such a Petition, I have told you so much of my mind already, that I
need to say no more, either of what I think fit in such a case to be desired,
or of what may be urged as reason to induce to a concession of it. But
peradventure, if this discourse, which now you and I have had, should be known
to some of them, unto whom Mr. Moor presented his, they would think it more fit
for him to bestow his pains in seeking to reform the evils and abuses in common
fields, there where he is acquainted, then in soliciting strangers for a
Petition against Enclosure. Howsoever, although I grant not your request in
this, yet having already answered your desire in other things, give me leave
likewise to propose some questions unto you. I will not put you to the trouble
now to answer them, but if you know any that are adversaries to enclosure in
general, desire them, if they can, and will, to do it for you. First, does it
appear by any text in Scripture, or by the testimony of any Author whatsoever,
that ever any fields lay open, and were used in common, so as now they are in
some places of England (those inland Counties in particular, where enclosure
is now so much inveighed against) either in the land of Canaan, the lot of
Isreal's inheritance, or in any other country whatsoever? Secondly, does it
appear, that breaking down walls, or taking away hedges, whereby grounds
formerly enclosed, and kept several, may again be laid open, and used in
common, is any where in Scripture spoken of otherwise, then as an accursed
thing, either the fruit or punishment of sin? Thirdly, is there any
probability, that it can be any more unlawful to enclose hereafter any land
which is now in common, then it is necessary now, to lay open all the land,
which has been heretofore enclosed? Fourthly, is it true, or no, which has
been said by some, that it was a practice of policy in King William the
Conqueror, to have men's lands laid scattered, as they are in common fields, of
purpose to minister unto them so much occasion of contention with one another,
that they might not have opportunity and leisure to unite against him, in
consideration whereof it has been called the Conquerours curse?


I will say no more, but only trim up this homely discourse with a few fine
lines borrowed from him, in all whose writings wit and art do equally triumph
together; Mr. Fuller I mean, who in the second book and thirteenth chapter of
The holy State, concerning the good Landlord, amongst other things writes
thus. He detests and abhors all enclosure with depopulation. And, because this
may seem a matter of importance, we will break it into several Propositions.

1. Enclosure may be without depopulating. Infinite examples show this to be
true. But depopulation has cast a slander on Enclosure, which because often
done with it, people suspect it cannot be done without it.

2. Enclosure made without depopulating, is injurious unto none. I mean, if
proportionable allotments be made to the poor for their commonage, and free
and lease-holders have a considerable share with the Lord of the Manor.

3. Enclosure without depopulating is beneficial to private persons. Then have
they most power and comfort to improve their own parts, and for the time and
manner thereof may mold it to their own convenience. The Monarch of one Acre
will make more profit thereof, then he that has his share in forty in common.

4. Enclosure without depopulating is profitable to the Commonwealth. If
injurious to no private person, and profitable to them all, it must needs be
beneficial to the Commonwealth, which is but the summa totalis of sundry
persons as several figures. Besides if a Mathematician should count the wood in
the hedges, to what a mighty Forest would it amount? This underwood serves for
supplies to save timber from burning, otherwise our wooden walls in the water
must have been sent to the fire. Add to this the strength of an enclosed
country against a foreign Invasion. Hedges and counter hedges (having in number
what they want in height and depth) serve for barracadoes, and will stick as
birdlime in the wings of the Horse, and scotch the wheeling about of the Foot.
Small resistance will make the enemy to earn every mile of ground as he
marches. Object not, That Enclosure destroys Tillage, the staff of a country,
for it need not all be converted to Pasturage: Cain and Abel may very well
agree in the Commonwealth, the Plowman and Shepherd part the Enclosures
betwixt them.

5. Enclosure with Depopulation is a canker to the Commonwealth. It needs no
proof, woeful experience shows how it unhouses thousands of people, till
desperate need thrusts them on the Gallows. Long time had this land been sick
of a Pleurisy of people, if not let blood in the Western plantations.

6. Enclosure with depopulation endamageth the parties themselves: It Is a
Paradox, and yet a truth, that reason shows such enclosures to be gainful, and
experience proves them to be loss to the makers. It may be because God being
(...), a lover of mankind, and men's society, and having said unto then,
Multiply and increase, counts it an affront unto him that men depopulate;
whereas Bees daily swarm, men make the hives fewer. The Margin shall direct you
to the Author, that counts eleven Manors in Northamptonshire thus enclosed,
Mr. Benthams Christian conflict, page 322.
which Towns have vomited out (to use his own expression) and unburthened
themselves of their former desolating owners, and I think their posterity.


Lectori candido S. Daveniam subitis: non displicuisse meretur,
Qui prodesse magis, quam placuisse cupit.
Pardon this sudden work: who strives to profit,
More then to please, should not repent him of it.
FINIS.

