A LETTER From The LORD OF LECESTER, To the RIGHT HONORABLE, The EARL of
NORTHUMBERLAND; And by him comunicated to the House of PEERS.

Declaring the true causes of his long stay at Court, and with what earnest
desires he continually pressed his Majesty to assign his dispatch, which he
notwithstanding denied to grant.

Also how, and in what manner his Majesty took away the Horses, bought by the
Parliament, for the service of Ireland, and employed them to his own use.

Die Lunae, Sep. 26. 1642.

ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, that this Letter be forthwith Printed and
published.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.



Sep. 27. London Printed for John Wright. 1642.

A LETTER From the LORD OF LEICESTER, To the RIGHT HONORABLE The EARL of
NORTHVMBERLAND, And by him communicated to the House of PEERS.
My Lords,
THough I have written thrice to the Commissioners for the affairs of Ireland
since my coming from London to give them account of my stay at Court, and that
I have also written several Letters to some particular friends in hope that
thereby the truth might be known, and my self ^ightly understood. Yet because
these Letters peradventure may have miscarried, and lest I should incur the
censure of the Parliament for negligence or slacknesse in that service to which
I have been designed, I will truly and as briefly as I can relate to your
Lordship how I have behaved my self and if your Lordship please you may
Communicate it to the House of Peers, as in your judgment and favor to me you
shall think fit, and I hope it will appear that as I have bin very impatient
of this delay, so I have not wanted diligence in the Solicitation of my
dispatch,

When I came to York I told the King that I was come thither to receive his
Majesty's Commandments and Instructions for that employment: which he had done
me the honor to confer upon me, and I did humbly beseech him that I might not
be stayed at Court because the Parliament did desire my speedy repair into
Jreland, and that this service as I conceived did require it at least that some
governor (if I were not thought worthy of it) should be presently sent into
that Kingdom; the King told me he would think of it; but I must confess I
did not find his Majesty so ready to dispatch me as I hoped and expected. From
that time I did not fail to beseech his Majesty to send me away, upon every
opportunity I had of speaking to him, and I think there passed not a day, that
I did not desire the Secretaries of State and some other persons about the
King, to put his Majesty in mind of me, and to hasten my dismission: and
diverse times I made it my Petition to the King, that he would dispatch me, or
declare his intention that he would not let me go at all.

The King said my instructions should be drawn, and that he would give Order to
Master Secretary Nicholas to do it as speedily as he could, in expectation
whereof, I stayed about three weeks, till the King came from York, when his
Majesty appointed me to follow him to Nottingham, and there I should have my
expeditions, I obeyed his Maj. and came after him to this Town, where I have
attended ever since, perpetually soliciting to be dispatched, and beseeching
his Majesty that I might either go to my employment, or have his leave to
retire my self to my own house and private condition, that if he were
unwilling to trust me in an employment of so great importance, I did beseech
him that I might be no burden to his thoughts, and that he would be so
gracious as to let me know his resolution, for I conceived my self to be under
a heavy censure, both of the Parliament and of the whole Kingdom, whilst
possibly they might think it my fault that I was so long absent from that
charge which I had undertaken. It is to no purpose to tell you every passage,
but this I profess to your Lordship, that if it bad been to save the lives of
all my Friends, and of my self, I could not have done more for my dispatch,
nevertheless I have not been able to advance it one step, nor have I seen
any token to make me hope to have it quickly till this morning, when Master
Secretary Nicholas gave me a draught of my instructions to peruse, and so I
hope that between this and monday I shall have done that part, and I will do
the best I can in procuring some other things, without which I know not how I
shall be able to do any acceptable service in that Kingdom; your Lordship
knows I am a servant, and I could not run away if I would, or at least it had
been to little purpose though I should have adventured to do so undecent and
so undutifull an action. Therefore I hope it will be believed that I have not
been too blame.

Now with your Lordships leave, I shall trouble you with another particular,
wherein perhaps I suffer in the opinion of them that knew not what has passed,
though I be as innocent as a newborn Child, ^^y I have opposed it as much as
I had power to do, so the King being informed at York by some officious
persons, that there were certain draught horses provided to be sent into
Jreland, his Majesty told me that he must needs have them for his own use, I
did humbly beseech him not to take them away from his own service in Jreland,
for which they were bought, and in which they were to be impolyed, and besides
what I said my self, I made means by others to save the horses, so as I heard
no more of it till I came hither, but then his Majesty told me again, that he
must needs have those horses, and would have me send for them, I represented to
his Majesty the inconsiderablenesse of those few horses, and that the
Parliament might take it very ill, in regard that the horses were bought with
their money for the service of the poor Kingdom of Ireland, therefore I did
beseech him not to take them, or however that he would secure me from being an
instrument in that which I conceived would much hurt his affairs, and that I
being trusted by the Parliament, I could neither do it my self, nor consent
that any other should do that which was a breach of trust, and a great
diservice, even to his Majesty himself, notwithstanding this the King sent
unto me by Master Endimion Porter, and Sir George Hay, at several times to the
like purpose, but I returned the same answer, adding this also, that I could
not do it and be an honest man to his service, though it be true that the King
said he would restore the horses, or pay for them, but for all this, it pleased
his Majesty to employ one Erington that served me, and gave him a warrant to
fetch the horses, Erington told me of it, I forbad him as far as I could to do
it, and told him that if he did it, he must not look to have any thing more to
do with me for ever, and further that I made no doubt but the Parliament would
hang him for stealing their horses. This and more I said to Erington, in the
presence of James Battiere my Secretary, who will witness it, and conceiving it
to be an unjust thing in it self, displeasing to the Parliament, and hurtful
to the Kings service, I protested against it, though Erington said, his Master
had commanded him upon his allegiance to execute the warrant, but indeed I told
him that I did not believe him, nor could think that his Majesty would command
a Subject upon his allegiance to take away other men's Horses, this I thought
sufficient, but it seems I was deceived, for Erington without my consent or
knowledge, went from Nottingham toward Chester, as I heard afterward, and I
have never seen him since, nor heard from him, what he has done I do not
know, but I sent to Chester that the horses should be presently shipped away, and
I caused my Secretary to write to Master Hawkins, to take care that neither
Erington nor any body for him, should receive any more money of Master Loftus,
or his Deputy, to provide the rest of the horses, for as yet I think there
has bin only 1600 li. issued to buy 200. of the 600. horses allowed by the
Parliament, and of that 1600 li. I will do the best I can to get a good
account, whereof the Parliament God willing shall be informed with my best care
and diligence, truly my Lord I do the best I can to serve my Country, they that
wiser may do more, but of any thing contrary to the duty of an honest man, the
Parliament upon strict examination shall never find me guilty, for the
reputation of honesty and fidelity is (and I can say no more) as dear unto me,
as your esteeming me

Nottingham, Sep. 9. 1642. Your Lordships humble and and affectionate Servant,
LEICESTER.

FINIS.

