REPLIES Made to the ANTIQUERIES OF Thomas Lie, who writes himself Minister of
the Gospel at Chard. WHEREIN The Parish-Ministers, Call, and Maintenance, and
diverse other matters now in controversy, are handled and debated,

By H. L. a friend to the people of God called Quakers.

-- Yea, they are greedy dogs that can never have enough, and they are
shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their own way, every one for
his gain from his quarter, Isa. 56.11. For both Priest and Prophet are
profane; yea, in my house have I found their wickedness, says the Lord, Jer.
23.11. Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my people err,
that bite with their teeth and cry peace, and he that puts not into their
mouths they even prepare war against him: Therefore night shall be unto you
that ye shall not have a vision, and it shall be dark unto you that ye shall
not divine, and the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be
dark over them. Then shall the Seers be ashamed, and the Diviners confounded,
Mic. 3.5,6,7. London: Printed for Dan. White at the seven Stars in Paul's
Churchyard; 1657.

To the PARISH-TEACHERS OF ENGLAND.
Friends,
REfuse not to think upon that day wherein ye must give an account of your
doings; when not others tongues, but your own self-consciences shall be your
accusers and witnesses; when not a fallible and corrupt minded man, but God
that cannot err, shall be Judge. Then will you not have leave to plead, what
cunningly may be said; but shall what is really known, confess. Then will no
witty gloss deceive, nor nice distinction have place: Now will ye be pained as
a woman in travel, and paleness will spread over your faces.

But when especially shall come to your remembrance, those whom ye now do
scorn, vex, and bitterly persecute, the harmless holy Lambs of Christ: Then
alas! what will ye do? how will ye bear, sustain how can ye the presence
offered of such a thought as this?

Now surely will your hearts be pierced as with arrows, and the horrors of
death will clasp you round; and to dye ye shall wish, but death shall flee from
you.

Thus I say will it be with you except ye repent in time.

H. L.

Replies made to certain Antiquaeries propounded by Thomas Lie, who styles
himself Minister of the G^spel at Chard, etc.
THomas Lie. Answers returned to these Quaeres by one of those Ministers of the
Gospel who in scorn are called Parish-Teachers, etc.

Ans. The very beginning of this work is blemish't with an untruth, for I did
not so call them in scorn, but did purposely choose that word, as the which I
judged less apt to give them cause of distaste. Yet this is a very meet
foundation for that which is afterward built upon it, so like they be one to
other.

T.L. To be left at the house of T. B. of Ash, who is desired in the fear of
God seriously to read and meditate on 1 John 2.19. They went out from us,
because they were not of us, etc.

Ans. Yes truly they were of you, so long as (the earthly in them prevailing)
they could take Tithes, etc. sprinkle Infants, sing David's Psalms in meter and
wanton sounds: but after that the eye of their understandings was opened, and
they turned from these Vanities to worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth,
then went they out from you indeed, and ceased to be of your number, (being
taken into a better society) even in like sort, and for like cause as just Lot
with his family went out of wicked Sodom, then ready to be seized on with Gods
fiery vengeance, and wholly to be destroyed. And now do they stand as so many
witnesses against your false Call, and manifold deceits and evil practices;
what they know, what they felt in themselves, the same do they now against you
testify. Add hereunto this also, That whiles they were of you, they were as so
many Lillies among the Thorns for sundry good parts and virtues (which are
wanting in you whom they left.)

T.L. Whether those whom God has competently qualified with Ministerial
knowledge, 1 Timothy 4.6. and utterance, Col. 4.3. and who are solemnly set apart
to the Office of the Ministry with prayer, tasting, and imposition of hands,
Acts 4.23. 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5.22. may be justly charged to run when they are
not sent?

Answ. He that is in darkness himself, can badly see how for to turn others to
the light; and who knows not whither himself does go, an ill guide will he
certainly prove in showing the way to others. And who knows not God, Ipse
notipsum.
[himself] how can he well teach others to know him? And yet such are all they
that hate their brother; that sin; that are not in the New Covenant; and such
(for these causes) are you also, who are called of men both Ministers and
Masters; and this is even manifest to the children of light, and shall moreover
(in the progress of these Answers, as occasion is offered) be openly showed and
declared. What prayer and fasting had ye when ye were ordained Ministers? and
what imposition of hands? was not the prayer made by them whose very prayer was
an abomination to the Lord? and the fasting, was it not of them who fast for
strife and debate? Also, the hands imposed upon you then, were they of other
then a crimson color, as having been stained with the blood of the Saints and
Martyrs of Jesus? But to what purpose cited the Anti-querist all these
Scriptures? as though the usurpers of the late devised Ordination were men of
the same account, gifts and power, as were the holy Apostles, who were filled
with the Holy Ghost, who did and spoke as they were thereof moved, who had the
gift of tongue; and other miracles; these do we know, and own. But what are
your Ordainers? Or came at any time the voice of the holy spirit to them,
saying, Separate ye me such, or such a one for the work of the Ministry? Also,
what gift do they give by their laying on of hands, which is to be stirred up?
Is it the spirit of Power, of Love, and of a sound mind? yet such a spirit was
received by, or with the imposition of the Apostles hands, 2 Timothy 1.6,7. see
also Acts 8.17. and 19.6 Moreover the gift mentioned in the forecited 1 Timothy 4
14. was so given Timothy by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery: Are also your gifts (if any) thus received? Is the Spirit of
Prophecy assisting, or conversant in your feat of Ordination? Do your Elders
at any time declare the truth of their Office and Calling by healing of the
sick? Iam. 4.
And yet was this gift and faculty annexed, or incident to the Office of
Elders, who such were truly, and indeed. Now seeing these things are not so
with them, with what kind of impudence then, or rather blasphemous arrogance do
they yet assume and challenge to themselves the Name, when they have in no wise
the thing it self? but do lack not only all these causes that did concur to the
due creation thereof, but also all those virtues, gifts, and faculties that did
accompany and show themselves in the right administration or exercise of the
same; wherefore your Ordainers be like to certain Impostors that profess indeed
the true Art of Physic, but cannot give a proof thereof by healing any one
disease. Away then with this fasting, praying, hand-laying Ordination, which
was never yet followed nor attested by a miracle, or any other visible effect;
it is no better then that Mat. 21.19.
fig tree that bare indeed leaves, but no fruit at all.

Shortly after he mustereth up a number of things, and calls them, Doctrines by
your Party a^erted; to which I forbear to answer* he having not respectively
cited the Books and pages where they might be found: In the mean time it may
not seem good proof that such or such a thing is truth, because so says Thomas
Lie. Neither ought it to be charged on our friends for error or blasphemy if
they sometimes mistake the meaning of words, they being in this behalf
unlearned, as also most of Christ's Disciples and Ministers were, whiles the
learned Rabbles and Priests were bitter opposers and persecutors both of him
and them.

T L. Whether those godly Priests and Prophets that lived by a
standing-maintenance, are those that are accused by Micah 3.11. to teach for
hire, etc.

Answ. Here would ye methinks allude and compare your maintenance to that of
the godly Priests and Prophets of old time: First; Where in all the
Old Testament find you this Epithet [godly] standing so near the word [Priest?]
I am sure it is a very rare conjunction. Neither is your implied comparison a
whit better; theirs, that is, the Priests and Levites, was a voluntary
contribution, and of God himself ordained; yours a forcible exaction, and by
humane Law, if any; whereof more hereafter.

Joels Prophesies, I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, (says God) and
your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, etc. Also, Priscilla was one of
those two that instructed eloquent Apollos in the things of the Gospel; God
gave the word, and great was the company of the She-Preachers (as the Hebrew
reads it.) Psalm. 68.11.

T. L. Whether Christ has not ordained, That they that preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel; and that they which sow spiritual things should reap
carnal things, 1 Cor. 9.11,13,19.

Answ. To sue men at Law for tithes, to recover trebble damages, to distrain
men's goods, and take much more then is claimed, is this to live of the Gospel?
Did ever any Priest or Prophet in the times of the Law, or any Apostle or
Minister since the Gospel, so live either of the Law or Gospel? Or will ye else
grant us, That never any of Christ's Ministers (mentioned in the Scriptures) did
live of the Gospel? Is it not much rather to be said, That to live of the
Gospel is to live of such Alms and Contribution as men freely give to
Ministers, as such, and that without the awe of any outward co-action, terror
of trebble damages, or other peril?

Obj. We also live of such means as the Magistrate has freely allotted for our
maintenance.

Answ. If indeed the Magistrate (or other) shall give of his own private Goods
or Lands to what kind of Preachers soever for their livelihood, I have nothing
here to gainsay: But if he shall give them that which is another man's,
without his consent, to keep them in idleness, I see not how this can be
justified by the Scriptures, or by any sound reason. This also were repugnant
to Christ's own Otdinance, namely, That they which preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel; and to live of the Gospel is not to live of any enforced
maintenance, as above is shown; neither can you produce any one such Ordinance
of Christ, that the Magistrate ought to take such course for the livelihood of
his Ministers. Now the Ordinance above entreated, and to which the Scripture
cited in the Quaery has reference, we find in Luke 10.7,8. And in the same
house remain eating and drinking such things as they give, for the labourer is
worthy of his hire: And into whatsoever City ye enter, and they receive you,
eat such things as are set before you. From whence I note these things: 1. That
the Apostles were to eat such things only as were freely ministered to them. 2.
By them who should receive them. 3. Of their meat, who having a private and
proper right therein, should so give, or cause to be given: Now whether the men
of your quality do live after this manner and rule, let all sober men be
Judges. And albeit it were true that you sowed indeed to your hearers spiritual
things, yet should you not therefore reap their carnal by force, muchless take
them being reaped. Now what kind of Seed it is you sow, does by the Fruit
appear.

But if we have nothing allowed for our maintenance, but must depend of the
charity of our hearers, soon may we either beg or starve.

Ans. Wherefore if God so cloth the grass of the field, which to day is, and
to morrow is cast into the Oven, shall he not much more clothe you? O ye of
little faith! Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat, or what
shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed, for after all these things do
the Gentiles (or Heathen) seek Matthew. 6.30,31,32,33. Now if so great be Gods
care of ordinary Christians, how much more shall he provide for his Ministers,
who are as it were his Ambassadors, and have specially addicted themselves to
his service? Are you his choice Darlings unto bliss eternal, and will not yet
trust him with your bodies? Are you his Laborers, and will not yet rely on
him for your Wages, no, not though you have his own word for it, and solemn
Engagement? What greater infidelity then this has any of the Gentiles ever
bewrayed? Neither can you avoid the Edge of this Sword by saying, Your
petitioning the Magistrate, indenting with the people for maintenance, etc. is
no distrusting of God for your livelihood; forasmuch as the provision God makes
(and has made) for his Ministers Livelihood is by inclining men's hearts to
supply their necessities, and that out of their own private goods, and not out
of other men's, as elsewhere I have said.

T.L. Then do men preach for hire when they make hire their chiefest end, etc.

Answ. Yea; and if they make hire any end at all, do they truly preach for
hire; Neither are we justly charged to entrench on Gods prerogative in that we
do judge you to preach for hire; for certes that can be no part of Gods Secrets
which is manifest to all men: By your fruits are you known; Your suing to the
Magistrate or Patrons for the gift of the Benefice; your requiring of, and
contracting with those that would have you, for great yearly sums; and all this
before you settle any where to preach; also your late device of uniting of
BENEFICES, but especially your removings from place to place, even out of
New England and Scotland hither, for sake of a better call, and a louder; that
is to say, of a greater revenue; I say, all these things fully inform us what
is the end of your preaching, that we need not to pry into your hearts to know
that which is so openly written in your foreheads for every man to read.

T. L. Whether the Scripture-saying concerning them that preach the Gospel,
That he that ploweth should plow in hope; and that he that thresheth should he
made partaker of his hope, 1 Cor. 9,10 does not allow some respect to a
maintenance for preaching the Gospel.

Answ. Your plowing and your threshing are of one consideration with your
sowing abovesaid? And plainly, this place is not intended of any violent
maintenance, nor yet of a State or Public Exhibition for Ministers, as such,
which is the thing we oppose. And yet here would I not be thus understood, as
if I were against a competent Livelihood to be allowed out of the Public
even unto all men that be in want; this in the mean time not omitted, That
idle persons who are able to work, be compelled thereto. But how can you be
said to plovv or thresh in hope of a Livelihood, when as this is alvvaies the
first thing ye make sure of, and get possession of before ye settle to plovv or
thresh any where? Now that which is thus possessed or assured is no longer
capable of being hoped for: So your own Weapon recoils upon you, and wounds you.

Tho. Lie believes to the contrary) That either the Hireling abides in true
Doctrine, (Can an evil Tree bring forth good fruit?) or that he which preaches
freely brings the Doctrine that is false; especially, if besides his free
preaching he is sure to undergo for his doctrine sake all manner of despite
and persecution. The Hireling is the false shepherd, and how can it then be
hoped he will feed with Doctrine that is true?.

T. L. Whether it be not lawful for the people of God to dedicate part of their
Estates for the Worship and Service of God? And whether it be a sin for the
Preachers of the Gospel to receive that which is so dedicated? And whether it
smell not ranckly of an Ananias and Saphira-like spirit to withold that which
is so dedicated? Durst you charge us, That though we feed our selves, yet we
feed not the Flock?

Ans. Tell us who they were, or are, that thus have dedicated part of their
Estates, when, where, how, by what mean and instrument, and finally, for what
space of time. Then again, demonstrate that you are the men that have right to
receive it. If this query relate to any such [supposed] dedication made by our
Ancestors in times of Popery, I then oppose the Authority of a man well known
by hearsay, viz. John Wickliff, who in his Complaint to the King and
Parliament, (Printed together with other his works, Anno 1608.) Artic. 3. thus
says, Ah Lord Jesus! where this be reason to constrain the poor people to
find a worldly priest, etc. is pomp and pride, covetise, envy, gluttony,
drunkenesse, leachery, in simony and heresy, with fat horse and jolly, etc. Ah
Lord Jesu! since within few years men paid their tithes and offerings at their
own free will, etc. where it were lawful and needful that a worldly Priest
should destroy this holy and approved custom, constraining men to leave this
Freedom, etc. Also Tho. James, where he industriously maintains the Ministers
right to tithes, alleges yet no such dedication made by our Ancestors, but is
forced therein to fly to the Analogy of Scriptures (as he calls it) where he
also confesses, That the judgment of our Common-Lawyers was, That tyths were
not due to any particular Church, before the Council of Lateran, (which was yet
a very sandy foundation) but that men might bestow them where they would, Answ.
to 6. Obj. of Parsons. In the new Law the paying of the tenth part is by a Law
that is made by the Church, that is (by the Bishops, etc.) Lib. de fund. Legum.
Angl. But before I pass over Wickliffs testimony, I shall for his greater
Authority therein, note to the Reader these particulars: 1. He was a man
esteemed to be of great and profound learning. 2 Of eminent piety, truth, and
honesty. 3. He was himself a priest, and therefore not likely to have been
disposed to do or say any thing unjustly against the Commodity either of
himself, or the rest of his Order, but rather the contrary, and so is here as a
double witness against you. 4 He is acknowledged to have been a man well
skilled in the then Laws of England, and so its not likely that he erred
through ignorance. And fifty, he delivered this his to testimony in Complaint
to the King and Parliament, to whom no doubt he was (as became him) pasing
careful, and every way circumspect, not to offer any thing that might have
savor'd of defect, either in knowledge, or charity; or of any dishonest
affection, or private end.

Suitably to this Witness may it also now be said, that there is no ancient
law of this Nation, by which the called Ministers are enabled to su for
tithes etc in any Court of justice or equity that now is (the city of London
and liberties thereof excepted.)

And what then are they the better, if they have a Law, when they cannot by Law
attain the execution and benefit thereof; your suing in the Exchequer is
without all direction and countenance of Law; yea it is expressly See Star. An.
32. H. 8. C. 7. and An. 2 Edw. 6. C. 13.
against the Law; and also upon most false pretenses: As namely, when in your
Bills you suggest, that you are disenabled to pay your It may be 20. or 30. s.
a year.
tenths and A small sum paid at their first coming etc.
first fruits, because such or such a one, withholds from you the tithes etc.
when as many times it is but one man against whom you so complain: Many times
but a 10, or. 20 s. matter that you sue for; although you have both Glebe and
Augmentations besides, to very great values; and the rest of your Tithes be
quietly paid you: (if so I may use this word, where a thing is not due.)

Furthermore I demand by what good-right, or way of conveyance, could our
Ancestors give away the Lambs that should come of our sheep; the wool that
should grow on our flocks: our apples and such like things, which never were
theirs to give, nor then were not yet in being; neither were they capable of so
much as being certainly known, whether as to their kinds or quantities. Again,
its in the choice of the owner of the land, whether he will manure and occupy
it, or not: If he will not, then are there no Tithes payable for, or out of it,
which is a point considerable: For now, were it granted indeed to have been in
our Ancestors power to break, and transmit into posterity, the duty or
obligation of paying such Tithes, as are above specified; yet would it
notwithstanding remain in our own power still wholly to avoid all effect
thereof; and this without being liable to be punished or questioned by the
Clergy. Moreover, it is to be marked that our forefathers who were Papists did
little intend, when they gave their Tithes, that they should go and redound to
the maintenance, much less the luxury of Protestant Ministers (so called) who
with such cruel hatred and detestation they persecuted even to bitter deaths
and torments: And one of our great and ancient Laws says; Let the will of the
giver be observed.

But if the Querent respect to latter times; neither here do I know of any
effectual Law yet enforce for payment of Tithes. As for the late Ordinances of
Parliament tending hereto; its true, that they were able to make a great
noise, siting the Parliament: But when once the Parliament was dissolved,
they could not now longer lavvfully be discharged. So you see you are
disovvn'd both by Law and Gospel, (so called) as to your pretense about
Tithes: whether will ye next go, ye vvandring stars; whether will ye fly, ye
Clouds without water.

Now as concerning withholding of Tithes from parish Ministers, the forecited
John Wicklife seems not to have smelt any such Ananias and Saphira like
spirit in them that should so do: For thus he reasons in his complaint
aforecited: Therefore if our Prelates or other Priests whatever they be,
Blemished.
blecked by sacrifice of Maumetry, as with covetise, that is, openly sacrifice
of false Gods, and other great sins, as pride, Simony, Manquelling, Glotany,
Drunkenness and Lechery, by the same skill ( i.e. Reason) Tithes and offerings
should be withdrawn from them by Gods Law and be given to poor needy men at
ensample of rightful Toby: and therefore it is lawful to Parishioners to
withhold their Tithes for open fornication of the Curate, and turn them into
better use: And much more they may and ought to withdraw their Tithes for great
sins and open; as for Simony, that is Heresy (as Popes Law says;) and for
covetousness, that is, worshipping of Gods, as holy writ says, and for Pride,
envy, and Gluttony and drunkenness, since by Gods Law and man's Law God curses
such men's blessings and prayers. And a little after; the first, if Curates do
not their office in word and in ensample that God commands, then their
subjects ( i.e. their Parishioners) are not bound to pay them Tithes and
offerings; since the principal cause for which Tithes and offerings should be
paid is wanting, the paying of Tithes should cease. Moreover in the same
Article he thus determines: But suppose that such Parish Churches ( i.e.
Benefices) were Lawfully gotten; yet since they be superfluous to such men, the
Tithes and offerings should be given to poor needy men; as St. Ierom and the
Popes Law teaches. It seems, the Pope himself here to have been more modest,
and sober, then to pronounce so black a Judgment (as you in effect have done)
against them that withold their Tithes from the Parish Curates, or Ministers;
for he allows the Parishioners, when the Curate, or Priest, has superfluity
of liveings, to bestow their Tithes to other uses; and this without purpose of
ensnaring them in the guilt of an Ananias and Saphira-like sin; (or casting
them into prison.)

Concerning Moses respect to the recompense of reward; I say that between your
respect and his is a very great difference: His was to that which was eternal;
yours to that which is temporal: His was to Heavenly glory; yours to filthy
lucre: Neither is it to be thought, that Christ would have styled the false
shepherd, an Hireling, if his respect had been only to the recompense of
eternal life (as Moses's was) and not chiefly to the Tithe of Lamb and Wool,
etc. (as yours is.)

Jude condemns for running greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, were
not the same with those that perished in the gainsaying of Corah? whose
provoaking sin was, as some of yours is, an opposition of and rising up against
authority in Church and State.

An. If the querent had told us who this same were, that so rise up against
authority etc. He had done us some kindness; for such do we mark, and avoid.
Now who they be, and of what color that are opposers of Authority in State,
may easily be known: Read but King James's the second Epit.
BASILICON DORON, Doctor BAYLY'S History of John Calvin; but especialy the
relation of Christopher Love's Conspiracy; and thou shall find that there
lodges in this portion of men, a spirit of pride, stubbornness and rebellion,
not much inferior to the Jesuits: Hereunto also may be added the In his Disp.
with Rivet.
testimony of Hugo Grotius which is (as I remember) to this purpose, viz. There
is never any stir or rebellion in the Christian world, but they who be called
Ministers of the Gospel, are chief contrivers [or Promoters] thereof; Where was
your obediene to Authority then, when you not only refused to take the
Engagement, but preached aginst it, then you refused to observe days of public
Thanksgiving and Humiliation?
And this well know all Christian Princes. And that he did not here exclude the
men of your Judgment, may easily appear, if we but consider the man with whom
he has there to do, and to whose reproach he spoke it. Now as to them that be
called quakers, where and what opposition do they make against Authority, both
in Church and State? Is not this indeed Nero-like, who burnt the City of Rome,
and then laid the blame upon the Christians? Name (if you can) one man of our
way, that has done any wrong to others. Contrariwise, what kind of harm, and
injury have they not received from others, especialy from the men of your
Function? yet when did they render evil for evil; when did your cruelty
overcome their patience? Thrusting, Beating, Haleing, and almost death it self
do they many times endure at your hearers hands and fists; and that before your
very faces, and even in your Solemn Assemblies: yet who of them made ever any
resistance in such case? or did open his lips so much to revile? And is not
both this a right Christian spirit, and that such a one as the Devil himself
would be abasht to defend? But wherein do some of ours make opposition or rise
up against Authority etc.? Do they not ever come, when the Magistrate sends for
them? and go when he bids them go? or all the while they are before him (or
elsewhere) do they do him any harm in Body, Goods, or Name? Did they ever
break prison, or escape out of Custody? And for all those injuries they
received and suffered at the Magistrates hands (which for multitude cannot be
numbered) did they ever so much as seek for satisfaction or amends against him?
Now name ye unto us on the other hand, of all your Party one only man (if you
can) whom ye may dare to match and parallel with these men for true Christian
meekness and patience, so bearing all kind of wrongs, and as touching the
Magistrate and Authority for very friendliness and exact obedience: These of
all men else in the world can better take wrong then give it: Matthew. 18.22.
These are they alone that can forgive their brothers offenses, though again
and again repeated, though even unto seventy, times seven, they do at length
amount. In these finally, now after long death and utter oblivion, is the true
Christian spirit and perfect mind revived again, and unto mankind restored. No
marvel is it then if they hear like slanders and reproaches, and the same
entertainment do find and ^eel with the men of the world, as also their Lord
and Example, Christ Jesus, did before them; He before them was accused to have
a Devil, to break and subvert the Law and Religion; to have spoken blasphemy,
and many like crimes and misdemeanors to be guilty of: And the servant is not
above his Lord, neither must the Disciple expect to fare better then his Master
did before him: But it is like you intend their not putting off the hat, and
refusing to swear, to be this opposition and rising up against Authority, etc.
if so, then it seems by your account, that Mordecai also (a far better Jew than
any or your Sect are Christians) was guilty of like opposition and rising up
against Authority, for that he in like sort refused to bow to, or to rise
before, or to do any reverence at all to Haman, the next man in dignity and
degree to the King, who also had commanded Mordecai that he should reverence
Haman, and that under such a penalty as threatened death to no fewer then to all
the Jews in his Kingdom. But I ask, What is Authority the worse, or how is it
more empaired by a man's keeping on his Hat before the Magistrate, then if he
should put it off? Suppose that no man at all would put off his Hat to another,
show us now what mischief or harm would by this means befall Authority,
especially if they were in all things else equally obedient and conformable to
Authority, as are the people called Quakers. Again, what is Authority the worse
if men will not swear at all? Can civil Authority at no hand subsist without
men's yiedling obedience to the pride of man, and disobeying the Law of God? Now
so confident I am of our cause, that to your own very conscience I appeal to
say who they be that oppose and rise up against Authority both in Church and
State, whether your ^riends or ours: Yours at midday, and in open place doubt
not to strike, kick, pull, hale, drag and imprison men of rare innocence and of
excellent virtues, that unto them had done no violence; that do not provoke
them so much by any unseemly word or gesture; that being harmed of them, do no
harm to them again; finally, that expose themselves also both unto all these,
and yet farther sufferings for their souls good, who thus misuse them: And all
these things have your friends dove, without either Judge, Witness, or so much
as Accuser. Tell me now what is this to be deemed but a kind of Rebellion, and
broad-fac't Contempt against the Laws of this Nation, and the Magistrate
thereof? But what had these sufferers done? even this, Something being revealed
to them from the Lord, they spoke the same in all soberness, he that first
spoke having ended his speech, and this in obedience to the Lord, and according
to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 14.29 30,31. And again, are not they the very men
that oppose Authority in Christ's Church, who break his Laws and Commandments
daily? who drink down iniquity as an Ox drinks water, and glory in their
shame? and such be most of your friends and followers: Are these men like to be
such great friends unto, and supporters of the Churches Authority? Indeed,
without these your Synagogues cannot stand.

T.L. Where are those warlike preparations? where those conspiracies for
devouring of them that differ from us in Religion?

Ans. Read but the Relations of the late Wars in Scotland, and specially of
Christopher ^oves ^onspiracy, and there shall thou find where the warlike
preparations were: Read also the Law, or Bill, made and contrived by the
Assembly of Divines, so called, and by rhem recommended to the Parliament, and
there will thou find the conspiracies for devouring of them that differ from
you in Religion: Moreover what may we term those many Petitions that by the men
of your order were not long ago sent to the Parliament? surely the aim and
intent thereof was for devouring more persons than only James Nayler and his
Adherents; let the effects thereof be witness: Look also on the children that
since are born, and deny (if thou may) That a Priest was their Father? Who
can it doubt that shall have once viewed and noted well their faces? So full of
black lines they be, and signatures of malice; verily their sullen and
mischievous countenance will not bear to be guessed that they came and took
nature of other blood then which runs in your very veins: Pilate indeed
condemned Christ, but 'twere the Priesthood that laid the plot aforehand:
These, these were the men that not only as Authors, did devise shape, and
prescribe to others the means, method, and order of betraying and killing
Christ, but also as Actors themselves they did, and executed many things
against him: These ministered as it were to the Ship, in which was imbarqued
this so nefarious design, both Wind for the motion, and Art and Counsel for the
steerage thereof and conduct. Be they any whit better now, who bear the same
Name: Oh how much worse! Those, that is to say, the Jewish Priests, had for
their proceedings the countenance of a Law; these do all things [herein] i.e.
Instrument of Government.
contrary to the Law. Those killed not Jesus till above thirty years old; these
would have stifled him in the Womb. Those in one body of flesh only; these in
thousands. Those, for putting end to, and crossing their way of Worship; these
for very practicing and being what themselves profess and pretend to be: In
sum; Those, though they were the worst of all Jews, seem yet to have been much
better then they who would be counted the very best of Christians.

T. L. Whether it be a sin to endeavor to take the Foxes that spoil the Vines?
Cant. 2.15, etc. Ans. If all such Foxes were taken and kept in restraint, how
many of you Teachers would then be at liberty? The Grapes of Christ's Vines are
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, Gal.
4.12. Now where are the Foxes among us that spoil such Grapes as these? On the
other hand, What Congregation is there of yours in which are not plentiful
Litters of such Beasts to be found, except for their ravening nature they be
rather to be named Wolves then Foxes.



Tit. 1.11. 1 Timothy 4.1. (in the Query cited) did not mean that men's mouths
should be stopped with a hand, or a fist, as the manner is of your disciples to
do, with many a shrewd blow, and mischief besides: Neither meant he any outward
restraint or force whatsoever; for when were the false Teachers mouths so
stopped? it being as it were the lot and portion of false Teachers in all ages to
have the earthly powers of their side, and all manner of favor, encouragement,
and protection from the Magistrate, but they that will live godly in Christ
Jesus shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.2.

Ephesus, Rev. 2.2. use any outward violence toward them who said they were
Apostles, and were not, etc. (as neither do the people of God to the false
Apostles now-a-daies:) But by not bearing, here is meant not owning and
acknowledging, etc. for otherwise it is very absurd to imagine that this Angel
did beat, whip, stigmatize, pillor, fine, or imprison both the false Apostles
here meant, and the rest that were evil, for these also were not born, (as
aforesaid) which thing if you Teachers should once put in practice upon all
your evil hearers, (and I think you count your selves Angels) how many would
you then have left for an audience? And it is plain this Angel was not so much
in favor with the secular Powers, that he was able (if never so willing to
have effected such penalties on the false Apostles and evil men; the Angels
themselves in those times (as now also) being of all other most obnoxious to
the wrath and cruelty of the Civil Power, as credible Histories do assure us.

T. L. Whether it be a sin to hate the Whore, and to eat her flesh, etc. Rev.
17.16. Answ. It is not to be believed you love the Whore so ill as to eat her
flesh. Go curb thy lusts, vanquish thy affections, and bring them to submit to
the yoke of Christ, and then shall thou know the Whore here meant, and her
flesh; till then thou do but feed her of thy own flesh, instead of eating of
hers.

T.L. Whether we ought not to oppose Popery, though ( Jezzabel-like) it appears
under a specious paint.

Ans. Yea; but then ye must be self-opposers: I will not here say what a very
eminent man feared not to preach, and that before the Parliament, viz. That
Presbytery was in some respects worse then Popery it self: See Peter Sterry's
Sermon preached before the Parl. on occasion of the Victory obtained against
the Scots, etc.

T.L. Because many evildoers did not turn from their wickedness in the days
of the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, was therefore their Ministry
succesless? Isa. 53.3. Joh. 12.38. Romans 10.16.

Ans. If you Teachers had turned from their wickdness so many evildoers as
those here mentioned in this Quaery, (one of you with one of them compared) I
should grant indeed your Ministry not to have bin succesless, but rather of
great effect: But now if any man lists to know the success of your Ministry,
and so to judge of this question, let him but come into your Meetings, and
there let him speak as soberly as he can, or else be silent, with his hat on,
and soon shall he discern it may be with danger of life, or limb, what success
your Ministry has, or rather what spirit your hearers be baptizd into: Who
were they, I pray; and what kind of proof did they give of the Ministerial
success, who stirred up the people, and laid hands on Paul, being in the Temple,
crying out, Men of Israel help; This is the man that teaches all men every
where against the people, and the Law, and this Place; and farther, brought
Greeks also into the Temple, and has polluted this Holy Pla^e: And all the
City was moved, and the people ran together, and they took Paul, and drew him
out of the temple, etc. And as they went ab^ut to kill him, etc. And when they
saw the chief Captain and Soldiers, they left beating of Paul, etc. Acts
21.27,28, and so along. And yet if (a few Names only changed) this place were
rehearsed any where in England, would any man doubt it to be meant and truly
related of your Hearers.

T.L. Is it not an Argument of matchless pride in you, thus boldly to condemn
the whole generation of the just that either have lived, or do yet remain in
the Land of the living, for evil doers, and persons not turned from their
wickedness, etc.

Answ. I never so condemned the generation of the just, as this quaery implies;
for my quaery had reference only to your Hearers, whom when you shall have
proved to be the generation of the just, I shall then confess your Argument; in
the mean time I shall never doubt to account them for a wicked and adul^erous
generation, so long as I see them with the same ill conditions as had they whom
therefore the Scriptures have so termed.

Noble Martyrs and their fiery Chariots, as though you with them had any
affinity or conjunction? Verily you are the children of them who sent those
Martyrs in fiery Chariots to Heaven (to use your own words) though you can now
adorn and celebrate their memories as it were with garnished Sepulchers, as did
your forefathers also, the Scribes and Pharisees toward the holy Prophets,
whom yet in other bodies (as it were) they had most cruelly slain: Like as your
Ancestors did to those you call godly Martyrs, so do ye now to the Saints of
God so far as you have power; and that you extend not your cruelty to death it
self, is no thank to you; nor may it be interpreted as the voluntary bound of
your malice, as is well known.

T.L. Shall all those, etc. Ans. The way to heaven is but one. and a very
narrow one; it will at no hand receive the vast and spreading Compass of
Tithes, Glebe, Augmentations, together with the love of the world, and lusts of
the flesh; these in no wise can be gotten in, the waie's so strait.

T.L. Whether, supposing that Timothy followed the command of Paul, viz. in
meditating on that Word which he was to deliver, etc. as also, in studying in
the discharge of his Ministry, etc. he might therefore be justly charged to
speak visions of his own heart?

Answ. Timothy was an holy man, and holy men of God spoke as they were moved
by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. Also had Timothy received a gift which was
given by Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy
4.14. and the spirit of power, of love, and of a sound mind. Now dare ye say,
(even he that is most arrogant among ye) That such a gift, such a spirit as was
in Timothy, ye also have received? The Be can convert into honey such Juices
as she gathers from Flowers: The Spider contrariwise is said to turn the same
Juices into poison. Pick out the meaning.

Timothy when he cited the sayings of other holy men, well knevv what he
spoke, his understanding and spirit also being suitable and commensurate with
the things he said: Neither did his life give his Doctrine the lie.

T.L. Whether those that so far slight the Majesty of the great God and his
Divine Oracles, as upon pretext of immediate inspiration, to rush upon them
without premeditation, etc.

Answ. Suppose ye that they who spoke as the spirit gave them utterance, Acts
2.4. as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. in whom the Spirit of
the Father did speak without their taking thought how or what to speak, Matthew.
10.19,20. I say, did all these premeditate what they should say? and yet were
they not therefore slighters of the Majesty of the great God, and his Divine
Oracles, as impiouslie this quaery (by consequent) supposes them to have been.

Or think ye that they who were Christ's Ambassadors, did by long premeditation
and study engender and compose those Messages which as Christ's Ambassadors they
did deliver to others? The Woman that speaks not without taking thought
aforehand what and how to speak, here duty is (not to teach others, but her
self) to learn in silence. Go learn what this means.

quaery, concerning reading, quoting, and making use for edification the Books
of the Prophets, Apostles, etc. I answer, That he that is duly called to this
honor may take it; but unto you, thus says the Lord, What have ye to do to
take my word into your mouths while ye hate to be reformed? Or can ye, being
evil, speak good things? Or can ye prophecy when the Spirit of the Lord never
rests upon you. It was not for every one to bear the Ark that had a shoulder;
neither yet is it lawful to every one to say The Lord lives, although he have
a tongue, and a voluble one too, left he be found a transgressor even in
speaking that thing which is true, because not commanded, or nor meetly
qualified thereunto.

T. L. Whether these quaeries which you sent us were immediately inspired* or
rather, Whether there were not a conspiracy among you for the inventing and
penning of them? etc.

Ans. The Author of those quaeries pretended not himself to be a Minister of
the Gospel, but did direct them indeed to such as say they are Ministers, and
are not, but are found liars, Rev. 2.2. Neither was there any the least
conspiracy among us for inventing and penning those quaeries; neither were
they gleaned out of the Papers and Pamphlets of any seducing Leaders: Ye
thought we were such ones as your selves; but our ways are not like yours:

T.L. Whether it be an Argument of covetousness in an humble and orderly way,
to desire opportunity, liberty, countenance, and maintenance from a Christian
Magistrate for the comfortable discharge of our gifts and abilities?

Answ. A Christian Magistrate will readily give opportunity, liberty, and
countenance to the Ministers of Christ for to discharge their Ministerial gifts
and abilities, though by them never hereunto desired, (will he forbid or
restrain them) or else shall he be no Christian Magistrate, but rather an
Antichristian: And as for maintenance, that will he also provide them if their
heavenly Father (as Christ has promised) feed them not, Matthew: 6.26. But
friends, if ye seek first of all the kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof, (though you never in this humble and orderly way desire of the
Magistrate food and raiment) all these things shall be added unto you: But you
by not believing the promises of God, but seeking after all these things, do
openly bewray of what generation ye are, for after all these things do the
heathen seek, Mat. 6.32.

And here by the way I cannot but this observe, That you who with such open
confidence claim to your selves the glorious titles of Ministers and
Ambassadors of Christ, do yet reckon your selves it effect to be less regarded
of God then the very Fowls of the air, for these the heavenly Father (and not
the Magistrate) feeds, (and rayeth too) Matthew 6.26:

Here also I do require of you to show any one example in the New-Testement, or
any thing like an example, where the Ministers of Christ did ever once sue the
civil Magistrate for any of these things mentioned in the quaery: But hereof
more hereafter.

There is as much equity for a public maintenance to be allowed to the
Ministers of the Gospel now, as there was herotofore to the Tribe of Levi under
the Law.

Ans. 1: The Levites were forbidden to have any Inheritance among the people,
Numb. 18.25.

Ans. 2: The tithes under the Law were not only for the sustenance of the
Tribe of Levi, but also of the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, that
they might eat and be filled Deuteronomy. 26.12.13. Deuteronomy. 14.29 So that the
storehouse for Tithes mentioned Mal. 3 19. had far greater alliance and
resemblance to Hospitals and Almshouses, then to the called Ministers
Parsonage-Barnes, and Places of receipt etc.

An. 3. The man and his house were also to eat of the tithes or the proceed
thereof Deuteronomy. 14.26.

An. 4: The year of tything among the Jews was on the third year Deuteronomy. 26.12.
Deuteronomy. 14.28.

An. 5: The Owner of the tythable Lands was to lay up the tithes within his
gates Deuteronomy: 14:28: And not the Levite to carry them Captive into his own
private Barnes; as now the called Ministers use to do: from whence, as to the
relief of the stranger, the fatherless and the widow, (with many of them)
there is no more return, then is redemption out of Hell.

An: 6: The Ministers of the Gospel ought to be conformable as well in point of
maintenance as in other things, to the ordinances, rules, and examples,
touching this matter, which are contained in the new Testament, which also you
do pretend to be your rule of life, as well as of faith: Who so do otherwise,
albeit they be called and counted Ministers of Christ; yet is it manifest that
they serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies Phil. 3.19. where also
they may read their Doom: Whose end is destruction.

And here I shall admonish the Reader once for all, that for the most part in
this controversy touching Ministers maintenance, I thus have disputed with the
adversaries, as men yet personating true Ministers of Christ: certainly my
answers have equally concluded these also as to the maintenance here debated;
whereupon it follows that though all those Scriptures and reasons above
alleged were valid enough to warrant a state or public maintenance for
Christ's true Ministers; yet will they stand our adversaries in no stead at all,
but be unto them as broken staffs, until they also shall have proved
themselves to be such Ministers, which is a difficulty no less then for a
Camel to pass through a Needles eye.

T.L. Whether your Seducing Leaders may not be as justly charged to scent fat
houses at vast distances (even as far as Dan to Beersheba, from the North to
the West of England) as Ministers to scent fat Benefices?

Luke 10.7.8. Do your Leaders also do so too? No, yours are first to go in an
humble and orderly way to the Magistrate, for Warrant to collect and recover a
large Revenew, before you espouse your gifts and abilities to any particular
Flock (as you cal't:) It Is muck makes marriage with you.

Think ye in your consciences, that our Leaders, as you call them, would have
relinquished their own Countries Habitations, Kindreds, Callings, Estates, with
many other things dear to men; for to travel so many miles and with so many
difficulties to conflict, such and so many scoffs, taunts, stripes, hurly
burlyes, and tumults; stocks, questionings, perils, and finally both long and
grievous imprisonments, voluntarily to undergo and endure, and all for sake of
a Fat house, or the like? sure, ye cannot so think; say what ye will. Although,
(to retort this matter upon your selves) it be not only thought, but even
certainly known; that whole swarms of the men of your faculty, have come out of
Scotland and New England hither, for sake of our larger Benefices; though its
like enough they felt no great want (certainly not such a pinching one, as to
make them start so great way,) in the places where they formerly resided.

But how much the men of your Coat, do prefer their own outward ease, before
the service of Christ, is manifest by this; that on every light occasion,
untouched, unharm'd, they cross the Seas, and away for another Land; wherein
they seem one degree (at least) worse then the Hireling Shepherds in John
10.12. for he first saw the Wolf coming ere he left the sheep and fled;
whereas your fellow shepherds have away, when as there is no danger in view; so
far they are from laying down their lives for their sheep, which yet is the
part and property of a good shepherd, ( John 10.11.) Also what kind of
shepherds were they, and what title of honor deserve they for their courage who
in the late wars, so unanimously left their flocks, and fled, not once
adventuring to sustain the least hazard, either for them, or with them: Are not
these rather Cowards then shepherds; and Mercenaries rather then Volunteers?
And yet of this sort consist your holy godly Orthodox Ministers, and renowned
Champions for truth (miscalled so.)



An^ Even those of your order, that thus are solicited to accept your
particular Flocks, I trow they be not such yet, as be content with the Lamb and
wool, only of those sheep, which (as in recompense of their Pastors care) are
willing to give them these things; I believe their hands are of yet a far wider
graspe: Do not even these your choice ones, your rare ones, your men for
ostentation, Reap where they never Sowed? Spoil they not of their fleeces,
these sheep also which never were accounted as of their Fold; but always
rejected their care, and overseership?

Neither did the holy Ghost make such men overseers; but their own, and their
followers wills, and deceit.



An. Do ye not much more frequently go from greater to lesser congregations
where ^he profits yet be greater? for who is there now so blind among us that
sees not clearly, that all such your motions and trudgings from Parish to
Parish do rest always, as in their center, in places of larger revenue, then
those you last left? Have you the boldness to deny it? I cite for witnesses
against you, not hundreds, nor thousands, but well near all the Parishes in
England: As for those Benefices, that are poor and having little Dowry; are
they not like a widow forsaken? Have these their doors ever knocked at by you?
exce^ perhaps at a Harvest time, or other good season, it be for your profitt
(not for Gods glory, and good of souls) to visit them; truly you can pass by
such (how sick and ill soever) as the Priest and the Levite (your Ancestors)
did by the wounded man going to Jericho. So that it may seem you account all
mean Beneficed Parishes to be but flocks of Reprobates; and so not to be for
the Glory of God to endeavor their salvation; but rather to promote their
damnation; to make for the Glory of his justice: (as you sometimes speak.)

T. L. Whether those Ministers at least must not by your selves be pronounced
not covetous, that have either gone

An. How many such Phaenix's can ye number among you? How many such black
Swans? May not all of your Tribe that be such, be conveniently covered under a
Bushel, and this without lack of room? It may have been indeed, that
heretofore in the times when tithes were in danger to be abolished, some of
your brethren, being pretty well beloved of the Parishes where they dwelt,
thought it no part of prudence to change a certainty for an uncertainty, though
of greater value for the present: So still here was cherisht the plant of
covetousness, though in a walled Garden.

these men pretend it to be) why do he yet call it a slander, if one affirm it
of them? for slanders are of things evil in their nature, and not of things
Lawful to be done: This is therefore no less then an implicit confession, that
who so of the called Ministers, thus indent for maintenance, they do committ
that which is evil; seeing if this matter be charged on another, that has not
don it, it is by them called a slander; That is, an evil matter falsely charged.]

Further he says -- When as it is well known many of them live on a free
contribution [An. Call ye not that a free contribution which men yield unto you
for fear of the Law, and of trebble damages etc. When they give you that, which
if they refuse, ye are ready to take by force to their great loss and trouble
to boot: Such a free contribution as this, is, when a true man delivers his
purse for fear of the sword or Pistol.]

Again says he -- And others very many preach hundreds of Lectures gratis.
etc. An. And how many hundreds be there among you, that take a stipend, or
other reward for their Lectures? But who sees not this business of Lecturing,
is even become with many of you Preachers as an occasion of merry meetings, and
a kind of recreation? (To omit other ends yet worse then these:) Most commonly
the Lecture is but the second edition of a Sermon formerly preached, and for
which ye were richly paid; and so ye might well afford to give it away another
time gratis.

Tim. 5 8. [An. If ye be of the flock of Christ; much more if ye be his
shepherds (as you pretend to be) this prudent care is needeless; for the
Heavenly Father provides for such; see before: Neither is it lawful for you to
shun this point of Infidelity, by taking, or begging other men's estates to
provide-for your own, no more then it is for a man being in want to take or
beg an others goods of him that cannot justly give them.] 'It follows -- and
fear of giving occasion of offense, if really forced to remove forwant of a
competent maintenance [An. Do we any where read such sentences in the
Scriptures? Here has the querist in effect confessed, that their Removals (at
least sometimes) is for want of a competent maintenance: What Is that? let us be
informed: Whom of these Removers shall we take, as having defined unto us what,
and how much his competent maintenance is? Some have removed from 50 l. 60 l.
70 l. 80 l. 100 l. 150 l. 200 l. by the year, to places of greater profit. Now
say that 80 l per Annum is a competent maintenance (and I trust ye will not
deny it) all such then, as having this maintenance or a greater, did
nevertheless give ear to the call of a louder Benefice, must needs be
condemned of Avarice, love of filthy lucre, and that by Judgment not to be
reversed, no, not in your own Court of conscience; so corrupt and partial as it
is: Now how many such there have been, is not my purpose here to recount; nor
scarce a great Volume would suffice to contain them; nor are their names worthy
even to be remembered; so many and so bad they be: Then says he; 'As also the
fear of tempting God instead of trusting him, Matthew 4.7. [An. There Is no fear
at all of Incurring Gods wrath by thus tempting of him; which were indeed but
to confess his truth, and honesty, by trusting to his own promise; see before:
But what makes this Scripture to the purpose? Did Christ in that place forbid
you, or the Ministers of the Gospel, (while he reproved the Devil) to depend
upon God for livelihood?]

It follows -- 'Are not sufficient grounds to induce some Ministers to
procure a promise of a Gospel livelihood, [An. A Gospel livelihood is, having
food and raiment, to be therewith content; not to have our lusts supplied to
all excess, and luxury, both in food and raiment. But where do we find this
kind of bargaining for Ministers mantenance in the Scriptures? Indeed we do
read such a thing in Micah. 2.11. The Priests thereof teach for hire, and the
Prophets thereof Divine for money etc. Also, we have such Teachers foretold in
2. Pet. 2.1.2.3. But there were also false Prophets among the people even as
there shall be false Teachers among you, Who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies etc. and through covetousness shall they, with fained words, make
merchandise of you: and in ver. 14. Having eyes full of Adultery, and that
cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls: an heart they have [Mark what
a one it is;] exercised with covetous practices; cursed children which have
forsaken the right way, and are gone astray following the way of Balaam the son
of Bosor, etc. This Balaam is he that prophesied for gifts and rewards: See
also Iudes Epistle; and there may thou see these Mercenary Teachers limmed as
it were in a Prophetical picture or Idea, when as yet they were rather seen
then felt. But to the query briefly thus I answer; If ye be Ministers of man,
and not of Christ, its then consentaneous, that from man ye do also procure a
promise for maintenance, and not that ye rely on God in this behalf; seeing
his promise and care hereabout respects true Ministers, and not such as ye
are. But be it supposed, that ye should procure no such promise for your
maintenance: Suppose all forced maintenance were taken a way, Do you believe
notwithstanding, that God and the people would administer to you a competent
maintenance? If you do so believe, then what need of this indenting, and
procuring of promise for such competent maintenance; together with your suits
to the Magistrate and others? (For none of these things did Christ's Ministers
of old time practice, and yet had they food and raiment even to contentment.)
If you do not believe it, but do doubt thereof, then do you clearly manifest
that you esteem your selves to be less regarded both of God and man, then
those you count and call seducing Leaders, and Teachers of Heresy, Blasphemy,
etc. for all such, you see, have a competent maintenance, and yet do they never
indent, or use other such means to obtain it, as you do: Neither yet are they
Murmerers and Complainers as both the false Teachers in Jude 16. and most of
you are, about things pertaining to maintenance; Will ye deny it? I appeal to
the Court of Exchequer (which yet is your greatest friend) I appeal to all the
Parishes (almost) in England, If such ye be not. And for a conclusion of this
Answer, I do seriously commend unto you (ye indenting Covenanting Preachers)
the reading of Matthew. 26. especially the 15. verse. And [Judas] said unto them,
What will ye give me? etc. and they Covenanted with him for thirty pieces of
Silver. Is not here your very type? Can any two things be more alike, than
Judas and you? What will ye gi^e me (says he)? Acknowledge ye not this
language? And they covenanted with him, etc. And is not this your For
Covenanting is a mutual or reciprocal Action.
practice also? Not one Egg more like another.

T.L. Whether the Apostles did ever forbid all Suits before Christians? 1 Cor.
6.1,2,3,4,5.

Answ. By the place here cited, it appears, That the Apostle reprehended, and
that severely, the Corinthians, for going to Law before the unjust and
unbeleevers; advising them in effect to refer their Controversies unto the
Judgment of the Saints and Christian Brethren. Now the Christians in those
times, as is well known, were not Judges of Civil Courts, and so had not power
to enforce the execution of their Judgment (if at any time they had judged of
Controversies) or otherwise to punish the Contemners thereof. Had you also sued
in such manner, and with like event, we should then have little to say against
you, touching this point. And yet here does the Apostle allow no better event,
and fruit of such Judgments, than is above employed: For had he been otherwise
minded, I see no reason why he should have so grievously taxed these
Corinthians. But how sure a Patron the same Paul is to your unreasonable Suits
at Law; If ye list to know, read but the 9th verse of the fore-quoted Chapter:
N^w therefore there is utterly a fault among ye, because ye go to Law one with
another: Why do ye not rather take wrong? Why do ye not rather suffer your
selves to be defrauded? Oh, how is this Scripture, so full of right Christian
Spirit, by men of your Trade contemned! Do you never go to Law, but before the
Saints, as Paul here advises? Do you never Sue before the unjust, which Paul
here disswadeth: Think ye it was suitable to this mind of Paul, to approve your
many and costly Suits, with your trebble Damages to boot; especially your title
to the thing Demanded, and other circumstances being withal considered? Yea,
rather with what indignation and bitterness, would he have pronounced, There Is
utterly a fault amongst you? See more in the next Section.

T.L. Whether Ministers may not make use of one Ordinance of God for the
upholding of another, viz. Ministers Maintenance? 1 Cor. 9.14.

Answ. You are first of all to prove that you are that, whereof you deceitfully
vaunt your selves, viz. Christ's true Ministers: In the mean time you do but
strutt and swagger under a false Name, like as sometimes vile Scenicks do in a
Princes robe and Person. To your Query therefore I give this Answer; If Christ's
true Ministers ye be not, then it follows that your Ministry is not at all to
be upheld, but rather cast down. But if ye be such; then again it is evident,
That never had these need (that I read, or know) to make use of the Magistracy
for their maintenance; at least not such a maintenance as is here disputed. To
the Scripture cited in the Query, I Answer; That the livelihood there meant,
was the voluntary Contribution of Believers (as I have showed before) and no
forced maintenance, (as you would have it.) But it is apparent John Wickliffe
(whom also I have formerly alleged) was of quite another mind and judgment
than you are: For thus he says, [ Art. 3. Complaint] Of which authority it is
plain and open, That the things that be due to Priests, should not be asked by
Strength, by Violence, or by Cursing; but be given freely without Exaction or
Constraining. And a little after; Also Christ with his Apostles lived most poor
life as it is known by all the process of the Gospel, Nothing Challenging by
Exaction, nor Constraining; but lived simply and scarcely enough of Alms freely
and wilfully given: Therefore they that pretend themselves to be principal
Followers of Christ's steps, should live and walk as Christ did, and so live
full poor life, taking of things freely given, as much as need is. Doubtless
you think it foul scorn, and much beneath your worth, to follow this wholesome
advice of Wickliffe, albeit it be grounded on, and exactly conform both to the
Commands, and Examples of Christ, and all his Apostles.

T.L. Whether a Child may not run, when abused, for redress, to his Nursing
Father? Isa. 49.23.

Answ. Think ye that the Magistrate, is there called Nursing Father, because of
his feeding the Ministers of Christ, or others, with earthly food? And yet it is
not long since, that ye called him Dry Nurse; namely, when he diverted from
your mouths (then gaping wide to receive it) his milk of Bishops, and Dean and
Chapters Lands.

T.L. Whether the Tenth part of the Increase be not by the Law as due to
Ministers, as the Nine parts remaining to the Possessor?

Answ. Your Right to the Tenth of the Increase of Peoples Goods, is it not one
and the same with the Right of the late Monopolists, which they had to their
Pensions out of Pins, Soap, etc? For this did they beg of the Magistrate; and
by what other way do you come by your Right to the Tenth of Increase? The
People do buy their Lands, Sheep, etc. for money, at reasonable Estimations;
and that of the right and private Owner: Do you in like manner acquire your
Right to the Tenth of Increase? The Title you get by Begging, what is it else
but a Beggarly Right?

T. L. Whether Ministers, when all peaceable means; etc?

Answ. When ye shall have proved your selves to have as good Propriety in
Tithes, as other men have in their Estates, we shall grant you then, That you
may as justly appeal also to the Christian Magistrate, for the obtaining
thereof, as any other man for the procuring of his demands.

T. L. Whether your decrying of trebble Damages, etc?

Answ. It Is well for the false Prophet, he has the Beast to ride on: But tell
us of that Magistrate that gave you trebble Damages, or other Mulcts, that ye
now can lawfully sue for in any Court that is extant? What one Magistrate for
you did, i.e. Took away the Ecclesiastical Courts; wherein alone it was lawful
to sue for Tithes.
another has undone; as I formerly noted.

T.L. Whether it be not covetousness, and no conscience to refuse to pay that,
which is due, and unjustly to detain that which is neither yours, nor was your
Fathers by Gift or Purchase?

Answ. If any man there be that so does, far be it from me to defend him. But
what say ye to them, that bought All their Closes, Grounds, Tenements, etc. and
this without all exception of the Tith, or any other part? You Will say perhaps,
he did not buy the Tenth of the Corn, Hay, etc. Answ. No more did he buy the
ninth, seventh, sixth, or other part, viz. in words express: Is it lawful
thereupon for another to go to the Magistrate, and beg all these parts of the
increase of my land; or could the Magistrate justify such a Gift? Although it
may seem in this matter, ye count all Fish that comes to your Net. The
Magistrate gives; Ergo, you may take, be it right or wrong, you pass not for
that Which is language more befitting Court-parasites, and filching
Monopolists, than such as go under the name (a great way you are beneath it) of
Ministers of Christ.

T.L. Whether Ananias and Sapphira, Acts. 5.1,2. and those mentioned Mal.
3.8,9. had not as great reason to pretend Conscience, as those that withold
others due?

Answ. 1. When you also in like manner can avenge your cause on them that
withold your Tithes (so called) as Peter there punished the sin of Ananias
and Sapphira; men will lay the Tithes at your feet, and never stand out to a
trial with you.

Answ. 2. We grant we are as well like Ananias and Sapphira, as you are like
Peter.

Answ. 3. If our Case be the same with Ananias and Sapphira's, your Right is
then extended, not now to the tenth, but or the whole price of our Possessions:
and so we shall be but as your Alms-men, or Tenants by courtesy, for the other
Nine parts we keep.

T.L. If by Petitioning you mean the late Petition handed in this County; we
ask, Whether that abominable Blasphemer, Nayler, and his adherents, etc?

Answ. It Is notorious that those your Petitions, embraced a far greater number,
than Nayler and his adherents, who were not above six or seven (as I remember:)
Yea, surely your Petitions were as large (at least in aim and vote) as Hamans
Decree, Esther 3.13. namely, for destroying the whole Race of the Jews; as
before I have noted. And if even they be blasphemers, who say they are Jews,
and are not, Rev. 2.9. then are not they abominable blasphemers, who say they
are Christ's Ministers and Ambassadors, and are not, but are rather so many
Chieftains in the Synagogue of Satan? Yet did we never Petition the Magistrate
against you, nor wish you any evil; but rather desire that with persecuting,
and blasphemous Saul, ye may be converted, and your sins forgiven. So
fulfilling the Commands of Christ, who says, Bless them that curse you, do
good to them that hate you, pray for them that despightfully use you, and
persecute you.

T.L. Whether Ministers, or your Selves, occasioned the Tumults and
incivilities (if there were any) at the time of your Meeting at Aish?

Answ. If there were any! Why, what plainner Tumult could have been made; and
what greater incivilities could have been committed, than were at the Meeting
at Aish? Thrusting, pushing, pulling, haling, renting of clothes; throwing of
apples, dirt, sticks: hooting, shouting, loud laughters, scoffing, jearing,
etc. Do not, I say, all these amount to a Tumult? Any one of these things in
your Meetings would be counted occasion enough for a tumult. And when did this
savage uproar begin? When those called Ministers came to the Meeting. How, and
with whom did they come? They came with a multitude of rude Fellows, having
Corn-pikes, clubs, staves, even in like manner, and with like company, and
almost like armed, as Judas their elder brother, came against Christ to betray
him, Matthew. 26.14,15.47. But I hear the Relation it self is to be Printed; to
which I refer the Reader.

T. L. Whether your usual course of coming into our Assemblies, and railing
at, and reviling at Ministers without the least provocation, be not an occasion
of Tumults?

Answ. It was not railing, nor reviling, when the true Prophets called the
false Teachers, Preachers for hire; Diviners for money; Dumb dogs; Greedy dogs;
Idol shepherds; Ravening Wolves, and the like. And what occasion is it of
Tumults (in a Christian; yea, in a civil, or reasonable Congregation) if these
or the like names be now also given, to those, to whom the same do no less
truly belong; and that through the movings and impulse of the same holy Spirit,
as led the said Prophets to do so before? But a very small matter will put your
Disciples into a tumult, who never were in any good order: And a slight offense
will them provoke, who are the children of wrath, and have fingers ever itching
to shed blood; the blood of the innocent.

T.L. He quaeries, Whether when the Scriptures speak of the Saints being
Perfect, they be not to be meant of the last day?

Answ. Ye do prudently, Friends, to adjourn Perfection unto the very last day;
as being conscious to your own selves, The Womb of your Ministry is too base
and barren a thing, to bear and bring forth so goodly fruit. But if the Saints
may be perfect on the last day, why not as well a day, a month, a year before?
Your Case is even thus; You are convinced by a many plain Scripture, That the
Saints are per^ect, (as anon I shall also prove) Now because the Scholars of
your School (with the Masters and all) are at so great distance from perfection
(though they be ever learning, 2 Timothy 3.7.) They have invented this Artifice to
salve the matter; No man, say they, is perfect but when he is a dying, (as some)
or till the last day (as others say.) And now do they think they have got a
sure shield, for to ward off all Assaults of them, who may charge them with
sin, and imperfection: perfection: But this shield is too narrow for their
turn, as may appear by the Scriptures ensuing: 1 To be perfect is one of Gods
Commandments, Matthew. 5.48. And the Commandments of God are not grievous, 1 John
5:3: If not grievous, then not impossible; seeing even that which is grievous,
is yet possible to be done: And he that keeps Gods Commandments (which may be
done) the same is perfect. 2 Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I c^mmand
^ou, Joh. 15 14: The Saints are Christ's friends; and therefore do they
whatsoever Christ commands them: and they that so do are perfect. 3 The
Saints are Gods workmanship, Ephesians: 2:10: But the workmanship of God perfect,
Deuteronomy: 32:9: 4 He that neither sins, nor can sin, is perfect: But such are
they that are born of God, 1 John: 3:9: 1 John: 5:18: 5 He (Christ) gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, etc. for the perfecting of
the Saints, Ephesians: 4:12:13: Did not those Apostles, Prophets, etc. attain the end
for which they were given? Or else did their Ministry suspend its operation
and effect until the last day? 6 It Is possible for the Saints to come unto a
perfect man; to the measure of the stature of Christ's fullness, Ephesians: 4:13,14:
And they that be here, be surely perfect. Now that these things are all
attainable in this life; and that also many years before the hour of death, is
evident by what is immediately subjoyned, viz. That we henceforth be no more
Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine by
the slight of men, etc. It Is said [that henceforth] that is, From the time of
their being a perfect man and of being come to the measure of the stature of
Christ's fullness; else, will the sense be broken, jarring, and altogether
incoherent. And surely all those things that follow [Henceforth] do imply a
much larger time, than the last day. Had Paul here been of the Querents mind,
That perfection comes not till the last day, would he have said, That
henceforth; that is, That after the Saints be perfect, and be come to the
measure of Christ's stature, They be no more children tossed too and fro etc.
For what space, time, or danger or possibility, could he then have conceived,
of their being tossed too and fro with every wind of Doctrine etc. This is,
after the last day: on which day the querents supposes that the Saints are to
be made perfect; and not before. 7. If any man offend not in word, the same is
a perfect man Iam: 3:2: Now it is impossible that there should be such men, as
James here describes. Or did he here only propose the Idaea or Pattern of a
perfect man, which never yet had, nor never was to have actual being? This
were rather to make him a Platonic Philosopher, then one of Christ's faithful
Ministers: and a nugatory speculator rather, then a teacher of things to be
done. 8. Now the God of peace -- make you perfect in good works to do his will
Heb: 13:20:21: If we be not made perfect till the last day, what space of time
then remains, wherein, after one is perfect, he may do the will of God. Think
ye that this prayer regards only the last day? Was it needful to pray that
believers might be made perfect in good works to do Gods will on the last day?
Would you not have Gods will to be done before that day? See 2 Cor: 13.1.
Finally brethren farewell; be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live
in peace etc: Are all these things not attainable before the last day? Or are
some before; and some (or one) not till then? 9: Mark the perfect man, behold
the upright, for the end of that man is peace Psalm. 37:37. Do these words so
sound as if David held no man perfect until the last day? Is not the peaceable
end, here spoken of, the effect or concomitant of perfection? But if no man be
perfect till the last day what sense can be gathered from these words? What end
is the perfect man to have at, or after the last day? And who is then to mark
it? 10. Heb: 7.19: For the Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a
better hope did etc: He does not say shall; and that at the last day: Again
Heb. 10.14. For by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified. They therefore that are sanctified, are likewise Perfected: But men
are sanctified before the last day. Also Heb. 12.22.23. But ye are come unto
Mount Sion etc. and to the spirits of just men made perfect etc. Now how could
the Saints be then come to the spirits of just men made perfect, If it be true,
that none be made perfect till the last day.

11. Let us therefore as many as be Prefect be thus minded Phil. 3.15. Now if
neither Paul himself, nor any other were at this time perfect, this
exhortation were void of all sense and reason: For if none were then perfect
whom did he then exhort? 12. Howbeit we speak Wisdom among them that are
perfect, 1. Cor. 2.6. Now if none can be perfect till the last day, then will
it necessarily follow, that either Paul spoke Wisdom among them that were not
perfect, or else among none at all. But both these are false. Objection: Paul
himself professes that he was not made perfect Philip. 3.12.13. Ans. The
perfection there spoken of, is to be understood of a certain degree or measure
of perfection, which Paul at that time had not attained unto; and not of
perfection, simply considered: Otherwise this place should contradict other
both many and evident Scriptures; yet does the same Paul say in the following
words: But I follow after if that I may apprehend that for which also I am
apprehended of Christ: and in Verse 14. He says, I press toward the mark etc.
Now did he follow after, and press toward this degree of perfection in faith,
or not in faith? If in faith, then did he believe it possible to be attained
unto. See more of this point hereafter.

13. Finally, the Scriptures give this testimony of Noah, Job, and others, that
they were perfect men, Genesis 6.9. Job 1.8. and this was long time ago.


T. L. Whether can you rationally expect that our hearers should be more
perfect then the eleven Apostles. [ Answ. I grant indeed 'twere very absurd to
expect your Hearers should be perfect while they are under such imperfect
Teachers.] Those stars of the highest magnitude in the Church. [ Answ. And yet
the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees could not abide them, but sought to pluck
them out of their Firmament.] Whom yet Christ upbraideth with unbelief and
hardness of heart. [ Answ. There is a childhood in grace, they had not as yet
received the Promise of the Father, which was the gift of the Spirit; neither
were their understandings yet opened, etc. Ioh. 15 26. and 20.22. Luke 24
45,49. Act. 2.1,2,3,4.

Ob. Eccles. 7.20. James 3.2. 1 John 1.8. Answ. I do not deny but he that is a
Saint may commit sin; but ye the that abides in Christ sins not: Resist the
Devil and he will fly; Here I demand whether it be possible to resist the
devil and all other temptations to sin? If thou say it is possible at all times
so to resist; then it follows, That a Saint may forbear at all times from
sinning, and so never sin: But if thou say its impossible so to resist, and
that he must needs give way to temptations, and so commit sin, Then is this not
to be counted a sin which thus is not willingly committed, but as an enforced
passion, and is of the same account with a Rape, which a woman may suffer
without any guilt of sin.

T.L. Whether, though none of our Hearers in this life either are, or can be
free from the relics and remainders of sin, To. 7.23,24. yet whether many of
them are not perfectly freed from the condemnation of sin, Rom 8:1: and 33,34.
yea, and so far from the dominion and power of sin, Rom: 6:14: that though sin
be in them, yet they are not in sin? but that we may comfortably believe that
testimony of them which the Scripture gives of Job, Job 1:1. That they fear
God and eschew evil? And that notwithstanding their human frailties and
infirmities, yet nevertheless their hearts, as the heart of Asa was, are
perfect all their days, 2. Chron. 15.17. so perfect as to be sincere and
upright?

Answ. Concerning the righteousness and perfection of your Hearers; I Answer:
That by their fruits they are known. And if they be not free from sin, then not
dead to sin; and so under the Law and not under grace, Romans 7.6: Romans 6:18:22:

In Romans 3:23,24: Paul declares his warring estate, at which time he was
carnal, sold under sin, verse 14: brought into the captivity to the law of sin,
verse 23: At which time he also cries out, Oh wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death! But the same Paul in other places
does witness a far different estate from this: for thus he says, When we were
in the flesh, verse 5: Ye are not in the flesh, Romans 8.9. For the law of the
spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and death,
Romans 8:2: How can we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? Romans And if
Christ be in you the body is dead because of sin, Romans 8.10. See also Romans 7.6.
From these, and many other places that might have been alleged, it is most
evident, That Paul in this seventh Chapter to the Romans, treats of his
warfare, and of the condition he then was in while yet he was not wholly dead
to sin, nor had yet obtained the victory over the carnal part; and so was not
yet delivered from under the thunders and tempest of Sinai's condemnation.

T.L. Whether any of you received the mystery of Christ by Revelation, the same
way that Paul did, who received it by Christ's speaking to him in the Hebrew
tongue: compare Ephesians. 3.3,4,5. with Acts 26.14.

Answ. This seems to me a very silly quaere; as though the language in which
God speaks, when he calls any one to the Ministry, or other service, were of
any consideration or moment, as in respect to the validity of such a Call, and
authority thereby received: Let the Reader compare these two Scripturers (in
the quaere) and he shall find the latter end of this question yet worse than
the beginning.

T.L. Whether those faithful men at Ephesus to whom Timothy committed those
things that he had heard of Paul, 2 Timothy 22. and 3.14. And whether those Elders
that were ordained in Creet, by Titus, whom Paul left there for that purpose,
Tit. 1.5. might not be truly styled Ministers made by Jesus Christ, i. e. by
Christ's appointment; though they were not Apostles, Prophets, or Evangelists?

Answ. 1. To that of Timothy, I Answer; 1. They were to be faithful men. 2. It
follows not, That this committing of things heard, etc unto them, did make and
constitute such men ipso facto Christ's Ministers. 3. Timothy was able to judge
who were fit and able, To teach others also. Did such a man, or men, as Timothy
was, give any of you commission to teach others? Of this before.

Answ. 2. Neither doubt I but Titus had good Authority to Ordain those Elders,
(so as the place imports.) And had your Ordainers as good also, I should as
little doubt theirs too.

Answ. 3. If your Ordainers had Ordained such Ministers as Paul there
describes, and appoints to be Ordained, Tit. 1.6,7,8,9,10. I believe I should
readily own and embrace them: For such had been blameless, sober, just, holy,
temperate, and not given to Filthy Lucre, etc. which are such virtues and
graces we cannot yet see in any of you, no, not though we stand never so near
you: Whereas the contrary vices are so vigorous in you, that you yield a bad
scent wherever you come; with them that have senses incorrupt, to smell it.

Answ. 4: And is it not rather to be said, That this ordaining of Elders was
not a constituting of Ministers simply; but an assigning or appointing of them,
that were such before, to some new, and special, or particular charge, or
service? The word is as well, if not better englished, Settle, Place: Also this
sense, the cohering words do favor; In every City; He says not of such or
such a place, or Church; nor yet Elders simply.

Finally, It Is here to be remembered what kind of Ordination was in use in those
Primitive times; For this see Sect. 3.

T.L. Whether Christ's promise, That he would be with his Apostles unto the end
of the World, Matthew 28.19,20. can be any otherwise made good then in his being
present with ordinary Pastors, that should succeed in the Church to the end of
the world?

Answ. If the place be so to be understood as the Quaerent takes it, then
where were those Pastors and Successors to the Apostles; and how was God with
them for so many hundreds or years, even during all the time of Popish
Apostasy, which began even in the Apostles age? But your main business is, to
prove your selves to be true Pastors of Christ; which ye never can do, so long
as ye continue Hirelings (See John 10.12.)

T.L. Whether ordinary Pastors and Teachers are not as well said to be given
for the Work of the Ministry etc as well as Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Ephesians 4 11,12. and that till we all come to the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, verse. 13. which is not, cannot be till the end of the world;
compare Ephesians 4.11,12,13. with 1 Cor. 12.28.

Answ. 1 I deny your distinction of Pastors into ordinary and extraordinary
(taking the word Pastor as distinct from Apostle, etc) This is your case; ye
are ashamed to claim to your selves the name of Apostle or Pastor in a
Scripture sense, which you seem to call extraordinary; This one name therefore
ye craftily divide into two; that being driven from the possession of the one
(i. e. exttaordinary) ye may yet as a reserve, have the other to fly to:
imitating herein (after a sort) those Spirits, that being commanded to go out
of the man, prayed they might have leave to pass into the Swine.

Answ. 2. Ye cannot away to hear of the Saints arrival to the measure of
Christ's stature: Why? Because ye your selves are so short thereof: Also well
know ye in your selves, That as many as are come hither, or fair in the way
thereto, be now tall enough to overlook all your deceits and failings.

Answ. 3. I demand, Whether All the Saints shall come to this neasure all at
one time; that is, (as you say) at the end of the world? If ye say, Yea; then
it seems (after your sense) the Saints shall neither till then come to the
unity of the Faith, or the knowledge of the Son of God: Forasmuch as both these
are coupled together with the other; which were very absurd to affirm, (taking
the end of the world in that sense you take it) and openly contradictory to
many other places of Scriptures. Whosoever is truly in the Faith; is one with
all others who are likewise in the same Faith. The Believers of old time were
all of one heart, and of one soul ( Acts 4.32) were not these come to the Unity
of the Faith; and also in the way of attaining to the measure of Christ's
stature, etc.? The one Faith being in many, makes them all of one heart, mind,
and consent: We are one bread; fellow members of the same body. See also, 1
John 1.7. Again, how can a man be a true Believer, that is not, in some
measure, come to the knowledge of the Son of God? See John 17.3. 1 Cor. 2.2.
Phil 3.10 2 These. 1.8. 1 John 2.3. and 2.13, etc. Now that all these things,
namely, Unity of the Faith; Knowledge of the Son of God, and Coming to be a
Perfect man, are referred to one and the same time, ( i e. the time of this
life) with coming to the measure of the stature of Christ's fullness, is very
plain, in that they are all alike joined together in one form, and manner of
speech under the word [until.] See more of this in Section 49:6.

T L. Whether Magistrates are not truly styled Ministers of God, though
ordained by men?

Answ Magistrates indeed are Gods very Ministers, but in Civil, not in a
Spiritual account: And yet if the Magistrate, so well as ye now account him,
should once abandon your Function to voluntary Contribution, you would turn
your Tale, I believe:

T:L. Whether those that say none other things than those which Moses and the
Prophets did say should come, Acts 26.22. and that determine to know nothing;
yea, to Preach nothing but Jesus Christ and him Crucified, and that according
to the Scriptures, may not be rightly styled to speak as the Oracles of God?

Answ. They only are to be said to speak as the Oracles of God, who speak by
inspiration or revelation of the holy Ghost; or else in the Light speak those
things which themselves have handled and tasted, both seasonably and aptly for
the edification, or benefit of the hearers: But they that are in the flesh
cannot please God, ( Romans 8 8.) whatever they say, or determine to know, or
preach. And though ye may use the words of Scripture, yet cannot ye thus be
covered: the Tempter so did, and that cunningly too; and yet got he thereby no
thank at all at Christ's hands: No more do you neither by Preaching long Sermons
compiled of words stolen in like manner out of the Scriptures, (and other Books)

T.L. That these are very virtues, etc. And yet we affirm, That, through Grace,
some; yea, many of us, have attained to this, That even the piercing eye of
malice it self cannot see so far as justly to charge us.

Answ. The eye of wisdom then sees farthet than the eye of malice; for this
sees you full of iniquities: Now the eye of malice is of your side, and
therefore not so apt to charge you, how far soever it may see into your
guiltiness; yea even this piercing eye has a mote in it self, and therefore
cannot see a beam in yours.

T.L. That our Gifts and Conversations are not, at least, in a competent
measure, suitable to that high Calling, whereunto we are called; However not
unto us, not unto us, [you mean not here of Tithes, and Augmentations, etc.]
but unto our God's name be the praise.

Answ* Our Gifts -- If ye were indeed wise, yet your Gifts would blind your
eyes: Your Conversations, they are like a menstruous garment, whereof is no
part remaining clean, but is wholly defiled Your Calling is from the Serpent,
and your Gifts and Conversations are suitable to it. But why is your Calling an
high Calling; Because it sets you in the Pulpit on high? It Is certain, were it
not for Tithes and rich Livings, the most of your number would turn the deaf
ear to this High Calling, and say they never heard sound thereof. But how
bountiful ye are to God! To his Name be the praise. A few empty words without
any true ground. Go, offer unto God the firstlings of your flock, and the fat
thereof; until ye so do, the Lord will have no more respect to your Sacrifice,
than he had unto his, who for envy slew his Brother; (a vice most truly yours)

T.L. Whether when the Obedience and satisfaction of Christ, our Surety, unto
the Law and Justice of God, is by God the Father freely imputed to us, the
righteousness of the Law may not in the Apostles sense ( Rom 8.4.) be truly
said to be fulfilled in us, or by us, 2 Cor. 5 19,21.

Answ. Here may the Reader take a taste whereby to judge what kind of
Interpreters ye are of the Scriptures; the which where they fit, not your
purpose, or fancy, ye stick not to wrest, contract, extend, at the beck of
each frivolous Opinion, just as if they were a Nose of Wax But Paul has
sufficiently declared what he means, when he says, That the righteousness of
the law might be fulfilled in us [not out of us,] in that he adds immediately
after, Who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit; And they that so
walk, do verily fulfill the righteousness of the Law. By these words therefore
he expresses the mean, or way, wherein, or whereby such righteousness is
fulfilled

T.L. Whether those that are said, 1 Cor. 14. to speak by immediate revelation
were not extraordinary Officers, and such as continued only for a time in the
Church of God and its first planting, and are now ceased?

Answ. While the Churches did abide in the Truth and ways of God, so long was
God also with them; and they did feel the movings of his Spirit, and spoke
accordingly as of it they were moved: But when they began to forsake their
first love, and to join with the whore and false Prophets, and to worship the
Beast, then did God also justly withdraw himself from them; then did their Sun
begin to set, and the shadows of Night ensued. Now heard they not the Word of
the Lord, nor the workings of his Spirit did they perceive, but became
estranged thereunto. In these days did they make a Calf, and offered sacrifice
to the Idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own hands

T.L. Whether those extraordinary Officers were not styled Prophets, Ephesians. 4
11. 1 Cor. 12.28.

Answ. Though all in the Primitive Churches were not Prophets, yet was it
lawful in those true Churches (though forbidden in yours) for any man to
Prophecy, without exception or restraint: For thus says Paul, Ye may all
prophecy one by one 1. Cor. 14.31. and in Verse 1. he says, Follow after
Charity and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy: Also
Verse. 5. I would that ye spoke with tongues, but rather that ye prophesy. Hence
it is manifest that Paul permitted any one to prophesy: and not only so, but
secondly, also exhorts them all indifferently to desire the gift of prophesy
(not the office:) And, thirdly, He declares his willingness that they Declaring
himself to be of the same mind with Moses who desired that all the Lords
people were Prophets.
all might prophesy, etc. Now in Verse 3. he explaineth what he means by
prophesying, namely, A speaking unto men to edification exhortation and
comfort; and this by revelation of the spirit; as may be gathered of Verse. 30
Let us now erect a comparison, between the speaking and order that were in the
Churches of Christ of old time, and the speaking and order (such as it is) that
are in your meetings at this day. 1. In those it was lawful, and according to
order, for All to speak: In yours only for One to speak. 2. In those they did
speak by revelation of God: In yours they speak by imagination of their own
brain. 3. In those they did speak for edification, exhortation and comfort of
others: In yours for Augmentation, Decimation, and benefit of themselves.

T. L. Whether when the Apostle says that all may prophesy, he does yet suffer
a woman to speak in the Church etc

Ans. Joel ( Chap. 2. Verse 28) prophesyed, that (not their sons only, but also)
their daughters should prophesy etc. Where? To whom? Does not prophesying serve
for them which believe? (1. Cor: 14 22) And if to one believer, such
prophetesses might rightly prophesy; why not also to two, to three, or more? If
in a place where these beleivers did or do not usually meet; why not likewise
in a-place where they usually meet? If out of a house; why not as well in a
house? To a Church in a house? Philemon, 2 Or say ye that the number and place
do make and give being to the Church of God? Define unto us then, how many
persons be necessarily required to the making up of a Church? and also what
place it behooves to be, that with such number must concur, to the so making up
of a Church

T. L. Whether he does not also exclude private members from intruding on that
great office of prophesying when he demands, Are all Teachers etc.

Ans. What private members does Paul exclude from prophesying, when speaking to
the Church he says, Ye may all prophesy (1. Cor 14 31) Neither does he only
permit (or rather declare it to be lawful) that all may prophesy; but
desires also that they all might have the gift of prophesy (Verse. 5.) And
finally exhorts the whole Church indistinctly that they desire the gift of
prophesy; as is noted before. Agreeable to this mind of Paul was also that of
Moses; I would (says he) that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the
Lord would put his spirit upon them, Numb. 11.29. Where also it is to be noted,
that though Eldad and Medad had never been counted or acknowledged as Prophets,
but were private members of the Jewish Church, yet did they prophesy, and that
in the Camp; not waiting for the trial or approbation of man, nor for any
Solmn Investiture into the office of Prophets: It was sufficient authority to
them, to prophesy, that the spirit of the Lord rested upon them (Verse. 26.) Now
Moses when he heard thereof (yet not yet by what warrant they prophesied) what
did he do? Verily he set not the rude multitude upon them to beat them, pull
them, tear them, neither charged he the civil Officers to apprehend them, and
carry them away for endless Imprisonment: None of these things (I say) did
Moses; But says he, Enviest thou for my sake? would God that all the Lords
people were prophets etc.

Its plain therefore neither Paul nor Moses to have been of your Teachers mind,
(to forbid any to prophesy;) but as far distant from you herein (as in most
other matters also) as namely becomes the true servants of God, with Satan's
Ministers compared.

T. L. How can they i. e. how can they lawfully and as to God acceptably
preach, except they be sent? Romans 10 15.

Ans. Apply this place unto your selves. Ye Preach for hire, and Divine for
money: ye are not the men that bring glad tidings: [who deny men may be perfect
and free from sin in this life;] that publish peace: [who bring along with ye
the black Threats of war, and manifold miseries against all that will not put
into your mouthes] Neither do ye publish salvation, [but keep men ever
learning, that never come to the knowledge of the truth, and the end of faith.]
Understands not the Apostle in this place such a Sending as his also was? who
was not sent of men, neither by men, but by Jesus Christ. And though the
operations of the spirit be diverse, yet do they not all alike proceed from the
spirit? Did not the same spirit that made heretofore Apostles, make Pastors
also? And dare you that call your selves Pastors of Churches, pretend to have
received such office and quality immediately of the spirit? I have seldom
known any of you so impudent. Wherefore your operation is not by the same God;
neither is your gift by the same spirit, neither your Administration by the
same Lord Jesus, 1. Cor. 12.4.5 6. And if no man can say, that Jesus is the
Lord, but by the Holy Ghost: How then do you talk whole hours of Jesus, without
the Holy Ghost? But if ye yet challenge to have the Holy Ghost, then make it to
appear, by showing the fruits thereof; such are love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; are these
things in you, or so much as the very shadows, or counterfits thereof? rather,
bring you not forth such fruits as be clean contrary to these? Let the
spiritual man be judge.

T. L. Whether it be not usual in our Churches to give liberty to several
Ministers, to exercise their gifts and discharge their office successively one
by one decently and in order.

Ans. Ye seem to have propounded this your practice and order, as having some
resemblance and agreement with the practice and order which Paul did advise to
be observed in the Church at Cornith: But even in this point do ye greatly
differ and swerve from the right pattern, and foully miss of your mark: For 1.
The men that you suffer to preach in your meeting houses, they be such as are
known to have been ordained or approved for this office of preaching, by man.
2. Such Preachers, are Pastors or Ministers (falsely so called) of several
Churches (so named) and not of one: 3. They first have the leaves of the
Teacher of that Parish, where they are to preach. 4. They bring along their
Sermons with them ready prepared; and so do but rehearse what before they had
invented and composed. Now all these things, to omit many other, were quite
otherwise in the Churches of Christ of old time, where due order was observed.
Will ye give liberty of speech, or prophesying to any one in your Assemblies,
that is not made Minister by, or according to man? That speaks forth that
which God reveals unto him? No; you appropriate the use of speaking, as it
were a Monopoly, to your selves alone you may speak what you will, none may
control you, without danger of great harm and imprisonment.

T. L. Whether to be hated for this very cause, because we profess our selves
Ministers of the Gospel, etc.

Ans. We do not hate you because you do profess your selves Ministers of the
Gospel; nor yet at all: Although we do not doubt but ye are hated of the Lord,
for this your Blasphemy, etc. Rev. 2.9. Ye do indeed profess your selves to be
Ministers of the Gospel, but oh how short do ye come of approving your selves
as such, 2 Cor. 6.4.5.6 7.8.9.10 Where Is your much patience? [while ye cannot
endure to hear a man speak in your Assemblies, though moved of the Lord
thereunto:] Where your afflictions? [who cruelly vex, and persecute others,
even the Saints of the most high, doing you no harm at all] where your
necessities and distresses? [who live at ease in the flesh, fareing dilitiously
every day, and vie with the great men of the world, in gay apparel and
sumptuous buildings:] where your stripes and imprisonment? [do you not cause
both these almost every week, to be infflicted on others, even the Innocent?]
where the tumults ye sustain; labors, watchings fastings: where the pureness,
knowledge, long-suffering, kindness, Holy Ghost, love unfeigned, etc. Do you
not both cause others to suffer the former, and of the later are not ye wholly
void? Now then is it any way likely, or consentaneous to any sound reason, that
ye who call your selves Ministers of the Gospel, and Successors to Paul in this
office, be such as ye avouch your selves to be? seeing not only none of the
things aforesaid which Paul sustained ye likewise suffer, but contrariwise by
your means and malice ye do even cause the same things to be suffered of others,
and that most wrongfully. Blush then and be ashamed any longer to arrogate to
your selves this name, when as ye do suffer none of all those things that
always did accompany the same where it was truly owned.

T.L. Whether our calling to the Ministry be not that which does provoke your
spleen and bitterness against us.

Ans. Your calling to the Ministry does no whit provoke us, but your
hypocrisy, but your deceit, your covetousness, pride, gluttony, luxury,
cruelty, and the rest of your vices: Yet do not these neither so provoke us,
as at any time to pull you, hale you, stock you, stone you, imprison you, rifle
your goods, etc. Neither ever did we so much as desire that any of these
things might be done unto you, at least not since the time we were called
Quakers, our witness is on high.



Ans. What stout Martyrs your brethren have been in times of persecution, is
sufficiently known to all English men whose ages do number forty years or
upwards; for in such men's remembrance, for fear of the Bishops Apparitors, or
other small trouble impending, they shipped themselves by scores for another
land as is also before touched But these things not so willingly do I remember,
as well knowing that they who so fled away were of the very best of your number

Those you call Ministers of the Gospel in the Quaerie, were not such as ye
are, save in name of Religion and certain Tenets; but were (at least in spirit
and frame of mind) as far unlike you, as you are like them who so made them
lay down their lives in the very Flames (as the Quaere has it.) Do not you
likewise persecute men for living godly in Christ Jesus, as these also did?
Blush to deny it. Do not you and your disciples yet far outstrip in wrong and
barbarous cruelty, all the generations of persecutors that ever were of old
time? Those executed their malice (for the most part) by Process at Law, with
show of Order and Civility; You or your learners (with your well liking at
least) doubt not to commit all manner of harm and savage cruelty not only
without any legal Process, but without any Law it self; yea, clean contrary
to The Instrument of Government.
Law. You make them to suffer, by whom partly you reign: You make them poor, by
whose means you are rich: You cast them in prison, by whose bonds and travels
you enjoy your liberty. I say these things have ye done partly in vote, and
partly in fact, as is well known.

Tell us now ye that are yet alive, or ye that have gone before us, if ever
like unkindness to this, ye have seen with your eyes, or heard by report of
others?

T.L. Whether you durst appeal to the Tribunal of heaven, who are persecutors
in heart, word, deed; you or we.

Ans. O singular impudence! O boldness not to be matched! Provokest thou us to
heavens Tribunal for trial of such a question, as almost all (both men, women
and children) on earth can judge and determine, and that without danger of
erring? Does not almost every city, town and village in the Nation ring and
resound of scoffs, taunts, clamors against them that be called Quakers? Is
there ever a Prison in England in the which are not some of our friends
detained? What Judge is there? What Justice that has not had an hand in
condemning of our friends to some kind of punishment? Many other things I here
might recount, but I am even grown weary to mention them: And now to bring the
matter home to your own doors; Is there any one grievance or injury that our
friends do suffer, but it points unto you as the cause thereof, and is to be
charged on your account? And this may you not your selves deny, while ye dare
not but confess of your many and infinite accusations, informations,
subornations, testifications, abominations, countenancings, and abettings, etc.
whereby all these wrongs and afflictions have befallen our friends: And if
there be happily any such among you so far dissenting from the rest of their
brethren, that have not yet stained themselves with the guilt of any the things
above remembered; yet likely it is that even these also have tacitly and in
heart assented thereto, and approved the same: Or if there be, who are even
hitherto clear, yet I challenge you all to this, viz. To name me the man
amongst ye, that openly and of his own accord, has rebuked and earnestly
testified against those many open sins and abuses which their Hearers daily
commit on those that are called Quakers: Or that has so qualified and disposed
them before hand by sound teaching, godly instruction, and example of innocent
life, that they be not now apt to commit or intend such violence and fury? But
why appeal ye to Heaven? Is it hence, because that ye fear to refer your cause
to the judgment of any here on earth? But whatever it be, if ye so will
appeal, I assure ye we dare to join with you herein; provided ye will interpose
good Caution to meet us there: for this of your part do we very much doubt,
except ye mend your lives while ye be here on earth.

Marian days in the following Quere? You are not much liker those Martyrs in
spirit and temper of mind (though you succeed them in name of religion and
certain opinions) then the Popes are like Peter, whose Successors they likewise
pretend to be.

Vipers, Serpents, children of the Devll, false deceivers? even such persons,
as holy men have formerly branded with the self-same names: And therefore ought
you neither to call us Raylers for so useing these names; unless you can prove
that these also who so have done before us, were Railers too.

T. L. To run up and down stark naked, as one of your Brethren at Exeter, and
one of your Sisters at Westminister etc.

Ans. I know not of any of our friends that so have done, as here is surmised:
As for one of them, I am sure he was disowned of our friends; and touching the
other, whom you call our Sister, I am verily persuaded she never was
acknowledged as such a one by our friends neither.

Note here Reader, that albeit so many evil eyes do so diligently watch for our
haultings; yet the accuser was fain (when he had objected one trifle done at
Exeter) to go as far as Westminster for a another. Thus is the charge not only
repelled, but turned even greatly to our commendation and praise.

T. L. "Whether those that profess such Doctrines mentioned S. 3. 3. before,
and are guilty of such practices as are not to be once named amongst us [ Ans.
No? what think ye then, of Adam and Eve and of Isaiah the Prophet? for all
these did go naked; and that a far longer time, then those above named are said
to have done: Is it long of your super-excellent holiness, and purity of mind,
that such things as were done in the state of Innocence, and by the greatest of
Prophets, would yet annoy your ears, if they were but named amongst you?] ("as
we have them quoted in Fords Answer to Speed) will stand with that Innocence
etc.

Ans. Read Speeds reply to Fords Answer and thou shall find his refuge of lies
to be swept away: But what kind of proof is this? One of you invents a crime
against us; then reports it to another, or prints it himself, and ever after
this serves for Judicial evidence, whenever you have occasion to use it. And
generally concerning such accusations and crimes, as were objected or witnessed
against our friends by any of the mercenary Teachers, this I say, and admonish,
that as their testimonies and authorities are not to be regarded, much less
believed; because such men are both our mortal Enemies, and also parties
themselves, in most the controversies and contests wherein we are engaged. This
Ford is the man, of whom when he lived in the Western parts, this jest was
carried about, viz. That he had stolen the Bishops Lawn Sleeves, to make him
boot-hose topps of; [then was he noted of pride.] I have also since heard of
him, that he is a very troublesome man to his Parishioners, in exacting of
tithes: [here he is taxed of covetousness, and of cruelty.] Mark now Reader
what kind of men they be, that witness against us. For thou may guess the
Lion by his paw, (as the saying is.)

T. L. Whether though all inordinate care concerning the things of this life be
a sin; yet all holy careful duties to preserve our lives be not our duty? Ephesians.
5.28. Genesis 30.30. 1. Tim. 5.28.

Answ. Call ye these holy careful Studies to preserve your lives, namely, to
beg of the Magistrate or Patron power to receive 100. or 200. l. per Annum,
for preaching the divinations of your brain? To cast men into prison, and be
but for 12 d.? To beggar your Neighbors (whom you ought to love better) with
long and costly suits at the Law, and that upon false pretexts, (as is before
shown:) To See I Bensons book hereof.
distrain their goods and take much more then ye claim? To procure a supplement
of Augmentations, though ye had a sufficient, yea, many times a large
maintenance before? to seek Annexation of another neighbor Benefice, to that
you had before, if your friends shall but estimate it within a 100 l. per
annum; (though it happen many times to be more worth) which practice heretofore
in the Episcopal Clergy, was even by the men of your own Sect, greivously
censured and condemned: I say, are such as these your holy careful Studies to
preserve your lives? What could the very Heathen have done more in point of
self-preservation, then you have done? Even such holy careful duties as these,
were those of Micah's Priests and Prophets, (chapter 3. Verse. 11.) Isaiah's also
and Ieremiah's, and finally Peter and Iudes false Teachers, murmurers and
complainers, etc. did practice like holy careful Studies to preserve their
lives; Where at length may we find those Belly-Gods ( Phil. 3.19) if these be
not they? where them that mind earthly things, if not here? Would it seem here,
Reader, to have ought of the nature or likeness of a Slander, to call such men
as these be, Hireling Shepherds, and ravening wolves and greedy Dogs, that
never can have enough? And yet will they say they be reviled as often as they be
so called? As if it implied no inconvenience at all, to be counted true
Ministers of Christ, and at the same time to be the Devils Servants, in doing
all manner of sin? I say moreover, that they that are holy, do cast their care
on the Lord, who cares for them; and they that will save or preserve their
lives, shall lose them.

T: L. Whether the penalty of not eating be not to be inflicted on those that
are Idlers in Gods Vineyard, and on such of your party as wander and labor not.

Answ: The penalty of not eating partaineth to them all, whatsoever they be,
who being whole and able of body, and specially wanting food and raiment of
their own, do yet think it matter of fowl disgrace to them, to work in some
honest calling, (though Paul and other Ministers so have done;) but chose
rather to live after the manner of Drones, by devouring the fruits of others
labors and cost; like as did also their Predecessors, the false Priests and
Prophets of old time, who did eat of the fat and cloth themselves with the
wool, not sparing the flock, Ezekiel 34.3:

As concerning those of our party, name who they be that wander and labor not.
Wnder indeed did the Saints and Ministers of God in old times, and that very
Heb. 11.9
poorly arrayed; and not sat they still in a Wander indeed they might, and
that long enough before they found it too.
fat Benefice, in the glory of the world and the friendship thereof; as the
Ministers of Mammon in these times do. Of these things also elsewhere.

T. L. Whether there is no labor but that which is handy etc.

Answ. With you it is some labor to invent and write your Sermons, which after
ye may recite to the people for money, or moneys-worth: a practice utterly
unknown to the ancient Ministers of the Gospel; save what they had read in the
old Testament, touching the false Priests and Prophets there reproved for this
very cause

T. L. And whether has not the mind its labor, and that even to defatigation.

Answ. Think ye that Paul, Silvanus, and Timotheus, with the rest of Christ's
true Ministers, went not so far in the labor and travel of the mind, as any of
you? And yet for all this did they not omit, much less did they scorn to labor
with the body also, for sustenance of the outward life, (as none of you
ordinarily do.) Of this more at large elsewhere.

T. L. Whether Paul does not judge laboring in the word and Doctrine to be
labor, 1 Timothy 5.17. And our Savior says The Laborer is worthy of his hire.

Answ. Though Paul did indeed so judge, as is supposed in this quere; yet
let not this, but that he used handy labor too, and that night and day,
earnestly pressing and exciting, withal, other Ministers to follow such his
example: For our Saviors saying (cited in the quere) it is plain, that he
here, by alluding to (or alleging) the case or right of a laborer in respect
of his hire (as being a master notorious and of all men confessed,) insinuates
only the like equity and reasonableness of his Apostles taking necessary supply
of food and raiment of them they should Minister to in the Gospel: There being
a certain portion and parity of reason between the one and the other in this
behalf: And in no wise does he mean or imply, that his Apostles should or might
lawfully be hired, (even as a laborer) to preach for money, or like reward; or
that they might or would preach and teach for sake of the same; for so should
he altogether cross and oppugn, as well what himself has said, ( John 10.) by
way of noting and condemning the Hireling Sheepherd* as also the many and
vehement testimonies born against this mercenary Teaching, by the holy Prophets
and his own Apostles. But were the matter even so here as the Quere seems to
take it; yet ought the laborer in such case to require and take his hire of
them who hire him, for whom and to whose benefit he laboreth; and not of
others, who hire him not; who refuse, reject, and detest, both his labor as
vain and fruitless, and himself as a counterfeit and deceiver. See also, 8.

T.L. Whether Ministers are not to give attendance to reading, to meditate on
those things? And whether it is possible for them so to do, at least, to give
themselves wholly to them, and yet follow handy labor? 1. Tim. 4.13.15.

Answ. Both Paul that so advises, and Timothy so advised did yet
(notwithstanding their many travels and offices pertaining to their Ministry,
and the meet discharge thereof) work with labor and travel night and day, that
they might not be chargable to any, etc. And this ( beside other causes) To
make themselves an ensample to others to follow them etc. (Ministers not
excepted) with this command also, or penalty rather, That if any would not
work, neither should he eat. Afterward they note such as walk disorderly, not
working at all, whom they command and exhort by the Lord Jesus Christ, that
with quietness they work and eat their own bread, 2 Thessalonians. 3.7.8.9.10.11.12.
By these things it does appear, how much Paul and Timothy, whom yet you have
avouched for your Patrons, do befriend your idle cause. See elsewhere.

T. L. Whether Pastors and Teachers are not to wait on their office? and
whether handy labor be not a means of distraction and hindrance to the laboring
in the word and Doctrine, etc.

Answ. Did not Paul, Sylvanus, Timotheus, and the rest laudably wait on their
office? yea; did they not better wait on their office then the best among you?
And yet did they (this notwithstanding) put their hands to labor, as is a
foresaid. Neither is such handy labor more a distraction and hindrance, to
Christ's true Ministers now, then it heretofore was. But and if I should grant
the thing to be so as the quere would have it; yet would it not straightway
follow to be lawful, that, to relieve their necessities arising by their not
working and waiting on their office, they may beg, or take a way other men's
goods; especially theirs, who make no part of their Flocks, to whom they sow
no spiritual things, nor plow, nor thresh, nor any labor take, (except to do
them mischief, and harm.)

T. L -- Though they had an extraordinary spirit to assist them etc.

Answ. Are there more holy spirits then one, as this quere seems to imply? The
Scripture says, There is but one spirit, Ephesians. 4.4. And again, There are
diversities of gifts, but the same spirit, 1. Cor. 12.4. If so it be, what mean
ye then by extraordinary spirit? Now seeing there is but one holy spirit; and
this the Apostles had, let the Reader then judge what a spirit yours is, which
is not the same which the Apostles had, but some other. Say ye that I wrong you
by such a Deduction? what else do your words import? If the Apostles had an
Extraordinary spirit, and you have not this extraordinary spirit; then have you
not the same spirit as they had, but either another; or none at all: But if ye
Retract, and affirm, that ye have the same spirit indeed, as the Apostles had
also, but not in that extraordinary measure, as they had it: Mine Answer then
is; show it by the fruits proper unto it, Gal. 5.22. Also I ask, if your spirit
be fallible, or infallible? If fallible, then not Gods spirit, If infallible,
How comes it then to pass that ye can neither preach, talk nor write without
so many Errors, and contrad^ctions both unto your own selves, and to others,
like spirit with you, both having and pretending? Does this your spirit guide
and instruct you what to preach? what need then of inventing and penning your
Sermons thus aforehand? Does the same spirit ever move and direct you to go to
such a place, or people? Whence is it then, that it moves you never to bestow
your Ministry upon a leane-Beneficed Parish, if a fatter may be obtained?
whence, that it stirs you to change Parishes so often, and still for earthly
advantage? Now tell us which of the very meanest of Christ's true Ministers of
old, did ever do any of these things: Of the contrary part, how many of your
number, even the best and greatest of them, these things have not done, and yet
do? (unless perhaps as to some or one of them there lacks opportunity or
faculty, or other requisites for atchieving thereof:) Now by these notes and
arguments, (though there be many more added) it is no hard thing to determine
what spirit it is you are guided by; and what is the god that rules in you ye
sons of disobedience

T. L. -- Yet thought it reasonable on this very account, not to serve Fables,
that so they might wholly and continually give up themselves to the Ministry,
etc.

Answ. The Apostles (says the Quere) thought it reasonable for Ministers of
the Gospel, not to serve at Tables; I grant that they might refuse to do it.

The same Apostles command and exhort the Ministers of the Gospel, to work with
their hands; are they not here also to be heard and obeyed? But the querist was
somewhat over-bold in this place, to set the Apostles against the Apostles; to
oppose one authority against another: To the reason of the Quere, I say, that
there is not the same Anal^gy or likeness of reason in both the cases: For
where they command to work, they command even that which pertayneth to the
sustentation of life; to the honor of the Ministry, and Gospel, by making it
not 2 Thessalonians. 3.8. 1 These. 2.9.
chargeable to others. And lastly, charity and beneficence; seeing that by thus
laboring, they may be enabled not only to supply their own necessities but Acts
22.24.
others also, that be in want Now in the matter of waiting at Tables, none of
these reasons do hold place (at least, not in equal breadth) nor yet any other
having parallel moment, and necessity with these. So it will not follow, that
because one of them may be dispensed withal, as to the Gospel Ministers, for
to avoid distraction and hinderance; therefore the other may be also, for the
selfsame cause.

Object. It was necessary in the first Plantation of the Gospel, that the
Pastors should work, because that the Churches then were poor, and under
persecution; but so it is not now.

Ans: This reason is nowhere alleged in the Scripture, where at any time it
is entreated or mention made of such working but other and diverse reasons, as
both before is, and hereafter shall be declared

T.L. Whether these words, Freely ye have received, freel^ give, Mat. 10.8,9.
are not to be limited to miraculous Cures, and only to that extraordinary
time of first planting the Gospel?

Ans 1. The Scriptures do make no such limitation of freely giving unto
miraculous cures; nor do they confine this free or gratuitous Ministry unto
any time at all.

Answ. 2. These words viz Freely ye have received, freely give, do relate to
the Apostles whole Ministry; and preaching was a part thereof. Now they had a
like freely received the gift of preaching, as that of doing Miracles; and
therefore were here commanded, to Administer both a like freely. And to heal
gratis (like good Physicians) and not Preach for money like bad Ministers:
Briefly thus; whatsoever those Ministers of Christ (as such) had freely
received of Christ, the same were they also to give to others freely: The gift
of Preaching, as well as that of Miracles, they had freely received: Therefore
etc.

Ans. 3. The reason of the gratuity or freeness of this their Ministry, was
perpetual, and discharged of all respect to time or place etc. For that, that
Christ's true Ministry always both was, and is freely received (without money
and without price:) Therefore is it also, and that according to Christ's own
mind and reason, freely to be executed, (without limitation of time) With the
like probability of reason, (and same measure of impudence) may ye also except,
and say: We are not now bound to follow that Precept of Christ, viz. Learn of
me, for I am meek and lowly of heart: Because (might ye say) this was commanded
at the first planting of the Christian faith, when yet the embracers thereof
were poor and persecuted; at which time it became them indeed to be meek and
lowly; but now the times are changed: Nay; may you not by the like way of
reasoning, or cavilling, rather subvert and vacuate the whole body of precepts,
and directions contained in the Scriptures? And so make them like an Instrument
without any strings, save what your own ends and conveniences are pleased to
give it to sound by.

T. L. Whether in this Text our Savior does not only moderate the affection,
and prohibit a mercenary affection and greedy appetite of gain; and in the
mean time permit to eat and drink and take supply of necessaries where they
preach?

Answ. Y^^, he does so: But permits them not with all to take from men, meat
and drink perforce: Nor yet to beg other men's goods of the Magistrate; neither
to sue at Law, cast into prison, distrain etc. (as your practice is:) Neither
does Christ in Luke 22.35.36. (cited in the following quere) give his Disciples
authority to make provision for themselves, out of other men's money or goods;
but out of their own only.

T. L. Whether requiring that which is legally our own, may be justly styled a
coveting of other men's gold or silver?

Answ. 1. Prove it to be legally your own.

2. Prove that it is lawful for Ministers of the Gospel, to beg, and receive
of the Magisrate, a power to take other men's goods against their wills, or
indeed any other maintenance.

3. The Magistrate has no propriety in the goods of his Subjects; but a mere
trust only, and that of well disposing them for the Subjects good and benefit,
so as right reason does require: Now it is plainly against both these, that the
Subjects, (many of them being poor themselves, and needy,) be constrained to
contribute for maintaining others unto all points of luxury and excess:
especially being such as cannot plainly demonstrate, that their Profession or
Ministry do bring any good or benefit to the Commonwealth or people; (but
rather the contrary may be shown:) Seeing withal if they could so do, yet such
over large contributions and allowances for bodily sustenance, would dispose
them to sundry vices; and so also lessen and destroy the hope and benefit of
such their labors.

4. You covet Tithes, Glebes, Augmentations etc. before they are yourss
Therefore you covet that which is another: (for certainly these belong to some
body, before they be given you; else also the giver gives you that which was
none of his to give)

5. You covet all these things without purpose of rendering for, or in lieu of
them, any price or compensation of equal value; nay, or any value at all.

6. You covet more then is requisite unto necessary food and raiment, and the
rest uses of life; which you ought not to do: seeing ye both beg, and receive
these things, as mere Alms or charitable relief.

T. L. Whether all the Apostes did follow handy labor, or rather were not
maintened by the Churches, among whom they labored?

Answ. I have showed before that Paul, Silvanus, and Timotheus (so Barnabas
also) did not only use handy labor themselves, but commanded and exhorted other
Pastors and Elders also, to do likewise; and that in most vehement sort. And
though true it be, that Paul had power, as he says, to forbear working, and to
give all his time to the Ministry; yet did he choose working rather; as
preferring it before not working. And this he did (as one cause thereof) to
propose himself an example to others. By like he did even then foresee, that
in after times there would creep in (by fair words, and the Magistrates power,)
such Teachers into the Churches, and obtruders; (or that such men should
pretend to be ministers of the Gospel,) as should have hearts exercised with
covetous practices, and who would take upon them this office chiefly for gifts
and rewards: And therefore against this sort of men, it seems, he thought it
meet and necessary to fence, and shut up the office of the Ministry, by
injoyning thereunto, and as it were annexing handy labor, well knowing, that
now very few would be forward to undertake this office, (to which no outward
privileges were annexed) but such as should be moved thereunto of zeal and
good will: And indeed this is one good Criterion, by which the false Teachers
may be known and distinguished from the true

T. L. Whether Paul did not yield up his right, and wrought with his hands on
extraordinary occasions, viz. to avoid the show of covetousness; to ease the
poor and distressed Churches; and by his example to win authority to his
command, concerning labor.

Ans. If Paul did well to use handy labor for these ends and reasons, Why is
it then that none of your Tribe do think him a pattern worthy their imitation
herein? Now Paul's ends and reasons for using bodily labor, we shall here
collect, and rank together.

1. That he might have to sustain his life, and supply the wants thereof: Here
was he led by necessity of nature.

2. That he might not be chargeable unto others: Here he discovers his
Nobleness of mind, and Christian amplitude.

3. That he might make the Gospel without charge: Herein did his wisdom
appear; since to have over-burthened such as entertained him, might probably
have frayed them (and others) from embracing the Christian Religion, and have
brought them into misliking and wearisomness toward the Planters thereof.

4. That he might make himself an example unto others: Here was his Fatherly
care, and the property of a good Overseer and Planter of the Gospel.

5. Because as he had freely received his Ministry, so he might also freely
give the exercise and benefit thereof; here is his justice seen: He would not
again sell for money or price, that which himself had freely received.

6. Because it was more blessed to give, than to receive: Here was the
happiness of his choice; with Mary, he chose the better part: Are not these
ends, reasons, and motives all, both for nature, full of weight and worth, and
also for durance of time perpetual? Do they not alike obtain, and hold in all
times and places indifferently? Are they any part of the old Law? Are they
typical, and so out of force and use with Christians?

T. L. Whether the main grounds of Paul's forbearing to receive maintenance
from the Corinthians and Thessalonians, were not fear of giving offense to the
one, that were very proud, and of burthening the other, that were very poor?

Ans. 1. Those were neither the only, nor yet the main grounds of Paul^s
forbearing to receive maintenance of the Corinthians, or Thessalonians, as the
Reader may easily perceive, by reading the places themselves, where mention is
made of Paul's working, and forbearing to take maintenance, viz. 2 Cor 11.7,8,9
1 These. 4 11,12,13. 2 These. 3.7,8,9,10,11,12. In these two last places, the
Reader shall find other ends and inducements for Paul's and others working,
besides these here surmized in the Query, viz. 1. That we might not be
chargeable to any of you (which yet does not necessarily imply them to have
been proud or poor.) 2. To make our selves an ensample to you to follow us. 3.
For we hear there are some among you that walk disorderly, not working at all
(not working at all was disorderly walking) 4. And to work with your own hands,
as we commanded you, that ye may walk honestly toward them that are without,
and that ye may have lack of nothing.

Ans. 2. But what do you say to the Elders and Pastors of the Church at
Ephesus, mentioned Act. 20.17. Were they also with their Churches, poor, or
proud? And yet even unto these did Paul in sad and solemn manner commend his
example of handy working, not doubting to tell them, that so laboring they
ought to support the weak, finally enforcing such their duty, and his advice,
with the unquestionable authority of the Lord Jesus, who said, It is more
blessed to give, than to receive.

Ans. 3. There are the same ends, reasons, and motives, why Ministers of the
Gospel should now also work for their livings, (if not otherwise hindered and
withheld therefrom by their travels, and other employments to which they be
called and commanded of the Lord) as in the Primitive times, (so called) if not
far greater; for there be now as proud, and as poor, as were then, for ought
appears to the contrary: Certainly in this one thing at least, do the times
that now are, even far exceed those in which the Apostles lived; namely, in
disputes, controversies, objections, and criminations moved about, and grounded
upon the idleness and avarice of them who are called Christ's Ministers; and
therefore were there no other reason but this, this alone were enough (if they
more regard had to their own authority, or the honor and success of their
Ministry, than to luxury of food and raiment, and other carnal respects) to
drive them to cut off such occasion, as before is said, by working with their
hands, and abstaining from taking even voluntary contribution; abundantly more
ought they (for the cause abovesaid) forbear to sue at Law, to distrain, to
imprison for treble damages, etc. under pretext of a competent maintenance; and
all these things do they practice many times against these, for whom they never
sowed, plowed, threshed, or planted a vineyard, being such as do reject and
disown them, and never did or could profit by them; yea, not rarely, even such
as live many miles distant from them, whose very faces they have never seen.

T. L. Whether it has not alvvayes been the cognizance of false Apostles to
pretend to teach freely, only to disgrace true Pastors?

Ans. This cognizance had not the Priests and Prophets, against whom the
Prophet Micah cried, Mic. 3.11. and against whom Jerem^ah, and Isaiah in so
many places do thunder; and yet notvvithstanding they were false teachers.
Also Judas Iscariot, and Demas, together with Jude's false teachers, not only
have not this cognizance given them, but even such brand, description and
character, as they hold in common with all you Parish Teachers; as face
answers face in a glass, so you and they in every point agree.

Were all the Prophets of old time false Prophets? and for such to be discerned
by the foresaid cognizance; namely, because they preached and prophesied
freely? (without money, and without price.)

Were Paul, Silvanus, Timotheus, and the rest of Christ's true Ministers, false
Apostles, and for such to be known, because they wrought with their hands, that
they might not be chargeable to others, and so make the Gospel without burden?

But who sees not how vain and senseless a thing it were for false Apostles to
pretend to teach freely, only to disgrace true Pastors? Seeing they also that
are, (or were) true Pastors, do likewise (and ever did) preach freely. Why do
not you also make use of this stratagem to bring those you call false Apostles
into disgrace? questionless it would prove a matter of no small advantage to
your Ministry; but no respect swayes so much with you, as love of fleshly
pleasure.

T. L. Whether Paul did not reckon his labors among his sufferings and
afflictions? 2 Cor. 6 5.

Ans. Let the Reader consider the coherent words and circumstance of the place,
and he shall find that the word labor there is to be taken for grief or pain
of body or mind, which a man is compelled to suffer against his own will or
choice; and so will the Greek word also very well bear to be taken, and not for
a voluntary working, which a man of his own choice uses to get his livelihood
by: And yet if it were to be taken in the Querents sense, verily Paul, and
those who (with him) were true Ministers of God, did by this and other
sufferings approve themselves as such, 2 Cor 6.4,5,6,7,8. A proof, which rather
then the Parish Teachers will yield of their Ministry, they will turn (most of
them) once every year, if the change of the Beast shall so require; they can
(if need be) be Papists one year, and the next year Protetestants, a third
Presbyterians, Independents the fourth; like white wool, they can take any
color for worldly advantage sake.

But I have formerly shown, that Paul's handy laboring proceeded of his own
choice and acord, and that for very weighty ends and purposes.

T. L. Whether Christ in Matthew. 23 6,7,8. condemns all these external actions
there mentioned, or the pride and hypocrisy which the Pharisees manifested in
them. etc Whether can you fix this charge on us, and prove it against us?

Ans. If you also (as the Pharisees did) do love the uppermost rooms at feasts,
the chief seats in the Synagogues (or meeting houses) greetings in the Market,
and to be called of men Master, then are you liable to the same reproof, as the
Pharisees also were: But now it is manifest that you love all these things, why
else do ye take them? some of them always, and the rest most often; and
certainly such be very ignorant of the temper of your hearts, as cannot
persuade themselves you would be sore displeased, if you should not be led to
the highest seats at a feast, or some other should possess your Pulpits,
without your license first obtained, or if men should forbear, though out of
conscience, to salute you in the Market, or elsewhere; or should call you by
your names, omitting the title Master, is it credible, that your Parishioners
and others would be so diligent and regardful (as they are) to salute you, to
call you Master, etc. were they not persuaded you both loved, and looked for
these things at their hands? (they do forbear to use them to such as they know
do not love them) or that ye your selves, if ye loved them not, would so kindly
accept them being given, and that with such elaborate significations of your
thankfulness, and being well pleased therewith? What say ye to this, that many
of your Coat have been known to be grievously offended, even to rage and evil
speaking, when as they have been denied the honor of any of the things
abovesaid? It Is clear then beyond all chance of a doubt, that men love that
thing, and expect it too, which being performed to them, they make much show of
thankful acceptance: and again, if the same be withheld from them, they are of
the contrary, much displeased, and all of a rage.

T. L. Whether it be not as unlawful to call any man Father, as Master, Mat.
23.7.9. and yet is not the word Father owned in the Scripture, Ephesians 6 1,2. yea,
and Master too, Ephesians 6.5. Col. 4.1.

Ans. I do not deny it to be lawful for a Son to call him that is his Father,
Father; or for a servant to call him that is Master, Master; but if a man call
him Father, who is not his Father, or him Master, who is not his Master, do
they not both hereby say that which is in effect an untruth?

Again, when a man entreats of those duties (or otherwise discourses of
things) that belong to persons, as they stand under such or such relations, he
is here by necessity driven to use such names or terms of relation, such as are
Master, servant, Father, Son, etc. so that such usurpation of relative names,
which very necessity constrains unto, gives men no warrant at all to assume
or require such names between themselves in ordinary communication and talk,
especially when such names are immediately given or taken; as namely, if Peter
talking with Paul, should have called him Master Paul; a dialect and calling
unread of in the later Scriptures, except as it relates unto Christ. These are
the words of a man of great name; Lud. Vives. Com. in lib. 8. c. 17. Aug. de l.
Dei.
Christ forbids his Apostles to assume the name of Master, to sit high at
tables, or love salutes in the streets, and commands that the chief should be
but as a Minister; for honor arose with heathenisme, and should fall therewith,
and not survive in the Church, etc.

T. L. Whether Ministers may as lawfully be called Masters, as Teachers, Ephesians.
4.11. Overseers, Act. 20.28. Rulers, 1 Timothy 5.17. Ambassadors. 2 Cor 5.20.
Masters of the Assemblies, a wise Master Builder?

Ans. 1. It Is a kind of incongruity in speech, to call him Master, who is
their Minister, that is, servant: This concerns your respective Parishioners,
whose Ministers you say you are.

Ans. 2. To these holy, wise, and spiritual Ministers, these names and
appellations did indeed belong: But what is this to your Fraternity? Those you
said a little before, were assisted with an extraordinary spirit, which was
indeed the very ground and foundation that verified all these denominations and
titles, above recounted, yet notwithstanding was it not usual for Paul, or
other Apostles, to whom yet these titles truly agreed, to be called in familiar
conference, Teacher Paul, Overseer Paul, Ambassador Paul, etc. wherefore these
things make nothing at all to your justification, who require to be called
Master John, or Master Thomas, even in common speech.

T. L. Did not Paul exhort his hearers to be perfect? and would not he have
blushed to have affirmed himself to have been perfect? Phil. 3.12 13. Was Paul
therefore like the Scribes and Pharisees, that said, but did not?

Ans. This even the blind Papists could see and acknowledge. Eng. Col. at
themes Annot. on Phil. 3.12.
There was a measure or degree of perfection, which Paul was not then come to,
toward which he yet pressed, etc. yet this lets not, but that he was even
then also perfect, that is to say, in a lower degree: And thus much in effect
he blusheth not to imply a little after, saying, Let us therefore as many as
are perfect, be thus minded. See more of this before touching perfection.

Neither ought we at all times, in the things of God, to be confined to the
notions and definitions of men, but may warrantably so understand, and use the
Scripture words, as we find the same words before to be taken, and used in the
Scriptures themselves. And thus it appears that Paul was clear of this
Pharisaical vice, and inconstancy; it remains now for you likewise to purge
your selves of the same, if you can.

T. L. Whether there may not be a lawful respect of orders and degrees among
men, without such a respect of persons as is condemned by James, etc.?

Ans. We blame you not for the very doing of any act of kindness, love,
humanity, nor yet for any modest and comely signification given thereof; but
for this do we reprove you, and justly, namely, because ye make so great
signification of respect to the rich, as bowing, flattering, complementing,
standing uncovered, etc. whiles ye despise the poor, howsoever rich in faith,
because ye give flattering lying titles to the Great ones of the World; as
Worshipful, Honorable, Excellent, etc. Contemning in the mean time those of low
degree. In sum, your fault is this, That ye make not the Image of God, nor any
true worth or virtue (most commonly) the Cause and Measure of that respect and
honor ye do unto men (whether in word or deed) but merely those things that
perish and decay: Which while ye do, ye honor the Creature more than the
Creator: which is Idolatry.

Paul's calling of Festus Noble; It may thus be Answered, namely, That this word
proceeded from him upon an urgent and present occasion, and that as a due
testimony and grateful acknowledgment yielded to the justice, moderation, and
fair behavior of the man; showed, namely in that his Controversy (then
depending before him) with Tertullus the High Priests Orator, Acts 25. The same
Paul also called Agrippa, King: being a title or name of Office (as well as of
Dignity and degree) and which truly did agree to him as a modest confession
thereof, and not in a way of flattery.

Now the things that we reprehend in this kind, are, 1. The giving such
honorable titles and nominal additions to men to whom they be not truly
competible: And this is a Lie. 2. The giving or using these same in ordinary
speech, whether with the men themselves, or of them: And this is Flattery.

Kings, Lords, Noble, Excellent, them whom we know or judge to be such: But we
may not so do, when the title, testimony, style, etc. do lack foundation of
truth: Neither yet can we use these words in a way of Flattery, without all
necessity, or occasion leading thereto; so as if the name of the man had
espoused such title or addition, and with it were inseparably conjoined.

But how came it to pass, thou could find no titles of honor given to the
Saints, as such? The Scriptures call them Kings, Priests, Sons of God,
joynt-heirs with Christ, etc. And all these things are most truly and
excellency said of them; yet notwithstanding it would be ridiculous to call a
Saint in ordinary talk, King John, Priest John, Son of God John, etc. or after
this manner to style or write them in Letters, Charters, etc.

They who expect or require from others titles of honor and superiority, do
plainly bewray a proud and Antichristian spirit: And Christ himself has openly
forbidden such affection; saying, Matthew. 23.10,11. Neither be called Masters,
for one is your Master, even Christ: But he that is greatest among you shall be
your Servant; and whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased. Now if it be
unlawful to Christian men to affect any greatness or exhaltation above their
Brethren, it can be no less unlawful to affect or expect the names or words by
which such greatness or exaltation is signified and confessed.

And is it not of equal vice and unlawfulness to affect or assume the title of
Master on a Civil account, as upon a Religious? Seeing the reason or ground
that makes the former unlawful, is equally found in the latter: namely,
Haughtiness of mind, and love of pre-eminence.

But how fully and clearly does Christ determine this Controversy, and put the
matter quite out of doubt, when he says, How can ye believe, that receive
honor one of another, and seek not the honor which comes of God only? Joh. 5.4.

Master, Lord, etc. at least in familiar converse.

CONCLUSION.
NOW he that alone judges rightly every Cause, being free from all byas of
prejudice, or other effect, be judge between YOU and US, and let him render to
either according to their works.

To the poor in spirit let him give the Kingdom of Heaven, while the rich he
send empty away.

The Mourners let him comfort, while they that laughed do mourn and weep.

To the meek let him give to inherit the Earth, while with the froward he deal
perverslie.

Fill he them that hunger and thirst after righteousness; while they that
seemed to themselves to be full, repent of their error in famine real.

Let the merciful, mercy obtain; as for the cruel, with what measure they
meeted to others, the same meet he unto them again.

To the pure in heart let him grant to see God, while the filthy be shut up in
utter darkness.

Honor he the Peacemakers with being called the children of God; as for them
that accuse the Brethren, and make war with the Saints, let them also be called
after his Name whose works they do.

Finally, To them that thirst after blood, let him give to drink of the pure
Wine of his fiercest Wrath, till fearfulness and trembling come upon them, and
the horror of death overwhelm them; till they consume as one in a sickness,
and wear away from amongst the living; till their very Names do rot and perish,
and their memories be no more with men, except for a proverb and byword of
infamy; except for a monument of His much-bearing Clemency; except for examples
of most detestable wickedness, and the dread Wrath of God revenging.

Thus, thus be it done unto them, for they are worthy.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 58. lin. 12. for Fables, read Tables.


