TWO LETTERS FROM Vice Admiral John Lavvson, The one, To the Right Honorable,
the Lord Mayor of the City of London; To be communicated to the Court of
Aldermen, and Common Council of the said City.
The other, to the Honorable the Commissioners for the Militia of the City of
London. Dated December the 28. 1659.
MY LORD,
When Alderman Fook, and the other Two worthy Gentlemen Commissioners were
here from your Lordships Court of Aldermen, and Common Council, the 25th
instant, they acquainted Me, and the Officers present, with what they had in
their Instructions; and also propounded, that We would appoint some number, to
join with the like number, in the behalf of the City, telling Us, That the like
proportion was sent to Portsmouth for an equal number in the behalf of the
Army; and that these Commissioners in beha^f of Army, City, and Navy, might
advise together, consider and agree of some things to be offered to the
Parliament, in order to the settlement of the Government of the Nation; unto
which We promised to return you answer by some of our own within few days,
which We give as follows, That the Parliament being now returned to the
Exercise and Discharge of their Trust and Authority, We are bound by Duty, as
We are Servants to Them and the Commonwealth, to yield Obedience to Them, and
to acquiesce in the Judgment of Parliament, as to Government. And as we have
publicly disclaimed the Interest of Charles Stuart, and all his Adherents, or
any Interest that shall add thereunto; so We humbly apprehend, if your
Lordships Court of Aldermen, and Common Council, improve your Authority in the
Government of the City against Charles Stuarts party, by a total, absolute, and
public disowning and discounterancing of them, and join with Us in a due
submission to the Parliament, it would be a great demonstration of your
Affections, and add much to the strengthening their hands in the settling of
the Peace of these Nations, and abating the Taxes and Burdens of the People,
and advancing the Trade of your City in particular, and the Nation in general;
and in these things, through the Lords assistance, we shall contribute our
utmost Endeavors. I remain,

My Lord, Your very humble Servant, John Lawson.
James off Gravesend, 28. December. 1659.
Vice Admiral Lawsons Letter to the Commissioners of the Militia of London.
GENTELMEN,
I Received yours of the 26th instant by these four Gentlemen my worthy
Friends, and therein cannot but take notice of your great respect both in your
Letter, as also by the Gentlemen, and do rejoice at your cheerfulness and
forwardness in helping to carry on the work of God, in securing his Cause, the
Interest of Christ and his people in their Civil and Religious Concernments,
and doubt not of your persisting therein: And I trust the Lord will crown yours
and others Endeavors with good and comfortable Issues; amongst whom, my Self
and Officers here shall be found ready to contribute to the utmost of our
Capacities; and if in any thing we may add to your Assistance, you may be very
confident of our forwardness: I have not further, but what these Gentlemen will
acquaint you withal, and that I am

James off Gravesend, 28. of December. 1659. Your assured Loving Friend and
Servant, John Lawson.


