PEPLUM OLIVARII, OR, A good Prince BEWAILED BY A GOOD PEOPLE. Represented in a
SERMON October 13. 1658. Upon the death of OLIVER Late Lord Protector.

By George Lawrence A. M. Minister of Crosses Hospital.

(...). Homeri Iliad. (...). said Achilles.

Theodosius tan^us Imperator recessit a nobis; Non totus recessit; reliquit
enim nobis HONORIUM, and filios suos, i^ quibus eum debemus agnoscere.
Ambrosius in Obitu Theodosii.

When the Inhabitants of the Land saw the mourning in the floor of Arad, they
said This is a grievous mourning: wherefore the name of it was called (...)
ABEL MIZRAIM.

Genesis 50.11. LONDON, Printed by E. M. for Samuel Thomson at the Bishops head
in Paul's Churchyard. 1658.

TO THE THRICE ILLUSTRIOUS RICHARD LORD PROTECTOR OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and
IRELAND, AND THE Dominions Thereunto belonging.
May it please your Highness,
TO accept this poor Oblation, as a Testimony of my unspeakable grief and
sympathy for the loss of your Renowned father, OLIVER LATE LORD PROTECTOR,
and as a paremphasis and acknowledgment of thankfulness for your Highness
personal undeserved respects to

Your most Loyal, And Humble Subject, George Lawrence.

PEPLUM OLIVARII, OR, A good Prince BEWAILED BY A GOOD PEOPLE.
2 CHRONICLES. 35.24. -- All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.


IN the twentieth Verse is Described the subsequent manner of Josiah's death,
The Coherence.
after he had done so many Glorious Actions, and especially his unexampled
Preparation of the Temple. That we may understand says Cajetan, That Divine
Grace even in the time of the Old Testament is granted to the very friends of
God not according to life temporal, though it be very much desired.

And the occasion was this. Pharaoh Necho, (or the lame) King of Egypt came to
fight against the King of Assyria, 2 Kings 23.29. Whom some suppose to be
Hadadrimmon, (or Adad the son of Tabrimon, who was Benhadad, 1 Kings 15.18.)
Josiah's confederate, and reigned in Carshemish: from whom, or the abundance of
Pomegranates, the City and the battelfield seem to take their names. Which
(...). 70.
place was eminent for the mourning of Ahab slain at Ramoth Gilead, say
Jonathan, Adrichomius, and others; and especially for the mourning for Josiah
wounded, and slain in the Valley of Megiddo, Zech. 12.11. But that Benhadad
was at this last fight, computers do deny, he being dead many years before this
engagement of Josias. And therefore more probable it was Nebuchadnezzar the
elder, who was both King of the Assyrians and Babylonians, and Carchemish by
Euphrates was his present hold, which being a Syrian City mentioned in Esaias
10.9. and Jerem. 46.2. sent many forces (says Josephus) against the Medes, and
Babylon, who had often worsted the Assyrians.

What was the cause now is not known, but it is apparent, that there was
continual hatred between them. The Truth, and Antiquity of which story, as to
its substance, is attested by Herodotus in his second book called Euterpe.

Lavater says, That Interpreters write that the King of Assyria had expelled
the King of Syria out of Carchemish, whom Necho intending to restore, brings
his forces through Judah the nearest way, having received a Commission to make
haste, and Josiah fearing National troubles, withstood this lame, yet flying
Necho.

And Albeit Necho sends him Ver. 21.


1. Ambassadors of Peace.

2. Informs him of a special Commission from God.

3. Disswades him from intermedling.

4. And though he tells him of the danger, as having received a prophecy from
the Prophet Jeremy, that he should go to Carchemish, and prevail, says Hierom
in his Hebrew Traditions, yet notwithstanding all his arguments, Josiah
provokes Necho, and draws forth to fight in the Valley of Megiddo.

Note, That the best of Gods people have their oversights and failings, which
many times they cannot see to redress, before it be too late.

James 3.2. In many things (...), we stumble all. Humanum est errare. Homo sum.
L. 1. Histor. Alieno Imperio felicior, qudm sao.
Tacitus says of Sulpicius Galba, that he was more happy in another Kingdom,
than his own: But Josiah was more happy in his own Kingdom, than another.

And though some things may plead for Josiah, as

1. His zeal against a proud, cruel, and lofty person.

2. His assistance of a Confederate.

3. His defending his own Land from Invasion.

4. Necho's pretended Commission might have been a mere Collusion, though the
effect showed otherwise.

5. Expedition, and haste to prevent an Incursion; yet Josiah was not
blameless.

1. Because hearing of Necho's Commission, he was incredulous: For God can
speak by wicked men, as Balaam, Caiaphas, yea by brutes, as by Balaams Ass.

2. Because he was self-confident, persisting in his resolved course.

3. Because he asked not counsel from God, says Cajetan. He must be in haste
indeed, who taking a long journey, will not pray a short prayer.

Whence we may learn,

1. Eccles. 7.20.

2. Chron. 32.31.

3. Asa, Jehosaphat, Amaziah, Uzziah, Hezekiah, and here Josiah. Though he dies
in Megiddo, yet in the peace of his Kingdom, and he lives in heaven.

4. Eccles. 7.16, 17, 18, -- Prove. 23, 4. Cease from thine own wisdom. For
though Josiah thirty years was a wise, holy, and happy Prince, yet he erred at
last in bringing war on Egypt. Many, and great be the errors of wise men,
which made Cicero himself exclaim against himself, O me nunquam sapientem! our
own wisdom is a weak Reed, which will quickly fail.

5. Job, chapter 12.5. He that is ready to slip with his feet, is as a Lamp
despised in the thought of him that is at ease.

6. Romans 14.1. (...); Receive such (as mothers their sick, and weak children)
into your bosom.

7. Lord order my steps in thy Word, Psalm. 119.133. and to cry, Hold up my
goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not, Psalm 17.5.

8. Add watchfulness, Matthew. 26.41.

Josiah is now come to the bloody field, Verse 22.
the Valley of Megiddo, taking its name from a Town, or Castle near adjoining,
for the word generally notes a Town, or Castle, says Strigelius. Armageddon
mentioned in Rev. 16.16. notes the place of cutting in pieces, or the
destruction of a Troop, says In his consent of Scripture.
Broughton; of (...), as in Eusebius; and Mageddon, the Mount of Megiddon. It
was a City whose King Joshua took, Josh. 12.21. And hence it appears, Tunc tua
res agitur --
that Necho marching beyond his bounds, moved Josiah to countermarch, lest he
surprising the neighbour-Kingdome, he might both overrun, and overthrow his
also: and in this place he was shot, saying to his servants, have me away. He
showed himself not wounded, but as sick, Verse 23.
ne exterreret exercitum suum, says Cajetan, that he might not dishearten his
Army, and of this wound he not long after died, and in this place; for it is
expressly said, 2 Kings 23.29. He was slain there.

And although in the four and twentieth verse, it is said, He was brought into
Jerusalem, and he died; Verse 24.
yet oftentimes the order of the thing done, is not according to the order of
the Narration. And though he was removed from one Charet to another, yet he
came not alive to Jerusalem; for it is expressed, 2 Kings 23.30. his servants
carried him in a Charet dead from Megiddo, and brought him to Jerusalem: Albeit
here the word Jerusalem is put before the word Died.

Quest. If Josiah so died; How was Huldah's Prophecy made good, by whom God had
said, 2 Chronicles. 34. Ver. 28. Thou shall be gathered to thy fathers in peace?

Answ. 1. He had inward peace in his own soul: so Junius. But this was not all;
for so he might have had peace, had he been elsewhere than in his own
Territories.

2. Sic dixit conestim veluti cedentia somno. Lumina dimi sit, plaeid^que ibi
morte quie vit. Hier. Vida.
In respect of the peace of his own Kingdom; for the peace is not the proper
and private peace of the King; for he died not peaceably as one is said to die
of old age, as Simeon, Ubi tam diu vivunt homines, ita quod habeant taedium de
suo vivere. Where men live so long, that it is a tediousness to live any
longer.
Luke 2.29. Or as the people in Ubi tam diu vivunt homines, ita quod habeant
taedium de suo vivere. Where men live so long, that it is a tediousness to
live any longer.
the Isles of Arren in Ireland, which will not let the candles of their lives
blow out, though they be in the snuff, says a Writer: Nor as one is said to
die of a natural disease, 1 Kings 2.6. But it is the public peace of the
Kingdom not disturbed with Wars wherein Josiah died. Thus a prosperous state
is peaceable, 2 Samuel 11.7.

3. In that he should not be a spectatour of the troubles threatened, which
should come after his death, Esaias 57.1, 2. He enters into peace, being taken
away from the evil to come; And so the nine Patriarchs before the flood came;
and all the Apostles but John, before the destruction of Jerusalem, says
Strigelius.

4. In that he should have a quiet Funeral, as should become the state of a
Prince. In War dead bodies are tumbled into the grave, 2 Kings 13.21. Jerem.
34.5. The Prophet speaking of Zedekiah who should suffer hard things, says
thus, Thou shall die in peace, and with the burnings of thy fathers, the former
Kings which were before thee, so shall they burn odours for thee, and they will
lament thee, saying, Ah Lord!

Therefore says Lavater, I will gather thee in peace; that is, I will not
destroy thee with others, nor lead thee a Captive as others to Chaldea; but thy
soul separated from thy body, shall be carried up into Abraham's bosom, and thy
body shall be interred in the Sepulchers of thy Ancestors; not as the bodies
of others to be devoured with birds and beasts: And as Sanctius notes, he is
said to be gathered in peace who is buried with Kingly Pomp, and Solemn
Mourning, which is not wont to be done in War and Tumult.

5. In that he should have everlasting rest, and glorious peace. So Deodate,
and others.

Thus this disguised Prince is wounded with a Lethalis Arundo, which fears no
Vizzards; wounded, dies; and dead, is brought to the Royal City; and so
imported, is Honorably inhumed in the Sepulchers of his Royal Predecessors,
while his Princely Hearse is embalmed with his Subjects tears.

The words are a sad and full Narrative of an universal lamentation for the
decease of a Noble and Religious Prince.

Wherein you have these parts. Division.


1. The person dead, King Josiah.

2. The Mourners, all Judah and Jerusalem.

3. The Solemn Funeral Act, Mourned. All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

Graecia tum possit Priamo quoque flenda videri. Ovid.


For Explication, we shall enlighten only one word. Explicat.
MOURNED.

1. The English word Mourned ( Minshaw.
say our Critics) comes of (...), fatale, fatal, (...), mors, death. Or of the
Hebrew word (...) Maar, dolere, to grieve, because death is the occasion of
sorrow.

2. The Latin word lugeo, read in the Text by Hierom, Montanus and Junius (say
they) derives it self of (...), or (...) singultio, to sob or sigh; (...) sunt
tenebrae, and (...) in caligine sum, noting the posture of a Mourner, in grief,
and blacks.

3. The French read, Menerent Dueil sur Josias.

4. The Septuagint, (...), he was (...).

5. The Hebrew word, (...) Mitheabelim.

1. (...) Methe notes a small number, Genesis 34.30. Deuteronomy 4.27. and (...) Methim a
greater number, or mankind, Deuteronomy. 3.6. Job 19.19. The people generally in City
and Country did lament.

2. Pagnin.
(...) Abelim of (...) Abal lugere, to mourn, Hos. 10.5. 1 Samuel 15.35. And
Metaphorically noting desolari, perire, Esaias 24.7. to desolate, languish,
perish. Abels death was the cause of Adams mourning. He was the first dead man,
and the first lamented; Adam was the chief Mourner: Funeral Mourning is as
Ancient as death it self. And some observe that the names of the three sons
of Adam were all mysterious.

1. Cain, A possession, the type of the first Creation.

2. Some derive the word of (...) Hebel, canitas, A thing which soon sades, as
the breath which goes out of the mouth.
Abel, Vanity, the type of the world since the fall.

3. Seth, A replantation, or replacing of a new Creation by Jesus Christ. The
truth is, that Adam could not but lament Abels death, and vanishing condition
very much; and is said by Stravus to grieve so much, that Adam vowed
continency, till warned by God, he did relinquish his vow. And Peter Comestor
affirms he mourned about an hundred years, because the Septuagint, Methodius
and Josephus write, that Adam was two hundred and thirty years old when he
begat Seth, Abels Successor.

And therefore this Abel who was the cause of so much Mourning, may seem a
significant expression to set forth this extraordinary grief in the Text for
the loss of an extraordinary Prince, the lamenting of whom is put for the
highest President Mourning, Zech. 12.11. Acts 2.37.

6. The Arabic renders the Text thus, All the people of Judah, and Citizens of
Jerusalem were sadned with vehement grief for King Josiah.

-- Whence observe,

That the deaths of public persons, are to be attended with the public
lamentations of the people.

Numb. 20.19. Proof.
All the Congregation mourned for dead Aaron thirty days, even all the house
of Israel. Deuteronomy. 34.8. The children of Israel wept for Moses when he died,
thirty days. 1 Samuel 25.1. When Samuel died, all the Israelites were gathered
together, and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah. Acts 8.2.
Devout men carried Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation over him.
Holy men says Beza, Invocat autem nem^.
lamented dead Stephen, and buried him with a singular example of charity and
faith, but no man prayed.

Genesis 50.3. The Egyptians lamented Jacob seventy days; and Joseph with his
brethren and fathers house accompanied with Charets and Horsemen, a very great
company, mourned with a great, and very sore lamentation, seven days, Ver.
8.9, 10.

2 Samuel 3.31, 32. David said to Joab, and all the people that were with him,
Rent your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before Abner: And
King David himself followed the Biere. And they buried Abner in Hebron, and the
King lift up his voice, and wept at the grave of Abner, and All the People wept.

2 Samuel 1.17, 24. David lamented with this lamentation over Saul, and Jonathan
his son, saying, Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul who clothed you in
scarlet with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel.

L. 1. de gentium moribus, c. 5. de Aegypticrum ritu.
Joannes Boemus of the Egyptian Rites, thus speaks, they bewail the death of a
beloved King seventy two days, renting their garments, abstaining from the
Market, Feasts and Wives; casting dirt on their heads, having two or three
hundred men and women walking about, and twice a day renewing their grief, in a
song renumerating the virtue of the King, grieving all those days as for the
death of a son: and upon the last day enclosing the Corpse in a Coffin, did
place it at the entrance of the Sepulcher, where the multitude did applaud his
worthy actions.

And in Theb. l. 6.
Statius, Pampinius describes the funeral fire wherein the body of Archemorus
was consumed with gold, silver, gems, and much Artillery attending.

Tunc septem numero Turmas (centenus ubique
Surgit eques) versis ducunt Insignibus ipsi
Grajugenae Reges, Lustrantque ex more sinistro
Orb Rogum, and stantes inclinant pulvere flammas;
Ter curvos egere sinus, illisaque telis
Tela son ant; quater horrendum pepulere fragorem
Arma, quater mollem famularum brachia planctum.
And Aeneid 11.
Virgil brings in Aeneas and his company deploring the death of Pallas thus,
Spargitur and tellus lachrymis, sparguntur and Arma,
It caelo clamorque virum, clangorque tubarum.


The very light of nature taught this; and therefore Funerals were called
Justa, Rites. Natura insitum est, (says one) non enim trunci sumus, aut
lapides. The live Pismires bury the dead ones, magna in suam speciem charitate,
says Textor, with a great deal of charity shown to their own kind; and so the
Storkes; and Mr. Sandy's in his Travels relates of the Virginians, that, having
covered the Corpse with dust, besmut their faces with coal and oil, and howl
at the grave twenty four hours.

Abraham bewails Sarah's death; Jacob, Rachels; Christ, Lazarus; and a great
company of people and women bewailed and lamented Jesus Christ, Luke 23.27.

The reasons of the doctrine we shall draw from a three fold spring, and all in
the Text.

1. From the person dead.

2. The Mourners.

3. The act of Mourning.

1. Taken from the person deceased.

1. A King, a public person, Josiah.

2. His Excellency and Worth. And,

3. The manner of his death.

1. A King, a public person.

(...). The chief Magistrate, one exalted above others by the head and
shoulders, a Vice-god. Moses had Gods Name lent him, Exodus 4.16. cap. 7.1. a
god (...), (...), Politicus.
non (...), not substantially, but by way of appellation. A King is the living
Image of God; he is as the Sun amongst the planets the Coryphaeus says
Keckerman. Him who imitateth the wise man, we call King, says Plato; says
Seneca, what is an imprudent King, but a Marmoset on the house top? The head of
Caligula was ill set on Jupiters body: The wisest we call King, hence King
Quasi Kunning. Now when the chief shall fail, it must cause sinking, it is as
when a standardbearer faints, Esaias 10.18. When the Sun is either eclipsed
or set, or knocked out of its orb, there must needs be horrible darkness. The
people prized David worth ten thousand of them, unwilling that he should
jeopardize his life, 2 Samuel 18.3. Unus mihi Cato pro centum millibus: This
struck deep on David's heart, when he bewailed Abner, 2 Samuel 3.38. saying to his
servants, Know ye not that there is a Prince and a great man fallen in Israel?
There was so much public grief in the death of Titus Vespasian, that all
grieved, as if every one had lost a son: And the people said of Octavian,
would he had either not been borne, or never died. A King is (...), the peoples
Basis: Among the eight kind of foundations said November. 5. 1608. ^n Psalm.
11.2, 3, 4. p 30.
the King of Preachers before King James, this was one, (...), vices, successi
ons, supplies. Father and son, res et spes, must drink of the deadly cup of
desolation. Now if the foundation be destroyed, what has the righteous done?
or what shall the righteous do?

2. His worth and excellency.

1. In his equity and justice.

1. He did right in the sight of God.

2. Followed the example of David his father, 2 Chr. 34.2.

2. Religion.

1. In his diligent seeking after God betimes, when he was young; as in ver. 3.

2. In destroying of Idolatry, ver. 4. foretold, 1 Kings 13.2.

3. Repairing of the Temple, ver. 8.

4. A tender heart, trembling at Gods Word; ver. 27.

5. Renewing the Covenant, ver. 30, 31.

6. Solemn and unexampled Passover, chap. 35.18.

3. Bounty, kindnesses and goodness, ver. 26.

4. Valor and undanted courage, though he failed in the last act, by an act of
rashness.

3. The manner of death. The Shepherd being smitten, the sheep are suddenly
scattered; as in Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.51. and Abimelech, Judges 9.55. The sudden
death of Eli and Phineas ashonished his wife, that she travailed, and died, 1 Samuel 4.19. Nil subitum est sem^^^ migrare par^tis, and jus^^s si ^^orte
pra^^^^patus (...) Refri^^ris crit.
And though it be true that nothing is sudden to them who are always prepared
to die; and that if a just man be surprised by death, he shall be in heaven;
yet in respect of Outward, and Relations, an unexpected blow brings more than
ordinary distraction, and it leaves a very sad character of Gods displeasure;
when men as birds and fishes are caught in the snare, and taken in the net,
Eccles. 9.12, 13. When the firstborn were suddenly slain, there was a great
cry, Exodus 12.29, 30.

Quis cladem illius noctis, Virgil. Aeneid. 2.
quis funera fand^
Explicet, aut possit lachrymis aequare dolores?
2.Taken from the Mourners themselves.

1. The sins of subjects hasten their Princes deaths, 1 Samuel 12. ult. and
especially,

1. Idolatry.

2. Disobedience to the Word, and Dispersers of it.

2. The peoples loss, and this will appear by what chief Magistrates are
represented in Scripture.

1. Captains to lead, 1 Samuel 9.16.

2. Sir John Heyward in the reign of King Edward the sixth.
Shields, Psalm. 47.9. Hos. 4.18. As the Protector and Admiral were called King
Edwards Shield and Target.

3. Heads, Number. 25.15. Judge. 11.8, 9, 11.

4. Heirs of Restreint, Judges 18.7. And Saul's Reigning, 1 Samuel 9.17. is called
restreining, Heb. When these curbs and bits are gone, horses turn wild. People
are sons of Belial without a yoke; when these Sea banks are broken down,
Libertinisme will break in as a mighty torrent.

5 Breath of the peoples nostrils, Lam. 4.20. Zedekiah being in prison, as
Calvin notes, his peoples breath is stopped: Motions cease, when there is a
suffocation.

6. Healers, Esaias 3.7. (...) Chosbesch, (...) Chobesch of (...) Chabasch to tie
and gird fast.
tying as a Chyrurgion and Physician, a Ruler, Job 34.17. Because Princes bind
their Subjects by their Laws. Patients dye, when Physicians give them over.
The good Samaritane did cure, when the traveller was wounded, Luke 10.34.

7. Shepherds. Cyrus my Shepherd, Esaias 44 28. David from a Shepherd of sheep,
came to be a Shepherd of men, Psalm. 78.72. Homer calls Agamemnon, (...), and
the King does rule by feeding, Matthew. 2.6. (...) Now Christ speaking of his
death, and the dispersion of his Disciples, said, Smite the Shepherd, and the
sheep will be scattered; Incustoditae diripiuntur oves,
which sentence is thrice spoken of in Scripture, Zech. 13.7. Matthew. 26.31.
Mark 14.27. After Paul's departing, grievous wolves would enter, not sparing the
flock, Acts 20.19.

8. Fathers. Agasicles King of the Spartans had this Apothegme, That there is
no more firm ground of establishment, than when a King does govern his
subjects as a father his children; and says Lavater, Princes are good parents;
and if fathers die, children should consider the benefits they have enjoyed,
and the many hardships and pains their parents have sustained for them. Wicked
Ioash weeping over dying Elisha, called him, O my father, my father, the Charet
of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. Yea, they are not only fathers, but
nursing fathers, Number. 11.12. Esaias 49.23.

9. Corner-stayes which bind the main building. If these are blown down, the
house it self will not stay long after, Esaias 19.13.

10. Builders, Psalm. 127.1.

11. Watchmen, ibid.

12. Eyes, Job 29.15. An eye with a Scepter was the Egyptian Hieroglyphick of a
Princes Vigilance and Rule. If the eye be out, or dark, how great is that
darkness? Matthew. 6.23. Such a Land is a mere Polyphemus blinded.

13. Saviors, Obad. ver. 21. to which may be added three more.

14. Steers-men. A Prince (...). Polit.
says Plato, is as a Shipmaster, who always takes care both of the Ship and
Seamen.

15. Pilots to conduct safe in the midst of Shelves, Rocks, Enemies and
Tempests.

16. Husbands, a good Prince is maritus populi. Now if it be an Art of Arts,
and Discipline of Disciplines to rule men, as Ars Artium, and Disciplina
Disciplinarum regere hominem.
Nazianzen speaks; then to lose such a Ruler, is a loss of losses not easily
expressed or repaired.

3. The peoples miseries; an inundation of calamities came tumbling in on
Josiah's death; Jehoahaz his eldest son was quickly deposed, and the Land
fined, 2 Chronicles. 36.3. Iehoiakim his second son was fettered, ver. 5. The Temple
was ransackt, and the Vessels were carried away, ver. 7. and Zedekiah his third
son was imprisoned and blinded. Nebuchadnezzar and the King of the Chaldees
crushed all; some were killed, others taken prisoners; Temple, City, Palaces
and all the goodly Vessels were destroyed, and the people were carried into
captivity, and remained in Babylon seventy years. The death of a Prince says
Charles the fifth, is as the Suns Eclipse, which usually portends commotions
and perturbations of State some time after; and this made Christ turn himself
and speech to the daughters of Jerusalem not to weep for him, but for
themselves and children: foreseeing a terrible storm coming on the State after
his decease, Luke. 23.27, 28. -- says the Prophet Jeremy, chap. 50.17. the
Pastor being away, Israel is a scattered sheep, the Lions have driven him away:
First, the King of Assyria has devoured him; and last, this Nebuchadnezzar
King of Babylon has broken his bones.

3. Taken from the Act of Mourning.

1. It testifies love, John 11.35, 36. Jesus wept at the death of Lazarus, then
said the Jews, behold how he loved him!

2. Its restrictive of envy, reproach and slander, John 11.21, 36. The people
beholding the sad Tragedy of Christ's death, in all its Acts, smote their
breasts, Luke 23.48. Gratia major est cum hominibus tanta reverentia incutitur,
ut agnitis criminibus, Christum jam colunt quem bactenus irriserunt.
The grace is greater, and more remarkable, when so much reverence is struck in
men, that acknowledging their sins, they now love Christ, whom before they
scorned, says Aretius; and indeed the dead move more compassion, than when
they have been living. Lycurgus the great Lawgiver more prevailed with the
Lacedaemonians when he was dead, than when he was alive: Julius Caesar wept at
the sight of dead Alexander: and living Alexander startled at the Tomb of
Cyrus: The Deeds and Trophies of Miltiades did affect Themistocles; and of
Hercules, Theseus: and Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, when he had
chop't off the head of Thomas Lord Cromwell Earl of Essex by his own Engine,
(says Speed) yet when he was dead, seeing the general Mourning, did wish (when
it was too late) that Cromwell were alive again. Even such praise the dead which
are already dead, in the speech of the Royal Preacher, Eccles. 4.2.

3. It is impulsive, inducing others to sympathize and condole, John 11.16.33.
Si vis me flere dolendum --; tears of friends draw on the tears of enemies and
neuters, Genesis 50.3, 11. The Egyptians mourned for Jacob, and the name of the
place was called ABEL MIZRAIM, the mourning of the Egyptians. Even the
daughters of the Nations shall lament, Ezekiel. 32.16. The wicked Prophet mourned
over the man of God slain by a Lion, 1 King. 13.29.

1. Use is of Information.

1. 1. Use.
Learn the Antiquity of Funerals; though the Rule of Augustine must be often
minded, namely Curatio Funeri^, conditio sepulturae, Pompa exequiarum magis
sunt vivorum salatia, quam subsidia mortuorum. l 2. de cura pro mortuis.
the over-seeing of the Funeral, the nature of the Burial, and the Pomps of
Exequies, are rather the comforts of the living, than the subsidies and
succors of the dead.

2. It is a blessing for Princes and others, to dye lamented, and to have (as
we say) Christian Burial; as 1 Kings 14.13. Jer. 34.4, 5. but otherwise a
curse, Esaias 14.18, 19, 20. Jer. 16.6. chap. 25.23. Ezekiel. 23.13. seen in
Jehoiakim the second son of this Josiah, Jer. 22 18, 19. They shall not lament
for him, saying, Ah my brother, or ah sister: they shall not lament for him,
saying, ah Lord, or ah his glory. He shall be buried with the burial of an
Ass, drawn and cast forth beyend the gates of Jerusalem. Hunc nemo lachrymis
decorat, neque funera fletu.

3. The special honor done to Josiah at his inhumation. Marcellus had six
hundred Herses, and Sylla six thousand Herses to attend his Hearse; and the
Ethiopians when their King was dead, would deprive themselves of life, as a
glorious testimony of their love and friendship. And all Judah and Jerusalem
seem to be but one common Hearse to honor the Hearse of their Noble and
Religious Prince.

See the Honor done to him.

1. He was buried in Mausolaeo, as reads Hierom, the burning place of Kings,
taken from that great and regal structure Queen Artemisia built for Mausolus
her husband King of Caria, which was accounted one of the seven wonders of the
world. He was buried in one of the Sepulchers; Notat sumptuosisimum, and
pulcherrimum, says Vatablus, a most sumptuous and fair Tomb.

2. By the Mourners.

1. In General. All the Inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem; all his subjects
paid their last and unenforced tribute, even that of tears.

2. In especial.

1. Jeremiah is recorded to be the chief Mourner. For he,

1. Composed the Funeral Verses, which were not his Threnod, or Lamentations
bound up in your Bibles next to Jeremiahs Prophecy, as Jonathan, Josephus,
Hugo, Abubensis. Lyra, the Hebrews, and others do imagine: for Calvin, and
Cornelius a Lapide understand it of Zedekiah Josiahs third son, who was
imprisoned, and in whose days the greatest part of the threatened storm and
desolation fell.

2. He foresaw that the Guardian of Religion, and Discipline being removed,
most sad confusions of opinions, manners, and worship would ensue.

3. With great grief of heart had he experience of the dissimilitude between
the father and children; and as Josiah had eighteen years cherished him as his
Patron (yea as his Father) yet his degenerated sons sported at the good
Prophets troubles; so Strigelius.

2. The Chorus, which was to carry on the Solemnity; and the Jews were so
skilled in lamentations, that the Greeks do hire them to cry at their
Funerals, says -- plorat Uberibus semper lachrymu, semperque paratis In
statione sua, atque expectantibus illam Quo jubeat manner modo. -- Juvenal.
Satyr. 6.
Juvenal.

3. The Chronicle of all his deeds. In perpetuam rei memoriam: Thus they who
honor God, them will God both in life and death honor.

2. Use is of Reproof, condemning,

1. Such who are senseless, as when King Uzziah died, the people were dull,
Isa, 6.1, 10. -- They have stricken me shall thou say, and I was not sick; they
have beaten me, and I felt I knew it not, Prove. 23.35. Evil men understand not
judgment, Prove. 28.5. Isa. 57.1.

2. Such who triumph at the death of godly Princes. It is observed by the
Historian, That none rejoiced at the death of Hannibal but Rogues; even that
Hannibal who was an instructed enemy against Rome from nine years old, insomuch
that when he was Adult, Hannibal ad Portas, put all the Inhabitants to an
afright, as Senacherib throwing his fireballs. The sinners in Sion were
afraid, saying, who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us
shall dwell with everlasting burning? Isa. 33.14. The truth is, Though our
Oliver of spreading Fame did bear the Olive of Peace in his Name, yet his heart
and actions were at war with Rome; and no marvel then that Papists, as the
daughters of the Philistines, and uncircumcised at the death of Saul and
Jonathan, do so much triumph, 2 Samuel 1.20. Many laughed, says Levater, (on my
Text) not lamented, as we may collect from Jeremiah, and Zephaniah, because
they hoped Idolatry would be restored.

There be three sorts who now rejoice.

1. Malignants. And

2. Debauched persons, as Panders, Trepanners, Hectors, Fiddlers, and the scum
of the people. And

3. Despisers of Dignities,

Because the sword did hew the first.

His Laws did scourge the second; And

His clemency did unboot the third.

And it is but the truth of the Prediction of our departing Lord and Master,
Joh. 16.20. Ye shall weep, and lament, but the world shall rejoice; ye shall be
sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy, at the Masculine birth of
a traveling womb the Scene shall be changed, Isa. 65.13, 14.

3. Such who err in mourning.

First, In Defect

1. Who mourn hypocritically, as Herod for John, and Ishmael Gedaliah, Jerem.
41.6. For often in Funerals says Lavater, many dissemble sorrow.

Ille Dolet vere, Qui sine vest Dolet. It is storied of the late King Charles,
Esquire Saundersons Chronicle.
contrary to former Presidents, that he in person attended the Hearse of his
father, as the chiefest mourner. But the nakedness of his fathers grave puts
the question, Whether that action (in it self imitable, and commendable) were
not a a piece of Court-policy to still the shrill clamor about his fathers
death, rather than a testimony either of the truth, or excess of his own love,
or sorrow.

2. Who mourn customarily, as the daughters of Israel the Recesse of Iephthah's
daughter, Judges 11.39. and -- ^^^los erudicre suos.
the mourning women, who school their eyes a lamentation. These Christ
dismissed, Matthew 9.23.24. Martyroleg lom. 1 page 493.
A Text Master Thorpe a godly Minister and Martyr did use against Arundel
Archbishop of Canterbury in the Reign of Henry the fourth, to overthrow
Organs, and Church-musick. Many lay no more to heart the death of public
persons, than children the death of a father, or mother, if they can have
comfits, though they quickly feel to their real grief afterward, that they
had such a father, and such a mother.

3. Who mourn profanely, carowsing, swearing, and as it were dancing about the
dead man's grave. Said Esau in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are
at hand, then will I slay my brother Jacob, Genesis 27.41. King Marres was so
profane, that he bewailes his Crow, says Aelian; the Lady her Dog, says
Martial, and Crassus his Lamprey no less than a son, and built a Sepulcher,
says Sandys. Some there be so wicked, as to lament the death of beasts, fish,
and foul, more than they would the death of the best, and most useful
Christians.

Such was the ridiculous profanesse of the Magaveres, that at the burial of the
dead, they wrapped the dead body in Holly twigs, binding the neck and legs
together, putting it into a hole, covering it with stones, and setting on the
heap some ridiculous thing or other, and so without any more ado departed.

Secondly, In excess.

1. Who mourn immoderately: Jacob surmising his son Joseph to be rent in
pieces, rent his clothes, and put sackcloth on his loins, and mourned for his
son many days: and all his sons, and all his daughters rose up to comfort
him: but he refused to be comforted, and he said; for I will go down into the
grave unto my son mourning; thus his father wept for him, Genesis 37.33, 34, 35.
Rachel weeping for her children, refused to be comforted, because they were
not, Ierem. 31.15. And Lyra faith, it was a tradition among the Jews, that
Rachels Tomb did lament and weep to the Israelites passing by there, when they
were taken captives by the Babylonians, and lead to Babylon. And Hierom reports
of Paula, that she would grieve at the death of her husband, and children, that
she was always like to die for sorrow. Now the Apostle disswades from this, 1
These. 4.13, 14. By believing the great Articles of the Resurrection.

Baal Turim.
The Hebrews gather from Genesis 23.2. Because the letter Caph is less than all
the rest; Abraham wept but a little for Sarab; not as if he did care for her
but a little, but to show moderation: though the death of public persons calls
for a greater stream of tears, than the death of others, yet there is still to
be observed a due proportion. The Turks mourn in white, and but a little says
Sandys. The Egyptians mourn too much.

2. Who mourn desperately, as Saul's Armourbearer seeing his Master fall, falls
on his own Sword, and kills himself, 1 Samuel 31.5. and the Ethiopians seeing
their King dead, slay themselves. The speech of Thomas to his fellow-disciples,
let us also go that we may dye with him, John 11.16. meaning dead Lazarus,
savoured much more of true affection, than regulated zeal. God that made a Law
that none should kill another, made no such proviso, that any should be Felo de
se, and kill himself.

3. Read Buxtorf. Synag. c. 35. de sepultura mortuorum Judaeo rum.
Who mourn superstitiously, Jerem. 16.5, 6. Levit. 19.28. Ye shall not make any
cuttings in your flesh for the dead, nor print any marks upon you, as the
Arabians, and other Heathens. The women's weeping for Tammuz, Ezekiel. 8.14, 15.
whether it were an idolatrous Prophet, or Adonis, or Osiris King of Egypt, or a
beast, or the Sun in some figure; the lamentation was a great abomination,
and this their wailing was to be bewailed.

So that the Rules of mourning must be these. It must be 1. Real; 2.
Affectionate; 3. Christian; 4. Proportionable; 5. Charitable and Merciful; and
6. Scriptural, according to the Canon of the Word.

The third and last Use is of Exhortation

To quicken us to be affected with the stroke of Gods hand, and to grieve for
the death of the thrice Illustrious Oliver of BLESSED Memory. BLESSED.
The People were not sensible of King Uzziahs death; Evil men understand not
judgment, but they that seek the Lord understand all things, Prove. 28.5. For
all this I considered in my heart, even to declare all this, that the
righteous, and the wise, and their works are in the hand of God, Eccles. 9.1.
Woe is me says Micah, chap. 7.2. The good man is perished out of the earth:
And to provoke all the people in the three Nations to mourn, let them,

1. Consider His Dignity; 1. Motive.
who was raised up to the highest place in government, and lifted into the
Throne by the prayers of Gods people; and not by the ambitious and usurped lift
of self-exaltation, as The rebellious exalt themselves. Ps. 66.7. The Rule of
Diogenes was this, (...) -- THOU must be impudent and bold, and THOU must
slander Kings and private persons; for so it shall come to pass that all will
cast their eyes upon THEE, and judge THEE Valiant. Samosatensis. tom. 1. p. 366.
self-exalting Diogenians Stentorize. In which station (absit invidia verbo) no
Prince did behave himself more unbyassedly, religiously, and prudentially than
he.

2. Consider his worth; being a man every way fitted and furnished for the
discharge of so great a work, and so high a calling. Eminent he was,

1. In his Justice commutative and distributive; punishing few, and rewarding
many beyond their deservings with life and liberty, who had prodigiously
forfeited both.

Et piger ad poenas Princeps, ad praemia Velox, Quique dolet quoties cogitur
esse ferox. Walking by that golden Rule, 2 Samuel 23.3. He that rules over men,
must be just, ruling in the fear of God.

2. In his Religion; being a man mighty in Scripture, enjoying a praying
Spirit, a Spirit of communion with God, love to all the Saints, and living by
faith in all his actions; Making the interest of Christ his own, and in his
practice asserting the position of Non fundatur Dominium nisi in Imagine Dei.
Hugo, Dominion is not founded but in Gods Image. Animating and settling learned
and godly Ministers; extending his beams (as Charles the fifth notes of a good
Ruler) like the Sun even to the dark places, and providing an Act to confirm
the titles of Ministers; and showing to the Ministry in general (so settled) so
great affection, as emulatory to the Ministry of all the Nations round about
us: endeavoring and consulting an expedient to cement both Ministers and
Professors of the classical and congregational way, the grief for whose
divisions lay heavy on his spirit till the last; sympathizing with the
distressed Protestants in Peidmont, Poland, and other places, who resorted to
him, as affrighted chickens to the Hens wing for shelter, and esteemed him the
Protector General of the Protestant Religion: patronizing the Dutch, French
and Italian Congregations in their privileges and rites: passing that that
full and admirable bill for the Celebration of the Lords day: and like another
Constantine when Religion was languishing, even at the last gasp, was her
Physician, who did administer a seasonable restorative, if not miraculously
work a resurrection.

3. In his kindnesses to the Nation; for what Tertullus said of the Governor,
Acts 24.2. might be said of him, that we did enjoy great quietness, and very
worthy deeds. Witness his zeal and wisdom in asswaging that purple deluge of
English and Hollandish blood: he was the Dove with the Olive branch, who did
not only declare Peace, but effect it. He was the true Chobesch, the binder up
of our wounds, and stopper of that bloody issue of both Nations; and did not
only renew friendship with the Netherlanders, but with France, Portugal, and
Swethland also. Witness his disciplining of the Army; his encouraging of Trade
and Merchandising; his general care for the preservation of the whole; the
timous preventing of Hostilities abroad, and the speedy crushing of Cockatrices
in the egg at home: his neglecting of a Crown when offered with many pressive
and expressive Parliamentary persuasions: his passing so many advantageous
bills the last Parliament: Begun Anno 1656.
his unspeakable condescension to do the meanest offices for the welfare of
unthankful men: insomuch that he was pleased to acknowledge, that in the
juncture of broils, he did but execute the trust of a Constable to keep all
quiet; and what is Constabularius, but a stable-Groom to make unruly horses
tame, and stand together? (...), says Ethio^ic.
Heliodorus, the Prince did seem to serve; so that what an Italian Discourser
said, there was never any State so swadled in its infancy as the Roman was by
the first King, may be better said of this Protector. And what Pro Deiotare,
multa sunt tuae clementiae Monumenta, sed maxim eorum incolumitates.
Cicero said of King Deiotarus, let me say of him, that truly many were the
Monuments of his kindness, but especially this, the Peoples safety and
preservations.

4. In his valor from the Garrison of Ely to the last Worcester fight; his
faith many times subdued before he struck a stroke; and his name was more
terrible than that of Turcomastix.
Scanderbeg.

-- Plus nominis horror
Quam tuus ensis aget. --
When England, Scotland and Ireland were all in a blaze, he was the Ransomer of
the Nations, and the common extinguisher and quench-coal. The Army at
Marston-moore were put into a quaking ague but at the report of his being in
hurt and in danger. At Tredagh he stood himself in the breach, before the mouth
of the thundering Cannon; where gallant Colonel Castle and others were slain.
He was the long Parliaments battle-axe on every turn; as Edgar Etheling, he was
Englands darling; and the Parliament could be no less without him, than Henry
the eighth could be without the assistance of Thomas Cromwell Earl of Essex,
the root of this Glorious Branch.

He was called Malleus Monachorum in specie, Martyrolog.
but Renowned Oliver was Malleus Inimicorum, the mawle of enemies in the very
genus: and if the Lord Protector in the Reign of King Edward the sixth,
purchased so much honor in one battle at Muscleborough field in the year 1548.
then much more were the laurels of him who disputed so many hot battles with
success at Preston, Marston-moore, Dunbar, Worcester, Nazby, etc.

Quae Regio in terris nostri non plena laboris! So that I may speak of him what
was spoken of Charles the great, that he was a good Prince, and a valiant
Soldier; and such was his valor, (...).
that as Scipio by Rome, and Camillus by Fabius Maximus, so he was envied
living, and is now admired being dead.

-- Sublatum ex oculis quaerimus invidi. (...). In Ajace.
As Sophocles speaks, men never prize a mercy but when it is gone; and says
Solomon, Prove. 17.16. There is a price in the hand of a fool, and he has no
heart to it; and one thing more I cannot bury in silence; he always gave very
honorable terms and articles of war, and was as punctual in making them good;
which rendered himself in the eyes of the vanquished and the world truly
honorable.

Sparguntur in omues, In te mixta fluunt; and quae Divisa bea^^s Efficient,
collectatenes. -- Claridian.
Those lines of Honor which by refractions ran dispersedly in others, in him
were knit up as their natural center: and what made others happy in division,
was in him a College of virtues solemnly met and seated.

5. In his Prudence, and mannaging of Affairs both Military and Civil, as
Pliny says of Mauricius the Emperor, Vir grav^, prulea^, multis experimentis
eruditus, and qui futura possit ex praeteritis providere. Epistol.
he was a man grave, prudent, taught by many experiences, and who could
foresee things to come, by what was past. As for Civil Affairs, he had with
Vespasian learned what was the overthrow of the Lutinist Nero, in winding the
pins of Government sometimes too high, and sometimes letting them down too low:
and Chytraeus in Herodotum.
that the destruction of Astyages, Croesus, and Xerxes was cruelty, pride and
ambition; and that the establishment of the Commonwealth of Cyrus, Dioces,
Darius, Miltiades, Themistocles, Pausanias and others, was by prudence: he did
as Charles the fifth said of a good Ruler, like Saturn the highest planet move
slowly, doing all things with deliberation Ne quid respublica caperet detrim^mi.
, that the Commonwealth might take no harm. And as for Military Affairs, his
prudence was not inferior, both in the Discipline of the Army, and in his
frequent Orations at the heads of Regiments before engaging to encourage them
both against the fear of the enemy and death; Nulla vox humana existima tur
dulcius He rodotores maximas narrare, adeo ut Musae a veteribus fingantur ore
Herodoti esse locutae.
as if every Muse had given books to this Herodotus. No man's voice is thought
to relate great things more sweetly than Herodotus, so that the Muses were
feigned by the Ancients to have spoken in his mouth; of whom thus Frisius
sings; (...).

6. In his diligence about the guards at night; insomuch that about the evening
dusk he would ride Incognito as a private Soldier to take a view of the Guards
and the Soldiers duty. His presence like that of Europus King of Macedonia did
animate them; and the speech of Sulpitius Galba to his was still in
reciprocation, Ego vester, and vos mei, I am yours, and you are mine.

7. In his love and affability, as was evident in addresses to him, as I my
self was an eyewitness at Barkhampsted 1647. when the headquarters were
there. That what Omnes semper in Deiotaro virtutes, sed praecitue singularis
and admiranda frugalitas; fuit fortis, justus, severus, gravis, magnanimus,
largus, beneficus, liberalis. Hae sunt Regiaelaudes.
Tully said of King Deiotarus, may be to him applied, all these virtues were
eminent in Deiotarus; but especially his singular and admirable frugality, he
was strong, just, severe, grave magnanimous, large, kind and liberal. These,
these are the Royal praises of the glorious Saint.

8. In his death, in that he died,

1. With much assurance as to himself, like holy Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; and
though the Senate has deservedly adorned him dead with a Crown, and other
Regal Ensigns, which living he refused, There is laid up for him a Crown of
righteousness, a Crown immarcessible, 1 Pet. 5.4. Quarta Perennis.

Seneca as he lived virtuously, so he cheerfully died with this verse in his
mouth, Vixi, and quem dederit cursum fortuna, peregi.

And as Frisius said of Plato, (...).
he shined as the morning star amongst the living, and dying, the evening
star amongst the dead.

And though he had been in deaths often, and faced death as often as he fought
battles, and though his death had been attempted by Sundercombe, and others,
yet he died not a violent, but a natural death, in his own personal peace, and
peace of his Kingdoms, being full of days, and lies now in the bed of honor:
and on the third day of September, 1658. he received his Writ of ease from all
his more than Herculean labors, which had been a day one year after another,
viz. Anno 1650. and Anno 1651. rubrick't with two remarkable victories at
Dunbar and Worcester, as Antipater died on the same day of his rising.

2. With much grief to others. Octavian and Titus Vespasian were not more
lamented; of the former it was said, Would to God he had not been born, or
never died; and of the latter, that he was Amor, and Victor, and deliciae
humani generis.
the Love, Conqueror and delights of mankind, to whom Speed compares our
Henry the fifth. And such was the lamentation of the Emperor Severus, that Aut
non nasci, aut non mori debaisse.
the Senate of Rome said, he should either not be borne, or not die. Our
English Senate much laments his death, of whom it may be said, as of David,
Acts 13.36. After he had served his own generation, by the will of God he fell
on sleep. 1 Chronicles. 29.28. He died in a good old age, full of days, riches and
honor, and Solomon his son reigned in his stead. On whom the Critics made
this Epitaph, Here lies David, who when he was a boy
Slew Lions and Bears;
In his middle age great Goliath;
When he was a little older, great enemies,
The Philistines;
And in his old age, overeame himself.


9. In his fame, -- Statius.
Notum per saecula nomen. His memory as of the just is blessed, Prove. 10.4. and
shall be an everlasting foundation, ver. 25. whence the Rabbis in their
quotations of any eminent Author deceased, usually subjoyne this honorable
commemoration* BENEDICTAE MEMORIAEN. or such an one of blessed memory; Memoria
ejus sit in Benedictione. The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance,
HAPPY.
Psalm. 112.6. OLIVER of HAPPY MEMORY: this the second motive.

3. Consider your own sins. Our sins have hastened the Protectours removal; as
unthankfulness, pride, animosities, avarice, formality and licentiousness.
These were the ague fits which have expelled his breath, and our obduracy the
stone which has sunk him to the grave. And we may say, as Bradford said of the
death of King Edward the sixth King of England, Our sins made holy Oliver die.

4. Consider our own loss. The loss of a General, is a general loss. The
loss of him, is a complexion, or rather a complication of losses. We have lost
a Captain, a Shield, the Head, an Heir of Restraint, the Breath of our
Nostrils, an Healer, a Shepherd, a Father, and a Nursing Father, a
Cornerstone, a Builder, a Watchman, an Eye, a Savior, a Steers-man and
Rector, a Pilot, and a Common Husband.

5. Lastly consider our miseries which we deserve; even the miseries which
befell Judah and Jerusalem after Josiah's death, in the days of Jehoahaz,
Jehoiakim and Zedekiah, desolation of Cities, Temple, Families, and a Captivity
stricter, and longer than a Babylonian; which the Lord in mercy turn from us,
and turn us to him by true and unfeigned repentance. O England repent, repent.

And now considering all these incentives, who can refrain from weeping? Quis
enim tam tristia fando.
Myrmidonum, Dolopumve, aut Diri Miles Vlyssei
Temperet a lachrymis?


And if any should ask me what is the cause of so much mourning? I answer with
Ambrose telling the cause of his grief to a friend for the decease of an
eminent person, demanding the question, Quia di ficile esset similem ei
invenire.
Because it would be a hard thing to find one like to him. Says God of
Solomon, 1 Kings 3.12. There was none like him, neither after him should arise
any like him.

Anglia,
Nec primum similem visa es, nec habere sequentem.
He has won the Palm, Victory, has settled the Olive, Peace, and has left
his friends to hang Plectra dolo retacent, muta dolor lyra est.
their Harps upon the Willow.

Truly I may say his Deeds deserve a full, distinct, and faithful Chronicle,
which were so superlative, that a succeeding generation of no little faith
would scarce suppose them credible: yet of him I may dare say, as was said of
the Royal Princess, Prove. 31.29. Many Princes have done virtuously, but
Renowned OLIVER has excelled them all.

But here an Asthma stops me; for with Si omnia corporis mei membra verterentur
in lacbryma^.
holy Hierom, if all the members of my body were converted into tears, yet in
this short variety of words, I fear I should have silenced more than what is
spoken; and with Silere melius putem, quam parum dicere. Salust.
him of Carthage, better may I judge to say nothing more, than speak a little.

And therefore here die away my mourning pen, and let thy Manumitter sob the
rest, -- (...), easing his heart-bound grief by weeping forth this Epitaph; HIC
JACET TOTIVS ANGLIAE, SCOTIAE,
ET HIBERNIAE INDVPERATOR,
ET
TOTIVS CHRISTIANISMI MIRACVLVM,
OLIV ARIVS.


But now methinks I hear the treading feet, and the reviving voice of his Royal
Successor saying, Why make you this ado, and weep? has not my father of
admired fame by the advice of Parliament provided a succession to prevent the
Rivalry of all pretenders, and ten thousand woes?

O my Lord, you are the Honorius of our deceased Theodosius, his eldest son,
the rightful heir; you do patrize and walk in your fathers steps, you are
entered into the Harvest of your fathers dear-bought labors, and may you and
yours reap the sweetness of them to many generations.

But yet give me leave to vent these Votes, and pray, 2. Directions to prevent
miseries after the Protectours death.
1. For your Highness; That the God of Counsels would direct you, your Council,
Armies, and the whole Land, that you may be a father of thousands of millions,
and that your seed may possess the gate of them that hate you; that Jacobs
legacy to Joseph may be your portion, Genesis 49.26. Surpassing blessings may
crown your Head, that the advice of your languishing father on his death bed
may not be forgotten; Tu Civem, Patremque geras; lu consule cunctis,
Nec tibi; nec tua te moveant, sed publica vota;


As Theodosius counseled Honorius, That in the strength of Jesus Christ (...).
Plutarch.
, you would rouse and bestir your self; for without Christ's assistance, the
government of three Nations would quickly sink you. Grande opus, and sub quo
sudaret Olympifer Atlas,^


-- A work so great
Would make Olympus-bearing- Atlas sweat.
And that the wild dream of raving Porphyrius in Gildas, Britannia est
fertilis Provincia Tyrannorum, may by your godly and prudential Regency be
proved a lie.

2. That your Subjects would study loyalty, peace, and love, that you may not
be ashamed of them, nor they afraid of you; and that they may be as willing
upon all occasions to serve you; as Ittai, and his servants, David, 2 Samuel
15.15, 21. (...) --
Said Ignatius in an Epistle to the Smyrneans, The people ought to honor the
Prince; for there is none more excellent and near to God in the University of
things than he. And

3. That both you, and all might mind our own mortalities, while we are called
upon to bewail the death and sicknesses of others; Said Elihu to Job, chap.
36.18. Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his stroke.
But here I shall conclude with the vote of Tertullian to Trajan the Emperor,
wishing your Highness Vitam prolixam, Imperium securum, Domum tutam, Exercitus
fortes, Senatum fidelem, Populum probum, and Orbem quietum.
LONG LIFE, A SECURE REIGN, A SAFE HOUSE, VALIANT FORCES, A FAITHFUL SENATE, A
GOOD PEOPLE, AND A QUIET WORLD.

FINIS.

