The Debauched CAVALLEER: Or the English MIDIANITE.

Wherein are compared by way of Parallel, the Carriage, or rather Miscarriage
of the Cavalleeres, in the present Reign of our King Charles, with the
Midianites of old.

Setting forth their Diabolical, and Hyperdiabolicall Blaspemies, Execrations,
Rebellions, Cruelties, Rapes, and Robberies.

Do unto them, as unto the Midianites, as to Sisera, as to Jabin at the brook
of Kison, Psalm. 83.9.10. Penned by G. L. and C. L. for public good.

LONDON, Printed by L. N. for HENRY OVERTON, in Pope's Head Alley. MDCXLII.

The debauched CAVALLEER, or the English MIDIANITE.
Christian Reader,
BE pleased to consider, that the intent of this ensuing Discourse, is wholly
to render a viprous brood of prodigious Incendiares both of Church, Sic Canibus
Catulos similes sic matribus hoedos. Noram. Sic parvis componere magna solebam.
Virgill.
and State, more odious in the eyes of all the Kings most loyal, and religious
Subjects throughout this Kingdom, that they may hereby be excited to
contribute, both their Prayers, Substance, and all the Interest they have with
God, and man, against these debauched Cavalliers either for their sequestration
from the presence of our King, or for their total extirpation out of this
Realm of England.

In which Discourse, shall be dispatched these two particulars.

1. Concerning the name of Cavalleers.

2. Concerning the degeneration of these wretches from the name of Cavallier,
by several characters (a) running parrallel with the Midianites, and who did
set themselves against the Israel of God, and the God of Israel.

Condemnari nemo debet, antequam nomen e^us delatum sil.
1. Concerning the name of Cavallier.

There is a rule in the Civill-law, none ought to be condemned before his name
be known. Since therefore we come to condemn the damnable practices of those
men who bear this name, we shall endeavor to make it known unto the world.

The word Cavallier used amongst us here in England, is derived from the
Italian word Cavallero, which signifies an Horse-rider, as that word is derived
from Cavallo, which signifies an horse, whence the Italians have this usual
speech amongst them, monte Cavallo, Mount, or Get upon your Horse.

There is another word like unto it in sound, and used amongst us here in
England, and that is Chivalier, being derived from the french word Chevalier,
which signifies an horseman, as that word is derived from Cheval, an horse,
whence the Frenchmen have this usual speech amonst them, Mount Cheval, up and
ride, and whence also our english Noblemen in their tilting have the notion of
Chivalrie amongst them.

We are not ignorant, that some Ancients deduce the name of Cavallier from the
latin word, Gaballus, which signifies a great horses; as if the name
Cavallier, were as much as Caballier, V, and B, being letters which are
symbollicall, and so being trans-elemented, they easily sally forth, and run
one into the other. And the Greeks Becman does observe, derive it from the
Greek compound (...), from the weighty and burdensome saddles, which are cast
upon the backs of great Horses.

However, though not utterly disallowing these two last derivations, because
they are ingenuous, we shall accurre unto the former, both the French, and the
Italian satisfaction, and so much the rather, because our Cavalliers here in
England, are either French, or Italian, at least in the affection, yet
notwithstanding we shall especially agree to the Italian original, as the most
proper head radix, and fountain.

The name it self, we confess, is honorable, and is equivalent with our
Miles, Armiger, Armigerans, vel Equus auratus, which is a Knight, a Soldier,
or a golden horseman. But these unworthy miscreants have made the very name a
reproach, as the Antichristian Prelates, the name of Bishop, which in Saint
Paul's time was worthy of double honor, but by reason of their tyrannical
usurpation, is (as old father Latimer expresses it) worthy of a more than a
double, (even) a Treble reproach.

Thus according to the Physicians, Corruption optimi, fit pessima, the best
thing being corrupted proves the worst: and a good name being abused, is now
become most odious.

And therefore now, since the name of Cavallier is known what it is, we now
descend to show in the second particular how it is for the present abased, and
abused by these sons of Belial, who have degenerated from the honorable
reputation of the term of Cavallier, as shall appear in these ensuing
Charactars, paralleld with the Midianite.

The Characters of them are gathered out of the Books of Numbers, and Judges.

1. The first Character of the Midianites.
They were full of rage, and blasphemy, when the Altar of Baal was thrown
down, Judge. 6.28, 29, 30, 33.

So are the Cavalleers, what makes them rage, but that the Priests, and Altars
of Baal; are throwing down amongst us? and what makes their blasphemies break
forth, but their rage? according to the speech of the Prophet Isaiah c. 8. v.
21. They shall fret themselves, and curse their God.

Now to give a list of their raging blasphemies, our joints tremble, our hands
shake, and our pens do quiver; yet how ever, to render them more odious to all
the world, we could do no less, then depaint them out in their own labors,
and publish to the world some of those blasphemous execrations, which upon
certain information we have gatherered and inserted here as follows,

I. Whereas the Apostle did avow, and Heathens did confess, that we live,
move, and have our being, only in the living God. Act. 17.24. yet these men
say, they live, move, and have their being in a mortal man.
We drink a health to King Charles, in whom we live, move, and have our being.

II. Lo behold nthat Gospel which is the only means to keep men from
everlasting confusion, do these men wish confusion to us, throwing away the
only plaster that can cure their wounds, and the only remedy to save their
souls. Procul, o procul este prophani. Vir.
We drink a health to the confusion of the Gospel of Jesus Chrst.

III. A speech full of blasphemy if they meant the true God, whom he does serve,
or at least of uncharitablenes, also adiudging him to worship a false God.
We drink a health to the confusion of PIMM'S God.

IIII. Here is an unparalleld blasphemy, contrary to the principles of Nature,
Reason, and Religion.
We will drink, and be drunk, and whore, and be damnd, and will not be
beholding to God to save us.

V. The round heads might rather wish to be out of heaven, with those who are
termed by them Roundheads, then be in Heaven with such swearing and and
blasphemous Cavalliers, if it were possible that such sins should reign in
Heaven.
We had rather be in hell with our Comrades, then in Heaven with the Roundheads.

These five particulars were reported by a Godly Gentleman who went with a
message to the King, who declared that he heard all these himself, which Mr:
Norton a Minister now about the Army received from his mouth, and sent up in a
letter to Mr: George Walker a Reverend Pastor of a Church in Watlingstreete
here in London which Letter by him was delivered to the Parliament, that the
worthies also might read those horrid Epistolarie Execrations.

VI. Oh to what senseless stupiditie are these men grown to, who have forgot
their maker! and know not the Answer to the first question in the child's
Catechism, Who made you? instead of answering God, they say, The Devil.
The Divill that made us Damme us.

This was avowed in a Pulpit, by that reverend Preacher of Gods word Mr:
Simpson who came lately from Holland.

VII. It is well we know who are the Roundheads in the Cavalliers opinion; viz.
All those who will not wish their own damnation; rather our tongues should
cleave to our mouths, than such hellish language should proceed from us as
this. 2 Parallel.
A great Company of Cavalliers coming to plunder a Town, they swore, that they
would rob, and slay all the Roundheads in the Town; but some of that
Rascally Crew demanding how they might know the Roundheads from the rest of
the Inhabitants. Answer was immediately returned, they would make them wish God
Damme us, and all who would not wish God to Damme them, they would rob and slay
for Roundheads.

And thus by their Notorious Blasphemies, they do some notable despite, and
wrong even to the Spirit of Grace, the Holy Ghost Heb. chapter 10 v. 29.

Wherefore we lift up our hearts to Heaven in the words of the Psalmist,
Remember this O Lord, that the Enemies have reproched thee; and that this
foolish people have blasphemed thy Name, read Psalm. 74.18. Thus we leave them
to God to whom Vengeance belongs, that he may execute on them the Judgment
written, And thus we have done with the first charracter.

2. The second Character of the Midianites.
They were men of Cruelty and Oppression, Judge. 6.2.4. because of the
Midianites, The children of Israel made them Dens which are in the Mountains,
and Caves, and strong holds, and they Encamped against them and destroyed the
Increase of the Earth and left no Sustenance for Israel neither Sheep nor
Oxen. O quot Nerones, quot Domitiani, quod Commodi, quot Bassiani, quot Imites
Dionisii hasce peragravere terras. Sic Benzo in Histor. Indica.
etc. and thus the Holy Ghost proceeds to emblazon, and set forth their
opressing Cruelties.

Now let the world judge whether * the Cavalliers of our time do not fully
answer the oppressions of those Midianites spoken of in the world; and many
parts of this Kingdom can by sad experience give testimony hereunto. How many
of the Kings faithful and loyal Subjects have been forced to leave their
dwellings? and (as the Israelites when pursued by the Midianites) to run to the
denns and caves of the earth? Those who were able to relieve and feed others,
how are they now forced to beg their own bread? and those who had fair houses
to dwell in, good beds to lie on, how are they constrained to lie in the open
fields? (lest he should be exposed to Vivitu^ ex^apto, non hospes ab
hospitutus. Ovid. Vitur ex rapto, non hospes ab hospite sospes. Palin.
their rage and robberies) who have nothing but a Stone for their Pillow, the
Bank for a Bolster, the Earth for their Bed, the Grass for their Rugg, the
Trees for their Curtains, the Hedges for their Vailance, and are like to have
(if not seasonably supplied) the Winter Snow for their Sheet, the Sky for
their Canopie, and the chirping Birds of the morning to be their Alarm, to
awake them. To bring up the Parallel close: as Midian did destroy the increase
of the Earth, and left no sustenance for Israel, They may well say of
themselves, as the people said of themselves in Salvians days, Iniusti sunt
Barbari, and nos hoc sumus. Avari sunt Barbari, and nos hoc sumus Infideles
sunt Barb^ri and noc hoc sumus. Impudici sunt Barbari and nos hoc sumus. Omnium
denique Improbitatus and impuritatum pleni sunt Barbari, and nos hoc sumus.
Salvian. l. 3. de Gubernat. Dei. 3. Paral.
neither Sheep, nor Oxen, nor other beasts; so have Populus Inviden^io^,
Inimicior, Implacabilior sub Sole, Solis nullus est Judaeis. Buxtorf. Synag.
Iudaic. c. 22. p. 426.
these cruel Cavalliers destroyed the fruits of the Earth in many parts of
this Kingdom, spoiled Corn in the ground, burned much up when gathered into
the Barn, or standing in the Reeke; and as for taking away their substance,
they have by violence broken into houses, taken away all household stuff, and
provision left nothing but naked walls, insomuch that men had not bread for
their Wives, and Children. And as for taking away the beasts (as the Midianites
did from Israel) to make that true, they have driven men's Dear out of their
Parkes, men's Sheep out of their Folds, men's Oxen out of their Ploughes, and
Horses from their Harrowes, constraining men to part with their horses, to
further them in their unwarrantable Designs. And thus we have also done with
the second Character.

The third Character of the Midianites.
They were rambling Renagadoes; now here now there, one while at Gaza, Judge.
6.4. another while by Ophrah, Judge. 6.11. another time at Baals Alter and the
Grove, Judge. 6.28.29. another time in the Valley of Iezreel. Judge. 6.33. another
time at Bethshittah toward Zererath, another time at the border of
Abel-Meholuh unto Tabath, Judge. 7.22. and another while at the Rock of Oreb,
and the Wine Press of Zeeb. v. 25. one while in Karkor, Judge. 8.10. and
another while at Tabor, Judge. 8.8. and still to surprise Israel.

Thus do who are like the vain and Light persons of Abimelech, whom the
Septuagint call persons mazed and affrighted out of their senses, who were
hired with 70. pieces of silver out of the house of Baol-Berith, whom Vatablus
terms Instabiles, unstable, rolling from Town to Town, from City to City,
from Shire to Shire, and from one Kingdom to another.
our Cavalliers rove from one place to another. First, from London to York,
from York to Hull, then to Beverley, then to York again; thence to Warwick,
thence to Banbury, then to Warwick again, thence to Coventry, thence to
Nottingam, thence to Worcester, thence to Shrewsbury, and the Lord knows how
soon they may come again to London.

-- Nam toties versa est fortuna locorum. And thus we have done also with the
third Character.

The fourth Character of the Midianites.
* They were a crafty and a subtle Generation to beguile Israel and ensnare
them with their wiles, seeking to get Israel at an advantage Numb. 25.18.

So are our Cavalliers it seems, the Serpentine brood, a subtle Generation:
witness the feigned Letters they send, the false Alarms they sound, the
sudden surprisals they make, to take us at an advantage by Policy; for never
had they yet the power to stand before the face of our Army.

The fifth Character of the Midianites.
They were unclean both by bodily and spiritual uncleanness. Numb. 25.6.18.

We put spiritual and bodily uncleanness together, because one seldom goes
without the other. As for bodily uncleanness, we will not accuse them how
many they abused; you may take that ex concessio, for they said themselves (as
has been intimated in the fourth Particular of their Blasphemies) that they
would Whore, Drink, and be Damned, wherefore if they do not whore, at least
they lie, both which Sins God will judge; yet we cannot but give you the
Report of the Country, of two Cavalliers who ravished one Maid while another
stood by and held the Horses: of 7. more, who abused another, before she could
be released from them; besides the many Rapes and Chamber-Adulteries, which we
leave to the All-seeing Eyes and Revenging Hand of Justice, and as for
Spiritual Uncleanness, which is Idolatry, that cannot be free from their
Camp, having so many Papists and profane ones in their unhallowed and
Pseudo-Catholique Army.

6 The Sixth Character of the Midianites.
They were frequent in plotting Combinations with the Children of the East, the
Amalekites and others to discomfit Israel. Judge. 6.33. Judge. 7.12. Judge. 6.3.

So do these Chrisostomus loquitur in Holmilia unicam ad populum Antiochienne.
Cavalliers combine with the Praelaticall party, who are the children of the
East, and with Papists who are these Amalekites, with persons accused of
treason, with diverse Delinquents, and Incendiaries both to Church and State; To
give you a view of their Plots and Combinations, look back to their
Endeavors of Surprising the six Worthies of Parliament, their Plots to enter
the Town of Hull, theit late desperate Plot to blow up our L. General in
Worcester. Yet to all these Plots we may say as to the Conspirators of old.
Associate your selves together, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces
etc. Es. c. 8. v. 9.10.

7. One Character more of the Mid^^nites.
They were subdued, Judge. 8.28. Thus was Midian subdued before the children of
Israel, so that they lifted up their heads no mo^e, and the Country was then in
quietness.

More is the pity that the Cavalliers do not run parallel with them in this
Character; yet they are not subdued, and yet is not our Land in quietness. But
do unto them O Lord as unto the Midianites, Read Ps. 83.9.10.11.15.16.17.18.
verses.
as to Sisera and Iabin at the brook of Kison which perished at Endo^^ they
became as dung for the earth: make their Nobles like O^^b and Zeeb, etc.

Christian Reader, thou have presented to thy view by these Characters that
which might make thine ears tingle, thy heart tremble, thy joints shatter, and
blood to startle in thy face, that the Name of the living God should be thus
blasphemed by mortal men. Oh! stand amazed, and wonder, that an holy God
should suffer such hellish Blasphemies to go so long unpunished, that they
(being but worms under his feet) he should not trample them to powder, and
make them lasting Monuments of everlasting vengeance. God lets them live so
long to make your rising more visible, and their fall more dismal: wait but a
while and you shall see what slaughters your God will make; he is whetting his
glittering Sword, lifting up himself on high, his hand taking hold on justice;
their blow is coming, their doom approaching, their judement near, their sin
ripe, the sickle of Gods wrath will soon cut them down, they shall wither
like the grass, be scattered like chafte before the wind, and consumed like
stubble before the everlasting burnings. Oh ^ think no time too long, no
labor too great, no cost too much, in so good a cause, against so bad enemies:
they are the greatest enemies to Christ that ever this land bred; they have
lifted up swords against him, drank healths to the confusion of him, they
defile his Name, abhor his Worship, throw out his Ordinances, oppose his
Gospel, malign his people, and would lay all his honor in the dust; yea they
would infringe your liberties, ensnare your consciences, pull Laws up to throw
you down; they expect to be happy by your misery, and rich by your poverty;
these idle Vagrants would feign live by the labor of your hands and the sweat
of your brows: Oh! how can you hold your hands from these men of violence and
blood, lest that curse come upon you of this Land which was denounced by the
Prophet Jeremiah, c. 48. v. 10. Cused be he that does the work of the Lord
negligently: and cursed be he that keeps back (in this case especially) his
sword from blood. Wherefore turn your plate into money, your Coach-horses into
Warre-horses, your Ploughshares into swords, and your pruning-hookes into
spears, and make ready for the Battle. Let us tell you, you have that mark
to shoot at, at which God is aiming to have his arrows stick in their sides,
and be drunk in their blood. O ye Inhabitants of England, in whose eyes Christ
and the Gospel, your Laws and Liberties are Precious; go on and prosper, up
and be going, up and be doing, and up and be fighting, and the Lord be with
you. If you will not, take heed lest ye be found fighters against God,
fellonious to your selves, rebellious to Nature, treacherous to your Country,
injurious to posterity, and infamous to eternity. Wherefore to conclude, as
Moses spoke unto the people, in Numb. 31.3. saying. Arm some of your selves
unto War, and let them go against the Midianites, and avenge the Lord of
Midian; and so do you also against the Debauched Cavalliers, or the English
Midianites.

FINIS.

