TRVE NEWS FROM NORWICH: Being a certain Relation how that the Cathedral
Blades of Norwich (on the 22. of February 1641. being Shrove tuesday, did put
themselves into a posture of defense, because that the Apprentises of Norwich
(as they imagined) would have pulled down their Organs.

In which Relation the foolishness of these Cathedral men are to be
understood, and deserve to be laughed at for this their silly enterprise; there
being no such cause to move them thereunto.

Written by T. L.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Allen, and I. B. 1641

To the kind Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Was loath for to divulge this Relation, but that I had two enforcements to
excite me thereunto.

The first reason was the truth of it,

I put it forth to declare to the world the sillyness of these Cathedral
Blades: Norwich, for The Cathedral Courts.
they have been the cause of many a sorrowful heart in Norwich; and has
been a trouble to the Author of this ensuing Discourse:

Who is Thine to command T. L.

True News from NORWICH.
THere being a rumor that the Apprentises of Norwich would pull down the
Rayles of the great Church, ( Christs-Church they call it) but there is but a
little of Christ taught, and less practiced. But as I said, there was a talk
that the Apprentises of Norwich would pull down the Rayles, and the Organs;
therefore there was forthwith a Convocation called, wherein was debated by the
Unnecessary members, so say the Parliament.
Deane and Chapters, whether or no the Rayles should be pulled down; and the
Convocation of Deane and Prebends thought fit that the Rayles should be pulled
down, for fear least when the Apprentises came, Organs and all should go to
wrack; therefore it was thus ordered.

That the Rayles should be pulled down, and so they were, but the Organs stood
still: The Apprentises of Norwich not being content with that, they threatened
to have a bout with the Organs, upon Shrove-tuesday that was suddenly after to
follow, but had no such intent, only to skarre the fools.

The Cathedral Blades upon this did forthwith provide great store of Parsons
and Priests, There was about 500.
to be in a readiness against that day, to resist the rebellious Puritans, as
they termed them; the matter was no sooner propounded, but it was presently put
in agitation, and the gates of the great Cathedral were shut for two days.
Shrove tuesday being come, they began to put themselves into a posture of
defense, at the command of the Convocation of the Deane and Prebends of the
Cathedral Church, as follows.

First, extempore, for they cannot preach a Sermon unless their books be
before them, which is Doctor-like forsooth, and therefore a short warning might
serve their turns; for some of them cannot, and the rest will not preach
extempore, but must be mute like asses; or else do as a Priest that I heard of
did, when he had forgot his book, he told them he would read a chapter of
Job, that should be worth two of his Sermons, and I think it would be worth
twenty of our Priests Sermons: thus they stood then.

In the second place there were in order set the Canoniers,

There was thirdly the Quiristers, one of which said, that he had been to do
his duty: that is, he had been at singing Service, that they there use, and now
says he, I am come to do my duty to keep the Organs; and there he, with the
rest, stood like a company of fools, to keep them from danger, which none
that I do know, had any mind to hurt.

And says His name is Atkins.
another, what rogues are these that dare offer to pull down the Organs; for
says he, if I do but go into Church and say my prayers, and hear the Organs
go, they make the water run down my cheeks, they are so good and so sweet a
music. Thus good Reader, thou may see how these men are rocked and lulled
asleep by this music, which have indeed lulled many one asleep in ignorance.
There is one True that is a constant hearer of this musical Mass; and he
says, that he finds great comfort by it, how will he do when it be put
down? as I hope it will ere long: Thus are many lulled asleep in Romish
ignorance, (as the Papists say) the mother of devotion, which is I think all
the devotion that many (if not all of them) use; and these are the effects that
the Pipes produce.

In the fourth place there were the Musketeers, His name was Nicholas True.
one of them had in his Musket a bullet split in parts for to shoot the
Apprentises when they come (say they:) Thus they stood all the day long
shooting, and threatening the Rebels that dare come to pull down their Organs,
when as the Apprentises had no intent to come, but were at home about their
masters occasions; and did not intend to foul their fingers about such a
company of rake-shames: and thus they stood like so many Abraham Ninnies, doing
nothing but tell how many Crows flew over the pinnacle.

And in the fifth place there was the Holbardiers, bodies belly that dare offer
to come and commit any injury against the Pipes: they did examine every body
that came to Church, and not so much as a little boy should pass, but that
they would know whether he were any of those that did intend to pull down the
Organs: Insomuch that one being taken, was carried before their Reverend Deame,
and be examining him, the man told the Deane, that the Rayles, and Pipes, and
other Innovatious, was against the Protestation; and he had sworn against all
Innovations, and he would pull them down wherever he saw them, for so he was
bound to do by the Protestation that he had taken. The Deane hearing these and
many other words come brom him, he bade him go his way, he was a Puritan, he
would not meddle with him; and I pray what was the reason, because he had no
power: I believe his will was good, had he had power as well as desire, he
would have put him to punishment enough. And another foolish fellow they took,
(take notice that be was an Idiot) and sent to the Justices, and so he was
sent to Bridewell, but they were glad to take him out again; had he had wit
enough, he might have made his accusers smart for it. It seems he had a mind
to go into Church, (as a many fools had besides he) and they would not let
him go; and said be would come 400 strong and pull down their Pipes, and
upon this they sent him to Bridewell: thus the Holbard-men stood in a posture
of defense to carry this fellow to Bridewell, and so one fool carried another.

And in the sixth and last place there was about the number of 500 persons,
True by name, (though not by nature) said, if 500 come we will kill 2000 of
them; and to that end he said, come fellow Soldiers we will slay them all, and
so he pulled out his pistol, and said he would kill one if he could: I have
such a good opinion of him, that I think the fool had more wit than to think
that 200 of 500 could be slain; but he was drunk, and this 2000 was the
reason of his so foolish a speech; he and others were so intoxicated with
strong Ale that was to be sold at the great Cathedral, that they could not
tell what they said or did. Thus good Reader, thou may see the folly of these
Pipe-mongers, that should prepare such a multitude of people, to be there a
whole day for nothing.

If the Deane and Prebends had been studying, the Canoniers a singing, the
Quiristers a chanting, the Musketeers about their callings, the Holbardiers
about their business, and their pistoll-blades about their occasions, it had
been a little better for their praise; for now I hope by this small paper their
foolishness shall be divulged to the uttermost parts of this Kingdom, that
all the people may laugh at the sillyness of the Cathedral Blades, and the
Episcopal Abettors. Oh how loath they are to part with their Diana's, their
Altars, Images, Crucifixes, Coapes, Surplices, and Romish Vestments; no, (as
some of them said) they would rather lose their lives then their Organs, so
fast they are glewed to their Pipes and Popish trinkets.

It is a saying as true as ancient, that there is nothing so bad, but some good
may be gotten from it; no flower so bad, but that the Be will get some honey
from it: so not so much but from this foolish practice, and simple tractate,
there may be some good got.

First we may hereby see the presumption of these Cathedral men, of defense,
whereas there was no fear; and when they had no power but from the Deane,
whose office is not wartantable Iure Divino.

We may see the fearfulness of these men who are afraid of their friends
when none are near them,

Want of resistance makes the Enemy bold,
For if they would had their Canons, none might have them controlled
Their wrong usurped power, above the reach
Of Iure Divino; for which so much they teach:
But if they had their power from Divine right,
Surely it is to preach, and not to fight.
FINIS.

