Laurentius Lutherizans. OR THE PROTESTATION OF GEORGE LAVRENCE, Master of
Arts, late Commoner in Oxford, and late Lecturer in the Parish Church of George
Buttolph-Lane, by Little Eastcheap in LONDON.

Against certain Calumniations Asperged on him by the Corrupt Clergy, and
their Lay-Proselytes, for some Particulars, Delivered in two Sermons, at
Michaels Church in Corne-hill, and elsewhere, concerning our National
Protestation.

As it was declared, by way of Digression, in a Third Sermon at the same
Church, the 23th. Day of Januarie, in the Morning Lecture, Anno, 1642.

(...). Chrysostom. ad Scandalizatos. Innocens inter ipsa Tormenta Fruitur
Securitate, and cum poenam. metuat, de Innocentia gloriatur.

Hieronymus ad Demetriadem. The mouth of the Wicked, and the mouth of the
Deceitful are against me: They have spoken against me, with lying Tongues.

David, Psalm. 109.2. London, Printed for R Harford, in Queenes-head All^^
Paternoster Row. 1641.

Courteous Reader,
I Am to certify thee, that I was constrained, for the present, to commit this
Paper to the Press, for the Vindication of my self, and true Religion; having
not as yet (according to the Desires and Expectations of many Godly Divines,
Worshipful Citizens, and Sincere Professors) fully Digested, for the Press,
my Sermons upon our English Protestation.

LAVRENTIVS LVTHERIZANS.
MArtin Luther being infested with many Adversaries, and amongst the rest,
especially with one Jacobus Hostraten, termed by him, Haereticorum ominium
Haereticissimus, The most Heretical of all Heretics, who had falsely charged
him with many Errors, and scandalous Accusations, was necessitated to
vindicate himself with this public Protestation to be known of all.

Protestatio Lutheri Brevis, Iulii 13. Anno, 1518.
I Martin Luther, Publickely Protest, that I have published certain
Propositions, against Pontifical Indulgences, although hitherto, neither this
our Famous, and Renowned School of Witenberge, neither any Civil, or
Ecclesiastical Power, has as yet condemned me: yet notwithstanding, Some
certain men there are, as I do hear, of a rash and bold Ingenie, who as if
they saw alone, as it were into a Millstone, presume to pronounce me an Heretic.

Ego Martinus Lutherus, public Testatum volo, Propositiones aliquot, contra
Pontificales, ut vocant, Indulgentias a me esse editas, etsi autem me hactenus,
neque celeberrima haec, and laudatissima Schola nosti a Vitebergae neque
Civilis, aut Ecclesiastica Potestas condemnaverit, sunt tamen, ut audio, quidam
praecipitis, atque au facis ingenii homines, quire quasi been cognita, and
perspecta, Haereticum me pronunciare audent.

I therefore, as oftentimes before, so also, now by the Faith of a Christian,
beseech others, either to Indigitate and point out unto me a better way, if a
better be divinely revealed unto them, or else to submit their opinion, both to
the judgment of God, and his Church. For as I am neither ready to prefer
mine own opinion, before the judgment of all others, So neither am I so
doltish, as to place the Word of God, either below, or behind the Tables
invented by the brains of men.

Ego vero ut ante saepe, ita nunc quoque per fidem Christianam obtestor
singulos, vel ut meliorem mihi monstrent viam, si quibus haec divini^us esset
revelata, vel certe suam sententiam De^, and Ecclesiae iudicio submittunt. Non
enim adeo temetarius sum, ut meam solius opinionem caeteris anteferri, neque
came stupidu^etiam ut verbum Dei, fabulis human^ ratione excogitatis postponi
^^l^m. ^om 1. Fol, 195.

In like manner, your Orator, who speaks to you this Day, being encircled with
many Adversaries, (as David was with Bees) who have charged him with many
falsehoods, upon the preaching of the two former Sermons in this place,
touching the National Protestation, am now enforced to be Protestator
Lutherizans, clearing my self of those assperged imputations, in the presence
of God, his Angels, and this Congregation, by this short, and serious
Protestation.

1. I Protest against all Vainglory. For whereas the Bishops Factions, and
their adherents say, that in my Sermons, I looked here for applause from men,
but I did lose it, Let them

First know, and tell it to their Fellows, that I met with that, which the
Lord knows, I neither did gasp after, nor expect, you your selves in some
part being Judges. Secondly, That they measure other men's actions, by the
ragged staff of their own crooked Rule. Thirdly, That it is the constant
toil and labor of a sincere Minister of Jesus Christ, to stifle the Bubbling
and Boiling Surges of his swelling heart, and with Paul alone to glory in his
infirmities, 2 Cor. 12.9. Lest otherwise, with Herod, taking the Glory to
himself, and not giving it to God, with him, (according to the Syriack) become
a Dunghill or a Stable for the Worms, Acts 12.23.
2. I Protest against Seditition, and Seduction. For whereas the Bishops
Faction, and Carnal Gospellers do say, That I, and others are Seditious, and
Seduce the People, Let such

First know, That the Nature of Sedition, is the drawing of a People, out of a
right path, into a wrong, from good to evil, and not from evil to good, and
that the Nature of Sedition, is to sow Tares amongst the Wheat, and not sowing
of Wheat amongst the Tares. Secondly, That the House of Ahab, and Iezabel, that
is, the Bishops faction, the whore of Rome, the Jesuits and Papists are, and
have been the seditious Seducers, and Troublers of our English Israel: for
these are they, who have misguided the people, leading them blind fold to the
brow of the hill, to tumble them headlong down to Hell, and to crush both
themselves, and them to pieces, to all Eternity. Thirdly, that it is their
Policy to call seditious, and Seducer; first, like a crafty courtizan, who will
call whore first, that she might not be suspected. Whence in the New
Testament, the Scribes and Pharisees are observed to stigmatize, and
agnominize, Christ and his Disciples, with the reproachful Terms of
Deceivers and Seducers, while they themselves seduce, and lead about sylly
creatures, creeping into their houses, loving the uppermost rooms, and
desiring to be called Rabbi, Rabbi, which is as much, as to say, Doctor,
Doctor.
3. I protest against Frenzy; for as the Corrupt Clergy, and their Lay
Adherents belch out, and say, that such as my self are of a Phrentick Spirit,
and have Laesa principia, because we dare not Symbolize with them, either in
their Doctrines, or their practice; Let them again.

1. Know, that Shemajah, the Nehelamite, which is as much, as Shemajah the
lying Dreamer, called Jeremiah a mad man; Ier. 29.26. as being more fit for a
prison, and the stocks, than the Pulpit: though good Jeremiah was approved to
be the conscientious Preacher. 2. Know, that Festus, though a great, yet a
Carnal man with a loud voice told Paul, that he was beside himself, and mad,
whereas indeed, he spoke forth the words of truth, and soberness. 3. Know,
that they and their Adherents, are the mad fellows, as they are
Catachrestically called the good, and Kuriologically the bad fellows, and not
they, who by them are called the Puritan-Preachers, and the Puritans, and
preciser people, for if you read, Act^. 26.25. That Paul being converted, and
out of his Natural condition, he does profess against the term of mad
fellow, whereas in the 11. Verse, when he was in a Carnal state, he does
avouch, that he was mad, yea exceedingly mad against the Saints, persecuting
them even unto strange Cities: And therefore, if you believe the Scripture, and
not, as the Popish Church believes, they themselves are mad and phrentick. Mad
upon their Idols, Ier, 50.38. The Prophet is a fool, and the Spiritual man is
mad; Hos. 9.7. Mad after Popish Bishops, yea mad to be Bishops, though the
Bishops themselves were never more mad, than in these times: as in their late
Towring-Swelling, ^ower-Aspiring, Protestation, and therefore, if they do not
sail to Rome, yet they may, as in our Proverb, take shipping and sail unto
Anticyras, yea further, so insensibly entoxicated, by a strange, and an hideous
Metamorphosis, that as Pope Sergius the second, (as I remember) was called Os
porci, Swines-snout, or Hogges-face, because of his uncleanesse; So, the
corrupt Clergies may be called Dens Diaboli, yea Deus Caninus Diaboli, The
great Doggetooth of the Devil; as Parisiensis terms, all dogged and currish
Persecuters and Back-biters.
For as a mad dog rolling himself, like the Icneumon, or Mus Indicus, in a
sheet of mud, and rising up upon his legs, sets a black, and a dirtie patch on
every post in the street, biting every one he meets: So the corrupt Clergy
tumbling themselves in the mire of rottenesse and superstition, fasten one
beastly mark or other; yea many dirty spots where they are seated, snarling,
showing their teeth like so many mad dogs, and biting, yea tearing in pieces,
were they able every one, who thwarts them in their way, and contradicts them
in their unwarrantable insolences, and illegal proceedings whatsoever. And
here, Let not any discerning or discreet Reader, adjudge me to be too
immoderate in my expressions, since the Devil, Pope, Bishops, Corrupt Clergy,
and their Adherents, have neither been moderate in their blasphemies, Modum
autem tenere, in co difficile est, quod honum esse credideris; Senec. Epist. 23.
nor in their tyrannizing persecutions, and since according to the Dialect even
of Seneca an heathen man; In that thing, or that cause, which thou beleevest in
thy conscience, (yea undoubtedly do know) to be good, it is a great
difficulty, (yea a great sin) to use a moderation.

4. Lastly, I protest against all Popery, according to our National
Protestation: For whereas some have bruited abroad, that I and others have
extended our discourses, further than the Determinaton of the covenant admits,
Let them.

1. Know, that the Term, All popery, has a large Periphery and
circumference, which as it does reach out to that Popery, which was discovered
at the time when the Protestation was composed, so also, (yet with submission
be it spoken) may it be extended to all those several grains, which lay
under the Turffe, and should hereafter bud forth, and appear to be
superstition, and Idolatry in after times. 2. Know, that I, and my
fellow-brethren are of the resolution of Martin Luther, who although like him,
may be t^armed Heretics, or Schismatics, because we speak against the Pope
and Popish Hierarchy, yet by the creditable faith of Christians, beseech
others to indigitate, and point out unto us a better way, if a better be
Divinely revealed unto them, or else to submit their opinion, both to the
judgment of God, and the reformed Churches, for as we are neither ready to
prefer our own opinions, before the judgment of all others, so neither are
we so doltish, as to place the word of God, either below, or behind the fables
invented by the brains of Brainsick, and cloud-pated Lycophrons, and the
conceptions, or rather deceptions of Superstitious Temporizers, 3. Know, that
whatsoever I have delivered in the two former Sermons in this place, or what
is, or shall be further delivered in this third Sermon, or whatsoever I have
delivered elsewhere, and especially in those Sermons concerning the
solemnization of our great deliverance from the Gunpowder Traitors, and the
Papists Conspiracy, Upon the words of Ezekiel c. 24. v. 2. in the last November.
in comparing N^buchadnezzar the King of Babylon, and the whore of Babylon
together, who did set themselves against Jerusalem, (for which I was unsettled
from my place of preaching, as John Hus was inhibited, and forbad the Pulpit by
the Pope, when he began to preach the Doctrine of Wickliffe against the Pope,
and his Attendants;) I shall God willing, Martyrolog.
and God assisting be ready like John Hus, to seal the Doctrine, and every
branch of that Doctrine which I have published elsewhere or, in this place,
with the loss of my dearest blood, comforting my self with the Cordial of an
Ancient father saying:
Gaude, O Innocentia, and exulta, Gaude inquam, quia ubique illaesa es, ubique
secura: Si tenta^is, proficis: Si humiliaris, erigeris: Si pugnas, vincis: Si
occideris, cor^naris. Constantinopolitanus.
Be glad O Innocence, and rejoice: Be glad I say, for no where art thou hurt,
and every where thou art secure. If thou art tempted, thou do profit, if thou
art humbled, thou shall be exalted, if thou fightest, thou do overcome, and
if thou art killed, thou may lose thy head, but thou shall not lose thy
Crown.

And thus being necessitated hereunto, have I like Martin Luther vindicated the
truth, My self, and my Fellow Laborers by this Protestation: and have read it
to you distinctly, that you might avoid mistakes, and that the corrupt Clergy,
and their Lay Adherents, might not say with any just ground against me, as
Erasmus of Hierom when he writ against Vigilantius, Conviciis debacchatur
Hieronymus, what I did, I did in hot blood, In Argumento Epistolae adversus
Vigilantium.
and instead, of a vindicating Protestation, I brought a vicious, and
convicious debacchation.

To conclude with an History, suiting with our purpose, it is reported of Emme,
the mother of Edward the Confessor, who being falsely accused, was constrained
to go barefooted for her self 4. steps upon 4. sharp plough-shares, burning
hot from the scalding fire, and having past them over without any hurt, was
adjudged innocent.

In like manner, being maliciously oppugned, have I been enforced to run over
4. Particulars, as 4. burning ploughshares, which were laid not only to scortch
and sindge my reputation, but also to burn up like so much stubble, the very
cause of God, and his Gospel: and am now confident, that, that God, whose
cause I agitate, and his despised people in this congregation, (...). Septuag.
(...). Homer. Od. L. 17.
(though the Prelaticall faction, and their Lay-Proselites, may, or do gather
into a cloud and thicken into a blustering storm) will acquit me as
guiltless of all unjust, black, and opprobrious imputations.

For I know with David, Psalm 140.13. That the Lord will maintain the cause
of the afflicted, and the right of him, that is distressed, and Psalm
18.47.48. That it is God who gives Avengements for me, and delivers me
from all mine Enemies.

The Lord in mercy sanctify to me the Calumniation, and those, whom it does
concern, the Protestation.

FINIS.

