KING CHARLES VINDICATED, OR The grand Cheats OF THE NATION discovered. With an
abstract of 1 The Rumps extraordinary exactions, 2 Their large distributions of
other men's Estates.


By W. L. a lover of his Country.

Printed, for Theodorus Microcosmus, 1660.

KING CHARLES vindicated, OR, The Grand Cheats OF THE NATION discovered.
IT is not unknown (but too notoriously known) to the whole world the abuse of
this our once happy Kingdom of England, by a mercinary Soldiery, and some few
mercinary men's wills, whose wills are their Laws, and what they will (and
nothing else) shall be adjudged Law or reason, when indeed all they do is
beyond Law and Reason, the fundamentals of all Government, the breach of
Liberty, and restraint of Conscience, forcing men to swear, to forswear
themselves, or else unjustly to forfeit an Estate. And if the question be
asked, in whom the legislative power of the Nation at this time resides, no
other can properly be so called but the Soldiery, who assume to themselves the
Government of all things, doing that they know not what it well means, or they
pretend to mean that they intend not to do; they seem to act, and not only
seemingly, but actually do act that which the most High is said to do, (that
is) to set up Kings or Rulers, and pull them down at pleasure. First a King,
then a thing called The Keepers of the Liberty of England (and indeed in one
sense they are justly so called for they keep our Liberties from us.) After
that a Protector, and after him another with loud acclamations of joy and
congratulations of the people to Crown his inaugeration; yet the Soldiery at
this is not well pleased, they quickly forget the gifts of mourning, their red
coats given them at their Mr. Olivers Funeral, and like the Weather Cock turn
with the next wind and depose him (who I verily believe since our unworthiness
called the other, I mean the late King Charles of famous memory away to receive
a reward beyond an earthly Crown, that would have settled (with that so free
chosen Parliament) the Nation in Peace and Happiness. But this pleased not
their humors neither, he must out or they must down, and he no sooner out but
an assumption of Government is taken to themselves, but not fineding an
expedient convenient to their purpose, knowing better how to weild a Sword than
a Scepter; after a little playing with the Government, they resign it into the
hands of those bloodhounds (the Rump) who have been the undoing of the Nation,
who must not rule neither long, for they are called in May and dissolved again
by the Soldiery in October following; after them comes a pitiful Committee of
Safety, amongst whom, and of whom it may be said rake Hell and skim the Devil
you could not find such a pack of R -- two of the chiefest I will not forget to
name, Ireton and Tichbourn, alias Tyburn, the last deserving for a hasty
sentence by him and others (not many years past) pronounced to be hanged at
Tyburn, (and the first named to receive the same punishment at the same place)
His name and the name of that fruitful Tree, differen^ing only in two letters,
so that I humbly conceive it his destiny, which is not so much improbable but a
little time may effect: two fellows perfidious, never true to any trust, two
that any man may lead to perpetrate any villainies, two of the chiefest Actors
in undoing the City, two constant revealors of the City Counsels, two who for a
little gain are ready to sell their own souls to the Devil, (but I believe they
are not now to sell, but rather sold long ago) two whose actions never agreed
with their pretentions; and last of all, two, who accounted themselves Saints
from whom (and all such other pretended Saints) good Lord deliver me and every
honest man.

Next after this Committee of Safety (who sat not long) in came the Rump once
more, fellows whose actions are without parrallel in any Nation. Now under and
by what spetious pretense this Rump Acted as a Parliament, take in general
Terms, which is, That the late King Charles together with the House of Peers,
and themselves, did Enact that they should not be adjourned, Prorogued, or
otherwise Dissolved, unless it were by an Act of their own making, well, grant
this, they were called by the Kings Writ, and certainly if all Writts in his
name cease at his Decease, they must likewise needs cease to be a Parliament,
or if they claim a Power to sit, by virtue of that Act, why the House of Peers
secluded? or any of the Members of the House, of Commons, the Act extended as
well to one, nay all, as to this Rump: besides, there is not one tittle
mentioned in that Act, to the purpose they Act by; that is, that the King gave
them power by virtue of that Act to take upon them the Government of the
Kingdoms after his Decease, to take away his own life, seclude the House of
Peers, or any of their fellow Members, for the King being Caput principium ad
sinem, no man cannot but conclude, that upon his departing this life the
Parliament determined.

But they are pleased still to sit as a Parliament contrary to all Law, for let
any man show me where ever a Parliament being Dissolved as this legally was by
the death of the King, that ever had the impudence to sit and do what they
listed, I must confess adjourned of themselves, or by the King that called them
prorogued until a further time, at which time of meeting the King as he
pleases dissolves them. But if they will not acknowledge this a Dissolution you
may find one in 1653, for when they understood that Oliver the late Protector
was resolved to turn them out of Doors (the which he did with a Title befitting
them, Rogues and Whore masters) they put it to the Vote whether they should
suffer themselves to be turned out, or Dissolve themselves, it past in the
affirmative to Dissolve themselves, upon which a Dissolution was recorded not
(interruption as they call it) the which if Mr. Scobell their then Clerk durst,
he can (if he please) justify, or the Records themselves if searched would
make it evident if these fellows (I mean the Rump) have not altered: the roll,
the which no doubt they would not stick to do or make a scruple of, more then
their often for-swearing themselves.

Next to bring Oliver and their Power into Competition, they stick and call it
(as I said before) an interruption, to which I put this Query, whether Oliver
that dissolved them, or they that Acted as a Parliament (when none) had the
most and best power, to which I answer, their power was equal alike, though
the Rump may urge Oliver receiving his Commission from them ought to have been
obedient to their Commands, to which then I answer they being called by the
Kings Writ (and chosen by the people for their Representatives in Parliament)
was the Kings Servants, and by the Oath of Allegiance bound to be faithful to
the King, more then Oliver to them, for they (according to the Law were
Traitors, and thereby incurred the penalty of the Law against such offenders in
taking away their lawful Sovereign which Oliver knew very well, and that it
was more lawful for him to dissolve them, then they to cut off the King's
Head, knowing also they were Rebels and Traitors in Acting what they did
against the King, therefore no Legal Power but what ever he Acted against them
could be no Treason, upon which a Question here arises, which is, who was
Supreme after the death of the King? to which I answer, not the Rump, nor
Oliver, according to our Laws, the Crown being settled Hereditary many Centaries
of years before* which without doubt ought so still to continue.

But to go further this Rump (as they say) being but interrupted and not
Dissolved why did not they as well in Olivers time as the Kings time keep up
their power; the King demanded but five of their Members, Oliver and the Army
under his Command, first gave them a large purge of above two hundred and odd,
and afterward dissolved all, yet the Kings Legal demand of five Members must
be voted and adjudged a high breach of the privilege of Parliament, nay
greater then Olivers dissolving all; And if Olivers interruption (as they call
it) of them were no dissolution, but only an interruption, why then did they
allow of, or contribute too, the payment of any duties whatsoever, and declare
to the world that they were under a force, and that the power which dissolved
or interrupted them were Illegal, and that if any man paid any duties
whatsoever, it was in their own wrong; but they were afraid to lose that which
I hope will not be long ere they do lose their Heads, as but just; And if they
urge it, was under a force, then likewise from thence do I conclude, That the
death of the King, the Dissolution of themselves, the Power we have been and
still are governed by, is a force, a mere force, no less, just so, and
therefore an Illegal Power. And to add this one thing more, there were
Parliaments in Olivers time, and a Parliament in the late Protector Richards
time, and if this Rump that now sits as a Parliament were then as they still
would be a Parliament, it is the weakest reason in the world for any man to say
(that because they sat as a Parliament) they only were the supreme power,
which if it were true that this Rump or pretended Parliament were only
(according to Law) ever since the death of the late King the supreme power,
then they cannot but conclude but that all the actions of Oliver were Treason,
all the Army Traitors, all proceedings in every or any Court ever since
Illegal, and most part of the Nation involved in Treason, amongst which number
of Traitors (according to their own made Supremacy and power) a great many of
their own gang may be reckoned in the late Committee of Safety, which being
true, why ought not those persons to receive the reward of their Treason
openly? as their private crimes made them privately guilty of receiving condign
punnishment.

Now to begin with the grand Quarrel the Parliament had against the King which
was of Shipmoney, a thing but just, and which they themselves knows it to be
just, and that a King being in necessity may Legally exact money from his
Subjects for his and their just defense, a thing the Parliament could
themselves make use off, although they denied it to the King, as the following
Sums unjustly exacted by the Rump will appear.
IN Anno 1643 they borrowed a great sum of money upon the public faith (which
is now a Bankrupt) as you may find in the eighteenth Chapter of their book of
Acts. In Anno 1645 they borrowed another great sum of money, chap. 56. In Anno
1646, two hundred thousand pounds more was borrowed upon the Excise, chap. 65.
In Anno 1647 two hundred thousand pounds more was advanced for the service of
England and Ireland, chap. 75 and 79. In the same year 1647, forty-two thousand
pound more was borrowed and secured upon Bishops Lands, chap. 79. In the same
year 1647, Fifty thousand pounds more was borrowed and secured upon Delinquents
Estates, chap. 102. In the year 1648, Two hundred thousand pounds more was
secured upon Delinquents Estates, chap. 115. In the year 1650, Security for
another great sum of money was advanced for the use of the Army and Navy,
chap. 11. In the same year 1650, One hundred and twenty thou sand pounds more
was borrowed and secured by sale of Manors, of Rectories and Gleabe Lands,
Chapters 29, and 30. In the same year 1650, Two hundred and fifty thousand
pounds more was borrowed and secured upon Fee Farm Rents, chap. 47. In the
year 1651, Two hundred and fifty thousand pounds more was borrowed and secured
upon other Delinquents Estates, chap. 10. In the year 1652, Twenty five
thousand pounds more was borrowed and secured upon the remainder of Fee Farm
Rents, chap. 6. In the same year 1652, Two hundred thousand pounds more was
borrowed and secured upon other Delinquents Estates, Chap. 11. In the same year
1652, Six hundred thousand pounds more was borrowed and secured upon other
Delinquents Estates, Chap. 23. In the same year 1652, One hundred thousand
pounds more was borrowed and secured upon other Delinquents Estates, not
contracted for before the first of November, 1652, chap. 29.
These particulars I can only name, 'this not being the fifth part of their
unjust exactions, but if they had had no more, this same might very well have
been sufficient, it amounting to two Millions one hundred and seven thousand
pounds, besides Taxes at one hundred and twenty thousand pounds per mensem,
which annually amounts to one Million four hundred and forty thousand pounds
out right, besides the Sale of Crown Lands, which in seven years amounts to
ten Millions and fourscore thousand pounds, the Plate, Jewels of the King Queen
and Prince Delinquents Estates, Delinquents Compositions, Church Revenues,
Lead, and Timber Forests, Fee Farm Rents, Dea^e and Chapters Lands, the
Citizens with their Wives Children and Servants free gifts of their Rings,
Plate, and Jewels, Thimbles and Botkins, besides Excise and Custom, Tunnage
and poundage, which cannot amount to less annually then two Millons of money
more, besides all the moneys first lent, and then doubled upon the public
Faith and their other private exactions, which in all amounts to so much or
more as would puzle the best Arethmetitian in Europe to bring into one gross
sum, and a thing that if they themselves were called to give an account of
they could not do it, or if they could, I do verily believe they would not, and
now that I have showed you a thing to be advised how all this money was so
unjustly exacted and paid, I shall here present to your view how some part of
it was disposed, and if truth were known, the most of it went the same way; all
the deeds these fellows ever aimed at, tending to the enriching themselves, and
impoverishing the Nation, as by the following Catalogue may appear, of whom
William Lenthall shall lead the Van.

William Lenthall Speaker to this Parliament, had two thousand pounds given him
at one time, six thousand pounds at another time, besides places of trust he
held and enjoyed, worth to him above twenty thousand pounds per annum; And he
likewise had of every Gentleman that made his Composition at Gold-Smiths-Hall
five pounds (at which some persons make a but) but if he had no more it was
very fair, for the books will show you that there was above four score thousand
persons, who compounded, which at five pound a man Lenthall received, it came
to above four hundred thousand pounds clear into his Pocket.

Edmond Prideaux had places given him worth seven thousand and two hundred
pounds per annum. The Earl of Warwick a place worth five thousand pounds per
annum. Sr. Gilbert Gerrard had gratuities and places worth threescore thousand
pounds. Bulstrode Whitlock had given him the place of one of the Commissioners
of the Great Seal, worth 1500 pound per annum. Alderman Pennington had given
him seven thousand pound, and store of Bishops Lands. One Thomas Pury three
thousand pounds. John Seldom five thousand pounds, of which he received two
thousand five hundred. Sir Benjamin Rudyard five thousand pounds. Sir John
Hipsley two thousand pounds. Benjamin Valentine five thousand pounds. Sir Henry
Heyman five thousand pounds. Denzill Hollis five thousand pounds. Nathaniel
Bacon three thousand pounds. John Stevens one thousand pound. Robert Reynolds
two thousand pound, etc:
But because I would not make my Narration too tedious, I thought good to
abreviate in naming every Particular man's name, to whom their liberality of
other men's moneys and Estates was given, and tell you the sum of their gifts
is as uneasy to be numbered, as all the particular persons on whom their guifs
were bestowed, but I leave you to judge how handsomely your moneys was bestowed
and that if Lenthall the Speaker got four hundred thousand pounds at five pound
every man that Compounded, the Gentlemen's moneys the Parliament received could
not but amount to Millions.

But if his late Majesty had used that severity he did lenity, he had done well
to have lop't the heads of the Monsters off, and adventured to have seen them
prove a Hydra's, I shall conclude upon this, that if Lenthall the Speaker were
ask't this Question, whether they that sat as a Parliament (without their
fellow Members) by Law were a Parliament, I question whether he would make any
answer, or I challeng him to vindicate it if he can, and free him and
themselves from the Calumny, and oblique that was cast upon them. But where
there is guilt in the Conscience, there silence confesses the fact; and they
knowing their own guilt made them so silent; Let them hugg to themselves what
fancies they please, they may be mistaken, God is just, and knew all their
secret Actings and Counsels, and no doubt but the Innocent blood that they
have shed, and caused to be shed, will light upon them and their posterities
heads, as it did upon the blind Jews for Crucifying our Innocent Savior, to
tell of all their Villainies would swell into a larger Volume, then would in a
good space of time be well read, as also of their several breaches of Faith
and Oaths both to God and man, their dissembling Hypocrisy, blinding the
people with the spetious pretenses of Liberty and Religion, when indeed the
whole they aimed at, was other men's Estates to maintain their Pride, Luxury,
and Ambition. This have I writ for a pre-caution to all true-hearted English
men to have a care of their next Election of Members, and that these fellows be
set apart as the Wolves from the sheep, that thereby once more we may have
cause to call our selves the happy Kingdom of England,

For which the Author shall daily Pray.
FINIS.

