PROPOSALLS FOR AN ACT For prevention of the great trouble and charge which the
honest people of this Nation, have been put to; by wrongful Arrests and
Im^risonments, and for preserving them from such Arrests (being upon feigned
great Actions) at the suit of diverse to whom they have owed nothing.

And also for ANOTHER ACT For the taking away the great trouble and charge,
which the people or this Nation have been put to; by Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
Sergeants, etc. to procure Arrests and Appearances of their Debtors, etc. in
order to the more speedy satisfying of Creditors;

For the saving to the people of this Nation, between 4 and 500000. pounds
yearly, part of the 1500000. pounds, formerly proposed to be so saved yearly,
mentioned in the Proposalls for Creditors and Prisoners.

With a short explanation in particular, how those 300000. pounds, and more, by
these Proposalls for Creditors and Prisoners, will be saved.

Offered to the same consideration, as those for Creditors and Prisoners are.

By Will. Leach of the Middle Temple Gent.

LONDON Printed by F. Leach, and are to be sold by Lawrence Blaicklock within
Yemple-Bar. June 25

Proposalls for an Act, for prevention of great trouble and charge, which the
honest people of this Nation have been pu^ to; by wrongful Arrests, etc.
FOrasmuch as diverse people of this Nation, of late years have been Arrested
and Imprisoned upon diverse Process and Precepts issuing out of Corporation
Courts, etc. where they have been Strangers, and there deteyned, until they
have made great Fines, or paid great sums of money, to their malicious,
deceiptfull, and unjust Pros^cutors and Persecutors (though such people so
Arrested, have owe^ nothing at all to such Prosecutors or Persecutors) or
otherwise, to release some great sums of money or lawful demands, which they
owed to such persons Arrested; before any Pledges found, or any summons or
attachment awa^ded, executed and returned, against such persons arrested,
contrary to the ancient Laws of this Nati^n.

For prevention whereof, it is proposed to be desired to Be Enacted

Proposal for Provisoes to be in such Act.
Provided, That if any such Plaintiff has, or shall have, any debt owing to
him by any, who goes about or intends to depart this Nation, or absent or
hide himself, or usually abide in places privileged, or so called, or secretly
to hide or convey away his Estate Goods or Chattals.

And that such Plaintiff or some credible person or persons for him, shall
make oath in writing, before any Justice of the peace, or etc. and they be
empowered and compelled to take the same; that such person owes to such
Plaintiff some certain debt duty or demand, or that he was dampnified by such
person to some certain value or sum of money, and that such person had given
out in speeches, that he or etc. would or intended, and did go about to depart
this Nation, or absent or hide himself, or etc. or that he, or etc. did
secretly absent or hide him or etc. self from any his, or etc. Creditors or
Demandants, or usually abide in places privileged, or so called, or convey away
his, or etc. goods, or chattals, to the intent to defraud any.

That then process may be made out by any Officer (having such Affidavit
delivered him to keep) to arrest or attach the person, against or concerning
whom such oath is or shall be made, for such demand only as is or shall be
mentioned in such Affidavit.

Or that such Plaintiff may proceed, according as has been used by forreyn
attachment in London (being a beneficial custom approved of for many years,
and no inconveniency found thereby) and that every Judge, Justice, etc.
Sheriff or Steward, so may proceed as in such attachment against the goods and
Chattals of, and Debts owing to, such Defendant.

Proposalls to take away the great trouble and charge, which the people of this
Nation have been put to; to procure Arrests and Appearances, etc.
WHereas Creditors of late years have been at more trouble and charges then
formerly, to the value of all or a great part of many debts and demands etc. to
cause their Debtors to appear, or to have them arrested, by reason of their
removing secretly of their goods from one County to another, or from one Town
to another, and absenting themselves to, and hiding themselves in, at several
times, sometimes in one County or Town, and at other times in an other, whereby
their Creditors could not, nor have been at any time, at any certainty where to
find them, nor procure any the public Officers for such affairs to come to
the view or knowledge of such Debtors, without continual waiting and attending
on such Officers by themselves, to their great trouble, charge; and hinderance
in their callings, or by their servants or agents, to their great trouble and
charge and long attendance, and sometimes such Debtors have continued in one
privileged place as they have claymed it, and at another time in an other, in a
very chargeable manner, and there wasted and consumed their means by diverse
lewd and wicked courses until many of such Debtors by so hiding themselves and
abiding, and living in excess and riot; have undone themselves, their wives,
and children, and disabled themselves to satisfy their Creditors their just
debts and demands, which otherwise they might in some measure have contented,
or compounded with, to their liking.

And whereas diverse Sheriffs, when they have had process brought them against
such parties so hiding themselves, etc. and Warrants required to special
Bayliffes to arrest them, when upon former Writs such Sheriffs have returned
that they were not to be found, such Sheriffs have been so prevailed with by
rewards and otherwise, by such fugitive persons, that such Sheriffs have
denied to make Warrants against such persons, (sometime pretending that they
have had executions against them, when they have had none) and sometime
pretending one dilatory excuse, and sometimes another (though such Sheriffs
usually grant and make Warrants against diverse honest and sufficient men, for
small and trivial occasions.)

And many times when Warrants have been granted out, against such fugitive
persons, to Bailiffs, Sergeants, etc. they would not arrest them without sums
of money given them by the Plaintiffs, and the Plaintiffs or some for them
attend upon such Bayliffe, etc. to see arrests done; otherwise diverse of them
have taken rewards of such fugitive Defendants to spare such arrests.

For prevention whereof, and for the more speedy satisfaction of Creditors,
etc. desire that it may Be Enacted, That process of Summons or Attachment by
goods or chattals, or scir. fac. to summon, etc. the person, may be awarded and
made out of any the four superior Courts at Westminster, and at as easy a
rate in the one as in the other of them; and no more taken for any such
process than has been or shall be due, to summon, attach, or warn any
Defendant to appear to any action or actions, which within these 30. years
last past, have or has been usually brought or prosecu ed in any such Court to
summon or warn any Defendant in such process to appear in any such Court:
And that upon every personal summons or warning returned by any such Sheriff
into any such Court, the same may stand and be in the nature of an appearance
in Law, for such Defendant, and that the Plaintiff in such action may proceed
to judgment, against such Defendant thereupon if such Defendant does not, nor
shall plead to such action within -- days next after such personal summons. And
that in every such writ of summons there may be a precept, to such Sheriff,
that if he cannot find goods or chattals, or the person of such Defendant,
whereby to summon or attach him by his goods or chattals, or warn him
personally within 15. day^, or some other time to be thought convenient in that
behalf, next after such process delivered to such Sheriff or his Deputy or
Deputies; (and he or they to whom the same shall be so delivered be in the
County of such Sheriff, to whom such process is or shall be directed) that
then such Sheriff or, etc. shall arrest, or cause to be arrested, the body of
such Defendant, if he shall be found in etc. within 15. days, or some other
time to be thought convenient in that behalf, next after such first 15. days
expired, and shall make an entry upon such process, or in some book public
to be seen, at the next County Court of such Sheriff for such his County, and
by the space of 3. or 4. County Court days of the same County next after, for
every Plaintiff, or any for him, or, etc. to view and see, whether or not such
Sheriff had arrested, or caused to be arrested, or summoned or warned such
Defendant, or that he was not to be found in, etc.

And that (if such Sheriff, or, etc. had arrested or shall arrest such
Defendant) such Sheriff shall return a cep. corpus, at the return of such
process, into the Court from whence such process issued, or else be subject
to such Plaintiff, to an action of debt, for the debt or demand in the said
process.

And that such return shall stand and be in the nature of an appearance in Law,
and in such manner, as is before mentioned of the return of a personal summons
or warning.

And that if any (after Judgment had or obtained against him, and stand in
force, without writ of error, attaint, or etc. brought to reverse the same)
shall absent or hide himself, or, etc. by the space of -- that then he may be
proceeded against, as if he were prisoner etc. (summons being given to; or left
for him, according as is mentioned in the Proposalls for Prisoners and
Creditors, at his house, or, etc. to join in Commission and elect
Commissioners, etc.) against his; or, etc. person, and all his, or, etc. lands,
tenements, goods, and Chattals.

And that if such Sheriff shall nor make it appear, as is before mentioned, t
at he had taken the body of such Defendant by the r me before mentioned, to be
entered upon such process, or in such book, as before is mentioned or
otherwise; That then at the request of the Plaintiff or his Attorney, a Writ
shall or may be granted or made out of any such Court, from whence such
process issued, to any person or persons especially by such Plaintiff or his
Attorney to be elected, whereof one of such parties so to be elected, to be
present at such arrest, to have, in lands or tenements, goods or chattalls, to
the value of the Debt or Demand in such process, or of some other sum to be
thought convenient in that behalf; or to be Coroner or Constable of, etc.

And that after such arrest, such person or persons so elected, may have such
party arrested to the Sheriff of the County, where such person shall be so
arrested, his or their Deputy or Deputies, or Jailer, and that such Sheriff,
or, etc. shall be enabled and compelled (upon pain of an action of Debt,
against such Sheriff for recovery of etc. for his etc. refusal thereof) to
receive such person arrested, and deteyne him, or, etc. in custody until he or
etc. shall find suretyes for satisfying, what debt or damages shall be
recovered against such person arrested, and to be enabled and compelled to take
such security by way of recognizance in the name of the Party Plaintiff or
Prosecutor, and to his use, and that such recognizance may have the full force
of a Statute Merchant or of the Staple, and that the same may be returned with
such process by such Sheriff, into the Court from whence such process
issued, by which such arrest shall be made, at the day of the return of such
process, upon pain that such Sheriff, taking such recognizance, shall be
liable to such action of Debt, to such Plaintiff as before is mentioned; and
that the next Justice of the Peace to the place where such arrest shall be,
shall have power, and be compelled, to take and return such recognizance with
such process (if such person arrested do or shall find and provide such
suretyes as such party Prosecutor shall like of) and that all bonds taken, by
such Sheriffs, Justices etc. at any time upon any arrest or otherwise of any
Defendants or his Suretyes shall be taken in the same names, and in the same
nature, and to the same intents before mentioned, and returned as before, upon
and under the same penalty or pain.

A short view of the particulars to be saved, for the benefit of the
Commonwealth, by the Proposals formerly published for Prisoners and Creditors,
etc.
The number of prisoners yearly in England and Wales, and as have been in
Ireland, as diverse conceive above 20000. The number of Prisoners early. 12000.
Waster and consumed by them yearly. Proposed to be saved to the Commonwealth.
yearly. And as all, or most who have taken observation of such things, do
esteem there be above 12000. Estimated as is estimated. By some to so much
more, And by Others double so much. Every of which Prisoners one with anothher,
wastes and spends yearly, above 30 li. which amounts to 360000 li. 360000
li. Of which is proposed to be yearly saved, for the benefit of the
Commonwealth above 300000 l. 300000 li. Besides for the prevention of frauds,
which have been usually hatched in prisons, by long liars there, whereby diverse
have been totally defrauded of their just Debts and damages, amounting as is
estimated by some to so much and by others double so much. 600000 li. 900000
li.

The particulars by these proposals, For prevention of wrongful Arrests, and
imprisonments, etc. and for saving the excessive charges of Arrests for just
debts, now newly published, to be saved to the honest people of this Nation,
are drawn ready to be published in convenient time;

And that for the Proposalls formerly published for Creditors, etc. be large,
and are so drawn for the prevention of fraud in danger to happen, and for the
perfect understanding of all the common people, how they have been wronged by
permission of things to be acted, thereby proposed to be remedied, and for their
certain understanding, how they may speedily, and at small charge he remedied,
here follows an abstract of the benefit for he Commonwealth Proposed by the
Proposals before mentioned for Creditors etc.

1. That all Creditors may have their due of and against al their Debtors and
Prisoners out of all their Estates both real and personal of what Nature
soever; etc that all Prisoners whatsoever (satisfying their Creditors rateably
according to their abilities) may speedily be delivered out of prison, and not
lie lingering there in misery and extremity. 2. That all Prisoners of ability
may be compelled to discover the truth of their Estates to their Creditors, and
out of the same to satisfy their Creditors, and not lie in prison wasting and
spending in a riotous way among their keepers, and their agents, as much as
would satisfy their Creditors. 3. And that such as shall be found faulty in
concealing or so wasting their Estates, should be taken from the prison where
they so he rioting, and be put to some place straightly to be held to work for
the benefit of their Creditors; which course will cause those who usually
contribute for such their Liberty and riotous and delicious maintenance and
living, contribute more large to their Creditors to gain their favor for the
liberty of such Prisoner.


And because some destructive Proposalls or Petitions have inconsiderately been
often divulged and scattered abroad by some, this following Proviso to those
former Proposalls not perfectly expressed in the same, in regard three sheets
of more ma eriall things were filled, and no space left to express at large
provisions against such like inconsiderate Proposalls thereof, this next
following Proviso is now expressed more at large, for the more perfect
understanding of the inconveniences which inevitably would happen, if such
inconsiderate Petitions should be granted; which following Proviso is a full
answer to, and discovery of, the mischiefs and inconveniences which would ensue
upon those Petitions, with an Errata in some of the first former Proposalls for
Creditors, etc. to the intent that those who have any of them may amend the
same for their perfect under standing thereof. Page 5. line 8. inter etc. and
against, read there to except, p. 8. l. 13. inter Creditors and upon, read to
an action of ejectment, and confess the ejectment and the outer, p. 21. l. 23.
strike out prison, and read person, p. 28. l. 8. put our direction, and read
discretion.

4. And that such persons shall be so dealt with, as those so concealing or
wasting their estates, which shall be found guilty of outrages, as may hemes,
batteries, and other trespasses, conspiracies, scandalls, etc. and such like;
for if such outrageous persons should go free and be set at liberty out of
prison, in regard of their poverty, by virtue of any new act of grace (as some
inconsiderately have propounded and desired) then its feared, that there will
be no quiet in the nation, being diverse outrageous persons of mean estate will
then be apt and ready of their own mischievous and wicked intents, or by
rewards or promises of reward, secretly given by some others, work and act such
mischief for a very small reward or promise, so that by the permission thereof,
outrageous persons so easily to be discharged out of Prison, honest men living
by their handicraft art, or labor, by mayhemes, wounds, and such like, may be
deprived of their livelihood, and diverse men living by their credit by
outrageous conspiracies and scandalls may be deprived of their credits, and
thereby utterly undone, and many other men besides may by such permission be
put to excessive charge, and have their lives and estates brought into danger
of losing, by mischievous actions of such outrageous and scandalous persons.

FJNJS.

