THE Antichristian Presbyter: OR, ANTICHRIST TRANSFORMED; ASSUMING THE NEW
SHAPE OF A Reformed Presbyter, as his last and subtlest Disguise to deceive the
NATIONS.

REVEL. 13.11, 13. And he had two horns like a Lamb, and he spoke as a
Dragon, and he does great wonders; so that he makes fire to come down from
Heaven on the Earth, in the sight of men. And he deceives them that dwell upon
the Earth, by reason of those miracles.

By RICHARD LAURENCE, Marshal-Generall.

Printed for the Timly information of the People, 1647.

The Epistle to the READER.
CHRISTIAN READER,
I Would not have thee flatter thy expectation, by thinking to meet with
something in this Discourse, that should tend to the setting up, or casting
down any one practice or opinion now received or held forth by the Believers
(of several judgments) in this Kingdom, which are but as so many Bubles risen
upon the water: And when a strong gale of that Spirit, which blows where it
lists, shall breath upon them, they shall all break and fall, and shall
become a pure River of living water, clear as Crystal proceeding out of the
Throne of GOD, and of the Lamb: But that which J do here endeavor to hold
forth to thee, is only a discovery of that Mystery of Iniquity, which assumes
shapes and forms of Religion, for no other end, but to destroy both Moral and
Divine Rights and Privileges. And having had occasion, by reason of my
employments in the Army, to ride through most parts of this Kingdom very
lately; I have observed these things which I here represent to thee: hoping,
that not only Thou, but those whom England has chosen to be their Overseers,
and God has used to be their Deliverers, will observe what Vipers they have in
their Bosom, such as hold forth an Apple in their mouth, but have stings in
their hearts, such as only kissed with an intent to betray. That which moved me
to pen it, was out of conscience to that Covenant, which many of these
Deceivers have swallowed down: it would be well for the Kingdom, if there were
more Covenant-Keepers, though fewer Covenant-takers. J shall direct thee to
what follows, and rest thine in that everlasting Covenant, which does not
only bind us, but affect us in truth, and faithfulness one to each other.

R. L.

A brief Discovery of old Antichrist in the new shape of Presbytery.
EXperience teaches us, that it has ever been the way and practice of that
man of Sin, that mystery of Iniquity, that enemy to all peace and
righteousness, [commonly called by us, Antichrist, and known to us only by
the names of Pope, Jesuit, and Papist, etc.] to transform himself into that
shape or likeness, which he conceived would he most advantageous to his
designs.

For, before the time of this Parliament, we thought he had only dwelt at
Rome, and Spain, etc. among the Papists, and that the hanging of those
halfe-score men for the Gunpowder Plot, had frighted him clear out of
England. [But while we cried, Peace, Peace, behold trouble.] And when he
thought the time of our desolation d^ew nigh, then the time of our deliverance
was at hand.

For when he saw there was no remedy, he was very forward to have a Parliament,
thinking they would have done as some had done before them; to have given all
the peoples rights and privileges to the King, to purchase to themselves great
estates in Court.

But God gave us men of public spirits, which resolved to offer up themselves,
and a^l that was dear to them, to maintain the peoples rights and privileges,
so much invaded by the great-Ones of this Kingdom, and their Ha^ers.

And before they were well warmed in their seats, there came petition after
petition, and complaint after complaint, they could not tell which to hear
first; many of them wondering the people should lie under such heavy
oppressions, and yet be so silent. And when they began to enquire into the
business, they found the people were like a Horse in a quagmire, the more they
strove, the deeper they sunk: For though they had appealed from Court to Court;
the higher they went, the worse they were.

This seemed strange to them, that in such a place as England was (where there
were so many grave and learned Divines, such a powerful Ministry, the whole
Kingdom being looked at as a Church of Jesus Christ;) there should be such
unheard of oppression and tyranny.

And enquiring into the cause of these things, they began first to enquire
whether that old enemy of mankind, which was always a deceiver of the people
(Antichrist) was not crept in among us again. Which made Henry the eighth spill
so much innocent blood in this kingdom, hanging to day a Papist for his
Religion, and the next day a Protestant for his Religion; Having his reign in
burning and destroying religious people in this Kingdom, until the end of
Queen Mary, and was wholly cast out of Church and State, as we thought, by the
Parliament in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.

After which we grew secure, we thought Antichrist had been but of one religion.

Then they began to enquire what Papists were about the King; thinking they
might be the cause of all this mischief: for they had not heard that this
deceiver had been any thing but a Pope, or Jesuit, or Papist at least.

But when they had found out the truth of the business; this cunning Sophister
had turned Protestant, a zealous Common Prayer Book man, and would go to
Church twice a day at least.

And after they found it was Antichrist indeed only changed his shape, they
began to search further, to see how large his dominion was.

And well knowing he does not use to trouble poor folk much, they began first
at the Court; and going with the King to the Church, there they found him as
busy as could be, bowing to the Altar, and reading Common Prayer, and singing
the Letany, with a great deal more such stuff.

And when he had done that; up start he into the Pulpit in the likeness of the
Kings Chaplain, and there he tells them the King was accountable to none but
God for his actions; and, that all his subjects enjoyed, was wholly at his
disposing, whether liberties, privileges, or estates, etc. and those that
would not say so, were traitors.

And after further enquiry, they found him in all the chief Offices about the
Court; and for fear he should not be near enough to the King, he was crept
into bed to him.

A little after they found he was not only about the Kings person, but was
gotten into most of the chief places of Judicature in the kingdom.

They found he had been a great Privy-Counsellor for many years, and had been
acting many wicked designs tending to the inslaving of the people, and
destroying Religion.

He had been the only means of procuring Ceremonies, and a Book of
Common Prayer to be imposed upon the Church of Scotland. And because they would
not submit, they being imposed by the Kings authority, he persuaded the King to
raise an Army to force it upon them; and had not our God (which never was a
friend to imposers of forms) stood for them and us by them, we had been all
enslaved at that time.

After further enquiry, they found he had been in the likeness of a learned
Judge, and had rode most of the circuits in England, and had sold the poor for
a piece of bread. And where ever you find him, you may observe he loves money
well: for he did not use the Law to judge by, but judged for men as they were
able to pay him. And from thence it was, you had so little protection by the
Law.

He could persuade the Judges, and most of the Lawyers in the Kingdom, that it
were lawful for the King to raise money of the freeborn people of England,
whether they were willing or no, and bids them call it Ship Money.

He could make it lawful for the great men in the kingdom to take away all the
poor Countre-ymens Commons, though they had never so strong Charters to show
for them, only tell them it was the Kings pleasure.

If any well-minded Countryman which thought his own Birthwright and his
Countries privilege worth the standing for did but stand up in his Countries
behalf, he presently must be made an example, (and was befriended if he escapt
with his life though he lost all he had besides) for fear some others should
play such tricks.

Nay, he had almost persuaded the Lords of the Copy^hold-M^^^^r, that their
^^nes which were never known to be but set sums to be at their wills: And
thereby would have dispossessed many thousands of the Commons of England of their
Inheritance their Fathers left them.

Thus my honest Countrymen, what ever you were born too, ye may see what you
were near brought to. If I should instance in all particulars of this nature, I
should fill a Volume, as big as your Church Bible: If you be forgetful, or
have a bad memory, I shall commend the Star Chamber to you for a study, which
is a very convenient place for that purpose.

After they had discovered what work he had made in the State, they began to
enquire, whether he was not crept into the Church or no, and when the truth
came to be known he was Archbishop of Canterbury. And after further enquiry, it
appeared, there was not a Diocese in the Kingdom but he was the Bishop of it,
and not a Living worth a hundred pounds a year, but he had the disposing of it.
Nay, because he understood the people would not restore him all those great
Livings, which Henry the 8. took from him, under the same terms and names; he
then held them, rather then he would be without, he new christened them too,
And some he calls Church Livings or Spiritual means, or the Churches
Inheritance. And I believe it is all the Inheritance he desire his Churches
should have: for he can make a whole County of Temporal means all Spiritual
in half an hour, and make you believe its Blasphemy to say to the contrary,
and Sacrilege to take it away again.

There are two other little stipends, which like a Careful Father, he has
procured for his youngest Sons; and those he calls Globe-land and Tithes: So
rather then any of his Tribe should not have an office in the Priesthood, he
will have them Leviticall Priests.

But if they were not fit for Priests, he had other employments for them: for
he was nor only a Courtier himself, but he kept a Court too.

And this he called a Spiritual Court: it had other names, as sometimes the
Chancellours Court, or the Commissaries Court: but they that gave it the right
name, called it the Bawdy Court: What the Revenue of this Court was yearly, I
cannot inform you: but I am sure, they maintained a great and ungodly company.

And set but apart the Crown-Land and the Inheritance of the Nobility in the
Kingdom: and though his Tribe did not amount to the five hundred part of the
people; yet he had engrosed into his hands the fourth part of the Commons
Inheritance.

And if you please to mind what work he made in the State, and how well he
throve in the Church, if he had not bin discovered and stopped by the Parliament,
he would have made as many go barefoot, and bare-leg in England, as does in
Scotland, in a very short time.

After they found how rich and mighty he was grown in the Kingdom, they began
to inquire into his actions, and there they found he had been doing the very
same things in this shape he used to do in the other.

There were all the godly Ministers in the Kingdom either banished or silenced;
except some few which were able to make good friends, or could dispense with
most of his Popish Ceremonies, with many thousands of godly people scattered
all over the world, as they were at Jerusalem; witness, New England, Virginia,
with many of the remote Islands, Holland is not exempted.

If you would have further satisfaction, I shall refer you to the four
Champions of these times, viz. Mr. Prynne, Dr. Bastwick, Mr. Burton, and Lieu.
Col. Lilburn: I wish them to remember the loss of their ears, their branding
in the face, their pillory, their whipping-Cart, their exile and imprisonment.
Ask them, if Antichrist cannot persecute as well in the shape of a Protestant
as a Papist.

Know of them whether the enjoyment of this Parliament be not the greatest
outward mercy that ever God gave England, and themselves in particular. Ask
them again, if Antichrist be not a persecuter in all the shapes he assumes? and
whether the spirit of persecution be not the spirit of Antichrist, or no.

Thus (my honest and soon-deceived Contrymen) you may see by these few
hints, among the many thousands you may remember of the same nature, what
condition you were in when God raised you up this Parliament to be your
deliverers, and what a work they had to undertake in your behalf: They had
only of these two things to choose one; either to give you and your posterity up
to slavery, or run the hazard of the utter ruining themselves and families.

I need not tell you which it was they chose; but where they begun, will be
worth your observation.

They did not begin to lop off the branches, but to hew down the main body of
the tree: the first men they called in question, being the two greatest
Subjects in the Kingdom, viz. the Lord Deputy of Ireland, and the Bishop of
Canterbury: if they had questioned more of them, then we had been quietter
since.

But as soon as this wise Observer of Times, saw what would befall him, he
presently would change his shape again, and would be in the likeness of a
blessed Reformation, as he called it in the days of Queen Elizabeth.

When that trick would not serve, he knew there was no other means left now,
but his last shift, which was to see if he could stir up the people, to rise
with the King, to cut the Parliaments throats, and by destroying them wholly,
to inslave and vassalage the people for ever.

Thus you see what ever he faith, you never know what he means, till the last.

What he did in this kind, I shall not need to rehearse to you: woeful
experience I hope has convinced you; though I am able to particalarize as many
of his wicked cruel, and barbarous actions, as any one man in England.

But for further satisfaction, I shall refer you to Faringdon in Berkeshire, to
Prince Maurice his march, through Somerset and Dorsetshire; to Gorings Horse in
Devonshire and Cornwall; to Prince Ruperts march through Lancashire; to
Layton-Buzzar* and Wooburn in Bedfordshire: the Queens shriving of Burton upon
Trent.

And if you please to make each of these a Bishop, I shall furnish you with as
many Rapes, Murders, Robberies, and unheard of Cruelties, as shall make them a
sufficient Diocesan Priesthood.

Thus have I endeavored to trace Antichrist in his own steps to describe his
habits, discover his practices, and have given thee some hint of his actions;
to this end, that if ever thou see him or hear of him again, thou may know
him.

For be you sure, as long as there is so many great and spiritual Livings in
the Kingdom; so much Glebe-land, and other good things called Tithes: He will
not out, he will assume some other shape: he cares not what it is, so he may
but do his work, and receive his wages; which is* as you have heard, to rob,
kill, and destroy you, and will make you pay him well for it too.

Now let me entreat thee by the way, to take notice, what a wonderful
deliverance God has wrought for thee, by the hands of those men, which this
Monster would have turned thy hand against; that if ever Nation or People owed
themselves to a Parliament; this Nation does.

And though there be many Sons of Belial, which had rather see the Kingdom
ruined, so they might have the destroying of it: by fighting against them, then
to have it settled in truth and peace by them: yet let them know, with all the
enemies they have in the world, that if that God which hitherto has been their
wisdom and strength, do keep them close to the work they have begun, viz. to
lose the bands of wickedness, to take off heavy burdens, to let the oppressed
go free, and to break every yoke: though all the power of Hell and Earth
should set up themselves against them; The Lord of Hosts is our strength, why
should we fear? the God of Battle is our salvation, why should we be afraid?

But now my honest Countrymen, after all this care taken and hazzards run, and
blood spilt: when the Parliament with all the rest of their faithful friends,
scattered abroad from their own horns in the Kingdoms service, had thought
their work had bin done, and nothing remained, but to receive the fruit of
their former labors, which is an equal participation, with the rest of the
freeborn people of England, of their liberties and privileges due to them in
their several places and callings; yet, even while they were all crying peace,
peace, behold war.

There appears another Generation of Earth and Hell, like that Beast in the
13. of the Revel. verse. 11. Whose appearance is like a Lamb, and yet speaks
like a Dragon, his voice being nothing but of war and bloodshed.

Many thousands of such, as the Parliament had at their mercy, and has given
them their liberties and estates upon easier terms, then some thousands of
their own friends have preserved theirs by taking their parts.

And yet all the practice of these men is in speaking evil of the Parliament,
endeavoring to render them odious to the People; saying, they are all
Independent, and will have no King, with a thousand such false aspersions and
lies, making their boasts, they are confident of another day, and that the war
is not yet begun, and that they hope to see the Tide turned ere long, with many
such expressions.

That while the Parliament is disbanding their Armies, slighting their
Garrisons, endeavoring by all possible means to ease the people of their
burdens they have so long groaned under, by reason of the war;

These servants of that wicked One are sowing a new seed, fomenting a new war.

And because their old Names of Papists, Malignants, Cavaleeres, etc. are grown
so odious to the people;

Therefore this cunning High Priest of theirs, Antichrist, teaches them to
call themselves Presbyterians.

For, says he, by so doing, with some other tricks I have, we shall gain the
Scottish Nation, with a considerable Party in the City to those we have there
already, and set it ^ard to make a division in the House, by being in the
likeness of P^esbyterians till such time as we have gotten the King into his
power, and a considerable Army of French, and our Catholic Brethren in Ireland
about him.

And then we will put the Scots in mind, that they were the Beginners of all
our troubles, and that they have been twice proclaimed Rebels for fighting
against this King. We will then tell them of the old saying, It is no deceit to
deceive the Deceiver.

We will then put London in mind of their former Zeal to the Parliaments
Cause, and let them know, our good King has often times called them the
Rebellious City, and had long ago given them us for our Arrears.

We will then tell our Presbyterian Brethren, of their infirmities, our
faithful Brother Bishop Maxwell reckons up in his Book, entitled Issachars
Burden.

We will then convince them, as they would have convinced the Independents with
an Ordinance against Heresy and Blasphemy etc.

Thus friends, if ye have not resolved, to say its dark, when the Sun shines,
if ever your parsons tell you so, you may see this Spirit of Malignanc^e and
Antichrist in all parts of the Kingdom, in the shape or likeness of
Presbyters.

If there were but a Garrison slighted, or Soldiers disbanded, where the
Parliament conceives them useless to the Kingdom, they are told it is,
because they are Presbyterians.

If there be but an Officer cashiered in the Army for the most vild
misdemeanour that can be committed, be it Drunkenness of Swearing, or Whoring,
or plundering, etc. be cries out, it is because he is a Presbyterian.

And thus I could instance in many particulars, but I reserve them for future
occasion.

And if this trick be but a little better learned, the Parliament shall not
call in a Malignant to pay his Composition, but he will presently cry out, he
is sequestered for being a Presbyter. Nor punish a Priest for Faction in the
Pulpit in endeavoring to render the Parliament odious to the People, but he
will cry out, he is a Presbyterian.

As if the being a Presbyterian were a tolleration to commit all kind of
wickedness without control.

As if Faction and Sedition, with Drunkenness and Swearing, etc. in
Presbytery, were as absolute Jure Divino as their Government.

Nay further, if you ride through the whole Kingdom of England, and Dominion
of Wales, except some few Parishes, where the^e is a very good L^ving of 100.
l. or 200. l. per annum.

Who shall you find but some old-fashioned Common-prayer-book-Priest, and all
he is able to observe out of the Directory, is, to read a Chapter, sing a
Psalm, and say the peace of God, and away goes he to dinner, he has most skill
of that.

If ye do now and then meet with a second sort of them; which, with a great
deal of care, and pains-taking, can write as much in a piece of paper in
six-dayes, as he is able to read in half an hour on the seventh day, and add
but thus much (ex tempore) to it.

O these cursed Schismatickes, Sectaries, Heretics, Independents, etc.

He is a mighty well-gifted man; he is fit to make one of the Classes, at least.

Nay, a man may go into a thousand Parishes in this Kingdom, and demand but
of the Parson, why he does not wear the Surplice, and read Common Prayer, and
bow to the Altar as he used to do;

And all the answer he can give, is, the Parliament has put them down.

Ask them why they observe the Directory; why, the Parliament has put it out.
Or, some of them are so learned, as to say, they have imposed it, or established
it.

So that we want nothing but a Parliament to establish Popery: for we have
Priests as ready to officiate, as any Kingdom in Christendom.

These things considered, what manner of Church-goverment are we like to have,
think ye, when we have like people, like Priests?

And yet all the ablest Ministers of the Kingdom must be gathered together at
London to teach one another, and the poor ignorant people in the Country,
perish for want of knowledge.

Do ye think it would not be a more Christian brotherly way for them, to go
up and down the Country teaching the Gospel; then to be at London procuring
punishment for the people for their not believing it before they have heard it?

A man may ride twenty miles together in some parts of the Kingdom, and not
find two men in a Parish, that know what a Presbyter, or Elder, or Deacon is,
except ye mean Bishops and Archdeacons, such as they use to have in another
shape.

All I would desire you to observe from these things is this: what small reason
any honest people of this Kingdom have to b^ame the Parliament for not setting
Church Government, when the tenth part of the Kingdom is not capable of
receiving it, nor the tenth part of the ministry capable of officiating it.

My honest Country men look about you, be no more deceived; for all the noise
you hear in the Kingdom is not for Presbiter-Government: they do but put on
the same Government to see if they can deceive him of his Birthright; for
godly Presbyterians, and godly Independents must all drink of one Cupp, and
they that have the last draught may come to have the dreggs too for ought I
know.

And if not godly, ye may be Presbyters and Independents too, you are not the
men they aim at.

But now it is come to this pass, that if a man do but speak well of the
Parliament, what ever his Judgment be, he must be an Independent.

Nay I have observed it, having had occasion to ride through most parts of this
Kingdom lately, that there are many godly conscientious people which have not
a preaching Minister within five miles of them, and if there, hardly worth the
going to, and some of these people for using means to procure a preaching
Minister; for so doing are called Independents, and for such, hated and abused
by their Malignant dumb Priest, and the rest of their Neighbors.

I could instance many particulars of this nature, I shall only name two.

The one is at Charlbury in Oxfordshire, the Parish being great has three
Churches all in one simple fellows, ^ands, hardly fit to make a Clarke, one of
the places having a competent means to maintain a Minister, has endeavored
to procure one, and for so doing, are called Independents, and for such hated
and despised.

Another place is at East hendred in Bark-shire where there is a wicked
Malignant Priest called Doctor Rogers, he was the Kings Chaplin in Oxford, his
parish preferred Articles against him to the General, the General referred
them to the Committees, the Articles were these or to this purpose. That the
said Doctor Rogers had several times delivered in the Pulpet before his
parishoners, these or such like expressions.

That the Parliament at Westminster were Rebels and Traitors.

That he hoped to see their heads from their bodies, and their Limbs drying in
the Sun.

That it was Treason to call them a Parliament.

In his prayer, praying for their confusion under the names of the Kings
enemies.

Comparing them to Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and wishing the earth might open
and swallow them up: frequently praying they might be like Oreb, and Zeeb, and
that they might slay before the Lords anointed like Zeba, and Salmunna, with
abundance more of this nature: For endeavoring to put him out, and to have
another in his place, the poor men were called Independents, and for such
hated, and persecuted: some of the poor men being weary of their lives and
homes, came to Oxford to entreat me to be their friend to the General
professing they durst not go home to their wives and Children, the Malignants
wrath not being contented to persecute them himself with the rest of his
complyces in his parish; but procured troopers of Abington Horse, ^o fright,
slander and abuse them under the name of Independents, and Tub-preachers.

Thus my honest Country men, if the enemies of your peace have but so much wit
as to call you Independents; according to these practices, its policy enough to
destroy you all.

Its cause of admiration, that so many rational godly men, as be in this
Kingdom of the Presbyterian Judgment should be so blind as not to see in every
part of his Kingdom, that the same spirit of Malignancy, and Anti Christ which
hitherto has opposed the Parliament in their proceedings, has already assumed
the shape of a Presbyter, thereby to make a further rent and division in the
Kingdom, to the end they may destroy both Parliament and people.

Let me appeal to any that have not sold themselves to partiality, and have
not wholly given up themselves to believe lies.

What do ye think by that army of French so much feared and talked of?

Will they be al Presbyters think you, have ye forgotten the bloody massacre in
France?

Were none murdered there but Independents think ye.

Nay further, what kind of Presbyter-Government shall we have settled by the
Irish Rebels think ye; for they must come to assist you in that precious work
too.

Have none of their unheard of inhumane cruelties been acted against any but
Independents think ye.

What do ye think of the Lord George Digby that is to command the Army for
England from thence, is not there a reverend Presbyter.

Nay further, what do you think of the gathering together of those kind of
creatures in the North we used to call Cavaliers, are they all turned
Presbyters think ye.

Were they not within this twelve months firing of Towns, plundering of
Houses, murdering of people, ravishing of women wherever they came in the
Kingdom, and went under the name of dammee Cavaliers, and the Popish Army, and
are they so suddenly converted, and altogether, its time we had a national
Church Government settled then.

Oh that ever men should thus delude themselves and be their own betrayers, and
murderets, that at such a time as this, when there is such visible treachery,
and wicked plotting, tending to the ruin of the whole Kingdom, that men
should be silent which have so great an interest in it, and so much cause to
defend the liberty of it.

Have we not cause to fear that there is a lying spirit in the mouths of our
Prophets, that at such time as this is can flatter these spiritual
wickednesses in high places; if they were the Lords watchmen, they would not be
stirring up Israel against Judah, and Judah against Israel, but would tell
Judah of his sins, and Israel of his transgression.

Oh that we may never see the day that those which Englands Parliament has
chosen out of respect to their learning and piety to be their familiar friends,
and take sweet Council together, should in the days of Absalom rising up
against David, act the part of Achitophel. Is it possible those which could
foresee things so long in the last plot, if not partial could be so blind in
this, and if seeing it, if not deceitful could be so dumb in not declaring it.

What Is the reason ye have such a noise in the pulpits against such things as
could never be sufficiently proved evil, and the great crying sins of the
nation hardly spoke of? as if one sin against the Clergy were more dangerous
then a multitude of the sins of Sodom, which this Kingdom is full of against
that God of Heaven and Earth, which destroyed Sodom for sin.

By this ye may clearly see they preach themselves, and not Christ Jesus the
Lord.

But considering it is rather their infirmities then their qualities: Let us
earnestly desire, the Lord would open their mouth^, and they might show forth
his praise, that seeklesse their own things and more the things of Jesus
Christ: that they may no longer call evil good, and good evil, but reprove
the infirmities of their Brethren, as the Apostle did with the spirit of love
and meekness: and when they are speaking against the profaneness, lewdnes and
wickedness of the Nation; to cry aloud and spare not: to lift up their voice
like a Trumpet: to preach as those that have authority, and not as the Scribes.
I shall for a conclusion desire your consideration on the 33. and 34. Chapters
of the prophecy of Ezekiel.

The Postscript.
Christian Reader.
I Shall desire thy Impartial Censure on these few things. Judge, but Judge
not false Judgment. Though I have endeavored to discover to thee that
Antichrist is crept in amongst us in the shape of a Presbyter, yet do I not in
the least here strive to persuade thee that Presbytery is Antichristian; for we
have been too forwards to judge of men, and things as they have been
represented to us under good or bad names. And from thence rose that true
proverb among us, a Jew would not have done such a thing. But the Apostle tells
them, he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, but he that is one inwardly. Romans
2.28. and this was the, cause the Saints in the Apostles time differed so much
by judging one another according to outward appearance as they were
distinguished by their names, some of Paul, and some of Apoll. s, etc. 1. Cor.
1.12.

And therefore when Christ is prophesied on to come a Judge, it is said he
shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, nor reprove after the hearing of
his ears, but he shall judge with righteousness, and reprove with equity, and
though our Judges be forwardest to judge for the rich, and speak in the proud
men's Cause, Christ shall judge for the poor, and reprove for the meek, Esa.
11.31. Therefore take heed thou do not by thy thus judging, condemn that
which Christ shall justify, and justify that which Christ shall condemn,
especially in things that concern Christ's Kingdom: and godly people, because
Christ himself is thereby either justified or condemned by them. Luk^ 10.16.
Acts 9 4.

Therefore that I would desire thee to observe in these few things is this,
that Jesus is Christ though Crowned with thorns and in a robe of mockery. Mat.
27.29. that Jacob is not Esau though in his garment, Genesis 27.15. and that
Joseph's Coat is known to his Father though dipped in blood. Genesis 37.33. And
again, that Antichrist is a Wolf, though in Sheep Clothing, Mat. 7.15, as
much that beast when he appeared like a Lamb with two horns, Rev. 13.11. as
when he had the seven heads and ten horns, v. 1. as false an Apostle when he
is transformed into an Angel of light or is like the Apostle of Christ, 2 Cor.
11.13.14. as when he is that great red Dragon standing before the woman ready
to devour her seed. Rev. 12.4.

If thou do ask me how thou shall then know him?

I answer, by his works; for whatsoever his shape is, his business is all one.

For there are some deceivers which are not Antichrist, such were Peter, Gal.
2.12. and the leaders of the Saints in the 1 Cor. 1. and several others
through infirmity or mistake, and these the Apostle reproves as Brethren.

But the end of this decever is on purpose to destroy. This is that roaring
Lion which goes about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.

Therefore of all decevers, beware of the devouring destroying decever, such as
does not only come with their mouths full of deeeit; but with their hands
full of blood, who make it their business to root up, pull down, and destroy;
for the business of Christ's Ministers is to plant, to build and set up.
Therefore says Christ, I come not to destroy men's lives but to save them. It
was the work of the theife. John 10.10. to steal, to kill and destroy. But I
am come that ye might have life says Christ, and that ye might have it more
abundantly.

Thus if thou art not one of those whom the God of this world has blinded the
eyes of, or that have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, thou can not but
confess that those decevers which are so much in blood that are all for
imprisoning, hanging, and burning are of Antichrist what shape soever they are
in.

For the Churches of Saints in the Apostle; days, were among Heathens and
Pagans, Turks and Jews.

Such as held strange opinions, such as worshipped the Host of Heaven, would have
worshipped the Apostles as Gods. Acts 14.11. denied the resurrection. Acts 23.8.
1 Cor. 15.12. such as were so far from calling the Apostles Rabby or Master
that they called Christ himself Beelzebub and the Apostles deceevers and
bablers, thought them unworthy to live upon the earth. Acts 17.18. Acts 22.22.
such as had seducing spirits, taste doctrines of devils, speaking lies in
hypocrisy. 1 Timothy 4.2. Boasters, proud, Blasphemers, without natural
affection, Truce Breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce despisers of all
good. 2 Timothy 2.3.4. such as held damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them. 2 Pet. 2.1.

And yet no persecution, no imprisoning, hanging, nor burning.

If thou or any that tells them it is lawful to destroy men for not believing,
can but show me out of the word of God, where the time, place, or person,
where, Christ or the Apostles, or any after them, we have ground to take
example by did endeavor by any outward compulsion to force men to believe, or
punish any further then excommunication, for not walking in the faith receised
when they have done; if they can procure me letters, I will away to Damascus
presently.

But this was never the practice of Christ and his Church.

But of Antichrist and his tribe, it is they that are guilty of all the blood
spilt in this kind, from Abel to this present day.

It is not the spouse of Christ that comes up from the wilderness; leaning
upon her beloved. Cant. 8.5.

But that great Scarlet whore that comes riding upon the beast, with whom the
Kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the Inhabitants of the earth
have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication. Rev. 17.12. which is the
blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, verse. 6.

Not the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world.

But they which have been always slaying the Lamb.

Not the Shepard that have thus destroyed the Sheep.

But the wolf whose nature it is to destroy, not from that God that so loved
the world that he gave his Son, but from the Devil, which is come down into
the earth with great wrath, having but a short time.

Now reader if there be nothing here discovered, but what you knew before,
consider, it was never intended for thee, but to inform the ignorant, and
conform the weak, to be a light to such as are blinded with the smoke that
ascends out of the bottomless pit, Rev. 9.2. from whence arose this High
Priest, Antichrist, with all his tribe, verse 3. compared with the 11. who are
scattered up and down this Kingdom endeavoring to deceive and destroy the
people: whose way of deceiving you shall find to be after this manner, to
persuade the people that the Parliament had no cause to wage war with the
King at the first. In answer to which I have pend the first part of my
discourse, and where that will not take, then they transform themselves into
the shape or likeness of Presbyters, and then endeavor to persuade the
people, the Parliament are most of them Sectaries, and that they with the rest
of the Sectaries of the Kingdom, (in whom they conclude all the Parliament
friends, whether Presbyters or Independents) will have no Church Government,
but put down all religion, as they call it: Which bait is not only taking
with the scandalous and ignorant, but with many knowing people, because
Church Government is not, for the present, settled: In answer to which, I have
endeavored to show the unfitnes of the generality of this Kingdom for
Church Government, with some brief discoveries of their Presbyterian
practices, and some probabilities of their ends and designs. My end in penning
of it, is only this, to let all Syons friends, see that the enemies of their
peace have no such way to destroy them, as to become some thing like unto them.

And that however they are now separated one from another, by names of opinions;

Yet if they be Christ's, then are they Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to
promise.

And though they be not all baptized into one Church fellowship or way of
worship, yet they are all baptized into that one body of which Christ is the
head, by that one eternal spirit, and so are Members one of another, 1 Cor.
12.13.

And are thereby all imbarqu't in one Ship, and must all sink or swim together.

So desiring thee, what thou find to be truth in it, it may not fare the
worse, for the rudeness of the style. I refer it to your consi^eration, and
shall ever be yours in the Kingdoms Cause.

R. L.

FINIS.

