Huc Ades, Haec Animo. OR A SERIOUS And (perhaps) Seasonable Advice, To the
SOLDIERY Of the Three NATIONS of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

By T. L. Esquire;

LONDON Printed, Anno Domini, 1659.

depiction of a central crowned fleur-de-lis flanked by a crowned Tudor rose
and a crowned Scottish thistle
TO THE SOLDIERY.
Gentlemen, and my beloved Brethren.
I Cannot, nor ever shall I endeavor to hide or deprive of their due Praises,
those godly Lights which have shined amongst you, in the Armies of England,
Scotland, and Ireland; who by their many examples of Valor, Equity, Wisdom,
Magnanimity, Dexterity, and other excellent Virtues, are beyond all parallel:
But I must withal let you know, That to Judge of them soundly and aright, both
you and I, and every particular man of the three Nations, must fly to the
Father of all Lights, who using these great and worthy Personages for the
building, preservation, or increase of this Estate, has enriched them with
great and precious Graces; that acknowledging him the Author as well of these
Virtues, as of the happy success of things manged by them; we all may learn to
yield him homage, for the preservation, continuance, and increase of this
Commonwealth.

Suppose we then, that these former goodly Lights should now appear, as so many
terrible flaming Comets, or degenerate into such sparkling Firebrands, as would
in a moment fill these three Nations with intestine Flames, and unnatural
Combustions; Would not you who are the Soldiery of these three Nations, wisely
consider with your selves, what you went about, before you would force the poor
people of these Nations, to become fresh Fuel to such Infernal Flames? and
would you not hear Reason, and consult with good Counsel and Advice, before you
rashly made your selves, the Instruments of such lamentable Effects which would
shortly follow?

Let me tell you then, That hearing with grief of heart, the Divisions which
are noised abroad, and like to happen amongst us, by occasion of some of the
great Officers of your Armies; I thought it high time to come forth, and to
represent unto you the dargerous inconveniences, which may happen by such
alccrations, which will fill each Town with Confusion, our Neighbor States
with Scorn and Derision, and every other N^tion with bad Examples: Therefore in
the first place, I earnestly desire you all, That you would unanimously
entreat, and humbly request your Heads and Officers, to lay aside all spleen
and animosity, and to be reconciled to their Heads and Governors: For you, all
of you, sufficiently know those miseries which do accompany the Torrents of
Intestine War and Dissension.

Contemn not therefore this good Counsel; but receive it with the respect and
reverence which is due to so great a Commonwealth; and with the same good will
which you have showed at the first, so continue it unto the end.

All things are yet in good Estate, and may continue so if you will; for, by
the Grace of God, your Troubles are no ways come to irreconcilable Extremities.
It Is too true, you are too much behind with your pay; yet I hope you will not
so far prefer your Profit before Reason, as to force your Magistrates, and
fright their Ministers and People, to submit to your wills and pleasures;
seeing they are all of them resolved (if you hold but your hands) to pay you
all speedily, and with their thankful acknowledgment of your good services,
further to honor and advance you. Persuade therefore (if possible) your
Officers and Commanders, to leave their conceived hatred and spleen, and to lay
aside their passions, and with quiet spirits, to consider of all
inconveniences of Times, Places, and Persons. You see we are now in peace,
almost through the three Nations; and will you be the first to sound the
Trumpet to begin a new War? Would you that your Native Country should serve
as a Theater, to add a bloody Catastrophe, to our late past Tragedies? Alas!
you are all in the same Vessel, in the same Enclosure, breathing the same Air,
using the same Tongue, and the same Laws and Customs: And be assured, That
those whom you or your Commanders, do now repute for your Adversaries, are
your fellow Subjects, your Neighbors, your Kinsfolk, your Brethren, and and
Members of the same Body: And though your Opinions be diverse, touching matters
of Religion, yet your Wills should be united for the good of the
Commonwealth. To this end, let me entreat you once more, to entreat your
Officers and Commanders again, and again, to abandon all those pernicious
Counsels, which present nothing unto them, but through the false sight of
Opinion and Choler, and which will plunge them into a Gulf of Miseries at the
last; and invite them all by your examples, to embrace union and concord,
which is the foundation and root of all the rest, the Nurse of Peace, the
Consolation of good Subjects, and a plentiful Harvest of all good Things.

And as for your particulars, let me seriously and seasonably advise you all,
still to remain in the Port of this Concord, where the State does gu^de us all,
after so many Storms and Temp^sts; and where both you and we shall be assured.
^he Sea does no harm to Ships that have good Anchors: Now Obedience is the
Anchor which does assure out Ship against the fury of both Winds and Waves;
it is that which gives l^fe and motion to all the members of the Body; and
there is not a more certain sign of the life of a Commonwealth, then this
Obedience.

Let us all therefore stand and wait the providence which almighty God has
appointed, which ordinance neither Enemies can hinder, nor Friends advance; and
therefore the direction of this Truth, ought to teach you all to Sail in this
Sea, every man in his Place and Office, as he ought, and according to his
Degree and Command amongst you, expecting a more happy Harbor, by the bounty
and wisdom of him that rules the Waves of humane Confusions, as the Sovereign
Judge, holding in his hands both the hearts and the events of all things.

I shall conclude with the Exhortation of Moses the General of Israel, to his
both Spiritual and Temporal Soldiers, in these words, And Moses said unto the
People, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he
will shea to you today. Exodus 14. 13.

FINIS.

