THE COURTS OF JUSTICE Corrected and amended.

OR The Corrupt Lawyer untrust, Lasht and quasht.

Wherein The Partial Judge, Counselor, Great Mover, whispering Informer,
Favorite at the Bar are fully displayed, convicted, and directed.

By W. L. Esquire.

COKE lib. 6. 47. Multa conceduntur per obliquum, quae non conceduntur de
directo.

Presented to the Honorable House of Commons, and by Them approved of.

London, printed for George Lindsey. 1642.

THE PVBLISHER TO THE PERVSER.
THe difference of men's dispositions and degrees, (as we may daily note)
produces different Effects, as welin reproving vices, and in approving
Virtues, as on the contrary: Every one expressing himself by Lips or Letters,
according to the suggestions of that good or evil spirit, whereby he is
induced or seduced.

This man being of a temperate and sober quality envies against Riotousnesse
and Intemperance. That man addicted to labor and thriftinesse, accuses our
fashion-following Gentry of Sloth and Prodigality: So (in particular) the
Author of this Treatise, spending his days in the study and practice of the
Law (wherein he grew to such proficiencie always directed by integrity, as
made him famous both for learning and honesty, whose name nevertheless for
some causes I conceal) many years sithence, as one pathetically moved with
the corrupt courses used, and the excessive Bribery affected in those days by
his Brethren learned in the Laws, especially the more eminent sort, and the
continual condescending or proclivitie of the Judges, not only to their
unjust motions, but to the private and undue solicitations of their own
Menials, besides their Friends and Favorites at large; and their partial
profering or hearing of some Heads before others at the Bar of Justice,
whereby many a Client in his just cause has suffered wreck and perished
contrary to Law, al equity and good Conscience. That black Swan or honest
Lawyer, spared sometime from his others studies to pen these Animadversions;
which albeit the same cannot extend, nor may any way enure unto the least
impeachment or contumely of our honorable Judges in these times (who I
ingenuously acknowledge, and fame declares to be of a most reformed and
unimpeachable condition) yet may it serve as a Caveat and humble Information to
the uprightness of them and their Successors, for the preventing and avoiding
of the like abuses to be offered by their friends of followers, or by any such
ill-conscienced Advocates (whereof there are too too many (I fear) still
abiding or new started up) and also as a Memento, for all men to note the
plausible and happy alteration in Courts and courses of Justice, the ancient
with the modern proceedings duly compared. And likewise all those Trespassers
viewing (as in a glass) their own deformities (or rather enormities) herein
so lively represented and publicly declared may happily be incited, either
for fear of shame, or for the gain of an honest name to become conscionable
Convertites And for my part, with and in favor of every well-meaning and
abused Client, I wish all such Lawyers to be speedily converted or subverted;
and so conclude.

Editor Benevolus ad Causidicum iniquum.
Nec ^e vulgantem reprehendas, has neque charta,
Ne tua te vulget lingua malignareum.
Ad librum.
Te nolunt culpare boni bonitatis amore:
Te nolunt culpare mali formidine probri.
Animadversions upon Courts of Justice.
ALl Laws both divine and humane, and all the Counsels of learned and
virtuous politicians, do concur and join in this point, that it is the office
of an upright Judge, Investigare verum, to trace out the very truth of the
cause in Judgment before him, (...) secundum veritatem sententiam dicere, and
give sentence according to the truth. So in doing that office he ought not to
respect the person of any, but altogether to set up for his mark the Cause
with the circumstances thereof, being assured, that Qui^quide^tra causam est,
persona est. And therefore the Emblem of a Judge was rightly pourtrayed with
wide ears, but without eyes at all; to denote that he ought fully and patiently
to hear the whole Cause, but not affectionately to respect any party that has
to meddle therein. Altera^uris Accusateris, altern R^^ est res^^vanda.

The purpose of a whisperious Informer.
ON the other side the very drift of a whispering Informer, is either to allure
the Judge from that Indifferency, which he ought equally to nourish between
both parties in suit, to a partial disposition in favor of the one aganinst
the other of them; or otherwise to shore up the Judge, (as it were) when he
suspecteth his inclination to the adversary. In both, which he bewrays an
unreverend conceit and opinion of the Judge, whom in the Court of his own
heart he has already condemned of Infidelity; in the one, because he
suspecteth him to be drawn away to his disfavour; in the other, because he
hops to winn and fit him to his own bent and desire. And Mur^^ aheneus a
wall of brass, whom neither the wind of secret solicitation, nor the storm
of mighty threats, nor the shower of Crocodillian tears ought once to remove,
shake or mollify. For if this Informer were rightly persuaded of the
integrity of the Judge; what necessity can he pretend to solicit? what
reason can he yield why he should not permit them to sit down and rest in his
own sincerity? Yea, why should he endeavor to move him, (for so they term
it) unless he thought him to be light and movable, or finally to what end does
he causelessly waste his own labor, and vainly obtund the cares and interpell
the Affairs of him?

How speciously soever therefore these our Cabinet Inchanters shall pretend in
words, either that they desire none other than Lawful favor (a thing that is
not indeed, since Law is indifferent, and favor partial) or that they seek
only the good and equal conscience of the Judge, (which they might find
without labor) or that they sue for expedition only, or that the Cause may be
advisedly weighed, both which (in most of these cases) were but to plague their
own Client. Or that (according to the anciently allowed manner of entreating a
Judge) they require no more at his hands, but quot salva fide facere possit,
that which he may do with the safety of his duty; yet is there evermore an
irreconcilable dissension between Justice and their desire, who (what semblance
soever they make to the contrary) do indeed hawke and hunt the game o^ favor,
to the endangering of their own conscience, and the wrong of the one of the
parties; and that both with the dishonor and deceit of the man that (sitting
in the place of God) ought to deliver even and upright Justice to all that come
before him: And so are all their sacred speeches but Syrenean voices, the
poison of Aspes, and the very quintessence of abuse and corruption.

The sorts of Informers.
BUt now more particularly. As these Chambers be either the very parties in
suit, or their friends; and those friends either favorites at large to the
Judge, are some of his own Menials or followers, or else be privy and of
Council with those parties? So is there great difference in the venomous
forces of their several solicitations.

The Party.
FOr as touching the very parties, they do carry their own discredit in their
mouths with them, and cannot greatly prevail (unless they bring the ^gion of
reward) because they speak for themselves in a matter of professed and known
enmi^ie. And yet the Roman Laws, misliking all such audacious importunities,
did punish (...), both Actorem and reum, that by any subtle prayers attempted
the Judge in his house or elsewhere without the Court. See D. F. H. ad leg. Iul.
de Ambitu

The Friend at large.
MOreover their favorites at large, that be neither of Counsel not household,
as they have not (for the meaner sort of them) the opportunity or advantage to
work any great harm, so do they also many times speak but coldly, and as it
were for fashion sake, to satisfy the suit of their Clients, who otherwise
would think themselves forsaken by them.

Great Movers.
BUt if those Favorites be persons of estate (whose desires carry their weight)
officers of great places (who be able to interchange pleasures) or men for any
respect, lodged in the bosom of the Judge, then ought they so much the more to
forbear him, as they be more likely then others to allure and win him to
their desire, because they bring no warrant of a good conscience to assure them
that they speak but for the one party, so know they but the one half of the
business at the most, and wot not whether they promote Justice or place
Injury, whether they succor the afflicted or join with the oppressor: Neither
is it enough in this case to pretend that they are moved by their commiseration
toward the poor (as know that many keep for their defense) for what is that
to the Judge, who is a Judge, is utterly forbidden to behold the face of the
poor? Or what makes that to their own deliverance, when many (if not most)
of the poor which follow suits, can both bite and whine, (ut vulgo dicitur)
and then a many of which there is nothing more unquiet, clamorous and
wretchedly wrongful.

But of all the rest, the Meniall and Counselors are most pernicious, and yet
whether of them is more pestilent; I cannot determine, but due leave to the
judgment of the Judge himself that is haunted with them.

The Menial.
THe Menial or Familiar, if he may find the grace be in the eye* and to stand
at the elbowe of his Master, (especially in the closet) then shall he not want
his Suitors, and then also will he take the courage to board his Master, not
only in lawful Pe^^^ions, but also in Causes merely Judicial, and by reason
that he is near at hand to take hold of every advantage, and may best watch
both the time, the place, and good cheer of his Lord, and the absence of the
Adversary and of his friends, he will make his gain thereby both in jest and
earnest, though now and then he do but Fumum vendere, sell smoke, and pay
Alchymy for good and current money: for of these, some will soon raise or
abuse the name of their Masters, (as it were by way of a message to others,
where it may prevail) then take the pains to speak unto himself, lest they
discover a suspicion that they were hired for money. By these and such other
means the innocent Judge, like to Actaan, becomes praeda canibus, devoured
of his own dogs, who care not what dishonorable ^^ame they cast upon him
(whom they are most bounden to honor) so as they may reap the harvest of
their most greedy and ravenous (...): For as these men commonly cannot judge of
the State of a cause in controversy, so neither do they greatly care whether
that party which they favor, be right or wrong; but do only fasten their eye
upon the money, which may be coined out of it, accounting that booty as a
reward of their good service, where with they run away as glad as does the
dog with a bone. And in this part, some of them be so miraculous
Machiavellious, that they are able to express two sundry liquors out of one
same vessel, making their own profit, by both the parties, to one same suit
and controversy.

The Counselor.
THe Councellor like wise having first insinuated himself and become inward
with the Judge by the benefit of kindred, (...) recommendations of great
persons, former education and acquaintance, or by his own obsequie he will
forthwith set up his cr^st, he shall be followed with a cloud of Clients and
waged trebble more than men of better merit: yea, he shall be heard at the
Bar, when they shall be wearyed in warting there, happy is he can get him
retaind on his Council, and Fertunae filius omnes, every man will call him
fortunes own darling, and if he be of that ability, that he can bring the
Judge to be his fee-man (or pensioner) under color of a yearly newyears gift,
or may sinde the means to possess the Judge with the loan of some hundreds
of pounds, without taking any intrest therefore, then shall he cote all other
pra^ers, then may no door be kept against him, then shall he be a Guest at the
Judges table, and shall be admitted private both in the Closet and also in the
Bedchamber. And yet in the mean time, is that money (so lent) laid out to the
most extreme usurie? For all things reckoned, it shall by his increase of
Clients, yield him a^ the years end Centum pro Cent. or a better penny.

Now albeit, this man may not compare with the Meniall before, in taking the
start and watching of all bon heurs and opportunities, yet through his learning
and other parts (which the other wants) he may nip a Cause in the head, or
sting it to the heart as soon as he. It has been seen that some of these
Bell-weathers, perceiving their Clients business unable to endure the hammer
of open hearing, have advised him to bestow some score of pounds or slight of
Angels upon the Judge, to work it to some better end, and offered themselves to
present my Lord therewithal; and yet peradventure have suffered it by the way
to drop into their own pockets for a reasonable Supply of fees forgotten.

Thus, as you see, is the Integrity of this gentle Judge drawn first into
suspicion, and after that, into open obloguies, the one and the other growing
by his own facility, and by giving care to those buzzing flies and hissing
adders; his good quiet and repose is also interrupted by often obtunding that
in his privy Closet, which he might dispatch with once hearing in open Court;
the Cause of the honest Suitor must either take wrong, or else must be also
(against his will and good Conscience, besides his greater charge) find out
some Oliver to withstand this Rowland of his adversary. These Cormorants are
crammed even to the full-filling of their greedy gulf, the scale of Justice
suffers reproach. The Judge himself is laid open to the danger of any
stirring enemy, that will sift or fan him. The Prince of the people being
the wellhead of Justice, is abused in his vicarie: good men sobbing for
grief, and naughty packs laughing in their sleeves at it, who also do
evermore requite such their misbegotting favor with this thankfulness, that
their tongues do continually itch until they have blabbed abroad all the
manner and means of atchieving their injurious desires and corrupt Conquests.

The Remedy.
THe Remedy of all which evils is so easy, that the same is not only at
hand, but in the very hand and power of the Judge himself: For if he be
willing to maintain the authority and countenance of his call, he may Alto
vult^, with a lofty look take it unkindely at the hands of his Better, equal
or inferior friends; blaming them with the touch of his Credit, for their so
unadvised tampering with him in matter of his judicial and sworn duty: He
may also with one word of his mouth command his own curres to couch, and to
cease their barking: He may likewise send the Suitor to the Court, and his
Counselor to the Bar, and consequently rid himself and house of all this
unquiet kennell, and thereby redeem many a good hour, which he may bestow
partly for his needful recreation, and partly in the study and meditation of
such matters as be serviceable for the place that he holds:

Objection. But now, if this Justicer will justify himself and say, that
howsoever the way seem to lend his outward care to those importunities, (the
which it is hard in these last and worst days for any man to avoid that
means not to be at difference or war with all the world) yet notwithstanding
his heart is upright, and that he does and will do according to the exigencie
of his oath and office.

Answer. Let him also give me leave to say with the merry Poet, Credat Iudaeus
Ap^ll^, non ego, for as it is hardly credible, that a^y castle which is
continually battered, should not be taking at length, or that any woman which
admits all whores, should not apply to some one: So can this man never
excuse himself to the world-ward, but that by such affability and ready care
he mini^^^eth just suspicion of swerving from the Level of true Justice, and
that he gives passage that he plays (...) being no small cause that himself
is so vexed and mispendeth his time.

If he will reply and say, that to ^ast of this Cause before the hearing
avail^th no less to his in^tru^tion, then to the speed of the service? I will
acknowledge it; so as the same be done indifferently; but how that may be
performed without the presence of both the parties, or of their Counsel, feign
would I learn; For to place the one side alone were (in a matter judicial) to
be possessed with prejudicial conceit, and to hear them suddenly, were besides
the loss of time, but to be willingly abused, since either side may (at
liberty) offer what he will if the other be not present to confront him. Nay,
the world that is now a days curious and sharp-sighted, does well enough
perceive, that evermore after such crafty suggestions so apprehended, the (...)
keeps not the alley, but ^^yeth out by one ^ranke or other: So as though the
Cause in question takes not a direct or downright blow by judgment in
Court, yet shall it (by some obliquitie) crawle away with the back thereof
broken, whether it be by reasoning it to a private hearing, by drawing it to a
long and tedious prosecution, by committing it to a partial report, by
referring it to some unequal arbitrament, or by one or other indire^t thwart,
that shall carry no l^sse injustice with it, then if the judge himself were
utterly corrupted and perverted.

Admonition to all sorts
TO conclude therefore, let every good and true Friend, (...) of the Judge (if
at the least they be desirous to maintain the fame of his integrity) hold it
someere sacrilege and profanation of justice, once to attempt him in the part
of his jurisdiction, which ought to be unto him a most chaste and undefiled
virgin. Let them also look to them selves, and not only weigh (as I said) with
what good warrant of conscience they thus interpose themselves in a matter to
them hardly half known; but also (remembering that it is forbidden maintenance
by the Law of their Country, to embrace a ^urie, to solicit a Iurour, to fee
a Counselor, or to give countenance at the Bar in another man's suit) let them
(I say) consider of what nature it is, and what it deserves to labor, ply,
and wrest the Judge: Counselors also must keep their proper station; and
contain themselves within the duties of their calling, for they know, that
howsoever they represent the very parties, and ought to assist them; yet that
must be usque ad aras, and they may not be feed against a known truth; for the
beating out whereof (that it may be ripened for judgment) they be used as
necessary and most lawful instruments. So far ost it is, that they should
abuse their learning, wisdom, eloquence, and other gifts, to the perverting of
truth, and subverting of right, by seduction or corrupting of the Judge, that
holds the beam of the Causes in Balance. As for the Judge himself, let him
not fear to lanch his boat into the deep, where is Sea-roome sufficient, and
let him rest upon God (whose image he is) and stir up those Divines Talents
which he has received, utterly forbearing to sail near the Shallow and (...)
of this most dangerous Solicitation: So may his Prince joy in the choice of
him, so may he march on cheerfully, maugre whatsoever enemy; so may good men
trust unto him in their calamity, as to an holy Anchor: So shall not the
wicked dare to approach his Court or presence: Justice shall conserve her due
honor, and upright judgment shall stand fast and unmovable.

An Appendix with Objections against Favorites at the Bar of Justice.
The just respects, for which one Practiser at the Bar may be heard before
another, to my understanding, are these two:

One in regard of the Client, and another in respect of the Cause.

A motion in the behalf of a poor person, of a weak widow, of a fatherless
child, or of a public Servitour in a Commonwealth, is in hearing to be
preferred before the causes of such as be rich, well assisted, of discretion,
or private persons.

The Cause it self also may deserve preferment, either in consideration of the
prioritie of time that it has in Court, or for the imminent danger in which it
may stand, if it be not speedily heard.

But that any Counselor should be heard before other, in regard of his person
alone, without beholding the Cause or Client, hardly may any sound reason be
assigned: And of that undue favor, these evils amongst others do ensue:

First, by that ready lending of the ear to some only, or to them chiefly,
those only suits are expedited, which these few selected persons do undertake;
and in the mean space, all other causes are suspended, albeit they have
prioritie of time, or other good reason of preferment: the which unnecessarie
(or rather voluntary) delay is mere injustice, since justice consists not
only in the deliverie of right, but also in affording the same with all
agreeable and due expedition.

Secondly, by making such choice of a few Favorites, other good Practitioners
in the Law are discouraged, to the great loss and grief, as well of them in
their own particular, and of many toward Students, that are thereby taught to
seek favor more than to rest upon sound knowledge, as also of as many Clients
as do repose themselves and their suits upon the fidelity and good learning
of those, which seek not the influence of the like favorable aspect.

Thirdly, the culling, and cherishing of Favorites, draws the Favourer into
suspicion of corrupt partialitle, especially if the Favored be not of better
gifts and ornaments by Art and Nature than other men, as many of them are not
found to be.

Fourthly, godly and virtuous Practitioners will not use unlawful means for
the gaining of this favor, the which (without sinister practice) is not
always vouchsafed; and then belike the worst sort of men do endeavor that way,
and then also are Causes for the most part put into the hands and mouths of
such as be unworthy to touch them. For it is no small furtherance to justice,
when Causes be managed by men of modesty.

Fifthly, when these few do find, that they shall be heard, and others holden
off, they advance a Monopoly of practice in Law, enhancing the market of Fees,
by delay of their Clients, until they will apply to serve their greediness:
So as the Noble or Ryall (which within memory was an usual reward for a
Counselor) is now risen to 4 l. 5 l. 20 Nobles, or 10 pounds with some:
whereby also Suits are drawn out in length, and do rebound to the blame of the
Judge, that is Causer and Continuer of these evils.

Sixthly, what unbridled boldness (or rather audacious petulancy)
accompanies this unworthily-bestowed favor, is daily seen by the demeanours
of these special men at the Bar, where they forget not only common civilitie
to their Equals and Betters, but also that regard to the Judge and Court, which
sober men are wont and bounden to answer: Many of them also not forbearing to
betray their own Clients, when (after acquaintance with the inwards of their
Causes, and much money ^ilked from them) they shame not (for a little better
pay) to become Swart-rutters, and to go into the Tents of the Enemy; of which
fault these latter years have yielded too too many (and the same most
shameful) examples.

Seventhly, as virtues, so vices be chained together; so as by the motion of
one link, the rest are stirred: And therefore this unequal Selection draws
this further Invenience with it, that the Favorite (emboldened by this
pre-eminence) moves further, and takes courage to solicit the Judge at his
house or chamber, whereto if God suffer him to incline, then receives he just
correction for the first favor so unwisely disposed by him.

Eighthly, this gracing of a few (especially at the Bars of English Courts)
brings forward such as have animam in lingua, making them presume upon their
vain loquacitie, and to make no account of substantial learning. And here
again, Causes do lose the time, which these men do consume in idle and
vagrant discourses, digressing from the true points of the controversy.
Besides which, the Judge himself is in peril to be inveigled, and hawne out
of the way.

Ninthly and lastly, I may add that these men (blessed with such favor in the
eyes of the Judge) do at their departure, and (...) into their countries,
carry the badge thereof in their faces, bea^ing countenance, and seeking
credit above others; where also they will do no less (if not more harm) than
they are before charged to have committed here.

Now for the removing of this Malady, you may use the rece^t following.
TAke an head-full of Discretion, and choose out a convenient handful of the
freshest Flowers that do grow in the Garden of the Law, within quarters of the
Houses of Court: Admit these only for practice at Westminster, being first well
tried and fanned from such dust and dross, as may either yet remain a study,
or be meeter to keep their chambers, for directing of Causes in Suits, arguing
of Cases in Demurrers, or naming of Books of all sorts, or to serve for
Recorders in Cities or Townwikes incorporate, or to supply to Stewardship of
Leets, or other rural Courts: Then draw those first forth again, through a
fine strainer, and (according to their sundry gifts and growths) sort them, and
apply them to each Bar, and affected place at Westminster; the heavy, for the
Kings Bench and Exchequer; and the lighter for the English Courts; Change and
supply them, as often as need shall be hearing them (always in the mean time)
with good indifferency, and so as neither (...) swell, no others do shrink or
faint, And by Gods grace you shall soon perceive the grief to depart.

Proba^um est.
FINIS.

