THE BRAMBLE BERRY: OR, A brief discourse touching participating in mixed
Assemblies at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, wherein is most full and
clear satisfaction given to every weak and doubting Christian, both by
testimony out of Gods Word, and many invincible reasons and arguments for that
purpose, grounded upon the same, wherein is first principally discussed and
resolved these three maine Questions following: 1. Whether the Congregationall
Assemblies in England be true Churches of Jesus Christ, yea or no? 2. Whether
it be lawful to participate at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper among carnal
and profane men? 3. Whether the admitting of ungodly men to the Table of the
Lord be sufficient warrant for Ministers to desist the public administration
of the Sacrament, or for particular members to decline it, or separate
themselves?


SECONDARILY, Brief and satisfactory answers given to all the principal
places of Scripture alleged to maintain a separation from our Church
Assemblies, besides their arguments and allegations sufficiently resolved: set
forth for the benefit of the tender conscience.

By W. L. a faithful petitioner and careful practitioner for the peace and
welfare of the Church and people of God.

Printed at London by Richard Cotes. 1643.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, when I had the first occasion to enter upon this Subject, by
the request of some Christian friends to whom I was engaged by way of promise
to deliver my judgment; I did neither think to have waded so far into it as
I was afterward necessitated for satisfaction both of my self and them; nor
that such peeced and unpolished lines should ever have cumbred the Press: But
after the delivery of it, being desired to give Copies to diverse friends, I
found the writing both tedious and chargeable, which together with other
importunings, and the desire I have fully to satisfy such as desire
satisfaction in this point with as much ease, and as little charge as may be,
prevailed with me to bring that to public sight, for which I may meet with
private censure; but knowing the most pious and learned endeavors that ever
yet saw the Sun have been obnoxious to censorious humors, I wave that: the
Lord knowing that my principal aim herein is the glory of God and the peace
and concord of his Church and people in endeavoring the uniting of the
affections and opinions of Gods people, which in these times of distraction are
so divided in and about the point of mixed participation at the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, it being an Ordinance of so high concernement: and indeed the
diversity of opinions in and about this and other parts of Go^s worship, even
in godly men, is the maine ground and Bases upon which not only Papists and
Jesuits and others of that Romish rabble would build that great difference
that is fallen between his Majesty and Parliament, and make the very cause of
all the rapines, ruins, plunderings, and bloudsheds in the Kingdom; ^ut even
our carnal Gospellers, Neuters, and Lukewarm Professors, yea our Athisticall
and Profane wretches go hand in hand with them in this scandalous strain, as
if the great Council of the Kingdom were led by some factious private spirit.
And although it be nothing so indeed, yet too many at this day are so impious
as to charge it upon them, not thinking that in wounding that Assembly of our
Parliamentary Worthies they strike at the heart of Religion, Law, Liberty,
life, and posterity, and all that we can account precious in this life: we
cannot be ignorant how the ears of Gods people are daily filled from the
mouths of that Antichristian crew with these and such like expressions: We
wonder why the Parliament settles not Religion, the government of the Church,
there is now so many Religions a man cannot tell which to be of; these
Brownists, Anabaptists, Puritans, and Roundheads, are the cause of all these
troubles: one will have no Divine service, another no Lords Prayer, another he
will not come to the Sacrament because of the wicked there, nay these Puritan
Preachers are worst of all, and the like. And albeit a man might easily answer
these and many more such foolish allegations which if God permit I shall
endeavor in my next meditations for public not being able to hear the cause
of God wounded, and be silent, lest the very stones should cry out upon the
great neglect of such unto whom more properly it belongs: yet I believe these
men who ever they be that make this disturbance in our public Assemblies by
singing down Service, pulling Common prayer book and Surplesses out of the
Readers hands and from his back, keeping their Hats on in time of
Common Prayer, withdrawing from the Sacrament because carnal men are admitted,
although in other respect they may be godly, yet by this their preposterous and
blind Zeal, for at the best it must be Zeal without knowledge, have done
more hinderance to that great work of Reformation, so much prayed by for all
Gods people, and labored for by that honorable Assembly of Parliament, then
all their endeavors otherwise can ever be able to promote it, the enemies of
true Religion taking great advantage by it, and the cause of Christ so much the
more injured: the very Jesuits themselves not being able to hatch such another
stratagem for their purpose, for by this means all the neuters of the Kingdom
are readier to side with them then those that stand for the cause of God and
the Kingdom, not that I go about to plead for any corruption or innovation in
the Doctrine or Discipline of the Church, but do earnestly desire that men
would wait upon God in the use of lawful means till he shall be pleased to
perfect the work of Reformation by such instruments as are lawfully called to
it, and entrusted both by God and man with the great affairs of Church and
State, and not every particular man to snatch the sword out of the Magistrates
hand, or be a seeming reformer, when indeed he is an author, not of order, but
confusion: But not intending to raise too large a Porch before such a poor
thatched Cottage, lest the work become more tedious then either toothsome or
p^ofitable, I hasten, desiring (the) good Reader not to expect here either
Learning or Logic, but a plain, and I hope profitable discourse fitted to the
meanest capacity, for whose sakes my pains is principally spent upon it;
neither would I have been so easily prevailed upon to come to public, being a
man of such low abiliities, and having as little time as any, but that men of
great parts whose whole life is or ought to be sequestered from the world, do
either utterly forget, or wholly neglect to speak to a point of so great
concernment, especially in these times of so great distraction. What I have
done herein the Lord of his mercy add a blessing upon that, though the work
be mean and the Author despicable, yet God may have glory, and his Church and
people benefit: And if any thing dear Christ an have fallen from my pen
distastefull to the tender conscience, I desire it may be imputed to my
weakness, and want of time to make things more clear, rather then want of
affection to give satisfaction to such a soul: for as the meditations are
irretoricall and broken, so are the pieces a d patches of time spent upon them,
as my calling would permit. And to the end thou may profit, I desire thou
would have patience to read it first once through by reason it is not so
methodicall as I could wish it, and afterward with more deliberation consider:
Secondly, that thou would not receive prejudice at the meannesse of the
Author, who intends thy good: And lastly I desire the Lord to add such a
blessing as may tend to his glory, the peace of his Church; and also thy
particular satisfaction and edification, and I shall be encouraged to engage my
poor Talent for the like furture benefit.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, W. L.

A brief discourse touching participating in mixed Assemblies at the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, wherein is most full and clear satisfaction and
resolution given to every weak and doubting Christian; concerning these three
Questions following; to such places of Scripture as seem to maintain a
Separation from our Church Assemblies.
COnsidering there are many in this Kingdom, and in these days of division
and distraction, that question the truth of the Church and Church Assemblies in
England, or at least the truth of the Church of England, I have thought good by
way of Introduction to that which I mainely intend, to wit, the second
Question, Whether it be lawful to participate in and among profane and
ungodly men at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; to speak something to the
first, and only so much as shall be requisite to make way to the second and
third question, which by Gods assistance I hope will satisfy the impartial
and indifferent Reader.

First then concerning the truth of our Church Assemblies, that they are true
Churches of Jesus Christ.
I lay down this as an undeniable truth, that that Church or Church Assembly
wherein the fundamental truths of the Gospel of Jesus Christ is truly taught,
the Sacraments and Ordinances of Christ dispense, ^sufficient means offered to
salvation, obtained and had, and a visible profession of obedience to the same,
that is a true visible Church of Christ, notwithstanding there may be many
corruptions in it, both in Doctrine and Discipline and members thereof.

For the proof hereof I propound the example of the Church of the Jews, the
Apostolic Churches of Corinth, Galatia, and also the the 7. Churches of Asia,
spoken of by Saint John, Revel. cap. 1. verse 4. all which are confessed by all
to be true Churches of Christ, yet diverse of them as corrupt as the Churches of
England at this day both in Doctrine, Discipline, and members: in one degree or
other.

1. For the Church of the Jews.

Esa. 56.10. Mat. 23.16. Mat. 23.3. Mat. 15.14.
It was exceedingly corrupt in all three particulars, their Priests were
ignorant, unlearned, vicious, and profane, blind leaders of the blind;
Christ therefore exhorts the people not to do after their works, but after
their sayings, for they said and did not: very hypocritical binding heavy
burdens upon others, but not touching them themselves with their least
fingers, proud and ambitious, loving the uppermost seats in the Synagogues,
and made broad their phylactaries, all what they did was to be seen of men:
their callings was also corrupt, for whereas the high Priest by the Law ought
to have held his Office for his life, Exodus 29.5 E^ek. 22.26
they chose (...) every year, and according to our best expositors they bought
and sold the Office for money: they were also principal violaters of the Law
of God.

Secondly, the people were generally notorious and profane, for at Nazareth
they were so evilly disposed and so enraged against Christ, that they all rose
up to throw him headlong down the hill whereon the City was built: Luk 4 28.
See Caparnaum, Corazin, and Bethsaida, how the Lord Christ was against them
for their impiety and infidelity, Mat. 11.21 22.
notwithstanding the great works Christ had done among them: and as for
Jerusalem, Luke 19.41
Christ beheld the City and wept over it, saying, Oh that in this thy day thou
had known the things that belong to thy peace! See also how they made
havocke of the Lords Prophets, beating them, stoning them, etc. and as for
their affection to the Lord Christ, Luke 23.19
they prefer Barrabas a thief and murderer before him.

Mark 7.8.9. Mat. 21.2.
Thirdly, for their worship, it was filled with superstitious Ceremonies and
Traditions, and these they preferred before the commands of God, the Temple
also was profaned and made a den of thieves, they bought and sold Oxen, and
Doves, and made it an exchange for coin.

John 9.12 Mat. 15.4. Mat. 5.21. Mal. 1.8 Deuteronomy. 14.2.3. and 29.10.11, 12. and
7.6.7. Esa. 1.2, 3, 4 10. Lam. 4.6.22. Ezekiel. 16.46.47.
Also their Discipline was exceedingly corrupt, for if any man confessed Jesus
to be the Christ, he was cast out of the Synogogue; their Doctrine also
depraved, for they made the fifth Commandment of no effect, a man might
neglect his Parents by giving to the Temple; they forbad murder and adultery
in the act, but allowed them in the heart; their Sacrifices also corrupted,
offering the blind and lame, which were not only forbidden, but hateful to
God, in a word: the same people that the Lord calls his peculiar and chosen
ones, he calls also a stiff-necked, unwise, and rebellious people, a sinful
Nation, yet all having right to the external Covenant, and all join together
in the external worship, ordinances and service of God; yet the scandalous
infected not the better part, though they had fellowship in external
communion, therefore from hence we see a Church may be exceedingly corrupt, and
yet be a true Church.

2. The Church of Corinth was corrupt in Doctrine and Discipline.

1. In Doctrine, some of them erred in fundamentals, 1 Cor. 15.12. 1 Cor 7.16 2
Cor. 12.20, 21.
denying the Resurrection of the dead.

2. They held the Doctrine of single life, yea Paul himself.

3. There were amongst them fornicators, unclean, and contentious persons.

4. Diverse profane persons came to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, some
coming hungry, some drunk, and many of heretical and schismatic spirits
and opinions, which are more hurtful in the Church of God then profane men,
by reason one is an evil that every man knows, the other being an error to
seduce the judgment, is more hurtful and dangerous.

2. Corrupt in Discipline.

1. Their Discipline was not put in practice, for there was fornication among
them, not only unpunished, but unsorrowed for.

2. These Schisms and Heresies continued in the Church, and no course taken
for the casting them out.

3. Consider what the Churches of Asia were.

1. Ephesus had lost her first love.

2. In Smyrna diverse professed themselves to be Jews, Rev. 2.4. Rev. 2 9. Rev.
2.14.15. Rev. 2. v. 19.20.
and were even of the Synagogue of Satan.

3. In Pergamus there were diverse that held the Doctrine of Balaam, teaching to
eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit fornication, and diverse that
held the Doctrine of the Nicolaitanes.

4. The Church of Thyatira, though the Lord commends her for her charity,
faith, patience, as the other Churches, yet she also suffered Jezabel to
seduce people to fornication and idolatry.

5. The Church of Sardis had only a name that she lived, and was dead, Rev.
3.1.4.
there were but a few names in Sardis that had not defiled their garments by
spiritual fornication.

6. Philadelphia also had some that professed themselves Jews, Rev. 3.8.9.
yet were of the Synagogue of Satan, so some render it, however she had but a
little strength.

7. Laodicea a remarkable Church for lukewarmnesse, self conceitednesse, yet
poor, miserable, blind, and naked.

4. The Church of Galatia corrupt also.

1. They were even bewitched with the Doctrine of works, Gal. 3.12.7.
thinking salvation had been by keeping the Law, a fundamental error, for
then Christ died in vain.

2. They turned again to weak and beggarly rudiments, observing days,
months, times, and years, in so much that for their superstition Paul was
afeard of them, Gal. 3.^.10.11.
that though they professed Christ, yet his labor was in vain bestowed upon
them: yet all this while none of these evils in any of these Churches made a
nullity of the Church, but they were called and accounted by the Lord Christ,
and by the Apostle, true Churches of Christ, and that upon these three grounds
before delivered in the proposition at first laid down concerning the marks
of a visible Church: for I speak not now of the marks of an invisible Church,
as these following, and such like; 1. To be borne of God. 2. To be known of
God. 3. To have the Spirit of God. 4. To be joined to Christ by faith: but of
the marks of a true visible Church, which are these three especially and
essentially; 1. The preaching of the word of Christ. 2. Administration of the
Sacraments. 3. Visible profession to both.



And it will appear thus.

Acts 13.26.
1. If God would make a people to become his people or Church, he sends his
word, the Doctrine of salvation to them: Go, says the Lord Christ, Mat. 28.19.
teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, etc. teaching
them to observe all that I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always
unto the end of the world, Amen: hence is that our Savior speaks concerning
the Jews, John 4.22.
Salvation is of the Jews, that is, Acts 13.26.
the Word and Doctrine of salvation is with them, the Word and Doctrine of
salvation is sent to this purpose, that men may believe, Acts 18.10.
and for the sake of believers, Paul also is said to preach the Word at
Corinth, because the Lord had much people there to convert to him.

2. The Lord adds Seals of his Covenant to such a people, as Baptism and the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; for as Circumcision was a sign of the Covenant
between God and the Jews under the Law, Genesis 17.1.
so is Baptism to Christians under the Gospel: therefore our Lord Christ says
to his Disciples, Go, teach and baptize, etc. And for the nourishment and
strengthening his people in his ways, in their graces, the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper.

Acts 2.47. Chapter 4.5.
3. The visible profession of obedience to the Word of God and the Ordinances of
God is the maine mark of a member of a visible Church, And the Lord added to
the Church such as should be saved, that is, all that were saved made
profession of obedience to the Doctrine of Christ, and came into an external
Covenant with believers; not that all were saved, that were added to the
Church, but the Lord brought them into the way of salvation by making them
members of the Church: for though none were excluded that would profess
Christ, and such as were saved were added to the Church, yet all that were
added doubtless to the visible Church were not saved, for there was never such
a Church upon the face of the earth that had not unsound members: true, if we
take it to be meant of the invisible Church, then none are added but such as
are saved, but very hypocrites professing the faith of Christ are members of
the visible Church: the Eunuch before he was baptized and admitted into the
Church Fellowship made profession of his faith: so that both godly and
hypocrites must make profession if they will be members of the visible Church.

Object. Does there not actual and inward obedience belong to a true Church as
well as outward profession?

Answ. Yea, to make men true members of the invisible Church, but outward
profession is the visible mark of a member of a visible Church.

Object. If profession serve the turn, then a true Church may consist of
hypocrites.

Answer. No, it is impossible, for the Lord never sends his word to any people
but where he has his own number to call in, therefore Paul preached at
Corinth because the Lord had much people there.

Object. But many wicked men who are accounted members of the Church of England
do not make profession of obedience to the Gospel, therefore they cannot be of
the Church, neither can it be a true Church that countenances members that do
not so much as profess.

Answ. Although there be such among our Assemblies, yet they are members,
though unsound: for,

1. They are borne of Christian parents, men professing faith in Christ.

2. They are baptized into the Christian faith, and so admitted and received as
visible members of the Church.

3. The most profane of them, especially such as come to the ordinances of
hearing and receiving the Sacraments, do verbally confess Christ though their
conversation deny him, so that however God has not given them grace to walk
according to their profession, yet they do verbally confess obedience to
Christ and faith in his name, they acknowledge no other way of salvation, but
by Christ, nor worship no other God; all the outside service they do is to the
true God, though it be in a way of their own perishing; there were many
profane ones in the Church of the Jews, and also in Corinth, yet true
Churches, and these most of them in their best tempers and cool blood will
speak well of the ways of God, though in heart they hate the children of God
under the notion of hypocrites, while they indeed are guilty in the highest
degree of hypocrisy by their thrusting themselves into the Assemblies of Gods
people, claim interest in the Ordinances of God, nay in the Lord Christ,
taking the name of God into their mouths, Psalm. 50.16.
yet hate to be reformed.

4. Though there be many such profane wretches that thrust themselves into the
Assemblies, yet the Lord has his number of chosen ones that both profess and
practice obedience to the Gospel, for whose sake the Ordinances are continued,
and the presence of God in them, so that the uneven walking of wicked men does
neither take away the benefit of the Ordinances from the godly, nor give a
nullity to the Church.

5. This also is that that will leave them one day without excuse, that they
sinned in a Land of uprightness, in the midst of so much light, and of
enjoyment of so much means, and also aggravate their sin, that they have
presumptuously laid claim to the Ordinances of God, and have been negligent
and careless to walk suitable, hereby they in the Sacrament eat and drink to
their own damnation, and become guilty of the body and blood of the Lord
Christ in trampling his sacred blood under their feet, and crucifying to
themselves the Lord of life.

Object. The Church of the Jews was a true Church, and so the Church of
Corinth, and the rest named, they were a people in Covenant with God, rightly
constituted, and there was never a national Church since the Jews were
rejected.

Mr Bal^^^^^ ^rounds o^ Sep page 1^^.
Ans. Religion ever since the fall is all one in substance, though different in
the dispensation, and the Church one and the same, though different in its
manner of government and measure of its gifts fitted to the several ages
thereof; the mysteries are varied according to the times, but the faith whereby
we live is the same in all ages, and as God is unchangeable, so is the Covenant
unchangeable, that excepted which was peculiar to the manner of dispensation:
the confederates and members of the Church one and the same by Gods
approbation, and so the common nature and essence of all true Churches and
essential constitution from the beginning to the end of the world. In all ages
of the Church the members thereof ought to be holy and Saints, or they shall
not be approved by God, Psalm. 50.5.16.
they are Saints who have made a Covenant with God by way of Sacrifice: the
wicked have nothing to do with the Covenant, the end of the calling of the
Church is holiness to the glory of God at all times, and is true in all ages.
Gen 4.26. Luke 20.26 Mat. 5.16. 1 Pet. 2.12. Acts 2.47.
And they which are unanswerable to this end, or clean contrary affected, they
are not called into Covenant or communion with God: if in one age of a Church
the Scripture ascribe not holiness to a people for some few sake, if the rest
be unholy and profane, it ascribes it not to them in any age.

If in one state of the Church unclean persons do pollute, Lev. 14.46, 4^.
Hag. 2.12.13, 14. 1 Cor. 5 6, 7
and unhallow clean persons and things, as a little Leaven leaveneth the whole
lump, this must hold true in every age in its proportion.

And therefore if ignorant, unwise, impenitent, uncircumcised in hear^, and
life, rebellious and stiffenecked in course and conversation, might be in
external Covenant with God, and (in that respect) a separate and holy chosen
people with whom the people of God might hold external communion in the
Ordinances of worship, then it is lawful for Christians to partake in the
Ordinances of Gods worship, though scandalous livers be admitted, with whom in
partaking we have only external communion: for if the scandalous were in
Covenant in the Jewish Church, they may be so now; if communion with the wicked
defile now, it defiled then; Lev. 19.17.
if the godly might communicate then, because they could not cast them out,
even so may they now; if the faithful be bound now to reprove their delinquent
brother, and not suffer sin to rest upon him, the same duty concerned them in
former times.

If the Sacraments be now available and of use according to Covenant and
promise which God has made to the faithful and their seed, and no otherwise,
Genesis 17.7.2^.4.
as indeed the Sacraments are all one in the common nature, so are they in
their use only available to the children of the Covenant at all times. If it
be contrary to the maine ends for which the Lord calls and gathers a
Church, and preserves it upon the earth, that wicked and ungodly should be
received into Covenant, or permitted to continue in the external society of
the faithful, Jer. 5.31. Jer. 9.2.3. Esa 57.3. and 1.4.
it was unlawful in the Jewish Church as well as now in Christian Churches.
And therefore if the Church of the Jews, notwithstanding all that has been
said, were the true Church of God when it was corrupt in doctrine, manners,
officers, ordinances of worship, when the teachers were dumb Dogs, Jer.
11.14. Esa. 50.1. Jer. 3.11.2.13.11.
blind guides, the Prophets prophesied lies, the Priests received gifts, and
the people rebellious, adulterous, oppressors, an assembly of rebels, when the
Priesthood was bought and sold, the Temple defiled, the Law corrupted with
false glosses, and made void with sinful Traditions, when error, heresy,
idolatry, oppression, stubbornness, and all manner of sin was rise among
them. If for all this they continued the Lords visible flock, and the Lord
owned them for his people, and the Prophets and faithful held external
communion with them in the Ordinances of God, then the Covenant of God is not
disanulled with his people, nor the Church unchurched, though ignorant and
profane persons are tolerated in the Assembly, nor the godly defiled, because
scandalous persons are suffered to communicate.

Besides, I would feign know what may be said of the Church of the Jews in
defense of it under the Law, that may not in a more ample and large sense be
spoken in justification of the Christian Assemblies under the Gospel. First,
for the Covenant made between God and them, choosing them from other nations,
to place his name among them, and making Covenant with them to be their God,
and they his people; all was upon condition of faith and obedience, and this
Covenant was made with them only: but the Covenant under the Gospel between
God and his people is of a far larger extent, reaching to all Nations,
neither is his presence limited to any one particular place or people as then
it was; Esa. 55.1.2, 3, 4, 5.7. Joel 2.32. John 4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
nor his worship consists of so many burdensome Rites and Ceremonies, and
legal performances; the dispensation of the Covenants, and of the worship of
God differ, but the condition is all one, made and built upon faith and
obedience, as then it was; though they by faith saw the Lord Christ yet to come
in types, figures and shadows, we behold him in his word by faith already
come, having finished the work of our redemption, and now abides in the
Heavens to make intercession for his people.

God calls people now to him by the Word and by the Spirit, inwardly and
outwardly, not by extraordinary revelations and apparitions, dreams and visions
as formerly, but by means of grace appointed and ordained both for converting
and building up to and in Jesus Christ; they had the Temple, their Sacrifices,
their Sacraments, the same God and the same Christ that we have, so we have our
Temple, our Altar, our high Priest, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. Mat. 28 19. Mat.
18.20.
our Sacrifices, our Sacraments, all in a more substantial and spiritual
manner; they had the Law, we the Gospel; they the promise of Gods presence, so
we; they the promise of life and salvation by Christ, so we upon condition of
faith and repentance: Acts 19.18. Acts 8.^7. Mark 16.16. John 3.15.
they served God under the Law, we under Grace. If God call a whole Nation to a
visible and external Covenant with him by the preaching of the Word, the
giving them the Ordinances of life and salvation, by giving them hearts to make
profession of obedience thereto, as in England the Lord has done, I know
nothing against it, but that England may be as true a National Church as the
Church of the Jews was, and as lawfully called and constituted, though very
corrupt in Disciplin^ ^^d Doctrine, and members also: the Word may be preached
to Heath^ns and Infidels for conversion, as Paul did to the Athenians, and to
the blasphemous Jews, and yet had no external communion with them as members
of the same body.

Ans. The Word may be preached to them that are without, for their conversion
to the faith, to them that are within the Church by Baptism and external
profession for their sound conversion unto God from particular sins and
building forward in grace and godliness: there is no communion with Heathens
nor infidels, because they are not of the Christian society, but scandalous
persons received in by Baptism, and not cast out by public censure, the Word
is preached to them as members, and not as unto bare hearers; and they are
admitted to the prayers of the Congregation as well as hearing of the Word,
being members of the external Covenant; to use one Ordinance and not another,
is to make a Schism in the Church, and as the preaching of the Word, not the
bare tender of the Word, but the giving of it to dwell and abide with a people,
is a note of a true Church, so is the hearing of the Word an act of communion
with the Church: And if the presence of wicked men at the Sacrament did defile
the Ordinance to the believer, so their presence in hearing the Word would have
the same effect to defile the Word also to the faithful; but the presence of
the wicked defile not the ordinance to the worthy believing Communicant,
neither the Word to the prepared and sincere hearer, therefore it is lawful to
participate in mixed Assemblies.

Object. If this be all that declares a Church to be a true Church, preaching
of the Word, administration of the Sacraments, and visible profession thereunto
of obedience, then the Church of Rome may be a true Church.

Ans. In the Church of Rome the Word of God is not truly taught, the Ordinances
and Sacraments of the Lord Christ are not dispensed, therefore there can be no
visible profession of obedience to them, neither can it be a true Church.

For consider, it is not the preaching of some one truth or other, that is a
mark of a true Church, when fundamental points upon which salvation or
damnation depends, are erroniously maintained, and that by the whole Church,
as it is this day in the Church of Rome; that cannot possibly be a true Church
of Jesus Christ that maintains universally fundamental errors quite
overthrowing the very being of Christ, you may call such a Church, if you will,
yea a true Church, but let it be a true Church of Antichrist: For consider,

1. They permit not the word of God, the Doctrine of salvation, but in an
unknown tongue, 1 Cor. 14. the whole chap.
that people cannot understand, quite contrary to the rule of the Apostle Paul.

2. They will not suffer private men, Lay men, so much as to read the
Scriptures, which is absolutely against the command of Christ, and the
salvation of mankind; the Lord Christ says, Search the Scriptures, for they
testify of me, John 5.39. Acts 17.11.
and in them ye think to have eternal life; and see the men of Berea
commended by Saint Paul for that the Pope prohibits upon pain of Inquisition.

3. They preach and press their own tenets, the Popes Decrees, and their own
Traditions, before the commands of God, placing more infallibility and
confidence in the Pope, a sinful mortal man, then in the Scriptures
themselves, which is the word of truth.

4. They are corrupt in such fundamentals both in Doctrine and Discipline that
cannot stand with a true Church of Christ: 2 Cor 5.14. Ephesians. 2.1. Luke 17.10
Mat. 15.30 Hosea 4.6. 2 Timothy 3.15 Mat. 9.3.4, 5, 6. Esa. 42.1. Mat. 24.22.24.
Luke 18.7. Romans 9.11.11.15. Heb. 7.25. 1. Tim. 2.5. Heb. 12.24. Heb. 24. Mark
5.36. Romans 3.25.27.
yea, very contradictions to the Word of God and to the essence of Christ as
the all-sufficient Savior of all that believe, maintaining the Doctrine of
Freewill, of merits, of inherent righteousness, maintaining also lawful
ignorance, nay commending it for the Mother of Devotion, which the Lord
himself says, is the cause of perishing; they hold also the Scripture is not
sufficient to salvation, but the Popes Canons must be added; they also hold and
maintain confession of sins to Priests.

That the Pope and Popish Priests have power to forgive sins, they can sell
pardons for money.

They deny the Doctrine of Election and Predestination which the Word of God so
fully holds out.

They maintain prayer for the dead, Eccles. 11.3. Luke 16.22.27. Psalm. 49.8, 9.

They make more Intercessors and Mediators besides Christ, who is and ought to
be the only Mediator of our peace.

They overthrow the Doctrine of Gods free Grace, and of justification by faith
in Christ, by the works of super-erogation, merit, etc.

They worship Saints and Angels contrary to the Word and command of God, ordain
seven Sacraments, five more then Christ ordained. Esa. 42.8. Col. 2.1^. Rev.
19.^ Acts 10.25, 26. Judge. 13 15 16. Mat. 4 10. Luke 22.15 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
John 6.33.


They also turn the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ to an Idol
Mass, and maintain that gross and palpable error of Transubstantiation,
which is quite against a cloud of witnesses, John 6.53.54, 55, 56, 57, 58. John
6.63. John 16.7. the 17.10, 11. 1 Cor. 10.16.17. 1 Cor. 11.26. John 6.47, 48,
50. 2 Cor. 10.14. Matthew. 24.23. and 26.11. Mark 16.19. Luke 24.2, 3. John.
16.28. Phil. 3.20. Heb. 8.1. and 10.12. Besides these and other fundamental
errors, as the palpable Idolatry, etc. many other of less concernement, as
their Feast days, Fast days, Doctrine of single life to the Clergy,
Dispensations to sin, etc. that if ever there were a true Church (if I may so
call it) of Antichrist, it is the Church of Rome; therefore I conclude that
that Church which generally maintains fundamental errors against the very
being of the Word, the command of God, the essence of Christ, cannot be a true
Church of Christ. But of the Church of Rome this and more may be be truly
affirmed: therefore the Church of Rome is not the Church of Christ.

Object. There are other marks of a true Church, as a lawful Ministry and
true Discipline.

Answ. Yea, both these are necessary in a Church, and we also imply a lawful
Ministry where the Word is truly taught: and as for a true Discipline it is
necessary to the well-being of a Church not essential to the being of a Church,
the Church is not so well as it ought to be, that is defective this way, but
yet there may be great corruptions in Ministry and Discipline, and yet the
Church be a true Church of God; as a man though he have some infirmity or
imbecility in his body, in some one or more members, though he be not so
perfect a man as he would be or should be, yet he may be, and is a real man,
as in case of the Palsy, and the like debility. This we know, that no true
Church can be perfect in this life, either in the internal or external frame
thereof; As all true Churches from the beginning have done.
for if not any one man, much less a whole Congregation: and if the Lord be
pleased to account the Church to be his, when it fails in the internals of the
worship and service of God, surely we have no reason to think so rashly that
he will decline and disclaim it for outward defects where the fundamentals are
preserved and kept.

Object. The standing and calling of our Ministers as they stand by Bishops, is
Antichristian, and therefore they are not lawful Ministers.

Answ. It would be something difficult I think for those that are of that
opinion to prove either their proposition or conclusion to be truth, but in
answer hereof I say thus much.

2 Cor. 4 15 Gal. 1.9. Luke 9.49.
1. If they preach the Lord Christ, and life and salvation by faith in his name.

2. If they show forth the power of godliness in their conversations.

Phil. 1.15.18.
3. If they be furnished with ministerial qualifications. Let their calling,
standing, and preaching, be allowed by Bishops or not, they are no whit the
more unlawful in their standing or practice: Ma^k. 9.38 39, 40. Number. 11.28 29.
so Eldad and Meldad they prophecy, and Moses allows them; and desires all
Gods people were Prophets: viz. that they might be able to deliver the mind of
God to the people: and truly we should not envy, though there were a greater
number furnished with ministerial gifts, whether allowed by Bishops or not.

2. As Bishops are Ministers, they are lawfully called, and so may have a vote
I conceive, though with subjection, in electing and ordaining preaching
Ministers as they are (or ought to be) men able to judge of men's learnings,
parts, and qualifications, for the Ministry; for the spirits of the Prophets,
1 Cor. 14.32
are subject to the Prophets: as for that exorbitant power which they pretend
they received from the King as Supreme Magistrate, or their usurped authority
exercised over the lives, liberties, estates, and consciences of men; their
great intermeddling with secular and temporal affairs and jurisdiction: this,
though it be unlawful, yet this makes not their callings to the Ministry
unlawful, or them incapable of electing or ordination, no more then the abuse
of any calling makes the calling unlawful, though men by abuse may make
themselves unfit and incapable of their lawful callings. We must therefore
condemn them in what they have done that is unlawful and unjust; but the
appointing Ministers to preach the Word of God is a lawful action, and not
derogating from their function as I conceive: and indeed we should have had
little or no cause to complain of them for this, had they been faithful in
the trust reposed in them, and appointed such over and in the Church as were
godly, learned, and painful, and conscionable in their places, such who were
called by God as well as approved of by them: Examp. If there were an order
from Bishops that none might pray in his family without order from them, would
this order from them make our praying in our families unlawful? no surely,
neither does their giving orders to Ministers make their Ministry unlawful,
as it is lawful to pray and preach without them, so is it with their consent.

3. Know the principal call of a Minister is from God, for if men be rightly
qualified and gifted for the Ministry, that they are enabled from God to
deliver his mind out of his Word to his people, and preach sound Doctrine
approved of by the Scriptures, and the faithful who are enabled by the Spirit
of God to try the spirits whether they be of God, yea or no; 1 John 4.1.
this makes men lawful Ministers of the Word of God, whether approved by the
Bishops or disallowed by them: and indeed this is that that Gods people should
especially look after, and less trouble and puzle themselves about their
standing or not standing by Bishops; I know if I should ask such men as
account such Ministers Antichristian, and their callings unlawful; whether the
Bishops disallowing or disapproving of one rightly qualified for the Ministry
would make him incapable and unlawful to preach; they would answer as I do my
self, Certainly no: then I conclude that as their disapproving of a man makes
him not unlawful, if he be qualified, much less their allowing or approving
of him; for God is the great caller and sender, and if he send men to preach,
or call men, Man. 9.38.39.
who shall contradict it? our duty therefore is to pray the Lord of the harvest
to send painful laborers into his Vineyard.

Object. Our Bishops have placed over us profane, idle, and wicked men, not
fit to take charge of the flock of Christ, yea and many as ignorant as
profane.

Answ. For such as are ignorant and unable and idle, these are altogether
unfit, and this is the great sin of them that were in authority in the Church
to suffer it: as for scandalous and profane livers, they also are sinfully
thrust upon the Church, but if they preach well and truly, take pains in the
Ministry, the viciousness of their lives make them not altogether unlawful
in their standings, though they are unprofitable by reason of that prejudice
which we receive against their practice, though their Doctrine be true, and
this is of our selves, and arises of our corrupt hearts to decline and turn
our backs upon wholesome truths, though delivered by sinful men: Mat. 15 5.
Mat. 16 6. and 26.65. Isay. 57.^. Ezekiel. 34 3.
the Scribes and Pharisees, as before, were ignorant, unlearned, blind guides,
hypocrites, ambitious, covetous, and the Priests of old under the Law were
profane and unholy, yet the Doctrine of truth was to be received from them;
for Gods people should be like Bees sucking sweetness out of Thistles, while
wicked men like the Adder gather poison out of flowers.

Object. The Priests under the Law, the Scribes and Pharisees were rightly
called, therefore they ought to hear them, but ours are not.

Answ. What Paul says of himself, that he was not an Apostle by man nor of
man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, that is true of all the Apostles,
not only because they were to preach Christ, but received Commission from him,
and are therefore called the Apostles of Jesus Christ, (not in after times) for
then we must prove where the Apostles delivered the power of government to the
community of the faithful as they received it from Christ, for which there is
no Scripture: the Ministers and guides of the Church are immediately of Jesus
Christ, from whom they derive their power and receive their charge, in whose
name they must execute their office, Acts 20.28.
and to whom they must give an account whose Ministers they are; Take heed to
your selves and to the whole flock over which the holy Ghost has made you
Overseers: the Presbyters at Ephesus we see were appointed Overseers by the
holy Ghost, that they might govern the Church of God, they were chosen and
ordained of men, and so by immediaty of person, not from God as were the
Apostles, etc. but their gifts, off^ce, and authority was immediately of God:
in conferring those offices God uses the ministry of men, but the office and
authority is from God alone: (when Christ ascended on high, he gave gifts to
men, some to be Apostles, some Prophets, Ephesians. 4.8.11 1 Cor. 12.8
some Evangelists, some Pastors, some Teachers) so that the Pastorship and
office of teaching and their gifts are as immediately from Christ as the
Apostleship was, and though every Pastor is not immediately called, yet the
office and order is from Christ immediately, and not from men, and so is their
authority and jurisdiction; and so our Ministers that are gifted from God and
by God, are as lawful Teachers, Mat. 24 41 Tit. 1.7. Mat. 9.38. 1 Cor. 12 5.
Phil. 1.1. Col. 1.24. 2 Cor. 6.4. Romans 1.1. 2 Cor. 4 5. 1 Cor. 4.1.5. Argum.
c^ncerning our M^nist^rs one to apply to th^se that scandal them.
and have as much warrant from God as the Apostles had in their time, whether
approved by men or not, the harvest is the Lords, and to him it belongs to send
laborers: now there be differences of Ministers, but the same Lord, the
Ministers of the Word are not the Ambassadors of men but of Christ, as having
received their office, power, and gifts from him, and not of the Church; they
may be called the Ministers of the Church as the Lords Ministers and servants,
or the Church is Ministers or servants are taken indifferently, because, though
the Lord send them, and gift them, yet it is for the sake of the Church, and
they ought rather to be called the Ministers of Christ then of the Church, for
all power Spiritual and Ecclesiastical is of God.

And as for those that account our Ministers Antichristian, though never so
godly in their lives, or sound in Doctrine, by reason of their standing by
Bishops, I desire them to consider these six Arguments following, five of
which may be applied truly to many of our Ministers, who the thus brand with
that odious term of Antichristian Ministers.

1. No man that truly preaches Christ, and both in his life and Doctrine sets
himself against Antichrist, and his followers, 1 Cor 12 3 Man. 12.25, 26. Mat.
7.16. 1 Cor. 2.11 1 Cor 3.11 2 Cor. 4.5. 1 Cor 10.31. 1 These. 2 6 Mark 9 38 39.
1 Cor. 2.4.
can be accounted Antichristian.

2. No man that expresses the power of godliness in his life and conversation,
can be accounted Antichristian.

3. No man that makes Jesus Christ and the glory of God the maine end of his
preaching, can be Antichristian.

4. He that labors both by Doctrine and practice, or by either of them, to
convert men to Jesus Christ, and to dissuade men from the ways of Antichrist,
this man cannot be antichristian.

5. He that to his power shows his dislike of corruptions, both of Doctrine
and Discipline of the Church of God, and endeavors for reformation by earnest
prayer and such other means as are in the bounds of his place and calling, and
mournes for the continuance of them in the Church, this man cannot be guilty of
the corruptions in the Church, much less Antichristian.

6. To oppose Christ in his Ministers or members, 1 Cor. 12.3 Gal. 1.8.
to scandal the ways of God, the Ministers and the Ordinances of God, the
public assemblies of his people; this I conceive is a high degree of
Antichristianisme and blasphemy.

And truly as I am confident that there is none of the first five assertions,
but may well be applied to many hundreds of our Ministers for their
justification from that aspersion of Antichristianisme so maliciously cast upon
them, so I speak it with grief of heart, I fear the last asertion, which
shows plainly who are Antichristian, will of necessity fall upon the heads of
all such as with open and black mouths scandal the ways, Ministers,
Ordinances, public Assemblies of the people of God in the Church of England,
proceeding to a high degree of Antichristianisme and blasphemy: for this is
that maine deceit of the Devil, to vilify the Ordinances and administrations
thereof in the Church by calling them idolatrous, and the people Idolaters, and
Antichristian, or else he could never prevail with men whose hearts would else
reverence and respect them; and herein I conceive is that fulfilled of Satan,
transforming himself into an Angel of light; neither could any man persuade
himself it were lawful to separate from our public Assemblies, were it not
that he is persuaded the Ordinances, and Officers, and Assemblies, are so in
deed, which neither they nor the Devil himself can ever be able to make
appear out of the Word of God: Indeed no man, Minister, or other that believe
in Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.1.
and desire to walk with God in uprightness, as many thousands in the Church
of England do, can be counted other then the children of God, Gal. 1.8.
and he that preaches any other Doctrine, we ought to hold him accursed? Thus
much concerning the lawfulness of our Church Assemblies and Administrations:
now to prove the lawfulnes of joining with them in Ordinances.

Object. What shall we do then that are to join in mixed Assemblies, that we
sin not herein?

1. Take heed of joining with any corruption or known evil in the Church,
show your dislike of it according to your power.

2. Exhort and admonish, or reprove as the circumstance of thy calling,
relation, and opportunity will give leave, those that have no right to the
Ordinances.

3. Mourn for the abominations and corruptions in the Church, and wrestle
earnestly with godly prayers for reformation, but desist not thy duty though
Ministers be corrupt, and many people profane at the Sacrament, do thou
prepare thy own heart and receive to thy comfort; for know thus much, there
never yet was any v^^ible Church of God upon earth that was without its
corruptions in Doctrine, in manners, in officers, in members, as has been
sufficiently showed concerning the Church of the Jews, Corinth, Galatia, and
the seven Churches of Asia: yet I never read of any toleration to separate from
them, or that they ceased to be true Churches by reason of the corruptions in
them.

1. Our Savior Christ departed not from the public Assemblies of the Jews,
Luke 2.
for he was circumcised and so admitted a member of the Assemblies.

Luke 2 22.
2. His Mother was purified, and he presented, and an offering given for him as
for other children.

Luke 2.40.
3. When he came to age he was content to hear them, he was found amongst them
in the Temple, where there was also prayer and preaching every Sabbath day.
Acts 16.13.14.


4. He observed their Feast of Passover, and his Disciples eat it amongst
them, as Divines give it forth from the 26. Matthew. 2.3. and John 2.23. however
he observed it as they did.

5. He was baptized among them publicly, Matthew. 3.13.15. Mark 1.9.

6. He allowed his Disciples to do as he had done, Matthew. 23.12. exhorting
them to hear their Doctrine, viz. the Scribes and Pharisees, though they should
not follow their practice, because they had the Word of God taught among them,
though their lives were unanswerable: so that he tolerates none to separate,
neither by his Doctrine or example; Salvation, says he, is of the Jews, John
4.24. that is, the Word of salvation is with them, or salvation is had among
them by the means of grace with them: So also see Paul's example.

Notwithstanding the Church of Corinth was so exceedingly corrupt both in
Doctrine and Discipline, as has been said formerly, yet he gives no
toleration to separate, but rather shows in such cases what Gods people should
do, out of whose power it was, and is to reform abuses in the Church, viz.
private Christians.

1. Shows them their error in admitting unworthy receivers.

2. The danger of unworthy receiving, and how far it extended to their own
destruction and condemnation, besides those temporal diseases and sicknesses
brought also upon such disorderly Communicants.

3. Shows them the right institution of it.

4. The cure and remedy of this malady that it might not be hurtful to the
whole Church, Let every man therefore examine himself, look to his own
heart, and so let him eat, etc. not, Let any one separate; if that had been
the way, surely he would have said, there is an incestuous person not cast out,
there are schisms, strifes, and contentions, there are drunkards, etc. in the
Church, men of strange opinions, come not among them, nor partake of the
Sacrament with them, lest you eat and drink damnation to your souls: no, no
such matter, such there are among you, says he, but every one of you examine
your own souls, prove your selves, that you be not of the number of them: and
so eat, and so drink to your comfort, though the other eat and drink
damnation to themselves. And further, stirs them up to the duty, 1. By
showing them what he delivered to them he received from Christ. 2. That it was
their duty so to do, for thereby they kept a a continual remembrance of
Christ, and showed forth the death of the Lord till he come; one of the maine
ends of the institution of this Sacrament: See the example of Gods people in
former ages.

The sin of Elies sons was very great, as great as any Ministers can be, and as
public, they were impudent, lying with women before the door of the
Tabernacle, they profaned the Sacrifices, yet the people of God came
accustomarily to Shilo, where they did administer to perform their duty,
notwithstanding the wickedness of the Priests, as Elkanah and Hannah: at
Jerusalem the Church was wonderfully corrupted both in Priest and people, yet
the faithful in it that mourned, not separated, Ezekiel. 9 4.
are taken special notice of; so in our Saviors time he gives them no
toleration to separate from the Church of the Jews, but to hear them and join
with them, Mat. 23.12
and if any man can give me any example of any member either under the Law, or
in Christ, or the Apostles time, that did separate from the public Assemblies
of Gods worship, o^ had any warrant so to do out of the word of God,
notwithstanding the great corruptions that has been proved to be in Churches
in all ages, then I should think they speak something to the purpose; true
indeed, for Jews to separate from Infidels and the Heathen Nations and
Idolatrous practice, and so for Christians under the Gospel, so to do, is
justifiable, and both commanded by God, and expected to be done, but for one
Jew to separate from the public Assemblies of Gods worship from other Jews,
or one Christian from the public Ordinances and worship of God from the rest,
this I never read of.

But to speak more fully to this purpose, I will, 1. answer those Arguments
given in to maintain a separation from our public Assemblies as they were
given unto me, in the controverting of this point.

2. I will show the lawfulness of joining in our mixed Assemblies.

3. The unlawfulness to separate.

4. Give satisfaction in some measure to those places of Scripture that are
brought in defense of that opinion.

5. Give caution to keep off aspersion or prejudice that may be cast upon me
or any of my judgment in this point.

Their first Argument is this:

They that see the Lord Christ crucified are guilty of the body and blood of
Christ: but Gods people at the Sacrament see the Lord Christ crucified by
wicked men: therefore they are guilty of the body and blood of Christ.

Answ. This Argument is false in every part of it. For,

1. Men may see the Lord Christ crucified, and not be guilty of the body and
blood of Christ, for it is the very maine end and use of the Lords Supper to
behold Christ crucified, and to show the Lords death till he come in a special
manner.

2. If all that see Christ crucified should be guilty of his death and of his
body and blood, then Mary the mother of Christ and his disciples and friends
that saw him despightfully used by the Jews when he was haled and nailed to
the Cross, who were heartily gr^eved at it, and would if they could, have
prevented it, were guilty o^ the body and blood of Christ; and all that saw
Judas betray Christ, by the same reason were guilty of betraying him also, even
the Disciples themselves.

3. Know, no godly man can be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, as every
ungodly man is; for no man in the state of grace and salvation, etc. yet they
hold that Gods people can be guilty seeing Christ crucified by wicked men at
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper are guilty, etc.

Their Argument should therefore have run thus, They that either crucify
Christ, or join with them that do crucify him, are guilty of the body and
blood of Christ.

But wicked men at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper do crucify Christ, and
Gods people in coming to the Sacrament with them do join with them:
therefore they are both guilty of the body and blood of Christ.

This Argument for the major and minor, 1 Cor. 11.27.29.
may be granted with some caution, but the assumption is false: for grant that
wicked men in the Sacrament do crucify the Lord Christ, it is only to
themselves, and they are themselves guilty of the body and blood of Christ: we
may grant also that those that join with them do also crucify Christ, and so
become guilty of, etc. but with this exception or caution following.

There is a twofold joining with wicked men.

And both these ways.
1. With their persons 1. Voluntarily. 2. Accidentally, or Occasionally.
2. In their actions. 1. Voluntarily. 2. Accidentally, or Occasionally.

A man may come in the company of a wicked man, and yet not join with him, if
accidentally a man by reason of his business in his general or particular
calling, or the like: nay, a man may voluntarily be in the company of a wicked
man, being lawfully called to it, as in common and public meetings, either
concerning Church or Commonwealth, and yet not guilty of his evil actions;
that which makes a man guilty of another man's actions, is approving them,
consenting to them, voluntary joining in the action with them, not every
coming into their company and being with them accidentally or occasionally: as
for example, a wicked man and a godly man come to hear the Word, it is both
their duties so to do; if the wicked man shall purposely come to ensnare the
Minister, to cut a Purse, to do some other mischief; if the godly man have no
such end or intent, if he show his dislike of it, exhort him and reprove him
for it, and use all lawful ways and means to reclaim him: How can he be
guilty of joining with him? so in the Sacrament it is the duty of the godly man
to receive the Sacrament upon due preparation, if wicked men will thrust
themselves in to that sacred Ordinance without preparation, he that comes as he
ought, showing his dislike of this abuse, laboring by seasonable exhortation,
or reproof, or information, to reform the abuse, and in case authority do
not reform it, if he mourn for it, and pray against it, how can this man be
said to join with that wicked man? Nay, the one eats and drinks the body and
blood of Christ to salvation, the other crucifies Christ afresh to his own
damnation: therefore I conclude that Argument thus; that which a man utterly
dislikes, condemns, is humbled for, prays against, labors to reform to the
utmost of his ability, cannot be accounted that man's guilt: but Gods people,
etc. do utterly dislike, etc. the sinful approachings of wicked men to the
Lords Table, mourn for it, pray against it: therefore, etc. the sins of
another man must not make me decline my duty, but it is my duty to prepare,
examine, and receive the Sacrament, therefore the sins of wicked men coming
to it, is no reason for me to decline or separate from it, the principal part
of the duty lies in selfe-examination, 1 Cor. 11.28.
not so much in examination of others.

Object. Gods people do not do their duty herein, true; peradventure they
pray against it, and are humbled for it, but they do not their best endeavor
by reproof, exhortation, and information, either to reclaim such, or to have
them cast out.

Answ. So far as they fall short of their duty, herein they sin, but if
they should totally neglect this duty of exhorting, reproving, praying against,
mourning for, etc. which it is impossible for any godly man to do; yet this
would not warrant them to separate, for this were but the adding one sin to
another.

Again, suppose the party offending be not capable of admonition, or will not
reform, then you will say we must tell it to the Church; now suppose the
guides Temporal and Ecclesiastical, to whom the matter must be brought, be so
corrupt, that they would countenance the offender, and punish the complainant,
establish the disorder rather then redress it: What shall the innocent then
do? must he complain to his undoing, or leave his standing in the Church as
unlawful because he cannot do the duties which God calls for at his hands?
the Shepherds of Israel were many times blind, ignorant, vicious, robbers,
hirelings, vain persons; so the Scribes and Pharisees, if the Disciples or the
faithful should have sought to them for Reformation of abuses in the Church,
what could have been expected? 1 Cor. 3.10 2 Cor. 11.13. Gal. 1.6.
the Corinthian Pastors we know built hay and stubble upon the foundation Paul
had laid amongst them, were false Apostles, deceitful workers; in Galatia the
Pastors troubled the Church with corrupt Doctrine: in the seven Churches of
Asia all the Angels were reprehended, and so our Bishops, Ministers, and
Magistrates were all so corrupted, that no man durst complain of abuses in the
Church, nay nor himself with safety discharge his own duty, what should the
faithful do? depart from the Ordinances of grace while God is pleased to
dwell among them, or neglect the duty God has called them to, and so partake
in other men's sins? the Congregation it self divided or remiss the greatest
part the worst, so that the best cannot be held among them, truth cannot take
place, such division and dissension was in the Church of Corinth, that the
house of Cloe was constrained to complain to the Apostle, most of them so
puffed up in the case of the incestuous person, that it had been vain for the
better sort to have sought the casting him out, had not the Apostle sharply
reproved them, their abusive coming to the Lords Table was general, so that
the better sort might grieve at it, but could not reform it; in this case the
faithful cannot tell the Church, for that it is divided, 1 Cor. 1.11 1 Cor.
5.1.2
and as in our times the greatest part holding the worst side, depart they must
not, for the Lord is in the Church and Ordinances, and they must not leave them
till the Lord forsakes them; what remains then, but that with merciful
affections they dislike, reprove, and correct as much as in them lies what
they find amiss, what they cannot amend, endure and suffer patiently, and in
loving sort lament and bewail till God do correct and amend it, or make way
for their enlargement, and though some will say, but all this while they do
not their duty. I say rather the Lord requires not that particular duty at that
time, because they have no opportunity or means to do it; Mr. Bal cap. 11.
fol. 223.
those that look for further satisfaction herein, I desire them to read Mr.
Bals book, a trial of the grounds tending to separation.

2. Argument.

To have fellowship with them we are forbidden, to have fellowship with all is
sin, but godly men in the Sacrament have fellowship with profane, which is
forbidden; therefore they sin. This they labor to prove, Number. 15.30. Deuteronomy.
17.3. both places improperly alleged

Answer. Though we should grant the proposition, that it is sin to have
fellowship with those we are forbidden, yet we deny that Gods people have
fellowship with wicked men in the Sacrament, nor with the works if they
dislike and disallow of their actions, labor with God and man for redress so
far as they are able in the place God has set them, what fellowship have
they with them? as we said before in point of joining, so I say in point of
fellowship, it is not every occasional or accidental coming in wicked men's
company that gives me fellowship with them, or makes me guilty of their
actions; Have no fellowship, says the Apostle, with unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reprove them, intimating strongly, that he that reproves
or dislikes of the actions of others, cannot be said to have fellowship with
them, nay a man may have no fellowship with them, though he should not reprove
them, as appears by the word (rather) reprove them; implying, if he did not
consent and sinned with them though he reprove them not, he had no fellowship
with them: it is our duty to show our dislike of their abusive coming to the
Lords Table, Genesis 4 4. Lev. 10.
not to separate from the Ordinances: What fellowship had Abell with Cai^? both
sacrificed together; or Moses and Aaron, with Nadab and Abibu? or what
fellowship had Elkanah and Hannah with Elies wicked sons, 1 Samuel 1.3.
who went up yearly to Shilo where they did minister? their sin was not
charged upon them, because they were in the company performing their duty: What
fellowship had our Savior Christ with the Jews, Scribes, and Pharisees? What
fellowship had the rest of the Disciples with Judas? they kept him company
after they knew he was to betray the Lord Christ: or what fellowship had the
believing Corinthians with the incestuous person before he was cast out, and
with those other disordered Corinthians that came with them to the Sacrament?
truly they neither had fellowship with them nor their evil actions, neither
was their sins charged upon the faithful and godly worthy communicants. If
you say my presence among them approves of their sin, by the same reason ye
may say my presence with them in hearing the Word approves of their sin, when
as I said before there is a voluntary presence and a constrained presence;
indeed, if I lived as they do in profaneness, and followed their wicked
practices, I should then approve them, but my abominating them in my life,
showing my dislike of them, shows plainly I approve them not, neither can
their sin be any way charged upon me.

3. Argument.

They that have power given them to do that that makes for Gods glory and the
Churches good, and do not exercise it, they sin; but the Church in not
exercising its power to cast out offenders of this nature which would make much
for Gods glory and the Churches benefit does sin: this they labor to prove
in that 18. Matthew. 16.18. which speaks of a particular offense between man
and man, how we should proceed in love and brotherly affection one with
another: and if this were meant of abuse in and about the Sacrament where they
would have us after a second admonition and witness to tell the Church, I have
answered it sufficiently in the close of the first Argument: in case of
particular injury, I ought before I come to the Sacrament to labor for
reconciliation, but if he will be causelessly offended, I must not turn my back
upon the Ordinances of God, and in case the Church does reprove him, and he
will not hear the Church let him be as a Publican or a profane person, have no
unnecessary familiarity with him, but his incorrigible Condition, must not
cause me to decline my duty.

Secondly, I answer, what power the Church has is one thing, what particular
members have is another; if the Church be remiss in exercise of Discipline,
this gives me no warrant to separate: for unless the neglect of Discipline
give a nullity to the Church, and take away the use and benefit of the
Ordinances of God from me, it is no part of my duty to separate, but pray God
to reform the abuse, and make me a worthy receiver; for if it were so that the
corruption in remissness of Discipline had given a nullity to the Church, 1
Cor. 5.5.
then the Church of Corinth had ceased to be a Church when the incestuous
person was not cast out, and ever after so long as those fornicators, dunkards,
contentious, and disordered persons were amongst them: but we see by the text
it was nothing so, it was their sin, they sorrowed not, and not their sin,
they separated not themselves, therefore the Apostle gives them admonition to
examine themselves, and so to come to the Table of the Lord.

4. Argument.

They that be Stewards and have rule given to walk by, sin in not walking by
the rule; it is required of a Steward that he be found faithful: 1 Cor. 4.1*
but the Ministers and officers in the Church have rule given to walk by, and
if they do not walk accordingly, they sin: now if they exercise not the
Discipline of the Church, they walk not according to rule, and so are sinful.

Answ. Though the Ministers and other officers in the Church do sin herein,
what ground does this give me to separate? yet that place alleged has no
relation at all to the Discipline of the Church, but that Ministers of God
ought to be faithful in dispensing the secrets and truths of God, if they be
faulty, this is not to the matter in hand, unless you would infer, because
they sin in declining the duty, I must also sin in declining mine by
separating from the Ordinances of life and salvation; see the case of Elies
sons, etc. Elkanah and Hannah might have said, Elies sons are wicked, and they
deal vilely with the Ordinances of God, therefore we will not go up to Shilo
to worship: a very unsound conclusion.

5. Argument.

Object. That that offends the weak, the strong Christian ought not to do:
but coming to the Sacrament with wicked men offends the weak Christian:
therefore the strong Christian ought not to do it.

Answ. In cases of indifferency the weak must not be offended though the
thing we do in it self be lawful, but we must take heed of complying with
sinful weaknesses, or neglect duties of so high concernement, as on which
salvation and soul nourishment depend; though he be offended I ought rather to
use means to reform his judgment then to decline my duty.

Exam. If a man should be offended for my observing the Lords day, for my
praying in my family, for endeavoring to keep the commands of God, must I
neglect these weighty duties to humor his weakness? nay rather I shall do my
duty to inform him what his duty is, both by my exhortation, admonition,
reproof, or practice.

Besides, though it be his weakness to be offended at such duties of
necessity to be performed, yet I shall sin against knowledge and conscience,
if I upon so slight grounds turn my back upon the Ordinances of God.

6. Argument.

That that encourages wicked men in their sins, a godly man ought not to do:
but coming with them to the Sacrament encourages them in their sins:
therefore a godly man ought rather to forbear, etc.

This is spoken in the name of a believing and worthy communicant.
An. 1. I do not encourage them in their sins by my coming to the Sacrament,
unless I lived as they do in the like or the same sins, and came unworthily
and unpreparedly to the Table of the Lord as they do, then indeed I gave ill
example and occasion of encouragement; they see my life answerable to my
profession, but theirs clean contrary, and it is impossible for a godly man to
countenance wicked men this way, for then he would cease to be godly; if they
come unprepared, and with impenitent and unbeleeving hearts, this is their
sin, not mine.

2. How do I encourage them by coming when I do the best I can to dehort
them from it, show my dislike of it, nay reprove them, and use all lawful and
necessary means to reclaim them or deter them from it?

3. What evil effects depend upon the performance of my duty, I must not
altogether so look upon as to decline my duty, for as I must not do the least
evil that the greatest good may come upon it, so I must not neglect doing that
which is good and enjoined by God though some seeming evils ensue upon it.

For then by the same reason I must leave off professing Religion, observation
of the Sabbath, praying in my family, standing for the cause of Christ, nay
frequenting all public and private duties and Ordinances, because from hence
wicked men take occasion to scandal the ways of God, and reproach Gods people
with nicknames, as Puritan, Brownist, Roundhead, etc. for the reason why
wicked men hate Gods people, is, because they run not with them to the same
excess of riot; and Gods people it is their part and duty to suffer for the
name of Christ: the maine ground why Caine hated his brother Abell, 1 Pet. 4.4.
Luke 6.12.14.
was because his works were good, and his evil, for every one that does evil
hates the light, therefore it is my part to look what God requires of me to
perform, John 3.20.
that I must have respect unto and leave the success and event to the Lord.

4. If my coming with them to the Sacrament barely considered, encourage
wicked men in their sins because they come also, by the same reason my
coming with them to hear the Word, does also encourage them, and as much
reason I have to turn my back upon one Ordinance as another, because of their
frequenting them, for though it be lawful and expedient that they should hear
the Word, being the means of conversion, and unlawful for them to receive the
Sacrament in the profaneness, yet they not discerning the difference may take
as much encouragement in their sins by the godly hearing the Word with them,
as receiving the Sacrament among them, and as much reason there is for one as
the other, the premises considered.

5. As my prepared and worthy receiving can do them no good that come
unprepared and in their sins, so their unprepared and unsinfull presumptious
approaching the Ordinance can do me no hurt, that is, cannot take the benefit
of the Ordinance from me the cautions of dislike of them formerly observed, etc.

7. Argument.

He that sees a man murder himself, and is present with him, is guilty of his
sin if he hinder him not, but godly men in the Sacrament see wicked men
murder themselves, and hinder them not, therefore they are guilty of their
sin.

Answ. I refer the answer of this Argument to that first Argument of seeing
wicked men crucify the Lord Christ in the Sacrament, and the conclusion upon
it, this Argument being of the same nature is there sufficiently spoken to.

8. Argument.

That that brings judgment upon the Church and people of God, Gods people
ought to avoid and shun: but the coming with profane men to the Table of the
Lord, brings judgment upon the Church and people of God: therefore they ought
to avoid and shun this evil, 1 Car. 11.30.

Ans. 1. It is not my coming preparedly and worthily that brings judgment
upon the Church, but the disorderly and profane coming of profane men.

2. The judgment that fell upon the Church of Corinth of sickness and death,
doubtless was upon the profane and unworthy, not upon the guiltless, for
says the Apostle, they eat and drink Judgment to themselves, for though the
Apostle say, for this cause many of [you] are sick, and many sleep; he
means certainly many of your public Assemblies which by their profaneness
have provoked God, and by reason they were members of their public Assemblies,
he says many of [you] and not for that they were Saints that suffered: the
disorders, divisions, drunkenness and profaneness of many of the Assemblies
in coming to the Lords Table, was punished, in some that belonged to the
election of grace with temporal chastisements, in some that were vessels of
wrath with death and eternal vengeance: and therefore notwithstanding these
abuses in the Church he gives no toleration to separate, but lays down what
our duty is, even every man to be more watchful over his own heart and life,
and more diligent in the work of self-examination, and so to eat and drink with
comfort, and this is the only remedy he prescribes; he says not, if such and
such offenders be not cast out, separate your selves; nay he speaks not at all,
of casting out any but the incestuous person: but if neither the other
offenders nor the incestuous should be cast out, he I say says not separate,
but be humbled, you in whose power it is not to cast out, etc. mourn for it at
least, rejoice not in it, examine your own hearts, prove your selves, and so
eat of this bread and drink of this cup: and gives them a reason why they
should not depart the Assemblies, or decline their duty; For as often as ye
eat this bread and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. So
that I conclude with the Apostle, that seeing it was their duty to show or set
forth the Lords death, and to keep solemn commemoration of it till his second
coming, it was also their duty in the Church of Corinth, to examine
themselves, and participate the Sacrament, notwithstanding the abusive and
dangerous coming in of others; and so also in our public Assemblies and
Ordinances, notwithstanding the Lord may and will bring judgment both
temporal and spiritual upon the heads of them that vilify his Ordinances,
yet it being our duty to keep solemn commemoration of the death of our Lord
Christ till his second coming, we also ought to examine our selves, labor for
Sacramental qualifications, which I hope are not unknown to those that are
fit communicants, and so to eat and so to drink, etc.

9. Argument.

Not to put difference between the precious and the vile, is a sin: but Gods
people in the Sacrament by coming with wicked men do not put difference
between the precious and the vile: therefore they sin.

Answ. 1. The sin of not putting difference between the precious and the
vile, is charged upon the Priests under the Law, and so upon those under the
Gospel, which have power to receive or cast out, Ezekiel. 44. and 22.2.
not upon the people or private Christians: but now in case those in authority
be corrupt or neglect their duty in not exercising discipline, this gives me no
warrant to separate, no more then when the Priests under the Law profaned the
Ordinances by admitting persons uncircumcised and unholy into the Assemblies,
gave any warrant to the people of God to turn their backs upon his public
Ordinances, of which there is no example in all the book of God.

For though the vile ought not to come, yet the precious may and ought to come
to the Ordinances of God in strength of duty to God and for their own benefit:
and though it will be said it is not lawful to give holy things to Dogs, or
childrens bread, yet I hope holy persons and children themselves may
participate freely of those things that are provided for them; It were a very
ridiculous thing if I should see one casting a piece of bread, though it were
never so good, nay though it were a whole loaf to Dogs, for me to resolve,
Well, I saw such a one throwing good bread to Dogs fit for men to eat,
therefore I will never more eat bread while I live, nor come where bread is.

2. I confess Gods people, private Christians ought to put difference between
the precious and the vile, and though they do come to the Sacrament in mixed
Assemblies if they observe the cautions formerly given by showing their dislike
of such abuses, mourning for them, by seasonable exhortations, reproves, or
admonitions, labor reformation according to the bounds and limits of their
places and callings, observing circumstances of time, place, person, etc. and
by their praying to God for reformation herein, though they do come with
wicked men to the Sacrament, they do put an apparent difference between the
precious and the vile.

3. Though it be a sin not to put difference between the precious and the
vile this way, their separation is but adding one sin to another, and no way
cleares them of the guilt of sin, but increases it, because they have no
warrant to separate.

10. Argument.

That that is neither commanded by God in Scripture, nor necessarily employed,
that is unlawful to practice: but that Godly men shall partake of the
Sacrament of the Lords supper in mixed Assemblies is neither commanded in
Scripture, nor necessarily implied: therefore the practice thereof is unlawful.

Answ. It is both commanded and necessarily and strongly implied, and therefore
it is lawful to practice, and our duty so to do: that it is commanded will
appear thus, and therefore necessarily implied, where Scripture is more silent.

First, consider what has been said concerning the Church of Corinth, how
corrupt it was both in Doctrine and Discipline, and yet the Apostle lays an
Apostolic command upon them, that notwithstanding these corruptions and
corrupt members they should in strength of their duty examine, and eat, etc.
Let a man [therefore] examine himself: therefore, Wherefore? because many come
unpreparedly and unworthily to their own destruction and condemnation,
therefore do you examine your selves, and so eat of this bread and drink of
this cup: and that this his Apostolic injunction might take the better effect
with them, he first shows them his authority.

1 Cor. 11.23. 1 Cor. 11.24.25.
1. That what he delivered to them he received from the Lord Christ.

2. In so doing they should answer the end of the institution in that there by
they show the Lords death, and keep a continual commemoration of it till his
second coming.

Ma. 26.26.27, 28.
Christ says also, Take, eat, this is my body, etc. and our Savior Christ in
the institution of it says expressly [doe this] in remembrance of me, yea
even when Judas himself was known to them all to be the betrayer of Christ
after Christ had told them, yea and Judas himself of his treason, he blessed
the bread, brake it, and bid them all eat of it, and took the cup and bid
them all drink of it, etc. now if a know no hypocrite, a known Devil, a
known betrayer of Christ were among the 12. Disciples at the Sacrament, nay at
the institution of it when it was most free of corruption, and yet this sin
of Judas never at all charged upon the rest though they then all knew him,
surely a known profane person may be at the Lords Table, and yet godly men may
lawfully participate, and his sin not charged upon the rest, nor hinder them
from the benefit of the Ordinances.

Object. There was but one of twelve wicked, but in our Assemblies are above
twelve wicked to one godly.

Answ. If there were one of twelve whom Christ himself chose, who knew the
hearts of all men, well may there be twelve for one when corrupt men that can
see no further then the outside, nor have no power nor will sometimes to
reform that, have to do in admitting or keeping back; and when men of all
sorts that profess Christ, come together without an immediate call from Christ
as the Disciples had: one Devil among twelve chosen Disciples chosen by Christ
is more then one thousand in other Assemblies: and surely if Christ had seen
the being of an hypocrite or devil amongst them could have made the assembly
unlawful or taken away the benefit of the Sacrament from them, he would never
have chosen Judas to be one of the twelve, or at least would never admitted him
to the Sacrament; for though at first the Disciples knew not Judas to be an
hypocrite, yet Christ himself knew him, and a known hypocrite ought to be as
well kept from the ordinances as a known profaned person, and is a more
dangerous person in the Church. So if our Ministers or men that have power in
the Church should know a man to be a gross hypocrite, they ought to be as shye
and careful to cast him out as a common drunkard or adulterer.

2. It is necessarily implied, and more.

By the example of all Apostolic Churches who had all of them corrupt members,
and corruptions in them, in Doctrinein, Discipline, yet I never read of any
that were believing that ever separated or had any toleration so to do; indeed
the Apostle says they went out from us because they were not of us, 1 John 2 1^
if they had been of us they would have continued with us: false hearted
professors fell off and departed, but no believer, no Saint separated. I speak
now no more how they were corrupted both the Church of the Jews, Corinth,
Galatia, and the seven Churches of Asia, of that heretofore; in Corinth there
was that abuse that I never saw in our Assemblies, the Sacrament given to a
drunkard in his drunkenness, as we see the text is there plain for it, Some
came hungry, some drunk; or drunkards have a little more shame, though they be
drunk week after week, and day after day, yet when they come to the Lords
table, they will be some body, for shame they will not then be drunk; if they
were I think none would be so mad as to give the Sacrament to them.

The second thing considerable is to show the lawfulness of joining in mixed
Assemblies, the premises considered with those cautions formerly delivered, and
it will appear lawful if we consider these particulars ensuing.
First, As I have said no place or part of Gods word does forbid it, for though
some places of Scripture have some semblance that way, yet when I come to that
particular to answer them it will appear otherwise.

Secondly, As we have proved we have Gods command for it, as the former
instance of Christ and the Apostle Paul.

Thirdly, The example of Gods people in all ages; see Elkanah and Hannah under
the law. See the Jews also in the Prophets time, none decline the public
assemblies of Gods worship, ordinances, and people, though as has been
largely proved both Priest and people were corrupt in Doctrine and Discipline,
yea also in their conversations. See this also in the Apostolic Churches
before alleged.

Fourthly, It is our duty to come to the ordinances if we would have benefit by
them: Heb. 10.25. the Apostle exhorts to this duty, and reproved them that did
forsake the Assembly.

Fifthly, The sins of others are not charged upon us if we come duly prepared
and as we ought to do.

Sixthly, The errors of the governors of the Church are not made over to
particular members, no more then the sins of Elies sons was upon Elkanab and
Hannah, or the rest of Gods people.

Seventhly, The uses, ends and effects of the ordinances are obtained in mixed
assemblies, which are such as these following.

1. To strengthen our faith and other graces. 2. To renew our Covenant with
God. 3. To commemorate the death of our Lord Jesus Christ: all which may be
attained, notwithstanding the presence of wicked men at the ordinances.
Eighthly, We cannot, as has been proved, be said to join with wicked men in
the ordinances though we be present with them, the premises considered.

Ninthly, My own preparation and examination makes me worthy and capable of
the ordinances, the sinfullnesse and unpreparednesse of others makes me not
incapable: To the pure, all things are pure, Tit. 1.15.
but unto them that are defiled and unbeleeving, nothing is pure, but even
their minds and consciences are defiled.

Tenthly, It is one thing for a man to join himself with a congregation of
Idolaters in their Idolatrous worships and wages, another thing for a profane
man to join himself, nay rather thrust himself among Gods people exercised
in and about the ordinances of God.

Eleventhly, No example in Scripture of any that ever separated from the
public assemblies of Gods worship. I stand not now to prove whether our
assemblies are so because of that heretofore.

12. That which sometimes and in some respect may be unlawful, in some other
respect becomes lawful, 1 Cor. 5 9.10, 11. 2 These. 3.14.
as David's eating the shewbread in case of necessity. So I am commanded not to
eat with an inordinate brother, but rather then I will starve for food I may
eat with him; I ought not to have to do with wicked men at all if I could
avoid it, but if my calling compel me I am permitted: now if the necessity of
the body alter the case and make things lawful that are otherwise unlawful
much more the necessity of the soul: now we know there is a necessity laid
upon Gods people either to partake in mixed assemblies at the Sacrament, or they
cannot enjoy the benefit of the ordinances, Romans 8.35.
the food and nourishment of the Soul, unless they will separate which they
have no warrant for. Ephesians. 3.17. Joh. 6.56. 1 John 4.13


13. Nothing can separate between Christ the head and the believing Christian.
Christ dwells in the believer and the believer in Christ, therefore it is
neither man nor devil, death, sin, nor hell can separate them, much less
the company of profane men that thrust themselves amongst Gods people in the
Sacrament.

14. Had it been unlawful absolutely to participate in mixed assemblies either
our Lord Christ or the Apostle would have laid a prohibition upon it, for there
is nothing of absolute necessity for a Christian man to know and practice
tending to life and salvation but it is revealed in the word of God by precept
or example; nor no fundamental error but it is also therein forbidden.

15. Exek. 18.14.
God is just and he punishes not one man for the sins of another unless he
make them, his by consenting to them and liking or approving them, which none
of Gods people do by the sins of wicked men in the Sacrament: (The soul
that sins shall die.)

1 Cor. 5.4, 5.
16. It is agreeable to the rule to cast out the offender, but not for the
innocent to cast out themselves, there is no rule for that.

1 Cor. 6.14
17. Unbeleevers thrusting in themselves, gives them no fellowship with the
Saints, for they can have no fellowship with them.

18. Errors in discipline, nay in many points of doctrine take not away the use
of fundamentalls, nor the essentialls of a Church.

19. He that is cast out of the Church is delivered up to Satan though he be
cast out against his will, what becomes then of those that cast out themselves
(consider;) truly unless God have more care to preserve them from the snares
of Satan then they bewray herein, they would become a very prey to the devil.

20. That exposition of Scripture which is unreasonable is false: but to say
the Apostle would have us not at all to company with wicked men in the
Sacrament, or that we should deprive our selves of the means of life and
salvation, and of the benefit of the ordinance, by reason of the presence of
wicked men who deprive themselves thereof, this is an unreasonable and so false
exposition of Scripture, and an unsound conclusion.





First, it is our duty to feed upon Christ by Faith in the Sacrament, therefore
as we regard the thriving of our souls, we ought not to deny them the means
of grace, Joh. 6.55.
lest the guilt of perishing lie upon our own heads: the flesh of Christ is
meat indeed and his blood drink indeed, the flesh and blood of Christ is the
real food of the soul.

Secondly, it is the command of God, of Christ, of the Apostle, therefore our
duty as has been proved.

Thirdly, we have the example of Gods people in former ages to carry us through
it.

Fourthly, if it be our duty to commemorate the death of Christ, it is our duty
to receive the Sacrament though prophaners be there present.

Fifthly, the Apostle gives us order to examine our selves and eat, laying
down this as a remedy against the abuses and disorders in the Church. I
conclude therefore thus that it is lawful to participate in assemblies, where
profane persons are not cast out, as from all that has been said so briefly,
from there two Arguments.





But God by Christ and the Apostle commands us to receive the Sacrament, and
Gods people have practiced it in former ages, and that lawfully in strength of
duty, notwithstanding wicked and profane men have bin amongst them in all
times: therefore it is the duty of Gods people in our times also. I cease to
press it with more arguments, though all the former particulars may be drawn
into so many strong arguments, but I hope they will suffice being well
considered, as particulars of concernment to the purpose in hand.





First, I answer that as there are many godly and learned Ministers that have
upon this ground laid aside the administration of this sacred ordinance; so
there are as many, and far more in number as learned and as godly that
notwithstanding this corrupt mixture yet do continue the dispensation thereof.
Prove. 27.23. Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2.3. Ezekiel. 34.10.


Secondly, we must consider that there is in a Minister or Pastor of a
Congregation required not only Ministerial and Sacramental qualifications
for himself, that he may become a worthy Communicant, but a charge lies upon
him also to look well to the flock, over which the holy Ghost has placed
him, that they also may be such as have right and interest to the seals and
Sacraments of life and salvation: therefore he ought to be very careful of
them to instruct them concerning the author, institution and end of this
Sacrament, and what the Lord requires of all that desire to participate to his
glory and their own comforts. Also he ought to show them the great and
inestimable benefit of worthy receiving, and the extreme and inevitable danger
that ensues upon sinful, profane, unprepared, and unworthy approaching the
table of the Lord: yea he ought to have power to cast out offenders of this
nature. But now in case when he has done his duty in seasonable exhortations,
admonitions, instructions, and reproves, that the government of the Church be
so corrupt that the Disciples thereof be wrested out of his hands, into such
hands as are as corrupt and vain as those that ought to be cast out of the
Assembly, yea and that by consent of the public or supreme Magistrate, the
question is whether in this case it is more lawful to desist the
administration, or to continue the dispensation thereof in a mixed Assembly. For
my own part I conceive it more lawful to continue the use and administration
thereof, then to desist it, and that from these grounds following.

First, It will appear by all that has been formerly said concerning joining
or participating in mixed Assemblies at the Sacrament, that the sin of such as
come irreverently, and unworthily unto this ordinance, cannot be charged upon
either minister or people, that come themselves as they ought: And discharging
their duty in using all lawful means to prevent this abuse, as when neither
exhortation, admonition, or reproof, promises, or denunciations will take
place, when the power of discipline is corrupt as aforesaid, then praying
against and mourning for such abuses and abominations in the Church, Ezekiel. 9.4,
6.
is expected from Gods people, not a Cessation of the dispensation of such
precious ordinances.

Secondly, If Gods ministers have power, as I know nothing to the contrary, to
call Gods people together to distribute to them the seals of the Covenant, why
do they deny them that privilege to whom it especially and properly belongs,
and for whom it was principally ordained: though they deny it to such as have
no right to it? If they are not able to know what all men are, yet let them
administer it to those they are well persuaded of, and lay a general charge
upon such as by reason of our great Assemblies, they cannot be so well
acquainted withal, who in Judgment of Charity may have right also, and let
them have the like privilege till their lives give testimony to the contrary:
For as we were better in our alms to relieve ten counterfeits, then let
Christ go naked or hungry in any one member, so had we better to admit ten
Hypocrites to the Table of the Lord then deprive one godly man of this soul
nourishment; it is true our Savior Christ says, Cast not Pearls before
Swine, nor holy things to Dogs, Matthew 7.6.
that is spoken as well of the doctrine of the Gospel as of the Sacrament, yea
and more properly, Christian exhortations, admonitions and reproves are there
meant, as appears by the following words, Lest they turn again and all to
rent you, or lest they spurn at and reject your reproves, admonitions, and
you also. This also is of the same importance, Reject him that is an heretic,
Tit. 3.10.
after the first and second admonis^ion: both places import thus much, that if
wicked men would with patience and meekness receive and hear the word of God
with Christian admonitions, etc. and not resist and reject them, they might
receive the benefit of them, and though they might be yet incapable of the
Sacrament; that which I infer from that place of Scripture is, that it has no
relation at all to the Sacrament more then to other holy ordinances. Secondly,
that though we ought not to give holy things to dogs nor Pearls to Swine, yet
holy persons and those to whom such precious mercies belong, ought not to be
denied them; and although the first inference should be denied concerning the
relation of that place of Matthew to the Sacrament, yet no reasonable man can
deny the latter. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. 1 Cor. 11.28. 1 Cor 11.26. Matthew. 26.26,
27, 28.


3ly. Consider the command of our Savior Christ for the performance of this
duty, Do this in remembrance of me, and so also we have an Apostolic
injunction for it: Let a man examine himself and so let him eat of this bread
and drink of this cup: also consider the use and end of its institution; for
as often as ye eat of this bread and drink of this cup ye show the Lords
death till he come: and so also, drink ye all of it, for this is my blood of
the new Testament that is shed for many for the remission of sins: and in the
same place concerning the bread he says, Take, eat, this is my body, etc.

Fourthly, we have the example as of all Gods people in all ages partaking in
mixed assemblies, so of Gods Priests and Ministers in all times, yea in the
Apostolic Churches of Corinth, Galatia, the seven Churches of Asia, the Church
of the Jews, under the Law, yea also in our own Congregations since the
reformation of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper has been received in mixed
assemblies, as has been already largely proved, and if Gods people have
received it in mixed assemblies, by consequence, Gods Priests and Ministers have
delivered it in mixed assemblies; indeed God blames the Priests under the Law
for admitting people uncircumcised to his holy ordinances, but never for giving
holy things to holy persons or to any that were in external Communion with
them, though doubtless many of them were vicious in their lives. Saint Paul
does not say if the incestuous person or those drunkards or Schismatiques that
were in the Church of Corinth were not cast out that they should cease the
public administrations, no not a word to that purpose, but use all lawful
means in our power to purge abuses of this nature out of the Church, but
especially out of our own hearts: Let every man examine himself, and so let
him eat, etc.

Fifthly, godly Ministers give occasion to carnal men to despise the work of
reformation, while they see even those that seem to be most forward that way
different in their practices, some desisting the administration, some
continuing it. See say they what manner of reformation these men would have,
they differ so among themselves, they know not what they would have, so hinder
the work of reformation and scandal the ways of God by their divisions among
themselves, and give great advantage to the adversaries of our Religion.

Sixthly, as it is better for Gods sheep to feed upon pasture where some weeds
grow rather then starve for want of food; so it is better for Gods shepherds
to suffer some weeds to grow in the sheeps Pasture, if they cannot prevent it,
then to starve their flock; yea and as it is better for the sheep to feed
among goats rather then starve, so it is better the shepherds should suffer
goats to feed upon the sheeps pasture though it should poison them, then for
the sheep to be kept from it, it being as I said out of their power to reform
it.

7. Consider there is neither command in Scripture nor example of any Priest
under the Law, or Minister or Pastor under the Gospel, that upon this or any
such ground did lay aside the administration of public Ordinances, especially
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. But we see it is expressly commanded to be
observed, and enjoined Gods people to frequent, and if Gods people ought not to
forsake the Assembly, or the Ordinances, or turn their backs upon them from
any such ground, much less ought the Ministers who by their absence give a
cessation to the Ordinances, deprive Gods people of the benefit and use of
them, for whose sakes they were as I said principally ordained.

Object. Gods Ministers do but desist the administration a while till it
please God to open a door of enlargement, that power may be put into their
hands to cast out offenders and to have a people congregated according to God.

Answ. We all ought to labor and endeavor this way both by prayer and all
other lawful means to forward this work of reformation, but I know no
warrant any Minister of God has upon any such ground, to deny either Gods
people or themselves the benefit of this Ordinance, they may as well desist all
other public administrations upon one and the same ground: suppose diverse
honest men were confined to a place where they could not be without the
company of ungodly men, and that there were a keeper appointed to look to them
to give them that by which their lives and comforts are preserved and
maintained, what would we think of that keeper that would refuse to administer
such things as are of absolute necessity to preserve them in health till they
come as it were out of prison to have their tables spread in their own houses
and families out of such wicked company, not knowing when the time of their
confinement would end? surely we would conclude him an ignorant or idle fellow
that would rather suffer them to starve in keeping their allowance from them,
then giving it them in an untoward way, or among thieves and robbers; and as
foolish would they be found, that upon such grounds refuse to receive their
nourishment: even so though Gods people be constrained either to partake with
wicked men at the Lords table or lose the benefit of it; I hold it a very
weak argument that the presence of wicked men should debar them of it:
surely the necessity Gods people have of it, the right they have to it, the
command of the Lord Christ, and apostolical injunction inferring it, together
with the example of Gods people in former ages praising it, ought to be more
prevailant with ministers to continue the dispensation of it then the
unavoydable presence of wicked men ought to be for the desisting of this great
Ordinance. Certainly the Lord rather expects men should wait upon him in the
Lawful use of means in their places and callings, endeavoring to observe and
perform these duties in as holy a manner as they can till he open a door of
enlargement, rather then to turn their backs upon such duties of high
concernment.

Thirdly, I now come to speak to the unlawfulness of separation from our
public assemblies, having already sufficiently spoke to the lawfulness of
joining in them in the Ordinances, notwithstanding their corruptions in and
about the administrations of them.
First, consider we turn our backs upon the Ordinances, of God for as the
disorderly Corinthians sinned in despising the Church of God by 1 Cor. 11.22.
their abusive thrusting themselves to the Lords Table, so they that separate
from them do also despise the Ordinance of God in turning their backs upon
them, and are as deeply guilty.

Secondly, by separating our selves we deprive our selves of the benefit of the
ordinances, and hereby we do that hurt to our selves that wicked men's presence
with us could never do.

Thirdly, by departing and setting up ways of our own we become guilty of
performing our inventions before the ordinance of God, and with Nadab and Abihu
offer strange fire, which we know the Lord punished from heaven with fire.

Fourthly, we lay our selves open to temptation, for certainly if Gods people
be but a while absent from the public ordinances of preaching and
administration of the Sacrament or prayer, the great ordinances of the Church,
either accidentally by business, or voluntarily, if such a thing can be in
Gods people, what abundance of deadness and coldness overspreads their
hearts, how are they disabled, for duty public or private, how unable to
resist temptation, to wrestle with their lusts and wicked hearts? and truly if
we be foiled by sin or Satan, the world or our own heart in the time of
our voluntary departing from the means of grace, blame our selves herein, I
appeal to the hearts and consciences of every godly man that has experience
of the frailty of themselves this way whether it be thus yea or no.

Fifthly, We hereby deny our souls of their necessary food and nourishment;
and if it be a sin to neglect the preservation of the body, much more to
neglect the welfare of the soul.

Sixthly, We hereby lay a stumbling block in the way of weak Christians, who
are doubtful because of our departure.

Seventhly, We open the mouths not only of the Papists against the
Protestant Religion, but of carnal Gospellers and civil honest men, who make
this the great Thunderbolt to shoot at our Religion and profession, even the
divisions, diversity of opinions, several sects that are among such as
profess Religion, and this keeps many off from coming on to a Religious way
of life; The Lord of peace settle peace amongst us and make us all of one and
the same mind, according to truth in the worship and service of God.

Eighthly, We do by our separation scandal the Ordinances and whole
assemblies of the Church; for either the ordinances must be Idolatrous, and the
assembly Idolaters and Antichristian, as the Separation of necessity must call
them, and do, or else they know their separation were unlawful: and herein I
fear the Devil has a maine stroke by nourishing in men such opinions, as I
formerly said, while he appears in their estimation an Angel of light, for
certainly this is a more dangerous Rent he makes in the Church then any other
can be, for he divides now not Papists from Protestants, nor profane persons
from holy, which may be done in the exercise of the Ordinances of our public
assemblies, but he now divides and sowes discord and dissension between the
godly themselves. I pray God make us all wise to discern and avoid his
subtlety. Certainly if we ought not to receive accusation against an Elder
under two or three Witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.9.
how much more careful ought we to be to have very strong proofs and
arguments to make good an accusation, yea such a foul one as this is against a
whole Church or Congregation, some of whom our own hearts tell us are in the
number of Gods people, and truly so accounted? nay the scandal rests not
only upon Gods people, but upon the Ordinances of God also, for all that
separate must account them Idolaters, else their separation is unlawful.

Ninthly, it will appear, it is unlawful to separate from such assemblies as
ours are where the Word and Doctrine of salvation is so plentifully taught, the
Sacraments so duly administered, such a visible profession made to both these,
notwithstanding the corruptions among us; by these things to which the Church
of God is compared in Scripture.

First, to a Vine: I am the Vine, says the Lord Christ, and ye are the
branches, John 15.5. Now in case there be a dead fruitless branch or more,
what course is to be taken? What, cut off the living branches? Nay, John 15 2
cut off the dead branches that the living may thrive the better: Every branch
that bears not fruit he takes away, says the Lord Christ, meaning God the
Father, who is the Husbandman; and every branch that brings forth fruit he
purges that it may bring forth more fruit.

Mat. 20.1. Esa 5.1. 1 Cor. 3.9.
Secondly, The Church of God is Gods vineyard, Gods husbandry, the Lord he
preserves the vines, the young trees, the flowers, the profitable herbs, but
he takes away and roots up the dead branches, weeds and such like, and surely
we would count him a mad vine-dresser or gardner that because of some dead
branches in the vine or some weeds in the garden, should think to make the
vine fruitful by cutting off the living fruitful branches, and the garden to
prosper by plucking up the herbs and flowers, this indeed is the way to
destroy a vine, a husbandry, a garden, but never a way to preserve it: and
truly the next way to give a nullity to a Church, is for every godly man, if
they durst, to separate from it, and strip it of its Ordinances, and Members,
but the way to preserve it is to purge it by casting out the abusive, not by
departing from it: it is needless here to ask me what we should do, if
those dead branches be not cut off, I have already answered that.

1 Cor. 3.9.
Thirdly, Compared to a building; in buildings we know men use to cast away
refuse rotten Timber and rubbidge, but they make use of the sound and
serviceable materials, or else they would make but a foolish building.

Fourthly, To a body whereof Jesus Christ is head: now we know a man may be a
true man and have a palsy hand, Romans 12.4, 5. 1 Cor. 6.15 Ephesians. 5 30.
or a rotten finger, and the way to preserve life is to cut off the dead rotten
member, not to cut off the sound; if there should be any of that other opinion,
I should as the proverb says, count him a good Surgeon, but a very bad
Physician.

Mat. 13.24, 25.
Fifthly, to a field wherein is Cockle as well as corn, Tares as well as
Wheat: And though some hold that this parable has relation to the whole
world, and by Kingdom of heaven is meant the Gospel of the kingdom, yet it
may as rightly be applied to the condition of the visible Church, which shall
consist of Tares as well as Wheat to the end of the world. Yet take it which
way ye will, see the Lord of the Harvest is very careful to preserve the
Wheat, and therefore would not have the Tares meddled withal till harvest, not
that I would so apply it as that profane men in the Church should not be dealt
withal, but to this purpose, to let men know, the way to preserve a Church is
not by plucking up the godly, or the Wheat, but rather to root out the Tares,
the weeds, the ungodly, and let the good Corn stand and grow till harvest to
be gathered into Gods barn.

Sixthly, The Ordinances in the Church, as the Word and Sacraments and Prayer,
are compared to the Wedding Feast, to which a man should bring his wedding
garment, when in that Parable of the marriage of the Kings Son, the King came
in, he never reproved them that sat^ at table that had on these Wedding
garments, but him that had none, takes him and casts him out, the rest were not
shut from the table, because they sat with him that had not on his garment,
nor reproved for it, he sinned, and he only suffered: so consequently, the
believing prepared Communicant, shall not be blamed for the unbeleeving and
impenitent, but his sin shall be upon his own head. And as the sins of
wicked men and their presence at the Sacrament cannot hinder the godly from
eating the flesh and drinking the blood of Christ spiritually by faith, so they
can no way hinder the believer from life and salvation, Joh. 6.54.
by this their spiritual feeding upon Christ, Whosoever eats my flesh and
drinks my blood shall not perish but have everlasting life.

Tenthly, It will appear it is unlawful to separate from our visible and
public a semblies, because the Lord continues his presence among us, Let no
man be more holy than God. For so long as the Word and Sacraments are
continued, and the visible signs of Gods gracious presence making the means
effectual to convert and build up in the ways of God, as, the Lord be
praised, we have sufficient proof daily of, we may conclude it is utterly
unlawful to separate. They themselves that do separate do confess they had
their conversion in our assemblies, and their beginnings of grace, though some
of them evade it and say, not by the means in the Church of England, but by
reading and private conference, and the like; but we have daily sufficient and
good testimony of the benefit received by the Ordinances and means of grace,
continued in our public assemblies, I hope every godly heart among us has
large testimony of the daily heat, life, and comfort that is found in them: we
find that prophecy in the 42 of Isaiah and the 16. verse, fulfilled to us:
and so Isaiah 29.18. where the Lord by the Prophet foretells what he would do
for his people under the Gospel, he would bring the blind by a way they knew
not, that he would make darkness light before them, and crooked things
straight: so in that 29. Chapter, In that day shall the deaf hear the words
of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of
darkness, etc. And truly the proof of the efficacy of the means of grace
in our public assemblies, has received the witness of many hundreds who
have suffered persecution for it, and have, many of them, sealed it with their
dearest blood, who doubtless are now enjoying the blessed fruits of their
sufferings, for the name, profession, and Gospel of Christ: none of all which
Martyrs, did ever account in the Church of England the Ordinances of God
Idolatrous or Antichristian, or till it did wholly apostate, and as it now
stands it was in Kings Edwards time.

John 9.25.32.
What better witness can there be than experience? or how is the tree known
but by its fruits? this persuaded the blind man of the truth of Christ's
Doctrine, even the miracle that he wrought upon him: Surely, says he, God
hears not sinners, and I am sure I once was blind, and I now see; as I hope
many of us in our assemblies can say, whose eyes the Lord has opened, and
whose hearts the Lord has changed. Let the Separation rail upon our
Ordinances, Ministers, and Assemblies as much as the Scribes and Pharisees
against Christ and his Apostles, and Disciples, and labor to seduce men as
they would have done the blind man whose eyes he had opened; I say, let them
do what they will to reproach us, we may truly say, once we were blind and we
now see, and we are sure the Lord has opened our Eyes by this contemptible
means: and as by virtue of Christ's prayer, the clay and spittle became
effectual, so by virtue of the Spirit of God, and the Intercession of Jesus
Christ, for his poor Saints, the means of grace becomes effectual, both to
convert, and to confirm and establish to eternal life.

By works, Saint James says, faith is made manifest, or perfect, Jam. 2.22.
and so our Savior says, The works which I do, testify of me; and as the
miracles and great works of Christ ought to have convinced the Jews that he
was Christ, so the many years large and plenteous fruit reaped by the
public administrations of the Ordinances in our public assemblies ought to
be sufficient to convince all gainesayers, that deny the truth and lawfulness
of them, for surely were not the presence and power of God in the Ordinances
they would become dead and fruitless.

11. If a man were desirous to separate, and that it were lawful, where is the
Word of God, the Gospel of Jesus Christ, more fully, clearly, truly, and
powerfully preached than in our public assemblies, and in many places the
Sacraments as duly and reverently administered? And I am confident there are as
few false-hearted professors in the Church of England, considering the
proportion, as in the most exact assembly of separation: by Professors, are
meant not only such as are in external Communion, but such as seem in a more
special manner to perform godliness, and of these for uprightness, they may
set forth to most exact assemblies, etc. of separation.

12. Consider Salvation is to be had in the Church of England, by the means of
grace continued in it, therefore it is a true Church, and unlawful to separate
from it, and to turn our backs upon the Ordinance.

Object. We that separate, do not turn our backs upon the Ordinances, but we
desire to enjoy them with more purity.

Answ. It is lawful to desire and endeavor this way, but let no man be more
holy than God commands him, nor do unlawful actions that a good end may be
produced out of it.

Let any man show me where Scriptu^e allows of, or commands any such
separation from a true Church, for any such ends, and I shall be silent: it is
true, there are many places pointing out Gods people to separate from heathens,
public Idolaters and Idolatrous worshippers, but never did I read that one Jew
separated from the public assemblies of Jews, nor one Christian warranted to
separate from the public assemblies of that Church of which he is a member,
borne of Christian parents, which were members of this Church, and themselves
admitted members by baptism into the visible assemblies of Gods worship and
ordinances, that such a one should rip himself from the public assemblies of
Gods people for any error in Doctrine or Discipline, especially not
fundamental, 1 Timothy 2.1.2. Deuteronomy. 17.18 Iosu. 3.6. and 6.6. 1 King. 2.35. 2
King. 18.4. 1 Chronicles. 13.12. and 15 1.11.12.16. 2 Chronicles. 8.14. and 17.6, 7, 8,
9. and 19.18. Mat. 22.21. Romans 13.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.13. Mat. 10.23
or though it be fundamental, if not the error of the whole Church, it gives
no warrant to separate; for I do not account the private opinions of some of
our Divines, who are corrupt in some tenants, as that of Arminius, Pelagius,
Socinus, etc. to be the error of the whole Church. For many hundreds for one,
disclaim these errors, both clergy and Laity; they have no calling to create
a Church to themselves without consent of authority, the civil Magistrate
having power both, as I conceive, to establish and reform Religion, and so
long as he does do it according to God we must obey actively, if he derogates,
then we must obey passively: if the Magistrate command me to hear the Word, to
observe the Sabbath, etc. I am bound in conscience, I conceive, to obey; but if
he command me to go to mass, I may and ought to refuse but not resist, obey
passively, in this as in all other, I subject to better judgments; Yet I hold
it also lawful to fly rather then resist or suffer, but this flying I account
is passive also.

Fourthly, I come now to speak something of those places of Scripture alleged
for the maintaining of these errors of separation.
Deuteronomy. 33.28 From the matter
First, Numb. 2.34. the children of Israel did according to all that Moses
commanded them from the Lord, so they pitched by their standards, and so they
set forward every one after their Families according to the house of their
Fathers.

Answ. I know not at all what relation this has to the matter in hand or how
to conclude a separation lawful from hence, and though the Israelites did
observe Gods direction in their journeys, yet many of them were wicked enough
in their lives, and yet the other separated not from them; if they would
conclude from hence that Christians should undertake nothing under the Gospel,
but what they have command from God for, in matter of worship or otherwise,
then I conclude they must not separate because God never commands that we
should separate from the public assemblies of his people; but I will cease to
speak any thing at all to those places of less concernment, only quote them
in the Margent, that the Reader may peruse them himself, and speak to those
which seem to have more strength.

Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7. ^. Ibidem.
Secondly, Levit. 20.26. and ye shall be holy unto me, for I the Lord your God
am holy, and have severed you from other people.

Answ. This is far from the matter in hand; here is a command to Israel to be
holy because God their God is holy, and had severed them from other heathen and
Idolatrous nations, what warrant this gives one Jew to separate from another,
or one godly man to separate from public assemblies of Gods worship I know
not: our Savior Christ ^^yes the same command upon his Disciples, and so upon
us, to be holy as he is holy, and he chose his Disciples out of the world, does
this give them warrant to separate one from another? all true believers are
chosen out of the world, that is, from the common sinful courses, customs and
fashions of the world, yet they ought to hold fellowship in the worship of God.

Thirdly, Ezra 9.2. the Israelites are blamed for a sinful mingling
themselves, which were the holy seed, with the Idolatrous and heathen nations
that worship Idols and false gods, Sun, Moon, Planets, etc. and that in an
especial manner prohibited, viz. marrying with them. This is unsuitable to the
occasion it is quoted for: if we worship Idols or our ordinances be Idolatrous
in their institution, then it were to some purpose, John 15.19. Because I have
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hate you.

Answ. All Gods people are chosen out of the world, and upon the same ground
are hated by the world; does this give any liberty to decline the ordinances?

Fourthly, 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. But ye are a royal Priesthood, a chosen Generation.

Answ. This Text has reference to all the elect of God, as appears in the
first Chapter and first Verse, to strangers scattered throughout Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, who were converted and has no
relation at all to a Sacramental Communion or Church fellowship, only
intimates all believers are chosen, and peculiar to God, which we deny not in
opposition to the vast multitudes of prophanors in the world.

Fifthly, 2 Chro. 23.19. Jehojada appointed Porters to the house of the Lord,
that none that was unclean should enter in.

Answ. Put case that Leviticall cleansings, and purifications were not now out
of date: yet this is not to the purpose: For if he had set Porters to keep out
the clean from the ordinances, because of some unclean among them that were
already entered in, it had been something, though but a little to this purpose,
by reason many things, and many men at some times were then accounted unclean,
that now are not to be counted unclean under the Gospel: as by touching a
dead carkas, or having an issue of seed, etc. these are clean under the
Gosspell, which were then unclean.

Sixthly, Ezekiel 44.9. No stranger uncircumcised in heart or in flesh should
enter into the Sanctuary.

Answ. Though no stranger should enter, because they were not in the limits of
the national Covenant of circumcision, yet all that were admitted members of
the Jewish nation by circumcision were also admitted to the ordinances, and yet
many of them as vicious and profane, as has formerly been proved, as any in
our assemblies can be, and we admit none to that ordinance but such as by
baptism are admitted visible members as they were by circumcision; and if no
stranger should enter into the sanctuary, Ezekiel. 22.26. Lam. 1.10.
should not they enter in that were of the same nation, and under the same
covenant? yea doubtless, and if strangers were admitted by the neglect of the
Priests, as they were often, did this cause the other to separate? this is
absurd.

Seventhly, Ezekiel. 22.26. her Priests have violated my Law in that they put no
difference between the holy and profane.

Answ. This was the Priests sin, but this gave not the people warrant to
separate, no more than that of Elies sons.

Eighthly, Jeremiah 15.19. If thou take away the precious from the vile.

Answ. That is, if thou separate or cast out the vile persons from the
precious: for there is a twofold separating; one, when we cast out the party
from whom we separate, another, when we cast out our selves from them: but the
first of these is here meant;

First, because the precious have right to the ordinances and ought not to be
cast out.

Secondly, because of the words following in the close of the verse, (Let them
return to thee, but return not thou to them) viz. Let them upon repentance or
entering into covenant come again to thee, and to the ordinances, but do not
thou decline the ordinance to suite with their sinful manners: [Let them
return to thee] implies, the vile were once with him, and were cast out.

Ezekiel. 22.26.
Eighthly, Ezekiel. 44.23. They shall teach my people the difference b tweene the
holy and profane.

Answ. True, this was the Priests office so to do, to show who have right to
the Ordinances, who not, and so do our Ministers now, or ought to do, but I
can hear no Text say, yet if the Priest put not di^ference between the holy
and profane, do thou separate thy self and come not to the public
ordinances.

Ninthly, Numbers 19.20.22. Whatsoever the unclean person touches shall be
unclean.

Answ. We have not now under the Gospel to do with such shadows and
Leviticall purifications as then were in use, we are all clean through the
blood of Christ, 1 Ioh. 1.17 Luke 11.41 Ioh. 15.3.
we may now touch a grave, a dead person, a Leper, and yet come to the
ordinances: we now speak not of such legal ceremonies, but of godliness and
holiness of life: besides these unclean persons had their cleansings, as
appears in the cited Scripture: many men of vicious lives frequented the
sanctuary, and yet were not counted unclean: besides, to the pure all things
are pure, but to the impure all things are unclean. Lastly, we mistake if we
think that the unclean person touching the ordinances of God can make them
unclean in themselves, or to any other then to themselves: also it is to be
noted that the uncleanness spoken of in this Text is the uncleanness of the
body, whereby such a one was made incapable of humane society, and this
uncleanness kept him no more from the ordinances then from common society; it
is the corruption and the depravity of the inner man makes men incapable of the
Sacrament, not any defect or uncleanness in the body other then as it is
contagious. This Text of Scripture has no relation at all to a religious
separation but a Civil.

10. 2 Chro. 6.14.17. Thou showest mercy to thy servants that walk before thee
with all their hearts. If this Text have any thing in it to warrant a
separation from the ordinances of Christ, let the indifferent judge: if any
thing concerning Sacramental communion were here meant, it would rather be a
silent reproof of them that decline the ordinances; for they cannot be said to
walk uprightly with all their hearts before God.

11. Exodus 19.5. If ye will obey my voice, ye shall be a peculiar treasure
unto me. This is a general promise made to all the nation of the Jews, and so
to us under the Gospel, that upon condition of faith and obedience, the Lord
will graciously accept of us in his Son to be his; what there is here to
countenance separation from the public assemblies of Gods worship I
understand not.

12. Psalm 135.4. For the Lord has chosen Jacob to himself; this Text shows
how according to the election of grace, he has chosen the promised seed, the
children of the faithful out of the world to himself, as well under the
Gospel as under the Law. These places of Scripture therefore should encourage
us to walk with God in the frequent use of the Ordinances, not to turn our
backs upon them. I hope considering what has been formerly said, no man will
doubt whether the Word and Sacraments in the Church of England be the
Ordinances of God, though there may be some miscariage in the dispensation of
them: if they should make any such scruple;

First, let them remember they are of the Lord Christ his institution.

Secondly, by experience we see the Lord graciously found present in them, as
appears by the daily fruit proceeding from them; so that as our Savior says
concerning himself, My works testify of me, and, The tree is known by its
fruits, for men gather not grapes of thorns, nor, etc. even so the heat, life
and nourishment which is attained in these ordinances declare manifestly the
presence of God in them by his Spirit, making them effectual to all that
belong to the election of grace, and so consequently that they are the
ordinance of God, ordained for the converting and building up of his people in
the ways of God.

13. 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you, but ye are wasted, but ye are
sanctify; the Apostle here declares the different condition of Gods people;
what they were before conversion, what they are after, what they are by nature,
what by grace; it is very strange logic to draw any conclusion from hence to
countenance separation from the Church; true, hence we ought to gather that
Gods people after conversion ought not to live in that ungodly and unclean way
that they did formerly, nor frequent the societies of unclean and lewd livers,
nor run to the same excess of riot with them as they did before conversion,
but rather now apply themselves to the society and fellowship with godly and
holy men, 1 Pet. 1.22. Titus 3.3, 4, 5.
and frequent the ordinances of God, with all due care and diligence, that they
might be more and more built up in the ways of God.

Ephe. 4.15, 16. Ibidem.
14. Col. 2.19.20. And not holding the head from which all the body by joints
and bones having nourishment ministered, and knit together increases with the
increase of God; wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the
world, why as though living in the world are ye subject to ordinances? The
Apostle in these words shows the error and vanity of such as were led away
by Jewish, and heathenish observations, as new Moons, Sabbath days, meats,
drinks, etc. worshipping of Angels, etc. while they neglect the head of the
Church, which is the Lord Christ: what color men may here have to separate
from the ordinances of God I know not, as for being subject to humane
ordinances, we must not conceive that the Apostle means we should resist the
lawful power and authority of men set over us in Church and Commonwealth, 1
Pet. 2.13.
for then we should make one Scripture cross another, for Saint Peter exhorts
us to submit to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake. Then by humane
ordinances are such here meant as were Heathenish and Jewish, that were types
and shadows of the substance which could not now be consistent in the Church
with the being of Christ, not such ordinances as the Word preached, Sacraments,
and Prayer, these are the ordinances of God, and not humane ordinances, though
there may be some corruptions in the dispensation and administration of them;
yet they being the ordinances of God, we ought not to separate from them.

15. Matthew. 28.20. Teaching them, to observe all things that I have commanded
you, and lo I am with you always unto the end of the world, etc.

Answ. What there is here to maintain a separation from the public assemblies
of Gods people and worship, I know not, if Christ have left any such command
with his Disciples, surely it would be found extant in Scripture, especially a
point of so high concernment, 1 Pet. 1.22, 23. 1 Timothy 2.1.13. not suitable to
the purpose: besides the command of Christ, and the presence of Christ is to be
found for the justification of those that attend his ordinance. Such other
places of Scripture as seem to have more weight in them follow.

16. Romans 12.5. For we being many are one body in Christ: hence the Separation
conclude that all that partake of the Sacrament are of one and the same body,
and must therefore of necessity be Saints at least in outward appearance.

Answ. 1. I answer, all that come to the Sacrament whether godly or profane
may be accounted members of the same visible body by an external covenant,
being by baptism admitted into the fellowship of the visible Church, and
making a profession of faith in Christ, though their lives are unanswerable.

Secondly, The Apostle when he says here (we) being many are one body in
Christ, he speaks of that mystical union that is between Christ and
believers, and speaks here of the invisible Church, not of the visible, and it
will appear that he spoke only of believers, because it is unpossible for an
hypocrite to be joined to the body of Christ, more than a profane person, and
doubtless there were hypocrites among them. Yet says he, we being many, are
one body in Christ.

Thirdly, Admit he should speak of the visible Church, and that they ought all
to be such as in judgment of Charity are Saints, he does not say, if there be
any profane person among you, separate or cut your selves from the body.

17. 1 Cor. 10.17. For we being many are one bread, and one body, for we are
all partakers of that one bread: The Apostle here also shows that one-nesse
and spiritual Communion that all believers have with Christ the true bread of
life, and the true head of that mystical body. This Scripture is of the same
nature with the former, therefore already spoken unto.

18. 1 Cor. 5.11. If any man that is called a Brother, be a fornicator, or
covetous, or an Idolater, or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with
such a one eat not.

Answ. It is true, we ought not willingly to eat with such a one, or to have
any voluntary familiarity with him, this place has no relation at all to the
Sacrament.

Object. If we ought not to eat common bread with him, much less to join with
him in the Sacrament.

Answ. It is in our own power to have familiarity or common society with him
or not: but not in our power to eat or not to eat with him at the Sacrament; if
the Church be remiss in exercise of discipline, the remedy to be used in this
case, the Apostle prescribes in the last clause of the Chapter: Therefore put
away from you that wicked person: he says not, if the Church be remiss, and
that he be not put away, come not to the table of the Lord. The Text bears no
such weight that way, but that in discharge of my duty, I ought to frequent the
ordinance, unless it were in my power to cast him out, but of this heretofore.

19. 2 Cor. 6.17. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says
the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you.

This Text and that of Revelation 18.4. are the two masterpieces of all their
Scriptures: I will speak first to that, 2 Cor. 6.17. where we must consider,
first, who are to separate; secondly from whom they are to separate; thirdly,
what are the unclean things there not to be touched.

First, they that are to separate, are the believing Corinthians, men converted
from Heathenish and Idolatrous customs and services, to faith in Jesus Christ.

Secondly, they must separate from Infidels, men destitute of the knowledge of
Christ, and men void of faith, men not professing Christ, palpable Idolaters,
as appears in the foregoing verses. What fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness, or what concord has Christ with Beliall? the believer with
the infidel; or what agree-hath the Temple of God with Idols?

Thirdly, the unclean things from which they are to separate are their Idols
and profane sacrifices: and truly if in the visible face of our assemblies
Christ were not professed, his ordinances dispensed, if the ordinances were
superstitious and Idolatrous in their nature and institution, and heathenish
Gods were worshipped by us, it were indeed good reason for all Gods people, all
that believe in Christ to separate, but that this place tolerates any man to
separate from ordinances instituted by Christ and ministered in assemblies
professing Christ, and where are many believers met together in the name of
Christ; this I find no warrant for though there may be many corrupt members
exercised in and about them, the ordinances remain the ordinances of Christ,
notwithstanding profane men have to do in the dispensation of them: Elies
sons were wicked, but the ordinances kept their own nature and use to Gods
people that came duly prepared to them. If those that plead for separation can
make it appear that in all the book of God there is any one place to
countenance or warrant a separation from ordinances of the Lord Christ's own
institution, notwithstanding the evil managing of them, and corrupt men
employed about them, then they say something; but because Scripture commands
Gods people to separate from the Assemblies of heathens, which worshipped false
Gods, as the Sun, Moon, etc. and such as observed Idolatrous customs and
practices in ordinances invented of their own brain, not instituted by
Christ, this can be no warrant for Gods people to separate from the Ordinances
of Christ. If they shall yet say, the corrupt managing and dispensation of them
make the ordinances unclean and Idolatrous; I hope there is formerly spoken
enough to give satisfaction to that, where it is proved lawful to join in
mixed assemblies, and the unlawfulness of separation. Rev. 18 ^
As for this portion of Scripture, where it is said, Come out of [her] my
people that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues.

We must understand what is meant by this word [her,] and if we examine the 17.
and 18. Chapter of this book of Revelation, we shall plainly find it to be
the scarlet Whore, the Pope of Rome, so all expositors, the whore of Babylon,
that mother of harlots, and abomination of the earth. Chap. 16.19. And great
Babylon came in remembrance before God to give unto her the cup of the wine of
the fiercenes of the wrath of God. Chap. 17. Verse. 1. Come hither, says the
Angel to Saint John, and I will show thee the judgment of the great Whore,
that fits upon many waters, with whom the Kings of the earth have committed
fornication, and read, etc. read I say the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and so
to the end of that Chapter. Now in the eighteenth Chapter, the Lord by St. John
foretells the fall and destruction of this great whore of Babylon, by reason of
her great abominations; and gives an exhortation for Gods people to come out of
her, such as have joined with her in her sins, lest they do also partake of her
plagues. What warrant this gives men to separate from the ordinances of God,
and the public assemblies of Gods people exercised in and about the worship
of God I know not, we all know that Rome is the very seat of Idolatry, both
for the matter and manner of their worship, their doctrine false in
fundamentalls, more corrupt then Heathens and Pagans; there is no ordinance of
Christ among them, only the Word is preached in an erroneous and false way to
the people to seduce and betray them from Christ to Antichrist; they have
ordained Sacraments of their own, worships of their own, nay in a Scripture
sense, gods of their own; from the assemblies of these Idolaters Gods people
must separate, not from public Congregations of Gods worship, for as I have
spoken at large, with us are the ordinances of Jesus Christ, the Word of God
taught sufficiently to salvation in all that believe; we observe no other
ordinances but what Christ has instituted and ordained, but it is impossible
for any man to come to life and salvation by their Idolatrous worships; though
the Lord may have his number amongst them which have not bowed the knee to
B^all, yet these were never converted by the false worships, ordinances and
inventions, but by some extraordinary or immediate blessing bestowed upon them
from the reading of the Scriptures, etc. and inspiration of his Spirit, etc.
for Satan never begets children to God, Mat. 12.25.
nor Antichrist convert men to Christ, A kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand. And thus having very briefly spoken concerning those places of
Scripture alleged by those that plead for a separation, according as my weak
talent and short time will permit: I will shut up with the fifth and last thing
I intended and promised to speak to, which is only to give a few words to
avoyde mistakes; for I earnestly desire not to offend the conscience of the
weakest Christian, or to bring upon my self that aspersion which some
prejudicately would cast upon me. For I call God to witness that according to
that poor l^ght God has given me, I have not been inj^rious to any known
place of Scripture or winked at any known truth in this discourse, but have as
earnestly desired and unpartially endeavored to convince my own heart of the
truth of this point of so great concernement, and that makes so great
difference among Gods people, as for the informing of any other to whom I am in
some measure engaged by way of promise or private interest.

Therefore I desire to deliver my self plainly as I can, that whatsoever I
have spoken upon this subject is neither to dignifie my own opinion, nor to
maintain or plead for any corruption or abuse in our Church assemblies, or
dispensation of the ordinances: for while I say it is unlawful to separate
from such assemblies, for reasons formerly given, yet I say not it is lawful
for corrupt and profane men to be admitted to the Sacrament, only I have
desired to inform my self and others how and in what manner they may safely
join and frequent the ordinances of life and salvation to their comfort,
though those in authority be remiss in the exercise of discipline, and so
corrupt in their offices and trust reposed in them.

But I do earnestly desire to persuade and stir up my self and all Gods
people in all our several addressements to God in prayer we would make this
on^ special part of our desires, that God would purge the Church of all abuses
both in doctrine and manners, and settle the ordinances amongst us in their
power and purity: and I desire not only that Gods people should pray against
these corruptions, but mourn for the continuance of them, and every one
according to the bounds and limits of his place and calling to show his utter
dislike of them in all lawful ways, though not by separating, which I hope
sufficiently appears to be unlawful, the premises considered: and truly
this I have done for these reasons following.

First, to satisfy my self and others that were doubtful in this point of
joining in mixed assemblies lawfully.

Secondly, to make up the breaches and avoid dissension and division which
Satan is apt to make between not only carnal men and godly m^n, but between
the godly themselves, which is that that Saint Paul reprehends in the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.3.
and tells them plainly it was an evidence of their carnality; and this also
he earnestly exhorts them to by the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.10
that they would all speak the same thing, and that there be no division among
them, but be perfectly joined together in one and the same judgment, and in
Romans 16.17. he intreates them to mark such as cause division, and to avoid
them, have no unnecessary society with them.

Thirdly, that the enemies mouths may be stopped, not only the Papists, who
as I formerly said, shoot this as their maine thunderbolt against our Religion,
the diversity of opinions, but also our profane loose Protestants, nay even
our civil honest men, who take occasion from hence to reproach the ways and
people of God, of which we have too much woeful experience; yea and it is a
maine stumbling block in the ways of many weak ones that might otherwise be
won to Christ, even the devisions among Gods people, Ephe. 4.15.
whilst Gods people by an even and peaceably walking, following the truth in
love, and by keeping the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephe. 4.3.
might adorn the Gospel, and by their godly conversation encourage others to
come in. And now in all that I have said having declared my own judgment
which I shall ever carry in my hand, and lay at the feet of him that shall give
me further light, though I desire not to meddle with too many doubtful
disputations, my time nor abilities affording it: I beseech the Lord to
persuade our hearts what is good and acceptable to him, and how to walk in all
well pleasing before him, to whom be all honor and glory for evermore, Amen.

A Postscript.
AMongst many friendly solicitations I had for the publishing this Treatise, I
met with one whom I made acquainted with my intentions, that thought it not
convenient at this time by reason as be conceived it would give some advantage
to our wicked Malignants to cherish in themselves their evil thoughts of the
Church and people of God for their division, by reason this book also in
diverse p^aces of it reprehendeth the like misdemeanors in the Church, which
the Papists and our profane ones so much cast in the face of our Religion; and
truly before I brought it to the press, I debated the business with my
self, whether the premises considered, I ought rather in conscience to bring
it forth for the benefit of the Church and people of God, or to conceal it for
this supposed disadvantage: and being very willing to remove all scruples from
their tender conscience, I thought good briefly to set down the reasons and
arguments which enforced the birth of that which otherwise had been buried in
oblivion.

First, I considered many had labored with me to have it made public, and
but one only that objected any thing against it, and that only for the time
present be thought not convenient.

Secondly, I considered the fuller of distractions the Church and State is, the
more need is there to hasten forth such a subject as this is.

Thirdly, that we ought to have a far more high esteem of the satisfying the
conscience of the weak Christian, and to have a greater care to settle the
divisions which are in the Church, then to trouble our selves with the evil
constructions of the wicked.

Fo^rthly, there is nothing made known herein either to Papists or Ma^ignants
that they can take the least advantage, but what they already know they know
too well by our rents and schisms in the Church that we are divided, whether
any man should endeavor the unity thereof yea or no; surely w^e should not be
ashamed to make peace between neighbors, though some others do thereby take
notice of the difference between them, much less ought we to neglect to
endeavor the quiet of the Church and people of God, although even hereby some
men take notice of the distractions in it.

Fifthly, the best way to convince the adversaries of truth is to side with
them so far as they speak the truth, neither ought we to be ashamed to
speak that which is a truth, although the prophanest wretch in the world
should speak the same, for by the same reason, because the Devil acknowledged
Christ to be the Son of God the Disciples should have denied him.

Sixthly, men of profane and malignant spirits never trouble themselves much
with books of Divinity, especially in these times wherein nothing sells but
State matters; I dare presume where there is one malignant buys this Book to
abuse it, twenty honest men will buy it for their benefit.

Seventhly, the neglect of treating upon this and the like subject is a maine
cause of the divisions of the Church, there not being one of a hundred that
spend their time in public or private, by word or writing this way, and if the
consciences of Gods people be satisfied in this point, there will consequently
be more peace in the Church, and less ground of scandal; the cause being
removed the effect must needs cease.

Eighthly, if every man should be silent this way, it would be a tacit
justification of the preposterous proceedings of them that make such
disturbances in public assemblies, which no honest man dare do.

Ninthly, whatsoever truth of Gods Word there is, that concerns his glory, and
his Churches welfare, to be declared, this ought not to be smothered for some
seeming disadvantage.

10. If we must write nor speak no truths that wicked men will carpe at, and
draw false conclusions from, truly many precious truths would lie in
obscurity, as that of free Grace, of Predestination, and many other of like
concernment; nay we see by experience in general how the standing so much for
a reformation has caused many malignants to spend their wits, wealth, time and
strength to oppose it.

11. There is not a word of encouragement in all the Book to countenance
wicked men in their sinful approaching the Lords Table, although Gods people
may warrantably participate notwithstanding.

12. If Christians would rest satisfied in this point, and wait upon God in
the use of the means of grace, till the Lord by a lawful power perfect the
work of reformation; this would be both a great forwarding to the work, and
the best way to stop the mouth of the adversaries of peace and truth.

13. So long as the divisions of the Church are continued, and especially if
countenanced by silence, it gives the enemy cause to blaspheme the name of God,
and speak evil of his ways, far more then such endeavors for peace as
this is or any way can do.

14. The worst they can say or see from hence is that the Church is divided,
this they say and see too apparent, the more need of a speedy reconciliation.

15. If books of this nature give advantage to Papists and malignants to cry
out upon the divisions of the Church, how much more those hundreds that
maintain a separation and so occasion division?

16. If this Book maintain malignant Tenets, so does the Author, and as far
as it does, and then it can be no scandal at all to the people of God, it will
be conceived the work of a malignant; but I see no cause if it have Jacobs
voice, why it should have Esaues garment put upon it; it may peradventure meet
with the like entertainment from some particulars, as the Sun and Moon does
in their course; there is a kind of bird that loves not the Sun, and a kind
of beast that will bark at the Moon, yet the Planets themselves of admirable
use to the whole Creation; even so some one or other may be offended hereat,
that is no true friend to light, truth or peace; but I am comforted in this,
what I have written is well bottomed upon God Word, intended for his glory, and
the peace of his Church. And I am confident of this, that while wicked men like
Serpents suck poison out of the purest grape, Gods people like the Be will
draw bony out of this Bramble Berry, for whose sakes I have published it, the
Lord make it successful.

FINIS.

