ENGLAND DESCRIBED: Or the several COUNTIES and SHIRES thereof briefly handled.

Some things also premised, to set forth the Glory of this NATION.

By Edward Leigh Esquire, Mr of Arts of Magdalen-Hall in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Henry Marsh at the Sign of the Princes-Arms in
Chancery Lane, near Fleetstreet, 1659.

TO THE Right Worshipful, AND HIS Honored Friend Sr ROBERT PIE.
SIR,
IT is blamed in our Englishmen, that they are apt too much to admire Foreigne
Countries and Commodities; and exotic Fashions also, because they are either
ignorant of, or do not sufficiently prize the Excellencies of their own native
Soil; and herein the old Proverb of the English is verified, They never know
when they are well. We have little cause (I think) to envy any other
Country, if we rightly understand our own happy condition. I have in my
Prolegomena written encomiastically of this Nation; and in the Book have spoken
snccinctly of each County. Were the Subject well handled, I suppose it would be
a pleasing Argument to you who have seen a great part of England. However you
will (I hope) excuse my boldness in prefixing your Name to this work, since I
was willing to testify herein, how much I am beholding to you for your many
great Civilities and Courtesies to me and mine. I have heard you often say,
Though you had a great Office many years, and was Executor also to three
eminent Persons of the Nobility, yet you scarce ever had any complaint against
you for Miscarriages in your Place, or a Suit at Law with any (one excepted) in
your whole life. These, with a plentiful Estate, and a healthful Constitution
of Body are mercies, and lay a stronger Obligation upon you, to be careful to
please and honor that God, who has been so propitious to you.

Your exciting of others, and your own munificence also to so good a Work, as
to the edifying of a specious Chapel, for the solemn worship of God, and
settling also a competent Maintenance for a Minister, is laudable. Your prudent
avoiding Suretiship (though you were solicited by two Royal Persons to be bound
for them) is consonant to Scripture-Rules. But (Sir) in your declining Age, it
will be your wisdom now, and comfort hereafter, to lay up your treasures in
Heaven, to mortify all inordinate affections, and to secure your interest in
Christ. Nusquam tuta foelicitas ubi periclitatur aeternitas. A man is never
safe, till his everlasting condition be well provided for. I shall not enlarge
herein, but subscribe my self,

Sir, Your obliged and thankful Edward Leigh.

TO THE CANDID READER.
Reader,
I Did intend the publishing of this first Book of the Kingdom, or Several
Counties of England, together with another of The Kings of England. But the
Bookseller desired to put forth this first alone.

I have made much use of Camden, and if I could have added to his Chorography,
some new and memorable things of each County, which he had not observed, I
should have thought it might have been useful for a native Englishman and
Foraigner. Perhaps I have not been able to make additions to him in every
County; but I hope I have inserted some special things in the whole over and
above what he (traveling over most part of the Land for that purpose) has
published. I have perused Andre du Chesne his Histoire generale de Angleterre
d'Escosse, and d' Irlande, Councellor and Geographer to the King of France; and
also Draytons Polyolbion, with M. Seldens Illustrations. Those that have
written of any Counties or Cities of England, as Burton of Leicestershire,
Dugdale of Warwickshire, King of Cheshire, Nordens Speculum Britanniae, his
brief Description of Middlesex and Harfordshire, Lambert and another of Kent;
Crews Surveigh of Cornwall; Stows Description of London; Somners of Canterbury,
and Nevils of Norwich; we having only as yet the Description of those three
Cities. I made use also of Lelands Itinerary, a Manuscript written to Henry the
Eighth, and his Comment in Cygneam Cantionem; M. Burtons Notes on Antoninus his
Itinerary. I have confined my self to England, not meddling with Wales, Ireland
or Scotland. I have in the Prolegomena related some things which may make the
Nation illustrious, and also acquaint Strangers with the Politia or Government
thereof. I have lately received from M. Dugard a learned Minister in
Warwickshire, and Rector of Barford, a memorable observation concerning the
Family of the Fairfaxes there, the like whereto is scarce to be found in any
sacred or profane Writer, which coming too late to insert in Warwickshire, I
thought good to mention here.

The matchless Family of the Fairfaxes in Barford, two miles from Warwick,
wherein there are four Generations, and three of them double, viz.

1. Samuel Fairfax, a child of almost twelve years of age. 2. John and
Elizabeth: his Father and Mother. 3. John and Eleonor: his Grandfather and
Grandmother. 4. Richard and Alice: his great Grandfather and great Grandmother.
Not one of these three pairs has been twice married: and every pair of them
is an honor to marriage. They all for diverse years most lovingly dwelt
together in one house, and ate together at one Table. At last they are divided
in habitations, but not in affections. The youngest pair with their children
live at Wibtaft, in the furthest part of the County, nigh unto High-crosse: the
other two pair in Barford. The great Grandfather is above fourscore years of
age; a very proper and lusty man; an honest and loving neighbor; and one that
has born the Office of High-Constable. The most remarkable of these
particulars have been put into this Latin Epigramme by the present Rector of
Barford.

Mirabilis Fairfaxiorum Familia, quae est Barfordiae, secundo lapide a
Polemopoli, sive Warwico.
Quartus in aetheream Fairfaxius editur October. 18th, 1647.
auram,
Patris, Avi, Proavi, gaudia magna sui.
Hos tegit una domus cum terna uxore maritos,
Unaque alit lautis mensa benigna cibis.
Non magis unanimes norunt haec secula mentes,
Est bis corporibus men's velut una tribus.
Totque ex conjugibus bis vincla jugalia nemo
Nexuit: and nemo nexa soluta cupit.
More columbarum laetatur conjuge conjux.
Deseruit rugas nec juvenilis amor.
Hisce tribus Paribus Barfordia jure superbit.
Nampar his Paribus quis locus alter habet?
Tho. Dugard. Art. Mag. Rector Barf.
The same in English.
Fairfax the Fourth is born October. 18.
, a gallant Boy:
Fathers, Grandfathers, great Grandfathers great joy.
Under one roof these dwell with their three Wives,
And at one Table eat what Heaven gives.
Our times a sweeter Harmony have not known.
They are six Persons, yet their hearts but one.
And of these six, as none has hitherto
Known Marriage twice, so none desires to do.
Mate is to mate what dearest Dove to Dove.
Even grandest wrinkles are top-full of love.
In these three Pairs Barford may justly glory.
What other place can parallel this Story?
Th. Dugard.
Some parts of this Nation subsist upon Mines and Cole; others upon
Manefacture: Some upon Corn; others upon the Profits of Cattle: London and the
Seaports upon Exportation and Importation. M. Wrens Monarchy asserted, chap. 8.

Wileboord an Englishman was the first Bishop of Utrect, he is called the
Apostle of Zeland, for having there preached and planted the Christian Faith, as
also in the Provinces next adjoining. Verstegans Etymologies of our Saxon
Proper Names.

Willebrodus Britannus fuit, Frisiosque primus Christianae Religionis initiis
imbuit. Bertius in Tab. Geog. Contract.

I shall detain thee no longer, but subscribe my self

Thy hearty Well-willer Edward Leigh.

PROLEGOMENA.
EUrope the least of the four parts of the World (yet the most populous and
eminent for Arts and Arms) is divided into Vide Bertii Europae Universalis
Descript.
several Nations and Countries, Albion or Great Britain, Spain, France,
Germany, Rhetia, Vindelicia, Italy, Sardinia, Sicily, Sarmatia, Dacia, Maesia
and Greece.

Britain or Britanny, which also is Britannia, quae Ptol. Albion, insula maxima
Europae in oceano Galliae obversa. Ferrarii Lexicon. Geographicum. Vide Twini
Comment. derebus. Albioniois, Britannicis. L. 1. p. 9, 10, 11, 12. Munsteri
Cosmog. univers. l. 2. Camd. Britan. page 1. Britanniam omnium insularum quas
continet terrarum orbis: nobilissimam esse, and multis retro, seculis
extitisse, cunctorum jam poene literis ac linguis percrebuit, sive naturam
loci, situsve speciem atque pulchritudinem spectes, sive gentis rerumque a
gente gestarum magnitudinem. Nevvilli Norvicus.
Albion, the most famous Island, without comparison, of the whole world. It is
seated as well for air as soil, in a right fruitful, and most mild place.
Britain was generally called the great Island. See Burtons Annotat. on Clements
first Epist. to the Corinth.
The air so kind and temperate, that not only the Summers be not excessive
hot, by reason of continual gentle winds that abate their heat (which as they
refresh the fruits of the earth, so they yield a most wholesome and pleasing
contentment both to man and beast:) but the Winters also are passing mild: for
therein falling often with still showers (to say nothing of the Air it self,
somewhat thick and gross) dissolveth the rigor of the cold so; and withal
the Sea which compasses it, with moderate warmth, does comfort the Land in
such wise, as that the cold with us is much more remiss than in some parts of
France and Italy.

It is now called England, in Latin Anglia, in French Angle-terre.

Of the several Etymologies of which word, see Histoire d' Angle-terre Par Du
Chesne, l. 6. p. 195. And Munsters Universal Gosmography, l. 2. Britanniam
lasciviae
Culparier just negas?
Tamen fateri cogeris
Quod insula est, non continens.
Hugenii Epig. l. 6.

Great Britain (consisting of England and Scotland) contains one thousand eight
hundred thirty six miles in compass.

This Island (as Camden, Twine, Verstegan imagine) was broken off from the
Continent of France. See Twine, De Rebus Britannicis.

The Bodies of the Inhabitants are of Omnium Europae populorum bellicosissimi
and strenuissimi sunt Britanni. Bodin in Meth. Hist. c. 5. de recto Histor.
judicio.
an excellent Constitution, their Demeanor right courteous, their Natures
gentle, and their Courage most hardy and valiant, whose Manhood by exploits
achieved both at home and abroad, is famously renowned through the whole world.

King Edward the third, and his Quam existimatis fuisse Galliae faciem,
auditores cum Edvardus III. Angliae Rex, Philippum Valesium Galliarum Regem ad
Cressiacum vicit? Ubi interempti Gallorum circiter XXX. millia and inventi
inter Cadavera Joannes Rex Bohemiae, december Principes, octoginta Barons, mill
ducenti Equites, flos totius Nobilitatis Galliae; Philippus autem vix fuga
evasit, qui noctu ad urbem Brayum deveniens, Praefecto ad portas quaeren i; Qui
va la? Miserabili voce respondit: La Fortune de France. Achillis Consultatio de
principatu inter provincias Europae. Vide Humfredi. Lhyd. Fragmentum
Commentarioli Britannicae Descriptionis prop. fin. Terra Gallica frequens suit
tam pretium quam scena fortitudinis Anglicanae, praeliaque de Cressey,
Poictiers, Agincourt aeterna manent stupendae nostratium victoriae monimenta.
Praefat. ad expeditionem in Ream Insulam. Vide plura ibid.
Son did bear their victorious Arms thoroughout all France. King Henry the
Sixth was crowned King of France at Paris.

Our famous Kings Henry the Fifth, Edw. 3. and K. Henry the Eight, were the
most worthiest Warriers that our Nation ever had. Sir Roger Williams his brief
Discourse of War, page 37. See page 8, 9. and 58. Phil. de Commines Hist. l.
6. c. 2, 3.

Sir Francis, and Sir Horatio Vere, Sir Thomas Morgan, Sir John Vide Spelman.
Aspilogiam. p. 95.
Norris, by their singular knowledge in military affairs, and exploits most
valiantly and fortunately achieved in the Low Countries, have added exceeding
much honor and glory to themselves. See Dr. Dillinghams Veres Commentaries.

Sir Roger Williams also was a famous Commander. His name and fame was
dreadful to the French people absent, insomuch that women in France to fear
their young children, would cry, The Talbot comes, the Talbot comes. Grafton
in Henry the sixth. See Speed there.


John Lord Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury marched four and twenty years together
with victorious arms over a Johannes Talbotus Comes Salopiensis vir
clarissimus, fortissimusque, cujus virtute populi Anglicani nomen maxim Gallis
formidolcsum extiterat. Polyd. Verg. Ang. Hist. l. 23.
great part of France. Camden calls him Englands Achilles. See Froissarts Chron.
c. 130. of the victory of the English at the great battle of Cressy.

The Duke of Bedford was Regent of France, and being slain in a battle on Land
before Veronil, was buried in Roan, and together with him all the English men's
good fortune in France. Whose Monument, when Charles the Eighth King of France
came to see, and a Nobleman standing by, advised him to raze it: Nay, answered
he, let him rest in peace now being dead, of whom in war, whiles he lived all
France had dread.

Marshal Biron said, He liked not the English March (being beaten by the Sir
Clement Edmunds in his observations, on Caesar's Commentaries, says, We got
most of our victories from the French by our good Archers. See Sir Thomas
Elyoth Governor, page 83. And Aschams Toxophilus, l. 1. p. 29. Bello sunt
merepidi optimi sagittarii. Bertius Descript. Angl.
Drum) it was so slow: Sir Roger Williams answered him, That yet it had gone
through all France. See the Discourse of the National Excellencies of England,
Part 1. Chap. 1. Of the Wars of the Britains, and their Courage. Chap. 3. Of
the Danish Invasion. Chap. 4. Of the Norman Conquest. Chap. 5. Of Wars with
Spain. Chap. 6. Of Wars with France. Chap. 7. Of Wars with the seventeen
Provinces. Chap. 8, 9. Of Wars with Scotland. Part 2. Chap. 2. Of the English
Courage.

Our wooden Walls, the Ships, are a great safety to this Nation. The English
Navy is the strongest in the world. What service did our Ships do us in 88?

Sir Francis Drake, and after him Thomas Candish Esquire, within the space of
three years and three months, traveled about the Globe of the whole Earth.

This Isle has prescribed in all ages for the Dominion See Dees British
Monarchy.
of the Seas that incompasse it. Vide Seldeni Mare clausum. lib. 2. c. 12, 13,
14, 15, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 30, 31, 32.

Sir Richard Grenvile in a Ship of He is called by the Spaniards yet Don
Richard of the Greenfield, and they fright their children with him. Vide Camd.
Annal. rerum Anglic. part. 4. p. 40.
Queen Elizabeth's, fought against a great Navy of Spaniards. This single vessel
was fought with in turns by fifteen other great Ships, whereof the great St.
Philip of 1500 Tuns, Prince of the twelve Sea-Apostles was one: It sunk two of
their best Ships, and killed a thousand men. It was sunk at last, having first
to the full answered its name.

Without vanity our Nation may Habingtons History of Edw. the 4th. p. 134. See
more there. Fuere viri semper in insula eruditissimi, qui tanquam doctrinarum
riv^li ab illo font decurrentes, non modo Angliam, sed Galliam quoque
mellifluo disciplinarum nectare irrigarunt. Polyd. ver. hist. Arg. p. 15. Vide
l. 4.
assume to it self the praise, considering the narrow limits of the Island, to
have produced as many Scholars, admirable in all degrees of knowledge, as any
Country on this side the Alps. Beda, Bradwardine, Scotus, Wicliffe, Ockam,
Baconthorp, Joannes de sacro Bosco, Cuthbert Tunstall, Pool, Colet, Lilie,
Linacer, Pacaeus, Fisher, More, Stapleton, Leland, Camden, Juel, Whitaker,
Rainolds.

Sir Philip Sidney, a man of excellent parts, learned and valiant.

Our English men's pronunciation of the Latin tongue is condemned much by
Outlandishmen.

A Herald brought a Letter of Defiance from the King of England in very good
language, and so excellently well penned, that I am persuaded it was never of
English man's doing. Phil. de Comin. in his History, lib. 4. chapter 5.

They write good Latin, though Car has written an Oration, De Scriptorum
Britannicorum paucitate.

In Edward the Thirds time there was a Letter directed to the Pope in The
Letter is in Walsingham.
justification of making it Treason, to bring in Papal provisions, which was so
excellently penned, as did not only move admiration, but astonishment. Cito
post Rex direxit Papae illam famosam Epistolam pro liberate Ecclesiae
contuenda, quam praesentibus duximus inserendam. Walsing. Hist. Angl. Edw. 3.
p. 161.

There are sundry opinions, whence this word Britain had the original
derivation. Camden dislikes that from Camd. Brit. p. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Brutus.

Some say, It is most probably derived Caesar qui primus Romanorum hujus
insulae nomen
from Brit, which in the ancient British signifies painted, and the word Tain,
signifying a Nation; the Britains litteris commendavit, eam Britanniam
appellavit, quem omnes fere, Latini Scriptores secuti, idem nomen haud
mutavere. Commentarioli. Britan. Descrip. Fragmentum per Llhyd. Ille Brutus
sive Brito (sic enim nominandus erat, ut ex ejus nomine, Britanniae aliquo
pacto dicta videretur) fertur a principio insulae potitus imperio, ac
Britannorum gentis author fuisse, nec diu deinde visus in terris. Polyd. Verg.
Angl. Hist. lib. 1. Fama perrebuit, an verax nescio, (nec virorum magnorum,
Nennii, Galfridi Monumethensis, Pontici Virunnii, Alexandri Nechamii, etc. nec
non Joh. Lelandi horum omnium acerrimi defensoris, patrocinio indiget) Brutum
Albanium (quem volunt Ascanii Trojani Albae Italorum conditoris nepotem)
Britanniam aut Albionem cum suis occupasse; hinc antiquitus (ut aiunt) a Bruto
nomen obtinuit. Wheloci notae in Bed. Hist. Eccles. Gentis. Angl. l. 1. Vide
Seldeni Praefat. ad Analecta Anglo-Britan. Anglia Oceani Polygonia insula, quam
Britanniam vocant a Bruto Trojanorum duce, qui profugus in hanc terram venit,
vidit, vicit. Adolphi a Daus vita Elizabethae.
used to discolor and paint their bodies, that they might seem more terrible
in the eyes of their enemies.

Camden in his Britannia, p. 26, 27. seems rather to incline to this Etymology.

Brith signifies blew-coloured, sc. with woad, hence Britons.

The Greeks gave to this Isle the name Camd. Brit. p. 23, 24. Albion ab
albedine rupium ab austro albarum, dici quidam volunt, quale quid Albion in
summitate montis Alpium apud Strabonem prae se fert. Wheloci notae in Bedae
Hist. Eccles. Gentis Anglorum, lib. 1. cap. 1. Vide Polyd. Verg. Angl. Hist.
lib. 1. Vide RR. Armach. Primord. Eccles. Brit. page 721. and 733. Albion ab
Albione Nep^ uni filio ibidem regnante sic appella^ta. Circa annum mundi 2220.
Quod vero aliqui eam ab albis rupibus, sic vocatam affirmant, ridiculum est:
mirorque viros alias perspicaces, in tanta luce connivisse, omniumque locorum
and hominum nomina Etymologiis Latinis obsuscare: Cum omnibus constat Latinos
minimam Italiae partem tunc temporis possedisse. Commentarioli Britannicae
Descript. Fragmenta, Auctore Humfredo Lhyd.
Albion for difference sake. Seeing they have in fabulous wise named Italy
Hesperia of Hesperus the son of Atlas; France Gallatia of a son of
Polyphemus: I cannot otherwise believe, but in the same vein also of fabling,
they called this Island Albion, of Albion Neptunes son: which thing Perottus
and Lilius Giraldus have put down in writing. Unless a man would derive it
rather of (...), which as Festus witnesses, in Greek signifies white, whence
the Alps also have their appellation: for it is environed with white Rocks.

England is called Albion ab albis rupibus, whereby it is specially
conspicuous: So was an Isle in the Indian-Sea called Leucas white. Seld. on
Drayt. Polyolb. Song first.

This Etymology is disliked by Lhoyd, but defended by Sir John Price, in his
Defense of the British History.

England bears a great sway in the affairs of Europe.

Speed in his Chronicle says, The great affairs of Europe mainly depended Ita
illa quasi Heroina, and honoraria arbitra inter Hispanos, Gallos and ordines
sedit, ut illud patris usurpare potuerit. Cui Adhaereo praeest. Et verum sit
quod ille scripsit, Galliam and Hispaniam esse quasi lances in Europae libra,
and Angliam lingulam sive libripendem. Camd. Annal. rerum Anglic par. prim. p
271.
upon the Directions of Queen Elizabeth, who sitting at the Helm of the Ship,
arbitrated and guided their estates both in Peace and War. See more there to
this purpose in his 9th Book, chap. 24. p. 880.

The English have been very helpful to the Netherlands in their wars, and
atchievers of the greatest exploits amongst them.

Heinsius in his Oration made after the taking of the Busse says, Anglorum
sanguine stat haec respublica, This Commonwealth stands by the blood of the
English.

The first of all Provinces this Island of Britain, by common consent,
Britannorum inaccessa Romany loca Christo vero subdita. Tertul. advers. Jud.
cap. 7.
received the Christian Faith.

The glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ Gildas testis est, Britannos jam inde ab
initio orti Evangelii, Christianam recepisse religionem. Polyd. Verg. Hist.
Angl. l. 2. Vide R R. Armach. in Primord. Antiquitat. Britan. p. 3. and 27. and
740. and eruditissimum D. Hen. Spelm. in apparatu. Council. Brit. page 12. and
Godwinum De prima Britanniae nostrae ad fidem Christianam conversione.
(says Gildas Albanius, surnamed the Wise, the most ancient of our British
Historians) which first appeared to the world in the later time of Tiberius
Caesar, did even then spread his bright beams upon this frozen Island of
Britain. And it is generally received for a truth, that Joseph of Arimathea
laid the foundation of our faith at Glastenbury.

He that has written of Honor Military and Civil, lib. 4. cap. 19. says, The
chief place of Honor and Precedence in Europe appertains to the Kings of
England. And one of the reasons he gives is, Because the King and people of
England received the Gospel and Christian Faith before France or Spain.

There have been more Kings and Princes of the Blood Royal, Confessors and
Martyrs in England, than in any one Province in Europe. Fasciculus temporis.

See Gainsfords Glory of England, Chap. 21. and 27. concerning our famous Kings
here, and of famous Kings and Princes that came hither.

Claudia Rufina of the British Nation is celebrated by the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy
4. 21.
and also by Martial.

It is apparent that this Island had the first Christian King in the world, and
clearly in Europe. If priority of time Vide Spelman. Epist. Ded. ad Lib. de
Council. Seldens Illust. of Drayt. Polyolb. Song 8.
swayed it, and not custom (derived from a communicable attribute given by the
Popes) that name of Most Christian should better fit our Sovereigns than the
French.

Vide Polyd. Verg. Angl. Hist. l. 2. p. 41.

We had also the first Christian Emperor M. Seldom says there also, that
Constantine the Great was born here.
Constantine.

The first King that ever renounced the Popes Supremacy was King Henry the
Eighth.

The first King that ever wrote against the Pope, to prove him to be the
Antichrist, was King James.

England has been an Asylum for the Regina Elizabetha Protestantibus in Gallia
subvenit, Gallosque in Angliam confugientes nullo non humanitatis genere
prosequuta est, ut etiam and Belgas, quorum magna multitudo, Albano nihil nisi
Caedem and sanguinem spirante, in Angliam ut in asylum se receperant. Qui
Reginae permissu Norwici, Colcestriae, Sandwici, Maidstonae, and Hamptonae
seeds posuerant magno sane Angliae emolumento. Artem enim conficiendi
levidensas quas Bays and Says vocant, and id genus alia linea and lanea varia
textura primi in Angliam intulerunt. Camd. Annal. rerum Anglic. pars prima. p.
148. Vide Humfredum de nobil. l. 2. p. 252, 253, 254.
distressed Protestants of other Countries.

The Arms of England are three Leones tres aureos gradientesque, oribus
obversis, in scuto puniceo gestabant Reges Angliae; and eorum ad exemplum,
leones frequentissime nostris in clypeis videre est. Bissaei notae in Vptonum.
Polydorus Vergilius, Wilielmo, quem vocant, Conquestori, Tres Leones accomodat
jubatos aureos in clypeo rubeo. Sed and tribus etiam liliis (ut hodie solet)
commixtos: oblitus lilia ab Edwardo tertio, accedente jam Gallia, fuisse
annexa. Spelman. Aspilogia p. 44.
Lions passant gold in a field gewls. The Lion signifies fortitude and
generosity.

Three Flour-delices were since that time annexed thereto by Edward the Third,
by reason of his claim to the Crown of France.

The State is Monarchical.

A Kingdom of a perfect and happy Subsidium vocamus quod singulis capite censis
viritim pro ratione bonorum and agrorum imponitur. Verum nec haec, nec illa
taxatio (quindenarum and decimarum) unquam imponitur nisi ex ordinum consensu
in Parliamento. Camd. Annal. rerum Angl. par. 1. p. 80.
composition, wherein the King has his full Prerogative, the Nobles all due
respects, and the People, amongst other blessings, perfect in this, that they
are masters of their own purposes, and have a strong hand in the making of
their own Laws.

Of all Seniories in the world that I know, the Realm of England is the
Country where the Commonwealth is best governed, the People least oppressed,
and the fewest buildings and houses destroyed in Civil War, and the lot of
misfortune falls upon them that be authors of the War. Phil. de Commin.
Hist. l. 5. c. 18.

England is not subject to Imperial and Roman Laws, as other Kingdoms are,
but retains her ancient Laws.

It is governed by the Municipal or Common Law, a Law proper to the Nation.

The Commonalty of England is the best Commonalty in the world, and The
Englishmen are the best shot in the world, says Philip de Commines l. 1. c. 3.
p. 10.
the best Infantry, or Foot-souldiers, in whom the principal strength of an
Army consists.

It was once the saying, That the Sir Walt. Ral. Hist. See Gainsfords Englands
Glory, Chap. 24. ^ And Sir Francis Bacons History of Henry the Seventh, page 74.
Husbandry and Yeomandry of England, were the freest men in the world.

The Merchant of England surpasses all other Nations. See Gainsfords Glory of
England, chapter 26.

England abounds with all sorts of Cattle, except Asses, Mules, Camels and
Elephants. No Country yields such plenty of Beeves and Sheep.

A Country always most temperate. Britannia beatissima est insularum,
foecunda frugibus and arboribus, copiosa rivis and nemoribus, jucunda volucrum
and ferarum venatibus, ferax avium multi fluviis, and diversi generis terra;
mari, and fluviis alendis autem mira pecoribus, and jumentis, Fluviis abundat
valde piscosis, fontibus praeclara copiosis: Et quidem praecipue isicio
redundat and anguilla, nec non and halecia, and ostrea mire in ea redundant.
Huntingd. Hist. lib. 1. Ager non sterilis, sed mire foecundus est, excepto quod
merum non gignat, nec illic largo vinea pubescat foetu. Genus hominum non
solutum, non agreste, sed maxim cultum, qui per totum terrarum orbem, vel
literis, vel armis clari habentur. Non silebo luculentam corporis
pulchritudinem qua cunctas gentes and nationes vincunt. Adolphi a Dans vita
Elizabethae. Vide plura ibid.
The Air is thick, and so it is much subject to winds, clouds and rain: and
therefore in regard of the thickness of the Air, it is neither oppressed with
too much heat, or too much cold.

It is somewhat cloudy. Gundamore being here, bid the Spanish Post, when he
came to Spain commend him to the Sun, for he had not seen him a great while,
and in Spain he should be sure to find him.

The Ocean which beats upon the Coast of this Island abounds with all
manner of Fish.

There are no where in all the world, either more dainty Oisters, or greater
store.

The soil is fruitful in Mines of Lead, Iron, Tin and other Minerals;
especially A Spaniard boasting of his Countries Citrons, Orenges, Olives, and
such like, Sir Roger Williams answered him; yea, but (said he) in England, we
have dainty Veal, and well fed Capons to eat with this sauce, and many delicate
dishes worthy the name of sustenance indeed. Gainsfords Glory of England, lib.
2. chap. 13.
it abounds in Coal, a necessary and rich Commodity. It is replenished also
with all sorts of Grain, with Medows and Pastures, in which innumerable flocks
of Cattle feed.

Cardan exhorted Edward the Sixth, to plant Olives, and was fully persuaded
they would prosper in this Island.

Many places in Glocestershire, and elsewhere in England, are called Vineyards,
seeing it has afforded Wine; and surely it may seem to proceed rather from the
Inhabitants idleness, than any distemperature and indisposition of the Air,
that it yields none at this day. Camd. Brit. in Glocestershire.

In Hantshire he says, We had Vines in Britain, since Probus the Emperors
time, rather for shade than fruit.

The People are tall of stature, well-favoured, and fair countenanced, for the
most part gray-eyed. The women most fair and beautiful, do go very decently
and comely attired. We feed mostwhat on flesh. The drink which we use, and do
make of malt, is in deed very good, wholesome and pleasant.

There are more Parks, Forests, England a great mistress of Hunting.
Chases in England, than are found in all Christendom beside.

At this day there are 9285. Parishes in the Kingdom.

There is in no place of the world Ortel. Theat. Orbis terrarum.
greater and larger Dogs, nor better Hounds.

That the British Hounds and Mastives excel those of other Nations. See
Burtons Comment. on Antoninus Itin. page 219, 220.

Of all the Dogs in Europe ours Camd. Brit. in Hantshire. See him also in
Middlesex. Molossi nullibi terrarum praestantiores saevioresque sunt. Lucae de
Lind. Descript. Orbis.
bear the name. They were in most request, both for those baitings in the
Amphitheaters, and also in all other public huntings among the Romans.

Magnaque taurorum fracturi colla Britanni.

Claudian.

The Cock is a bold and stout Bird, and will fight valiantly with his
adversaries, and presently crows when he obtains victory. See Pliny, lib. 29.
cap. 4.

The Cocks also there give not over the fight till death parts them.

There are three principal Rivers in England, Thames in the South-East, Sunt
duo flumina caeteris clariora. Tamesis and Sabrina quasi duo brachia Britaniae,
per quae sibi suas and alienas effert and infert divitias. Huntingd. Hist. l.
1. Tamesis fluviorum omnium, qui Britanniam alluunt facile princeps. Lel.
praefat. in Cygn. Cant.
Severn in the South-West, Trent a Northern River.

Isis the principal and Prince of all Tame and Isis meet near Wallingford in
Barkshire, as Jordan is compounded of Jor and Dan.
the English Rivers, afterward entertaineth Tame, and by a compound word is
called Tamesis. His ita compositis, hinc Plantageneta regressus
Fluctibus aequoreis trajectis venit in arcem,
Urbis Londini, quam praeterlabitur amnis
Piscosus Thamesis, famae celeberrimus inter
Albionis rivos. --
Oclandi Anglorum Praelia.

The Thames swells with the access of the flowing tide of the Sea, about Lx
Italian miles by water from his mouth. Neither to my knowledge is Camd. Brit.
in Surrey. See more there.
there any other River in all Europe, that for so many miles within Land
feels the violence of the Ocean forcing and rushing in upon it, and so
driving back and withholding his waters, to the exceeding great commodity of
the Inhabitants bordering thereupon.

The second River of England is Sabrina Tacitus.
Severn, the head of it is the Hill Plinlimon in Montgomery-shire. He slowly
wandereth through this Shire, Shropshire, Worcestershire, and last of Camd.
Brit. in Montgomery-shire.
all Glocestershire, infusing a certain vital moisture into the soil every
where as he passes, until at length he mildely discharges himself into the
Severn-sea.

Trent by his due right challenges to himself the third place among all the
Rivers of England.

It runs out of two Fountains being near neighbors together in the North
part of Staffordshire among the Camd. Brit. in Staffordshire.
Moors. Certain unskilful, and idle headed, have dreamed, that it was so named
of Trente a French word, which signifies Thirty, and thereupon also have
feigned, that thirty Rivers run into it, and as many kinds of fishes live
therein.

We have more glorious Universities, Vigent duo Gymnasia alterum apud Oxonium
supra Thamesim, alterum Cantabrigiae non long ab Eliensis urbis paludibus In
haec ingenuorum adolescentium ingens numerus ad perdiscendas liberales
disciplinas concurrit: professoribus enim stipendia, alimentaque discipulis
antiqua Regum liberalitate, and optimorum Antistitum testamentis persolvuntur.
Paul. Jov. Britanniae Descriptio.
Colleges, Schools and Churches, than any Nation of the world.

There are two famous Universities See my Book of Religion and Learning.
in England, Oxford and Cambridge.

Five great Schools in England, Westminster, Eaton, Winchester, Paul's and
Merchant-Taylors School.

For Churches Doctor Heylin in his Geography shows which are the best.

It is famous beyond Seas also for Lana Anglica verum fuerit Belis Vellus
Aureum, cui Inclytus ille militaris Ordo Velleris Aurei, suam originem and
Burgundiae Duces magnas opes debuerunt. Camd. Annal. rerum Angl. pars. prima.
page 90.
its fine Wool, which is our golden Fleece.

The most considerable Ports on the East Side of the Island, are New Castle,
Hull, Lynne, Yarmouth, Harwich, Colchester, Sandwich; on the South Side lies
Plymouth; on the West, Chester.

Our Language consists partly of French, Danish, Saxon and Pictish Language.

The English-Saxon Tongue came in Anglicum Idioma non solum Belgico and
Alemannico, sed etiam Graeco and Hebraico in multis convenire inspicienti
sacile patebit. Seldeni Praefat. ad Analecta Anglo Brit. Saxonica lingua eo
olim in honor fuit (forte quod e Graeco plurima retulisset) ut doctissimo ipfi
Bedae Anglo-Saxoni inter lauds detur, fuisse doctum in Saxonica lingua. Spelm.
Praefat. ad lib. de Council. Vide plura ibid.
by the English-Saxons out of Germany, who valiantly and wisely performed here
all the three things, which imply a full conquest, viz. the alteration of
Laws, Language and Attire. Camd. Remains.

He says also there, that our Tongue is as copious, pithy and significative,
as any other Tongue in Europe.

There is in English as true strains of Eloquence, as strong and fine
expressions, as elaborate and solid pieces of fancy, as in any Language
whatsoever. Howels Instruct. for Travel. Sect. 12.

George (commonly called St. George) was the Patron, both of our Nation, and of
the most honorable Order of Knighthood in the world.

The first and last Heresy that ever troubled this Island was inbred by
Pelagius; but that was amongst the Britons, and was suppressed by the zeal of
the Saxons, who liked nothing of the British breed, and for whose sake it
suffered more happly then for the foulness of the opinion.

The sweating sickness called for Vide Polyd. Verg. Ang. Hist. l. 26. in
Henrico 7timo, page 568. Speeds Chron. in Edw. 6.
the propriety by which it seized on the English Nation chiefly, Sudor Anglicus.

It followed only Englishmen in foreign Countries, no other people infected
therewith.

There is a good course taken to secure this Land from foreign Invasion by
burning of Beacons.

Beacon of the old word Beacnian, Specula. Lamb. Perambul. of Kent.
that is, to show by a sign; for these many hundred years they have been in
great request, and much used among us: in some places by heaping up a deal of
wood, in others by barrels full of pitch fastened to the top of a Mast or Pole
in the highest places of the Country, at which by night some do always Camden
in Hantshire.
watch, that by burning the pitch the enemies coming may be showed to all the
neighbor inhabitants. The Scots in such danger command the fire-crosse to be
carried (an ancient custom in cases of importance) which was two firebrarnds
set in fashion of a Cross, and pitched upon the point of a spear. Sir Richard
Bakers Chron. in the Reign of King Edward the 6th.


This Realm was first divided into Circuits by King Henry the Second, who
appointed twice in the year, that two of the most grave and learned Judges of
the Land, should in each Circuit administer Justice in the chief or head Towns
of every Country. Of these Judges one sits on matters criminal, concerning
the life and death of malefactors; the other in actions personal, concerning
Title of Lands, Debts, or the like, between party and party.

The first Circuit heretofore did comprehend the Counties of Wilts, Somerset,
Devon and Southampton.

The second contained the Counties of Oxford, Berks, Gloucester, Munmouth,
Hereford, Worcester, Salop and Stafford.

The third had in it, the Counties of Surrey, Kent, Essex and Hartford.

The fourth consisted of the Shires of Buckingham, Bedford, Huntingdon,
Cambridge, Norfolk and Suffolk.

The fifth of the Shires, of Northampton, Rutland, Lincoln, Nottingham, Darby,
Leicester and Warwick.

The sixth and last, of the Shires of York, Durham, Northumberland, Cumberland,
Westmerland and Lancaster. So that in these six Circuits are numbered thirty
eight Shires. The two remaining are Middlesex and Cheshire: whereof the first
is exempted, because of its vicinity to London; and the second as being a
County Palatine, and having peculiar Judges and Counselors to it self.

The seven Kingdoms, Kent, South-Saxia, The Saxon Heptarchy. This Island most
flourished then, and in the Conquerours time it was far better inhabited then
at the present.
West-Saxie, East-Saxia, Northumberland, Mercia and East-Anglia, were governed
by so many several Kings.

Ethelbert was King of Kent. Sebert of East-Saxon. Erpenwald of the East-Angle.
Edwine of Northumberland. Kingill of West Saxon. Peada of Mercia. Ethelwolf of
the South-Saxon.
King Alfred ordained the Division of Shires, Hundre^, and So named, because
there were ten persons in each of them, whereof each was surety for others good
abearing. Lamberts Perambulat. of Kent.
Tithings, that every Englishman living legally, might be of a certain Hundred
or Tithing, out of which he was not to remove without security.

There are one and forty Shires in England, every Shire consisting of so many
Hundreds, and every Hundred of a number of Boroughs, Villages, or Tithings.

England was divided into seven Kingdoms by the Saxons, after into Totius
Angliae (de Aluredo Rege sic scribit Ingulphus Abbas Croulandensis) pagos and
Provincias in comitatus primus omnium commutavit. Comitatus in Centurias and in
decimas divisit, ut omnis indigena legalis in aliqua centuria and decima
existeret. Seldeni Janus Anglorum.
Provinces, Shires, or Shares, and Countries by Alured.

In these Shires there is appointed in troublesome times a Deputy under the
King, to see that the Commonwealth sustain no hurt.

Now every year, some one of the Gentlemen Inhabitants, is made Ruler of the
County wherein he dwells, whom we call in Latin Vicecomitem, as one would
say, the Deputy of the Comes, or Earl, and in our tongue Sheriff. It is his
duty to gather the common moneys of the Prince in his County, to collect and
bring into the Exchequer all fines imposed, even by distreining: to be
attendant upon the Judges, and to execute their commandments: to assemble and
empanel the twelve men, which in causes do enquire of the Fact, and make
relation thereof, and give in their Verdict to the Judges (for Judges with us
sit upon the right only of a cause, and not upon the fact) to see condemned
persons executed, and to examine and determine certain smaller actions.

OF THE Several Counties IN ENGLAND.
CAmden begins with Cornwall, and ends with Northumberland, I shall mention the
Counties of England, rather according to the Letters of the Alphabet.

Barkshire.
IT is called in Latin Berkeria. It is bounded upon the East with Surrey, upon
the North with the River of Thames from Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire upon
the West with Wiltshire, and upon the South with Hantshire.

Abbendune or Abington, so called Abbay Town.
of the Abbay, rather than of one Abben an Irish Eremite of the Abbey there. See
Monasticon Anglicanum, page 97.

Farendon famous now for a Mercate there kept.

Wadley. It is situate in a vale, though The vale of the white Horse, is a very
fruitful vale, and full of Gentry, it is both in Barkshire and Wiltshire.
not so fertile a soil, as some vales afford, yet a most commodious site,
wholesome, in a delicious air, a rich and pleasant seat.

Newbury, as much as the Newburgh, a fair Town, well seated in a Champion plain.

Reading of the British word Redin, A very ancient Town, and the best Town of
all Barkshire. Lelands Itinerary MS. to H. 8. Others say Abington.
which signifies Fearn (that growing here plentifully) excels all other
Towns of this Shire in fair streets, and goodly houses: for wealth also of the
Townsmen, and their name in making of Cloth. There is a very great Market.

Maidenhead, so named of the superstitious worshipping of I wot not what
British Maidens-Head. Camd. Brit.

Maidenhead or Maidenhith. Hith in the old Saxon did signify a Wharf, Haven,
or Landing-place. It had its name from the Wharf or Ferry, belonging at that
time to some neighboring Nunnery, or to some private Maidens dwelling
thereabout, who then received the profits of it. So Queen-Hith in London took
that appellation, because the profits of the Wharf were anciently accounted for
to the Queens of England. Dr. Heylins Animadvers. on the Church. Hist. of Brit.
lib. 1. p. 20. See Camden of Maiden-bradly in Wiltshire, fol. 243.

Windesore, A Royal Castle and House of the Kings, with the Town New Windsore*
Oppidum antiquum, nobile, magnificum, and situ denique tam amaenum, ut cum alio
quocunque jure optimo de palma contendat, quam and mihi vel in ipso castri
vertice quo sol splendidius sane nihil aspicit, decentissime gestare videtur.
Lel. Comment. in Cyg. Cant.
adjoining.

A Princes Seat cannot have a more pleasant situation. For from a high Hill
that rises with a gentle ascent, it enjoys a most delightful Prospect round
about.

With the pleasantness of this place, Princes were allured, very often to
retire themselves hither: and here was Edward the Third that most puissant King
borne: who here built new out of the ground a most strong Castle, in bigness
equal to a pretty City, fortified with Ditches and Bulwarks made of stone: and
forthwith after he had subdued the French and Scots, held at one and the self
same time John King of France, and David King of Scotland prisoners together in
the same.

In this place King Edward the Third, for to adorn Martial Prowess with
Honors, the Guerdon of Virtue, ordained the most Noble Order and Society See
Histoire d' Angle-terre. Par Du Chesne, l. 15. p. 670, 671, 672,
of Knights, whom he called Knights of the Garter: who wear on their left
Leg, somewhat under the knee a Blew Garter, with these golden Letters in
French, HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENS'E, Shame to him that evil thinks, and fasten
the same with a Buckle of Gold, as with the Band of a most inward Society, in
token of Concord and Unity, that there might be among them a certain
Consociation and Communion of Virtues.

Some attribute the original of it unto the Garter of the Queen, or rather Joan
Countess of Salisbury, a Lady of incomparable beauty, which fell from her as
she danced, and the King took up from the floor: for when a number of Nobles
and Gentlemen standing by laughed thereat, he made Camd. Britanin Barkshire.
answer again, That shortly it would come to pass, that Garter should be in
high honor and estimation. This is the most common, and most received report.

There is a Book entitled, Catechismus ordinis Equitum Perifcelidis, written
long since by Belvaleti, the Popes Nuncio here, and published in the year 1631.
by Bosquierus: wherein the Author makes an Allegory on the whole habit of the
Order, the Matter, Color, Fashion, Wearing, to the very Girdle. Dr. Heylins
Antidotum Lincolniense. Sect. 3. chapter 10.

The mightiest Princes in Christendom, An Order verily of all the Orders of
the Christian world (if it be to be compared with any other) most ancient and
most famous. Milles of Nobil. Polit. and Civil. p. 88. The Order of the Garter
exceeds in majesty, honor and fame, all chivalrous Orders in the world.
Seldom. Illustrat of Drayt. Polyolb. 16th Song. See more there, and Lel. Com.
in cygn. Cant. and Seld. Tit. of Hon. 4to, page 363.
reputed it amongst their greatest honor to be chosen and admitted into this
Company: and since, the first Institution thereof, there have been already
received, and enrolled into this Order, which consists of six and twenty
Knights, two and twenty Kings, or thereabout; besides our Kings of England, who
are named Sovereigns thereof: to speak nothing of Dukes, and others of most
high calling, very many.

The Founders of the Order, which in those days for stout courage and warlike
Prowess, had few or no Peers, and were in that regard advanced to that honor.

Edward the Third King of England. Edward his eldest Son, and Prince of
Wales. Henry Duke of Lancaster. Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick. Peter Copit
de la Bouche. Ralph Earl of Stafford. William de Montacute Earl of Sarisbury.
Roger Mortimer Earl of March. John Lord Lisle. Sir Bartholomew de Burgherst.
Sir John Beauchamp. John Lord Mohun of Dunstere. Sir Hugh Courtne. Sir Thomas
and Sir Otho Holland. Sir John Gray of Codnor. Sir Richard Fitz Simon. Sir
Miles Stapleton. Sir Thomas Wall. Sir Hugh Wrothesly. Sir Neel Lorenge. Sir
John Chandos. Vir pugnacissimus Joannes Chandos Periscelidis eques primarius,
Gallisque propter summam virtutem sub Ed. 3. bellator notissimus. Spelman.
Aspilogia.
Sir James Audley. Sir Henry Eswi^. Sir Sanchio Dampredicourt. Sir Walter
Pavely.
There is an honorable Family of Barons, surnamed of Windsore.

Eaton is hereto adjoined by a wooden Bridge over the Thames, and in it a
Splendour loci omnis in scholae publica, quam erexit Vindelisorae in alumnos,
Rex^longe pientior, quam fortunatior. Lelandi Comment. in Cygneam Cantionem.
fair College, and a famous School of good literature, founded and built by
King Henry the Sixth: wherein besides the Provost, eight Fellows, and the
singing Choristers, there are threescore Scholars, instructed in Grammar, and
in due time preferred to the University of Cambridge.

It contains twenty Hundreds, twelve Market Towns, and an hundred and forty
Parishes.

Bedfordshire.
BEdford is the principal Town, Bedfordia, the River Ouse runs through the Town
in the midst.
whereof the Shire also takes name.

A Town to be commended more for the pleasant situation, and antiquity thereof,
then for beauty or largeness, although a man may tell five Churches in it.

Hockley in the Hole, so named of the miry way in Winter time, very troublesome
to travelers: for the old Englishmen our Progenitors called deep mire Hock and
Hocks.

Dunstable. This Town seated in a A tale of vain credit is reported of
Dunstable, that it was built to bridle the outragiousnesse of a thief named
Dun, by King Henry the First: but certain it is, the place was formerly held by
the Romans. Speed. Yet Sir John Hayward in the Life of King Henry the First,
page 282. says, Dun was a famous thief amongst others, commander over the rest,
and of him the place was called Dunstable.
Chalky ground, well inhabited, and full of Innes, has four streets answering
to the four quarters of the world: in every one of which there is a large Pond
of standing water, for the public use of the Inhabitants.

It contains ten Market Towns, an hundred and sixteen Parishes.

Buckinghamshire.
IT brings forth Beech-trees plentitifully, There is a Country in Germany
bearing Beech-trees, named Buchonia, and with us a Town in Norfolk called
Buckenham, fruitful of Beech.
which the English Saxons in elder times called Bucken, whence Buckingham the
chief Town, and so the whole Shire took the name from Beech-trees.

The Country generally is of a rich plentiful soil, and passing full of
inhabitants, who chiefly employ themselves in grazing of Cattle, there is store
of Mutton and Beef.

Chiltern got that name according to the very nature of the soil of Chalkie
Marle, which the ancient Englishmen termed Cylt or Chilt.

Marlow a pretty Town of no mean credit, taking name of the said Chalk commonly
termed Marle: which being spread upon Corn-ground eaten out of heart with long
tillage does quicken the same again; so as that after one years rest it never
lies fallow, but yields again to the Husbandman his seed in plentiful
measure.

High Wickham or Wicombe rather from the turning of the River Thames, the
Germane Saxons term any winding reach of River and Sea, a Wick, and Comb a low
valle. This Town for largeness and fair building is equal to the greatest Town
in this Shire, and in that it has a Mayor for the Head Magistrate.

Colbroke-Pontes is parted into four Pontes in France and our Tunbrige, and
others are so called of Bridges.
channels, over which stand as many Bridges for the commodity of passengers,
whence it took its name.

Hamden gave name to an ancient and well spread Family in these parts. Some
say, one of that name was High Sheriff when William the Conqueror came into
England. There is part of* the House at great Hamden yet standing, which has
been built ever since the time of William the Conqueror.

They have ancient Records, one of which runs thus, Osbert Hamden Lord of Great
Hamden, one of the Commissioners for expulsion of the Danes.

Ailesbury a fair Market Town, compassed about with many most pleasant green
Medows and Pastures, of which the whole Vale is termed the Vale of Ailesbury.

Ascot the principal mansion house of the Dormers, from whence descended the
Duchess of Feria in Spain, and others of noble note.

Stony Stratford, named so of Stones, the Streetway, and a Fourd. The houses
are built of a certain rough stone, which is dug forth in great abundance at
Caversham hard by, and it stands upon the public street, commonly called
Watling-street, which was a military highway made by the Romans, and is
evidently to be seen yet beyond the Town with the Bank or Causey thereof, and
has a ford, but now hardly passable.

Newport-Painel so called of Sir Fulcod Painel the Lord thereof.

Here are an eleven Market Towns, and an hundred and eighty five Parishes.

Cambridgeshire.
CAmbridgeshire is famous for fish and fowl.

Cambridge a most famous Mart and Cambridge and Huntingtonshire have but one
Sheriff.
Storehouse of good Literature and Godliness, stands upon the River Came,
which turning into the East, divides it into two parts, and has a Bridge over
it, whence arose the name Cambridge.

Neither is there wanting any thing here, that a man may require in a most
flourishing University, were it not that the Air is somewhat unhealthfull,
arising as it does out of a fenny ground hard by.

There are sixteen Colleges in it.

Saint Ides is one of the famousest Markets of England, it serves several
Counties.

The Isle of Ely.

There are several Etymologies of it given by Camden.

Ely a Bishops See Seeds est and Cathedra Episcopalis. Ipsum solum fertilitate
omnes alias Angliae regiones adaequat, plerasque superat; pascua succulento
virent gramine, agri denso laetantur segete, prata aquis irrigua luxuriant. Sed
alia est ubertas nobilior, in qua mihitriumphare videtur, triginta
concionatores simul floruerunt, qui ex oppido solo natales suos derivarent;
quod de nulla alia civitate, Londino excepto, affirmari posse credo. Willeti
Epistola Dedicat. ad lib. 2. Samuelis. Vide plura ibid.
, the City has an unwholesome Air by reason of the fens round about, although
it be seated somewhat higher.

Hard under Cambridge Eastward near It begins on the 8th of September, and
lasts about a fortnight. It is called Sturbridge-Fair.
unto Sture, a little brook, is kept every year in the Month of September, the
greatest Fair of all England, whether you respect the multitude of buyers and
sellers resorting thither, or the store of Commodities there to be vented.

Near unto Cambridge on the South-East side, there appear aloft certain high
Hills called Gogmagog. On the top of them is a very large Fort, entrenched,
strengthened with a threefold Rampire.

Wisbich amongst Fennes and waters.

It has eight Market Towns, and an hundred and sixty three Parishes.

Cheshire.
IT is very pleasant and plenteous in Cheshire chief of men; Lancashire fair
women. King of Cheshire.
all things needful for man's use, and therefore had the name of the Vale Royal
of England from Edward the First.

The Grass and Fodder there is of that goodness and virtue, that Cheeses are
made there in great number, of a most pleasing and delicate taste, such as all
England again affords not the like; no, though the best dayriwomen otherwise,
and skilfullest in Chees-making be had from hence.

This Region has always bred more Gentry than the other Countries in England:
For you have not in all England again any one Province beside, that in old time
either brought more valorous Gentlemen into the field, or had more families in
it of Knights degree.

The Breretons, Manwarings and Venables are the most noble Families in that
County.

On the South Side it is hemmed in with Shropshire, on the East Side with
Staffordshire and Darbyshire, on the North with Lancashire, and on the West
with Denbigh and Flintshire.

The River Dee, called in Latin Deva, breeding very great plenty of Salmons,
arises out of two fountains in Wales, and thereof men think it took the name:
for Dwy in their tongue signifies two.

This River no sooner is entered into Cheshire, but it passes by Banchor, a
Yet Banchor is in Flintshire.
famous Monastery. It fostered and brought up (as some write) the most wicked
Arch-heretique Pelagius, who injuriously derogating from the grace of God,
troubled a long time the west Church with his pestiferous Doctrine. Prosper
Aquitanus in this Verse of his, terms him the British Adder, Pestifero vomuit
coluber sermon Britannus.
A British Snake, with venomous tongue,
Has vomited his poison strong.


Chester It is chiefly one street, of very mean building. Lel. Itin.
or West-Chester, of the West situation. Cestria de castris nomen quasi castria
sumpsit.


This City built in form of a quadrant, Cestria Episcopalis magnifica, and
celeberrima Angliae urbs, amplitudine, superbo aedificiorum nitore, and
cultissimorum hortorum elegantia commendata, duo passuum millia, in circuitu
colligit. Ecclesias Parochiales novem, and Cathedralem elegantem exhibet
praeter loca alia sacra, ut hospitalia, and nosocomia religioni nuncupata.
Georgius Bruin. Theat. Vrbium praecipuarum totius mundi.
four square, is enclosed with a wall that takes up more then two miles in
compass, and has eleven Parishes.

Near unto the River stands the Castle upon a rocky Hill, built by the Earls:
where the Courts Palatine, and the Assizes, as they call them, are kept twice a
year.

The Houses are very fair built, and along the chief streets are Galleries or
Walking-places, they call them Rows, having shops on both sides, through which
a man may walk dry from one end to another.

It is called the County Palatine of Chester, because the Earls thereof had
Royalties and Princely privileges belonging to them, and all the Inhabitants
owed Allegiance and Fealty to them as they did to the King.

One Hugh Wolf was made Earl of Chester by William the First, and the County
given him in Fee, Tenendum sibi and Haeredibus it a vere ad Gladium sicut ipse
Rex tenebat Angliam ad Coronam. And as the King, so he for his Heirs had their
Barons, by that name specially known.

King Edgar in magnificent manner triumphed over the British Princes. For
sitting himself in a Barge at the fore-deck, Kennadie King of the Scots,
Malcoline King of Cumberland, Macon King of Mann, and of the Islands, with all
the Princes of Wales, brought to do homage, and like Watermen working at the
Oar, rowed him along the River Dee, in a triumphant show, to his great glory,
and joy of the beholders.

King Henry the Seventh made it a County by it self incorporate.

Bunbury contractly so called, or Boniface-Bury, Boniface was the Patron Saint
there.

Beeston-Castle has a wall of a great circuit.

Here are very famous Salt Pits, or Salt-wiches, five or six miles distant
Salinae Anglice, The Wiches, videlicet Nantovicum, Nortovicum, and Dirtovicum,
in quibus locis sal purissimus conficitur. Leland. Cheshire excels for white
salt, not only all other Shires in England, but also all other Countries beyond
the Seas. King of Cheshire.
asunder, where brine or salt water is drawn out of pits, which they boil over
the fire, to make salt thereof. These were known unto the Romans, and from
hence was usually paid the Custom for salt, called Salarium.

Nantwich, Middle-wich, Nortwich:

Nantwich, which the River Wever first visits, is reputed the greatest and
fairest built Town of all this Shire after Chester. It is called the White-wich
or Salt-pit, because the whitest salt is there boiled.

North-wich is called the Black-salt pit.

Congleton a Market Town, famous for Gloves, Purses and Points of Leather.

Kinderton the old seat of the ancient race of the Venables, who ever since the
first coming in of the Normans have been of name and reputation here, and
commonly are called Barons of Kinderton.

Brereton has given Name to the A rebus of a Brier and a Tun.
worshipful, ancient and numerous Family of the Breretons Knights.

Before any Heir of this House of the Breretons dies, there are seen in a Pool
adjoining, bodies of trees swimming for certain days together, so Camden, but
some deny this.

Middle-wich, there are two Wels of salt water parted one from the other by a
small brook.

Maclesfield one of the fairest Towns of this County.

Lee from whence there is a Family bearing the same surname, that is not
Adlington the chief seat of that race of Leighs of Adlington, which is one of
the great names of Gentry in this County, whereof these have had a very ancient
continuance here from many Knights and Esquires, down to the present owner Sir
Vrian Leigh Knight. King of Cheshire.
only of gentle blood, and of especial note, but also far and fairly
propagated into a number of branches. Camd Britan.

High Leigh in Cheshire I think gave Names to all the renowned Races of that
Name in this County. Two distinct Descents of the same Name have their seats in
the same place, and there have continued in a long succession of their
Ancestors, Knights and Esquires of much worth: one is Thomas Leigh, the other
is Peter Leigh Esquires. King of Cheshire.

Lime in Cheshire a great Family of the Name of the Leighs, of whom there have
been many famous Knights, Sir Peter now the Possessor thereof. King of
Cheshire. Nor thou magnanimous Leigh must not be left In Richard the Seconds
reign, this was Ancestor of Sr Peter Leigh of Lime in Cheshire that now is.

In darkness, for thy rare fidelity;
To save thy faith, content to lose thy head:
That reverent head, of good men honored.
Daniels Second Book of Civil Wars.

Cholmundeston or Cholmeston anciently the Lands of the Leighs of Rushall in
Staffordshire. King of Cheshire, page 74.

It contains thirteen Market Towns, and sixty eight Parishes.

Cornwall.
IT extends in length to about seventy miles, the breadth in the largest place
passes not thirty. Carews Surveigh of Cornwall.

Speed computes the length sixty miles, and the breadth forty.

It is called by later Writers Cornubia Cornwallia, The farthest Shire of
England westwards, so called from Cornu Galliae, being cast out into the Sea,
with the shape of a Horn. Carews Surveigh of Cornwall. Vide Polyd. Verg. Camden
in the close of Cornwall commends that Carew, and acknowledges he received
much light from his Description of this Country.
in Latin, of all Britain it does bear most Westward, because it waxes
smaller and smaller in manner of an Horn, and runs forth into the Sea, with
little promontories, as if they were Horns on every side. Others would have it
so called of one Corin, and do call it Corinea. Camd. Brit.

There is dug here wonderful store of Tin, yielding exceeding much profit
and commodity, whereof are made household Pewter vessels, which are used
thorowout many parts of Europe in service of the Table, and for their
glittering brightness, compared with silver-plate.

Terra admodum sterilis, fructum magis ex cultorum industria, quam ex sua
bonitate praebet: sed fert uberius plumbum nigrum and album, hoc est, stannum,
in quo effodiendo maxim consistit vita incolarum. Polyd. Verg. Angl. Hist. l.
1.

The Kings of England, and Dukes of Cornwall, in their times have reserved to
themselves a praeemption of Tin (by the opinion of the learned in the Law) as
well in regard of the Propriety, as being chief Lords and Proprietaries; as of
their Royal Prerogative.

Not only Tin is here found, but therewith also Gold and Silver; yea and
Dyamonds shaped, and pointed angle-wise, smoothed also by Nature it self:
whereof some are as big as Wall-nuts, and inferior to the orient Dyamonds, in
blackness and hardness only.

So plentiful is this Country of grain, although not without great toil of
the Husbandman, that it has not only sufficient to maintain it self, but also
affords often times great store of Corn into Spain.

Besides a most rich Revenue and Commodity they have by those little Fishes
that they call Pilchards, which swarming, as one would say, in mighty great
skuls about the shores from July unto November, are there taken, garbaged,
falted, hanged in the smoke, laid up, pressed, and by infinite numbers carried
over into France, Spain, and Italy, unto which Countries they be very good
chaffer, and right welcome merchandise, and are there named Fumados.

Michael a Cornish Poet, and of Rhymers in his time the chies, has these
Verses of Cornwall. Non opus est ut opes numerem quibus est opulenta,
Et per quas, inopes sustentat non opulenta:
Piscibus and stanno nusquam tam fertilis ora.


The people three are civil, valiant, The Cornish are a race of men, stout of
stomach, mighty of body and limb, which live hardly in a barren country. Sr
Francis Bacon in his Hist. of H. 7th.
hardy, well pitched in stature, brawny and strong limbed: such as for wrestling
(to speak nothing of that manly exercise, and feat of hurling the Ball, which
they use) so far excel, that for slight and clean strength together, they
justly win the prize and praise from other Nations in that behalf.

Godolphin-Hill right famous for plentiful veins of Tin, but much more
renowned in regard of the Lords thereof, bearing the same name, who with their
virtues have equalled the ancientnesse of that House and Lineage. That name in
the Cornish Language came of a white Eagle, and this Family has anciently born
for their Arms in a Shield Gules, an Aegle displayed Argent, between three
Flower-deluces of the same Shield.

Falemouth-Haven is as noble as Brundusium it self in Italy: of exceeding great
capacity; for it is able to receive an hundred Ships, which may ride therein so
apart by themselves, that out of never an one of them the top of another Mast
can be seen: and most safe withal under the wind, by reason that it is
enclosed on every side with brims of high rising banks.

The Gullet on either hand, as well for the defense and safety of the place, as
for terror to enemies, is fortified with Block-houses: to wit, the Castle of
Maudit Eastward, and toward the West, the Fort Pendinaes, both built by King
Henry the Eighth.

Foy a Town most renowned in former ages, for Sea fights: which the very Arms
of the Town do witness, as being compounded of the Cinque Ports Arms.

Padstow a pretty Market Town, so called short for Petrockstow of one Petroch a
Britan, canonized a Saint by the people: who spent his days here in the
service of God.

Edward the Third erected Cornwall into a Dukedom, and invested Edward his
Son, a Prince most accomplished with Martial Prowess, in the year of Christ,
1336. Duke of Cornwall, by a Wreath on his Head, a Ring upon his Finger, and a
silver Verge.

Since which time, the King of Englands eldest Son is reputed Duke of
Cornwall by birth.

Launston the chief Town.

The Promontory named the Lands end, the most Western point of the Kingdom.

It contains nine Hundreds, two and twenty Market Towns, an hundred sixty and
one Parishes.

Cumberland.
IT took the name of the Inhabitauts, The places every where bear British names.
who were the true and natural Britans, and called themselves in their own
language Kumbri.

This Country although it be somewhat with the coldest, as lying far North,
and seems as rough by reason of Hills, yet for the variety thereof it smileth
upon the beholders, and gives contentment to as many as travel it.

Of all the Shires we have, it is accounted the best furnished with the Roman
Antiquities. Burtons Comment. on Antoninus his Itin. p. 13.

At Newlands there are copper or brass Mines. Black-lead is also found there.


Skiddaw-Hill is very high. Skiddaw, Lauvellin, and Casticand,
Are the highest hills in all England. Two other Hills in that Tract.



Solway Frith, so called of Solway a Town in Scotland standing upon it.

Under this Burgh, within the very Frith where the salt water ebbeth and
flows, the Englishmen and Scottish, by report of the Inhabitants, fought with
their Fleets at full Sea, and also with their Horsemen and Footmen at the ebb.

Hard by the Riveret Dacor, stands Dacre-Castle, of signal note, because it
has given surname to the honorable Family of the Barons Dacre.

Carlisle. This ancient City is fortified with strong walls of stone, In Latin
Carleolum.
with a Castle, and Citadel, as they term it.

Here begun Picts-wall, or simply by It flourished in the time of the Romans,
as diverse tokens of Antiquity now and then dug up there, and the famous
mention of it in those days do sufficiently prove.
way of excellency, The Wall, the limit of the Roman Province, continued
through this Country, and Northumberland, and ending in Walls-end.

Here are nine Market Towns, and fifty eight Parishes.

Darbyshire.
IT is a plentiful Country, there are many Minerals, and several kinds of
Stones.

Darby is the chief Town of all this Shire, a Town of good trade.

There be five Churches in it: Of The foundation of it was laid by young men
and maids, and part of it built by them, as appears in letters there on the
Steeple.
which the greatest named All-Hallows, dedicated to the memory of All Saints,
has a Tower-steeple, that for height, and singular fine Workmanship excels.

They had a famous Minister there one Chapel, which was brother to him that
was of Cambridge, and went afterward into Ireland. He did much good in Darby.
When King James came thither a witty Butcher in the Town said thus to him,
Jemmy, for a Chapel and a Steeple
We may compare with any people.


The Assizes are there kept for the whole Shire, and the best nappy Ale is
brewed there, in two places especially. It is the ancient and peculiar drink of
the Englishmen and Britains, and very wholesome.

Henry of Aurenches the Norman Arch-Poet to King Henry the Third, merrily
jested on it in these Verses. Nescio quid Stygiae monstrum conform paludi,
Cervisiam plerique vocant: nil spissius illa
Dum bibitur, nil clarius est dum mingitur, unde
Constat, quod multas faeces in ventre relinquit.
Of this strange drink, so like to Stygean lake,
(Most term it Ale) I wot not what to make:
Folk drink it thick, and piss it passing thin,
Much dregs therefore must needs remain within.


The wealth of this Town consists much of buying of Corn, and selling it
again to the mountains: for all the Inhabitants are a kind of Badgers.

Thomas Linaker the famous Scholar was born here, and so was Mr. Cotton the
famous Minister of Boston, and Dr. Wilmot near it.

Chesterfield a Market Town.

The Peak (which signifies to appear aloft) is severed from Staffordshire by
the Dove a most swift and clear River.

It is plentiful of Lead, also Stibium or Antimony. Millstones likewise are
here hewed out, as also Grinde-stones and Whet-stones, to give an edge unto
iron tools. In Anglia est Castrum quod dicitur Pech, in quod am monte situm; in
cujus montis latere est foramen apertum, de qu^ sicut de quad am fistula,
ventus non modicus saepe spirat; cujus Dominus dictus Gulielmus Penerelli, cum
in animalibus dives esset, and subulcus ejus unam gravid am suem in pascuis
amisisset, pro ipsa quaerenda dictum for amen intravit, quod tamen nec dum
aliquis perscrutatus fuerat. Cum ergo per opaca for aminis percurrisset, tandem
in locum lucidum devenit, scilicet in Camporum planitiem spatiosam: ad quam
ingressus; Messores colligentes maturas segetes reperit, inter quos suem
perditam, quae suculas ediderat, adinvenit Habito ergo verbo cum praeposito
terrae illius, scropham recepit, and dimissus ab illis, ipsam nove grege per
idem soramen ad domum Domini sui reduxit.


Under the old Castle, called the Castle in the Peak, there is a Cave or Hole
within the ground, called the Devils Arse, Devils Arse in Peak, that gapeth
Mira res ait Gervasius (qui apparet Anglicus fuisse, vel multum in Anglia
commoratus) de messibus subterraneis venerat, and in nostro hemispherio
hyemalia frigora videt. Pet. Berchor. Deduct. Moral. De Anglia.
with a wide mouth, and has in it many turnings and retiring rooms.

This Hole is reckoned one of the wonders of England.

There are several other wonders in the Peak.

Ashburn in the Peak.

There is a place called Elden-Hole, which lies two miles distant from
Castleton a Town in the high Peak, it is within the Peak Forest, it descends
directly down into the earth, it is about thirty yards long, and fifteen yards
broad at the top of it, but is much straighter when it comes forty yards
deep. You may see into it about sixty yards, being as far as the light which
comes in at the mouth of the Hole will give light to see: it is fearful to
look into, being a face of rock on each side. About sixty years since one Mr.
Henry Cavendish (eldest brother to Sir Charles Cavendish) who had spent all his
days in travel, had been at Jerusalem, and several other parts of the world,
and hearing of this place, came to it, and caused Engines to be made or to let
a man into the Hole, which being done, one George Bradley of the Peak Forest
was let down in a rope fourscore yards. And then another Engine was made to let
him go further, and from thence he was let down fourscore yards further, and at
the end thereof a third Engine was made whereby he was let down almost
fourscore yards further, at the top of the rope was fastened a Bell, which he
was to ring if he could go no further, or would return back; when he was let
down almost the third fourscore yards, he rung the Bell, and being drawn up, he
was much affrighted, remained speechless for a time, and was struck with
lamenesse; but after he recovered his speech, he declared, that as he descended
down, were bones of Deer, Sheep, and other Cattle, and also of men, and that he
was affrighted, but how, or in what manner he could not tell; he lived several
years, but never was in perfect memory, nor sound of his limbs.

Within the Town of Buxton, there is a Bath called Buxton-Well which cures
very many Diseases. There are two springs of water, the one within a hand
breadth of the other, the one is very hot, the other cold as ice.

There are eight Market Towns, six Hundreds, and an hundred and six Parishes in
this County.

Denshire, OR Devonshire.
A Country harborous on either In Latin Devonia. Devonia nobilium ingeniorum
ferax. Camd. The commodities of this shire Cloth, Kerfies, Lead, Silver,
Loadstone
side with commodious Havens, enriched with Tin-mines, especially Westward;
garnished with pleasant medows, sightly with great store of woods, and passing
well replenished with Towns and buildings.

There is not any place almost in all England, where the ground requires
greater charges. For in most parts thereof it grows in manner barren, if it
be not over-strewed and mingled with a certain sand from the Sea, which is of
great efficacy to procure fertility, by quickening, as it were, and giving life
unto the Glebe: and therefore in places far from the shore it is bought at a
dear rate.

On Teave a little River Teavistock, commonly Tavistoke fluorisheth, a Town in
times past famous for the Abbay there.

Of the River Plime, the Town adjoining to it, is called Plimmouth, sometimes
named Sutton.

Of late time it became of a poor fisher Village to be a great Town, and for
the number of Inhabitants grown to that pass (as now it is to be seen) that it
may be compared with a City.

Such is the commodiousnesse of the Haven, which without striking sail
admits into the bosom thereof the tallest Ships that be, and does harbor
them very safely, and is sufficiently fortified against hostility.

The whole Town is divided into four Wards, governed by a Mayor, ordained there
by King Henry the Sixth, and under him every Ward had in times past a Captain
set over it, each of them likewise had his inferior Officers.

The Circuit of this Town is not great, but much renowned it is among foreign
Nations: and not so much for the comodious Haven, as the valor of the
Inhabitants in Sea-services of all sorts. From hence was Sir Francis Drake that
famous Knight, and most skillful man at Sea. In the year 1577. putting to Sea
from hence, he entered into the Straits of Magellane, and in two years and ten
months, through many alternative varieties of Fortune, God being his guide, and
Valor his Confort, was the next after Magellaenus, that sailed round about the
world. Whereupon, one wrote thus unto him, Drake, peragrati novit quem terminus
orbis,
Quemque semel mundi vidit uterque polus.
Si taceant homines, facient te sidera notum,
Sol nescit commit is immemor esse sui.


Plimpton a Mercate Town, well frequented.

Dertmouth a Port Town, by reason At the mouth of the River Dert. The mouth is
the place where any River finds a passage out, either into the Sea, or into
another greater River; which in Latin is termed ostium, or a gate, Septem
ostia Nili, Seven mouths, by which it falls into the mediterranean. This gave
the name to many Cities and Towns in England, as Dartmouth, Plimmouth,
Portsmouth, Yarmouth, Weymouth, Axmouth, with many others. Carpenters Geog. l.
2. chapter 9.
of the commodious Haven, defended with two Castles much frequented by
Merchants, and furnished with good shipping.

Excester, so called from the River In Latin Exonia: Ptolomee calls it Isca.
Isc, and by the Saxons Ex. It is a Bishops See. It is situate upon a little
Hill, gently arising with an easy ascent to a pretty height, environed about
with Ditches, and very strong Walls, and contains in circuit a mile and an
half, having Suburbs running out a great way on each side. In it there are
fifteen Parish Churches, and in the very highest part thereof, near the
Eastgate, a Castle called Rugemont, at this day commended for nothing else,
but the antiquity and situation thereof: For it commands the whole City and
Territory about it, and has a very pleasant prospect into the Sea.

Joseph Iscanus was born here, and from hence took his surname, a Poet
Bartholomaeus, qui quod in lucem editus esset Exoniae (quae civitas antiquitus
Isca dicitur appellata) Iscanus est cognominatus, in Exoniensem Episcopum
consecratus fuit; in utraque Philosophia, tam humana scilicet, quam divina, vir
non mediocriter eruditus. Godw. de Praesul. Ang. Comment.
of a most excellent wit, whose writings were so well approved, as that they
had equal commendation with the Works of ancient Poets. For his Poem of the
Trojan War was divulged once or twice in Germany under the name of Cornelius
Nepos.

The Civil Government of this City is in the power of four and twenty persons:
out of whom there is from year to year a Mayor elected; who with four Bailiffs
rules here the State. This City has three Dukes.

Tawstoke a very ancient Town, Berstable upon the Taw navigable here for great
vessels.
for elegant building and frequency of people, held chief in all this Coast.

The Inhabitants (for the most part) are Merchants, who in France and Spain
trade and traffic much. Out of this Towns School, there issued two right
learned men, and most renowned See Carpenters Geog. l. 2. c. 15. the famous men
of Devonshire.
Divines, John Jewel Bishop of Salisbury, and Thomas Harding the public
Professor in Lovain, who most hotly contended, and wrote learnedly one against
the other, concerning the truth of Religion.

This Shire contains thirty three Hundreds, thirty seven Market Towns, three
hundred and ninety four Parishes.

Dorsetshire.
IT is bounded on the North-side with Somersetshire and Wiltshire, on the West
with Devonshire, and some part of Somersetshire, on the East with Hampshire: On
the South part, where it carries the greatest length, it lies all open to the
Sea.

Some say, there are within six miles compass round about Dorchester, three
hundred thousand Sheep.

It is a fruitful soil, and a great Ship Country.

Lime a little Town situate upon a deep Hill, so called of a small River of the
same name running hard by.

Shaftsbury a Town of note.

Baurtport, or more truly Birtport, is placed between two small Rivers which
there meet together. In respect of the soil yielding the best Hemp, and skill
of the people for making Ropes and Cables for Ships, it was provided by a
special Statute, to remain in force for a certain set time, that Ropes for the
Navy of England should be twisted no where else.

Portland an Island, so called of one Port a noble Saxon, who Anno 703.
infested and sore annoyed these Coasts.

Weymouth a little Town upon the mouth of Wey a small River; over against which
on the other side of the Bank stands Kings-Melcomb, divided from the other
only by the Haven between.

Pool in calm weather, when the waters are still, resembles a Pond, whence it
received its name. A Market Town exceeding rich and wealthy, beautified with
goodly Houses.

Frau or From, the greatest and most famous River of all this tract.

Dorchester is the head Town of the Durnovaria the River passage or Ferry.
whole Shire, and yet is neither great nor beautiful. It has but three Parish
Churches.

The Forest of White-Hart. When King Henry the Third came hither to hunt, and
had taken other Deer, he spared a most beautiful and goodly White Heart, which
afterward T. de la Lynde a Gentleman of this Country, with others in his
company took and killed. But the King put them to a grievous Fine of money for
it, and the very Lands which they held pay Camden.
even to this day every year by way of Amercement a piece of money into the
Exchequer, which is called White-Hart silver.

Shirburn Town or Castle is sited in Fons limpidus, or clarus. Pure fountain or
clear Well.
the hanging of an Hill, a pleasant and proper seat: It is the most populous
and best haunted Town of this Country, and gains exceeding much by clothing.

It contains thirty four Hundreds, eighteen Market Towns, and two hundred and
forty eight Parishes.

Durham or Duresme.
DUresme the chief Town, in Latin Bishopric of Durham. Durham Dunelmensis
civitatis and Ecclesiae indita est appellatio a Dun, quod montem, and Holm,
quod lingua Saxonica insulam amnicam significat, quia Coquedus fluvius per
Maeandrum in se quasi reductus, montem ab omni fere part circumluit (quasi
insulam molitus) in quo Dunelmum (Anglice Durham) situm est. Godwin. de
Praesul. Ang. Comment.
Dunelmum, a County Palatine, and a Bishops See.

It is seated on high, it is shaped in form of an Egg.

The River Teise or Teisis, commonly Tees, boundeth the South part of this
County.

It first beats upon Bernard-Castle, built and so named by Bernard Balliol
the great Grandfathers Father of John Balliol King of the Scots.

Hartle-Poole a good Town of Trade, and a safe Harbor for fishing.

By the Tine there is situate a memorable Town called Gateshead, or Goateshead:
The common people think it is far more ancient than New Castle itself.

This name was given unto this place by occasion of some Inn that had a
Goats-head for the Sign.

Jarrow, the native soil of venerable Bede.

Thomas Wolsey Cardinal, who in his high prosperity wanted nothing but
moderation, and Cuthbert Tunstall, who for singular knowledge in the best
Sciences, sincere holiness of life, a singular Ornament to his native
Country, were Bishops of Durham.

Essex.
A Country large in compass, It is famous for the Ministry, Dike of Epping,
and Rogers of Dedham, whose picture is therein the Church.
fruitful, full of Woods, plentiful of Saffron, and very wealthy: encircled,
as it were, on the one side with the main Sea, on the other with Fish-full
Rivers, which also do afford their peculiar Commodities in great abundance.

The Air is temperate and pleasant, only toward the waters somewhat aguish,
insomuch that in one Hundred they will ask a stranger merrily, Whether the
Bailiff of the Hundred has yet arrested him.

Waltham Forest of the Town Waltham. It was stored very full with Deer, that
for their bigness and fatness withal, have the name above all other.

Rochford, it has given name to an Hundred. It is aguish.

Rumford, the glory whereof depends on a Swine Market.

Brent-wood a Market Town.

Engerstone a Town of note for nothing else but the Market and Innes for
travelers.

Chensford a good big Town situate in the heart of the Shire between two
Rivers: Of note only for the Assizes.

Cogeshall a Mercate Town.

Maldon for the number of the Inhabitants, An ancient Colony of the Romans,
called Camalodunum.
and the bigness, it is worthily counted one of the principal Towns in all
Essex, and in Records named, The Burgh of Maldon. It is a Haven commodious
enough, and for the bigness very well inhabited, being but one especial street
descending much about a mile in length, upon the ridg of an Hill answerable to
the termination of Dunum, which signified an hilly and high situation.

Colchester a proper and fine Borough, The chiefest Town of the Shire. Many
have thought it was so called from a Colony in the R^man time placed there,
rather from Coln the River whereon it stands, as Lincoln from the River Lune.
Burtons Commentary on Antoninus his Itinerary through Britain. It is famous for
Oisters and candied Eringoroots, and Cloth.
well traded, and pleasantly seated, as being situate upon the brow of an Hill,
stretching out from West to East, walled about, beautified with several
Churches, some of which were lately demolished.

The Inhabitants affirm, that Flavia Julia Helena the Mother of Constantine the
Great was borne and bred there.

Harewich a most safe Road, whence it has the name. The Town is not great, but
well peopled, fortified by Art and Nature.

Walden of Saffron Crocum ad cor exhilarandum, and sedandos dolores utile,
cujus fortasse non est ubique terrarum quam in agris Essexio, Suffulcio, and
Cantabrigienfi, tam uber proventus. Twini de Rebus Britan. Comment. lib. 2.
page 138.
called Saffron Walden, among the fields looking merrily with most lovely
Saffron. A very good Market Town.

Here Sir Thomas Smith, Secretary to Queen Elizabeth, a wise and learned man
was born.

Audley-end, a magnificent House built by the Earl of Suffolk, where there is a
spacious and very broad Gallery.

Barrington-Hall, where dwells that right ancient Family of the Baringtons.

Lees-Abbey now the Seat of the right Honorable Lord Rich, Baron Lees, and
Earl of Warwick.

It contains twenty Hundreds, one and twenty Market Towns, and four hundred and
fifteen Parishes.

Glocestershire.
ON the West Side butteth on Monmouthshire and Herefordshire; on the North on
Worcestershire; on the East upon Warwickshire and Oxfordshire both; on the
South with Somersetshire.

A pleasant Country, and fruitful in Corn, Wool, Apples and Pears, and
Severn full of Salmon.

Commonly through all Glocestershire there is good plenty of Corn, Pasture and
Wood, saving in Coteswold, where the great flocks of Sheep be, and yet in some
places there grows fair Corn. Lelands Itinerary.

Forest of Dean, or Dean-Forest was It had this name of Dean a little Town
adjoining.
wholly bespread with thick tall Wood.

It is between two navigable Rivers Wie and Severn.

It was a wonderful thick Forest, and in former ages so dark and terrible, by
reason of crooked and winding ways, as also the grisly shade therein, that it
made the Inhabitants more fierce, and bolder to commit robberies. Since that
rich Mines of Iron were here found out, those thick woods began to wax thin
by little and little.

Tewksbury. It is a great and fair Town, having three Bridges to pass over,
standing upon three Rivers, famous for the best Mustard. One may carry it in
bals a long way.

Gloucester the head City of this A Bishops See.
Shire.

It lies stretched out in length over Severne: on that side where it is not
watered with the River, it has in some places a very strong Wall for defense.
A proper and fine City both for number of Churches, and for the buildings.

Above the Quire, in an Arch of this Church, there is a Wall built in form of
a Semicircle full of Corners, with such an artificial devise, that if a man
speak with never so low a voice at the one part thereof, and another lay his
ear to the other being a good way distant, he may also hear every syllable.

Cotswold, it took its name of Woulds and Cotes, that is Hills and Sheepfolds.

Here feed in great numbers, flocks of Sheep long necked, and square of bulk
and bone, by reason of the hilly and large situation of their pasturage: whose
Wool being most fine and soft is had in passing great account among all
Nations.

Barkly honored with a Castle, whereof the Lord Barklies are entitled.

Camden a Market Town well peopled, and of good resort. Near unto it stands
Weston, where there is a fair House which makes a goodly show, built by Ralph
Sheldon for him and his posterity.

Hales in late time a most flourishing Abbey, and deserving commendation for
breeding up of Alexander of Hales a great Clerk, and so deeply learned above
all others in that subtle Divinity of the Schoolmen, as he carried away the
surname of Doctor Irrefr agabilis, the Doctor ungain said, as he that could not
be gainsaid.

Winchelcomb a great Town, and well inhabited.

Cyrencester a famous Market Town, both for Corn upon the Monday, and for Wool
and Yarn on the Friday.

Bibery. There is a spring under the side of a Hill which is so forcible, that
it serves to drive a Mill about a stones cast from it.

Strowd, whence the name of Strowdwater, where are multitudes of rich
Clothiers, fair building, and famous also for dying of Clothes, by reason of
the nature of the water.

It contains thirty Hundreds, two hundred and eighty Parishes.

Hantshire.
ON the West it has Dorsetshire and Wiltshire; on the South the Ocean to bound
it: on the East it joyneth to Sussex and Surrey, and on the North it bordereth
upon Barkshire.

A small Province it is, fruitful in Corn, rich in plenteous Pasture, and for
all commodities of sea most wealthy and happy.

Wools, Clothes and Iron are the general Commodities of this Shire.

Ringwood a well frequented Market Town.

New-Forest. King William of Normandy pulled down all the Towns, Either that
the Normans might have more secure arrival into England, or for the pleasure he
took in hunting.
Villages, Houses, and Churches far and near, cast out the poor
Inhabitants, and when he had so done, brought all within thirty miles compass,
or thereabout, into a Forest and Harbor for wild Beasts.

Hurst-Castle commands Seaward every where.

South-hanton a Town populous, rich Antona australis, Northampton Antona
Borealis, so called for the South situation of it.
and beautiful, from whom the whole Shire deriveth her name.

Andover.

Winchester Its situation is fruitful and pleasant, in a Valley under Hills.
Wina Wintoniensis primus extitit Antistes, neque tamen civitati nomen dedit,
quod stolide satis nonnulli augurantur, Ab antiquis Britannis Caerguentia olim
apellata, quasi Civiras Guenta; a Saxonibus (quod idem sonat) Wentchester,
Wentancester and Wintoncester nuncupata est, unde nostra Wintonia. Godw. De
Praesul. Arg. Comment. Vrbs vini vel vinifera, quasi dicas munitio vel
fortificatio ubi crevit optimum vinum in Britannia, appellata est. Celebris
fuit haec civitas olim, Arthurii procerum mensa rotunda, occidentalium Saxonum
regia and sepulchris, Episcopali sede, lanarum custodia and mercatu, Henrici
tertii favore and frequenti praesentia, instructissimo Wickami Episcopi
Collegio. Twini De Rebus Britannic. Comment. lib. 2. page 116, 117.
in Latin Wintonia; a City flourishing even in the Romans times.

It is indifferently well peopled and frequented, having plenty of water, by
reason of the River conveyed diverse ways into it; it contains about a mile
and half in circuit within the Walls: which open at six Gates, and have every
one of them their Suburbs reaching forth without a good way. It is adorned with
magnificent Churches, and a Bishops See. There is a fair College which William
Wickham Bishop of this See, built for a School, out of which, both for Church
and Commonwealth, there arises a most plentiful increase of right learned men.

In this College, one Warden, ten Fellows, two Schoolmasters, threescore and
ten Scholars, with diverse others are plentifully maintained.

Potesmouth, that is, the mouth of the Haven. A place always in time of war
well frequented. It is fortified with a Wall made of Timber, and the same well
covered over with thick Banks of earth: There is nothing wanting that a man
would require in a most strong and fenced place. Of the Garrison Soldiers, some
keep watch and ward both night and day at the Gates: Others upon the Tower of
the Church, who by the ringing or sound of a Bell give warning how many Horse
or Foot are coming, and by putting forth a Banner show from what Quarter they
come.

Basing stoke a Market Town well frequented.

Basing is near it, the Seat of the Marquesses of Winchester.

Odiam a Borough corporate, belonging in times past to the Bishop of Winchester.

William Lilie the great Grammarian was born here. He was the first Master of
Paul's School.

There are in this Shire two hundred and fifty three Parishes, eighteen Market
Towns, and forty Hundreds.

To this County of Southampton belongs the Isle of Wight, Vecta, or Vectis
Insula.

This Isle, between East and West in Vectis Insula, forma Ovo simillima a
littore alibi septem alibi duobus passuum millibus distans Neoportus unicum
insulae Emporium. Est and Castrwn Caerbro, id est, Cassium tractus,
antiquitatem Britannicam referens. Lhyd. Comment. Britann. Descript. Fragmentum.
an old form, stretches out twenty miles in length; and spreads in the
midst, which is broadest, twelve miles. So Camden.

Leland says, it is ten miles broad.

The Ground (to say nothing of the Sea full of Fish) consists of a very
fruitful soil, it breeds every where store of Coneys, Hares, Partridges and
Pheasants. It has one little Forest, and two Parks replenished with Deer, for
game and hunting pleasure. Through the midst thereof runs a long tract of
Hills, yielding plenty of Pasture and Forage for Sheep. The Wool of which,
next unto that of Lemster and Cotteswold, is esteemed best, and in special
request with Clothiers, whereby there grows to the Inhabitants much gain and
profit.

There are thirty six Towns, Villages, and Castles: which for Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction belonged to the Bishop of Winchester, and for Civil Government to
the County of South-hanton.

It armeth four thousand men exercised by their Captains.

The Inhabitants of this Isle were wont merrily to make their boast, That their
case was happier than all others, because they had neither hooded Monks, nor
cavilling Lawyers, nor yet crafty Foxes.

Newport is the principal Market Town of the whole Isle.

Caresbrook an old Castle is in the very heart and midst of the Isle.

Brading a Market Town.

Newton and Yarmouth have their Majors, and send Burgesses to the Parliament.

Sauham-Castle.

The Inhabitants of the Isle being naturally most warlike, bold and
adventurous, are through the diligence and care of the Captain of the Isle,
confirmed so by continual exercise in strength and military Discipline, that
they exactly know beforehand with their Pieces to shoot point blank, and not
miss the Mark, to keep their ranks, to march orderly and in ray, to cast their
squadrons, if need be, close into a ring, to display and spread the same at
large, to take pains, to run and ride, to endure both Sun and dust, and
fully to perform whatsoever warfare does require.

Of these Soldiers thus trained, the Isle it self is able to bring forth into
the field four thousand: and at the instant for all assayes appointed, there
are three thousand more of most expert and practiced Soldiers out of
Hantshire, and two thousand beside out of Wiltshire, to be ever pressed and in
readiness for the defense of the Isle.

That all hostile Forces whatsoever might be withstood more speedily and with
greater facility, the whole Country is divided into eleven parts, and every of
them has their several Centoner or Centurion, their Vinton also, Leaders (as
it were) of twenty, their great pieces of Ordnance, their Sentinels and
Warders, who keep Watch and Ward at the Beacons standing on the higher grounds:
their Posts also or Runners, whom by an old name, grown almost out of use, they
term still Hoblers, who presently give intelligence of all occurrents to the
Captain and Governor of the Isle.

Vespasian was the first that brought it into subjection, whiles he served as a
private person under Claudius Caesar.

This Isle had a noble Family, named Nobilissima Lisleiorum familia, D'or au
chef d' azur, trois lions rampans del premier. Ex hac gente nonnulli olim ad
Comitia Parliamentaria, cum reliquis Regni Bar^nibus evocati fuerunt. Bissaei
Notae in Uptonum. p. 48.
De Insula, or Lisle, out of which in the Reign of King Edward the Second, one
was summoned unto the Parliament by the name of Sir John Lisle, of the Isle of
Wight.

Herefordshire.
THis County lies round in compass, This and Monmouthshire have been now long
reckoned among the Counties of England.
as it were a Circle, it is bounded on the East Side with Worcester and
Glocestershire; on the South with Monmouthshire; on the West Side with Radnoc
and Brecknotshire; and on the North with Shropshire.

For three W. W. W. Wheat, Wool and Water There are sundry sweet and fresh
Rivers, the chiefest whereof are the Wye, Lug and Manow.
it yields to no Shire of England.

This Country is reputed the Orchard of England. From the greatest persons to
the poorest cottager, all habitations are encompassed with Orchards and
Gardens; and in most places the hedges are enriched with rows of Fruit Trees,
Pears or Apples, Gennetmoyles, or Crab-trees. Worcestershire is more proper for
Pears and Cherries; Herefordshire for Apples.

Herefordshire Orchards, a Pattern for all England. By J. B.

Bradwardin-Castle gave both original and name to that famous Thomas Bradwardin
Archbishop of Canterbury, who for his variety of knowledge, and profound
Learning, was in that age termed, The profound Doctor.

Hereford is the chief City of the A Bishops See.
Shire, it is seated among most pleasant Medows, and as plentiful Cornfieldsd,
compassed almost round about with Rivers. On the North-side and the West with
one that has no name; on the South Side with Wye, which hasteneth hither out
of Wales.

Lemster upon the River Lug. The greatest name and fame that it has at this
day is of the Wool in the Territories round about it, (Lemster Ore they call
it) which setting aside that of Apulia and Tarentum all Europe counts to be
the very best. Where lives the man so dull, on Britains furthest shore,
To whom did never sound the name of Lemster Ore:
That with the Silkworms web for smalnesse does compare:
Wherein, the winder shows his workmanship so rare.
As does the Fleece excel, and mocks her looser clew;
As neatly bottomed up as Nature forth it drew;
Of each in highest account, and reckoned here as fine,
As there the Appulian Fleece, or dainty Tarentyne.
Draytons Polyolbion 7th Song.

In Apulia and the upper Calabria of Italy, the Wool has been famous for
finest excellence: insomuch that for preserving it from the injury of earth,
bushes and weather, the Shepherds used to clothe their Sheep with skins; and
indeed was so chargeable in these and other kind of pains about it, that it
scarce requites the cost.

Seld. Illustrat. of Drayt. Polyolb.

Brameyard upon the River From.

Ledbury under Malvern-Hils.

It is also so renowned for Wheat and Bread of the finest Flour, that Lemster
Bread, and Weabley Ale are grown unto a common Proverb. By reason of these
Commodities the Mercates at Lemster were so frequented, that they of Hereford
and Worcester, complaining, that the confluence of people thither impaired
their Mercates, procured that by Royal Authority the Market day was changed.

There are an hundred and seventy six Parishes, eight Market Towns, and an
eleven Hundreds in this County.

Hertfordshire.
FAmous for a good Air, and fair Houses of Gentlemen, and Wheat.

It lies on the East, and partly on the South Side of Bedfordshire: The
West Side is enclosed with Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire: the South with
Middlesex, the East with Essex, and the North with Cambridgeshire.

A rich Country in Corn, Fields, Pastures, Medows, Woods, Groves, and clear
Riverets. There is scarcely another Shire in all England that can show more
good Towns in so small a compass.

In Ware in this County, there is

1. The Head of the River that runs into Tames. 2. A great Bed which is about
three yards at least every way about, at both the sides and ends.
Roiston a Town well known, it is very famous, and passing much frequented for
Malt.

It parts four Shires, Cambridgeshire, Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire and
Huntingtonshire.

Ashwell, The Well or Fountain among the ashes, where there is a source of the
springs bubling out of a stony bank overshadowed on every side with tall ashes,
from whence there flows at certain Veins, continually running such store of
water, that forthwith being carried within banks, it carries a stream able to
drive a Mill, and all of a sudden, as it were, grows to a good big River.

Whethamssed a Town plentiful in Wheat, whence it took its name; which place
John of Whethamsted there born, and thereof named, a man in King Henry the
Sixth his days much renowned by his due desert of learning, made of more
estimation.

Bishops-Hatfield in times past belonging to the Bishops of Ely, whence it
Godwin. de Praesulibus Ang. says, it is reported that Bradwardine was here
born.
was named Bishops-Hatfield, which John Morton Bishop of Ely re-edified. The
Earl of Salisbury has an House there.

There were seven Parks in the Manor of Hatfield.

Hertford, it has given name to the whole County, and is reputed the Shire
Town, it is ancient.

Hodesdon a fair through fare.

Saint-Albans. It was famous for nothing Vide R. Usseri. de Britannic. Eccles.
primord. cap. 7.
so much as bringing forth Alban a Citizen of singular holiness and faith in
Christ, who when Dioclesian went about by exquisite torments to wipe Christian
Religion quite out of the memory of men, was the first in Britain that with
invincible constancy and resolution suffered death for Christ his sake.
Whereupon he is called our Stephen, and the Protomartyr of Britain.

Fortunatus Presbyter the Poet wrote thus of him, Albanum egregium faecunda
Britannia profert.
Fruitful Britain brings forth
Alban a Martyr of high worth.


The Abbey of St. Albans was the L. Herberts Henry the 8th. See* Monasticon
Anglicanum.
first of England, whether because Adrian the Fourths Father called Breakspear
was Monk there, or from Saint Alban himself Proto-martyr of England.

This Town was raised out of the ruins of Verolamium, it is a fair and large
Town.

Redborne or Red water is seated upon that common and military highway, which
we call Watling-street.

Hamsted a little Market Town called Hehan Hamsted situate among the the Hills
by a Riveret-side.

Kings-Langley, in which was born, and thereof took name, Edmund Langley King
Edward the Third his Son, and Duke of York.

Over against Kings-Langley, in a manner, there is Abbots-Langley, so called,
because it belonged to the Abbots of St. Albanes: wherein was born Nicholas
surnamed Breakspear, afterward Bishop of Rome, known by the name of Pope
Hadrian the fourth, whose breath was stopped in the end with a Fly that flew
into his mouth.

Watford a Market Town.

Welwen. Here the murder of the Danes began, when they were generally murdered;
and it was so called, because the weal of that Country (as was then thought)
was there first wone. But who well considers the sequel of the story, shall
find little weal that ensued of this deed. Graftons Chron.

Rickemausworth also a Market Town.

Caishobery. Here Sir Richard Merisin Knight, a great learned man, and who had
been used in Embassages to the mightiest Princes under King Henry the Eighth,
and King Edward the Sixth began to build an House, which Sir Charles his Son
finished.

Bernet famous for the Beast Market there kept.

This County has an hundred and twenty Parishes, eight Hundreds, and eighteen
Market Towns.

Huntingdonshire.
IT confineth Northward and Eastward upon Cambridgeshire, Southward upon
Bedfordshire, Westward upon Northamptonshire.

A Country good for Corn and Tillage: and toward the East, where it is fenny,
very right and plentiful for the feeding of Cattle: elsewhere right pleasant,
by reason of rising Hills and shady Groves.

Kimbolton.

Saint-Neots, commonly called Saint-Needs, so named of one Neotus, a man both
learned and holy; who travailed all his life time in propagating of Christian
Religion.

Ainsbury, it was named Ainulphsbury of one Almulph likewise, an holy and
devout man, which name continues still also in one part of it.

Huntingdon, in the public Seal Huntersdune, Leland calls it Venantodunum, the
Hill or down of Hunters. This is the chief Town of all this Shire, to which it
has given also the name.

Godmanchester a very great Country Town, and of as great name for Tillage;
situate in an open ground, of a light mould, and bending for the Sun. There
is not a Town in all England which has more stout and lusty Husbandmen, or
more Ploughs a going: For, they make their boast that they have in former time
received the Kings of England, as they passed in their progress this way, with
ninescore Ploughs, brought forth in a rustical kind of pomp, for a gallant
show.

When King James came first into England, here the Bailiffs of the Town
presented him with seventy Teem of Horses, all traced to fair new Ploughs, in
show of their Husbandry, of which when his Majesty demanded the reason, he was
answered, That it was their ancient Custom, whenever any King of England
passed through their Town, Howes Chron.
so to present him. Besides they added, That they held their Lands by that
Tenure, being the Kings Tenants. His Majesty took it well, and bad them use
well their Ploughes, being glad he was Landlord of so many good Husbandmen in
one Town.

Saint-Ives of Ivo a Persian Bishop, who (as they write) about the year of
Christ 600, traveled through England, preached diligently the Word of God, and
to this Town, wherein he left this life, left also his name.

Ramsey a wealthy Abbey.

In this little Shire are numbered seventy eight Parishes, four Hundreds, and
six Market Towns.

Kent.
THis name Cantium, and the name Kent, was given by reason of the form and
situation. The Helvetian Countries were called by the French Cantons. This
Country by the old Geographers is called Angulus, an angle, or corner of Land.
Or of the British word Cainc, they call their great woody Forest in
Staffordshire yet Lamb. Perambulat. of Kent. See Kilbourns Surveigh of Kent, p.
2. Cantium, quod amaenissima and humanissima* Britanniae habita semper fuit
provincia, ad austrum Solemque Orientem Oceano Germanico, ad aquilonem uberrimo
Thamesi fluvio, ad Occidentem Surra, ac Sussexia provinciis, quas Angli
comitatus appellant, cingitur. Haec and agrorum feracitate faecunda, populoque
generoso ac potenti referta, plures urbes, villasqae in locis ob aquas and
sylvas, vicinas humanae habitationi commodioribus condidit, and ob maritimos
portus, quas multos habet, peregrinorum consuetudine, Galliaeque vicinitate
magis (...), quam reliquae hujus Insulae regiones a Scriptoribus perhibetur.
Quibus item rationibus, and moribus cultier, and opibus ditior jure
existimatur. Antiquitates Britannieae, page 33. Britannos Caesar, maxim
Cantios, long omnium humanissimos vocat, and eam humanitatem illis fraudi
fuisse, and belli Caesariani causam extitisse apparet, quod praesidia Gallis
Caesaris hostibus submiserint, and eos adventantes subinde amico ac
peropportunos profugio exceperint. Humfredus De Nobil. lib. 2.
Kanc.

It is the pleasantest Country of England.

This Region extends it self in length from West to East fifty miles; and
from South to North six and twenty.

The upper part of it, they say is healthful, but not so wealthy: the middle
they account both healthful and plentiful: the lower they hold to be wealthy,
but not healthy; as which for a great part thereof is very moist.

It is every where almost full of Medows, Pastures and Cornfieldsd: abounding
wonderfully in Apple Trees, and Cherry-trees also: the Trees are planted after
a direct manner one against another by square, most pleasant to behold.

It has Villages and Towns exceeding thick and well peopled, safe Rodes and
sure Harbors for Ships, with some veins of Iron and Marle: but the Air is
somewhat thick, and somewhere foggy, by reason of vapors arising out of the
waters.

The Revenues of the Inhabitants are greater both by the fertility of the soil,
and also by the neighborhood of a great City, of a great River, and the main
Sea.

This County is enriched with two Cities and Bishops Seas, strengthened with
twenty seven Castles, graced with four of the Kings Houses, traded with four
and twenty Market Towns, and beautified with many stately Buildings.

Camden in Kent, page 324. says, The Kentishmen had privilege to lead the
Van in all Battles for their valor showed against the Danes.

Amongst our old English the Kentishmen had the honor due to them always of
being in the Vant-guard, and those of Wiltshire, with Cornwall and Devonshire
in the Rere, which they all might challenge by the continual worth of their
performance. Mr. Seldens Preface to his Titles of Honor.

The Sueuians had anciently prerogative, In omni expeditione Regis Teutonici,
exercitum praecedere, and primi committere. Id. ib.

The meaning of that common Proverb, Kent and Christendom, was, that it Not
that Kent was conceived distinct from Christendom. Kilburns Survey of Kent. p.
5.
was famous as Kent, and famous as Christendom.

This was the first of the Kingdoms of the Heptarchy, and no one County of
England had a King of it self, but this.

They are the most civilized people of the Nation.

It is plentiful of Fowl and Fish of all sorts. Fertile Lands, Fruit, Grain,
Wood.

When William the Conqueror came in, the Yeomanry of Kent at Suaves-comb,
carrying before them in their hands, every one a great green Bough,
representing afar off a moving Wood, yielded them unto William It is agreed
by all men, that there were never any bondmen (or villains, as the Law calls
them) in Kent. Lamberts Perambulat. of Kent. The tenures of Land here are as
free tenures as any in England.
the Conqueror, upon this condition, that they might retain their ancient
Customs unviolated, and especially that which they call Gavelkind, that is,
Give all kin, by which they are not so bound by Copyhold, Customarytenures,
or Tenant-right, as in other parts of England, but in manner every man is a
Freeholder, and has some part of his own to live upon.

For Lands of this nature are equally divided among the Male children, or if
there be no Sons, among the Daughters. By virtue of this also, they are at
full age, and enter upon their Inheritance when they come to be fifteen years
old: and it is lawful for them to alienate and make it over to any one, either
by Gift, or by Sale, without the Lords consent. By this likewise, the Son
(though their Parents were The father to the Bough, and the son to the Plough.
condemned for Felony or Murder) succeeds them nevertheless in such kind of
Lands.

After this, William the Conqueror, that he might more firmly assure to
himself Kent, which is the very Key of England, placed a Constable over
Dover-Castle, the most important Castle of England, and according to the
ancient order of the Romans, made him also Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports.
These be they, Hastings, Dover, Hith, Rumney and Sandwich, unto which,
Winchelsey and Rye are joined, as principal Oppidum Winchilseum olim vento,
frigori, and ponto obnoxium, unde ei nomen obvenit. Twini Comment. De Rebus
Brittanuicis. lib. 1. page 25.
Ports, and other small Towns as Members. Which because they are bound to serve
in the Wars by Sea, enjoy many great immunities: they are free from payment
of Subsidies; and from Wardship of their children, as touching the body, they
are not sued in any Court, but within their own Towns; and of the Inhabitants
therein, such as they call Barons, at the Coronation of Kings and Queens
support the Canopies over them, yea, and have a Table by themselves that day
spread, and furnished on the Kings right hand. And the Lord Warden himself, who
is always one of the Nobility of most approved trust, has within his
Jurisdiction the Authority of Chancellor and Admiral in very many cases, and
enjoys other rights besides.

Depe-ford a most famous Ship-dock, where the Kings Ships are built, and such
as are decayed, repaired: there is also a good Storehouse, and an
Incorporation ordained for the use of the Navy.

Green-wich, that is, the Green-Creek, for the Creek of a River in the old
English tongue was called Wic.

A place of very great name by reason of the Kings House there, and because
Queen Elizabeth was here borne.

Barclay the Scot in his Icon animorum, commends Green-wich Tower for one of
the best Prospects in Europe, to see London on the one side, the Thames, Ships,
and pleasant Medows on the other:

Eltham a retiring place likewise of the Kings, but unwholesome by reason of the
Moor.

Seven-oke, so called (as men say) of seven exceeding great Oaks now cut down.
Which commends Sir William Sevenok an Alderman of London, who being a
foundling and brought up here; and therefore so named, built herein grateful
remembrance an Hospital and a School.

Dartford upon the River Darent, a great Market Town well frequented, and well
watered.

Graves-end, so called, as the Gereves-end; that is, the limit of the Gereve or
Reve. A Town as well known as any other in England, for the usual passage by
water between it and London. Henry the Eight raised two Block-houses here, and
two other opposite on Essex-side.

Tunbridge the Town of Bridges.

Maidstone the Shire Town: a large, fair, sweet and populous Town.

Rochester may glory in her impregnable Fortification by the Navy Royal.

Rochester signifies as much as Castrum A Bishops See.
in rupe, the Camp or Station on the Rock. All places ending in Chester arise
from the ruins of the old Roman Castra. Burt. Comment. on Antoninus Itin.
through Brit.

The Island Shepey, or the Isle of Sheep: It feeds mighty great Floks of
Sheep; it is plentiful in Corn, but scarce of Woods, contains twenty one
miles in compass.

Queen-Borough-Castle, King Edward the Third built it, and so named it in
honor of his Queen.

Tenham the Parent (as it were) of all the choice fruit Gardens and Orards of
Kent, and the most large and delightsome of them. Thirty Parishes thereabout,
are replenished with Cherry-gardens, and Orchards beautifully disposed in
direct lines.

As for Orchards of Apples and Gardens of Cheries, and those of most delicious
and exquisite kinds that can be, no part of the Realm (that I know) has them
either in such quantity and number, or with such art and industry set and
planted. Lamb. Perambulat. of Kent.

Amongst these is Feversham very commodiously situate.

Reculver of name for the salt savoury Oisters there dregged, and for a Minster.

The Oisters here do as far surpass those of Whitstaple, as these do the
rest of this Shire in savoury saltness. Lamb Perambul of Kent.

Canterbury Durovernum olim, nunc Cantuaria. Cantuaria urbs est
Archiepiscopalis and Metropolitica, quae ut antiquitate it a peramaena situs
jucunditate multis Angliae urbibus, sed and dignitate praefertur. Nam
Cantuariensis Archipraesul totius Angliae primatum obtinet. Georgius Bruin. in
Tabulis urbium Praecipuarum totius mundi.
the chief City of this County, ancient and famous no doubt A Bishops See.
in the Romans time.

The Archbishop of Canterbury was called Totius Angliae Primas; the Archbishop
of York, Angliae Primas; without any further addition.

Anselme (for recompense of the service he had done in oppugning the marriage
of Priests, and resisting the King for the investiture of Clerks) was by Pope
Urbane endowed with this accession of honor, that he and his Successors,
should from thenceforth have place in all General Councels, at the Popes right
foot, who then said withal, Includemus hunc in orb nostro, tanquam alterius
orbis Papam.

Canterbury is one of the famousest Cities in England: It has had a rare See
Mr Somner of Canterbury.
Cathedral, though now much ruinated by reason of these later times.

The Cathedral is in the midst of the City, a fair Church, the body of which is
within a little as large as Paul's in London; between the body and the Quire a
very high Steeple, where hangs a Bell, called by the name of Bell-Harry,
being one of them which King Henry brought out of France. There is also in this
Steeple four Spires much like to Sepulchers in London. There is on each side of
the great Westgate two other Steeples, the one called Dunston-steeple, the
other, Arnold-steeple, in each of which are a very pleasant ring of Bells. In
the same Cathedral there was the famousest Window that ever was known in
England, for which there was offered (as some say) by the Spanish Ambassador
10000lb, being the whole History of Christ from his Nativity to his Sufferings,
but is now battered to pieces. In the Quire of this Cathedral is buried Prince
Edward, called the Black Prince, whose Monument is there of brass.

The Dean and Prebends had very fair Houses within the bounds of the said
Cathedral, which was like a little City, and so much power formerly, that the
Majors Sword was not suffered to be held up within the Gates of the Deanery.
There is underneath this Cathedral a great Congregation of French living in the
City; and the Dutch also have a Church in that place which was called the
Bishops Palace.

Within the bounds of the said Deanery there is a free School, called, The Kings
School, wherein are two Masters, and many Scholars (formerly wearing Gowns)
that are there brought up, and many from thence sent to the University. There
was one Schoolmaster Mr John Ludd.
some years before he died, affirmed, he had had thirty seven Masters of Arts
of his bringing up.

There are many Churches in the City and Suburbs.

There are two Markets a week.

The Mayor and Aldermen are clothed in Scarlet, and they keep the Sessions in
the same City. The City is walled, and has a Mote about it, the Wall being so
broad that two or three men may go a-brest, with gallant Watch houses, called
Citadels, all built with flint-stone.

There was an old Castle, but it has been for many years demolished, and some
of the Works (or Forts) are yet standing, that were when the Danes came in, one
or two of which were made use of when the last rising was there.

There are two Hospitals in the City, one for Ancient people, and the other for
Children.

The Isle of Thanet, it is eight miles long, and four broad, a right fertile
soil.

Goodwin-Sands a sandy dangerous place.

In the Reign of William the Second, certain Lands in Kent, which did once
Haywards Life of William the 2d.
belong to Godwin Earl of Kent, were overflowed and covered with sand, which to
this day do bear the name of Godwins Sands.

See Kilburns Survey of Kent, page 262, 263. How Tenterden Steeple was said to
be the cause of Goodwins Sands.

Sandwich one of the Cinque Ports.

Dover. The Town is seated between high Cliffs, more famous for Dubris. One of
the Cinque Ports. A Dovero ad Caletum maritimum ex altera part in Gallia
oppidum secundis ventis spirantibus, quatuor horis brevissimus fit trajectus.
Antiqu. Britann.
the commodiousnesse of the Haven, (such as it is) and for ready passage into
France, then for any elegance or great trade.

There is a most stately Castle like unto a pretty City, fortified strongly
with Bulwarks, and many a Tower.

It is the strongest hold of all England, and most commodious for the French.

Sandgate-Castle, and Satlwood, a Castle.

Hith, it signifies an Haven or Harbor, one of the Cinque Ports.

Rumney-marsh a fruitful soil, it feeds a number of Herds of Cattle sent One
of the Cinque Ports. It contains 24000 Acres. Lamb. Perambul. of Kent. Quis
quaeso hodie credat, magnam partem illius prati sive Planiciei nobis nunc
Rumnensis marshii, id est, Romani maris, nomine dictae, fuisse quondam altum
Pelagus, and mare Velivolum? Vbi tot ovium greges oberrant: tot pecorum armenta
pascuntur tot juga bovum arant: tanti foeni copia qvotannis conficitur: tot
templa in divinum cultum construuntur: tot familiae foventur: denique unde tot
pingues pecudes in macellis veniunt, ut non modo universum Cantium hujus locis
commoda sentiat, verum etiam civitas Londinum non nihil emolumenti inde
percipiat. Twini Comment. De Rebus Britan. l. 1. p. 31.
hither from the furthest parts of Wales, and England to be fatted.

There is at Bilsington a Priory built by John Maunsel.

Weaver in his Funeral Monuments says, He saw a Pedigree of the Maunsels from
Philip de Maunsel, who came in with the Conqueror, until these our times.

Wie. Here was born John Kemp Archbishop of Canterbury, and one of the great
Benefactors to the University of Oxford.

He was Bishop of Rochester, Chichester and London, Archbishop of York first,
and afterward of Canterbury, twice made Cardinal. Bis primas, ter Praeses, and
bis Cardine functus.


This Province has three hundred ninety eight Parishes, and sixty four
Hundreds.

Lancashire.
IT is a large, populous and well wooded Country.

The County Palatine of Lancaster (famous for the four Henry's, the Fourth,
Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Kings of England, derived from John Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster) is upon the South confined and parted by the River Mersey, from the
County Palatine of Chester, the County of Darbyshire bordering upon the East;
the large Country of Yorkshire, together with Westmerland and Cumberland,
being her kind neighbors upon the North, and the Sea called Mare Hibernicum
embracing her upon the West.

Their Kine and Oxen have goodly Heads and fair spread Horns, and are in body
well proportionate withal.

Warringdon.

Rochdale a Mercate Town well frequented.

Manchester, a Town of great antiquity, from Main a British word which
signifies a Stone: It is seated upon a stony hill, and beneath the Town, there
are most famous quarries of stone.

It far excels the Towns lying round about it, for the beautiful show it
carries, for resort unto it, and for clothing: in regard also of the Mercate
place, the fair Church and College.

John Bradford the famous Martyr was born here.

Letherpool or Lirpool, so named of the water spreading it self in manner of a
Pool: whence there is a convenient passage over into Ireland, and much
frequented, and in that respect more notorious than for any antiquity.

Ocmeskirk a Mercate Town, well known by reason of the Sepulture there, of the
Stanleys Earls of Derby, whose chief seat Latham, is hard by, a stately house.

Wiggin a Corporation with a Mayor and Burgesses.

Bolton upon the River Irwell.

Preston a great fair Town, and well Priests-Town.
inhabited.

Hornby a fair Castle.

Lancaster the chief Town of this Or Loncaster from the River Lone.
Region.

There are thirty six Parishes in this Shire, but those very populous and
spacious, six Hundreds, and fifteen Market Towns.

Leicestershire.
IT has bordering upon it on the East Side, both Rutlandshire and
Lincolnshire; on the North Notingham and Derbyshire; and Warwickshire on the
West; and on the South Side lies Northampton.

The whole Shire yields great abundance of Peace and Beans more than any other
Country, insomuch that there is an old byword of the same, commonly known to
all men, viz. Leicestershire Bean-Belly.

Burtons Descript. of Leicestershire.

The South-East-side of this Shire is exceeding rich ground, yielding great
increase of Corn in abundance of all kinds, and affords many good and large
Sheep-Pastures, breeding a Sheep to that height and goodness; so that (as I
have credibly heard) neither Lemster nor Cotswould, can exceed them, if one
respect either largeness of the body, finenesse of the Wool, or goodness of
the breed. Id. ib.

Leicester stands upon the River Leire, now called Sore, it signifies the
City standing upon the River Leir. It is a Town of great antiquity, and
stands in the center and heart of the Shire, bearing the proportion of an
heart, and being in the very midst and heart of the Land.

It is situate in a most rich, delicate and pleasant soil, and delicious air;
it wants only a navigable River.

Harborow a Town famous for a Fair of Cattle there kept.

Carleton, all that are born there, whether it be by a peculiar property of the
Carlton-Curlew
soil, or of the water; or else by some other secret operation of nature, have
They cannot prenounce the letter R. Camd. Brit. And Burtons Descript. of
Leicestershire.
an ill favored, untunable, and harsh manner of speech, fetching their words
with very much ado, deep from out of the throat, with a certain kind of
wharling.

Lutterworth a Market Town, it has Bishop Latimer was also born at Thurcaston
in Leicestershire.
a fair Church. That famous John Wicliffe was sometimes parson of this Church,
a man of a singular, polite, and well wrought wit, most conversant also in the
holy Scripture.

Near to this Town there is a Spring so called, that within a short time
turns straws and sticks into stones.

Cathorp. It came to one Cook, a Merchant of the Staple in the time of Henry
the Fourth, whose Daughter and Heir was married to William Harper of Rushall in
the County of Stafford, and from thence by descent, to Leigh. It was not many
years since belonging to Sir Edward Leigh of Rushall.

Burtons Descript. of Leicestershire.

Hinkley.

Burton-Lazers, so called from a famous Hospital, which was there founded for
the use of Leprous people, to whose Master all the lesser houses of that kind
were subordinate, as he himself was to the Master of the Lazers at Jerusalem.

Bosworth, an ancient Market Town. Here Henry Earl of Richmond with a small
power, encountered in pitch-field with King Richard the Third, and overcame and
slew him, and then with joyful acclamations was proclaimed King in the very
midst of slaughtered bodies round about.

Ashby de la Zouch, a most pleasant It was so called of the Zouches, sometimes
Lords thereof. Burtons Descript. of Leicestershire*
Lordship now of the Earls of Huntingdon, but belonging in times past to the
noble Family De la Zouch.

Cole-Overton or Orton, famous for Pit-coal. It is so called of the Colemines
which are there in great abundance.

Mount-Sorehill, famous only for a Market there kept.

Lough-borough a Market Town, next Town to Leicester in this Shire: whether a
man regard the bigness or building thereof, or the pleasant Woods about it.

Melton-Mowbray a Market Town, bearing name of the Mowbrayes sometimes Lords
thereof.

Within this Shire are two hundred Parish Churches, six Hundreds, and twelve
Market Towns.

Lincolnshire.
A Very large Country, reaching The largest next Yorkshire.
almost threescore miles in length, and carrying in some places above thirty
miles in breadth: passing good for yielding of Corn, and feeding of Cattle; well
furnished and set out with a great number of Towns, and watered with many
Rivers.

The Diocese here is the largest of England.

After three Bishoprics were taken out of it, it contains four whole
Counties, and parts of two, usually thus expressed, it had under it two Bs, two
Hs, two Ls.

The whole Shire is divided into three It is well stored with all kind of
provision, it abounds with fish and fowl.
parts, whereof one is called Holland: a second Kesteuen; and the third Lindsey.

Crowland or Croyland, a raw and muddy Land, as Ingulph the Abbot of The roof
of the Church is richly guilt.
this place interprets it, a Town formerly of good note among the Fenne-people.
It is seated like unto Venice. In the Month of August, they have sometimes
spread a Net, and at once drawn three thousand Mallards: and they use to term
these Pools or watery Plots of theirs their Cornfieldsd. In regard of this
their taking of Fish and Fowl, they paid yearly in times past to the Abbot
three hundred pounds of our money, and after so much to the Crown.

Spalding a fair Town, enclosed round about with Riverets.

Boston a famous Town, standing on Mr John Fox the Author of the Acts and
Monuments was born here.
both sides of the River Witham, which has over it a wooden Bridge of a great
height, well frequented by means of a commodious Haven unto it: the Market
place is fair and large, and the There are so many steps in the steeple from
the bottom to the top as there are days in the years.
Church makes a goodly show, as well for the beautiful building as the
greatness thereof: the Tower-steeple of it, which rises up to a mighty
height, does salute passengers and travelers a great way off, and gives
direction also to the Sailers.

In the Coat of Boston for the Corporation there are three Crowns relating to
the three Kingdoms, the Crest a Ram lying upon a Wool-sack, the Ram
signifying the great Sheep-walks in the fens round about, and the Wool-sack,
that it was a Staple-town. The Supporters of the Coat are two Maremaids,
signifying, that it is a Port-Town.

Stanford, it was built of rough stone, whence it has the name.

A Town well peopled, and of great resort, endowed also with sundry immunities,
and walled about. It is At the George there is one of the fairest Inns of
England.
beautified with seven Parish Churches, or thereabout, and shows an old
Hospital.

Belvoir or Beauvoir-Castle, so called of the fair Prospect, mounted upon the
top of a good steep Hill. It belongs to the Earl of Rutland.

The Vale of Bever, a very pleasant place lies under the Castle.

The Vale of Bevell barren of Wool, is large and very plentiful of good Corn
and Grass, and lies in three Shires, Leicester, Lincoln, and much in
Nottinghamshire. Lelands Itinerary.

Grantham a Town of good resort, adorned with a School built by Richard Fox
Bishop of Winchester, and with a fair Church, having a Spire-steeple of a
mighty height.

Lincoln. This City is large, well Lincolnia.
inhabited and frequented, it stands upon the side of an Hill, and thence
has its name from its situation, or because it has been a Colony.

There are fourteen Churches, the Minster is a fair one, and in one of the
Steeples there is a very great Bell rung The greatest Bell of England.
by sixteen men, called great Tom of Lincoln.

Camden honorably mentions two learned Bishops of Lincoln, Robert Grosthead,
and his Master Thomas Cooper.

Wainfleet, it bred William Wainfleet Bishop of Winchester a worthy Prelate, He
was great with Henry the 6th, he built a Free School at Wainflet, his name was
Patten of the worshipful family of which he was descended.
founder of Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford, a man that singularly well deserved of
learning.

Alford a Market Town.

Castor an ancient Castle.

Mercate-Rasin, so called of a Market there well resorted unto.

Gainsborrow a Market Town standing upon the River of Trent.

Grimsby an old Market Town. Here was Archbishop Whitgift born.

There are in this Shire six hundred and thirty More than in Yorkshire.
Parishes, thirty and one Hundreds, and thirty Market Towns.

Middlesex.
IT is severed from Buckinghamshire by the River Cole; on the West Side, from
Hertfordshire; on the North-side by a known crooked limit; from Essex on the
East with the River Lea, from Surrey and Kent on the South by the Thames.

It is a small Shire, in length not twenty miles, in circuit not above seventy
miles, yet for the fertility thereof it may compare with any other Shire: for
the soil is excellent fat, fertile and full of profit. Nordens Speculum
Britaniae.

For Air passing temperate, and for soil fertile, with sumptuous houses, and
pretty Towns on all sides pleasantly beautified, and every where offers to
the view many things memorable.

Uxbridge full of Innes, it stretches out in length.

Harrow-hill, the highest Hill of all this Country, under which Southward there
lie for a long way together, exceeding rich and fruitful fields, especially
about Heston a small Village, that yields so fine flour for manchet that a
long time it has served for the Kings mouth.

Hampton Court a Royal Palace of The chiefest at this day of all the Kings
houses.
the Kings, a work of admirable magnificence, built out of the ground by Thomas
Wolsey Cardinal, in ostentation A City rather in show then the Palace of a
Prince: and for stately port and gorgeous building not inferior to any in
Europe. Weavers Monum.
of his riches. It was enlarged and finished by King Henry the Eighth so amply,
as it contains within it five several inner Courts passing large, environed
with very fair buildings wrought right curiously, and goodly to behold.

The neatest pile of all the Kings houses. Godwins Annal.

It is called Hampton Court, Hampton of the Parish of Hampton, which stands
not far thence: Court in regard of the Majesty and princely beauty. There are
two Parks, the one of Deer, the other of Hares. Nordens Speculum Britaniae.

Thistleworth, or Isleworth.

Brentford a fair thorow-fare and frequent Market.

Fulham the place of Fowls, where the Bishop of Londons house was.

Chelsey a place garnished with fair and stately houses.

London It is most sweetly situate upon the Thames, served with all kind of
necessaries most commodiously. The air health full, it is populous, rich and
beautiful. Nordens Speculum Britanniae.
, the Epitome or Breviary of all Britain, the seat of the British Empire, and
the King of Englands chamber.

King Luds re-edifying Troinovant (first built by Brute) and from thence
leaving the name of Caer Lud, afterward turned (as they say) into London, is
not unknown, scarce to any that hathbut looked on Ludgates inner Frontispiece.

Seld. Illustrat. of the eighth Song of Drayt. Polyolb.

Georgius Braun or Bruin in his Theatrum Praecipuarum totius mundi urbium, in
three great Volumes in Folio, mentions London in the first place of his first
Volume.

Sir Robert Dallington in his view of France; comparing the City of Paris with
London, says, That Paris is the greater, the fairer built, and the better
situate: London is the richer, the more populous, the more ancient.

Howell in his Londinopolis makes a parallel of it, with the other great Cities
of the world, and so does Gainsford in his Glory of England, lib. 2. chapter 17.

For the space of above one thousand five hundred fourscore and six years it
has flourished more for the stateliness and magnificence of her goodly
buildings, for the large extent of her bounds and jurisdiction, for the
Religion and civility of her Inhabitants, for the Wisdom and Honor of her
Magistrates, for the profession of Arms, all good Letters and Arts, not to
speak of her Traffic and Commerce with all Countries and Ports of the known
world, more than any other known City whatsoever throughout all Christendom.
Burtons Comment. on Antonin. his Itin. through Britain, page 154, 155. See more
there, and 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164. See also M. Calamy and
M. Hardy his Sermon preached before the Londoners.

Caput atque Metropolis totius insulae Trinovantum sive Londinium sive
Londinum, urbs potens and amaena, quam fluviorum Rex Thamesis pererrat. Adolphi
a Dans vita Elizabethae. Quicquid habet miri Memphis, pretiive Corinthus,
Illion antiquum, Graecia magnificum,
Roma ecquid sanctum, Campania deliciarum,
Subtle Hetrusci, splendidulum Hesperii:
Quicquid opum Venetis, doctrinae quicquid Athenis,
Metropolis Britonum dicat id omne suum.
Stradlingi Epig. l. 1. p. 1.

Tacitus, Ptolomee, and Antonine call it Londinium; Ammianus Lundinum, and
Augusta, the Inhabitants London.

It is situate in a rich and fertile soil, abounding with plentiful store of
all things, and on the gentle ascent and rising of an Hill, hard by the Thames
It is convenient for situation, has a noble Bridge, navigable River. 2.
Strictly governed. 3. Opulent, has abundance of all kinds of provision. 4.
Ancient, and enjoys many Immunities. Of St Paul's Cathedral. See Mr Dugdales
History, and of the Bishops of Paul's. Londinum copia negotiatorum and commeatu
valde celebre. Tacitus.
side, which by his safe and deep chanel able to entertain the greatest Ships
that be, daily brings in so great riches from all parts, that it striveth at
this day with the Mart Towns of Christendom for the second prize, and affords
a most sure and beautiful rode for shipping.

King James being displeased with the City, because she would not lend him such
a Sum of Money, he told the Lord Mayor and Aldermen one day, That he would
remove his own Court, with all the Records of the Tower, and the Courts of
Westminster Hall to another place, with further expressions of his Indignation;
The Lord Mayor calmly heard all, and at last answered, Your Majesty has power
to do what you please, and your City of London will obey accordingly; but she
humbly desires, that when your Majesty shall remove your Courts, you would be
pleased to leave the Thames behind you.

It is for Antiquity honorable.

Ammianus Marcellinus called it in his times, and that was twelve hundred years
ago, an old Town: and Cornelius Tacitus in like manner, who lived in Nero his
days, 1540. years since, reported it to have been a place very famous for
fresh trade, concourse of Merchants, and great store of victuals, and all
things necessary.

The Tower of London, a most famous and goodly Citadel, encompassed round about
with thick and strong Walls, full of lofty and stately Turrets, fenced with a
broad and deep ditch, furnished also with an Armoury or Magazine of warlike
Munition, and other buildings besides: so as it resembles a big Town.

The Tower contains a Kings Palace, a Kings Prison, a Kings Armoury, a Kings
Mint, a Kings Wardrobe, a Kings Artillery. Gainsford.

In the year 1235. Frederick the Emperor sent to Henry the Third three
Leopards in token of his Regal Shield of Arms, wherein three Leopards were
pictures, since which time those Lions and others have been kept in a part of
this Bulwark, now called the Lions Tower, and their Keeper there lodged. Stows
Survey of London.

There are twelve chief Companies out of which the Lord Mayor is to be annually
chosen.

Twelve Innes ordained for Students The Inner Temple is the mother and most
ancient of all the other houses of Court, Burtons Descript. of Leicestershire.
of our Common Law, whereof four being very fair and large, belong to the
Judicial Courts, the rest unto the Chancery.

Herein such a number of young Gentlemen do so painfully ply their Books and
study the Law, that for frequency of Students it is not inferior either to
Angiers, Cane, or Orleans it self, as Sir John Fortescue in his small Treatise
of the Laws of England does witness. The said four principal Houses, are the
Inner Temple, the Middle Temple, Grayes-Inne, and Lincolns-Inne.

John Leland the famous Antiquary was born in London, Bishop Andrews, Mr.
Gataker, M. Calamy, Sir Thomas More. Chaucer, Edmund Spenser the famous English
Poets were born in London.

If any City in the world may at this day be called, as Jerusalem once was, a
Dr Reynolds Sions praises.
City of Truth, a holy Mountain, in regard of the Doctrine of truth and
holiness preached therein, then certainly London may. Insomuch that
Foraigners, Hungarians, Germans, Batavians, others learn our Language, and come
over to this City, that they may hear our Preachers, and read our English
Divines.

London Bridge is an admirable Workmanship of stone hewn out of This work,
viz. the Arches, Chapel, and stonebridge over the Thames was thirty three
years in building. Stow.
the Quarry, upon nineteen Arches, besides the Drawbridge, and is furnished on
both sides with passing fair houses joining one to another in manner of a
street, that for bigness and beauty it may worthily carry away the prize from
all the Bridges in Europe.

The whole City is divided into six and twenty Wards: and the Council of the
City consisted of as many ancient men, named of their age in our tongue
Aldermen, as one would say Senators, who each one have the over-seeing and
rule of his several Ward.

The chief Magistrate is the Lord Mayor and two Sheriffs, whereof the one is
called the Kings, the other the Cities Sheriff.

In Henry the Sixths Reign Godfrey Bolein was Lord Mayor of London (being the
Ancestor of two renowned and virtuous Queens of England, Anne Speeds Chron.
second wife to King Henry the Eighth, and Elizabeth their Daughter) through
whose great vigilance and providence, the City stood so well guarded, that the
Kings peace was dutifully kept, notwithstanding the great Lords of both the
Factions (Yorkists and Lancastrians) were with so great Troops of followers
lodged within, and about the same.

In Edward the Thirds Reign, Henry Stows and Speeds Chron. in Edw. the 3d.
Picard Mayor of London, in one day sumptuously feasted four Kings, Edward the
Third King of England, John King of France, the King of Cyprus then arrived in
England, David King of Scots.

See the courage and piety of a Lord Mayor in King James his time in Wilsons
History of Great Britain, p. 106.

The Merchants meeting place standing upon Pillars, which the common Thomas
Greshamus Cives Londinensis, Mercator Regius, and ex ordine Equestri, qui
patriae ornamento, and Mercatorum usui Perystillium pulcherrimum (Excambiam
Regium Elizabetha nominavit) Londini extruxit, and aedes, quas in urbe habuit
amplissimas bonarum literarum professioni dicavit, constitutis in iisdem Sacrae
Theologiae, Juris Civilis, Medicinae, Astronomiae, Geometriae and Rhetoricae
praelectionibus cum honestis salariis. Camd. Annal. rerum Anglic. pars ^^. p.
286. Vide etiam page 189.
people call the Burse, and Queen Elizabeth with a solemn Ceremony named, The
Royal Exchange, was set up by Sir Thomas Gresham Citizen and Knight; a
magnificent work, whether you respect the Model of the building, the resort of
Merchants from all Nations thither, or the store of wares there. Which Sir
Thomas Gresham, being withal an exceeding great lover of Learning, consecrated
a most spacious house his own habitation to the furtherance of Learning, and
instituted the Professors of Divinity, Law, Physic, Astronomy, Geometry, and
Music, with liberal Salaries and Stipends, to the end that London might be a
place, not only furnished with all kind of Traffic, but also with the Liberal
Arts and Sciences.

There is also a fair and goodly Library in Sion-Colledge, containing an
hundred twenty and one foot in length, and above five and twenty foot in
breadth.

In the Reign of King James, Robert Earl of Salisbury, caused to be erected The
new Ex change.
a stately building in the Strand, which upon Tuesday the tenth of April, in
the year 1609. was begun to be richly furnished with Wares; and the next day
after, the King, the Queen and Prince, with many great Lords and Ladies came to
see, and then the King gave it the name of Britains Burse.

Westminster was called in times past Thorney, of Thorns, now Westminster of
the West situation, and the Monastery.

A City of it self, having its peculiar Magistrates and Privileges.

It is renowned for the Abbey Church, the Hall of Justice, and the Kings Palace.

This Church is famous especially by Monasterium Westmonasteriense Regum
angliae inauguratione, sepultura, and Insignium Regalium custodia celeberrimam.
Camd. Annal. rerum Anglic. par. 1o. p. 60. Vide plura ibid. and Monasticon
Anglicanum, p 55, etc.
reason of the Inauguration and Sepulture of the Kings of England.

William the Conqueror and Matilda his wife were first crowned at Westminster,
and since them all other Kings and Queens of this Realm have been there
crowned. Stows Surveigh of London.

It is a Church of very fair Workmanship, supported with sundry rows of Marble
Pillars, a piece of work that cost fifty years labor in building.

It was founded by King Edward the Confessor.

King Henry the Seventh for the Burial of himself and his children, adjoined
thereto in the East end a Chapel of admirable elegancy: Leland calls it, The
wonder of the world, all the curious and exquisite work that can be devised, is
there compacted.

It is reported, That the Chapel L. Herb. Henry the 8th.
cost ten thousand pound, or as others say fourteen thousand pound.

There is a Collegiate Church, and famous School: Forty Scholars in their due
time are preferred to the Universities.

Here are buried the Prince of English Poets Geffrey Chaucer: as also he that
for pregnant wit, and an excellent gift in Poetry of all English Poets came
nearest unto him Edmund Spenser.

Isaac Casaubone.

William Camden Clarenceux King of Arms.

Westminster Hall is the greatest Hall in England, and the very Praetorium, or
Hall of Justice. In this are the Judicial Near hereunto are the two Houses of
Parliament.
Courts, the Upper-Bench, the Common Pleas, and the Chancery; and in places
near thereabout, the Star Chamber, the Exchequer, Court of Wards, and Court
of the Duchy of Lancaster. In which at certain set times (we call them Terms)
Causes are yearly heard and tried.

This Judgment Hall King Richard the Second built out of the ground, as
appears by his Arms engraven in the stone-work, and many arched beams.

There are a hundred twenty and one Churches, more than Rome it self can show.

Redcliff, so called of the Red cliff, a pretty fine Town and dwelling place of
Sailers.

Enfield-Chase a place much renowned for hunting.

In this County without the City of London are reckoned Parishes much about
seventy three, with the City, Liberties, and Suburbs an hundred twenty and one.

Monmouthshire.
IT is enclosed on the North-side with the River Munow that separateth it from
Herefordshire: on the East Side with Wye running between it and Glocestershire:
on the West with the River Remmey, which severeth it from Glamorganshire; and
on the South with the Severn.

The East part is full of Grass and Woods: the West is somewhat hilly and
stony, yet not unthankful to the Husbandman.

Monmouth the chief Town of the Shire.

Munow and Wye at their confluence do compass it almost round about, and give
it the name. On the North-side, where it is not defended with the Rivers, it
was fortified with a wall and ditch. In the midst of the Town, hard by the
Market place stands a Castle, which (as it is thought) John Baron of Monmouth
built. It was the Birth place of Henry the Fifth that triumpher over France,
and the second Ornament of the English Nation.

It glories also that Geffrey Ap Arthur, or of Munmouth, Compiler of the
British History was born and bred there: a man well skilled in Antiquities, but
(as it seems) not of antique credit; so many toys and tales he every where
enterlaceth out of his own brain, as he was charged while he lived.

Chepstow a famous Town, and of good resort, situate upon the side of an Hill,
rising from the very River, fortified round about with a Wall of a large
circuit, which includes within it both Fields and Orchards. It has a very
spacious Castle situate over the River.

Strighall Castle, it belongs to the Earls of Pembroke.

Sudbroke, the Church whereof called Trinity-Chappel stands near the Sea, a
moor for many miles together.

Abergenny, It is fortified with Walls, and a Castle.

This Shire contains Parish Churches an hundred twenty seven.

Northfolk or Norfolk.
PEople of the North.

It is a Region large and spacious, and in manner all thorowout a plain
champion, unless it be where there rise gently some pretty Hills; passing rich,
exceeding full of Sheep, and stored with Coneys, replenished likewise with a
great number of populous Villages: for besides twenty seven Market Towns, it is
able to show Villages and Country Towns six hundred twenty and five, watered
with diverse Rivers and Brooks, and not altogether destitute of Wood.

A man may collect the goodness of the ground by this, that the Inhabitants Ex
infima plebe non pauci reperiuntur quin si nihil litium sit, lites tamen ex
ipsis Juris apicibus serere calleant. Camdenus.
are of a passing good complexion, to say nothing of their exceeding wily wits,
and the same right quick in the insight of our Common Laws: insomuch as it is
counted, the only Country for best Lawyers.

One says, that three hundred and forty nisi prius were tried there at one
Assizes.

It is a pleasant Country for sports, Hawking and Hunting.

Thetford the Ford of Thet, of good There are three Churches.
bigness, yet it has but few Inhabitants.

Harleston a good Market.

Norwich a famous City by reason of the wealth, number of Inhabitants, the
resort of people, fair buildings, and many fair Churches (it contains thirty
two Parishes, and forty two Chapels and Churches) the painful industry of
the Citizens, and their courtesy unto strangers.

The Market, Cross and Cloister of the Cathedral there, are the fairest in
England.

It is pleasantly situate on the side of an Hill, compassed about with strong
Walls, (in which are orderly placed many Turrets, and twelve Gates) unless it
be on the East Side, where the River is a fence thereto..

It is three miles about. The Arms of the City are the Castle and Lion.

A City whose Antiquity Alexander Vrbs nunc ampla est, nobilis florens,
celebris, and civitatum omnium secundum Londinum (universi Regni Emporium)
multo maxima augustissimaque. Nevilli Norvicus. No one Shire of England has
three such Towns as Norwich, Linn and Yarmouth. Speed.
Nevil has most learnedly and elegantly set down in Latin.

It has been long famous for the ancient clothes, or stuff, called Worsted,
but has lately abounded in variety of weaving through the invention and
industry of the Dutch and French Flemmings which inhabit there in great numbers.

There is a great House there of the Duke of Norfolks, now the Earl of
Arundels, where there are very fair Granaries, and the best Bowling-alley in
England.

There is also an Hospital, where an hundred of men and women are maintained.

Matthew Parker was born here.

Yarmouth a very convenient Haven, and as fair a Town, beautifully built, and
well fenced, both by the natural strength of the place, and also by the
skillful industry of man's art.

It has but one Church, yet the same is very large, having a high Steeple to
adorn it. It is famous for fishing and merchandising.

There are two long Streets in it, each of them a mile long, one called the
Dean-street, the other the Key: There is also another Street, called the
Middle-street, and many rows, as they call them after the manner of Holland.
There is also a fair Market place.

Holt a Town so called of an Holt or tuft of trees, and for the Market well*
known.

Ailesham a Market Town of good resort.

Worsted, where the stuff worsted in so great request amongst our Ancestors was
first made; and hence so named, as Dornicks, Camery, Calecut, had in like
manner their denominations from the places where they were first invented and
made.

Walsingham. This Village is very famous by reason of the best Saffron growing
there.

The Family of the Walsinghams Knights, fetched first their name and original
from hence: out of which house flourished that Sir Francis Walsingham Secretary
to Queen Elizabeth, a man as of deep insight, so also of as rare and painful
industry in the weightiest affairs of the Realm.

Lynne peradventure so named of the waters broad spreading. So Lynne imports in
the Welsh tongue.

This is a large Town encompassed with a deep Trench and Walls, for the most
part thereof divided by two small Rivers that have fifteen Bridges, or
thereabout over them. It is called old Linne, and Linnum Regis, that is, Kings
Linne; yet by reason of the safe Haven which yields most easy access, for
the number also of the Merchants there dwelling, and thither resorting, for the
fair and the goodly houses, the wealth also of the Townsmen, it is doubtless
the principal Town of this Shire, except Norwich only.

Mershland, a little moist Mersh-Countrey, as the name implies, a soil
standing upon very rich and fertile mould, and breeding abundance of Cattle:
insomuch as that in a place commonly called Tilneysmeth there feed much about
thirty thousaud Sheep.

In this Province there be Parish Churches about six hundred and sixty.

In Norfolk and Suffolk there are more Parishes than in any other Counties, six
hundred and odd in Norfolk, and above five hundred in Suffolk.

Northamptonshire.
THis County is situate in the very middle and heart (as it were) of England.
On the East lie Bedford and Huntingdonshires. On the South Buckingham and
Oxfordshires: Westward Warwickshire: Northward Rutlandshire, and Lincolnshire,
separated from it by Avon the less, and Welland two Rivers.

It is a champion Country, exceeding populous, and passing well furnished with
Noblemens and Gentlemen's Houses, replenished also with Towns and Churches;
insomuch as in some places there are twenty, and in others thirty Seeples with
Spires or square Towers within view at once.

The soil very fertile both for Tillage and Pasture, yet nothing so well stored
with Woods, unless it be in the further and hither sides. But in every place,
as elsewhere also in England, it is overspread, and (as it were) beset with
Sheep.

Brakley a place full of Brake or Fern, the Students of Magdalen* College in
Oxford, use the College there for a retiring place.

Torcester, so called of Towrs. It has a large Church in it.

Hard by at Eston-Nessont there is a There is the earliest Park of England. The
King was went to have venison thence before he had it out of his own Parks.
fair and beautiful House belonging to the Knightly Family of the Farmers.

Sacy-Forest stored with Deer, and fit for game.

Avon a general name of all Rivers. This Aufona or Nen is a notable River,
which after a sort runs through the middle part of this Shire.

Dantrey is a through-fare Town, well known at this day by reason of the Innes
there.

Fawesly where have dwelt a long time the Knightleys descended from those more
ancient Knightleys of Gnowshall in the County of Stafford.

Wedon in the street. It is a pretty through-fare set on a plain ground, and
much celebrated by Carriers, because it stands hard by the famous way there
commonly called of the people Of that, and the other famous ways in England,
see Burtons Commen. on Antoninus his Itinerary through Britain.
Watlingstreet. Lelands Itinerary.

Holdenby-House, a fair pattern of stately and magnificent building.

Northampton, so called from its situation upon the North-bank of the River
Aufon. The City for Houses is very fair, for circuit of good largeness, and
walled about: and from the Wall there is a goodly Prospect every way to a wide
and spacious plain Country.

There are seven Parish Churches within the Walls, whereof the Church of
Alhallows is principal, standing in the heart of the Town, and is large and
well builded. Lelands Itinerary.

Market Wellingborow.

Kettering a Market Town well frequented.

Higham-Ferrers. The excellent ornament of this place was Henry Chichley He was
brought up in New-Colledge in Oxford, where he proceeded Doctor of Law.
Archbishop of Canterbury, who built All Souls College in Oxford, and another
here, where he placed secular Clerks and Prebendaries, and withal an Hospital
for the poor.

Oundale, there is a fair Church, and a Free School for the instruction of
children, and an Almes-house for poor people.

Fothering-hay Castle, environed on every side with most pleasing medows.

Here Mary Queen of Scots was beheaded.

Upton, so called, because it is highly situate.

Peterborow, because the Monastery Petriburgus, or Petropolis.
was dedicated to Saint Peter. See Monasticon Anglicanum, p. 63.

Baibroke Castle.

Rockingham Castle.

Welledon.

Maxey Castle.

There belong unto this Shire three hundred twenty six Parishes.

Nottinghamshire.
IT is limited Northward with Yorkshire, Westward with Darbyshire, and in some
parts with Yorkshire, and on the South Side with Leicestershire. The South and
East parts thereof are made more fruitful by the noble and famous River Trent,
with other Riverets resorting unto it.

The Forest of Shirewood in the West Ab arborum proceritate, and in frequentia
veprium, Lympida Sylva noto satis nomine dicitur. Twini Comment.
part stretches out a great way. It yields store of wood to maintain fire.
It has a great number of Fallow-Deer, yea and Stags with their stately
branching heads feeding within it.

Mansfield there is a great Market passing well served, and as well frequented.
The first Earl of Mansfield in Germany was one of King Arthurs Knights of the
Round-Table, born and bred at this Mansfield.

Nottingham (the principal Town, which has given name unto the Shire) is
seated on the side of an Hill. The Town for the natural site thereof is right
pleasant: as where, on the one hand lie fair and large Medows by the
Rivers-side; on the other, rise Hills with a gentle and easy ascent: and is
plentifully provided of all things beside, necessary for man's life.

It is both a large Town and well builded for Timber and Plaster, and stands
stately on a climbing Hill. It has a fair Market place and street. The Castle
stands on a rocky Hill on the West Side of the Town, and Line Riveret goes
by the roots of it. Lelands Itinerary.

For largeness, for building, for three fair Churches, a passing spacious and
beautiful Market place, and most strong Castle, it makes a goodly show.

Newark, as one would say, the new work, of the new Castle. Here King John
finished the most wearisom course of his troublesome life.

Little-borough, a little Town indeed, and truly answering to the name.

Workensop a Town well known for the Liquorice that there grows, and
prospers passing well.

Blithe a famous Market Town.

Wollerton a fair House built by Sir Francis Willoughby.

There are in this County an hundred sixty eight Parishes.

Northumberland.
THe Ground it self for the most The Nobility and Gentry of the North, are of
great antiquity, and can produce more ancient Families, then any other part of
England, many of them Gentry before the Conquest; the rest came in with William
the Conqueror.
part is rough, and hard to be manured, seems to have hardened the
Inhabitants, whom the Scots their neighbors also made more fierce and hardy,
while sometimes they keep them exercised in wars, and other whiles in time of
peace intermingle their manners among them, so that by these means they are a
most warlike Nation, and excellent good Light Horse men. And whereas they
addicted themselves wholly to Arms; there is not a man amongst the better sort,
that has not his little Tower or Pile: and so it was divided into a number of
Baronies: the Lords whereof in times past before King Edward the First his
days went commonly under the name of Barons, although some of them were of no
great living. But a wise and politic devise this was of our Ancestors, to
cherish and maintain Martial Prowess among them in the marches of the
Kingdom, if it were nothing else, but with an honorable bare Title.

Toward the Sea and Tine, by diligence and good Husbandry it becomes very
fruitful; but else where it is more barren, rough, and (as it were)
unmanurable. And in many places Sea-coles are dug up in great plenty to the
great gain of the Inhabitants, and commodity of others.

Thrilwale Castle, not great, but strongly built.

Otterburn, where there was a field most valiantly fought between the Scots and
English; in which the Victory waved alternatively too and fro three or four
times, and fell in the end to the Scottish.

Axelodunum.
Hexham.

New Castle So called, because Robert de Curtois Son of William the Conqueror
built there a new Castle out of the ground against the neighboring Scots.
upon Tine, the very eye of all the Towns in these parts, ennobled by a notable
Haven, which Tine makes, being of that depth, that it bears very tall Ships,
and so defends them, that they can neither easily be tossed with tempests,
nor driven upon shallows and shelves. It is situate on the rising of an Hill.
It is adorned with four Churches, and fortified with most strong walls, which
have seven Gates in them, with many Towers.

It is wealthy, partly by intercourse of traffic with the Germans, and partly
by carrying out Sea-coles, wherewith this Country abounds, both into foraign
Countries, and also into other parts of England. Portus, Castrum, Carbo, Salmo,
Salina, Molaris,
Murus, Pons, Templum, Schola sunt novi gloria Castri.


Hurst. A Sylva nomen accepit, nec aliunde sejactat, quam a minaci Castello.
Lel. Comment. in Cygn. Cant.

Tinmouth-Castle, a stately and strong Castle.

Morpeth a famous little Town.

Morpith-Castle, so called, from the death of the Picts in that place.

Withrington an ancient Castle, which gave the name unto the Withringtons
Gentlemen of good Birth, and Knights, whose valor in the war has been from
time to time remarkable.

Warkworth a proper fair Castle. There is a Chapel wonderfully built out of a
Rock hewn hollow, and wrought without beams, rafters, or any pieces of Timber.

Alnwick or Anwick, a Town ennobled Alnevicum.
by the victory of the Englishmen over the Scots, and fortified with a goodly
Castle. The Earls of Northumberland kept their Court at that Castle.

Emildon. Here was born John Duns, In Dunston a little village within the
Parish of Emildon.
called Scotus, because he was descended of Scottish blood, who being brought up
in Merton-Colledge at Oxford, became wonderful well learned in Logic, and in
that crabbed and intricate Divinity of those days: yet as one still doubtful
and unresolved, he did overcast the truth of Religion with mists of obscurity.
And with so profound and admirable subtilty, in a dark and rude style, he wrote
many Works, that he deserved the title of the Subtle Doctor: and after his own
name erected a new Sect of the Scotists. But he died pitifully, being taken
with an Apoplexy, and over-hastily buried for dead; whiles upon return of life,
nature (though too late) was about to discuss the violence of the disease: and
he, making means in vain by a lamentable noise for help, after he had a long
time knocked his head against the Gravestone, dashed out his own brains, and
at last yielded up his vital breath.

Norrham or Northam. There is a Castle upon the top of an high steep Rock, and
fortified with a trench.

Berwick the utmost Town in England, Berwicus.
and the strongest hold in all Britain. It is well near compassed about with
the Sea. and Twede together.

Upon the West parts of Northumberland, the Picts-Wall is; in some of the waste
ground the Wall is to be seen of great height, and almost whole.

The Roman Britains being continually molested by the often incursions of the
barbarous people called Picts. The Emperor Severus built a Wall of stone, An
hundred miles long.
with great wisdom and industry to strengthen the Northern parts of Britain,
against the many inrodes of the Picts. At every miles end of this Wall was a
Tower, and in the Wall a Pipe of Metal betwixt the Tower or Sentinel-houses,
that so soon as a man had set his mouth to this Pipe, they might hear through
all the Sentinels, where the enemy was, and so in a short time giving warning
from one end of the Wall to the other.

There are about forty six Parishes in Northumberland.

Oxfordshire.
ON the West Side it joyneth upon Glocestershire; on the South, which way it
runs out farthest in breadth, it is dissevered from Barkshire by the River
Isis or Tamis; Eastward it bordereth upon Buckinghamshire; and Northward where
it ends pointed, in manner of a Cone, or Pineapple, has Northamtonshire of
one side, and Warwickshire on the otherside, confining with it.

It is a fertile Country and plentiful* wherein the plains are garnished with
Cornfieldsd and Medows, the Hills beset with Woods, stored in every place not
only with Corn and Fruits, but also with all kind of Game for Hound or Hawk;
and well watered with fish-full Rivers.

Hoch-Norton, for the rustical behavior of the Inhabitants in the age
afore-going, it grew to be a Proverb, when folk would say of one rudely
demeaning himself, and unmannerly after an Hoggish kind, That he was born at
Hocknorton.

Woodstock a woody place. Here is one of the Kings Houses full of state and
magnificence, built by King Henry the First, who adjoined also thereunto a very
large Park compassed round about with a stone wall, which John Rosse writes to
have been the first Park Wedgenock Park in Warwickshire is one of the most
ancient Parks in England.
in England.

Our Historians report, that King Henry the Second being enamoured upon
Rosamond Clifford, a Damsel so fair, so comely and well-favoured without
comparison, that her beauty did put all other women out of the Princes mind;
insomuch as she was termed Rosa mundi, the Rose of the world; and to hide her
out of the sight of his jealous Juno the Queen, he built a Labyrinth in this
House, with many inextricable windings, backward and forward: which
notwithstanding is no where to be seen at this day.

She was buried at Godstow with this Epitaph in Rhyme. Hic jacet in tumba Rosa
mundi, non Rosa munda,
Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet.


The Town it self having nothing at all to show, glories yet in this, that
Jeffrey Chaucer our English Homer was there bred and brought up.

Banbury a fair large Town. It is famous Nunc autem conficiendo Caseo
notissimum. So Camden. Dr Holland englisheth that thus. Now the fame of this
Town is for Zeal, Cheese and Cakes. Though that is but an unhandsome
conjunction, and there is no ground for it in Camden, yet in Mr Wheatlyes time
(to my knowledge) it was famous for zeal, and I hope is so now.
for Cheese and Cakes.

Hanwell, where the Family of Cope has flourished many years in great and good
esteem.

Broughton, the seat of my Lord Say and Sele.

Islip the native place of that King Edward, whom for his religious piety and
continency, our Ancestors and the Popes vouchsafed the name of Edward the
Confessor.

Oxford a fair and goodly City, whether Oxonia or Oxonium. Quodcunque habuit ab
initio nomen, pulcherrimum and saluberrimum habet situm regionemque, omnia
necessaria affatim ministrantem, bonarumque litterarum celeberrimam scholam, ut
omnes, qui alias Europae Academias adierunt, facile agnoscunt. Lhyd. Com. Brit.
Descrip. Fragment.
a man respect the seemly beauty of private houses, or the stately magnificence
of public buildings, together with the wholesome site or pleasant prospect
thereof. It was from its situation in ancient times, called Bello situm.

Isidis vadum Saxonice Ouseford, and Ousenford, corrupt Oxford. Historia
circumfertur adfirmans hanc urbem olim ab amaenitate situs Bellositum dictum
fuisse: Joannes Rossus hinc edoctus, hoc idem affirmat. Let. Comment. in Cygn.
Cant.

Oxoniensis Universitas Schola secunda Ecclesiae, imo Ecclesiae fundamentum.
Matthew Paris Hist. Angl. page 945.

In the Council of Vienna, it was ordained that there should be erected Schools
for the Hebrew, Greek, Arabic and Chaldaean Tongues, in the studies of Paris,
Oxford, Bonony and Salamanca, as the most famous of all others, to the end that
the knowledge of these Tongues might by effectual instruction be thoroughly
learned.

Here are 17 Colleges, and 7 Hals.

Dorchester, a Town known in times past to the Romans. Vide Lel. Commentin
Cygn. Cant.

Henley upon Tamis, The Inhabitants of it for the most part are watermen.

This County contains two hundred and eighty Parish Churches.

Richmondshire.
IT takes the name from a Castle.

Most of it lies very high, with ragged Rocks, and swelling Mountains, whose
sloping sides in some places bear good Grass, the bottom and Valleys are not
altogether unfruitful. The Hills themselves within, are stored with Lead,
Pit-coal and Copper.

Nappa an house built with Turrets, and the chief seat of the Medcalfs, thought
to be not long since the greatest Family for multitude of the same name, in all
England: For I have heard that Sir Christopher Medcalf Knight, and the top of
this kindred being of late High Sheriff of the Shire, accompanied with three
hundred men of the same House all on Horseback, and in a Livery, met and
received the Justices of Assizes, and so brought them to York. So Camden.

Bolton-Castle, a stately Castle.

Richmond, the chief Town of the Country, well peopled and frequented.

Hourby-Castle.

There are contained in this Shire an hundred and four Parishes besides
Chapels.

Rutlandshire.
IT is the least County of all England. Lying in form almost round like a
circle, it is in compass so far about, as a Light-horsman will ride in one
day.

It was called Rutland, as one would Rutlan-Castle in Wales is so named, being
built on a shore of red earth.
say Red-land, the Earth in this Shire is every where red, and so red that even
the Sheeps fleeces are thereby colored red: the English-Saxons called Red in
their tongue Roet and Rud.

Uppingham a place upon an high ascent, whence that name was imposed, a well
frequented Market Town.

The Vale of Catmose a field full of Woods.

Okeham is in the midst of it, so called from Oaks.

This small Shire has Parish Churches forty eight.

Shropshire.
ON the East Side it has Staffordshire; Commitatus Salopiensis.
on the West Mongomeryshire and Denbighshire; on the South Side Worcester,
Hereford and Radnorshires, and on the North Cheshire.

It is replenished with Towns and Castles standing thick on every side, in
regard of repelling and repressing the Welshmen in the Marches bordering
hereupon. Whence our Ancestors by an ancient word, named the Confines of this
Shire toward Wales, the Marches, because they were Bounds and Limits between
the Welsh and English; and diverse Noblemen in this Tract were called Barons of
the March, and Lords Marchers, who had every one in their Territory a certain
peculiar jurisdiction, and in their own Courts ministered Law unto the
Inhabitants, with sundry Privileges and Immunities.

Bishops-Castle, so called, because it belonged to the Bishops of Hereford,
whose Diocese and Jurisdiction was large in this Shire.

Clun-Castle, so called from the River Clun.

Ludlow, it stands upon an Hill, a Town more fair than ancient.

Bridgnorth, so called of Burgh or Borough, and Morfe (heretofore a Forest)
adjoining. A Town fortified with Walls, a Ditch, a stately Castle, and the
Severn: seated also upon a Rock, out of which the ways leading into the upper
part of the Town were wrought out.

Wenlock, now known for the Lime.

Huckstow-Forest.

Routon-Castle.

Tong-Castle, there is a Bell for the bigness of it very famous in all those
parts adjoining.

Draiton.

Wem.

Morton-Corbet, a Castle of the Corbets. Shrewsbury the famousest Town of Salop
in Latin Salopia.
this Shire, it stands most pleasantly.

It is seated upon an Hill of a reddish Earth, and Severn, having two very fair
Bridges upon it. Neither is it strengthened only by nature, but fortified also
by Art; it is like a Horse-shoe in the opening place. There is a strong stately
Castle.

It is a fair and goodly City well frequented and traded, full of good
merchandise, It has a fair Library and School-house* and Brewhouse.
and by reason of the Citizens painful diligence, with Cloth making, and
Traffic with Welshmen, rich and wealthy. For, hither (almost) all the
Commodities of Wales do conflow (as it were) to a common Mart of both Nations.

It is inhabited both with Welsh and English, speaking both Languages.

One of the rarities there is their Cakes, such as cannot be made so well in
any other place of England.

Shrawerden Castle.

Knocking-Castle.

Oswestre, a little Town enclosed with So called from Oswald King of the
Northumbers:
a Ditch and a Wall, fortified also with a pretty Castle, in it there is great
Traffic of Welsh Cottons.

Whittington-Castle.

Whit-Church, or Album Monasterium.

Ellesmer a little Territory, but rich and fruitful.

In this Region there are about an hundred and seventy Parishes.

It had the great Lawyer, Ployden; the rich Squire Thin; the great Hebrician,
Broughton; the strong man, the Baron of Burford; the witty Jester, Tarleton.

Somersetshire.
THis County is very large and wealthy: The North-side whereof the Severn Sea
beats upon: The West part confineth with Denshire: in the South it bordereth
first upon Devonshire, and then upon Dorsetshire: Eastward upon Wiltshire: and
North-East upon part of Glocestershire.

The soil very rich, yielding for the most part thereof passing great plenty
both of Pasture and Corn, and yet not without stony Hills: exceeding populous,
and full of Inhabitants: furnished also with commodious Havens, and Ports
sufficiently.

As it is soul, so it is fruitful, which makes them comfort themselves with
this Proverb, What is worst for the Rider is best for the Abider.

This name grew from Somerton, a Asserius, an ancient Writer calls this
Country always Somertunensis, that is, Somertunshire.
famous Town in ancient time, and of all others in the Shire most frequented.

Dunster-Castle is enclosed round about with Hills, saving to the Seaward, built
by the Mohuns, a right noble and mighty Family, which flourished from the very
Conquerours days, (under whose Reign that Castle was built) unto the time of
King Richard the Second.

Cheder, famous for five things:

1. Cheese. 2. Used about Cloth.
Teazers. 3. Garlic. 4. Mills: there is a spring whereby many Mils are turned
about. 5. Cliffs, a great Rock cleft asunder.

Evel a great Market Town.

West-Camalet and East-Camalet, or Queens-Camalet two Towns.

Winecaunton a great Market.

Ilchester, there is a Market there kept.

Montacute, fo termed, because the Hill rises up by little and little to a
sharp point. It has given name to that right honorable Family of Montacute.

Longport a Market Town well frequented.

Wellington a pretty Market Town. Sir John Popham dwelt here, a man of an
ancient worshipful House, and withal a most upright Justicer, and of singular
industry.

Taunton or Thonton from the River The One. A very fine and proper Town, and most
pleasantly seated, one of the eyes of the Shire. The Country here most
delectable on every side with green medows; flourishing with pleasant Gardens
and Orchards, and replenished with fair Mannor-houses, wonderfully contenteth
the eyes of the beholders.

Athelney a pretty Island, a place famous for King Alfreds shrouding himself
therein, when the Danes had brought all into broil.

Somerton the Shire Town in times past. There is kept a Fair of Oxen, and other
Beasts from Palm Sunday until the midst of June, with much resort of people;
the Countrymen all thereabout are very great Grasiers, Breeders, and Feeders
of Cattle.

Bridgwater a great and populous Town; King Henry the Eighth adorned it with an
Earldom.

Bruiton.

The Glassy Isle, so called, Propter amnem scilicet quasi vitrei coloris in
marisco circumfluentem* Monasticon Anglicanum. Vide plura ibid.

Here flourished the famous Abbey of Glastonia Monasterium viderint parents
nostri, amplitudine, ac magnitudine perpaucis in universa Europa (quantum
autumo) postponendum. Godwinus De Conversione Britanniae ad Christianam
Religionem. Vide plura ibid. Et Monasticon Anglicanum, p. 1, 2, etc.
Glastenbury, the beginning whereof is very ancient, fetched even from that
Joseph of Arimathaea, who enterred the body of Jesus Christ, and whom Philip
the Apostle of the Gauls, sent into Britain for to preach Christ.

See Dees British Monarchy.

Ochy hole a Cave, or Den far within Of Ogo a British word which betokens Den.
the ground, wherein are to be seen certain Pits and Riverets.

Congerbury, so named of one Congar, a man of singular holiness.

This County is famoused by three Cities, Bath, Wells and Bristow.

Wells a little City with an Episcopal Fontanensis Ecclesia, Fountain Church.
See, so called of the Springs or Wells, which boil up there.

For multitude of Inhabitants, for fair and stately Buildings, it may well and
truly challenge the pre-eminence of all this Province. It has a goodly Church
and College. The Church it self all thorowout is very beautiful, but the
Frontispiece thereof in the Westend, is a most excellent and goodly piece of
Work indeed, for it arises up still from the foot to the top all of Imagery,
in curious and antique wise wrought of stone carved, and embowed right
artificially, and the Cloisters adjoining very fair and spacious.

A gorgeous Palace of the Bishops, built in manner of a Castle, fortified with
Walls, and a Mote stands hard by, Southward; and on the other side fair
houses of the Prebendaries.

In the Reign of Henry the First Johannes de Villula of Tours in France, being
elected Bishop, translated his See to Bath, since which time the two Sees
growing into one, the Bishop bears the title of both, so that he is called,
The Bishop of Bath and Wells.

Selwood, a Wood thick of Trees, whereof the Country adjoining is called
Selwoodshire.

Bathe of the hot Bathes in times past, Bathonia. Vrbs non mode antiqua verum
etiam celebris Romanorum Monumentis multis, liquido in muris comparet, qua itur
a porta meridionali ad borealem. Lelandi Comment. in Cygneam Cantionem. Vide
Johnsonum De urbe; and Thermis Bathonicis.
callid in Latin Aquae calidae.

It is seated low in a plain, environed round about with Hills almost all of one
height, out of which certain rilles of fresh River waters continually descend
into the City, to the great commodity of the Citizens. Within the City it self
there bubble and boil up three Springs of hot water, of a Bluish or
Sea-colour, thin vapors, and rising up from thence a kind of strong sent
withal, by reason that the water is drilled and strained through veins of
Brimstone, and a clammy kind of earth, called Bitumen, which Springs are very
medicinable, and of great virtue to cure bodies overcharged and benumbed with
corrupt humors. For, by their heat they procure sweat, and subdue the
rebellious stubbornness of the said humors.

From eight of the clock in the forenoon unto three in the afternoon, they are
in a manner scalding hot, and do work: and being thus troubled, cast up from
the bottom certain filth; during which time they are shut: neither may any body
go into them, until by their fluces they cleanse themselves, and rid away that
filthiness.

Of these three the Crosse-Bath (so called of a Cross standing upright in old
time in the midst of it) is of a very mild and temperate warmth; and has
twelve seats of stone about the brink or border thereof, and is enclosed within
a wall.

The second, distant from this not fully two hundred foot, is much hotter;
whence it is termed hot Bath. These two are in the midst of a street on the
West Side of the City.

The third, which is the greatest, and after a sort in the very bosom and heart
of the City, is called, the Kings Bath, near unto the Cathedral Church, walled
also round about, and fitted with two and thirty seats of arched work; wherein
men and women may sit apart, who when they enter in put upon their bodies
linen garments, and have their guides.

This City has flourished as well by clothing, as by reason of usual
concourse thither for health twice every year.

Bristow. This City standing partly in Somerset, and partly in Glocestershires,
A Bishops See, and famous Port.
is not to be reputed belonging to this or that, having Magistrates of its own,
and being of it self entire, and a County incorporate.

It is situate somewhat high between Avon, and the little River From,
sufficiently defended with Rivers and Forfications together. So fair to behold
by reason of buildings, as well public as private, that it is fully
correspondent to the name of Brightstow. With common Sews or Sinks (they call
them Goutes) so made to run under the ground, for the conveyance and washing
away of all filth, that for cleanliness and wholsomnesse a man would not
desire more: whereupon there is no use here of carts: so well furnished with
all things necessary for man's life, so populous, and well inhabited withal,
that next after London and York, it may of all Cities in England justly
challenge the chief place.

For the mutual intercourse of traffic and the commodious Haven, which
admits in Ships under sail into the very bosom of the City, has drawn
people of many countries thither.

The Citizens themselves are rich Merchants, and traffic all over Europe, yea,
and make Voyages at Sea so far as into the most remote parts of America.

The most beautiful Church there is S. Mary's of Radcliff without the Walls,
into which there is a stately ascent upon many stairs; so large withal, so
finely and curiously wrought, with an arched roof over head of stone
artificially embowed, a steeple also of an exceeding height, that it surpasses
in many degrees all the Parish-churches in England.

There is hard by, another Church also, which they call the Temple, the Tower
whereof, when the Bell rings, shakes to and fro, so as it has cloven and
divided it self from the rest of the building, and made such a chink from the
bottom to the top, as that it gapeth the breadth of three fingers, and both
shuts and opens whenever the Bell is rung.

S. Vincents Rock, so full of Diamonds, that a man may fill whole strikes or
bushels of them. They are not so much set by, because they are plenteous: in
bright and transparent color they match the Indian-Diamonds, if they pass
them not: in hardness only they are inferior to them.

In this County are numbered three hundred eighty five Parishes.

Staffordshire.
IT has on the East Warwickshire and Darbyshire; on the South Side
Worcestershire; and Westward Shropshire bordering upon it; reaches from South
to North in form of a Lozeng, broader in the midst, and growing narrower at
ends. The North part is full of Hills, and so less fruitful: the middle being
watered with the River Trent is most plentiful, clad with woods and embrodered
gallantly with Cornfieldsd and Medows: as is the South port likewise, which
has Coals also dug out of the earth, and Mines of Iron.

There are these Rivers in Staffordshire, Sow which runs by Stafford, Dove,
Peru a little River by Pencridge, Charnet, Blithe, Tame. The River Trent arises
in Colonel Boyers Park, and Dove passes through part of it; Severn passes
through some part of the Shire.

Stourton Castle stands upon the River Stour in the very confines with
Worcestershire.

Dudley-Castle did stand upon an Hill, named so of one Dudo, or Dodo ah English
Saxon. It is now demolished.

Under this lies Pensneth-Chace, wherein are many Cole-pits.

Pateshall a seat of the Astleys descended from honorable Progenitors.

Wrotestley, the habitation of Sir Walter Wrotesly whose Father was Sir Hugh
Wrotesly. In the Parlour window among diverse of the Arms of the Ancestors of
that Family there is one Sir Hugh Wrotesley mentioned, who for his approved
valor was made by King Edward the Third Knight of the Garter at the first
Institution, and so accounted one of the Founders of the said honorable Order.

Chellington a fair House and Manor of the ancient Family of the Giffards.

Brewood a Market Town.

Weston.

Theoten-Hall, by interpretation, the habitation of Heathens or Pagans, at this
day Tetnal.

Ulfrunes-Hampton, so called of In Henry the 7th his time Stephen Gennings
Mayor of London founded a free Grammar School there, where he was born.
Wulfruna a most devout woman, who enriched the Town (called before simply
Hampton) with a religious House, it is now corruptly called Wulver Hampton.

For an Inland Town, there is a famous Market for Cattle and Corn.

Weddsborow, there is Sea-coal.

Walsal, a little Market Town, a mile There is a Corporation.
by North from Weddesbury.

There are many Smiths, Peuterers and Bit-makers. There is a Park of that name
half a mile from the Town.

There are many Lime-pits near the Town.

Draiton-Basset, the seat of the Bassets.

Tamworth, a Town so placed in the So called from Tame the River running beside
it.
confines of the two Shires, that the one part which belonged sometime to the
Mirmions, is counted of Warwickshire; the other which pertained to the Hastings
of Staffordshire.

Here is a fair Castle.

At Falkesley-Bridg that Roman Highway Watlingstreet, enters into this
Shire, and cutting it through (as it were by a strait line) goes Westward into
Shropshire.

Wall, so called of the relics of an old Wall there remaining, and taking up
much about two acres of ground.

Penck-ridge, so named of the River Penck, famous for an Horse-Fair, which the
Lord of the place Hugh Blunt obtained of King Edward the Second.

New Castle under Lyme.

Trentham.

Stone a Market Town, which having the beginning in the Saxons time, took the
name of the Stones, which our Ancestors after a solemn sort had cast on a
heap, to notify the place where Wolpher the Heathenish King of the Mercians,
most cruelly slew his two Sons Wulfald and Rufin, because they had taken upon
them the profession of Christianity.

Sandon.

Cankwood, or Forest.

Gerards-Bromley an House.

Chebsey.

Eccleshall.

Raunton a Monastery.

Stafford, near unto which there was a Castle upon an Hill, now demolisht.

It is the head Town of the whole Shire.

Ticks-Hall, the dwelling place of the Astons, a Family which for Antiquity,
Kindred and Alliance, is in these parts of great name.

Chartley, there is a Castle.

Beaudesert, the House of the Lord Paget.

Lichfield. This City is low seated, of Cadaverum Campus. The field of dead
bodies, a number of Christians was there martyred under the Emperor Dieclesian.
good largeness, and fair withal, divided into two parts with a shallow pool
of clear water: which parts notwithstanding join in one by the means of two
Bridges or Causeys made over, that have their sluices, to let out the water.

It was beautified with a very goodly Cathedral Church, which being round about
compassed with a fair Wall Castle-like, and garnished besides with fair Houses
of Prebendaries, and with the Bishops Palace also, mounting upon high with
three Pyramids or Spires of stone, making an elegant show, and for elegant and
proportional building it did yield to few Cathedral Churches, but is now
demolished.

Burton upon Trent, a famous Market, the Bridge there has 38 Arches.

Blithfield a fair House of the ancient Family of the Bagots.

Needwood-Forest was very large.

Moorland, so called, because it rises A small Country bare and cold, it
keeps snow lying upon it a good while.
higher into hills and mountains, and is less fruitful, which kind of places we
call Moors.

Leek a well known Market Town.

Wotton, a little Country Village there lying under Weverhill. Wotton under
Wever
Where God came never.


This fond Rhyme the neighbor Inhabitants use of it. Yet in so hard a soil it
breeds and feeds beasts of large bulk, and fair spread.

The River Dow or Dove does swiftly run along the most part of the East Side
of this County, and separateth it from Darbyshire, if it chance to swell above
the banks, and overflow the Medows in April, it makes them so fruitful that
the Inhabitants use commonly to chant this joyful note; In April Doves flood
Is worth a Kings good.


Utcester, it is situate upon the side of an Hill with a gentle ascent: a Town
A Market Town. Dr Lightfoot was born there.
more rich in gay flowring Medows, and in Cattle, than fair built.

Tutbury-Castle in times past large and stately.

There are accounted an hundred and thirty Parishes in this Shire.

Suffolk.
IT has on the West Side Cambridgeshire; Southfolk or people in respect of
Norfolk.
on the South the River Stour, which divides it from Essex; on the East Side
the German-Sea, and on the North two little Rivers, ouse the least, and
Waveney, which flowing out (as it were) of the same fountain, run diverse
ways, and sever it apart from Norfolk.

It was famous for worthy Ministers in the very beginning of Reformation. In
the entrance of Queen Elizabeth to the Crown, it was moved at the
Council Table, Whether it was not dangerous (for some Politic respects) to
alter the Religion before established? Sir Nicholas Bacon (who was of the
County of Suffolk) demanded, Which was the true Religion acccording to
Scripture, the Protestant or Popish? it being answered, the Protestant, Leave
that to God then (said he) to defend it.

It is a large Country and full of Havens, of a fat and fertile soil (unless
it be Eastward) being compounded of Clay and Marle, by means whereof there are
every where most rich and goodly Cornfieldsd, with Pastures as battable for
grazing and feeding of Cattle.

Great store of Cheeses are there made, which to the great commodity of the
Inhabitants are vented into all parts of England: nay into Germany, France and
Spain also.

There are also Woods and Parks.

New Market a Town lately built, as the very name imports.

Here lies out a great way round about, a large plain, named of this Town,
New-Market-Heath, consisting of a sandy and barren ground, yet green withal.

There are great Ditches, called, The Devils Ditches.

St. Edmunds-Bury, or Bury, a renowned Town.

A place for situation and wholsomenesse of air so excellent, that Camden
says, Sol non vidit urbem situ elegantiorem. Many of the Gentry live there.

There are two Churches in one Churchyard, where there are Lectures several
days in the week.

Here was born Richardus de Bury Here Bishop Steven Gardener was born.
Bishop of Durham, the Governor of Edward the Third when young, and famous
especially for a work which he entitled Philobiblos, in the Preface of which
he confesses, Ecstatico quodam librorum amore potenter se abreptum. Godw. de
Praesul. Ang. Comment.
He was well acquainted with Petrark the Italian, and other learned men of that
age. Bradwardine Archbishop of Canterbury, and Richard Fitzralph, Armachanus,
Walter Burleigh, Robert Halcot, and other most famous men of that age were his
Chaplains.

Lidgate a small Village, yet in this respect not to be passed over in silence,
because it brought into the world John Lidgate the Monk, whose wit may seem to
have been framed and shapen to the very Muses themselves: so brightly reshine
in his English Verses, all the pleasant graces and elegancies of speech,
according to that age.

Clare a noble Village, it gave name Stoke Clare the Dukes of Clarence.
to the right noble Family of the Clares, Earls of Clare.

Sudbury, that is, the South-Burgh, it is populous and wealthy by reason of
clothing there.

Mont-chensie.

Nettlested.

Offton the Town of Off a King of the Mercians.

Lancham a pretty Market.

Hadley a Town of good note for making of clothes.

Higham.

Bentley.

Walpet, that is, the Wolves-pit, a Market Town.

Stow and Needham two little Market Towns.

Ipswich A large, sweet, well watered Town, a Town in Orchards. Here was born
Cardinal Wolsey, of whom see a pithy description in Herberts Henry the 8th,
page 314, 315.
a fair Town resembling a City, situate in a ground somewhat low: which is the
Eye of this Shire, as having an Haven commodious enough; fenced in times past
with a trench and rampire, of good trade and stored with wares, well peopled
and full of Inhabitants, adorned with twelve Churches, and with goodly large
and stately Edifices, plentiful in shipping.

Mendlesham, there is a Market and Fair.

Ufford the seat in times past of Robert de Ufford Earl of Suffolk.

The roof of this Church and other parts of the Quire are curiously engraven
with sundry kinds of Works and Pictures, all burnisht and guilt with gold.

Weevers Ancient Funer. Mon.

Rendelisham, that is, Rendils Mansion place.

Woodbridge a little Town beautified with fair houses.

Framlingham-Castle, a very fair and beautiful Castle, fortified with Bank,
Ditch, and Walls of great thickness, wherein are thirteen Towers; and inwardly
furnished with buildings right commodious and necessary.

Parrham a little Town; Barons Willoughbey of Parrham.

Oreford.

Aldburgh, that is, the old Burgh, or the Burgh upon the River Ald. An Harbor
very commodious for Sailers and Fishermen, and thereby well frequented.

Dunwich, it lies now desolate.

Blithborow a small Town, it has a Market and a Fair.

Southwold a Town well frequented through the benefit of an Haven.

Wingfield, it has given name to an ancient and renowned Family.

Dunnington the habitation of the ancient Family of the Rousses.

Heuningham the residence of a Family of that name of very great Antiquity.

Halesworth a Market Town.

Hoxon, ennobled by reason of King Edmunds Martyrdom.

Brom, there dwelt a long time the Family of Cornwalleis of Knights degree: of
whom Sir John Cornwalleis was Steward of Edward the Sixth his household while he
was Prince; and his Son Sir Thomas, for his wisdom and faithfulness became
one of ^he Privy-Councel to Queen Mary, and Controller of her Royal House.

Eaye an Island.

Beddingfield, it gave the name to an ancient and worshipful Family.

Flixton, or Felixton, so named of Faelix the first Bishop of these parts.

Mettingham, where there is a Castle.

Luthingland of Luthing the Lake.

Comerley Town.

Burgh-Castle, now ruined.

Sommerly-Hall, my Lady Wentworths House, famous for fair Walks and Ponds.
There is one long Walk encompassed with Fir-trees on each side.

The Parishes in this County amount to the number of five hundred seventy five.

Surrey.
FRom the West it boundeth partly upon Barkshire and Hantshire; from the South
upon Sussex; and from the East on Kent; toward the North it is watered with the
River Tames, and by it divided from Middlesex.

It is a Country not very large, yet wealthy enough, where it bears upon
Thames, and lies as a plain and champion Country. It is likened by some unto
a course freeze garment with a green guard, or to a cloth of great spinning,
and thin woven, with a green list about it, because the inner part is but
barren, the outward edge or skirt more fertile.

Chertsey a kind of Island.

Fernham, so named of much Fern growing in that place.

Guildford a Market Town well frequented, and full of fair Innes.

Ockam, where that great Philosopher and Father of the nominals William de
Ockham was born, and whereof he took that name, as of the next Village Ripley,
George Ripley a ringleader of our Alchymists.

Oatlands a fair house of the Kings: near unto which Caesar passed over Tames
into the Borders of Cassivelaunus. For See more in Camdens Britania there.
this was the only place where a man might in times past go over the Tames on
foot, and that hardly too, which the Britains themselves improvidently bewrayed
unto Caesar.

Ockley, so named of Oaks.

Rhiegate, the Rivers course.

Holm-Castle.

Beckworth-Castle.

Effingham.

Kingstone a very good Market Town The Kings Town. Regio-dunum Tamesinam sic
dictum quod ad Tamesini fluvii ripam situm sit. Lel. Kings Kingston upon the
Thames, so called to distinguish it from Kingston upon Hull in Yorkshire.
for the bigness, and well frequented. It had beginning from a little Town
more ancient then it of the same name. In which, when England was almost
ruinated by the Danish Wars, Aethelstan, Edwin and Ethelred were crowned
Kings upon an open stage in the Market place, whence it was called Kingston.
Leland. Comment. in Cygn. Cant. Camd. Brit.

Shene, so called of its shining brightness, now Richmond, wherein the most
mighty Prince King Edward the Third, when he had lived sufficiently both to
glory and nature, died.

King Henry the Seventh built it, and gave it that name of Richmond, of the
Title he bare, being Earl of Richmond, before he obtained the Crown of England.
He had scarce finished this new work, when in this place he yielded unto
Nature, and ended his Life. Here Queen Elizabeth also died.

Nonesuch a retiring place of the Princes, Quanta illic Romanae antiquitaris
aemulatio? Quantum speciosae picturae? Quantum auri? Quantum denique omnia
genera ornamentorum. Diceres Coelum esse stellis interpolatum. Lel. Comment. in
Cygn. Cant.
and surpasses all other houses round about: which King Henry the Eighth, in a
very healthful place called Cuddington before, selected for his own delight
and ease, and built with so great sumptuousness and rare workmanship, that it
aspireth to the very top of ostentation for show: so as a man may think, that
all the skill of Architecture is in this one piece of work bestowed, and heaped
up together. So many Statues and lively Images there were in every place, so
many wonders of absolute Workmanship, and Works seeming to contend with Roman
Antiquities, that most worthily it might have this name that it has of
Nonesuch. Hane quia non habeant similem laudare Britanni,
Saepe solent, nullique parem, cognomine dicunt.
The Britains often are wont to praise this place: For that through all
The Realm they cannot show the like, and Nonesuch they it call.


The House was environed about with Parks full of Deer, it had such dainty and
delicate Orchards, such Groves adorned with curious Arbours, so pretty
quarters, Beds and Alleys, such Walks so shadowed with Trees, that it was
exceeding pleasant.

Wandle a clear Riveret full of the best Trouts.

Woodcot a pretty Town.

Croidon, there was the Archbishops house of Canterbury: There are Charcoals.

Bedington a fair house, beautified with a delightful show of pleasant Gardens
and Orchards.

Addington.

Aguilon situate in a most fertile soil.

Merton. It is famous for the Statute of Merton, enacted here in the 21. of
King Henry the Third, and also for Walter de Merton Founder of Merton College
in Oxford, borne and bred here.

Wimbledon, there is a goodly House, beautiful for building, and delectable
for fair profpect, and right pleasant Gardens, built in the year 1588. when the
Spanish Armado made sail upon the coast of England.

Wandlesworth.

Putney. Thomas Cromwell Earl of Essex in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth,
was born there.

Batersey. Battersega. Nomen loco inditum ut ego conjicio ex cymbis. Leland.
Comment. in Cygn. Cant. A low or clayish rode or hide. The Southwork or
building, because it stands South ove against London, the Suburbs whereof it
may seem in some sort to be.


Lambeth. Canutus the Hardy King of England there amidst his cups yielded up
his vital breath.

It was the Palace of the Archbishop of Canterbury.

Southwark, the Borough of Southwork, the most famous Market Town and place of
Trade in all this Shire. It is large and populous. In the Reign of King Edward
the Sixth, it was annexed to the City of London, and is at this day taken for a
member (as it were) of it.

Sterborow-Castle.

This County has in it an hundred and forty Parish Churches.

Sussex.
THe Region of the South Saxons, a word compounded of the site thereof
Southward, and of the Saxons, who in their Heptarchy placed here the second
Kingdom. It is above threescore miles long, and somewhat above twenty miles
broad.

It lies upon the British Ocean all Southward with a strait shore (as it were)
far more in length than breadth: How be it it has few harbors, by reason
that the Sea is dangerous for shelves, and therefore rough and troublous, the
shore also it self full of Rocks.

The Seacoast of this Country, has green Hills on it, mounting to a greater
height, called the Downs, which because they stand upon a fat chalk, or kind of
Marle, yields corn abundantly.

The middle tract, garnished with Medows, Pastures, Cornfieldsd and Groves,
makes a very lovely show.

The hithermore and northern side thereof is shaded most pleasantly with Woods,
like as in times past the whole Country throughout, which by reason of the
Woods was hardly passable. The Wood Andradswald taking the name of Anderida the
City next adjoining, took up in this quarter, a hundred and twenty miles in
length, and thirty in breadth.

It is full of Mines in sundry places, where for the making and fining whereof
there be Furnaces on every side, and a huge deal of Wood is yearly spent, to
which purpose diverse Brooks in many places are brought to run in one chanel,
and sundry Medows turned into Pools and Waters, that they might be of power
sufficient to drive Hammer-mils, which beating upon the iron, resound all over
the places adjoining.

Boseham a place environed round about with Woods, and the Sea together.

Chichester lies in a champion plain* In Latin Cicestria.
A City large enough, and walled about, built by Cissa a Saxon the second King
of this Province, and of him so named. It has four Gates opening to the four
Quarters of the World: from whence the streets lead directly, and cross
themselves in the midst, where the Market is kept; a fair stone Market place,
supported with Pillars round about.

The Church it self is not great, but very fair and neat, having a
Spire-steeple of stone, rising up passing high.

Selsey the Isle of Sea-Calves, now Called Seals.
famous for good Cockles, and full Lobsters.

Amberley, there is a Castle.

Arundel.

Petworth a house of my Lord of Northumberland, where there is a very fair
stable.

Horseham an indifferent Market.

Michel-grove, that is, Great-Grove.

Old Shoreham a Village.

Stening a great Market, and at certain set days much frequented.

Jews, this for frequency of people It is the Shire Town.
and greatness, is reputed one of the chiefest Towns of the County, it is
seated upon a rising almost on every side. There are six Churches in the Town.

High-hills, called the Downs, which for rich fertility gives place to few
valleys and plains.

Pemsey or Peremsey Marsh of Pevensey, the next Town adjoining,

Herst-Mounceaux.

Ashburnham, it gave the name to a Family of great Antiquity.

Hastings. It is accounted the first of the Cinque Ports.

Winchelsey a fair Town.

Rhie, a very commodious Haven: Ripa.
There is an usual passage from hence into Normandy.

Echingham.

Bodiam a Castle belonging to the ancient Family of the Leaknors.

Ashdown-Forest, under which stands Baron Buckhurst.
Buckhurst, the Habitation of the ancient House of the Sackviles.

Waterdown-Forest.

This Province contains Parishes three hundred and twelve.

Warwickshire.
IT is bounded on the East Side with Sanders, Glover and manyother Martyrs
suffered in Warwickshire.
Northamptonshire, Leicestershire, and the Watlingstreet way: on the South with
Oxfordshire and Glocestershire; on the West for the greatest part with
Worcestorshire; and on the North-side with Staffordshire.

It is divided into a plain champion, and a woody Country: which parts the
River Avon, running crookedly from North-East to South-West, does after a sort
sever one from the other.

Edgehill.

There is the Vale of the Red-horse, so termed from a shape of a Horse cut out
in a red Hill by the Country people hard by.

Essenhull. It takes its name from the situation, standing Eastward from
Monks-Kirby, and upon a rising ground.

Pillerton.

Shipston a Market of Sheep in times past.

Kinton a Market of Kine.

Compton in the Hole, because it lies hidden under the Hills, thence a noble
Family has taken the name.

Shugbury, stones resembling little stars are there found, which the Lords of
the place surnamed thereupon, have long showed in their Coat Armor.

Southam a Mercate Town well known.

Leamington a Market Town, so caled of Leame a small Brook that wandereth
through this part of the Shire.

Chesterton the Habitation of that ancient Family of the Peitoes.

Rugby a Market chiefly for Butchers.

Newenham Regis, Kings Newenham, to distinguish it from Newenham Paddox, the
King was anciently possessed of it. There are wholesome Wells.

Upton, so called, because it stands upon an ascent.

Bagginton, which belonged sometime to the Bagots.

Stoneley a stony place.

Warwick is the principal Town of the whole Shire. It stands over the River
Avon upon a steep and high Rock, and all the Passages into it are wrought out
of the very stone.

It stands in a dry and fertile soil, having the benefit of rich and pleasant
Medows on the South part, with the lofty Groves and spacious thickets of the
woodland on the North.

It has a very strong Castle, the seat in times past of the Earls of Warwick,
The Town it self is adorned with fair houses. A place of strength and health in
the same Fort
You would conceive a Castle and a Court,
The Orchards, Gardens, Rivers, and the Air
May with the Trenches, Rampires, Walls compare.
It seems no art, no force can intercept it,
As if a Lover built, a Soldier kept it.
D. Corbets Iter Boreale.

Blacklow-Hill, here Piers de Gaveston was by the Nobles of the Kingdom
beheaded.

Charl-Cot the habitation of the renowned ancient Family of the Lucies Knights,
which place long ago descended hereditarily to them from the Charlcots.

Stratford upon Avon a little Mercate Town; there is a stone Bridge supported
with fourteen Arches.

Bitford a Market Town.

Studly-Castle.

Coughton the principal mansion house of the Throckmortons.

Beauchamps-Court, so named of Baron Beauchamp of Powick.

Henley a pretty Market Town.

Aulcester a small Market of Wares and trade, but much frequented for the
Corn-Fair there holden.

Wroxhall, there is a little Priory.

Killingworth, there is a most ample, beautiful and strong Castle, encompassed
all about with Parks.

Bremicham or Bremingham full of Inhabitants, and resounding with Hammers and
Anvils, for the most of them are Smiths. The lower part thereof stands very
waterish, the upper rises with fair buildings.

Sutton-Coldfield. It stands in a It stands South of Lichfield.
woody, and on a churlish hard soil, but in an excellent air, and full of all
manner of pleasures. There is a Grammar School.

Coleshull, so called from the River Cole.

Maxstock-Castle is near to it.

Meriden. This place situated upon London-road, has from some Innes and
Alehouses built for the receipt of Passengers, grown of late times to the
credit of a Village.

Coventry. It is a City very commodiously Coventria quasi Coventus trium, a
Covent of three sorts of Monks.
seated, large, sweet and neat, fortified with a strong Wall, and set out with
right goodly houses: among which there rise up on high two Churches of rare
workmanship, standing one hard by the other, and matched (as it were) as
concurrents, the one consecrated to the Holy Trinity, the other to Saint
Michael. One and the self same Bishop carried the name both of Coventry and
Lichfield.

Leofrick the first Lord of this City being much offended and angry with the
Citizens, oppressed them with most heavy Tributes, which he would remit upon no
other condition, at the earnest suit of his Wife Godina, unless she would her
self ride on horseback naked through the greatest and most inhabited street of
the City: which she did indeed, and was so covered with her fair long Hair,
that (if we may believe the common sort) she was seen of no body, and thus she
did set free her Citizens of Coventry from many paiments for ever.

At Gosford-Gate there hangs to be seen a mighty great Shield-bone of a Or
rather of an Elephant, being not so little as a yard in length. Speed.
wild Bore, which Guy of Warwick slew in hunting, when he had turned up with
his snout a great pit or pond, which is now called Swansewell, but Swineswell
in times past.

Ausley-Castle.

Brand.

Caledon.

Whitmore-Park. Though it be for the most part woody, yet is in some places so
moorish, as that the ground bears nothing but moss; which being in one place
white, gave occasion (doubtless) for its name.

Dugd. Antiq. of Warwickshire.

Willowby, because of the Willows.

Cester-over, near unto which the High port-way Watlingstreet.

Nun-Eaton, or Eaton.

Mancester a very small Village.

Atherstone a Market Town of good resort.

Merival.

Pollesworth. Sir Francis Nethersole a Kentish Gentleman of an ancient house,
sometimes Orator to the University of Cambridge, Secretary to the Queen of
Bohemia has erected a See Mr Dugdales Antiq. of Warwickshire illustrated.
School-house there.

In this County there are an hundred and fifty eight Parish Churches.

Westmerland.
IT is so called, because it lies all of Westmaria, Westmorlandia.
it among Moors and high Hills, and was for the most part unmanured. Such barren
places the Northern Englishmen call Moors: and West-moreland is a
Western-moorish Country.

It is bounded on the West and North-side with Cumberland; on the East with
Yorkshire, and the Bishopric of Durrham.

The Barony of Kendale and Candale of the River Can, which running through upon
stones, cutteth through it.

Kendale-Kirke by Kendale, a Town of very great Trade and resort, with two
broad and long streets crossing the one over the other, and a place for
excellent clothing, and for industry so surpassing, that in regard thereof it
carries a great name. For, the Inhabitants There were Lords also of Kendale.
have great traffic and vent of their woollen Clothes throughout all parts of
England.

In the River Can are two water-falls, where the waters have a downfall, with a
mighty noise.

Kirkby-Lonsdale, whither all the From the River Lone.
people round about repair to Church and Market.

Wharton-Hall, the seat of the Barons Wharton.

Kirkby-Stephen a Market Town well known.

Musgrave, there are two little Villages of that name, which gave name unto
that martial and warlick Family of the Musgraves.

Burgh under Stanemore a small poor Village fenced with a little Fortress.

Apelby memorable for its antiquity Aballaba.
and situation only. It stands in a pleasant site, encompassed for the most
part with the River Eden; for its antiquity it deserves to be counted the chief
Town of the Shire. The Castle is the The Sessions and Assizes are there kept
common-Goal for malefactors.

Whellep-Castle.

Brougham.

In this Shire are contained six and twenty Parishes.

Wilsthire.
IT is altogether a mediterranean or Wiltonia of Wilton sometime the chief
Town, and of the River Willy
midland Country. It is enclosed with Somersetshire on the West, Berkshire and
Hampshire on the East; on the North with Glocestershire; on the South with
Dorsetshire, and a part of Hampshire.

A region, which as it breeds a number of warlike and hardy men, who in old
time with Cornwall and Denshire together challenged by reason of their manhood,
and martial prowess the prerogative of the English Army, of that Regiment
which should second the main Battle; so it is exceeding fertile, and plentiful
of all things; yea, and for the variety thereof passing pleasant and
delightsome.

Wansdike a Dike of wonderful work, cast up for many miles together.

The Saxons made it as a limit to divide the two Kingdom of the Mercians and
West Saxons asunder: For this was the very place of Battle between them, while
each strove one with another, to enlarge his Dominions.

Greeklade, so called of Greek Philosophers, as some are ready to believe; who
(as the History of Oxford reports) began there an University, which
afterward was translated to Oxford.

Camdens Britan. Crecolada non insignis olim ut vulgus indoctum somniat,
Grecanicis scholis. Lel. Comment. in Cygn. Cant. Vide Burtoni Graec. Ling.
hist. p. 52. Et Godwin. de Praesul. Ang. Comment. de Theodoro Archiepisc. Cant.
p. 61.


This (though Leland dislikes) other learned men approve.

See M. Seldens Illustrat. of Draytons Polyolb.

High-worth highly seated, and well known.

Wood-Town or Wotton-Basset. It has his primitive name from Wood, the addition
proves, that it belonged to the noble House of the Bassets.

Malmesbury, a very neat Town, and has a great name for clothing.

See Monasticon Anglicanum, p. 49. of the Monastery here.

Maidulphi Urbs, that is, Maidulphs City, and afterward short Malmesbury.
Aldelme the chief of Maidulphs Disciples being elected, his Successor built
there a very fair Monastery, and was himself the first Abbot thereof. He was
canonized a Saint, and on his Festival day, there was here kept a great Fair,
at which usually there is a Band of armed men, appointed to keep the peace
among so many resorting thither. He was the first of the English Nation, who
wrote in Latin, and that taught Englishmen the way how to make a Latin Verse.
Primus ego in Patriam mecum, modo vita supersit,
Aonio rediens deducam vertice Musas.


This Monastery among other famous Clerks, and great Scholars, brought forth
William surnamed thereof Malmesburiensis, unto whom for his learned industry,
the History of England both Civil and Ecclesiastical are deeply indebted.

Colne an old little Town situate upon a stony ground, having in it a fair
Church to commend it.

Chippenham, of note at this day for Cyppanus in the Saxon tongue is to buy,
and Cyppen a buyer, as with us Cheapen and Chapman.
the Market there kept. There is now nothing worth the sight but the Church,
built by the Barons Hungerford, as appears every where by their Coats of
Arms set up thereon.

Cosham a little Village.

Castle-Comb an old Castle.

Leckham the possession of the noble Family of the Bainards.

Lacock a Monastery.

The Castle De Vies, the Devizes, built by Roger Bishop of Salisbury. He built
also the Castle of Malmesbury and Shireburn.

Trubridge, that is, a sure and trusty Bridge in great name and prosperity by
reason of clothing, and shows the remains of a Castle.

Bradford, so named of a broad Ford.

Long-Leat, the dwelling place of the Thins, a very fair, neat and elegant
house in a foul soil.

Maiden-Bradley. A Maiden infected with the Leprosy, founded an house here for
Maidens that were Lepers.

Stourton the seat of the Lords Stourton, so called of the River Stour.

Werminster exceeding much frequented for a round Corn-Market.

Sarisbury-Plains, they are but rarely inhabited, and had in late time a bad
name, for robberies there committed.

Heitesbury an ancient Mansion place of the Family of Hungerford.

Yanesbury-Castle a very large warlike Fence or Hold, fortified with a deep and
double Ditch.

Wardour a proper fine Castle.

Hindon, a quick Market.

Wilton, so called from the River Willey, a place well watered, and sometime
the head Town of the whole Shire, which thereof took the name. It is now a
small Village, having a Mayor for the head Magistrate, and in it a fine House
of the Earls of Pembroke.

Salisbury. There is a stately and Sarisburia. Roger of Salisbury built this
stately Church also. The Cathedral was longer in building than the Jews Temple,
for it was above fifty years in building, and do you not think the Founders did
intend, by proportioning the Doors to the Months, and the Windows to the
Days, and the Pillars to the Hours of the Year, that you should learn this
instruction? Not a Month, nay not a Day, nay not an Hour should be let pass
without something of Religion. Mr Annesley on 1 Chronicles. 12. 32.
beautiful Minster, which with an exceeding high spired Steeple, and double
crosse-Isles on both sides. The Windows in the Church, as they reckon them,
answer just in number to the days, the Pillars great and small, to the hours
of a full year, and the gates to the twelve Months. Mira Canam, Soles quot
continet annus, in una
Tam numerosa, ferunt, aede, fenestra micat.
Marmoreasque capit fusas tot ab art columnas,
Comprensas horas quot vagus annus habet.
Totque patent portae, quot mensibus annus abundat,
Res mira, at verares celebrata fide.
Daniel Rogers.

It has a Cloister for largeness and fine workmanship inferior to none:
whereunto joyneth the Bishops Palace, a very fair and goodly house: and on the
other side a high bell Tower, and passing strong withal, standing by it self
apart from the Minster, every street is watered.

It is the second City in all this Tract well inhabited and frequented,
plentiful of all things, especially of Fish, adorned with a very stately
Market place, wherein stands their common Hall of Timber work, a very
beautiful Edifice. It boasts chiefly of John It had also Bishop Abbot and
Davenant.
Jewel long since Bishop there, a wonderful great and deep Divine, a most
stout and earnest maintainer of our Reformed Religion against the Adversaries
by his learned Books.

Clarindon a very large and goodly Park very fit for the keeping and feeding of
wild beasts.

About six miles from Salisbury in Our old Historians termed it for the
greatness Chorea Gigantum, the Giants dance. Our Countrymen reckon this for
one of our miracles.
the Plains before named, is to be seen a huge and monstrous piece of work
Stone-henge. Within the circuit of a Ditch, there are erected in manner of a
Crown, in three ranks or courses one within another certain mighty and
unwrought Stones, whereof some are eight and twenty foot high, and seven foot
broad; upon the heads of which, others like overthwart pieces do bear and rest
crosse-wise, with small tenants and mortesis, so as the whole frame seems to
hang.

Everly-Warren, a Warren of Hares. Leporarium.


Savernac-Forest of great name for plenty of good game, and for a kind of Fern
there, that yields a most pleasing savor. In remembrance whereof, their
Hunters-horn of a mighty bigness, and tipped with silver, the Earl of Hertford
keeps unto this day, as a Monument of his Progenitors.

Atibury an uplandish Village.

Rockley a little Village.

Kenet.

Marleborow. It was most famous by Of Marga marle, which we use in stead of
dung to manure our grounds. It lies near a chaulkie-hill, which our Ancestors
before they borrowed this name Chaulk of the Latin word Calx, named Marle.
reason of a Parliament there holden, wherein by a general consent of the
States of the Kingdom there assembled, a Law passed for the appeasing of all
Tumults, commonly called, The Statute of Marleborow.

Ramesbury a pretty Village, which has pretty Medows about it.

Littlecot, a place worthy to be remembered, because of the late Lord thereof
Sir John Popham, who being the chief Judge in the King's Bench, executed Justice
against malefactors to his high praise and commendation.

This County contains in it three hundred and four Parishes.

Worcestershire.
SO called of the principal Town in it. Wigorniensis Comitatus.


Here are many Salt Pits, which the old Englishmen in their Language named
Wiches.

Warwickshire confineth on the East of this County, Glocestershire on the
South, it is bounded Westward with Herefordshire and Shropshire; North-East
with Staffordshire; it has so temperate an air, and so favorable soil, that
for healthfulnesse and plenty, it is not inferior to the neighbor Countries,
and in one part for dainty Cheese surpasses them. It yields store of Pears,
of which they make a bastard kind of Wine called Pyrry, which they drink very
much, although it be (as other drinks of that kind) both cold and full of wind.

In every place there are sweet Rivers, which afford a great abundance of the
most delicate kind of fishes.

Severn that noble and renowned River carries his stream along, through the
midst of the Shire from North to South; and Avon that comes down out of
Warwickshire to meet with Severn, waters the South-part thereof.

Beawdly, worthily so called for the beautiful site thereof, stands most
pleasantly upon the hanging of an Hill, and hovereth over the River on the
West Side: on late days well known for the admirable tallness of Trees growing
in the Forest of Wyre adjoining, which now in manner be all gone. Delicium
rerum Bellus Locus, undique floret
Fronde Coronatus Virianae tempore Sylvae,


Kidderminster a fair Town, and has a great Market of all Commodities, well
frequented, parted in twain by little River Stowre that runs through it.
There is a very beautiful Church.

Hertlebury-Castle.

Holt-Castle, so called of a very thick wood there.

Frankeley the Family of the Littletons, planted by John Littleton, alias
Westcote the famous Lawyer, Justice in the King's Bench in the time of King
Edward the Fourth, to whose Treatise of Tenures the Students of our Common Law
are no less beholden, then the Civilians to Justinians Institutes.

Bromesgrove a Market Town.

Grafton.

Droitwich, some term it Durtwich, Vnum est satis mirabile, quia aqua illa per
medium annum est salsa, scilicet a nativitate Domini usque ad festum sancti
Johannis Baptistae, per aliud vero medium temporis est dulcis. Sed quod
mirabilius est pro illo tempore quo est sali necessaria, si non hauritur,
superfluit, per aliud vero temporis vix semper excrescit. Gervas. in lib. de
Ociis imperialibus citat^r Pet. Bechor. Reduct. Moral. l. 13. c. 3. De Anglia.
of the Salt Pits, and the wettish ground on which it stands, where three
fountains yielding plenty of water to make salt of, divided asunder by a little
Brook of fresh water passing between, by a peculiar gift of nature spring out:
out of which most pure white Salt is boiled for six Months every year, viz.
from Mid-sommer to mid-winter, in many set furnaces round about.

Richard De la Which Bishop of Chichester was here born, whom Pope Urban the
fourth canonized for a Saint.

Fekenham-Forest.

Worcester the principal City of this Vigornia and Wignornia.
Shire, an ancient and beautiful place. It stands in a place rising somewhat
with a gentle ascent, by the Rivers-side that has a fair Bridge with a Tower
over it, it is well and strongly walled. There are fair and neat Houses, many
Churches. It is a Bishops See. The Cathedral Church is a passing fair and
stately building, adorned with the Monuments and Tombs of King John, Arthur
Prince of Wales, and diverse of the Beauchamps.

Powick, famous for Cherries.

Hanley-Castle.

Upton a Mercate Town of great name.

Malvern-Hills, great and high Mountains, which for the space of seven miles,
or thereabout, do (as it were) by degrees rise higher and higher, dividing this
Shire from the County of Hereford.

Bredon-Hills far less.

Elmesley-Castle.

Washborn a Village, whence came the surname to a very ancient and worshipful
Family in this Tract.

Eovesham, so called, as the Monks write, of one Eoves, Swinherd to Egwin
Bishop of Worcester. A very proper Town situate upon an Hill arising from the
River. A Town well known for the Vale under it, named thereof, The Vale of
Evesham, which for plentiful fertility has well deserved to be called the
Granary of all these Countries; so good and plentiful is the ground in
yielding the best Corn abundantly.

Charlton, now the seat of the Dingleyes.

Oswaldslow-Hundred, so called of Oswald Bishop of Worcester, who obtained it
for himself of King Edgar.

Augustines-Oke, at which Augustine the Apostle of the Englishmen, and the
Bishops of Britain met, and after they had disputed and debated the matter
hotly for a good while touching the Celebration of Easter, preaching Gods Word
also to the English Nation, and of administering Baptism according to the Rites
of the Roman Church; in the end, when they could not agree they departed on
both sides with discontented minds, upon their dissenting opinions.

There are in this Shire an hundred fifty and two Parishes.

Yorkshire.
THe County of York, the greatest Some say, it is as big as the twelve Counties
in Wales.
Shire by far of all England, is thought to be in a temperate measure
fruitful. If in one place there be stony and sandy barren ground, in another
place there are for it Cornfieldsd, as rich and fruitful; if it be void and
destitute of woods here, you shall find it shadowed there with most thick
Forests: So providently uses nature such a temperature, that the whole
Country may seem by reason also of that variety more graceful and delectable.

It is far greater and more numerous in the circuit of her miles, then any
Shire of England. The length extended from Hart-Hill in the South to the mouth
of Tees in the North is near unto seventy miles; the breadth from
Flambrough-head to Horn-Castle upon the River Lun is eighty, the whole
circumference three hundred and eight miles. Speed.

Helmsley a Manor in Yorkshire has two Parks and a Chase in it, it is said to
be about an hundred forty six miles compass, it had forty thousand timber
Trees, and two hundred Acres of wood. There are many Freeholders there.

It is famous for Wool, Grasing, Corn, Rivers and Fountains. There are the Gips
upon Yorkshire Woolds, which in the drought of Summer, when all other Springs
seem to be dried up, burst out and rise up five or six yards plum height, and
so fall down into the Dales, and make a little River, by which the Towns near
thereto refresh their Cattle, when the Valley springs fail.

On the North-side it has the Bishopric of Durham, which the River Tees with
a continued course separateth from it: On the East Side the Germane Sea lies
sore upon it: and the South Side is enclosed first with Cheshire and
Darbyshire; then with Nottinghamshire, and after with Lincolnshire, where that
famous arm of the Sea Humber flows between, into which all the Rivers well
near that water this Shire empty themselves (as it were) into their common
receptacle.

The whole Shire is divided into three parts: which according to the three
Quarters of the world are called, The West Riding, The East Riding, The
North Riding. West Riding, for a good while is compassed in with the River
Ouse, with the bound of Lancashire, and with the South limits of the Shire, and
bears toward the West and South. East Riding, looks to the Sunne-rising,
and the Ocean, which together with the River Derwent encloseth it. North Riding
reaches Northward, hemmed in (as it were) with the River Tees with Derwent and
a long race of the River Ouse.

West Riding.
Sheafield a Town of great name for the Smiths therein, fortified also with a
strong and ancient Castle.

Rotheram glories in Thomas Rotheram sometimes Archbishop of York, a wise man,
bearing the name of the Town, being born therein, and a singular Benefactor
thereunto.

Connisborrow an ancient Castle seated upon a Rock.

Dan-Castre. There is the fair Church The Scots call it Don-Castle from the
River Don.
of S. Georges.

Tickhill an old Town, fenced with as old a Castle, large enough, but having
only a single Wall about it.

Hatfiele-Chace, a great game and hunting of red Deer.

Halifax a most famous Town. Holy-hair. The Englishmen dwelling beyond Trent,
called the hair of the Head Fax. There is also a Family in this Country of
Gentlemen, named Fairfax, of the fair bush of their Hair.


This place is become famous as well among the multitude by reason of the Law
there, whereby they beheaded straitwayes whosoever are taken stealing: as also
amongst the learned: for they report that Johannes de Sacro Bosco the Author
of the Sphere, was here born: yet more famous it is, for the greatness of the
Parish, which reckons eleven Chapels; whereof two are Parish-Chappels, and
to the number of twelve thousand people therein.

Halifax Nuts are spoken of proverbially, All shells and no kernels.

Dewsborough seated under an high Hill.

Wakefield a Town famous for Clothing, for greatness, for fair building, a
well frequented Market, and a Bridge, upon which King Edward the Fourth erected
a beautiful Chapel, in memorial of those that lost their lives there in
battle.

Sandall-Castle.

The Tract lying here round about for a great way together, is called the
Seigniory or Lordship of Wakefield, and has always for the Steward one of the
better sort of Gentlemen dwelling thereby.

Medley, so called for the situation (as it were) in the midst between two
Rivers.

Skipton, it lies hidden and enclosed among steep Hills, as Latium in Italy,
which Varro supposes to have been so called, because it lies close under
Appenine and the Alps.

The Town (for the manner of their building among these Hills) is fair enough,
and has a very proper and strong Castle.

Leeds a rich Town by reason of Clothing.

Winwidfield, a name given it from a victory.

Pontfret, the Normans of a broken Pontefract. A French name brought in by the
Lacies Normans, for the English word of broken bridge. Lelands Itinerary.
Bridge, named it in French Pontfract. It is seated in a very pleasant place,
which brings forth Liquorice and Skirworts in great plenty, adorned also with
fair buildings, and has to show a stately Castle, as a man shall see, situate
upon a Rock, no less goodly to the eye, then safe for the defense, well
fortified with Ditches and Bulwarks.

Shirburn a little Town, but well inhabited.

Aberford a little Village, famous only for making of Pins, which by women's
judgment are especially commended as the best.

Hesselwood the principal seat of that worthy and right ancient Family of the
Vavasours, who by their Office (for the Kings Valvasors in times past they
were) took to them this name.

Peters-post a famous quarry of stone, so called, because with the stones hewed
out of it, by the liberal Grant of the Vavasors, that stately and sumptuous
Church of S. Peter's at York was re-edified.

Harewood-Castle of good strength.

Wetherby a Market Town of good note.

Tadcaster, it is situate upon a Port highway.

Rippley a Market Town.

Knasborrow-Castle, situate upon a mostragged and rough Rock, whence also it
has the name. There is a Well under it which turns wood into stone, within two
miles of it is the Spaw, which makes women conceive that were barren before,
and cures many diseases.

Within three miles of Knarsborough are the stinking Wells, which come out of a
mineral of Brimstone, and do many cures, especially for Worms, the Scurvy and
Itch.

Rippon. There is a very fair Church, which with three high Spire-steeples does
welcome those that come to the Town.

Burrow-Bridge a little Town, so called of the Bridge that is made over the
River.

Pyramides, four huge stones of pyramidal form in three diverse little fields,
they were monuments of victory erected by the Romans, hard by the high street
that went this way.

Eboracum, Eburacum is derived from the River Ure by Ure, or a long the side of
Ure. See Burtons Comment. on Anton. his Itin. p. 60, 61. why it is called
Eboracum;
York. This is the second City of England, the fairest in all this Country,
and a singular safeguard and ornament both, to all the North parts. A pleasant
place; large and stately, well fortified, beautifully adorned as well with
private as public buildings, rich, populous; and it has an Archiepiscopal See.

Ure, which now is called Ouse, flowing with a gentle stream from the North
part Southward cutteth it in twain, and divides it (as it were) into two
Cities, which are conjoined with a stone Bridge, having one mighty Arch.

The West part, nothing so populous, is compassed in with a very fair Wall, and
the River together, four squarewise, and gives entrance to those that come
thither at one only Gate, named Mikel-Barre, The great Gate. From which a long
Street, and a broad, reaches to the very Bridge, and the same Street beset
with proper Houses, having Gardens and Orchards planted on the backside on
either hand, and behind them fields even hard to the Walls, for exercise and
disports.

The East Side, wherein the Houses stand very thick, and the Streets be
narrower, in form resembles (as it were) a lentill, and is fortified also with
very strong Walls; and on the South-East defended with the deep chanel of
Fosse* a muddy River; which entering into the heart of the City by a blind way,
has a Bridge over it, with houses standing upon it, so close ranged one by
another, that any man would judge it, to be not a Bridge, but a continued
Street; and so a little lower runs into Ouse.

There is a Cathedral Church dedicated to Saint Peter, an excellent fair and
stately Fabric, near unto which there is the Princes House, commonly called,
The Manor.

York was a Colony of the Romans, as appears both by the authority of
Ptolomee and Antonine; and also by a piece of Money coined by the Emperor
Severus, in the reverse whereof we read, COL. EBORACUM LEG. VI. VICTRIX.



Severus had his Palace in this City, and here at the hour of death gave up his
last breath, with these words: I entered upon a State every way troublesome,
and I leave it peaceable even to the Britains.

Valerius Constantius surnamed Chlorus, an Emperor surpassing in all Virtue
and Christian Piety, ended his life also in this City, and was deified.

This Emperor begat of his former Wife Helena, Constantine the Great, who was
present in York at his Fathers last gasp, and forthwith proclaimed Emperor.

York was in great estimation in those days, since the Roman Emperors Court
was there held.

Our own Country Writers record, That this City was by Constantius adorned and
graced with an Episcopal See. Alcwin of York Schoolmaster to Charles the Great,
first Founder of the University of Paris, and the singular honor of this City.

From Paulinus the first Archbishop, consecrated in the Year of our Redemption
625. there have sitten in that See threescore and five Archbishops, unto the
Year 1606. in which Dr Tobie Matthew a most Reverend Prelate, for the Ornaments
of Virtue and Piety, for learned Eloquence, and continual exercise of Teaching,
was translated hither from the Bishopric of Durham.

Cawood a Castle.

Selby a little Town, well peopled, and of good resort; where King Henry the
First was born.

East Riding.
It is the second part of this Region, it lies Eastward from York.

Stanford-Bridge, of the Battle there fought, it is called Battle-Bridge.

Wreshill a proper and strong Castle.

Howden a Market Town, it has given name to a little Territory adjoining,
called of it Howdenshire.

Metham, it gave both surname and habitation also to the ancient House of the
Methams.

Humber an arm of the Sea, whereof also the Country beyond it, by a general
name was called Northumberland.

It is one of the broadest arms of the Sea, and best stored with Fish in all
Britain.

Wighton a small Town of Husbandry well inhabited.

Drifield a Village well known by reason of the Tomb of Alfred that most
learned King of Northumberland; and the Mounts that are raised here and there
about it.

Beverley a great Town, very populous and full of Trade.

John surnamed de Beverley, Archbishop of York, a man both godly and learned,
after he had given over his Bishopric, as weary of this world, came hither,
and ended his life in contemplation, about the Year of our Redemption, 721.

Cottingham, a Country Town of Husbandry.

Kingston upon Hull, but commonly The Kings-Town built by King Edward the First.
Hull.

For stately and sumptuous Buildings, for strong Block-houses, for well
furnished Ships, for store of Merchants, and abundance of all things, it is
become now the most famous Town of Merchandise in these parts.

The Town is a County incorporate by it self.

Headon.

Patrington.

Rosse, from whence the honorable Family of the Barons Rosse took their name.

Kelnsey a little Village.

Constable-Burton, so called of the There are also high and low Burton houses.
Lords thereof.

Sureby.

Bridlington.

North Riding.
This carries a very long Tract with Or the Northpart of this Country.
it (though not so broad) for threescore miles together, even as far as to
Westmorland.

Scarborough-Castle a goodly and famous Castle.

Within it there is Ting-tong-Wells which go two miles under the earth toward
an Hill, called Weapness, in which passage there is an Iron-gate, and by that
way the people in the time of Civil Wars brought in their Goods and Cattle, and
so supplied the Castle.

The Hollanders and Zelanders use to take mavelous plenty of Herrings upon
this Coast, and make a very gainful Trade thereof, having anciently first
obtained License by an ancient Custom out of this Castle.

Cliveland, it takes that name of steep Banks, which we call Cliffs; for there
run all along the side thereof cliffie Hills.

Sken-grave a little Village much benefited by taking great store of Fish.

Kilton-Castle within a Park.

Skelton-Castle appertaining to the ancient Family of the Barons Brus, who
derive their Descent from Robert Brus the Norman.

Wilton-Castle.

Yare a Market Town well known.

Stokesley a little Market Town.

Gisburgh a small Town very pleasant and delightful.

Ounsbery-Hill, or Rosebery-Topping, it mounteth up a mighty height, and makes
a goodly show a far off, so often as the Head thereof has his cloudy Cap on,
lightly there follows rain: whence they have a proverbial Rhyme, When
Rosebery-Topping wears a Cap,
Let Cliveland then beware a clap.


Kildale a Castle.

Pickering a good big Town belonging to the Duchy of Lancaster, situate upon
an Hill, and fortified with an old Castle: unto which a number of small
Villages lying there round about do appertain: whence the Country adjoining is
commonly called Pickering-Lith; The Liberty of Pickering and Forest of
Pickering.

Kirkby-Morside it lies hard unto the Hills, whereof it had that name, a famous
Market Town.

Rhidal a goodly, pleasant and plentiful Vale, adorned with three and twenty
Parish Churches, through the midst whereof runs the River Rhie.

Malton a Market Town well known and frequented for Corn, Horses, Fish, and
implements of Husbandry.

Newborrough a famous Abbey unto which we are indebted for William of
Newborrough, a learned and diligent Writer of the English History.

Gilling-Castle belongs unto that ancient and worshipful Family, which of
their fair bush of Hair got their name Fairfax.

The Forest of Galtres, notorious for a solemn Horse-running, wherein the Horse
that out-runneth the rest has for his prize a little golden Bell.

Sherry-Hutton a fair Castle.

Hinderskell a little Castle: Others call it Hundred-skell of a number of
Fountains that spring up and rise there.

Northallertonshire, a little Country watered with the Riveret Wisk, and
taking the name of Northalverton a Town having in it on Saint Bartholomews day
a great Fair of Kine and Oxen.

In this County there are four hundred and fifty nine Parishes, under which are
very many Chapels, for number of Inhabitants equal unto great Parishes.

A CATALOGUE of some Books lately Printed, and in The Press a Printing, And
sold by HENRY MARSH at the Princes-Armes in Chancerylane, near Fleetstreet.
Folio.
THe Sovereigns Prerogative, and the Subjects Privilege, comprised in several
Speeches, Cases and Arguments of Law, discussed between the late King Charles,
and the most eminent Persons of both Houses of Parliament.

Together with the Grand Mysteries of State then in agitation, collected and
revived by Tho. Fuller B. D. in Fol.

Quarto.
That delightful Piece, entitled, Gemmarius Fidelis, or, The Faithful
Lapidary, experimentally describing the richest Treasure of Nature, in an
Historical Narration of the several Natures, Virtues and Qualities of all
Precious Stones.

With an accurate Discovery of such as are Adulterate and Counterfeit, very
necessary for all Gentlemen, Merchants and Tradesmen.

Large Octavo.
The Rogue, or, The Life of Guzman de Alfarache the witty Spaniard, the fifth
and last Edition corrected, with many Additions never before printed.

Small Octavo.
The Ascent to Bliss by three steps, viz. Philosophy, History and Theology. In
a brief Discourse of Man's Felicity, with many remarkable Examples of diverse
Kings and Princes. Very pleasant and profitable for all sort of people. To
which is annexed that most excellent Dialogue of D. Thaulerus with a Beggar.

The Practick Part of the Law, showing, The Office of a Complete Attorney in
the full Prosecution of any Action, whether Real, Personal or Mixed; (from the
very Original to the Execution) in all Courts; with the exact Fees of all
Officers and Ministers of the Court.

Together* with special Instructions for the Solicitation of any Cause in
Chancery or elsewhere, relating to the present Government, being useful for all
men. The last and fifth Impression corrected, with a Table.

The Baptized Turk, or, A Narrative of the happy Conversion of Signior Ripex
Dandulo the only son of a silk Merchant in the Isle of Tzio from the
Delusions of that great Impostor Mahomet unto the Christian Religion, and of
his Admission unto Baptism, by M. Gunning at Exeter-house the 8th of November,
1657. drawn up by Tho. Warmestry D. D.

The Mirror of Justices, by Andrew Horn. To which is added, The Diversity and
Jurisdictions of Courts, both now most exactly rendered to more ample advantage
out of the old French into the English Tongue, by W. H. of Grayes Inn Esquire. The
second Edition corrected and amended.

Advice to Balaam' s Ass, or, Momus Catechized; in Answer to a certain
scurrilous Pamphlet, entitled, Advice to a Daughter.

Large Twelves.
The Entrance of Mazzarini through the first years Regency of Anna Maria of
Austria Queen Dowager of France, and Mother of the present Monarch Lewis XIV.
wherein the Principal Causes of those Revolutions that have since happened in
that Kingdom may be discovered.

The Fatal Doom to the Reprobates, and Charms of Divine Love to the Regenerate,
being a Learned and Useful Comment on 1 Cor. 16. 21. by R. Hook late Preacher
to the Honorable Society of Lincolns-Inne.

Small Twelves.
The Christian Diary, or, The whole Duty of Man, describing the Means of
obtaining every Virtue, and the Remedies against every Vice, with Prayers
containing the whole Duty of a Christian, and the Parts of Devotions, fitted
for all Occasions and Necessities, by N. Caussin Author of the Holy Court.

The Wicked Man's Plot Defeated, or, The Wicked Man laughed out of Countenance,
by Tho. Baker Rector of S. Mary the More in Exon.

A Word of Caution to the present Times, in relation to the Atheists and
ERRORISTS thereof, by Edward Reynolds D. D.

Twenty fours.
A Bundle of Spikenard, or, Holy Thoughts and Devotions for the Lords Table,
before the Receiving of the Sacrament, by Tho. Warmestry D. D.

HYGIASTICON, or, The right course of preserving Life and Health unto extreme
Old Age: Together with soundness and integrity of the Senses, Judgment and
Memory, by the learned Leo Lessius. The third Edition.

An Elegy on the deplored Death of that rare Column of Parnassus M. John
Cleveland.

Plays.
The Valiant Scot. Antiquary. Dukes Mistress. Unnatural Combat. Mounsieur
Thomas.

