THE Copy of two Letters sent FROM ROME, The one to Conny mac Guire, Lord of
Jniskillin, now present in the Tower, or to his Brother Roury mac Guire in
Ireland; The other to Phelim Roe O Neal, prisoner with the Lord Conny mac Guire.

The one written by Francis mac Guire, Cousin to my Lord Jniskillin: The other
from Bonoventura O Conny, to Phelim Roe O Neal.

Brought from Rome by Colonel Crely, who was apprehended at Dublin, and
afterward executed, the 26. of June.

Sent from Dublin within an enclosed Letter by Master William Scot, to his
beloved Son William Scot now Resident in London.

London, Printed for Marmaduke Boat. 1642. July 2.

DELIVER THIS TO CONNOR MAC GVIRE, Lord of Iniskellen; or to his Brother Roury
mac Guire in IRELAND.
My honored Lord,
A Thousand Commendations unto you, to Bryan, Roury, and the rest. I have heard
of your and Hugh Oges imprisonment, and truly I never heard worse News in my
life, had not some men much wiser then my self, comforted me; in regard you
esteem that great good, and no hurt will redound unto you and your whole
Nation, from these your troubles. Truly my Lord, if you were dead (which God
forbid) through that attempt, you purchased unto your former honors a glorious
and everlasting name. The Pope, and the Cardinals his Nephews heard of your
case, and how valorously Phelim, Roury, and other Gentlemen their assistants
have behaved themselves, and rejoiced greatly thereat; so that I doubt not but
he will send help unto you, if it be demanded, as becomes you. Therefore
Father Bonaventure O Conny, brother unto Encas O Conny who is Lecturer here,
thought fit to write to your General Phelim touching this matter; and I advise
you to see wisely unto your reasons which he writ, and unto the good which will
arise from them in time, and that you and Phelim do all things according to his
directions, and the rather, that the Father Bonaventure is a wise, prudent, and
learned man, and as faithful and natural to you as I am: If you be not
present your self, Roury will supply your place before all things, I beseech
you for the love of Jesus Christ, that true love be established amongst you,
and let not the temptation of the Devil or man divert your mind from
cherishing all possible love and kindness betwixt your self and Brian
Mac-Connaght his children, as I doubt not you will ^ndeavour to draw unto you,
not only your own kindred, but also all the ancient Roots of the Irish where
ever dispersed or distant; and all to the glory of God, and the defense of our
Religion; and I will be bound that God will be your help, if you bear out but
one year, believe me the Pope and all the Catholipue Kings will be glad that
you crave their assistance, the merciful God grant it, and defend you from the
outrage of your Enemies; so will he pray night and day, which is

Your own poor Cosen, FRANCIS MAC GUIRE
Rome; from Issidores College, March 4. after the Roman Account. HAd I
finished my intended studiet, there is no thing in the world I had rather, then
to live with you, and serve you until death; and seeing I am not present with
you, I beseech you let your counsel be wise and conscienable men, and such as
be acquainted with the Customs of other Nations. I commit you to Gods
protection; behave your self nobly for your Religion.

Commend me to Hugh Mac-Mahoune and his children.



TO MY HONORED FRIEND, PHELIM ROE O NEIL, with my well-wishes, in IRELAND.
MY Honored Lord, the Great God help you; I would have written often unto you*
since I received Saint Francis his habit, and especially during the seven
years I lived in Rome, were it not that the Lord lately slain, and Hugh Roe my
Brother charged me to keep no correspondence with you or any other friend
there, to avoid suspicion or damage to happen unto you thereby, now if that
which is written unto us, and which we hear from all parts be true, (to wit,)
that the thing which we long desired, and whereof we hoped in God, and in you
until now, be come to pass, the time of writing and keeping correspondence
with you, touching such matters as are best and most needful unto you in the
present opportunity is now at hand; wherefore I could not choose above all
things but write these few lines unto you in my Mother tongue as being most
safe. The holy Father and his two Nephews, Cardonall Anthony Barbarimus
Protector of Ireland, and Cardinal Francis Barbarimus, who has the power here
in all such matters as concern the Pope, have heard of the war and
confederation which you make for your Religion and Liberty; and truly I
cannot express unto you the greatness of their joy thereat, in so much that
if they had received Letters, or if you did send an Agent with your will and
designs, you should want no help, therefore I would have you to send some
able man hither weth a Declaration of the grievances in form of Law. My
Brother Owin Roe the Priest is in Spain, except he be gone into Ireland by
this, he has finished very well his study of Philosophy, Theology, and Law,
and is well spoken in the Latin, Spanish, and Dutch, he is I know well, sober,
discret, learned, and bred according to the manner of several Nations, to
treat with any Prince of what matter soever; further more he is as you know
faithful and natural to the other Lords your Confederats; which qualities are
most requisite in a man to be employed here, or in any place else upon the like
occasion. I protest unto you before God, that I commend him not in that he is
my Brother, but that I am not acquainted with any man of more ability to be
employed in that service here then he, since Hugh Roe my Brother dyed, through
the great misery and pains he has taken in his last travels. I am teaching
here these six year of the College of the Irish, and all that time employed
about the affairs of the late slain Lord. I might do you some service, if I had
received any intelligence from you; and some help to ^^m whom you intend to
send hither; there is nothing I h^d ^^t then come where you are, although I am
settled here to ^y ^w^e contentment, do you use me and the rest of my function
after such manner as shall seem best unto you for your own service: Father
Arthur Mac-Geny is in Madrid, and many more who would gladly perform any
service, wherein you would be pleased to employ them, Father Francis Mac Genis
is in Germany, so likewise is Father Francis o Farrall, who is very natural
toward you, and very intimate with the Emperor who now may give you good help,
since you have eased him of the trouble of the Palatinate whom only he feared;
there is in Germany also a Priest from the County of Tyrone, Edmond Mac Gray a
learned man, having of late comenced Doctor in France; there is a Divinity
Professor Patrick O Connor, descended from the O Connors in Leinster, who has
done great service to the late deceased Lord; he is of nature loving and
constant and bold as is his Cousin Brandon o Connor, who I doubt not will favor
you. Michael o Gormly is in the Low Countries, Gaurdian of Lovaine, and many
other of the like sort; See your self what is best to be done with Owin o Neal,
who is in Flanders, and with Con mac Cormock, who is Sergeant Major in Spain
but more is the pity a man of no great policy or wisdom. I would that all
the old trained Soldiers were there, I will write to my Brother Murtaugh o
Conney, who was Ensign to the late deceased Lord, and is now Captain; and to
the rest of the Nobility of Vlster, that they repair to you without delay: You
may write to the King of Spain amongst other things, that he give them leave to
come unto you; I do not know well, what will the Earl of Terconell do upon
this occasion, his Regiment is disbanded, and he himself is gone to the Court
to Madrid. I fear much, That if he should go into Ireland, he would breed more
then trouble good. Noble Sir, fear God above all things, in following wisely
the fortune which God offers you; let love and unanimity be among your selves,
and show great kindness to the old Irish of Leinster. Obliege all men unto
your self as near as you can; beware of the trick of the Munster men, who at
this hour show no candid dealings toward you in Rome, and will do worse as you
shall see hereafter, unless you prevent it speedily by your Agent; for they
ascribe unto themselves without any ground, the praise and glory of all your
Heroical deeds, as you may understand by Enis who is now with you, be sure to
have a great heart, and make some head among you; but be sure to reserve the
Crown for Conus side, viz. Vlster; Remember the old slavery wherein you lived
long, and the general destruction to come upon you, except you prevail; you
shall prevail if you join your forces as you ought, God send it; I would advise
every chief Officer among you, to have a Secretary a long with him, to take a
Diurnall of every passage, and of the overthrows which your enemies receive,
which shall redound much to your glory; Waste not the Country for fear of
famine, I will write according as I hear from you; we would send unto you a
Bull after the form of the Bull, which Hugh mac Baron got, if we had received
your Letters; The Church will do wisely if they commit the election of the
Prelates there to the Nobility, and give them authority in this point.

Your faithful servant Bonoventura o Conny.
Rome, From Isidores College, March 4. 1642. After the Roman account.
FINIS.

