Match me these two: OR THE CONVICITON AND ARRAIGNMENT OF Britannicus and
Lilburne.

WITH An Answer to a Pamphlet, entitled, THE Parliament of Ladies.

Printed in the Year 1647.

The Conviction and Arraignment of Britannicus and Lilburne.
WITH An Answer to a Pampulet entitled, The Parliament of Ladies.
THe well-affected party in and about the city of London, finding by too common
experience, that the fames of diverse upright and honest men were daily
bespattered, and the faithfulness of diverse real Patriots weekly calumniated
by diverse envious depravers, and presumptuous overweening Libellers; to take
away so great a reproach, and for the future to impede the inevitable rents and
distractions that would happen, occasioned by these men's lying reports,
petitioned His Majesty, that a body of learned men might be admitted to
assemble together in a Court of Judicatory, there to summon before them, the
chief broachers of vain and altogether unsufferable leasings; and that having
examined them on strict interrogatories, they might according to their deserts,
receive censure, and suffer condign punishment.

His Majesty cheerfully assenting, these men were chosen as Members of the
Court: Philoparthen a Poet, Sozimus a Lawyer Soranzo a Philosopher, and Philo
as Antiquary, with diverse others.

The Members being assembled, they had some debate about choosing their Judge;
some pitched upon Bathillus, but it was objected, that his fancy was wholly
taken up in compiling the third part of his Night-Search, and that it was
likely, if his expression were to be measured with his muse, he would bestow
many hours in talk, and yet utter but few words; and therefore he was utterly
incapable of the place. Then they thought of electing Mantuan, but it was soon
waved, on consideration that he might be employed in finishing his Pastoralls
of Britannia; and his Muse having hitherto but sung of Pan, and of imaginary
Groves, he could not be acquainted with a refined dialect.

At last they concluded, that the golden-mouthed Linus, who had so sufficiently
manifested his Oratory in his excellent Madagascar, and his Albovine, was the
fittest man on earth to be their Judge; and therefore they ordered that
Catzius, who had so profoundly shadowed himself in Emblems, should be
dispatched with Letters into France, imploring Her Majesty of Great Britain to
part with her Poet one Month, the time limited for the sitting of that Court.

Her Majesty was graciously pleased to dismiss her beloved Bard, who was as
welcome to the Members of this imaginary Court, as ever Apollo to the
Heliconian Damsells: he being invested on the Bench, they ordained Catullus to
be Clerk of the Assize, John Tailor to be Doore-keeper, and Martin Parker to be
Subfizer, and carry out the offall.

All things being conveniently disposed of, meet for the effecting of those
affairs, ready to be taken into consideration; the Court sat, and first fell
into debate, what penalty ought to be inflicted on those that should derogate
from the honor, or cast aspersions on the names of any either noble or
virtuous: then Sozimus after a silence commanded, began to say;

Sozimus his Speech.
Reverend Sirs,
IN this last and worst of ages, time being grown sickly and humerous, it is
not sufficient, that we have each man sharpened a sword to slay his brother,
and have tired our selves with destroying eveay man his friend; but now we set
on foot a worser fiercer war, a war of the pen; every man that has but
sufficient ability to spell his own name right, and to subscribe to an
acquittance, summons his wits, and he will needs be invective against some
one, and divulge his folly in print. Diverse wholesome Laws have been enacted by
our Predecessors to remedy this evil, and to curb the boldness of Libellers:
See the Laws of King Alfred, Chap. 28. where it is said, that the Author and
spreader of false rumors among the people, had his tongue cut out, if he
redeemed it not with the price of his head: And again by the Statutes at
Westminster, first made 3 Edw. 1. c. 33. 2 Rich. 2. c. 5. 12, etc. and Eliz.
Chap. 7. which Statutes yet remain in their full force and virtue, it is
enacted and strictly defended, upon grievous pain; that from henceforth none
shall be so hardy as to contrive, speak, or set forth any false news, lies, or
tales of Prelates, Earls, Dukes, Barons, or great men of the Realm, whereby
debates, discords, or slanders may arise, between the King and his people, and
the Lords, Nobles and Commons, to the ruin and quick destruction of the
Realm, if remedic were not provided: and he that shall offend therein shall be
kept in prison until he brought him forth in Court that first did speak and
report the same; and if he cannot bring him forth, then he shall be grievously
punished, according to the nature of the offense, etc. by which it appears,
how hainously our Ancestors, the States of this Land in former time, were
offended with Slanderers and Libellers; and what an infallible president we
have before our eyes, to prosecute with all vigor against the Revilers and
Calumniators of our days. Let us therefore with all convenient speed summon
before us the persons of those the most notoriously known, to be active in this
kind, and proceed against them impartially, handling them so severely, that
the aftertimes may wonder at the severity of our justice.

The Court allowed of Sozimus his Speech, and ordered Catullus the Clerk of the
Court the next day should exhibit a Bill, including the names of the remarkable
offenders in that kind, with the nature and quality of their crimes, and so
for that day adjourned their Court.

Next day the Court met again, and the Judge received three Bills from the
Clerks against Lilburne, and the other against an Author then unknown, the
Writer of a Pamphlet entitled, The Parliament of Ladies; the Court commanded
them to be read, and the Clerk began to read these ensuing Articles of high
Treason drawn up against Britannicus.

Articles of high Treason charged on the exorbitant Reviler Britannicus.
1. That he the said Britannicus contrary to his Oath of Allegiance, had
proclaimed the King to have forfeited his power, and that none ought to yield
him subjection.

2. That he the said Britannicus vilified his Sovereigns wife, mentioning her
name in an unseemly and unruly Dialect.

3. That he the said Britannicus had taken away the good names of many eminent
and worthy persons, and upon all occasions reviled, abused and contemned many
right honorable Personages of His Majesty's Privy Counsel.

4. That for many months he was a constant Shimei, a Rabshekah, and an
Aretine, and in some respects was as great an Incendiary as the most perverse
and evil Counselor about His Majesty.

After the Clerk proceeded, and began to read the Articles drawn up against
the obstinate and refractory Col. John Lilburne.

1 That he the said John Lilburne advanced to a Commander from being a
Servitor, had not dealt so punctually, nor managed his actions so faithfully,
as was requisite for the attaining of those immunities, for which he went
forth, as otherwise he might have done.

2 That he the said Lievt. Col. Lilburne, according to his demerits, justly
shut up in prison, ceased not continually to divulge Pamphlets and Papers, of
very dangerous and evil consequence, and tending to steal away the hearts of
the people from their Rulers, and to make the high Court of Parliament as
odible in their eyes, as ever was the High Commission or Star Chamber.

3 That the said Col. Lilburne had revolted from his principles, and of a
seeming helper, was become a furious demolisher, and that he had shown himself
a perfect temporizer.

4. That he the said Col. Lilburne had assayed to eradicate, even the very
fundamental Laws of the Land, to root out Monarchy, and set up Anarchic, as
in his Free-mans Freedom vindicated, page 11. where he desperately inveigheth
against all power and authority what soever, both divine and humane, and
therefore in so doing his fact was treasonable.

5. That he the said Colonel Lilburne, in a book entitled, A Remonstrance of
the freeborn people of England, maintains a doctrine never before heard of,
which overturneth all Law, and breaks in pieces the sword of Justice, and
opens a gap to all licentiousness, exorbitancie, and profaneness, saying,
that the body of the People may do that of themselves, which their Deputies,
Trustees, Representators, chosen ones do for them, only for greater
convenience they depute them, and they may go no further in any thing, nor sit
no longer, nor dispose of any thing, but according to their commission and
power received from the represented, and that the State universal, the body of
the common People, is the earthly Sovereign Lord, King, and Creator of the
King, Parliament, all Officers, Ministers of Justice, underived Mejesty, and
Kingship inherently resides in the State universal, the common People, etc.

6. That the said Col. Lilburne has most traitorously and vilely spoken
against the Kings Majesty, in his late printed book called Regal Tyranny
discovered, as in Page 14. We may see, he says, The office of a King is not in
the least of Gods institution, neither is it to be given to any upon earth. And
p. 56, 57. he says of the King in these words, Charles Stuart has committed
Treason against the Kingdom of England, etc. and that he is guilty of all the
innocent blood shed in England, Scotland, and Ireland, since the Wars, which is
the blood of thousands, for which if all the sons of men should be so base and
wicked as not to do their duty in executing justice upon him, which legally
may and ought to be done, by those especially who have power and authority in
their hands, yet undoubtedly the righteous God will, and I am confident in an
exemplary manner in despite of all his wicked protectors and defenders.

7. That the said Col. Lilburne now arrived at the height of impudence, lays
the cause of the Parliament against the King in the one scale, and the cause of
the oppressed people of England, enslaved by them, in the other scale, and
censureth, that the Commons of England are now more burdened by them, then ere
they divulged they were by the King, and have the same and greater reasons to
fight against them, who have entered themselves into a conspiracy, and are
become a company of lawless, unlimited, and unbounded men, setters up of the
highest Tyranny that can be set up in the world, who have no rule to walk by,
but their own corrupted and bloody wills, and are a company of devouring
Lions, ravening Wolves, and crafty Foxes, as page 7. of his last Book,
entitled, Oaths unwarrantable.

8. That he the said Col. Lilburne, to the disgrace of Christianity, and all
enlightened men, who know that they are forbidden to rail on those that are in
authority, no, although their Government were vicious and tyrannical,
according to the example of Saint Paul, who excused himself, when he had but
in a slight manner something taunted Ananias, has avouched he will maintain
the Parliament to be degenerated into the most notorious pack of tyrants, that
ever in the world were assembled together since Adams Creation, minding visibly
nothing in the world but pleasure, oppression, cheating and cozening the whole
Kingdom of its treasure and revenues, trades, lives, bloods, liberties, and
properties, for which he censureth them, to deserve nothing but to be pulled
out by the ears, and thrown out to the dunghill, and be trodden under foot by
all men, etc. as in his Book aforesaid, page 38.

9. That he the said Col. Lilburne has endeavored to persuade the people, the
Parliament of England are no longer a Parliament, and in his Book
aforementioned, page ibid. have forfeited their essence, and absolutely
nullified the end of their sitting, and are from a company of faithful
Shepherds, become a company of devouring Lions, and ravenous Wolves; and
because they are so, he adjudgeth them to be worried to death with
mastiffe-dogs, (which alas, cannot but be too weak to encounter them) and that
by them they should be worried and pulled in pieces.

The Court taking into consideration the substance and import of the several
Articles, Ordered the principal Heads of them to be drawn up, and a Messenger
to be dispatched, with plenary power, to bring the bodies of the three
Libellers beforementioned, to answer each of their offenses at their Bar, the
next ensuing day, and so for that day adjourned.

The next day the Court being sat, Britanicus and Lilburne were at hand to
show themselves, but the Author of The Parliament of Ladies could not be found,
although diligent search was made for him; The Messenger related to the Judge,
and the Judge to the Bench, that they had brought the two Incendiaries,
Britanicus and Lilburne, who were ready to attend at their Bar, and that they
had more to do to bring Lilburne, then to find Britanicus; for the one
alleged, that it was a breach of Magna Charta, for any freeman of England, to
render an account of his actions, or to suffer punishment for any crime, were
it never so heinous, and therefore they were enforced to ravish his person, and
bring him perforce before them. That they found Britanicus in his bed, in to
deep a study, that at their approach he scarcely credited his eyes; that they
guessed by the papers which they then had seized on, that he was deeply
projecting how to find a clew, which might guide him out of that labyrinth in
which he had involved himself; and that his papers imported, that he had a
purpose, so he could slip his own neck out of the collar, to leave others
therein, though they were strangled, to lay his guilt on them that had hired
him to ra^le, and proclaim himself a transcedent Rebel, a reviler of his
Sovereign for money.

The Judge then commanded Britanicus to be brought to the Bar, and caused the
Clerk of their Court to read his Charge, upon which Philo thus inferred:

Behold the man before you, who has made the Natives of great Britain a
mockery, and a word of reproach to all Nations, who has dared to fly in the
face of his Maker, to contemn, accuse and vilify his Sovereign with such
invective taunts, and reproachful terms, that not all the Histories in the
world report of one in any age so desperately inclined, and impudently
incorrigible; he has hitherto escaped the hand of justice, and has nourished
himself (no doubt) with vain hopes, that he should never render an account for
his insolences; but now the time is arrived, that he must suffer for his
sins, and be made an example of justice to posterity.

Britanicus having heard his charge read, with Philos speech, most lively
characterizing him, was licenced to answer for himself, who no less bold of
speech, then impudent in writing said,

My worthy and learned Judges, it does not the least affright me to render an
account to you, whom I know to have drank deep of the Pierian fount, and to be
conversant with the Muses, knowing my Annals comprised in poetic prose, have
been indeed but dissolved verse: And that I bare away the palm from the whole
crowd of Pamphleters; the Diurnal, the Weekly account, Rusticus, Hybernicus,
Civicus, and the London post, they were but silly empty Chroniclers, I Lord
predominant, sententious, as well as narrative. O Chaucer and thy Genius, help
on my tale: I confess I was bold and invective; he that undertakes to
encounter Majesty, must not be shaken with Pannick fear; I esteem it my chief
glory, that I shall be the sole wonder of the next Age, and be styled THE
PRINCE OF LIBELLERS: His Majesty has ample cause to applaud my vein, for if
he consider rightly, my lines not so Eclipsed his glory as they advanced his
cause, so that foreign Nations, were it for my sake only, will term his war
just.

Soranzo answered,

You see the fellow's bold confidence; to be impudent in an error is
unsufferable; mix your votes, and Doom the Libeller according to his merits.

The Court then commanded him to withdraw and resolve upon the question, that
forasmuch as Britanicus persisted in his error, and confirmed the same with
pride, his own mouth had judged him, and therefore they gave Sentence, that he
should be drawn on an hurdle from Newgate to Tyburne, by a Lion and an Ass,
with a paper on his breast, bearing this inscription, THE BLASPHEMER OF GOD AND
HIS ANOINTED. And being arrived at the triple tree, to be fastened by the neck
with an iron collar, and so hanging between Heaven and earth, as unworthy of
both, a soft fire kindled beneath him, to scorch and puff up his skin, and one
in the shape of a fury to prick his imposthumated flesh, with a sharp bodkin,
till the expired, that he might despair, and be sensible of the pains of hell
he was to suffer eternally.

He being dismissed, and signed with the Character of death, Lilburne was
brought to the bar, who being commanded to kneel, refused to do it, having had
formerly denied to yield homage to an higher Judicature: therefore to them he
would not bend the knee, on which occasion of his unwarrantable obstinacy
Philoparthen answered,

WORTHY SIRS,

You see the perverseness of this man, now Englands chief and prime Incendiary,
who has hitherto occasioned a prolix multitude of sorrows, to scourge our
Nation: one who has made it his chief employment to revile and caluminate,
this is the man that has railed against the Government of the Church of
England, terming it Antichristian, and Diabolical, this is the man that has
sold the Englishmans Birthright for a mess of pottage, when he wrote Englands
Birthright, pretending to Vindicate their Rights, whose very breath is
contagious, and whose papers, sent from so unsettled a person, have fired the
breasts of the Commons of this. Kingdom with an Epidemick heat, whose
insolences should I relate, the naration thereof would be sufficient to
pervert your senses, and to shake in sunder the supporters of this square roof;
he has a long time been mewed up, and has triumphed hoping that his own
faction in despite of justice, would guerdon him, and render him guiltless:
the fates have suffered him to persist, till he has filled up his measure of
sin, brim-full, and running over, and now have given up, to suffer condign
punishment.

Sozimus answered, Although his actions merit not, that he should have
admittance to reply, but to be seized on by the rough hand of justice, yet it
will not be an error, if we suffer him to speak for himself, and hear from his
own mouth.

Lilburne nothing daunted, custom having imboldned him, not to be affrighted
at the stern looks of his Judges, began to say as follows.

God the absolute Sovereign Lord of all, having created one man, even Adam,
invested him with Power and Authority to regulate, command, and subject all
beasts of the field, creeping things, and fishes, etc. But he made not the
least mention that any should esteem another man to be Inferior to himself, or
that his successive posterity should be distinguished by verbal Titles, and
Lordly Commands, neither has any power, neither can they execute any, but
merely by institution or Donation: and it is unnatural, irrational, sinful,
wicked, and unjust, for any man, or men whatsoever, to part with so much of
their power, as shall enable any of their equals to question, doom, and inflict
punishment upon them; and it is also unnatural, unjust, sinful, wicked, and
devilish, for any man whatsoever, Spiritual, Temporal, Clergyman or Layman,
to appropriate and assume to himself, Power, Authority, and Jurisdiction, to
rule govern or reign over any sort of men in the world; and whosoever does it,
whether Cleargy-man or Layman, endeavors to appropriate and assume to himself
the office and Sovereignty of God, which was the sin of the devils, therefore
I appeal from you, as not being Idonci, and competentes Judices, and I stand at
the Judgment feat of God, unto whom only I ought to render an account.

Soranzo retorted,

Gentlemen, you see the man still retains the same Soul that he harbored,
when he appealed from the sentence of the House of Lords assembled in
Parliament, but now he may not escape with so mild a censure as only to be
amerced and confined, he is the only disturber of mankind, that is now
visible, Britanicus being taken away, proceed we according to his Crimes.

Then Lilburne being commanded to withdraw the Court, entered into serious
consultation to determine what punishment wa^ most meet to inflict on so
notorious a Libeller, and after some expense of time, gave the result thus.

That forasmuch as Lilburne had both abused Mars, and vilified Mercury, the
one by his temeritie, when fighting, the other by his debility, when writing;
they ordered, that during his abode on earth, he should be confined to an high
Turret, so to penetrate his mind with an hate of his ambition, that he should
be girt with a wooden sword, sheathed in an earthen scabberd; his meat to be
the carcasses of Ravens, because he had made such fatal music, and was still
croaking against his Superious; of windfuckers, because he took pleasure to
beat the air: of Eagles because he has wounded many with his tallons: and of
Canarie birds, because he could fing songs pleasing, to contrary-minded
parties: his drink they ordered, should be taken out of the river A flood that
whosoever drinks of, his guts by degrees, congeal to stone.
Ciconia, and spiced with the powder of Mandrakes, for that his voice was
ominous, with some quantity of the juice of the herb called Hellebore, for that
it might be possible in time, he might be purged of his madness: his bed they
ordered should hang by Pullies betwixt the roof and the floor, and so fashioned
by cunning workmen, that it might continually move, and falsie from one side to
another, to put him in mind, that as by his poisonous Rethorick he had rockt
others in the Cradle of security, and sent them in a sleep to hell, so himself
was now sailing to the invisible land: Moreover they ordered, in derision of
his Pamphlets, and to lance his imposthumated conceit of his own worth, that
the pictures of Orpheus and Homer, of Austin and Ambrose, of Livie and Seneca,
compassed about with Apollo, and the nine Muses, should be pourtrayed on the
wall, their faces veiled, and darts in their hands, having this motto engraven,
in letters Capital over their heads.

Divine verse, and Sacred Theology,
the Mistrisse of the Arts Philosophy:
With fair Historia, we and they do mourn,
for that a Lilburne on the earth was born.
After Lilburns sentence was confirmed, and he given into the hands of those
who were commanded to shut him up, and inflict upon him the unheard of
punishment, the Court took into consideration the transcendant crime of the
Author of that abusive Pamphlet, entitled the Parliament of Ladies, and
commanded the Articles drawn up against him to be read, which were,

1. That he the said Author, though he had shadowed his spleen very covertly,
and darted his thunderbolts unseene, bad very grossly and impiously abused the
Parliament of England, in particular, diverse honorable Lords, worthy Knights,
virtuous Ladies, and well descended Gentlemen.

2. That he had cast aspersions on his Highness the Prince Elector, taxing him
of libidinousnesse and incontinencie with diverse Ladies.

3. That he had abused the Right Honorable the Lord Rich, the Lady Cockham,
and the Lord Cambden.

4. That he had abused the reverend Doctor Sibballs, not sticking to aver, that
he had lately been in Cornelius Tubs, and that the Lady Kensington was much
delighted with M. Saltmarsh his performances.

5. That he had grossly vilified the Lady Cobham, averring, though
mysteriously, that she had three Children not by her Lord, but her Lemman.

6. That rowing one way, and looking another, he had reviled, despised and
jeered even the Parliament of England, questioning their Orders in dark
speeches, censuring their Actions under feigned names, and deriding their
persons by a wilful mistake.

The Court taking into consideration, the substance and import of the several
Articles, Ordered, that in regard the said Author was not to be found; diligent
search should be made for him, and that so soon as he shall be seized on by
the rough hand of justice, he should be imprisoned in Newgate until those
Ladies whom he had taxed of incontinencie and other gross crimes, should be
assembled in some convenient place, where they shall think fit, and each Lady
being seated round, that he the said Author, with his hands and feet bound, be
thrown in the midst of them, and from them to receive his doom, according as
the wisdoms domes of the said Ladies shall think fit, the honorable Lords, and
worthy Ladies, needing not to suspect, but he the said Author shall undergo
the severest censure, and have his soul divorced by some unwonted torture. All
Histories afford, a woman's will
Is not so strong in anger, as her skill.


These things thus prudently handled, and the Libellers according to justice
doomed, the Members dispersed themselves, each to his own abode, supposing
that nature could not produce such another trinity of Libellers, as the Hue and
Cry. Englands Birthright, and the Parliament of Ladies.

THE END.

