MIDSVMMER'S PROGNOSTICATION Of Pacification and Unity BETWIXT THE KING AND
PARLIAMENT. To the joy of the two Twin-Sisters, LONDON AND WESTMINSTER.

Wherein is expressed, The only and readiest way to settle peace in this our
Israel these distracted times, and to bring a happy reconciliation and
agreement to this Kingdom, with a steadfast love between His Majesty and his
Subjects, This Vacation. 1642.

Written by Isaac Massy, M. A.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin. 1642.

THIS Midsummer's Prognostication.
AMongst the Papers thick and threefold sent,
Twixt York and London, King and Parliament,
Let now a Preacher of Gods Holy Word
One Paper print, A Message from the Lord.
Go to, There Is some would go to ransacke Hull,
And so their stomachs would be pretty full:
There Is others would go ransack Lumbard street,
But fie upon them they shall never meet.
For what say I now to such hungry souls
That gape for such unheard of hony-falls;
Their proper swords must in their gutts be sheathed,
That from their mouths have first such frenzy breathd.
To Ireland run, ye swordmen that would fight,
Turn ye, take leave, and bid this land good night.
We have a promise made to Protestants,
Peace is extended to supply our wants.
The love of peace good protestants unites,
God is our peace; and nothing must affright's.
Christ is our peace, of peace the Counselor
Preacher of peace, of peace the practiser.
He is not angry but with only those
That are to God, and each to other foes.
The law's for war, the Gospel is for peace,
We of the Gospel have a lasting lease,
Called Gospellers of old, who has not seen
That such the protestants of old have been.
They took that lease not to expire, it is feal'd
A statute law, that cannot be repealed.
Now hold together London, Westminster,
Ye have one name and title Gospeller.
To get the honey bladder from the bees
The boys in pieces pull them (each man sees)
Let nothing pull you sisters two, in twain:
Then I prognosticate ye both shall gain.
London, and Westminster insectilees
I cannot liken ye but unto bees.
You Innes a Court-men, and you Citizens,
I do prognosticate you shall be friends.
I speak it seriously I do not jest
I hold ye past compare above the rest.
I leave ye both, my callings inclination
Binds me to be ith country this vacation.
But I have hope next term to visit ye
In health, in peace, in all prosperity,
I see so many humble men's petitions,
The King preventing many propositions,
I dare be bold now to prognosticate
We have a working reconcil'de estate.
If I be found to drive the lying trade
Of Almanacks that are at Christmas made,
I have excuse will answer for me soon,
I write mine almanac Midsummer Moon.
If I by chance am come into the fashion
Of being mad, it is less imputation,
Than to be mad at Christmas in cold blood
When to make lies in print is far from good.
But I may make a nigh and neighbor guess
And if I err my error is the less.
Because it is good to have adventured
Allthough success should be unprospered.
It Is Petermasse, John Baptist, Midsummer,
To be of future good a harbinger,
It Is sign of health, observe me in this tune
If ever you felt cooler month of June.
Or saw more plenty furnishing the earth
Or hasting more to come to timely birth.
It Is Saint John Baptists holy Almanac
Whereof at this time I presume to crack.
Both for the cooling rain that fell that day
And for the wind that sweetly blew away
The sickness, that is feared, and was so fell,
It is asswagde, allayed, and lessned well.
It Is little spoke of, all things promise fair,
To Citizens of nature Debonayre.
Bring forth your treasures hid, you that have store.
They do repent, that be not warned before.
You that have Country houses and will go
As I have said above, forespeaking so,
List what I say, attend you every man
I greet you with the luck of Jonathan.
That God, which went with David's friend, the good
Prince Jonathan, who clean did rid the wood
Of all the thieves (before that worthy man
Fled all the rogues, the host Philistian,
Whilst God with honey Jonathan did greet
From topps of trees the honey to his feet
Did drope, like amber from outlandish trees
The honey sweat from the laborious bees.)
That God with sweets bedew your country ground,
The choysest wellcoms for you there be found,
Where you intend in solemn recreation,
To pass the time of this next long vacation.
And for the rogues that robbers here would be,
Let them, like Philistims to tyborne flee.
That is a guerdon due, their just reward,
Who would have others from their own debarred.
But now for you that daily study how
Your private state may to the public bow,
And how you may the rustie things refine
In Church and state, that no man may repine,
The Lord that gives both hearts and hands to work
Put ends to rigid writings that do lurk
In woods of paper leaves, there is no end
Says Solomon, of making, much to mend,
Of many books, one humble supplication
May get of these a little relaxation.
God bless the happy hopeful Parliament,
God grant in some things that they may relent,
An intermission make of rigid writing,
It Is said, there is no end of much indigh ting.
Thus I prognosticate, you must forgive,
And by a pardon general must live.
The Parliament of some things must remit,
The King must pardon, and the nail is hit.
To this conclusion say a loud amen,
All you that are true hearted Englishmen.
This is prepared for peace and plenties meeting,
That they may have this year a friendly greeting.
The means you see, the Parliament inventing,
A bill toth' purpose, and the King consenting.
So by the end of this next long vacation
Our land shall be a quiet habitation.
Rumors of wars, distractions, all shall cease,
And then shall be security and peace.
After a day of raining showry wind,
A sunshine morning entertaines my mind,
Prognosticating after cloudy times,
Then comes a pleasure suting to my rimes.
FINIS.

