ISREAL'S REDEMPTION OR THE PROPHETICAL HISTORY OF OUR SAVIORS KINGDOM ON
EARTH; That is, Of the Church CATHOLIC, and Triumphant.

With a Discourse of GOG and MAGOG, OR THE BATTLE OF THE GREAT DAY OF GOD
ALMIGHTY.

By ROBERT MATON Minister and Mr of Arts, and sometimes Commoner of Wadham
College in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Friar, and are to be sold at his shop in little
Britain at the sign of the red Bull. 1642.

GO little book, go walk the worlds round;
And in all Countries thy great tidings sound.
Show them the wonders of Gods mighty hand,
When Jews come back unto the holy Land.
That they, (if possible) by faith may shun
That days great Wrath, before that day's begun.
For wit, nor wealth, nor Warlike force shall hold
That chosen people from their promised Ezekiel. 34.14.
Fold.
JOH. 10. V. 16. Other Sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I
must bring, and they shall hear my voice: and there shall be one fold, and one
Shepherd.

JOE 32. V. 6. etc. And Elihu the Son of Barachel the Buzite answered, and
said, I am young and ye are old, wherefore I was afraid and durst not show you
mine opinion.

I said Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom.

But there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding.

Therefore I said, hearken to me, I also will show mine opinion.

Luc. An. Senecae de beneficiis l. 4. c. 21, 22. Nihil aliud hic nisi
conscientiam (Caelesti ut spero afflatu concitatam) secutus sum: Quae etiam
obruta delectat, quae concioni ac famae reclamat, and in se omnia reponit, and
cum ingentem ex altera part turbam contra sentientium aspexit, non numer at
suffragia, sed una sententia vincit. Sivero bonam fidem perfidiae suppliciis
affici videt, non descendite fastigio, sed supra paenam suam consistit.

-- Prodest in equuleo, prodest and in igne, qui si singulis membris
admoveatur, and paulatim vivum corpus circumeat: licet ipsum corpus plenum bona
conscientia stillet; placebit illi ignis per quem bona fides collucebit.

PSALM. 27. V. 13. I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of
the Lord in the Land of the living.

POPVLO DEI OECVMENICO, Tum converso, tum convertendo, speciatim vero Matri
suae Doctissimae, pientissimaeque, ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE; Ejusque Filiae
ornatissimae, eruditionis cujuscunque nutrici uberrimae, Academiae OXONIENSI;
R. M. Alumnus suus humillimus, Evangeliique Minister minimus, pacalem verae
fidei, and charitatis unionem; aeternamque in Christo selicitatem, exoptat and
precatur.
OPusculumque hoc (quale, quale est) tanquam certissimum obsequii sui erga
Deum, firmissimum amoris sui erga Ecclesiam, and utilissimum gratitudinis suae
erga Academiam signaculum, benevole, placideque accipi and haberi, exanimo
obsecrat.

ISA 1.66. V. 10. etc. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye
that love her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her.

That ye may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations: that
ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory. For thus
says the Lord, Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river, and the glory
of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: then shall ye suck, ye shall be borne
upon her sides, and be dandled upon her knees.

As one whom her mother comfort, so will I comfort you, and ye shall be
comforted in Jerusalem.

And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish
like an herb; and the hand of the Lord shall be known toward his servants,
and his indignation toward his enemies.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
NOt for applause, not for preferment, (for though both these may safely, and
should freely be conferred, where desert is, yet neither of them can, without
sin, be made the Mark and White of our endeavors) but for the manifestation
of Gods glory, for my own comfort and pacification, and for the good of the
whole Church, did I at first adventure on the contemplation, and do now
acquaint thee with the contents of this Theme. The draught I confess is rude,
and more like a heap then a building; but yet it is some help to the
Architect, when his materials are in a readiness: and my hope is, that this
lump of Meditations may by Gods blessing draw on some skillful Artisan to
mould them into a plat-forme and model suitable to the worth and capacity of
their subject. Sure I am, the Apostles advertisement, I would not Brethren,
Romans 11. v. 25.
that ye should be ignorant of this mystery (lest ye should be wise in your
own conceits) moves me, not only to conceive, that it is very dangerous, not
to subscribe to the Jews salvation; but withal that it is no less then our
bounden duty, earnestly to enquire into the state and condition of the world,
both at, and after the accomplishing thereof. And indeed, what were truth
worth, if not the looking after? I confess again, that the gifts of Gods
Spirit are not all of the same sise and measure; and that he who has five
talents, must needs go farther, and do more in the search, then he that has
but one; and therefore I wish, that the Calebs and Joshua's of the ministry,
(who notwithstanding the soothings, the insinuating and fabulous relations, of
fleshly and faint-hearted temporizers, have already choakt and vanquished the
viperous brood (the aspiring and monstrous Anakims) of disciplinary and
doctri^ll innovations; that these I say) to whom God has given most, would
strive to do most for him, in the clearing of this particular also: at least,
that they would not scornfully reject this task, for no better reason, then
because none of our Ioh. 7. v. 8.
Rulers have hitherto approved of it. No, nor because of the illiteratenesse,
the contemptiblenesse, or whatsoever personal defect of him that proposes it.
For it is not the eminency of the Penman, nor the honor of the Patron, that
can turn falsehood into truth; although they may for a while persuade the
world to entertain such a humor of it: neither is it the want of the one, or
the weakness of the other, that can make truth become falsehood; although by
this means, it may the more easily, and successefully be censured for no
better. And what if it be so censured? certainly, the name of error and
heresy mis-applyed, is (like a scar-crow) terrible only in appearance, and
hurtful to none but such as fly from it. For who can be worse thought of, or
more vilely handled, by the most and mightyest on earth, then the best
Christians were? the preaching and teaching of their faith, was to the natural
eye mere 1 Cor. 1.18.23.
foolishness and Act. 26. v. 24. Wisil. 5. v. 4.
madness, and they themselves no more reckoned of, then the 1 Cor 4. v. 13.
filth and offscouring of all things. And yet for all that, The Act. 19 20.
Word of God grew mightily and prevailed. And it is not to be doubted, but that
God will have the victory in the end: and the longer, and more eagerly any
truth of his has been opposed and suppressed, the more suddenly and more
powerfully shall she break forth again, to the amazement and confusion of her
Adversaries, and the ratification and rejoicing of her self and her
professors. It is yielded that this Tenet was Christened in the primitive and
purest times: and that it had no mean Abettours for some ages after. And
surely, a part thereof (and that such a part which is a principal member of the
whole) has found believers amongst the most learned of all times. But unless
the Sun should depart, there could be no night: and unless this and many
other Apostolical truths and customs, had by little and little lost their
credit in the Church, That man of sin, That son of perdition, That blind
leader of the blind, could never with his tricks and trumpery have gained
such acceptance and advancement amongst men. And therefore I suppose, that that
which was at first a good advantage to him in his rising, and which is now his
best plea for the upholding of his pompous Clergy, of his Princely and
Magistracy-mastering Pontiffes; was, and is, the renouncing of the foresaid
truth, and thereupon the mis-application of all those revelations which
properly and naturally concern the Redemption and Restoration of the Jews
posterity and Principality. So unhappily, so unwittingly may even good men
befriend, and make way for the cause they hate, when they fail to divide the
Word of God aright; when they rob the Jew, the more to enrich the Gentile. Let
us beware then, lest our unbeleefe of the Jews Redemption (of their Romans 11 v.
24.
insition again into their own Olive tree) bring as great a loss to
numberless multitudes of us Gentiles; as the Jews unbeleefe of our conversion
(of our Romans 11 v. 17.24.
inoculation into that good Olive) has done to millions of themselves. The
truth is, both Jew and Gentile are sick in the same disease; as well the one,
as the other would feign ingrosse the benefits of the Messiah severally to
himself; whereas they belong indeed first and chiefly to the Jew; but only,
to neither. And never will the happiness of either receive perfection (never
shall they have full possession of the gifts and graces which Christ has
purchased for them) till both are folded together, till the time come, that
Ioh. 10. v. 16.
One Fold shall receive them, and One Shepherd feed them. Thus our Savior has
prophesied of both, and this he will in his appointed time accomplish to both:
As in the following discourse, it will, I hope, appear unto thee; if thou read
it soberly, consider it diligently, and judge of it uprightly. Farewell.

Thine in the faith and fellowship of our Lord Jesus Christ, R. M.

Jer. 23. v. 19.20. BEhold, a whirlewind of the Lord is gone forth in fury,
even a grievous whirlewind, it shall fall grievously upon the head of the
wicked.

The anger of the Lord shall not return, until he have executed, and till he
have performed the thoughts of his heart: in the latter days ye shall consider
it perfectly.

Hosea 5. v. 15. I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
offense, and seek my face: in their affliction they will seek me early.

Come, and let us return unto the Lord: for he has torn, Chapter 6.
and he will heal us: he has smitten, and he will Ezekiel. 34. v. 16.
bind us up.

After two 2 Per. 3. v. 8.
days will he revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall
live in his sight.

Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord: his going forth is
prepared as the morning: and he shall come unto us as the Ps. 72. v. 6.
rain: as the latter and former rain unto the earth.

Romans 11. v. 28. etc.

As concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your sakes; But as touching the
Mark 13. v. 20. Matthew. 24. v. 22. Except the Lord had shortened those days, no
flesh should be saved: but for the Elects sake, which he has chosen, he has
shortened those days.
Election, they are beloved for the Fathers sakes. For the gifts and calling of
God are without repentance.

Shortened. Not that they were, or could be longer, or shorter, then God had
before all time decreed them to be: but because they were not so long as either
Jews had deserved, or their enemies had purposed they should be: who, had not
God by his unsearchable providence stopped their course, would by the continuance
of that persecution have brought them to a final destruction.

For the Elects sake. The Elect which Saint Paul mentions in the 5. and 28.
verse. of the 11. chap. to the Romans are undoubtedly the same that our Savior
here spoke of. Now these could not be the Elect, that received the Gospel in
the Apostles days, in that first age of the Church: for neither were they
amongst those obstinate Jews, which almost wholly perished at the sacking of
Jerusalem: neither if they had, could any of those unbelieving Jews be saved,
for the Jews sake that then believed; seeing they had no such eager and bitter
persecutours as their own Nation were, whose cruelty toward Christ and his
Disciples, was indeed the very cause of the tribu^ation which at that time
befell them. And (it being easy with God, to destroy his enemies without hurt
to his own) they should then no doubt have utterly perished for it; but for the
Elects sake, which should come of the unbeleeving Jews that were left: which
should come of them I say, not immediately, and in the next generation (for
they continue in blindness unto this day) but after many generations, when
once the fullness of the Gentiles should come in; That is, when once the time
was expired, after which, All Israel should be saved, should again be
converted, and redeemed.

Isa. 54. v. 1. etc. Sing O barren, thou that did not bear, break forth
into singing, and cry aloud, thou that did not travel with child: for more
are the children of the desolate, then the children of the married wife, says
the Lord.

Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thy
habitations, spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes.

For thou shall break forth on the right hand, and on the left; and thy seed
shall Chapter 14. v. 1, 2. Chapter 49. v. 22 23. Chapter 60. v. 12
inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate Cities to be inhabited.

Fear not, for thou shall not be ashamed: neither be thou confounded, for thou
shall not be put to shame: for thou shall forget the shame of thy youth, and
shall not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more.

For thy Maker is thine husband (the Lord of hosts is his Name) and thy
Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, 7. v. 14.
the God of the whole earth shall he be called.

For the Lord has called thee as a woman forsaken, and grieved in spirit, and
a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, says thy God.

For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather
thee.

In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment: but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer.

For this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that the
waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn that I would
not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.

For the mountains shall depart, and the hills shall be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be
removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee.

Jer. 31. v. 15. etc. Thus says the Lord, A voice was heard in Ramah,
lamentation and bitter weeping: Rahel weeping for her children, refused to be
comforted, because they were not.

Thus says the Lord, Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from
tears: for thy work shall be rewarded, says the Lord, and they shall come
again from the Land of the enemy.

And there is hope in the end, says the Lord, that thy children shall come
again to their own border.

1 Chronicles. 16. v. 34.35. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his
mercy endures for ever.

And say ye, Save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us together, and
deliver us from the Heathen, that we may give thanks to thy holy Name, and
glory in thy praise.

ISRAEL'S REDEMPTION, OR THE PROPHETICAL HISTORY OF OUR SAVIORS KINGDOM ON
EARTH.
ACTS 1.6. They asked of him, saying, Lord, Will thou at this time restore
again the Kingdom to Israel?


THat Christ is already Matt. 1.20, 21. Luke 2.11. Joh. 1.29, 30, etc.
come; that as a Prophet he has Matt. 4.17. Luke 4.15, etc.
called us to repentance, and as a priest has been a Joh. 2.2. Heb. 2.17. Romans
3.25.
propitiation for our sins (and not for ours only, but also for the sins
of the whole world) having by Heb. 9.28. chapter 10.14. Mark. 8.31. Luke 24.46.
Joh. 10.15. Rev. 5.9.
once offering himself, perfected for ever them that are sanctified, is the
faith of Christians, and the infidelity of the Jews; but that he shall come as
a King to reign on earth, and restore again the Monarchy of Israel, is the
faith of the Jews, and the infidelity of Christians. And I think it a matter
equally difficult to persuade either part to the mutual imbracement of each
others belief; and yet (with submission to impartial judgments be it spoken)
I find not in the Scriptures more voices for the one, than for the other, and
therefore do verily believe, that neither Tenet apart, but both together do
make up the full and Romans 8.23. chapter 11.12.15. Ephesians. 1.14. chapter 4. v. 30. Rev.
10.7.
complete mystery of our Redemption: Which by Gods gracious assistance, I shall
to his own glory, and our Christian comfort, clearly prove, in the
examination of the words now read unto you, For they asked of him, saying,
Lord, will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom of Israel?

The words you see are a querie, and such propositions imply three things:

1 A person, or persons proposing it. 2 A matter or subject proposed. 3 A
person or persons to whom it is proposed.
The persons here are the Disciples asking the question, and our Savior
answering them, as the context declares; the matter enquired of, is the
restoration of the captivated Sovereignty of the Jews, as the text it self
does inform us: these are the parts; yet because it would be impertinent in
this business, to speak any thing of the persons, but only as their joint
authority may help somewhat to justify the truth of this proposal; I shall
(omitting this division) only glance at them in the ensuing confirmation of
the subject: God shall set up a Kingdom ever all the earth.
which comprehends in it, these two assertions,

1 That the Kingdom of the Jews shall again be restored unto them.

1 That the restored Jews shall be the royal Nation of that renewed world.
2 That our Savior at his coming shall restore it. And first of the first,
that the Kingdom of the Jews shall again be restored unto them: For they
asked of him, saying, Lord, will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom
to Israel?

So evidently do these words express an earthly kingdom (I mean only a
Kingdom to be held on earth) that no expositor which I have met with does deny
it, and therefore seeing they could not but embrace the sense, me thinks they
should not so rashly have rejected the consequence: and that for these reasons.

First, because the authors of this demand were not babes, either in years or
understanding, but the Apostles themselves: Men who had followed Mat. ^^* 19.
our Savior from the very time that he manifested himself to the world, by
preaching and miracles, and suffered not so much as a Mat. 13.36.
parable to escape their knowledge: Mat. ^.17.
men to whom Act. 1.3.
he had showed himself ^alive after his passion, by many infal^ible p^oofes,
being ^^e^^ of them forty days, and speaking to them of the things pertaining
unto the Kingdom of God. And yet that these men. should now at their last
conference with him be mistaken in a matter of such importance as this is,
which concerns the purpose of God touching the whole Nation of the Jews, is
(as I believe, and as I think you will all say) a thing altogether unlikely,
and so it is too that all the Apostles should be of the same mind, unless it
had been a truth formerly taught them, and not (as it is imagined) an error
then newly vented by them.

A second reason which makes me distaste the censure here cast on our Apostles,
is because our Saviors answer is alleged, as a sufficient ground for it;
whereas it will appear even to a weak judgment, by that his answer the
Apostles opinion is as much established, as their curiosity is reprehended:
for they asked, whether he would at that time restore again the Kingdom to
Israel, to which he answered, It is not for you to know the times and seasons
which the Father has put in his own power: as if he should have said, it is
enough for you to know that such a thing shall be done, and by whom, but as for
the time when it shall be done, this the Father has put in his own power, and
therefore ought not to be enquired of by you, nor to be revealed by me: This is
the whole meaning of the reply, and now give you your verdict, whether you find
the Apostles hereby condemned, for holding of an untruth; or rather for an over
curious affectation, to acquaint themselves with the very day, in which they
should behold the glorious accomplishment of so great a blessing.

Another reason which makes for our Apostles, is the answer our Savior gave
the sons of Zebedee, Mat. 20.21, 22.
when they besought him, that one might sit on his right hand, and the other on
his left in his Kingdom, or as Saint Mark paraphraseth it, Chap. 10.37.
in his glory; Ye know not, said he, what ye ask: this reproof you will
grant, goes nearer to the quick, than that before used to the Apostles; and
yet if you mark what follows, you shall find that the matter of their
petition is allowed of, and only the motives thereof condemned, to wit, their
ambition in seeking the highest room, and their unadvisednesse in supposing,
that Christ could then give that to any. which none could have but they for
whom it was, Mat. 20.23.
from all eternity, prepared of his Father. And therefore seeing this is all,
that these two were rebuked for by such a sharp reply, how can we mistrust
that more than this should be included in a milder answer?

Thus far we have argued Topically, and by way of probability, but that
which seems to me clearly to quit our Apostles from error, though not from
oblivion: from error, I say, in the subject, though not in the circumstance;
in the thing demanded, though not in the season of its performance; is because
I find my text to be a lesson read to them by our Savior before his passion.
For speaking of the destruction of the Jews, They shall fall, said he, by the
edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all Nations, and
Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the time of the
Gentiles be fulfild. Luke 21. the 24. verse. and at the 28. verse. (having before
shown what signs should immediately foregoe his appearing) he left them this
cordial: When these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up
your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. Behold here, beloved, the casting
away of Gods people for a time, which we see at this day verified: and their
receiving again for ever, which shall as certainly come to pass, plainly
foretold, the redemption, I say, not only of their souls, from the bondage of
sin, to the favor of God, by the profession of the Gospel, but consequently
of their bodies too, from their general captivity to the repossessing of their
country, by a miraculous deliverance: for if no more should be meant by the
word [Redemption] but the mere conversion of the Jews in those places where
now they live; it cannot be conceived, why this action should be accompanied
with such wonderful tokens, and perplexity of all other Nations, as is here
mentioned: unless we shall admit no space of time betwixt this conversion,
and that instant in which our Savior shall give sentence on the dead; which I
suppose few or none will yield to, and if you seriously consider the evidence
of the Prophets, I am confident you will confess, that a most righteous and
flourishing estate of the Jews in their own land, must of necessity
distinguish the time of their calling, and the worlds dissolution at the last
judgment.

And with what testimonies can we better begin, than with such as are of
nearest affinity with our Saviors Prophecy. They shall smite (says Micah in
his 5. chapter and 1. verse) the Judges of Israel with arod upon the cheek. And at
the third verse, Therefore will he give them up until the time that sh^e whi
h travelleth has brought forth: then the Cap. cjusd. v 7.8. Isay 1. v. 9. cap.
10.22. Mat. 24.22. Romans 11. v. 5.28.
remnant of his brethren shall return unto the children of Israel. What I pray
is meant here, by smiting the Judge of Israel, but the To this interpretation
of the Prophecy (suiting so well with our Saviors sufferings) the very next
verse which foreshewes the place where Christ the Ruler of Israel should be
born, does to my thinking directly lead us.
crucifying of Christ? ( whom, when they had blindfolded him, they stroke on
the face, and asked him saying, Prophecy, who is it that smote thee, Luke 22.
at the 64 verse.) and what by, until the time that she which travelleth has
brought forth, but the whole time of the surrogated Gentiles vacation? ( for
blindness is in part happened to Israel, until the Whether by [fulnesse] we
understand the whole number of those Gentiles which were successively to be
called before the National conversion of the Jews, or else the full,
universal, and contemporating conversion of all unbeleeving Gentiles
whatsoever, at, and through that extraordinary restoration of the Jews (whose
Tribes are wholly comprehended by this word, in the 12. verse. of the same
chapter;) whether I say, the first or last of these interpretations does pass
for current with us (and one of them must needs pass) yet it comes all to one
reckoning, it does nothing prejudice the cause, for which our Apostles saying
is here alleged, (which is to show that the giving up of the Jews must last
until the time which is appointed for the calling of the substituted Gentiles,
be fully ended:) for if blindness be happened to Israel, until the coming in
of the sulnes of the Gentiles, in the last sense (that is, of all of them
indifferently) shall come to pass, then must it of necessity continue, until
the coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles, in the first sense (that is, of
the substituted part of them) be quite and clean finished, seeing the total
conversion cannot take place before the partial gives way to it.
fullness of the Gentiles be come in, Romans 11.25.) from whence it necessarily
follows, that this Prophecy, and our Saviors must be understood of one and
the same time; for the dispersion foretold by Christ, was to happen after his
passion, and so was this, as their smiting the Judge of Isael declares; which
is alleged as the maine cause of it. Again, the captivity which our Savior
spoke of, is to last, until the Though by the word [times] the dominion and
power of the Gentiles over the Jews, and their possession of the holy Land, be
in this place especially aimed at: yet because the time of the Jews subjection
to, and captivity amongst the Gentiles in general, is to be of equal
latitude and extent with the time of the substituted Gentiles calling; this
thing also is necessarily (though not immediately and primarily) hereby employed.
times (or calling) of the Gentiles he fulfilled: and so is this, for when she
which travelleth has brought forth, then says the text, the remnant of his
brethren shall return unto the children of Israel: which is a plain
interpretation of that which our Savior does somewhat covertly express by the
word [Redemption,] and this the next verse does confirm, which tells us, that
at the time of this return, He (that is, the Judge of Israel before spoken of,
that he, I say,) shall stand and feed (or rule) in the strength of the Lord,
in the Majesty of the Name of the Lord his God, and they (that is, the Jews)
shall abide, for now (that is, at this coming of our Savior) he shall be
(not as when he took our nature upon him, of no Isay 53. v. 2 3.
form, nor comeliness, a man despised, and rejected of men, a man of
sorrows, and acquainted with griefs, but he shall be) Zech. 9.10. Psalm. 72.8.
great unto the ends of the earth: that is, over all the world; until he and
his shall at the last judgment, exchange the earthly Jerusalem (the Jer. 3.
v. 17. ca. 14. v. 21.
Throne of his Kingdom) which is to be Jer. 31.38.
built again by men, for that imperial Jerusalem, not 2 Cor. 5.1.
made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

Another Prophecy much like unto this, is that of Amos in his 9. chap. at the
8. verse. Behold the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinful Kingdom, and I
will destroy it from off the face of the earth, saving that I will not utterly
destroy the house of Jacob, says the Lord, for lo I will command, and I will
sift the house of Israel among all Nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve,
yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth. And at the 11. verse. In
that day will I raise up the Tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up
the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his ruins as in the days of old,
that they may possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the Heathen that are
called by my Name, says the Lord that does this. I will bring again the
captivity of my people Israel, and they shall build the wast cities, and
inhabit them, and they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof, they
shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them: and I will plant them upon
their land, and they shall no more be pulled up out of their land which I have
given them, says the Lord God. Now although this Prophecy took effect on the
ten Tribes at their transplantation, began by 1 Chro. 5. v. 6. 2 King. 15. v.
29. Cap. 16.9.
Tiglath-Pileser King of Assyria, and ended by Shalmaneser his successor: who
also brought up strange Nations, and placed them in their stead, 2 King. 17. v.
5, 6, 24. cap. 18. v. 9, etc.
which people were from Samaria, the ancient metropolis of that Province,
called Joh. 4.9.
Samaritanes: yet who is able to maintain, that it was fulfilled on the other
two (for not the house of Joseph, nor the house of Judah only, but the house of
Jacob wholly, is here spoken of: and why else is the Tabernacle of David
afterward expressed, as a prime agent in the restoration, if it were not before
included, as a succeding patient in the dispersion of Israel?) who then I say,
is able to maintain, that this Prophecy was fulfilled on Judah and Benjamin,
until their overthrow by the Roman Emperor Vespasian, ever since which time
they also remain forsaken, scattered, and despised captives? yea, who dares
affirm it, when God has said, that at their return from this universal
captivity, The usual answer of a condititionall promise, will take no hold on
this or the like places of the Scripture: for as God has here past his word
that he will no more pull them up out of their land: so in the 32. chap. of
Jer. at the 39. and 40. verse. the 50. chap. at the 20 verse. In the 36. of Ezekiel.
at the 27. verse. in the 37. at the 23. in the 39. at the 7. verse. and in the 3.
of Zeph. at the 13. verse. (All which Prophesies do in the time of their
fulfilling, concur with this) he has likewise promised, to give them one way
and one heart, that they may fear him for ever. Never to turn away from them
to do them good, but to put his fear into their hearts, that they shall not
depart from him. That the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there
shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found. That he
will put his spirit within them, and cause them to walk in his statutes, and
to keep his judgments and do them. That they shall defile themselves no more
with their Idols, nor with their detestable things, not with any of their
transgressions. That he will make his holy name known in the midst of his
people Israel, and will not let them pollute his holy Name any more. And that
the remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies: neither shall a
deceitful tongue be found in their mouth. And therefore God having thus
equally engaged himself, as well to keep the Jews from sin, as to free
them from bondage, it is as impossible that the accomplishment of this
Prophecy should be frustrated, and the fruition of these blessings forfeited
for want of obedience; as that God should either forget, or not regard, or be
unable to fulfill his word, and consequently, the appointed time for the
finishing of such Prophesies is yet to be expected.
he will so plant them in their Land, that they shall no * more be pulled up
out of it? which yet should not be true, if it it had been spoken of any
deliverance before our Saviors coming to suffer.

The next Prophecy shall be that of Joel, who mentions the very signs which
our Savior said should be the immediate forerunners of the Jews Redemption.
And it shall come to pass afterward (says he, in his 2. chap. at the 28.
verse.) that I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your
daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your young
men shall see visions: and also upon the servants, and upon the handmaids in
those days will I power out my spirit, and I will show wonders in the heavens,
and in the earth blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke: the Isa. 24.23. Mat.
24.29. Rev. 6 12.
Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood before the Great,
not only in regard of the strangeness, and dreadfulnesse of events of things
then to come to pass, but great also in regard of the long continuance, and
tract of time, which God in his revelations hereafter to be fulfilled, does by
the word [Day] (as well without this epithet, as with i^) frequen^ly import.
great and terrible Eze. 39. verse. 8. Malac. 4.5. Jude ver. 6. Rev. 16.14.
day of the Lord come. And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall call on
the Name of the Lord shall be delivered: for in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem
shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said, and in the remnant whom the Lord
shall call. And at the 3. chap. at the 1. verse. Behold in those days, and in
that time, when I shall bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, I
will also gather all Nations, and will bring them down into the valley of
Jehosaphat (which in the 14. verse. is called, the valley of decision) and will
plead with them there, for my people, and for my heritage Israel, whom they
have scattered among the Nations, and parted my land. And at 15. verse. again,
The Sun, and the Moon shall be darkened, and the Stars shall withdraw their
shining, the Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from
Jerusalem, and the Isa. 2.19, etc. Eze. 38.19, 20. Hag. 2.22. Mat. 24.29. Rev.
16.18. c. 6.13.14.
heavens, and the earth shall shake, but the Lord will be the hope of his
people, and the strength of the children of Israel.

I am not ignorant, that the darkning of the Sun and Moon, is sometimes taken
allegorically, and by way of allusion but that therefore it should be so
understood here, it does not follow, for where it is figuratively applied, it
signifies the judgment it self, which is to befall those people of whom it is
spoken: but where it is literally used, it is put only for a sign of an
eminent destruction, which shall suddenly follow it, as the great and terrible
day of the Lord shall do at the accomplishment of this Prophecy.

Neither have I forgotten, that the first of these Prophesies was made use of
by Saint Peter, to stop the mouths of such as jeered the Apostles, when by the
descent of the holy Ghost upon them, they began to speak with other tongues:
Act. 2.4.
but that this Prophecy was then fulfilled, I deny: for when some mocking
said, These men are full of new wine; Cap. cjusd. verse. 13. etc.
Saint Peter replied, Ye men of Judea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be
this known unto you, and hearken unto my words, for these are not drunken, as
ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day: but this is that which
was spoken by the Prophet Joel: And it shall come to pass in the last days
(says God) I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh: as if he had said, My
brethren, these are not the effects of wine, but of the Spirit of God, which is
now powered out on the first fruits of the Jews, as a pledge and assurance of
that bountiful effusion of it, which (as Joel has said) shall one day happen
to the whole Isay 32. verse. 15. Ezekiel. 39. verse. 29. Zech. 12 verse. 10.
Nation. And that this is all S. Peter meant, it may thus appear: first,
because the chief and most remarkable effect of the Spirit in the Apostles, at
this time, was the gift of tongues, of which the Prophet makes no mention: and
secondly, because as the Prophet revealed, so he repeats this pouring out of
the Spirit, as a contemporary event with the wonders which shall be shown, in
the heavens, and in the earth, before the great and terrible day of the Lord
come. Which day can no way be referred to the first coming of Christ, when he
came to Luke 9. verse. 56. Chap. 19. verse. 10. Joh. 12.47.
save sinners, and not to destroy them: when he would not take upon him, to be
Luke 12.14. Joh. 6.15.
Judge, and Ruler over them: for then it must have been an antecedent of his
birth, of the time he lived; and not a subsequent of his death and departure,
which has no analogy with a day. Is remains then that it is an expression of
his second coming, which is called a great and terrible day, in regard of the
general destruction which shall be brought on all Nations, that oppose
themselves against the Jews at that time: For in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem
(as you have heard) shall be deliverance, and in the Remnant whom the Lord
shall call^* And to put it out of doubt, that Gods bringing down of the
heathen into the valley of Jehospaphat, is meant only of his gathering them
together to a battle, and consequently of a judgment on the living, and not
on the dead: to put this out of doubt, I say, the Prophet makes it to be a
concomitant of the Jews Rev. 16. v. 12, 13, 14.
return from their captivity; and in the 9, 10, 11, and 12. verse. provokes the
Gentiles to prepare war, to assemble their mighty men, and to break their
ploughshares into swords, and their pruning-hookes into spears: a preparation,
which as it would be fruitless, so doubtless they shall neither have time,
power, or will to make, when they are summoned to receive the dreadful
sentence of, Go ye cursed. And for my own part, I am persuaded, that this
great army here spoken of, is the very same that shall be gathered together to
the battle of that great day of God Almighty, by the three unclean spirits
like frogs, which Saint John saw come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out
of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, Rev. the
16. at the 13. verse. Of this Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3. Ps. 46.6, 8. Ps. 68.30. Isa.
2.12, 13, etc. Chapter 24.21, 22. chapter 26.20, 21. chapter 34.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. chapter 49.
v. 26. chap. 66. v. 14, 15, 16. Micah 4.12, 13.
destruction also speaks Zephaniah, in his 3. chap. at the 8. verse. Therefore
wait upon me, says the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey, for
my determination is to gather the Nations, that I may assemble the Kingdoms,
to power upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger, for all the
earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy: for then will I turn to
the people (meaning the Jews) a pure language, that they may all call upon the
name of the Lord to serve him with one consent. And at the 19. verse. Behold at
that time I will undo all that afflict thee, and I will save her that halteth,
and gather her that was driven out, and I will get them praise and fame in
every land, where they have been put to shame. At that time I will bring you
again, even in the time that I gather you: for I will make you a name and a
praise among all people of the earth, when I turn back your captivity before
your eyes, says the Lord. And yet more fully Zechariah in his 12. chap. at the
3. verse. In that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people:
all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the
people of the earth be gathered together against it. In that day will I smite
every horse with astonishment, and his rider with madness, and I will open
mine eyes upon the house of Judah, and will smite every horse of the people
with blindness. In that day will I make the Governors of Judah like a hearth
Obad. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21:
of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheafe: and they shall
devour all the people round about, on the right hand, and on the left: and
Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, even in Jerusalem. The
Lord also shall save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of the house of
David, and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, do not magnify
themselves against Judah. In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among them at that day, shall be as David:
and the house of David shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them.
And in the 14. chap. at the 12. verse. This shall be the plague wherewith the
Lord shall smite the people that have fought against Jerusalem: their flesh
shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall
consume away in their holes, and their tongues shall consume away in their
mouth: and it shall come to pass in that day, that a great tumult from the
Lord shall be among them, and they shall lay hold every one on the hand of his
Eze. 38.21. Hag. 2.23.
neighbor, and his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbor; and
Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem, and the Mich. 4.13.
wealth of all the Heathen round about shall be gathered together, gold, and
silver, and apparel in great abundance, and so shall be the plague of the
horse, of the mule, of the camel, and of the ass, and of the beasts that
shall be in these tents, as this plague. And in the 38. and 39. chap. of Ezekiel.
the same army is foretold, under the names of Gog and Magog.

Now how can we forsake the literal interpretation of these prophecies, if
we do but consider, that the Jews are here distinguished from all other
Nations, of which we Gentiles, who are now converted, were then a part; and
are by this name in the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles still
distinguished from them, if we consider what gross absurdities would follow
from the Tropicall construction of these or the like prophetical revelations,
wherein the event of things is so plainly and distinctly attributed to the
Jews: who I am sure, did never since the Prophets days, return from any
captivity, with such an high hand, and with such a wonderful victory over
their enemies, as is here prophesied. And as for the Church that now is, let
the lamentable experience of all ages witness, whether she has not been more
often crowned with martyrdom, than victory: whether the blood-thirstie
Mohammedan has not gotten much ground upon her: yea, whether he who claims the
privilege to be her head, has not, and does not, most of all waste and
devour her, according as it is written of him in the 13. of the Rev. at the
11. verse. and therefore these prophesies can have no relation to the times of
the Gentiles: nor so much to the time of the Maccabees, as Cornelius a Lapide
endeavors to make these of Zachariah to have, for neither were their enemies
smitten with such plagues, nor brought into such subjection, as is here
foretold; neither was the house of David then so highly exalted, as is here
promised: and Judas and his brethren, who then bare the chiefest sway, were not
of the Tribe of Judah, but of Levi: neither was the wealth of all the heathen
round about then gathered together: neither did the Lord Zech. 14.5.
descend, and all the Saints with him, unless we will say (as our Commentator
does) that this was fulfilled, when the five comely men upon horses appeared
unto the enemies from heaven, as it is in the 2. of the Maccab. the 10. chap. at
the 29. and 30. verse. which apparition does as well expound these words, as he
does that other Prophecy of Zephaniah, by which he would have us to understand
Gods calling the Gentiles to repentance by the preaching of the Gospel, when
as the text says plainly, that Gods determination is to gather the Nations,
and to assemble the Kingdoms, that he may power upon them his indignation,
even all his fierce anger: and if this be not to cry peace, peace, when there
is no peace: if this be not to call evil good, and good evil: to put
darkness for light, and light for darkness: bitter for sweet, and sweet
for bitter, I know not what is.

But enough of the perplexity, which shall happen to other Nations when the
Jews return. Now again of their return, and of the prosperity which shall
then happen to themselves. And it shall come to pass in that day, (says
Isaiah, chapter 11. v. 11.) that the Lord shall set his hand again the second
time, to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria,
and from Egypt, and from Paphros, and from Cush and from E^am, and from Shinar,
and from Hamath, and from the Islands of the Sea: and he shall set up an
Ensign for the Nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and Isa.
49.12.25. chapter 30.18, 19. chapter 62.10, 11, 12. Eze. 20.32, 33, 34, etc.
gather together the dispersed of Judah, from the four corners of the earth:
the envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be
cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim: and
the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian Sea, and with his
mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the
seven streams, and shall make men go over dry-shod, and there shall be an
high way for the remnant of his people, which shall be left from Assyria, Mica.
7. 15, etc.
like as it was to Israel, in the day that he came up out of the Land of Egypt.
You see here that the Prophet speaks plainly of a miraculous recovery of Gods
people: of the recovery, I say, of Judah, not from Babylon, but from the four
Jer. 16. v. 14, 15. chapter 23.7, 8.
corners of the earth; and that together with Ephraim, with the ten Tribes from
Assyria, which as Joh. 7.35.
yet never came back, and therefore this is not yet fulfilled. Such another
Prophecy is that of Ezekiel. in his 37. chap. at the 19. verse. Thus says the
Lord God, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim,
and the Tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with him, even with
the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in my
hand. And at the 21. verse. Behold I will take the children of Israel from among
the Heathen whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and will
bring them into their own Land: and I will make them one Nation in the Land
upon the Mountains of Israel, and one King shall be King to them all; and they
shall be no more two Nations, neither shall they be divided into two Kingdoms
any more at all, neither shall they defile themselves any more with their
Idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions:
but I will save them out of all their dwelling places, wherein they have sinned,
and will cleanse them: so shall they be my people, and I will be their God. And
in Hosea 1.10. Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of
the Sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered, and it shall come to pass, that
in the place where it was said unto them Jer. 24, 6, 7. chapter 32.37, 38. Zech.
13.9.
Ye are not my people, there it shall be said, Ye are the Sons of the living
God. Then shall the Children of Judah, and the children of Israel be gathered
together, and appoint themselves one head, and they shall come up out of the
Land, for great shall be the Day of Jezreel. In both which prophesies the Lord
has promised, that the Jews shall again live under one King only (as they
had done before the division of the Tribes) and that in their own land too,
which has not been yet performed, and therefore the time of these Prophesies
is yet to come: for though this of Hosea be understood by some Expositors, of
the vocation of the Gentiles, that is, of the Christian Church in these our
days; yet doubtless they are much mistaken in this exposition, for seeing
this and the former Prophecy, concern one and the same thing, to wit, the
uniting of all the Tribes under one King, therefore they must needs receive
their accomplishment at one and the same time; and so this must be referred to
the Jews, as well as the other: and besides, how can that belong to the
Gentiles which was prophesied only of the Jews, as is declared by the
Prophets wife of whoredoms, and children of wheredomes, which he took of
purpose to upbraid the idol-worship, and spiritual whoredoms of the
Israelites? verse. 2. and therefore when she conceived, and bare him the second
son, Call his name, said God, Loammi: For ye are not my people, and I will
not be your God. The Israelites then it were, to whom this Prophet was sent,
and of whom it was said, Ye are not my people; and the place where they were
told so, was their own land, and therefore in that place it shall again be
said unto them: Ye are the sons of the living God, verse. 10. And this
Piscator grants to be the meaning of it here in the Prophet; but withal he
holds, that it is applied in the 9. of the Romans to the conversion of the
Gentiles, because the Israelites being thus rejected of God, were become like
unto the Gentiles, who until the preaching of the Gospel were not his people:
but notwithstanding this reason, me thinks it is very unlikely, that the
Apostle should borrow a Prophecy from the Jews, to prove Gods mercy toward
the Gentiles, which is in sundry places of the Scripture, so properly and
distinctly foreshewne, as you may see by the authorities which are urged to
this purpose in the v. 19, 20.
10. and v. 9, 10, 11, 12.
15. chap. of the same Epistle, and therefore I should rather take it to be
brought in by Saint Paul, as a testimony establishing the freeness of Gods
election, which is the doctrine he there maintains, and does in these words
(as he did before in the example of Jacob and Esau) give an instance of it,
touching the Israelites, whom God had for a long time rejected, and would yet
again receive: and that because (as the potter has power over the clay to make
of the same lump, one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor, so) he has
mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth. And this the 14. verse.
seems to confirm, where it is said, Esaiah also cries concerning Israel: for
what makes the copulative [also] here, if the Apostle understood not the former
prophecy of Israel, as well as this? and yet in what sense soever you please
to take it here, I hope it is already sufficiently declared, that it concerns
the Israelites only in the Prophet, which is as much as the subject of my
discourse requires.

There is yet in the 3. of Hosea, at the 4. verse. one more material argument
for the Jews deliverance. Hier. Zanch: in cap. 3. Hos. p. 12. and 23. ed.
Genevae, 1619. Pareus in c, idem. p. 481. col. 1. ed. in fol. 1628. Rivetus in
c. id. p. 23, 24. ed. 1625. Alsted. Chr. c. 32. p. 294. c. 35. p. 330. Lyra.
part. 4. p. 379, C. part. 2. p. 198. C. and p. 249. F. Part. 3. p. 212. F. and
p. 213. C. part. 4. p. 151. B, C. and p. 116. A. Dr. Mayers Lect. on James,
cap. 1. p. 4.
The children of Israel, says he, shall abide many days without a king, and
without a Prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an image, and without an
Ephod, and without Teraphim; afterward shall the children of Israel return,
and seek the Lord their God, and Isay 9. v. 6, 7.
David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter
days. Which prophecy cannot possibly be as yet fulfilled, for if it be meant
only of the ten Tribes, amongst whom Hosea prophesied, it is confessed, that
they did never yet return: and if of the other two, it must be meant of their
captivity since our Saviors coming, for till then, the Scepter could not
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet: as Jacob foretold,
Genesis the 49. at the 10. verse. and therefore till then they could not be without
a Prince, or Governors of that Tribe, although they were long before tributary
to other Nations, and this also is intimated by those words [the latter dayes]
which are no where put for the time before the incarnation of Christ. And this
it seems made Cornelius a Lapide refer the event of this prophecy to the
end of the world, that is, as the Romanists imagine, to the coming of
Antichrist: who, as their tale goes of him, shall manifest himself about that
time, and shall reign Fran. Johan. de Combis in compendio totius Theolog. lib.
7. cap. 13.
three years and an half, and shall put to death Id. l 7. c. 7.
Enoch and Elias, who shall be sent to preach repentance unto the Jews, and to
withstand the impostures of Antichrist; whom (because he is, as they say, to
be borne in Babylon, of the Tribe of Dan) most of the Jews shall receive for
their Messiah: but as soon as he shall be slain on the mount of Id. l. 7. c.
14.
Olives in his tent by the power of the Lord, (that is, as the gloss on the
Apocalypse has it, either by Christ himself visibly appearing unto him, or by
the ministry of the Archangel Michael) presently the Jews that followed him,
shall Cornel. a Lap. in c. 3. Hof. p. 93. col. 2.
partly through the remembrance of the miracles, and Sermons of the two
witnesses, and partly through the endeavors of other preachers, be converted,
and then, All Israel shall be saved: and for this conversion they they allow
The reason why they propose this number, rather than any other, is because in
the 12. chap. of Dan. at the 12. verse. it is said, Blessed is he that waits,
and comes to the 1335. days: which sum is made up by adding, 45. days
(the days, as they call them, of repentance to such as have worshipped
Antichrist) unto the 1290. days, mentioned in the former verse: and held by
them, (and that in their prime, immediate, and natural signification) to be
the full time of Antichrists most abominable worship, and tyrannical
usurpation. M. Foxes Acts and Monum. printed 1596. p. 443. in the story of
Walter Brute.
five and forty days, at the end of which days, the Fran. Joh: de com. l. 7.
cap. 14.
Ministers of Antichrist (who before boasted, that although their Prince was
dead, yet they still enjoyed their power, peace, and security) shall suddenly
(and that in the midst of their jollitie even while they are eating and
drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage) be destroyed: and so the Church
shall be at rest unto the end of the world. This is the Papists Antichrist, and
this is their opinion of the Jews conversion, a dream as full of folly as
falsehood: as if it were probable, that the Jews after such a long time of
blindness, and so near the time of their conversion, should fall into a
greater error than ever they did since the crucifying of Christ, or that they
should take one of the Tribe of Joh. 7.42. Rev. 19. v. 20, 21.
Dan for their Messiah, and believe him too, rather than Elias whom they yet
expect from heaven: or that they could be adherents to Antichrist, and yet be
alive all after his destruction, when as the Scripture says, that the beast,
and false Prophet shall be taken and cast alive into a lake of fire burning
with brimstone, and that the remnant shall be slain. Rev. 16. v. 14. chapter 19.
v. 18, 19.
And besides, Antichrists assistants shall be The Kings of the earth, and of
the whole world: and such, I think, the Papists do not account the Jews to
be. Again, as if it were probable, that Antichrist should come in the name of
Christ, saying that he is Christ, and so be a false (...) vocantur, non qui se
pro Christo and vero Messia falso venditant, tales enim in Scriptura proprie
(...), Mat. 24. verse. 24. Mar 13. v. 22. appellantur, sed qui doctr. Christi,
cujus se secta^^res pro fitentur, quoquo mede adversan. (unde Christum in
carnem venisse: seu, Jesum esse Christum negare, dicuntur, ut (...) collatione
verse. 3 cap. 4. 1 Ep. ver. 7. Ep. 2. and ver. 22. cap. 2. Ep. 1. Johan. cum
ver. 4. Ep. Iudae ver. 1. cap. 2. Ep. 2 Pet. and ver. 5. and 8. cap. 3.2. Ep.
Pauli ad Tim. luculenter apparet:) unde (etiam) magnus and eximius ille
Antichristus, qui toti fere doctrinae Christianae corpori adversatur, and sub
nomine Christi quam maxim Christum oppugnat, ejusque proprium honorem and
officium ad se transfert, in Scriptura vecatur, (...), 2 These. 2. ver. 3.
(...), ver. eod. (...), ver. 4. (...), ver. 8. (...), Rev. 16. v. 13. and
consequenter ipse ille, (...) est, vid. Disput. 13. Festi Hommii. p. 45.46.
Christ; and not a false 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. 2 Pet. 2. v. 1, 2, 3. 2 These. 2. v.
3, 4, 7, 8. Rev. 13. v. 11.12, 13, 14, etc. chap. 17. v. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
etc.
Christian, such as the Apostles foretold he should be: and so also, be one
person only, who must reign but three years and an half; and not rather a
continued Interim tamen tenendum, numero singulati notari aliquod regnum, in
quo ^ubinde unus quispiam praesideat; cui viam straverunt Antichristi illi, sen
haere^ici, qui jam tum tempor ibus Apostolorum, extiterunt: id quod tum
Johannes ^ignificat hoc loco, quum ait, Multos Antichristos jam tunc exortos;
and Paulas 2 These. 2. v. 7. ubi dicit Mysterium illud iniquitatis jam tum,
(...), in aliquibus operari, seseque exerere, vid. Observat. 16. Ioh. Piscat.
in cap. 2. Ep. ^. Icannis.
headship and supremacy over a settled apostasy: for (to let pass judicious
Doctor In the fourth book of his Apol. and Sect. 4. and 5.
Hackwels confutation of this fancy; it being altogether impossible, that the
2 These. ^. v. 7.
mystery of iniquity which began to spring up even in Saint Paul's time (and by
consequence was to ripen by degrees) should be the sudden and irresistible
work of one man, or age, so many hundred years after (although indeed it be
very likely, that the last inheritour of the Antichristian chair, may be the
most wily Rev. 16. v. 13, 14.
and bewitching deceiver of all) to let this pass) under whom, I pray, have
the servants of God suffered persecution from the time of the Heathen Roman
Emperors until now, if not under the great Apocalypticall Rev. 17 v. 6. chap.
18. v. 24.
Antichrist? by whose devilish power and policy, those which should afterward
be slain, were successively to be fulfilled. And if martyrdom has all this
while, and does still go forward under him; then certainly this 2 These. 2. v.
4. 1 Timothy 4. v. 1.2.3.
Churchchampion, this Wolf in 2 Timothy 3. v. 5. Rev. 13. v. 11
Sheeps clothing, has been long ago revealed: and consequently, the
Prognostication of a new and upstart Monarch, of no more then a bare three
years and an half continuance, will serve only for a popish Meridian.

But we are yet to show the Jews peaceable and prosperous estate after their
return, I appeal here to the consciences of all men, that shall read these,
or the like prophecies in the word of God; whether they can think it possible,
that the time appointed by God for the dispensation of such extraordinary
blessings, should be the very same, in which the world, and especially the
Christian part of it, was to groan under the continued plagues written in the
Revelation: which yet we must needs grant to be so, if we rest on those
interpretations, by which all such prophecies, are only, or chiefly applied to
the anticipated conversion of us substituted Gentiles.
Read then what Jeremiah has written in his 23. chap. at the 3. verse. I will
gather the remnant of my flock out of all Countries, whither I have driven
them, and will bring them again to their folds, and they shall be fruitful and
increase: and I will set up Shepherds over them, which shall feed them, and
they shall Isa. 33. v. 20.21, 22, 24. Zeph. 3. v 14, 15.
fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking, says the Lord:
and in his 31. chap. at the 10.27. and 31. verse. Hear the word of the Lord, O
ye Nations, and declare it in the Isles a far off, and say, He that
scatters Israel, will gather him, and keep him, as a Shepherd does his
flock: for the Lord has redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of him
that was stronger then he: therefore they shall come, and sing in the height of
Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for Wheat, and for
wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock, and of the herd, and their
souls shall be as a watered garden, and they shall not sorrow any more at all:
Then shall the Virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and old together:
for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them
rejoice from their sorrow: and I will satiate the souls of the Priests with
fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with goodness, says the Lord.
Behold the days come says the Lord, that I will sow the house of Israel, and
the house of Judah with the seed of man, and with the seed of beast: and it
shall come to pass, that like as I have watched over them, to pluck up, and
to break down, and to throw down, and to destroy, and afflict: so will I
watch over them to build and to plant, says the Lord. Behold the days come,
says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and
with the house of Judah, not according to the covenant that I made with their
fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand, to bring them out of the
Land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto
them, says the Lord: but this shall be the covenant that I will make with the
house of Israel: After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law into
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my people: and they shall teach no more every man his neighbor,
and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me,
from the least of them to the greatest of them: for I will forgive their
iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. And in his 32. c. at the 17.
v. Behold I will gather them out of all Countries, whither I have driven them
in mine anger, and in my fury, and in great wrath, and I will bring them again
unto this place: and I will cause them to dwell safely. And I will give them
one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them,
and of their children after them. And I will make an everlasting covenant with
them, and I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my
fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Yea, I will
rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them in this Land
assuredly, with my whole heart, and with my whole soul. For thus says the
Lord, Like as I have brought all this great evil upon this people, so will I
bring upon them all the good that I have promised. And in his 33. chap. at the
6. verse. Behold I will bring it health and cure, and I will cure them, and will
reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth. And I will cause the
captivity of Judah, and the captivity of Israel to return, and will build them
as at the first, and I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they
have sinned against me, and I will pardon all their iniquity whereby they have
sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me. And it shall be to me a
name of joy, a praise and an honor before all the Nations of the earth, which
shall hear all the good that I do unto them: and they shall fear and
tremble, for all the goodness, and for all the prosperity that I procure unto
it. And in his 46. chap. at the 27. verse. and his 50. chap. at the 19. verse.
But Chap. 30. v. 10, 11
fear not thou, O my servant Jacob, and be not dismayed O Israel; for behold I
will save thee from afar off, and thy seed from the Land of their captivity,
and Jacob shall turn, and be in rest, and at ease, and none shall make him
afraid: Fear thou not, O my servant Jacob, says the Lord, for I am with thee,
for I will make a full end of all the Nations whither I have driven thee, but I
will not make a Deuteronomy. 32 v. 26, 27, 36, 43. Psalm. 89. v. 31, 32, 33.34. Psalm.
94. v. 14, 15.
full end of thee, but correct thee in measure, yet will I not leave thee
wholly unpunished. I will bring Israel again to his habitation, and he shall
feed on Carmel, and Bashan, and his soul shall be satisfied upon Mount
Ephraim, and Gilead. In those days, and in that time, says the Lord, the
iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins
of Judah, and they shall not be found; for I will pardon them whom I reserve.
Read also what Ezekiel. has written in his 28. chap. at the 25. verse. Thus says
the Lord, when I have gathered the house of Israel, from the people among whom
they be scattered, and shall be sanctified in them, in the sight of the
Heathen, then shall they dwell in their Land, that I have given unto my servant
Jacob, and they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses, and plant
Vineyards: yea they shall dwell with confidence, when I have executed
judgments upon all those that despise them round about them, and they shall
know that I am the Lord their God. And in his 34. chap. at the 12. verse. As a
Shepherd seeks out his flock, in the day that he is among his sheep that
are scattered: so will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all
places, where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day: and I will
bring them out from the people, and gather them from the Countries, and will
bring them to their own Land, and feed them upon the Mountains of Israel by
the rivers, and in all inhabited places of the Country: I will feed them in a
good pasture, and upon the high mountains of Israel shall their fold be: there
shall they lie in a good fold, and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the
Mountains of Israel: I will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie
down, says the Lord God. I will seek that which was lost, and bring again
that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will
strengthen that which was sick, but I will destroy the fat and the strong, I
will feed them with judgment. And at the 25. verse. I will make with them a
covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the Land:
and they shall dwell safely in the Wilderness, and sleep in the woods, and I
will make them, and the places round about my hill, a blessing: and I will
cause the shower to come down in his season: there shall be showers of
blessing, and the tree of the field shall yield her fruit, and the earth shall
yield her increase, and they shall be safe in their Land, and shall know that I
am the Lord, when I have broken the bands of their yoke, and delivered them out
of the hands of those that served themselves of them. And they shall no more be
a prey to the Heathen, neither shall the beasts of the Land devour them; but
they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid. And I will raise up
for them a plant of renown, and they shall no more be consumed with hunger in
the Land, neither bear the shame of the Heathen any more. And in his 36. chap.
at the 8. verse. O Mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches,
and yield your fruit to my people of Israel, for they are at hand to come: for
behold I am for you, and I will turn unto you, and ye shall be tilled and
sown: and I will multiply men upon you, Isa. 45. verse. 25. Ezekiel. 37. v. 11.12,
etc. c. 36. v. 25. Ier. 12. v. 14.15. Romans 11. v. 32.^
all the house of Israel, even all of it, and the Cities shall be inhabited,
and the wastes shall be builded: and I will multiply upon you man and beast, and
they shall increase and bring fruit, and I will settle you after your old
estates: and I will do better for you, then at your beginnings, and ye shall
know that I am the Lord: yea, I will cause men to walk upon you, even my
people Israel, and they shall possess thee, and thou shall be their
inheritance, and thou shall no more henceforth bereave them of men. Thus says
the Lord God, because they say unto you, Thou Land devourest up men, and have
bereaved thy Nations, therefore thou shall devour men no more, neither bereave
thy Nations any more, says the Lord God; neither will I cause men to hear in
thee the shame of the Heathen any more, neither shall thou bear the reproach
of the people any more, neither shall thou cause the Nations to fall any more,
says the Lord God. And at the 24. verse. I will take you from among the
Heathen, and gather you out of all Countries, and will bring you into your own
Land, then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from
all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you: and I will put
my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall
keep my judgments, and do them: and ye shall dwell in the Land that I gave
to your fathers, and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. I will
also save you from all your uncleanness: and I will call for corn, and will
increase it, and lay no more famine upon you: and I will multiply the fruit of
the tree, and the increase of the field, that ye shall receive no more
reproach of famine among the Heathen. Then shall ye remember your own evil
ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your
own sight, for your iniquities, and for your abominations. Thus says the Lord
God, in the day that I shall have cleansed you from all your iniquities; I will
also cause you to dwell in the Cities, and the wastes shall be builded, and the
desolate Land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all
that passed by; and they shall say, This Land that was desolate, is become like
the garden of Eden, and the waste, and desolate, and ruined Cities are become
fenced and inhabited. Then the Heathen that are left round about you, shall
know that I the Lord build the ruined places, and plant that that was desolate,
I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it. And in his 39. chap. at the 25.
verse. Thus says the Lord God, Now will I bring again the captivity of Jacob,
and have mercy upon the whole house of Israel, and will be jealous for my holy
Name: after that they shall have borne their shame, and all their trespasses,
whereby they have trespassed against me, when they dwelt safely in their Land,
and none made them afraid. When I have brought them again from the people, and
gathered them out of their enemies Lands, and am sanctified in them, in the
sight of many Nations; then shall they know that I am the Lord their God, which
caused them to be led into captivity among the Heathen: but I have gathered
them unto their own Land, and have left none of them any more there: Neither
will I hide my face any more from them: for I have powered out my Spirit upon
the house of Israel, says the Lord God. And in the 10. chap. of Zechariah at
the 6. ver. It is said, I will strengthen the House of Judah, and I will save
the house of Joseph, and I will bring them again to place them, for I have
mercy upon them: And they shall be as though I had not cast them off, for I am
the Lord their God, and will hear them. And they of Ephraim shall be like a
mighty man, and their heart shall rejoice as through Wine; Yea, their children
shall see it, and shall be glad; their heart shall rejoice in the Lord. I will
hiss for them, and gather them, for I have redeemed them: And they shall
increase as they have increased; and I will sow them among the people, and they
shall remember me in far Countries, and they shall live with their children,
and turn again. I will bring them again also out of the Land of Egypt, and
gather them out of Assyria, and I will bring them into the Land of Gilead and
Lebanon, and place shall not be found for them.

Which Prophecies, as they do contain many evident and unanswerable arguments
for a future restoration of Israel, I mean a restoration yet to come; so
they have such correspondence with that of Isaiah in his 59. chap. at the 20.
ver. And with that of Amos in his 9. chap. at the 11. ver. (both which
Prophecies are alleged by the Apostles Act. 15. v. 16.
Saint James, and Romans 11. v. 27.26.
Saint Paul, for the conversion of the Jews, after the fullness of the
Gentiles is come in, that is, after all those of the Gentiles, which are
appointed to be called before Christ's coming again, be converted. Or rather
perhaps, when the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in; that is, when the
time shall come, in which (not a part, as now, but) all the Gentiles that are
left, shall through the wonderful deliverance of the Jews, together with them
serve the Lord) that seeing these are not yet fulfild, neither can any of the
other: betwixt which and that of The words, in 15. of the Acts at the 14. ver.
upon which the Prophecy of Amos is inferred, are taken by Doctor Mayer, to be
meant of the Song of old Simeon, and not of the former speech of Simon Pete^.
But it matters not much, which of the two is here spoken of: for seeing the
Prophet does plainly show a future restoring of the Jews, and yet the intent
of the Apostle was only to prove, that God had then called the Gentiles: it
cannot otherwise be, but that the words [After this] in the Prophecy, being
applied to the foresaid visiting of the Gentiles by the Preaching of the
Gospel, must needs conclude; that the extraordinary restoration of the
Jews, foreshewne by the Prophet, was to follow the calling of the Gentiles
then begun by the Apostles: And consequently, that the Jews endeavor to (1 Thessalonians. 2 v. 14, 15.) hinder the growth of the Gospel, was a sure proof of the
conversion of the Gentiles, and their own rejection. Who unto the death of
Christ, were the peculiar people of God, and not wholly cast off, until by
their wilful unbelief, they forced the Apostles to ( Act. 13. v. 44, 45, 46.)
turn from them to other Nations, to whom God had not formerly revealed
himself, and therefore could not at that time be said, [to Returne] unto the
Gentiles, whom he had but then received: no, nor to the Jews, whom he had then
(and not till then) quite forsaken. So that if we consider the [Returning] of
God here mentioned in the Prophecy, to be appliable only to the Jews, to whom
alone God had so long before made himself known; and yet that the Jews were
shortly after the calling of the Gentiles quite forsaken, we must needs grant,
that their great happiness here foretold has not been yet enjoyd, but shall
be, when the fullness of the succedaneous Gentiles is come in. And wherefore
did the Apostle change the Prophets, In that day will I raise up, into, After
this I will return and build? Wherefore, I say, did he, or rather the Holy
Ghost in him, make choice of this Paraphrase in place of the Text? if not of
purpose to make that which has been said, the more planely appear. To wit,
that the day of the Jews deliverance, is to await the accomplishment of the
surrogated Gentiles vocation. For though this consolatory Prophecy, according
to the order of the things revealed to the Prophet, has relation only to a
foregoing judgment denounced against the Jews, yet it is not therefore
mis-inferred here by the Apostle, as a subsequent too of the anticipated
conversion of the Gentiles, and that because the very same time, which was
foreappointed by God, for the execution of that punishment upon the forsaken
Jews, was also foreappointed by him, to be the time for the promulgation of
his mercy, toward the substituted Gentiles; as these next words, That the
residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles upon whom my
name is called, do most clearly intimate. For what is meant by the [Residue
of men] but the remainder of those Nations, which are not to be converted, till
the foresaid redemption of the Jews? (their Redemption, I say, as well out of
all Countries into which they are scattered, and from all Nations amongst whom
(as was foretold) they have been sifted (so many hundred years) as from all
their sins, which moved God to use such severity toward them.) And what by
the [Gentiles on whom Gods name is called] but the remuant of those Nations,
which are now already (or shall, if any more shall) while David's Tabernacle
lays waste, become the people of God in the hardened Jews stead? So that this
Prophecy does as well prove a profession of the Gospel, by a great part of the
Gentiles, before the Jews deliverance, and in the time of their blindness, as
by all that are left of them afterward; for that by a people on whom Gods name
is called, or which is called by Gods Name, is to be understood, a people
beloved of God, and called out from other Nations to serve him, as the Jews
were heretofore, and as the Christians are now, I think none will deny; or
that by the Residue of men, and all the Gentiles upon whom Gods name is called,
all other Nations besides the Jews are meant. And was there then ever as yet
such an unanimous consent in the true worship of God, betwixt the Jews and all
other Nations as is here foretold? surely never betwixt them and any one
Nation. No, nor long betwixt themselves; and (the more the pity) no less
odds has a long time been, and still is amongst Christians, both in their
opinion and practice of Religious duties. Vide Commentationum Apocalyp. partem
primam de sigillis, page 55, 56,
Amos, there is not any material difference; and no other betwixt them and
that of Isaiah, then there is betwixt a Comment and the Text, betwixt a brief
intimation and large explication of one and the same thing.

And yet there want not some, who by the words, [All Israel] in the 11. of the
Romans, understand only the Church of the Gentiles, to which some of the Jews
should be united: but if the obvious and simple meaning of the 28, 29.30, 31.
and 32. Nihil potuit apertius de futura populi Israelitici salute proferri.
Josephus Acosta in locum. Who also repeating the Prophecy in the third of
Hosea, at the 4. ver. says thus of it. Hoc quoque quamvis nulla expositorum
luce illustraretur, per seipsum clarissimum testimonium est. And then goes on
with that in the 4. chap. of Deuteronomy. at the 30. ver. Nec minus dilucide a Mose
praedictum. Postquam te invenerint omnia quae praedicta sunt (praedixerat vero
peccata illius populi, and terrae promissae amissionem, and dispersionem in
omnes gentes) novissimo, inquit, tempore reverteris ad Dominum Deum tuum, and
audies vocem ejus, quia Deus misericors, Dominus Deus tuus, non dimittet te,
neque omnino delebit, neque omnino obliviscetur pacti, in quo juravit Patribus
tuis. De teinp. noviss. lib. 3. c. 11. p. 547.
verses following, will not suffice to discover the weakness (that I say not,
wilfulness) of this interpretation: yet surely to any man that is not without
reason, the Vid. D. Parei explicationem dubii 18. in cap. 11. ad Romans p. 271
Pet. Mart. loc. com. class. 2. cap. 4. page 206, 207. and class. 2. cap. 16. p.
410.
, reasons which Wendelinus (in the 19. chap. and 2. Section of his natural
Contemplations, at the 391. page.) brings to the contrary, will give abundant
satisfaction. For, first, the Apostle does apparently distinguish the Jews
from the Gentiles, by the word [Israel,] when he says, that blindness is in
part happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. And
therefore I much doubt, whether he would in the very next line, by the same
word indifferently comprehend both Jews and Gentiles, especially seeing the
Israel that is to be saved must needs have relation to the Israel, that was
before said to be in blindness. And then too, what is become of the mystery
here spoken of, if the words, And so all Israel shall be saved, should not
signify such a conversion of the Jews, as must follow the vocation of the
Gentiles? for that some particular Jews were at that time to be gathered to
the Church, they knew before, seeing many such were then amongst them, some of
which did first conveigh the Gospel to them. And therefore in my judgment,
those Divines deal most sincerely with the Text, who acknowledging the
literal sense thereof, do send us to that of Isaiah, in his 66. chap. at the
8. ver. as to a plain proof of this opinion; who, says he, has heard such a
thing? who has seen such things? shall the earth be made to bring forth in
one day, Zech. 3. v. 9.
or shall a Nation be borne at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she
brought forth her children. Where the wonderful and unheard of conversion of a
whole Nation at once, (such as never happened to any Nation of the Gentiles)
together with the express mention of Zion, and the evidence of the following
verses should, me thinks, be motive enough, to make any impartial Reader
understand this Prophecy of the Jews; which yet implies not so much a return
of the whole Nation to their Country, as to their God; and therefore could not
be fulfilled by the return of a part of them from Babylon, at which time too,
the Kingdom of God (that is, the true worship of God, the means by which that
Kingdom is obtained) was amongst them only: but has since (according to our
Saviors Prophecy in the 21. chap. of Matthew. at the 43. ver.) been taken from
them; and shall again according to this, be suddenly and extraordinarily
restored into them: as Joel also before intimated, by the plentiful
distribution of Gods Spirit in the last days. 2. That the surviving and
subjected Gentiles shall gladly embrace the knowledge and sea^e of God with the
Jews.


You have hitherto heard of the deliverance and happiness of the Jews only: I
shall now acquaint you with their partakers, which shall be such as are left of
the Nations, that are then to be destroyed, as you may see in the fore-quoted
chap. of Isai. at the 15. and 19. verses. Behold, the Lord will come with fire,
and with his Charets like a whirlewind, to render his anger with fury, and his
rebuke with flames of fire, for by Ezekiel. 39. v. 4, 5, 6 etc. Mal. 4. v. 1.
Psalm. 50 v. 3 2 Thessalonians. 1.1.7, 8. etc.
fire, and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh, and the slain of
the Lord shall be many. And I will set a sign among them, and I will send
those that escape of them, unto the Nations, to Tarshish, Pull, and Lud, that
draw the bow, to Tuball, and Javan, to the Isles afar off, that have not
heard my fame, neither have seen my glory, and they shall declare my glory
among the Gentiles. And they shall bring all your Brethren for an offering Isa.
18. v. 7.
unto the Lord, out of all Nations, upon Horses, and in Charets, and in
Litters, and upon Mules, and upon swift beasts to my holy mountain Jerusalem,
says the Lord, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel
into the House of the Lord. And I will also take of them for Priests, and for
Levites, says the Lord. For as the new Heavens, and the new Earth, which I
will make, (to wit, at the judgment of the dead, when this Heaven and Earth
shall pass away, as it is in the 20. of the Rev. at the 11. ver. and in the
21. at the 1. ver. as these) shall remain before me, says the Lord, so shall
your seed and your name remain (to wit, after the foresaid return from their
captivity) And it shall come to pass, that from one New Moon to another, and
from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to Psalm. 68 u. 29.31. Psalm.
100. v. 1.2 4.
worship before me, says the Lord, and they shall go forth and look upon the
carkeises of the men that have transgressed against me: for their worm shall
not dye, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring
unto all flesh. And in his 60. chap. at the 9. ver. and the 61. at the 4. ver.
They shall I^a. 53. v. 12.
build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former desolations, and they
shall repair the waste Cities, the desolations of many generations. And
strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and the sons of the alient shall
be your Plough-men, and your Vine-dressers. But ye shall be named the Priests
of the Lord: Men shall call you the Ministers of your God: ye shall eat the
riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall you boast your selves. For
your shame you shall have double: and for confusion they shall rejoice in their
portion: therefore in their Land they shall possess the double: everlasting
joy shall be unto them, Surely the Isles shall wait for me, and the Ships of
Tarshish first, to bring my Sons from far, their silver, and their gold
with them, unto the name of the Lord thy God, and to the Holy One of Israel,
because he has glorified thee. And the Sons of Strangers shall build up thy
walls, and their Kings shall minister unto thee: For in my wrath I smote thee,
but in my favor have I had mercy on thee. Therefore thy gates shall be open
continually, they shall not be shut day nor night; that men may bring unto thee
the forces of the Gentiles, and that their Kings may be brought. For the Ier.
12. v. 14, 15, 16 17.
Nation and Kingdom, that will not serve thee, shall perish, yea, those
Nations shall be utterly wasted. The sons also of them that afflicted thee,
shall come bending unto thee, and all they that despised thee, shall bow
themselves down at the soles of thy feet, and they shall call thee the City
of the Lord, the Zion of the Holy One of Israel. Whereas thou have been
forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an
eternal excellency, a joy of many generations. Thou shall also suck the milk
of the Gentiles, and shall suck the breasts of Kings, and thou shall know,
that I the Lord am thy Savior and Redeemer, the Mighty one of Jacob. And in
the 49. chap. at the 22. ver. and the 25. at the 6. ver. Thus says the Lord
God, Behold, I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my Standerd to
the people, and they shall bring thy Sons in their arms, and thy daughters
shall be carried upon their shoulders. And Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers,
and their Queens thy noursing Mothers: they shall bow down to thee, with
their faces toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet, and thou
shall know that I am the Lord: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.
And in this Mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all people, a feast of
fat things, a feast of Wines on the Lees; of fat things full of marrow, of
Wines on the Lees well refined. And he will destroy in this mountain, the face
of the covering cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over all
Nations. He will swallow up death in victory, and the Lord will wipe away
tears from off all faces, and the rebuke of his people, shall he take away
from off all the earth, for the Lord has spoken it. And in his 14. chap. at
the 1. ver. The Lord will have mercy upon Jacob, and will Dan 7. v. 18.22.27
yet choose Israel, and set them in their own Land, and the Isa. 55. v 5. Zech.
2. v. 9.11.
strangers shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of
Jacob, and the people shall take them, and bring them to their place; and the
House of Israel shall possess them in the Land of the Lord, for servants and
for hand-maides: and they shall take them Ezekiel. 39 v. 10.
captives, whose captives they were; and they shall rule over their
oppressors. And in chap. 2. ver. 2. It shall come to pass in the last days,
that the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills: and al Nations shall flow unto
it. And many people shall go and say, come ye, and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will Isa. 49. v. 6. cha.
60. v. 3. 1 Timothy 2. v. 4.
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths, for out of Zion shall
go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And he shall judge
among the Nations, and shall rebuke many people* and they shall break their
swords into plow shares, and their spears into pruning hooks: Nation shall
not Psalm. 46 v. 9.
lift up sword against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more. The
same Prophecy also you may find it the 4. chap. of Mic^l^, at the 1. ver. And
not much unlike this, is that in the 8. chap. of Zech. at the 20. ver. And that
in the 14. chap. at the 16. ver. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, it shall come
to pass, th^^ there shall come people, and the inhabitants of many Cities: and
the inhabitants ^^done City shall go to another, saying, Let us got speedily
to pray before the Lord of Hosts: I will go^ ^l^o. Yea, many people, and
strong Nations shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem; and to pray
before the Lord. Thus faith the Lord of Hosts, in those days it shall come to
pass, that ten men shall takes old, out of all languages of the Nations, even
shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with
you, for we have heard, that God is with you. And in shall come to pass, that
every one that is lest, of all the Nations which came against Jerusalem, shall
even go^ up from year^ to year, to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts; and
to keep and fo^st of Tabernacles. And it shall be, that who so will not come
up of all the Families of the earth unto Jerusalem, to worship the King, the
Lord of Hosts* even upon them shall be no rain.

I know the most of these Prophecies are chiefly interpreted of the joining
together of the Jews and Gentiles in one Church, and rightly: but to say, that
this is now fulfilled, in the time of the substituted Gentiles Vocation, is to
overthrow what was before affirmed, and to take great pains to beguile our
selves and others of the Truth: It is, I say, to put out our own eyes, and bid
others follow us. For Saint Paul in the 11. of the Romans tells us plainly, that
the Jews are broken off from their Olive: Ver. 19, 20. v. 17. v. 15. v. 7. v.
32. ver. 11.
And that we are graffed in for them: That they are cast away: that they are
hardened. That God has concluded them all in unbeleefe: And that through their
fall, salvation is come unto us, to provoke them to Deu. 32 v. 21.
jealousy. And therefore it cannot possibly be maintained, that the Jews and
Gentiles are as yet Ioh. 10. v. 16.
one sheepefold. And as for those which were converted at the first Preaching
of the Gospel, and at other times since, they are but the first fruits, and
root (as I may say) of the branches, and lump, which shall follow after them
by a general conversion. And therefore the calling of these, can no more be
accounted a conversion of the Jews, then the calling of those Gentiles, which
were gathered to the Church before Christ's Nativity, can be taken for the
conversion of the Gentiles. Who were (as time has shown us) but the [(...)]
the forerunners and pledge as it were of al those Nations, which were a long
time after converted, by the Ministry of the Apostles, and their successors.
And besides, how the bringing of the Jews out of all Nations, Upon Horses, and
in Litters, and in Charets, and upon Mules, and upon men's shoulders; can bear
any other but a literal sense* Or how The veil that is spread over all
Nation^, can now be said to be destroyed, when as so many of them run a whoring
after their own inventions, I cannot conceive. Yea, Even unto this day, says
Saint Paul of the Jews in his time, when Moses is read, the veil is upon their
heart. Nevertheless, when it shall turn unto the Lord, the veil shall be
taken away, 2 Cor. 3.15, and 16. ver. But we see not yet Israel returned (yea
we see it fallen into more gross ignorance and superstition) and therefore the
veil is not yet taken away, and consequently is not yet Destroyed from all
Nations. Again, I know no reason, why we should give more credit to the
Metaphorical interpretation of these Prophecies, then to the Figurative
exposition, which some presume to put upon those words in the 12. of Zechariah
at the 10. ver. Although Saint John in his 19. Chap. at the 37. ver. has
alleged them as the only Ioh. 12. v. 39.
cause that our Saviors side was pierced: of which fact doubtless there had
been no necessity, if the Prophecy were not to be understood in a literal
sense. And to say with others, that it was thus fulfilled in the Disciples, who
beheld our Saviors sufferings, is not only to rob the Prophecy of its right
end, but also to make the Disciples guilty of their Masters death: For, the
Text says expressly, They shall look upon me whom they have Psalm. 22 v. 16.
etc.
pierced. Where also it follows, And they shall Mat. 24. v. 30.
mourn for him, as one that mourns for his only Son, and shall be in
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first borne. In that
day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of
Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Meggidon. But who can at the same time earnestly
bewail that man's death, whose punishment they themselves do not only
procure, but scoff at? As all that murdered Christ, did at his. And what
comparison is there, betwixt the grief of a few fearful and scattered
Disciples for a day or two, and the solemn mourning of all Judah and
Jerusalem, and that to every family apart, and their wives apart? As therefore
this Prophecy does concern the Jews only, and chiefly the Tribes that
crucified their Savior, so doubtless it shall then receive its
accomplishment, when God at their general conversion, Zech. 12. v. 10.
Shall power upon them the Spirit of grace and supplications, that so they may
at once obtain the forgiveness of their sins, and thus lament their
forefathers malicious and cruel contrivance, and their own hereditary and
wilful approbation of the death of Christ; who shall then descend unto them,
to restore their Kingdom, and to reign over all the earth, as it is in the
14. Chap. of the same Prophet, at the 5. and 9. verses.

3. That the whole creation shall be restored to its original perfection.
And thus much of the felicity of that remnant of the Nations, which shall
outlive the rest at the Jews return. Now a word or two of the alteration of
the sensitive and senseless creatures at that time. The Wolf, says Isaiah,
in his 11. Chap. at the 6. ver. shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard
shall lie down with the Kid: And the Calfe, and the young Lion, and the fatling
together, and a little child shall lead them. And the Cow and the Bear shall
feed, their young ones shall lie down together; and the Lion shall eat straw
Genesis 1. v. 30. cha. 6. v. 20, 21.
like the Ox. And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the Ass, and
the weaned Child shall put his hand on the Cockatrice den. They shall not hurt
nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be Hab. 2. v. 14.
full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. And in the 65.
Chap. at the 25. ver. The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion
shall eat straw like the Bullock: And dust Genesis 3. v. 1^.
shall be the Serpents meat. They shall not hurt, nor destroy in all my holy
Mountain, says the Lord. Where we may observe, against such as understand by
these expressions, the effects of Preaching, on the hearts of cruell-minded
men; that they are a part of those Prophecies, which concern the Jews
deliverance, and therefore can have no relation to the calling of the Gentiles.
And besides, is there no hurt nor destruction in all the Christian world, that
we should thus flatter our selves with such vain fancies? or rather, when was
there none? or where is the Nation, shall I say, or the City, yea, the Village,
amongst us, where cruelty is not practiced, where such mischiefs are not to be
found, as can scarcely be paralleled, in the common wealths of the most
barbarous Heathen? And as for those words; For the Earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, which seem to have been the occasion of the former
interpretation, in my conceit, they imply but this, that therefore God will
restore to these creatures their primitive obedience, and cause them to be no
more offensive to his people; because he has determined to make himself at
that time so well known over all the earth, that his people shall no more
offend him: And so the fear of God, shall at once be put again into the
hearts of men, and the fear of men into the hearts of the creatures. For the
enmity of the creatures, is but the issue of man's sin, and therefore when God
shall pardon the House of Jacob, and cleanse them from all their iniquities (as
has been said) the sins of men, which are the cause, and the curse of the
Creatures, which is the effect, shall depart together. As then there can be no
sufficient reason alleged for the allegorical interpretation of these
prophecies, so, if we believe Gods revelations touching the Jews return,
there can be no reason urged to the contrary, that will force us to forsake the
literal sense of them. By which sense I am sure, that passage of Saint Paul,
in the 8. Chap. of the Romans at the 21. ver. is so well explained, that the
great strife about the signification of the word [Creature] there, may be soon
decided, and by which too, the opinion of those, who from that place, would
make the sensitive Creatures Copartners with us, of that glory which follows
the last resurrection, falls to the ground: for is not the exchange of a
ravenous disposition for a quiet and peaceable, and the freedom from the abuse
of sin, A delivery of the creature from the bondage of corruption? and the
Dan. 7. v. 21, 22.
glorious liberty of the Sons of God, what is it, but the flourishing estate
of the Jews (before spoken of) under Christ their Head? who accompanied with
all the Saints departed, and then living, shall come and receive dominion Dan.
7. v. 14.27. chapter 2 v. 44. Rev. 15. v. 4 chapter 20. v. 4.6
, and glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and Languages, may serve
him; as you shall hear anon. Another Prophecy touching the renewed estate of
the Creatures, is to be seen in the 30. Chap. of Esaias at the 23. ver. Then
shall he give the rain of thy seed, that thou shall sow the ground withal:
And bread of the increase of the Earth, and it shall be fat and plenteous: in
that day shall thy cattle feed in lange pastures. The Oxen likewise, and the
young Asses that ear the ground, shall eat clean Provender, which has been
winnowed with the shovell, and with the Fan, and there shall be upon every
high hill, rivers and streams of waters, in the day of the slaughter, when the
towers fall. Moreover, the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the
Sun, and the Light of the Sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven
days, in the day that the Lord Mal. 3. v. 17, 18.
binds up the breach of his people, and heals the stroke of their wound.
But the great increase of the light of the Sun and Moon here spoken of, is
in the 60. Chap. at the 19. ver. plainly gainesaid, the words are these. The
Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the
Moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting
light, and thy God thy glory. Where, if it had been said, That the Sun should
no more burn them by day, nor the Moon by night, as it is in the 121. Psalm.
Or smite them, as it is in the 49. of Esaias at the 10. ver. I could have sent
you for an answer to the 4. chap. of the same Prophet, at the 5. ver. The Lord
will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a
cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night, for upon
all the glory shall be a defense. And there shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow
in the day from the beat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from
storm and from rain. But seeing it is said, The Sun shall be no more thy
light by day, These places will be better reconciled, if we acknowledge, that
in the 60. Chap. there is a mixed rehearsal of those blessings, which are
proper only to the Heavenly Jerusalem; (which as it is Rev. 21. ver. 23. and
chap. 22. ver. 5. has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it)
with those which the, Jews shall receive at the restoration of their earthly
Jerusalem; for such a mixture of things, which shall in their execution be many
generations apart, is very usual with the Prophets. And it is the more likely
to be so here (not only because the words immediately following in both
Prophecies, are in sense all one; for they show the same reason wherefore the
Sun and Moon should no more give light unto them, but also) because the
happiness which the Jews shall then be made Heirs of, shall never again be
interrupted by any misery. For the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come
to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads, they shall obtain joy
and gladness, and sorrow, and sighing shall flee away, Esaias the 35. at the 10.
ver. And lest we should conceit, that the judgment of the dead (plainly
described in the 20. Chap. of the Rev.) shall either suspend, Ver. 11, 12. etc.
ver. 2.
or disturb this joy, Saint Paul in the 1. to the Cor. and the 6. Chap. has
told us, that The Saints shall judge* These first words may not unfitly be
referred also to the time of the Saints reign on earth; for it is their
privilege at their entrance into their Kingdom, and throughout the whole
space of their reign, To judge the World, that is, all Nations of the Gentiles
with the judgment of government and reformation: with the exercise of a civil
and temporal power over them; as in the prophecies of the Gentiles subjection
unto them, it may plainly be seen. And it is their privilege at the ^a^^
resurrection, To judge the world, and the Devil, that is, all evil, as well
Angels, as men, by a joint approbation of their final and perfect
condemnation, of the full accomplishment, I say, of their eternal reprobation.
the world, that is, the wicked men that have been their oppressors; ver. 3.
and judge the Angels, that is, the evil spirits, that have been their
tempters: And therefore shall not be thrust down to the bar amongst them, but
advanced to the bench against them. An addition doubtless to their happiness,
and no abatement of it.

And this is as much as I need say, though not above half that the Prophets
say, concerning the Kingdom in the Text. I will therefore shut up all with
that solemn Protestation of God, in the 31. of Jer. at the 35. ver. Thus says
the Lord, which gives the Sun for a light by day, and the Ordinances of the
Moon, and of the Stars, for a light by night, which divides the sea, when
the waves thereof roar, the Lord of Hoasts is his Name; If those Ordinances
Ier. 33. v. 20.25.
depart from before me, says the Lord, then shall the seed of Israel also
cease from being a Nation before me for ever. Thus says the Lord, If Heaven
above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, I
will also cast off all the seed of Israel for all that they have done, says
the Lord. And with that humble complaint of Israel, whom God in the 7. of
Micah, at the 8. ver. makes to prophecy thus of her self. Rejoice not against
me, O mine enemy, when I fall, I shall rise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord
will be a light unto me. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I
have sinned against him, until be plead my cause, and execute judgment for
me. He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.
And so I pass from the thing to be restored, which is the Kingdom of Israel:
to the Person by whom it is to be restored, which is Christ the Lord, at his
next appearing. For they asked of him, saying, Lord, will thou at this time
restore again the Kingdom to Israel?

That our Mediator has undergone the offices of a Priest and Prophet, the
Gospel is our witness: That Christ shall reign on earth, proved. 1. By
consequence. Isa. 14. v. 1, 2, 3.
but considering that the Jews are yet to receive a Kingdom; a Kingdom in
which they shall bold them captives, whose captives they are; and in which
peace and righteousness shall flourish on the earth: considering this I say,
we may justly doubt, whether our Savior has as yet executed the office of a
King: and so much the rather, because he took our nature on him, as well to
perform his kingly office therein amongst us, as either his priestly or
prophetical; the glory of this being indeed the reward of that contempt and
torment which he suffered in the others: and though it cannot be denied, that
he has already Col. 2. v. 15.
spoiled principalities and powers (that is, the evil spirits) and has made a
show of them openly, triumphing over them in his cross: nor that he is Ephesians. 4.
v. 8.
ascended up on high, and has led captivity captive, and given gifts unto men:
nor that he is become the Col. 2. v. 10.
Head of all principality and power (that is, of the Saints and holy Angels)
and is set Heb. 1. v. 3. chapter 8. v. 1 chapter 10. v. 12. chapter 12. v. 2.
down at the right hand of the Throne of God: so that he is Phil. 3. v. 21.
able even to subdue all things unto himself: Yet that he does not now reign
in that Kingdom which he shall govern as man, and consequently, in that of
which the Prophets speak, his own words in the third of the Revel. at the 21.
verse. do clearly prove. To him that overcommeth, says he, will I grant to
sit with me in my Throne; even as I also overcame, and am set down with my
Father in His Throne: from whence it follows, that the Throne which here he
calls his own, and which he has not Heb. 2. v 8. chapter 10. v. 12.13.
yet received, must needs belong unto him as man; because the place where he
now sits, is the Fathers Throne; a Throne in which he has no proper interest,
but as God. Again, it follows, that seeing he is now in his Fathers Throne,
therefore neither is this the time, nor that the place, in which his Throne is
to be erected: not the place, for in one Kingdom there can be but one Throne:
and not the time, for then he should sit in his own Throne, which now he does
not do: and the reason of it (as is intimated in the first words) is because
the time in which all that shall overcome, are to be called, is not yet at an
end, and this also the answer which was made to the souls under the Altar (who
cried for vengeance against their persecutors) does fully confirm; for it was
said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until their
fellow servants also, and their brethren, that should be killed as they were,
should be fulfilled: Rev. the 6. and the 11. verse. and when this is done, Rev.
11 v. 15, 17.
then shall Christ sit in his own Throne, and they that overcome shall sit
with him; for he that overcommeth, and keeps my words unto the end, to him
(says he) will I give power over Nations (and he shall rule them with a rod of
iron, as the vessels of a Potter shall they be broken to shivers) even as I
received of my Father, Rev. 2. at the 26. verse. The like encouragement he gave
also to his Disciples before his passion. Ye are they (said he) which have
continued with me in my temptations, therefore I appoint unto you a Kingdom,
as my Father has appointed unto me, that ye may Mat. 26. v. 29. Mar. 14. v.
25. Luke 14. v. 15. ch, 22. v. 16.18. c. 24. v. 42.43. Act. 10. v. 41.
eat and drink at my table in my Dan. 2. v. 44. chapter 7. v. 14.27.
Kingdom, and sit on Dan. 7. v. 22. Rev. 20. v. 4.
seats judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel, Luke the 22. at the 28. verse. I
know these words are taken by interpreters, for a metaphorical expression of
those joys which we shall receive in In Heaven where the holy Jerusalem is,
that ( Rev. 21. v. 10) great City, distinguished from the City described to (
Ezekiel. 40. v. 2. etc. chapter 45. v. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.) Ezekiel, (which I take to
be the model and platform of the City that is to be built at the Jews
Redemption) by these and many more differences. First, because the ( Heb. 11.
v. 10.) builder and maker of the one is God, but the other ( Ier. 31. v. 38.
Ezekiel. chapter 40. etc.) men shall build. Secondly, the materials of Jerusalem which
is above, are all ( Rev. 21. v. 18.19, 20, 21.) gold and precious stones. But
the ( Ezekiel. 41. v. 16.17, 21. etc.) materials of that other Jerusalem shall not
be such. Thirdly, in this City, there is ( Rev. 21. v. 22.) no Temple, for the
Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it. But that City shall have
( Ezekiel. 40.41. etc.) a Temple. Fourthly, the river of ( Rev. 22. v. 1.) water
of life proceeds out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. But in that
City, ( Ezekiel. 47. v. 1. etc.) waters (not the river of life, though endued with
healthful and ( Ezekiel. 47. v. 9.12.) nourishing qualities, because of the place
whence they are to proceed) shall issue from under the threshold of the Temple:
for the forefront of the house shall stand toward the East, and the waters
shall come down from under the right side of the house, at the South side of
the Altar. Fifthly, in this City, the tree of life ( Rev. 22. v. 2.) only
grows on either side of the river, and bears twelve manner of fruits monthly.
But by the river, that shall issue out of the Sanctuary of that City, shall
grow ( Ezekiel. 47. v. 12.) all trees for meat. Sixthty, in this City there is (
Rev. 22. v. 5 chapter 21. v. 23.25.) no night, they need no candle, nor light of
the Sun. for the Lord God gives them light, and the Lamb is the light
thereof. But in that City, there shall be ( Esa. 30. v. 26. chapter 60. v. 11.)
night, and the light of the Sun shall then be sevenfold. Seventhly, this City
shall ( Rev. 21. v. 1.2.) descend to the new earth, with which there shall be
no sea created. But the waters which shall come from that City, shall go into
the ( Ezekiel. 47. v. 8.) sea, and being brought forth into the sea the waters
shall be healed, etc. and therefore that City is to be built, before the
annihilation of the first earth, with which there is a sea.
Heaven; but it is a current axiom in our Schools (non esse a litera, seu
propria Scripturae significatione recedendum, nisi evidens aliqua necessitas
cogat, and Scripturae veritas in ipsa litera periclitari videtur) that we must
not forsake the literal and proper sense of the Scripture, unless an evident
necessity does require it, or the truth thereof would be endangered by it: and
I am sure, here is no such cause for which we should leave the natural
interpretation of the place: yea, we are by many other passages in the
Scriptures rather compelled to stick to it; for besides that there is little
analogy and resemblance betwixt a perpetual Rev. 22. v. 3.
praising and worshipping of God, and the business of a politic government
here spoken of; besides this I say, we are already informed, that though our
Savior be now in Heaven, yet he sits not there in his own Throne, and
consequently, is not yet in the Kingdom which the Father has appointed him.
And as it is evident from his own words, that the Throne of his Kingdom is
not now in Heaven, so it is plain from Saint Paul's, in the first to the Cor.
the 15. chap. at the 22. verse. that it shall not be there after the judgment
of the dead, his words are these. As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall
all be made alive: But every man in his own order. Christ the first fruits,
afterward They that are Christ's, if there were not to be some distance of time
betwixt the resurrection of these and other men, it had been as easy for the
Apostle to have said, They that are dead, or, All that are in the grave. And if
there shall be a precedence of time, then no doubt but it shall be such a
precedence, as may bring some advantage and honor to the Saints: and therefore
not only of a few hours, or days, but of a more notable continuance of many
years. For if Christ should descend for no other purpose, but to call all men
to judgment, then as there would be need of none, so there could not well be
any priority of time to distinguish their resurrection; because in that Act,
both good and bad must be assembled before him at the same time, and the wicked
doubtless should then be raised as soon, to see his coming, as the just, to
mere and accompany him therein.
they that are Christ's at his coming (and therefore not the Zech. 14. v. 5. 1
These. 3. v. 13. chapter 4. v. 14.15.16. 2 These. 1. v. 10.
Martyrs only.) Then comes the end (what presently after his coming? no,
but) when he has delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father (and when
shall that be?) when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority, and
power. For he must reign till He (that is, the Father) has put all his
enemies under his feet: which will be fully accomplished, when the last enemy
shall be destroyed, which is death, and when all things shall be thus subdued
unto him, then (shall follow that inutterable glory, that height of happiness,
where) the Son also himself shall be subject unto him, that did before put
all things under him, that God may be all in all: thus far Saint Paul, whose
words do clearly prove that the reign of Christ as man (of which alone we
treat) does neither begin before his coming, nor extend it self beyond the
death of death, the last resurrection; and therefore cannot without a palpable
contradiction, be taken for the time, when he shall give up his Kingdom to his
Father; nor for the time that now is, betwixt which and his Kingdom too, our
Savior, in my conceit, has put an irreconciliable distinction; calling this,
the time, not of a Kingdom, but of temptation, that is, a time of persecution
for righteousness sake; a time, wherein his Disciples must be delivered up to
be afflicted, killed, and hated of all Nations for his name; that thus
fulfilling the rest of the afflictions of Christ, for his bodies sake, which is
the Church, they may at last wholly, and together (for shall not their bodies
as well reign with Christ as their souls? but these, we know, are, and shall
be yet captives to the grave: or, are the Saints that shall be found alive at
Christ's coming exempted from his coming? for if he should reign till then,
and then give up his Kingdom to his Father, they are exempted; but if as our
Apostle shows, his reign begin not till his coming, then as the living shall
at that time 1 These. 4. v. 15, 16, 17.
together with the dead in Christ, be caught up to meet him, so the Saints
shall then, and till then they cannot, wholly, and altogether reign with him)
I say together, and at once be made partakers of their Masters Kingdom: which
as it appears, is not to be in Heaven, and therefore must needs be held on
earth, where all things which our Savior promised his Disciples, may well be
accomplished in a literal sense. Of this Kingdom also speaks S. Peter in the
3. of the Acts, at the 19. v. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your
sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord, and he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached
unto you, Luke 19. v. 11, 12, etc.
whom the Heavens must receive, until the times of restitution of all things,
which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Rev. 10 v. 7.
Prophets since the world began: where if by the times of refreshing, and the
times of restitution of all things, naught else can be meant, but the Jews
inhabiting again of their own land, and the bringing of all other Nations
into subjection to them; then it is evident, that Christ's coming at this time,
shall be to accomplish this thing to Israel; and consequently to receive his
appointed Kingdom: but that those words can have no other meaning, a small
acquaintance with the Prophets will inform you: who as they speak of nothing
more, so they have nothing which can be applied to our Saviors second coming,
as a comfortable effect so generally foreshewne, but this. And here we may call
to mind too, our Saviors words to James and John, when they requested that one
might sit on his right hand, and the other on his left, in his Kingdom: To sit
on my right hand, and on my left, said he, is not mine to give, but it shall be
given to them, for whom it is prepared of my Father. Which saying, as it does
show, that our Savior had before acquainted the Apostles of his Kingdom, so
it intimates, that his Kingdom is to be held on earth, where only this may be
fulfilled; for in Heaven it cannot be done, unless we will grant, that other
men shall be as highly exalted there, as our Savior is, to wit, to the right
hand of God: which is a prerogative peculiar to the Son alone, a pre-eminence
I say, which the chiefest of the Angels never enjoyed. For, to which of the
Angels said he at any time, Sit on my right hand, until I make thine enemies
thy footstool? Heb. 1. at the 13. verse. And the same Apostles words in the
second to Timothy and the 4. chap. may not be forgotten. I charge thee, says
he, before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the
dead, at his appearing and his Kingdom. For why should Christ's appearing and
his Kingdom be joined together; yea, why should his Kingdom be added, as the
end of his appearing, unless both were to contemporate? unless his Kingdom
were to begin at his appearing, and not before it? And to my seeming, that
prophetical Image in the second of Dan. at the 31. verse. which represented
both the orderly succession, and diverse condition of all the then following
Kingdoms of this world, unto the Kingdom of Christ (shadowed there unto us,
by the stone that was cut out without hands) does give good light to this of
Saint Paul. For in what manner those Kingdoms have succeeded each other; in
the like manner is the Kingdom of Christ to succeed them, as appears by the
same phrase of speech, which is attributed as well to the setting up of this
Kingdom, as to any of them; to wit, that it shall break in pieces and consume
all those Kingdoms. Ver. 34, 35, 44.45.
And therefore seeing these words are meant of a conquest, and succession by
force of arms in all the former Kingdoms, how can they be otherwise
understood, in this of Christ, which is to succeed them all (as they have
succeeded each other) both in time and place, as the 35. verse. does fully
declare? and as the falling of the stone upon the feet of the Image, upon the
last and divided Kingdoms of the iron Empire does probably imply. For if the
Kingdom of God there spoken of, were to be understood of a Kingdom, which
should so be set up in the days of these Kings, that their reign should
notwithstanding continue together with it (as not only these, but all former
Kingdoms also have done with the Militant Church, with the Kingdom of grace;
which therefore cannot be the Kingdom there foreshewne) then doubtless it
should have been represented by some part of the Image it self (as the
contemporating Kingdoms of the divided Empire are, by the mixture of iron and
clay) and not by a thing so different from it: and adverse unto it: by a stone
I say, so wonderful for its beginning, operation, and increase. For it was cut
out without hands: and when it had smote the Image, became a great Mountain,
Ver. 34.45. Ver. 35.
and filled the whole earth, (which the Church as yet never did:) whose fall
and growth too, as they import a more powerful, speedy, and general conquest
over these Kingdoms, by this Kingdom, then either the gold received from the
silver, the silver from the brass, or the brass from the iron; so they imply
the utter extirpation, and total abolition of the manner of policy, and
government which these Kingdoms have used; of which it is said, that they
became like the chafe of the summer threshing-floores, and the wind carried
them away, that no place was found for them, verse. 35. And with this sense of
the interpretation of the vision, very well agrees that in the second Psalm. at
the 8. verse. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou
shall break them with a rod Rev. 2. v. 27. chapter 19. v. 15.
of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a potters vessel. And that in
Psalm. 110. at the 2. verse. The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of
Zion: rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. The Lord at thy right hand shall
strike through Kings in the day of his wrath. He shall judge among the Heathen,
he shall fill the places with dead bodies: he shall wound the heads over many
countries. He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall he lift up
the head. Yea, and that too, in the 149. Psalm. at the second verse. Let Israel
rejoice in him that made him; let the children of Zion be joyful in their 1 Samuel 1 v. 9.10. Psalm. 47. Psalm. 98.
King. Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in
their hand: to execute vengeance upon the Heathen: and punishments upon the
people: to bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of
iron, to execute upon them the judgment written: This honor have all his
Saints. And that naught else is meant by the world to come, in the second of
the Heb. at the 5. verse. but the Kingdom of our Savior, it is evident by the
authority there alleged out of the 8. Psalm. which prophecy is therefore made
use of by the Apostle, as a plain proof that Christ's manhood is exalted above
the chiefest of the Angels; because it shows, that it is to Christ as man, and
not to any of the Angels, that God has put in subjection the world to come.
And if there be yet a world, which is to be put in subjection to Christ as man,
then it must needs be a distinct world, from 1 Cor. 15 v. 24 28 Rev. 21. v. 3
that in which as man he shall give up the Kingdom to his Father: for that
which is to be given up, is already past. And it is no where said, that the new
Jerusalem, the City of eternal glory, shall be subjected to Christ as a
creature; but that Christ as a creature shall (after the judgment of the dead)
be there subject to the Father.

2. By express prophecy.
And thus it has been proved by consequence that our Savior shall heareafter
reign on earth. You shall now hear it directly and expressly affirmed.
Behold, says the Angel to the Virgin Mary, thou shall conceive in thy womb,
and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name Jesus: he shall be great, and
shall be called the Son of the Highest; and the Lord God shall give unto him,
Matthew. 2 v. 6. Acts 2. v. 30 31.
the Throne of his Father David, Luke the first, at the 31. v. Behold (says
Chapter 33. v. 15.16.
Jeremiah in his 23. c. at the 5. v.) the days come says the Lord, that I
will raise unto David, a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper,
and shall execute judgment and justice Whatsoever loss the disobedience of
the first Adam brought on himself, and his posterity, that no doubt, the
second Adam has recovered with advantage for himself and his chosen. But the
first Adam lost not only his right to Heaven, but the happy estate too, which
an innocent life would for a long time, have continued to him and his on earth.
And therefore that intercourse and familiarity with God, that rule, and command
over men, and all other creatures, which Adam (before the advancement of
mankind to its highest happiness) should have here enjoyed, if he had not fell;
that, and far more then that, shall Christ with his chosen inherit at his
next appearing. And now seeing even reason it self does thus strongly conclude
for our Saviors future sovereignty, what unreasonablenesse were it in us, any
longer to misdoubt the literal accomplishment of these and all other sacred
revelations, which so fully describe, and so clearly confirm it.
in the Is. 8. v. 8. Job 19. v. 25. Heb. 1. v. 2.
earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and
this is his Name whereby he shall be called. The Lord our righteousness.
Behold (says Zech. in his 6. chap. at the 12. verse.) the man whose name is the
Branch, and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the Temple of
the Lord, and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his
Throne, and he shall be a Priest upon his Throne, and the counsel of peace
shall be between them both. And in the 34. chap. of Ezekiel. at the 22. verse. I
will save my flock, and they shall no more be a prey: and I will judge
between cattle and cattle, and I will set up one Shepherd over them: and he
shall feed them, even my servant David, he shall feed them, and he shall be
their Shepherd. And I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a
Prince among them, I the Lord have spoken it: and in his 37. chap. at the 24.
verse. David my servant shall be King over them, and they shall have one
Shepherd, and they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes,
and do them: and they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my
servant, wherein your Fathers have dwelt, and they shall dwell therein, even
they and their children, and their childrens children for ever, and my servant
David shall be their Prince for ever. And in the 9. chap. of Isaiah at the 6.
verse. Unto us a child is borne, unto us a Son is given, and the government
shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. Of the
increase of his government and peace there shall be no end. Upon the Thron of
David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment
and with justice, from henceforth even for ever: the zeal of the Lord of Hosts
will perform this. And in the 52. chap. at the 13. verse. Behold, my servant
shall deal prudently, he shall be Ps 1^8. v. 22.23, 24 etc.
exalted and extolled, and be very high. As many were Luke 2. v. 34.35.
astonished at thee ( his visage, to wit, at the time of his suffering, was so
marred more then any man, and his form more then the sons of men) so, to
wit, at his next appearing, shall he sprinkle many Nations, the Kings shall
shut their mouths at him: for that which had not been told them, shall they
see, and that which they had not heard shall they consider. And in the 4. chap.
of Micah, at the 6. verse. In that day says the Lord, will I assemble her that
halteth, and I will gather her that is driven out, and her that I have
afflicted, and I will make her that halted, a remnant; and her that was cast
Romans 11. v. 12.15.32
off, a strong Nation: and the Lord shall reign over them in Mount Zion from
henceforth even for ever. And in the 72. Psalm. at the 6. verse. He shall come
down like rain upon the mowen grass: as showers that water the earth. In his
days shall the righteous flourish: and abundance of peace so long as the Moon
endures. He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river, to
the ends of the earth. They that dwell in the Wilderness shall bow before him:
and his enemies shall lick the dust. The Kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles
shall bring presents: the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts. Yea, all
Kings shall fall Isa. 45. v. 22.23. Phil. 2. v. 10
down before him: Ps. 22. v. 27, 28. Rev. 14. v. 6 7. chapter 15. v. 4
all Nations shall praise him. And in the 102. Psalm. at the 13. verse. The One
shall arise and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favor her, yea, the set
time is come: for thy servants take pleasure in her stones; and favor the dust
thereof. So the Heathen shall fear the name of the Lord: and all the Kings of
the earth thy glory. When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his
glory.

Now that these prophecies do concern the reign of Christ alone, I think no
man doubts; and that they are already fulfilled, it cannot be proved. For
neither did Christ at his first coming sit on David's Throne, nor any other of
David's lineage, or of that Tribe (or of the other Tribes) for the Scepter was
then departed from Judah, and a Lawgiver from between his feet. Neither were
Judah and Israel then in the land together: neither was the Temple then
destroyed, but afterward: and therefore the things here spoken of, are all to
be accomplished at his second coming: and that not in Heaven, but on earth. On
earth I say, and in Is. 33. v. 20. chapter 50. v. 1, 2, 3, 9, 10.
Jerusalem, Ps. 122. v. 5.
David's Throne was. For his feet shall stand in that day (to wit, when he
comes to receive his appointed Kingdom) on the Mount of Olives, which is
before Jerusalem on the East (from which Mount also he ascended) and the Mount
of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the East, and toward the
West, and there shall be a very great valley, and half the Mountain shall
remove toward the North, and half of it toward the South. And ye shall flee to
the valley of the Mountains: for the valley of the Mountains shall reach unto
Azal; yea, ye shall flee like as ye fled from before the earthquake, in the
days of Uzziah, K. of Judah. And the Lord my God shall Jude v. 14, 15. Rev.
19. v. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
come, and all the Ss. with thee: and it shall come to pass in that day, that
the light shall not be clear nor dark, but it shall be one day, which shall be
known to the Lord, not day nor night: but it shall come to pass, that at
evening time it shall be light. And it shall be in that day, that Ps. 46. v. 4.
Ezekiel. 47. v. 1. etc. Joel 3. v. 8.
living waters shall go out from Jerusalem: half of them toward the former
sea, and half of them toward the hinder sea: in Summer and in Winter shall it
be: and the Lord shall be King over all the earth: in that day shall there be
one Lord, and his Name one. All the Land shall be turned as a plain from Geba
to Rimmon, South of Jerusalem: and it shall be lifted up, and inhabited in her
place: from Benjamins gate unto the place of the first gate, unto the corner
gate, and from the Tower of Hananiel unto the Kings Wine-presses: and men shall
dwell in it, and there shall be no more utter destruction; but Jerusalem shall
be safely inhabited, Zech. the 14. at the 4. verse.

You see here that our Savior comes not only to conquer death, (which is the
last enemy that he shall destroy, and therefore not wholly to be destroyed till
the last resurrection) but also to take the Kingdoms of this world unto
himself: to put down (as Saint Paul has said) all the rule, and all the
authority, and power of other Nations; that there may be one Shepherd and one
Sheepfold; that the Dan. 7. v. 27.
Kingdom, and Dominion, and greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven,
may be possessed by the people of the Saints of the most High. That is, (as the
former prophesies do expound it) by the people of Ps. 148. v. 14.
Israel. And this, as I think, is the time of which he spoke these words,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, John 1. v. 15.
Hereafter shall ye see Heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and
descending upon the Heb. 1. v. 6.
Son of man. For that this may be fulfilled, it is requisite, that he be on
earth, whither these messengers may descend unto him, and from whence again
they may ascend. Which argues too, his continuance here, for a greater space of
time, then the judgment of the dead requires. And although it be said, that
Christ shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and, that of his Kingdom
there shall be no end: Yet it is not meant, that he shall always reign as
man: or that the earthly Jerusalem, the place of his Throne as man, shall
always stand. But this only is meant, that the Kingdom of the Saints, which
Christ as he is man, shall govern a Isa. 65. v. 22.
long time on earth, shall after the judgment of the dead (at which time this
Heaven and earth shall pass away) be delivered up to God even the Father, in
the new Jerusalem, where it shall ever remain, and where God shall be all in
all: yet so, that Christ too as man shall still retain the dignity and
pre-eminence of a King, a Priest and Prophet, though he shall have no need to
make use of either office. And thus a late and learned Master Down on the 17.
chapter of Saint Ioh. p. 157. of his Treatises pub. 1633.
Divine of ours, does reconcile the former words of Saint Luke in his first
chap. at the 33. verse. with that of Saint Paul, in the first to the Cor. the
15. chap. at the 24. and 28. verse. We are to know, says he, that the Kingdom
of Christ contains in it, two things. The Mediatory function of his Kingly
office: And his Kingly Glory. That he shall lay aside, for then (to wit, after
the judgment of the dead) there will be no farther necessity nor use thereof.
But this he shall hold for ever, as being by the acts of his Mediation justly
acquired, and according to covenant bestowed upon him by his Father. And
furthermore it may be observed, that the words, For Ps. 72. v. 17. Ps 89. v. 28
29, 36, 37. Ps. 145. v. 13. Isa. 32. v. 14, 15. Chapter 60. v. 15 Ezekiel. 37. v. 25.
ever, Evermore, and Everlasting, are in the Scriptures often joined with, and
put for, these and the like sayings: Through all, or many generations: through al
ages, or as long as the Sun and Moon endure. And therefore can conclud no more
but this; that Christ's reign as man, shall continue, as long as there shall be
men to succeed each other on the earth: or as long as this Heaven and earth
shall last: that is, until the time which God has foreordained for the
judgment of the dead. When the Heavens that are now shall Rev. 20. v. 11. chapter
21. v. 1.
pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the
earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up, the 2. of Saint
Peter, the 3. chap. at the 10. verse.

And to this purpose, when the Prophet Daniel had said, his Dominion is an
everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away; he adds presently by way of
exposition, and his Kingdom that, which shall not be destroyed. And in another
place more plainly; The Kingdom shall not be left to other people. Cha. 2. v.
44
So that when the Prophets say, that Christ shall reign for ever, and that his
Kingdom shall stand for ever, or be an everlasting Kingdom, it is all one, as
if they had told us only, That neither Christ, nor his Kingdom shall have any
successors; that no Son of Man shall succeed him in his Throne; that no humane
Kingdom shall be set up in the place of his Kingdom, as his shall be in the
place of the four Monarchies; but that in spite of all opposition both of men
and devils, his dominion shall endure, until the upshot and period of all
temporal and humane government; that is, until the last resurrection, when
with a Venite benedicti, he shall give up the number of the Electfull and whole
(as we say) unto God himself.

That the restoration of Jerusalem and the first resurrection shall concur.
You see again, that when our Savior comes to reign over all the earth, he
comes not alone, but brings all the Saints with him. Which words as they do
establish the literal sense of the Luke 14. v. 14. chapter 20. v. 35, 36. Ioh. 6.
v. 39 40.44, 45. Philip. 3. v. 11. 1 These 3. v. 13. chapter 4. v. 14. etc. Ezekiel.
37. v. 12, 13.
first Resurrection, mentioned in the 20. Chap. of the Rev. So they make the
Kingdom of Israel, and the thousand years reign of the Saints there spoken
of, to sunchronize and meet together, for why shall the Saints come with him,
but because they have a share in this Kingdom, and are to be his assistants in
it, as he told his Disciples; and as the Elders in the 5. Chap. of the Rev. at
the 10. ver. said in the hearing of Saint John. Thou have made us unto our God
Kings, and Priests, and we Sanctorum super terram regia dignitas and auctoritas
in hoc mundi statu unlla est; Sed exilium and perpetuae calamitates ac
persecutiones, quas a tyrannis mundi ^ujus regilus patiuntur. De al^ero igitur
mundi statu hoc accipiendum. Qued si vero super terram regnalunt Sancti, utique
ea non abo lebitur, vel annihi labitur: in id enim quod non est, creaturae
dominium non est. Eodem videtur Christus respexisse. Mat. 5. v. 5. Est and hoc
observandum, quod Sancti aiunt, regnabimus, non, regnamus. Quo digitum
intendunt ad alterum seculum. Nam ne Sancti quidem in coelo constituit, jam
regnant super terram: quia cum patientia adhuc expectant liberanonem fratrum,
quam accelerare non possunt. Apoc. 6. v. 10, 11. They are the words of Mar.
Frid. Wendelinus (page 429.430. of the 21 chapter of the 2. Sect. of his natural
contemplations) urged in desence of an accidental change of the world, against
the essential abolition of it. Both which Tenets are, as I think, very true,
if referred to their proper seasons. If (shunning both the improvident
consounding, and pernicious wresting of Scripture) we as^^me a marveilous
renovation of this heaven and earth, at the beginning of our Saviors Kingdom,
and a creation of n^w, at the end thereof, that is, at the last Judgment: when
as it is in the 20. of the Rev. and the 11. ver. This Heaven and Earth shall
fly away, and no place be found for them. And if they shall have place no
more, then surely they can have being no longer, for place is an inseparable
affection of their being. And consequently this Scripture proves an absolute
annibilation of the first world. Which I suppose no man will deny, if he does
observe when this passing away of the first Heaven and Earth is to be
accomplished, to wit, above a thousand years after the renewing of them. For
they are to be renewed at our Saviors entrance into his Kingdom, but they are
not to pass away, till the giving up thereof to God the Father at the last
Judgment, and so it stands ^^^me, that these words imply no less then a
perishing. Which yet may further be established by three other undeny able
testimonies. One of the same A postle, in the next Chap. at the 1. ver. And I
saw, says he, a new Heaven, and a new Earth; for the first Heaven and the
first Earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea. Which last clause
expressly affirming an utter abolition of the Sea, does plainly inform us,
that by the flying and passing away of the first Earth (which with the Sea
makes but one globe) is meant a substantial perishing of it. Another of Moses,
in the 8. chap. of Genesis at the 22. ver. While the earth remains, seed time
and harvest, and cold and heat, and Summer and Winter, and day and night shall
not cease. And therefore, when seed time and harvest, and Summer and Winter,
and day and night shall cease, as it is most certain they shall at the last
judgment; the earth it self must of necessity then cease also. A third of Job
in his 26. Chap. at the 10. ver. He has compassed the waters with bounds,
until the day ( Deuteronomy. 11. v. 21.) and night come to an end. Which words being
compared with the precedent testimony, wherein day and night are shown to be
of equal duration with seed time and harvest; and with that of the 22. of the
Rev. where it is said (of the new Jerusalem and the Inhabitants thereof) There
shall he no night there, and they need no candle, neither light of the Sun;
must needs be taken for a plain and positive proose. That the day and night
shall come to an end, and consequently, that the Stars, and so the sublunary
creatures too, whose generation and continuance do more or less depend upon
celestial influences (being all made only for the use of man, while he is to
have his residence and abode on this earth) shall (at mankindes removal from
hence) together with this earth, with which they were created, be brought
again to nothing.
shall Romans 4. v. 13. Luk 19. v. 17.19.
reign on earth. And this will appear to a diligent eye, even out of the
controversed place in the 20. Chap. of the Rev. for besides, that the
opposition betwixt the first and the last Resurrection, does impose the same
sense on both; besides this, I say, the vision represented not unto Saint John,
perfect men (at the first) that is, men that should be beheaded for the
witness of Jesus; but souls only, and that as of men already beheaded: which
most manifestly shows, that the Resurrection after mentioned, did follow their
death, and not go before it. And therefore, may not be taken spiritually, for
their regeneration, for the renewing of their minds, which is to precede their
persecution (and may more probably be referred to the sealing of the Servants
of God in their foreheads, spoken of in the 7. Chap.) but materially and
properly, for the quickening of their bodies, when once the number of the
persecuted is fulfilled: whose consummation and glorious exaltation, this
vision did represent. It is said also, that they Lived and Reigned with Christ
a thousand years. But how can it be, that they should reign immediately after
their resurrection; or begin their reign all at once; or continue it but a
thousand years, (which things these words imply) if by their Resurrection,
should be understood their Regeneration: and by their reign, their being in
Heaven, or if by the Word [they lived] should be meant only, they were
converted; how can they reign so long as a thousand years, seeing the place
of their Reign must be on earth? for if they should be any where else, how can
they be encompast again with war, when the thousand years are expired, as the
9. ver. declares they shall? and lastly, the reign of Christ does not begin,
till Antichrist is destroyed, so that a metaphorical interpretation of the
first resurrection, would make good this Conclusion, that most of the Saints
shall rise many hundred years before their Reign; there being no less
distance of time betwixt the hour of their calling, and Antichrists confusion.
The assumption is grounded on the 15. ver. of the 11. Chap. of the Rev. Which
shows, that till the time of the seventh trumpet (with the beginning whereof
the last Vial does concur) The Kingdoms of The Kingdoms of this world? It
is not said, the Kingdom of Heaven, to wit, of the third heaven (the
incorruptible habita^ion of Saints and Angels) or of another world, I say of
another in substance. But the Kingdoms of this world, that is, this world
which is now, and shall till then be divided into many Kingdoms, shall wholly
become Christ's; and be made by him, one Heavenly Kingdom: a Kingdom in which
men shall live after an Heavenly estate and condition: a Kingdom in which Gods
will shall be done on earth, as it is in heaven, for seeing that cannot
possibly become any man's possession, which does utterly cease to be, what other
construction can be given of these words, but this: that the government of all
the Kingdoms of the world, is hereafter to be taken into Christ's own hands as
he is man? and indeed, how else should they become his, after such a manner as
they are not now his, if not by a subjection to his manhood? for as he is God,
they were always his; and all will grant that this Scripture does plainly
foreshew a deposing of all the Kings of the earth at the accomplishment
thereof. A deposing of them I say, in such a way, that their Kingdoms may
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ. Which cannot be by
abolishing and dissolving the earth, on which they must reign: but may and
shall be by subduing and conquering them, and the Kingdoms over which they
must reign.
this world do not become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ. And
this also is intimated by the binding up of Rev. 20 v. 1, 2, 3.
Satan a thousand years (with which the reign of the Saints contemporates)
which vision as it is the next to that of the battle, wherein the beast and
false Prophet are taken; so doubtless it shall not till then receive its
accomplishment: for seeing Antichrist is but the devils instrument, we cannot
imagine, that his power shall outlast the devils liberty, especially if we
consider, that while Satan is in hold, there shall be a general peace over all
the World, as the Isa. 2. v. 4. Mich. 4. v. 3
Prophets say expressly, and as is here employed, in that as soon as he is
loosed again, Rev. 20. v. 7.8.
presently he shall gather all the rest of the world to fight against the
Saints, but their malicious attempt shall find no better success, then that
of the beast, the false Prophet, and the Kings of the earth (their
predecessors) had done at the beginning of the thousand years. Ver. 9.
For fire shall come down from God our of heaven and devour them.

Now against this which has been said touching our Saviors Kingdom, The
chief doubts resolved.
his own words in the 18. of Saint John, at the 35. ver. may be objected. For
there he says plainly; My Kingdom is not of this World. And in the 25. of
Matthew. at the 31. ver. he says, When the Son of Man shall come in his glory,
and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his
glory: And before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them
one from another, as a Shepherd divides the sheep from the Goats. With which
agrees that of Saint Peter, in his 2. Ep. 3. Chap. and 7. ver. But the Heavens
and earth which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto
fire, against the day of Judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. And many
other places there are of the like nature. But to the first, I answer, that
those words of our Savior do only distinguish the time and condition of his
Kingdom, from the time and condition of the Kingdoms of this world, at the
setting up of whose Kingdom there shall be such an Neo enim dubium quin maxima
rerum naturalium and humanarum mutatio regni hujus auspicia sit antecessura:
Antichristus enim cum to ta sua Synagoga abolebitur, extingue tur hominum pars
maxima, gentilibus non nisi paucis relictis; [qui in posteris suis, non extra,
sed intra regnum hoc mill annis supererunt, ut prophetiae supra memoratae, cum
aliis in Scriptura passim occurrentibus, abunde testantur; sub decursum vero
mill annorum mirum in modum aucti, and a Satana e carcere suo soluto iterum
seducti, Sanctorum castra oppugnabunt, sed incassum.] Nec dubium est, quin
rerum quoque naturalium, quae regni hujus incolis ministrabunt, long alia sit
futura facies, quam impraesentiarum est: siquidem beatissimum and
tranquillissimum erit regni istius seculum, omnis (...), quae in natura modo
decurrit, expers. Mar. Frid. Wend. Contemp. phys. Sect. 2. cap. 17. p. 375, 376.


alteration over the whole frame of Psa. 46 Isa. 2. v. 12.19.21. chap. 11. v.
6. etc. chap. 30. v. 25, 26. chap. 41. v. 18, 19. chap. 55. v. 13. Ezekiel. 38. v.
19, 20. Matthew. 24. v. 29, 30. Mark. 13. v. 24, 25. Luk, 21. v. 25, 26. Rev. 6.
v. 12, 13, etc. chap. 16. v. 18, 19. etc.
nature, and such a change of government on the Earth, that this time shall
then as well be accounted the time of an other world, as the time before the
Flood, is now taken for the old world by us; and was long ago so styled by
Saint Peter, in his 2. Ep. 2. Chap. at the 5. ver. and 3. Chap. at the 6. ver.
And therefore notwithstanding this proof, the place of his Kingdom shall be
the earth that now is, though this be not the time, nor any humane policy the
pattern of his reign. And to all such places, that mention only the
dissolution of the elements and the last judgment; I answer, that these are
but a part of those things, which shall be done by Christ at his next
appearing; and that as other Scriptures show only, that he must reign on
earth, and what shall be done at the beginning of his reign, so these show
only what shall be left undone, till the close of his Kingdom, when he shall
deliver it up to God, even the Father. And in my conceit, Saint Peter in the
very next verse does intimate as much; for having before used the word [Day,]
he warnes them not to be ignorant of this one thing, that One day is with the
Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one Day. As if he had told
them, that the Day he spoke of, was indeed a thousand years: The Holy Ghost
always using it in this sense, when it is emphatically applied to our Saviors
coming, or the Jews Redemption; (which as is already proved, shall happen at
the same time.) And though God, as he is eternal, cannot be measured by time:
And, as he is immutable, feels no alteration in time: a thousand (yea ten
thousand times ten thousand) years, and one day (hour, or minute of a day)
being in this respect all one to him: yet this shift cannot void the exposition
already given, seeing the apparent dependence of these words on the former,
does clearly prove, that Saint Peter intended not to show what a thousand
years, and one day were to God in regard of his nature, (which it is like they
knew before) but only what is usually meant by one day in the Word of God. And
indeed, to what purpose had this sudden and serious advertisement been
inferred, if the Apostle did not hereby discover unto them (besides the largest
definite and limited acception of the word) such a special relation of a
thousand years to one day, as could not belong to any other number? when as
touching Gods immensity and immutability, one day might as well have been
compared with ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, (as
I said) as with one thousand years. Th^^^ (...) being so, I see not, but that
Gods foreappointment of a thousand years continuance to the world, for Sicu^e
septenis annis, septimus quisque, An^us; ^emiss^^is es^^ita^e sep^e^ milli bus
a^^o^um mund^, septimus mi^^enari^ (...) enari^ (...) ^ission^^ e^it R. Keti^^.
vi^. Com. A^o^a. part 2 p. 28^.
each several day of its first week (the week of its creation) might in all
likelihood, be the ground of this prophetical sense of the word, wherein it
was afterward delivered, by the infallible penmen of holy Writ. To this also
may be added that in the 24. of Saint Mat. at the 31. ver. which shows that
when the Son of man descends, He shall send his Angels with a great sound of
a trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, from
one end of the Heaven to the other: At which time, Two shall he in the field,
the one shall be taken and the other left: Two Women shall be grinding at the
Mill, the one shall be taken and the other left. And as Saint Luke records, Two
men shall be in one head, chapter 17. v. 34
the one shall be taken and the other left. But if our Savior at his coming
shall presently give sentence on all that are not written in the book of life:
if he shall make no stay on earth, before he undertake this business; then why
shall the elect only be gathered together, and the rest left behind, seeing
that great Assise is to be held chiefly for the condemnation of ungodly men?
Who doubtless are not to be left, that the evil Angels may fetch them, for
they shall be partakers with them of that judgment, and therefore will be as
unwilling to appear before that bar, as they. Neither is it likely, that
they shall be left, because the good Angels cannot at once assemble them to the
place of Judgment, and the Elect to meet the Lord in the Air, if these
things were to be done at the same particular time. And therefore, as I
suppose, they shall be left, either to perish in that general destruction,
which shall come upon all Nations that fight against the Jews, whom our
Savior shall then redeem: Or to be eyewitnesses of Gods wonders in all
Countries at that time. (For that by Christ's judging the Ps. 2. v. 8. etc. Ps.
110. v. 2. etc. Ps. 149. v. 6. etc. Isa. 30. v. 25. chapter 66. v. 15.16. Ver. 8.9.
quick and the dead, mentioned in the 2. to Tim. and the 4. chap. cannot be
meant the last and complete, but rather a former and inchoate judgment of
ungodly men, it appears out of the 20. of the Rev. where it is shown, that
the Saints enemies shall be all slain before the last resurrection. And we
cannot say, that these which are to be left, shall be a part of that army there
spoken of, because that Gog and Magog is to be destoyed at the end of our
Saviors reign, that is, immediately before the last resurrection: whereas
these shall be alive, at the time of that general distress, which shall light
on the world, at his entrance into that appointed Kingdom, as the gathering
together of the elect, who are to reign with him, does declare.) And this
conjecture, Isa. in his 27. chap. at the 12. verse. does sufficiently confirm.
For the great sound of the Trumpet before spoken of in Saint Matthew. as a
warning for the gathering together of the elect, is there said to be a warning
also of the Jews return: the words are these. It shall come to pass in that
day, that the Lord shall beat off from the channel of the river unto the
stream of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye children of
Israel; and it shall come to pass in that day, that the Isa. 18. v. 3. Zech.
9. v. 14.
great Trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were ready to perish
in the land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and shall
worship the Lord in the holy Mount at Jerusalem.

And thus being thoroughly satisfied by this cloud of witnesses, the double jury
of Prophets and Apostles, with which I find the doctrine of my Text to be
encompast; I here give over the pursuit of these meditations, and commend to as
many as wish well to themselves and to Zion, these instructions following.

First, to praise God for his abundant mercy; who through the fall of the
Jews, has brought salvation unto us Gentiles: that together with them, we
might partake of the root and fatness of their Olive tree.

Secondly, to beware of unbelief: which was the cause that the Jews were
broken off from their Olive. And if God spared not the natural branches, much
less will he spare us, if by faith we continue not in his goodness.

Thirdly, not to contemn or revile the Jews, a fault too common in the
Christian world; and that partly because we are unmindfull as well of the Olive
from whence we were taken, as of that into which we are graffed: whose root
bears us, and not we the root. And partly, because we misapply the infallible
promises of God, by which he has so freely, and so feelingly, so often and so
openly declared, that he will again graffe them in. For if we were cut out of
the Olive tree, which is wild by nature, and were graffed contrary to nature,
into a good Olive tree, how much more shall they which be the natural
branches, be graffed into their own Olive tree? Romans the 11. at the 24. verse.

And lastly, earnestly to beseech God, that he would speedily put into
execution, the means which he has appointed for their conversion: that he
would even in these our days bring this mystery to light, by pouring on his
people, the spirit of grace and supplications, whereby they may believe and
repent. Zech. 12. v. 10.
For their happiness will both increase and consummate ours; so also the
Apostle, If the fall of them, etc. Observe here, what Jews are said to
occasion the riches of the Gentiles. Not those that believed when the Apostle
wrote this, although many of them were the first instruments of the Gentiles
conversion: and much less they that have believed since that time: for these,
as they come far sho t of the others both in number and qualifications; so
they may be said rather to have taken of us, then given unto us: to have
inherited the riches of the Gospel with us, but not increased them. Not the
first believers therefore, nor such which hitherto have so slowly, and thinly
followed them; but the stiff-necked and stubborn Jews, who slew Christ, who
martyred and persecuted his Disciples, They are here said to be the reconciling
of the wo^^d and the riches of the Gentiles: and that because their fall and
casting away moved God so soon to visit us with the tidings of Salvation. And
^^^^fulnesse, the receiving of them it must be, that shall perfect us, the
re^^^^^ng of them I say, which were then cast away: but how? not in ^^^ir own
persons (for it is impossible that the same men should fall, and not fall;
should be cast away, and not cast away) but in their posterity; and that not in
part, and by fits, but wholly, and at once: for the Apostle speaks not of
particular men, and families, but of all the Tribes, of the whole Nation. And
indeed what but a general conversion of the Jews, can bring such felicity to
the Gentiles, as shall not only parallel, but exceed the blessings which we
have already received by their unbelief?
If the fall of them be the riches of the world; and the diminishing of them
the riches of the Gentiles, how much more their fullness? And again, If the
casting away of them be the reconciling of the world; what shall the receiving
of them be, but life from the dead? Romans 11. verse. the 12. and 15.

Now to our Lord Jesus Christ, who is both the light of the Gentiles, and the
glory of his people Israel; who is the faithful witness, and the first
begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth: Unto him that
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood; and made us Kings
and Priests unto God, and his Father, to him be glory and dominion for ever and
ever, Amen, Amen.

Psalm. 14. v. 7. Psalm. 53. v. 6.

O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! when the Lord brings
back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

Psalm. 106. v. 4, 5.

Remember me O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy people: O visit
me with thy salvation.

That I may see the Ier. 32 v. 42. chapter 33. v. 9.
good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy Nation: that I
may glory with thine inheritance.

Micah 7. v. 14. etc.

Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock of thine heritage, which dwells
solitarily in the wood, in the midst of Carmel: let them feed in Bashan and
Gilead, as in the days of old.

According to the days of thy coming out of the Land of Egypt, will I show
unto him mavelous things.

The Nations shall see and be confounded at their might: they shall lay their
hand upon their mouth: their ears shall be deaf.

They shall lick the dust like a Serpent, they shall move out of their Isa. 2.
v. 19.20. Re^. ^. v. 19
holes like worms of the earth, they shall be afraid of the Lord our God, and
shall fear because of thee.

Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the Isa. 65. v. 9.15. Zeph. 3. v. 12 13. Romans 11. v. 5 28.
Remnant of his heritage? he retains not his anger for ever, because he
delights in mercy.

He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us: he will subdue our
iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea.

Thou will perform the truth to Isa. 65. v. 8. Romans 11. v. 16.28.
Jacob, and the mercy to Isa. 65. v. 8. Romans 11. v. 16.28.
Abraham, which thou have sworn to our (m) Fathers from the days of old.

Isaiah 12.

In that day thou shall say, O Lord, I will praise thee, though thou wast angry
with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortest me.

Behold, God is my salvation, I will trust and not be afraid; for the Lord
Jehovah is my strength, and my song, he also is become my salvation.

Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the Wels of salvation.

And in that day shall ye say, Praise the Lord, call upon his Name, declare
his doings among the people, make mention that his Name is exalted.

Sing unto the Lord, for he has done excellent things: this is known in all
the earth.

Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the HOLY Isa. 55. v.
5. chapter 60. v. 9.14. Luke 4. v. 34. Acts 2. v. 27 chapter 3. v. 14.
ONE of Israel in the midst of thee.

Isaiah 63. v. 15. etc.

Look down from Heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness, and
of thy glory, where is thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels,
and of thy mercy toward me? are they restrained?

Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledges us not: thou O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer, thy Name is
from everlasting.

O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways? and hardened our heart
from thy fear? return for thy servants sake, the Tribes of thine inheritance.

The people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while, our
Adversaries have trodden down thy Sanctuary.

O that thou would rent the Heavens, Chapter 64. v. 1. etc.
that thou would come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy
presence. (As when the melting fire burns, the fire causes the waters to
boil) to make thy Name known to thine Adversaries, that the Nations may
tremble at thy presence.

When thou did terrible things which we looked not for, thou came down,
the mountains flowed down at thy presence. For since the beginning of the
world, 1 Cor. 2 v. 9.
men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen O
God, besides thee; what he has prepared for him that waits for him.

Nunc fera, mucro, fames; nunc Rev. 6.8
morsque fidelibus instat:

Quos manet haec merces; gloria, vita, quies. War, wild beasts, want, and
death do now besiege
The sacred troops: whose future privilege,
Is this: to shine in glory, and to reign
In peace, with him who makes their death their Phil. 1.21.
gain.
The Testimonies of the Authors quoted in the margent of the 19. page.
ISraelitae non fuerunt liberati unquam a sua terrena captivitate, nec
redierunt in patriam, ut patet ex superioribus. Hoc etiam historiae docent,
abducti enim ab Assure in Assyriam and Mediam non leguntur ab eo fuisse dimissi.
Regno vero Assyriorum Babyloniis per Merodacum subjecto, in captivitate itidem
permanserunt Babyloniis subjecti. Cum vero postea Deioces, qui primus apud
Medos regia dignitate usus est, ab Assyriorum Babyloniorumque jugo Medos
liberasset, Israelitae multis de causis fuerunt e terris Medorum in ulteriores
regiones, nempe in Septentrionem, quo omnis spes redeundi ad suos illis
tolleretur, expulsi, and quidem dispersi. Qua de re videatur Funcc. comment.
lib. 1. page 23. Itaque videamus, cum Media, Babylonia, and Assyria in manu^
pervenit Cyri regis, facta liberate omnibus Israelitis redeundi in patriam,
solos Jehudaeos, and Benjamin, quae conjuncta erat cum Juda, and Levitas (qui
quoniam noluerunt vitulis sacrificare, expulsi a Jeroboamo, redierunt
Hierosolymam, and cum Judaeis se conjunxerunt, ut est 2. Paralip. 11. v. 13,
14. chapter 13. v. 9.) rediisse, ut est Ezra. cap. 1. and cap. 2. Nisi fuissent
reliquae Tribus in ulteriores regiones dispersae, illae potuissent quoque
redire. Tempore etiam quo natus est Dominus, Samaria cum aliis terris
Israelitarum, occupata erat ab illis gentibus, qui eo missi fuerant a rege
Assure, Israelitarum loco, ut est 2. Reg. 17. Itaque videmus, Israelitas nunquam
a captivitate terrena liberatos in patriam rediisse. Hier. Zanch.

Quaeritur ab interpretibus, Number ex hac prophetia certo colligatur december tribus
nunquam ex captivitate rediisse, quemadmodum aliae duae, post aliquot annos ex
captivitate Babylonica redierunt? Ratio dubitandi est, quod in hoc ipso cap.
subditur. Et co^gregabuntur filii Juda and filii Israel pariter etc. and Ezekiel.
cap. 37. Sub Symbolo duorum lignorum, in unum coeuntium, vaticinatur Judam and
Israel conjungendos, and Jer. cap. 50. v. 4. aperte dicit. Venient in tempore
illo, filii Israel ipsi and filii Juda simul. Ubi videtur certa spes
restitutionis, etiam december tribubus fieri. Nihilominus certum est,
Rempublicamillam december tribuum, nunquam postea coivisse, and eorum captivitatem
and dispersionem in populos, perpetuam fuisse: quod hic comminatur Deus, nec
solutam unquam fuisse eorum captivitatem, quod Josephus ipse, Ant. Jud. lib.
11. cap. 5. agnoscit; Dum scribit duas tantum tribus per Asiam and Europam sub
Romano degere imperio; december autem tribus fuisse ultra Euphratem, infinita
hominum millia, quae vix numero erat comprehendere. Nusquam etiam legimus in
Scriptura december illas tribus rediisse, quod de duabus legimus and saepe
praedictum, and postea impletum. Samaritani enim, quorum fit saepe mentio in
Evangelio, nullo modo pertinebant ad filios Jacob, quos aliunde missos fuisse
tanquam novam aliquam coloniam constat, ex 2. Reg. 17. v. 24. -- Et ideo
Christus Mat. 10. Viam Gentium, cum Civitatibus Samaritanorum pro eadem re
habet. In viam, inquit, Gentium ne abieritis, and in Civitates Samaritanorum ne
intraveritis, sed ite potius ad oves perditas domus Israel. Non tamen negandum
est, multos fuisse ex aliis tribubus etiam tempore Domini nostri, in Juda; sed
qui sub Judaeorum Repub. degebant: quod factum fuisse ab eo tempore, quo regnum
Israelis divisum sub Jeroboamo, author est Joseph. Ant. lib. 8. cap. 3. Tunc ad
Roboamum Hierosolymis degentem etota Israelitarum ditione confluxisse
Sacerdotes and Levitas, and quotquot e reliqua plebe erant boni ac justi
patriam suam reliquisse, ut Jerosolymis Deum colere liceret, offensi Jeroboami
tyrannide, qui eos ad vitularum suarum adorationem vi adigere volebat. Quae
confirmantur ex historia, 2. Paralip. 11. v. 13, 14, 16. Ex his and similibus
potest solvi objectio pro restitutione Israelitarum, ducta ex eo quod multorum
ex december tribubus fit mentio, qui cum Judae is habitabant post captivitatem
Babylonicam. Rivetus.

De captivitate Babylonica redierunt tantu^ duae tribus, and pauci ex december
tribubus, qui evaserant manus regis Assyriorum: and postea habitaverunt in
regno Judae, and cum duabus tribubus captivati fuerunt, and redierunt; non
tamen omnes, sed plures de istis and de illis remanserunt in Babylonia, detenti
amore uxorum quas ibi acceperant, and prolis quam genuerant, and bonorum
temporalium quae acquisierant. Nich. de Lyra, part. 4. p. 379. C. Part. 2. p.
198. G. and p. 249. F. Part. 3. p. 212. F. and p. 213. C. Illud non potest
intelligi de reditione captivitatis Babylonicae, nec de aliqua alia sequenti
salvatione temporali: quia secundum doctores Hebraeorum, and secundum
veritatem: populus Israel prout dividitur contra populum Juda, sicut est hic,
non est reversus de captivitate, nec a Judaeis expectatur reversurus, usque ad
tempus Messiae, quem Judaei expectant venturum. -- Sed quia Judaei, qui
crediderunt ad praedicationem Christi and Apostolorum, fuerunt pauci
respective: idcirco melius intelligitur quod dicitur hic, Et convertam
conversionem populi mei Israel and Juda, de generali conversione Judaeorum ad
Christum. Idem part. 4. p. 151. B. C.

In diebus illis. Hoc propriein Christi adventu completur: cum duodecem tribus
scilicet Evangelio credunt, and terram Aquilonis relinquunt and Diaboli
imperlum. Id. part. 4. p. 116. A.

Israelitae abducti in Assyriacam captivitatem, dispersi sunt at que permixti
gentibus toto terrarum orb: nec unquam sunt recollecti in populum Dei: sed
mansit dispersio etiam temporibus Christi and Apostolorum huc usque, ut ex
Epist. Jacob and Pet. constat. Pareus.

In the beginning of this chapter there is nothing difficult, but only that he
calls those, to whom he writes, The twelve Tribes scattered abroad, or in
dispersion, as the word signifies. Now, if this Epistle was intended to the
Jews, lately expeld from Jerusalem by Claudius Caesar, as was touched in the
Preface, A Question arises, how he could call them the twelve Tribes, seeing
they were all but of two Tribes and an half: for so much as from the carrying
away of the ten Tribes by Shalmaneser, they never returned more to this day,
that we can read of? For answer to this, it may be said, that James in this his
writing, had respect to them also, if happily by any means this Epistle should
come to any of their hands. Doctor Mayer.

The Testimonies of the Authors quoted in the Margent of the 30, 31. pages.
DE Judaeis cur tolerentur inter Christianos, ab August. inter caeteros aliquae
rations afferuntur. Is de Civit. Dei. lib. 4. and 18. Necnon super Psa. 58.
and alibi, scribit idcirco fieri, quod prae caeteris hominum generibus
promissionem salutis habuerint, neque sunt deploratae spei, cum subinde
nonnulli eorum, licet pauci, ad Christum redeant. Caecitas, inquit Paulus ad
Romans cecidit ex part in Israel: ac si diceret, minime in universum. And haec
subjicit idem Apostolus, Cum ingressa fuerit plenitudo Gentium, tunc omnis
Israel servabitur. Et ne fortassis arbitreris haec (...) intelligenda, Paulus
ea tanquam mysterium tradit, and ad suam confirmandam sententiam, vaticinium
Isaiae prophetae adducit: Iniquitatem videlicet, a Jacobo tum auferendam esse.
Praeterea nunc inimici Deo, scilicet propter nos dicuntur: verum amici propter
Patres. Id. Aug. in quaestionibus super Evangelia, lib. 2. quaest. 33. (si
tamen August. sunt ii libri) dum filii prodigi parabolam interpretatur, filium
illum Gentes refer ait; Nam in regionem longinquam discessisse scribitur
quoniam Ethnici tam procul a Deo recesserunt, ut idola public atque aperta
professione coluerint; Filius autem major natu, quo populus Hebraeorum
adumbratur, non ita long abiit. Et licet in paterna domo non esset, quae est
Ecclesia, in agro tamen agebat. Hebraei enim circa divinas literas versantur,
quas non recte intelligunt, nec eo spirituali sensu quo eas Ecclesia Christi
cognoscit, sed terreno atque carnali. Unde non inepte dicuntur, in agro agere.
Non ingreditur hic senior Filius ab initio domum Patris: sed postremis diebus
ipse quoque vocabitur and accedet. Affert quoque idem Pater pro hac sententia,
quod in Psalmo 59. prout ipse legit, habetur: Ne occidas eos, ne obliviscantur
legis tuae, sed in virtute tua disperge illos. Orat, inquit, Filius Dei Patrem,
ne illa gens aboleatur, sed per orbem passim vagetur. Aliae provinciae victae a
Romany in leges and ritus eorum cesserunt, ita ut Romani tandem efficerentur:
at Hebraei quamvis a Romany superati fuerunt, nunquam tamen in jura, leges,
and ritus eorum discesserunt; sua retinent adhuc ut possunt, vagantur dispersi,
nec legis Dei prorsus obliviscuntur: non sane, quod in illam servandam pie
incumbant; sed tantummodo legunt, and signa quaedam ac instituta retinent,
quibus a caeteris nationibus discernantur. Videtur porro Deus signum eis
quemadmodum Caino, quod interfecisset Abelem fratrem suum, imposuisse; ne
videlicet, ab omnibus interficiantur. Neque Christianis haec eorum dispersio
per orbem inutilis est, quia ut rami fracti, quemadmodum ad Romans habetur, nobis
ostenduntur. Cumque loco eorum jam fuerimus insiti, dum eos tam infoeliciter
excisos videmus, Dei gratiam in nos agnoscimus, and eorum aspectu cavere
docemur, ut ne ob infidelitatem, cujus causa illi fracti sunt, nos quoque
similiter excindamur, etc. D. Pet. Mart. loc. Com. Class. 2. cap. 4. p. 206,
207.

Praeterea cum ad Romans 11. vaticinetur de illis Paulus, quod convertendi sint
ingressa plenitudine gentium, illosque dicat inimicos propter nos, at dilectos
propter Patres, and de illis loquatur cum jam excidissent de Christo: id quoque
mihi videtur illis tribuendum, quod non sit adhuc exhausta Dei promissio erga
illud genus, ex vi enim promissionis Deus aliquot assidue ex illis vocat; and
in posterum creditur before vocaturus. Rursus agnoscimus cum Paulo illam bonam
Olivam cui exci si inserantur, esse illis propriam magis quam nobis, quia non
modo inseruntur ex Dei praedestinatione, ut nos: sed Christo secundum carnem
sunt magis proximi; atque illud genus quam nostrum est magis adscitum; unde
Paulus ait, Judaeo primum and Graeco. Quibus rationibus de illis loquens
Apostolus, etiam cum praevaricati essent, dicebat se admodum dolere de illorum
interitu, cum illorum essent Patres, adoptio, gloria and testamentum, (...)
quae omnia interpretanda sunt non ita, ut nunc actu ad foedus pertineant; sed
quoad illos, qui ex illorum genere sunt in illud cooptandi. Et dicta haec de
eorum genere, id est, de gente prout veteres habuit patres, Apostolos, and
credituros, non privatim pro unoquoque Judaeo, ita ut de incredulis and
obstinatis verificentur.

Opera autem Dei sunt ita comparata, ut facile sese juvent, nullo modo unum
alteri est impedimento. Ideoque Judaeorum excaecatio licet sit eis peccatum,
attamen qua Dei opus est, habuit bonum exitum, nempe Gentium conversionem; and
conversio Gentium adjuvabit salutem, quae danda est Judaeis; nam illos ad
aemulationem provocabit. Dum vero hoc non fit, expendamus apud nosmetipsos
admirandum opus Dei: adhuc in tam adversis casibus, adeoque varia and gravi
captivitate seu dispersione perstant and servantur: sua quantum possunt
retinent: In divinis libris exercent sese, licet prave omnia intelligant.
Profecto nulli antiqui Trojani, Longobardi, Hunni aut Vandali sic sua
retinuerunt, ut a cunctis populis civili victu and religione sejungerentur, and
suam originem atque historiam certis consignatam literis ostenderent, atque sic
ubique dispersi a suis institutis non discederent. Quod cum in Judaeis accidat,
est porro Dei opus singular, atque nobis non vulgariter commodat: sunt enim
testes nostrorum librorum: Eosque ut suos and authenticos circumf^r^n^, quod
and Augustinus annotavit. Nisi enim adhuc is populus extaret, conficta esse a
nobis Ethnici Philosophi possent suspicari, quae de orb condito, de Adamo, de
Noha, de Abrahamo, Patriarchis, R^gibus and Prophetis credim^s and praedicamus.
Servantur itaque perpetuo hoc tempore a Deo ind^bitato, ad aliquam futuram
salutem. Idem. loc. Com. class. 2. cap. 16. p. 410.

Dub. 18. Utrum locus ille Apostoli probet sub finem mundi, max ma copia
Judaeos ad Christum convertendos?

Respondeo. Tamersi in utramque partem sint eruditorum probabiles rations:
affirmans tamen sententia potius retinenda videtur.

1. Quia diserte sic sonat Apostoli oraculum, postquam plenitudo Gentium introi
erit, totum Israelem servatum iri. Totus vero Israel est tota gens Israelitica,
Totaigitur convertetur ad Christum, extra quem non est salus. Nec totus Israel
hic significare potest allegorice totam Ecclesiam ex solis Gentibus collectam,
cui aliqui forte Judaei sese adjungent: sic enim Apostolus nullum revelasset
mysterium, siquidem quotidie manifestum erat, gentes maximo numero, and aliquos
etiam Judaeos ad fidem converti. Nec loqui Apostolum de spirituali, sed de
carnali Israel, ex ver. 12.14. evincitur.

2. Manifestum est Apostolum voluisse Judaeos peculiari encomio ornare, and
consolatione erigere. At nisi credatur praedicere Israelitarum plenam
conversionem, nihil ad scopum dixisset.

3. Vaticinia prophetica ver. 26, 27. allegata, non de singularibus quibusdam
Judaeis, sed de ipsa populi multitudine loquuntur. Origenes addit ex Hos. cap.
2. Israel quaeret salutem instigatus, dicens apud seipsum, illud propheticum.
Revertar ad virum meum priorem, quoniam melius erat mihi ante, quam modo.

4. Etiam Joannis Apoc. cap. 7. videtur revelata fuisse sub extremis temporibus
futura Israelis plena conversio, quando quatuor Angeli prohibentur nocere
terrae and mari, donec obsignentur 144000. Servorum Dei in frontibus suis ex
omnibus tribubus filiorum Israelis: Quod oraculum ad literam de conversione
Judaeorum plane intelligendum videtur: quoniam Israelitae signati in frontibus
ibi diserte discernuntur a signatis gentibus, populis and linguis reliquis,
ver. 9.

5. Add quod ex populis antiquissimis soli Judaei in tam variis casibus,
captivitate and dispersione perstant, etc. sicut Pet. Martyr supra.

6. Denique Patres complures in hanc sententiam inclinant, quod ingressa
gentium plenitudine etiam Judaei sint reversuri ad Christum. Origenes, Si pro
eo ut introieret gentium plenitudo, caecitas facta est in Israel pro omnibus
quae fecerunt: sine dubio cum ingressa fuerit gentium plenitudo, caecitas
cessabit. Chrysostomus etiam homil. 12. de verbo Dom. in Marc. Tom. 2. Hilarious
lib. 11. de Trin. Et super Psa. 58. and 60. Augustinus Quaest. 148. super
Genesin, Ambrosius and Hieronymus in hunc locum. Dionysius Carth. Totus Israel,
id est, totus populus Judaeorum salvus fiet credendo in Christum. -- Orandus
est itaque Dominus, ut gentis suae misereatur, atque cavendum, ne per nos
ponatur obex implendo mysterio. D. Parei Explic. Dub. in cap. 11. ad Romans p.
271.

To these Testimonies I may add that in the 13. chap. of the 2 of Esdras, from
the 29. v. to the 51. ver. And that in the 4, 5, 6, and 7. ver. of the 14.
Chap. of Tobit. And that in the 7. last verses of the 2. chap. of Baruch, with
the 5. Chap. wholly. Which Records, as they challenge no less then belief to
what I have written, from them that equal these Scriptures with the
Canonical; and are indeed altogether incompatible with a Jewish Antichrist: so
they manifest also to the whole world, that I have uttered no yesterdayes
doctrine, no deformed issue of a private and distempered Spirit (hatched in a
corner, and nursed in a conventicle: studied in a closet or cloister, and
preached only in a chamber, or covent) but such things as accompany Heb. 6. v.
9.
Salvation. Such words, as every free Christian, every uncaptived conscience,
will plainly perceive, and publicly confess, to be the Act. 26. v. 25.
words of soberness and Truth. Even her words, Prove. 1. v. 20. etc.
whose wont it is, to utter (t) her voice in the streets, in the chief place
of concourse, in the opening of the gates; and in the City, saying, How long ye
simple ones will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in their
scorning, and fools hate knowledge?

Let old Tobit speak for the rest.

I believe that our Brethren shall lie scattered in the earth, from that good
land, and Jerusalem shall be desolate, and the house of God in it shall be
burned, and shall be desolate for a time.

And that again, God will have mercy on them, and bring them again into the
land, where they shall build a Temple, but not like to the first, until the
time of that age be fulfilled, and afterward they shall turn from all places
of their captivity, and build up Jerusalem gloriously, and the House of God
shall be built in it for ever, with a glorious building, Act. 3. v 19, 20, 21.
as the (u) Prophets have spoken thereof.

And all Nations shall turn and fear the Lord God truly, and shall bury
their Is. 2. v. 20.
Idols.

So shall all Nations praise the Lord, and his people shall confess God, and
the Lord shall exalt his people: and all those that love the Lord God in truth
and justice, shall rejoice, showing mercy to our brethren.

Gloria Deo, Vita Regi, Pax Regno.
Glory to God on high, on earth increase
To the Kings age, and to the Kingdom peace.
FINIS.
GOG AND MAGOG, OR THE BATTLE OF THE GREAT DAY OF GOD ALMIGHTY.

By ROBERT MATON Minister and Mr of Arts, and sometimes Commoner of Wadham
College in OXFORD.

Hab. 2. v. 3. The vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall
speak and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come,
it will not tarry.

LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes, for Daniel Friar, and are to be sold at his shop
in little Britain at the sign of the red Bull. 1642.

DEUTERONOMY. 32. v. 2.36.43. The Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for
his servants, when he sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up
or left.

Rejoice O ye Nations with his people, for he will avenge the blood of his
servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will he merciful
to his land, and to his people.

Jerem. 10. v. 11.10. The Isa. 2.20. Zeph. 3.11.
gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, even they shall perish from
the earth, and from under these heavens.

But the Lord is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King,
at his wrath the Isa. 2.19, 21. Rev. 6.15, 16, 17.
earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall not be able to abide his
indignation.

Isaiah 14. v. 24. etc. The Lord of Hosts has sworn, saying, surely as I
thought so shall it come to pass, and as I purposed it shall stand.

That I will break the Assyrian in my land, and upon my mountains tread him
under foot: then Isa. 10.24, 25, 26, 27.
shall his yoke depart from off them, and his burden from off their shoulders,

This is the purpose that is purposed upon the Eze. 38, 39. Joel. chapter 3. Micah
4.12, 13. Zeph. 3.5. Zek. 12.14.
whole earth, and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the Nations.

For the Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who shall disannull it? and his hand
is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?

Isaiah 30. v. 27, etc. Behold the Name of the Lord comes from far, burning
with his anger, and the burden therereof is heavy: his lips are full of
indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire.

And his breath as an overflowing stream, shall reach to the midst of the
neck, to sift the Nations with the sieve of vanity; and there shall be a
bridle in the jaws of the people causing them to err.

(Ye shall have a song as in the night, when an holy solemnity is kept; and
gladness of heart, as when one goes with a pipe to come into the mountain of
the Lord, to the mighty one of Israel.)

And the Lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard, and shall show the
lighting down of his arm, with the indignation of his anger, and with the
flame of a devouring fire, with scattering and tempest and hailestones.

For through the voice of the Lord shall the Assyrian be beaten down, which
smote with a rod.

And in every place where the grounded staff shall pass, which the Lord shall
lay upon him, it shall be with tabrets and harpes, and in battles of shaking
will he fight with it.

For Tophet is ordained of old: yea, for the King it is prepared; he has made
it deep and large; the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the
Lord, like a stream of brimstone does kindle it.

GOG AND MAGOG, OR THE BATTLE OF THE GREAT DAY OF GOD ALMIGHTY.
EZEKIEL. 38.2. Son of man, set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog, the
chief Prince of Meshech, and Tuball, and prophecy against him, etc.


THat we may the better know what enemies are meant by Gog and Magog in the 20.
chap. of the Rev. it will not be amiss, first, Verse. 8.
to examine who are meant by Gog and Magog in the 38, and 39. chap. of Ezekiel.
And this can no way be so well found out, as by comparing Ezekiels prophecy
with other Prophesies. For (albeit this of Ezekiel be in form and manner of
expression, somewhat different from others, and in matter much more copious
than others: that being delivered here plainly, fully, and together, which is
in some but obscurely glanc't at, and in others revealed but in part, or at
most by parcels (as we say) that is, some part in one place, and some in
another; yet) that Ezekiel goes not alone in the subject of this Revelation, it
is evident by the Querie made by God himself in the very same Prophecy. Thus
says the Lord God, Art thou he of whom I have spoken in Hab. 2.3
old time by my servants the Prophets of Israel, which prophesied in those
days many years, that I would bring thee against them? chapter the 38. at the
17. verse. Not only one Ezekiel then, but other Prophets also besides him,
have foretold the same thing which Ezekiel here speaks of. Yet passing by all
the rest, I will only join the Prophecy of Joel in his 3. chap. with this of
Ezekiel, and so compare them both with that which is written in the 16. and 19.
chap. of the Rev. And if it shall appear that Eccles. 4.12.
Ezekiel, Joel, and John, do all foreshew one and the same battle, then surely
it will be no hard matter to say to what time, and so to what army Ezekiels Gog
and Magog has reference. Now the reasons which move me to believe the
concurrence of the foresaid Prophesies in their argument and contents, and so
in the time of their accomplishment, are these:

First, because they all speak of a more general confederacy and combination
of the Kings of the world, then has hitherto been known in any age: by
means whereof there shall be such a mighty army, as was never yet gathered
together in any place, since there began to be war on the earth, Ezekiel. Chap.
38. Verse. 4, 5, 6.9.15. Joel Chapter 3. Verse. 2.9.11.14. Revel. Chap. 16. Verse. 14.
Chap. 19. Verse. 19.

Secondly, because they all say, that the returning of the Jews into their
own Land, shall be the occasion of this warre-like assembly. Ezekiel Chap. 38.
Verse. 8.16. Joel Chap. 3. Verse. 1.2. Rev. 16.12.

Thirdly, because they all declare that the destruction of this great army,
shall be in the land of Judea. Ezekiel. Chap. 39. Verse. 4, 5, 11, 12, 15, 17. Joel
chap. 3. v. 2, 12. Rev. chap. 16. verse. 16.

Fourthly, because they all discover the same extraordinary effects, which are
to happen at the very instant of the armies overthrow, Ezekiel. 38.19, 20, 22.
Joel 3.15, 16. Rev. 16.18, 19, 20, 21.

Fifthly, because they all foreshew, that as soon as this judgment is past
over, there shall ^nsue a most peaceable, prosperous, and pious estate to the
Jews in their own land, Ezekiel. chap. 39. verse. 21, 22, 29. chap. 40, 41, 42,
43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48. Joel chap. 3. verse. 17, 18, 20, 21. Rev. 20.2, 3, 4, 6.

And sixthly, seeing these Prophets go thus far hand in hand, it will not be
altogether impertinent to mind you in the last place of two things more;

One is, that the metaphor of the sickle and the winepresse, is used in the
description of no other overthrow but of this, Isa. chap. 63. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6. Joel chapter 3. ver. 13. Rev. 14. ver. 10, 19, 20. chapter 19. v. 15.

The other is, that (though the bodies both of the Jews and Gentiles; yea of
the good and bad, have been often left as meat for the fowls of heaven, yet)
the fowls are no way summond to eat the flesh of men, by way of proclamation
(which is a general one too, and so argues the visitation to be the greater)
but only at the execution of this judgment, Ezekiel. chap. 39. verse. 17, 18, 19,
20. Rev. chap. 19. verse. 17, 18.

Now all that will be stuck at in this parallel, is the obscurity on S. John's
part, the explication whereof (that the foresaid reasons might be all briefly
and roundly delivered without any interruption) I have reserved for this place.
And here the first Querie will have us show


v. of the 11. c. of Isa. the selfsame miracle which Saint John speaks of at
the effusion of this sixth vial, (to wit, the drying up of Euphrates) is plainly
foretold: and that as a thing to be effected merely for the Jews sakes at
their general redemption (which is there promised verse. 11, 12, 13.
the words are these: And the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the
Egyptian Sea, and with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the 2 Samuel
10.16. Ezra 4.17, 20. chapter 7. v. 21, 25. Genesis 15.18. Deuteronomy. 1.7. chapter 11. v. 24.
Isa. 7.20.
River, and smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dry shod. And
there shall be an high way for the Remnant of his people which shall be left
from Assyria, etc. Therefore says Comment. Apoc. part. 2. p. 272.
Mr Mead, Euphrates is here understood, who also referres his Reader to the
like Prophecy in the 10. of Zech. at the 10. and 11. verse. and to the Caldee
Paraphrase upon it. Having then so good a testimony as this unaccomplisht
prophecy of Isaia is, to justify both the literal sense of Euphrates, and
the former opinion of the Kings of the East:

It were strange (says Dr Major, pa. 475. of his exposit. of the doubtful
texts of the catholic
one) that such a poor runnagate people as the Jews, should have the title of
Kings of the East, where they are the basest, and of the least account.

For from whence does promotion come? By whom do Kings reign? whose manner is
it, to call those things which be not, as though they were? What is he, that
pulls down one, and sets up another? And who has chosen the foolish
things of this world to confound the wise? and the Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8, 17.18.19.
Ps. 105.11, 12, 13. Ps. 113.7. Deuteronomy. 32.36. Isai. 41.2.
weak things of this world to confound the strong? and base things, and things
which are despised, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things
that are? If God does all this, then well may the Jews (how mean soever now)
be called Kings in reference to that Day, in which they shall be such (in which
they shall reign as Kings over other nations) and of the East too, in
reference to the place from which they shall first, and in greatest number and
strength return. For such Kings of the East, as shall at that time be
governors over those countries, are necessarily comprehended amongst the Kings
of the earth, Rev. 16.
and of the whole world mentioned in the 14. verse. as associates and partakers
with the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet. And therefore I conclude again,
that this title may with far more reason be attributed to the Jews (whose
general conversion even the foresaid p. 510. of his Exp. on the cath. epist.
Author does confess) than to any of the Eastern Kings themselves, and yet
much rather to these, than to the Christian Kings of the West, whom most
favorers of the mystical exposition of Euphrates, would have here to be
understood. For although in this sense no doubt can be made touching the name
of Kings, because it applies the text to them that are properly and actually
such: yet why they should be called Kings of the East, when as they are
inhabitants of the West, I think no tolerable reason can be given.

Pareus, who tells us too, that it was the maine cause of his dissenting from
the literal interpretation of this place. For, says he, either the sixth
plague is intimated by these words, which show the drying up of Euphrates, or
else here is no plague at all spoken of, seeing the following verses speak not
of the plague comprehended under this vial, but only of the course the Beast
shall take for his defense against this plague. Whereby he seems to me to
take it for granted, that if the drying up to Euphrates should be understood
literally, (as it ought to be in relation to the former exposition of the Kings
of the East) then it can nothing at all concern the ruin and downfall of the
Beast and false Prophet.

Is there any thing too hard for the Lord? was his hand heavy upon all the
Egyptians at the deliverance of the Jews from the bondage of that Nation, and
can he not as well make the whole world to feel the weight of it, at their
Redemption from all countries? did he then harden Pharaohs heart to follow
after his people, that he might be honored upon him, and upon all his Host,
and that the Egyptians might know that he was the Lord: and can he not in the
like manner, and for the like end, gather all Nations against them at their
next return? Surely, to deny this (and either this or the foresaid argument
must be denied) were to limit the power of God, and to shorten the arm of the
Almighty, like those who spoke against God, and said, Can God furnish a table
in the wilderness? behold, he smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and
the streams overflowed: can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for his
people? Psalm. 78. at the 19. and 20. verse. Again, Has God said, and shall he
not do it? or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? has he foretold
the Jews general return: the general opposing of them by all Nations at
their return: the great and wondrous destruction, and general distress of
those Nations: and the general subjection of all the surviving Gentiles to the
Jews; has he, I say, by many Prophets, and for many years together,
repeated all these things to his people (and that as plainly too, as their
general conversion is revealed, to which yet most Divines of note subscribe)
and shall they all come to nothing? Shall his prophecies he even as a dream
when an hungry man dreameth, and behold he eats, but he awaketh and his
soul is empty; or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and behold he drinks, but
he awaketh and behold he is faint, and his soul has appetite? Surely to
affirm this (and whosoever allows the foresaid argument does affirm it) were
to make God a lier, while we believe not his record. And therefore seeing God
both can and will de i^er his people: and can and will Micah. 4 12, 13. Ps.
47.^3.
subdue all Nations to them at their deliverance; when should we expect the
accomplishment of it, but under those vials where we find an apparent allusion
to the Jews Redemption, in the drying up of Euphrates: and an express
revelation both of an extraordinary gathering of the Kings of the Earth, and of
the whole world to the battle of the great day of God Almighty, and also of an
extraordinary destruction of them?

Pareus supposes much, but proves nothing. For first he takes it to be
unquestionable, that the plague of the sixth vial, is intimated by the drying up
of Euphrates: when as the abominable means, the devilish miracles, which
shall be used for the gathering together of the Kings of the whole world, being
a most apparent taken of Gods fierce anger against them that shall be thus
deluded, and a sure forerunner of an imminent temporal death on their bodies,
and of an eternal on their souls; may, I think, well pass for the plague
contained under this vial: especially if we consider, that at the effusion of
the vials, there is first mention of the mutation of the thing on which it is
to be powered, and then of the hurt and damage which men are to receive
thereupon: to none of which the giving up of people to a reprobate mind (to
their hearts lusts, to vile affections) the sending of them strong delusions,
that they shall believe lies (that they shall even be deceived by the signs
and lying wonders of Satan's instruments) is any whit inferior. Secondly, he
supposes, as I said, that the drying up of Euphrates in a literal sense, can
no way set forward the destruction of the Beast and false Prophet: and this
supposition does spring from another, which many interpreters deliver as an
undeniable truth too, to wit, that the Beast and false Prophet are the adequate
object of all the vials; when as it is most manifest, that the last vial does
as immediately concern the rest of the world, as that part under the Beast: as
well the Kings of the whole world, and their subjects, as the Beast and his.
And very probable it is, that the second, third, and fourth vials do belong to
others also, besides the worshippers of the Beast; and therefore though the
first and fifth vials be appropriated to the Beast and his dominions, yet I see
not why the extent of these should be made the measure of any of the other
vials, whose effects are indefinitely revealed, rather than of the last vial,
of which it is well known, that it shall light heavy on all the earth. Yea I
am persuaded, that if the drying up of Euphrates does set forth the plague of
the sixth vial, this plague shall more nearly concern some other country, than
that where the Beast inhabits. For as I nothing doubt the literal
accomplishment of the drying up of Euphrates, so, if these words do set forth
the plague of the sixth vial, I believe also, that no other allegorical and
figurative sense of the words is so likely to be here employed with the
literal, as that which Mr Comment. Apoc. part. 2. p. 272.273.
Mead observes, to wit, the removing of the inhabitants of that Province
through which Euphrates passes.

Now these frivolous, raw, and rash exceptions being thus removed, I come to
that interpretation so commonly received, and so much preferred before the
foresaid sense of Euphrates, and the Kings of the East, and it is this.

By the drying up of Euphrates (say they) is set forth the decay of the riches,
glory, and dominion of the Roman See, the profits which were wont to come from
the Countries, and Kingdoms round about, being (for the most part) taken away:
by means whereof the Kings of the East, that is, the Christian Kings and
professors of the truth, whom God shall stir up against her in these parts,
shall have a notable advantage to bring her to ruin. And the ground of all
this is that in the 17. chap. of the Rev. at the 16. verse. where it is said,
that the ten horns (which are ten Kings, who were for a time to give their
Kingdom unto the Beast, with whom in one hour they received power as Kings)
shall hate the whore and make her desolate, and naked, and eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire.

But unless the abettors of this interpretation will deny, that the seven
vials do contain seven distinct plagues; which are successively to begin at
the pouring out of their particular vials, and not before (and this were to
contradict the Holy Ghost, who has left upon record, seven several
descriptions of seven different plagues) unless they will do this, I say, they
can never prove the decay of the Popes revenues to be the meaning of the drying
up of Euphrates. For seeing that the abatement of the Antichristian profits,
must needs be an act of equal standing with the reformation of the Church
under the Protestant Princes; and that the beginning and continuance of that
work, is ascribed by the foresaid Expositors to all the former vials (and
surely if this be the time of the vials, experience tells us, that the
reformation of religion pertaines to most of them) I say, seeing these things
are so, it necessarily follows, that the drying up of Euphrates in this sense,
cannot possibly be the proper event of the sixth vial, where only it is
mentioned; but must be a thing common to al, or most of the first six vials,
the consummation, and perfection whereof is to be referred to the sixth vial;
and the beginning and augmentation to the rest.

Neither is it more likely, that by the Kings of the East are meant the ten
Kings which shall hate the whore, and make her desolate: for,

First, at the destruction of that mighty army, which is to be gathered against
the Kings of the East; the Kings that shall take part with the Beast and false
Prophet shall be slain, as it is foretold in the 19. chap. of the Rev. at the
18. verse. but when the ten Kings who are to hate the whore shall burn her with
fire, the Kings that shall then take part with her, shall not perish in
battle, for it is said, that they shall bewai^e her, and lament for her, when
they see the sm^ake of her burning, Rev. 17. at the 9. and 10. verses, which
words also do further show, that this destruction of Rome, cannot be that which
is to concur with the over throw of the great army at the effusion of the
seventh vial, because this is to be by fire: but that by an earthquake
(expressed in the 16. chap. at the 19. verse. and represented here in the 18.
chap. at the 21. verse. by an Angel casting a great millstone into the sea, and
saying, Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown down, and
shall be found no more at all.) Again at Romes destruction by fire, the Kings
of the earth shall bewail Her, because her glory is departed. But at Romes
downfall by an earthquake, they shall bewail themselves, because the Rev.
6.14, 15, 16, 17. c. 16. v. 18, 19, 20, 21. Luke 23.30. Isa. 2.19, 20, 21.
great day of the Lambs wrath is come, They shall then, I say, have no regard
of the loss of worldly honor or possessions, but shall even wish that they
might enjoy the final judgment of that great City, that with it they might be
found no more at all: for what else is to be understood by their calling to the
Mountains to fall on them, and to the Rocks to hide them?

Secondly, seeing the ten Kings shall hate the whore, and make her desolate,
and naked, and eat, her flesh, and burn her with fire: It follows,

First, that this expedition is to be made by these kings against the false
Prophet, and not by him against them.

Secondly, that this desolation shall be wrought by the ordinary power of men.
And

Thirdly, that it shall rather be a destruction of Rome, and the Popes
temporalties, than of the Pope or Papacy it self.

But the expedition spoken of under the sixth vial, is to be made by the Beast
and false Prophet, against the Kings of the East, and not by these against
them, and their perdition shall be personal, and final, proceeding immediately
from Christ himself. For they shall be taken, and cast alive into a lake of
fire, burning with brimstone, and the remmant shall be slain, Rev. 19. at the
20. and 21. ver. And what is an utter perdition, what an everlasting
destruction, if to be cast into hell be not? and to whom is this Joh. 5.27.
power committed, but to Christ only?

Thirdly, if the success of the ten Kings against the false Prophet belongs to
any vial, it must be to the fifth, and not to the sixth: to the fifth, I say,
which is to be powered out on the very seat of the Beast: for what is the seat
of the beast, but the great City, which in Saint John's days Rev. 17.3.18.
reigned over the Kings of the earth? and what is that great City, but Verse. 5.
Babylon the great, the Mother of harlots, and abominations of the earth? and
consequently the whore whom the ten Kings shall burn with fire.

Fourthly, and lastly, it is much to be doubted, that the ten Kings shall help
make up that great army, which is to be gathered against the Kings of the East.
For,

First, it being apparent that they cannot be Kings of the East, how can they
be excluded from being a part of the Kings of the earth, and of the whole
world? for though there be not express mention of the ten Kings, at the
gathering together of the great Army, yet there is express mention of
persuading the assisting kings to battle by such a cursed and detestable
course, as would be altogether needless, if they were to be such Kings with
whom the authority and friendship of the Beast and false Prophet should be able
to prevail.

Secondly, it is said, that these ten Kings shall make war with the Lamb,
and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is the Lord of Lords and King of
Kings, Rev. the 17. at the 14. ver. and how can these words be referred to any
other war, but that which is spoken of in the 19. chap. of the Rev. where it
is foretold, ver. 14.16.19.
that the Army of the Beast and false Prophet is to be overcome by our Savior
himself, when he shall be revealed from heaven; when he shall mightily and
visibly manifest himself to be Lord of Lords, and King of Kings? ( in Isa. 66.
v. 15, 16. 2 These. 1. v. 8.10.
flaming fine taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, when he shall come to be glorified in his
Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe in that Day) For seeing the
beast to whom these Kings were to give their strength, was to Rev. 13 v. 12.
exercise all the power of the first beast before him, and that it was given to
the first beast, chapter 13. v. 7.
to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them: it necessarily follows,
that the war which these Kings were to make while they should agree to give
their Kingdoms unto the beast, was likewise to be with the Saints, whom they
should overcome; and not with the Lamb, who should overcome them. Neither will
it suffice against the force of this argument, to say, that they who fight with
the Saints, do fight with the Lamb; and that they who overcome the Saints by
the Sword, are yet over come by them through faith: for the first beast did as
much fight against the Lamb in this sense, as these Kings: and was as much
overcome by the Saints in this sense, as they: who yet is neither said to war
with the Lamb, nor to be overcome by the Saints. And sure I am, it is recorded
in the 7. chap. of Dan. that he beheld the presumptuous horn (of the fourth
beast exhibited to him in a dream) making war with the Saints (not the
Lamb) and prevailing against them. Until the ancient of Days did sit, and
the time came, that the Saints possessed the Kingdom. And whether that horn
be all one with the beast and false Prophet in the Rev. and so is to prolong
his dominion, his persecuting power in wearing out the Saints (who were to be
Dan. 7. v. 25.
given into his hand) even until the time of the Romans 8. v. 19.21.
manifestation and glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, spoken of by Saint
Paul (as a thing earnestly expected by the cha 8. v. 19.
Creature, even the chapter 8. v. 22.
whole creation) let the Dan. 7. v. 11. Apoc. 19. v. 20, 21.
Analogy of their destruction, and the Dan. 7. v. 11.18.22 26, 27. Rev. 19. v.
11, 12, etc.
expiration of the fourth beast, the Roman Empire, at the accomplishment
thereof: Let these things I say, together with the interpretation of the vision
made to chapter 7. v. 23, 24, etc.
Daniel, and the parallel observed by Master Comment. Ap^c. par. 2. p. 279 280.
Meade betwixt the Thrones, Judgment, and Kingdom of the Saints revealed in
both prophecies, determine the matter.

Thirdly, the state of the world at our Saviors appearing, shall be as it was
in the days of Noah, both for security and profaneness, for, When the Son
of man comes, shall he find faith on the Earth? says Christ, Luke the 18.
at the 8. ver. which is a plain proof, that there shall not be whole
Kingdoms and armies of faithful Christians, but only here and there Luke 17.
v. 34, 35, 36
one. Neither does this saying contradict the [ Ob. If there shall be at
Christ's coming such scarsenesse of faith, it is not l^kely that there shall be
such a multitude of believing Jews.
conversion] of the Jews Sol. Pareus gives this solution; that although there
shall be in the end of the world a multitude of believing Jews, yet their
number shall be but small, in respect of the unbeleeving Gentiles. To this
Solution, this further may be added; that the failing of faith which Christ
prophesies of, must be specially (he should have said, only) understood of
the Gentiles, where Christ had been preached, and believed upon: that even
there, where it was more likely, that faith should have been, none shall be
found: for when the Jews shall be called, faith shall wax very faint and cold
among the Gentiles. Willet in his sixfold Comment. upon the Epist. to the Romans
Chap. 11. Quest. 27. p. 511.
at that time, because the word [Earth] is figuratively put for [the people of
the Earth,] and by [The People of the Earth] all the Nations besides the Number.
23 v. 9.
Jews are in the Scriptures usually understood. So in the 28. of Deuteronomy. at the
10. ver. we read, All the people of the earth shall see that thou art called by
the Name of the Lord, and they shall be afraid of thee, in the 1 of the Kings,
the 8. Chap. at the 43. ver. That all the people of the earth may know thy
Name, to fear thee as do thy people Israel. In the 2 of Chron. the 32. chap.
at the 19. ver. They spoke against the God of Jerusalem, as against the Gods of
the people of the earth. And in the 1 of Kings, the 10. Chap. at the 24. ver.
All the earth sought to Solomon to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his
heart. And they brought every man his present. Where the word [Earth] alone, is
equivalent with [the people of the earth] in all the former instances: and
therefore seeing it does as well by it self, as together with its adjunct,
signify the Nations of the Gentiles only, why should it not be so taken in
our Saviors speech? yea it must needs be so taken: for as he said, when the
Son of Man comes shall he find faith on the earth? So he said also, and that
as well of the Jews only, as to the Jews only. Behold Mat. 23 v. 37, 38, 39
your house is left unto you desolate, and verily I say unto you, ye shall not
see me, until Mar. 14. v. 62. Psalm. 118 v. 21, 22, and^ ye ^o^^ 3^.16.
the time come, when ye shall say; Blessed is he that comes in the Name of
the Lord, Luke the 13. at the 35. ver. And shall we think, that our Savior
would have given such a testimony of the Jews, unless he had known, that
they should be a penitent and converted people, a people endued with the Zech.
12 v. 10.
Spirit of grace and supplication, when they saw him next? doubtless he would
not. And therefore this gratulatory acclamation does no less set forth unto us
the comfortable estate of the Jews at Christ's appearing; then the former
saying does the desperate estate of the Gentiles at that time. For, Blessed is
he that comes in the Name of the Lord, are the very same words, which with so
much Luke 19. v. 37.38.
alacrity and cheerfulness of mind were chanted out before our Savior, by
his Disciples, and those that met Ioh. 12. v. 12.13.
him, when he was riding to Jerusalem, to show the City a glimpse of his
royalty: and can they ever then become the language of those that shall fly
from his presence, to hide themselves in caves and dens of the earth? nay,
seeing they are to be resumed again by the same people at the revealing of the
same person, let us rather say, that as at Christ's first coming they were
proclaimed before him by most Jews that were present, to show that he was
their promised King: so, at his next appearing, they shall be proclaimed before
him, by all that are present, to show that he is come into his promised Mark.
11 v. 10. Luke 19. v. 11 15. chapter 23. v. 42. 2 Timothy 4. v. 1
Kingdom.

A second Querie bids us look, How it can be proved, that by Armageddon in the
third Parallel, some place in Judea is employed.


FIrst, that for ought I perceive, the copious resolution of the former doubt
does immoveably fasten the interpretation of the Kings of the East, upon the
Jews only. And if this may pass for a current truth, I see not what argument
can be brought, which may induce us to mistrust, that the place in which the
Armies of the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world shall meet, and sit
down against them, should be in any other Country, but that whither the Jews
are to return. And whither both Ezekiel and Joel do plainly show, that all
the opposite Kings shall at once come up to battle.

Secondly, I say, that seeing the Holy Ghost has here made choice to name the
place of these Kings randevouz by an Hebrew word, rather then by a word of any
other tongue; therefore it is very probable that hereby is understood a part of
that Country, which (whatsoever we account of it) is the proper Gen 48. v. 21.
Levit. 26. v. 32, 33, 34, 35. Ezekiel. 20. v. 42. chapter 28. v. 25. chapter 34. v. 13.
chapter 36. v. 12. chapter 37. v. 12. Joel. 3. v. 2.
inheritance of that people whose language the Hebrew is. Of whom some few do
yet, all have, and shall Zeph. 3. v. 9.
again make use of it.

Thirdly, and lastly, I answer, that in the latter part of the 19. Chap. of the
Rev. it is manifestly foretold, that the great Army which is to be gathered
into Armageddon, shall be destroyed by our Savior himself at his coming; now
as it is altogether unlikely, that our Savior shall descend to any other
Country, or people; but to that in which, and of which he was borne: and in
which, and amongst which he lived and dyed: So in the 4. and 5. ver. of the 14.
Chap. of Zechariah, it is not obscurely revealed; that he shall descend to that
very Mount from which he did Act. 1. v. 12.
ascend, and from which he Luk 19. v. 35, 37.
rode to Jerusalem when they proclaimed him King. And consequently Armageddon
is to be a place not only in Jury, but also near unto Jerusalem.

John and Zechar. do expressly show, the coming of our Savior to be at the
time of a ba^tell; and though the treading of the winepresse in the 14. Chap.
of the Rev. does plainly intimate as much. Rev 19. v. 15. Isa. 63 v. 1, 2, 3,
etc
And that no less perhaps is aimed at in the 1 to the These. and the fourth
Chapter, where it is said, That the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven
with a Exodus 32. v. 17. ^ Sam. 17. v. 20.52. 2 Chro. 13. v, 15. Job 39. v. 25.
Shout, etc. the usual token of armies entering into battle. Notwithstanding
all this evidence, I say, we are told, Doctor Mayor on the cath. ep. p. 515.
That when the great Day of the Lords descend shall come, there is to be a
general security: Mat. 24. v. 38. etc. Luke 17. v. 26, etc. Answ.
Eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage. And not warring and
fighting. For if an end of these wars should be made by the Lords coming,
how should the faithful have time here to rejoice, and to give thanks unto
God for their greatest enemies overthrow?

But unto the Scripture proof, I answer, That if the natural (and in some
sort necessary) actions of marrying and giving in marriage, and of eating and
drinking: or of festival eating and drinking (which also is in it self
commendable) if the accustomed continuance and observation of such actions
shall be a sufficient witness, to convince the world of its unmindfulnesse and
unbelief of our Saviors approach (when as there shall be very considerable
tokens, and perhaps too, Sicut in diebus Noah, a down right 1 Pet. 3. v. 19,
20. 2 Pet. 2. v. 5
warning thereof) then much more shall the inhumane enterprises, and merciless
events of warring and fighting, declare such a security.

Secondly, I say, that though our Savior did instance only in eating and
drinking, in marrying and giving in marriage: yet it follows not from hence,
that there shall be no warring and fighting then. For woeful experience
teaches us, that all these foresaid actions are not only at this day in the
world together: but in many particular Kingdoms thereof. Neither has such a
general peace been often heard of, in which no Nations of the world have been
at odds.

And thirdly, I say, that we are to consider what war is to be at our
Saviors appearing; not a war, in which the enemies of the Lord shall fight
one against another; not a war in which particular States and Kingdoms,
shall upon diverse occasions bid defiance to each other; but a war in which
the Rev. 16. v. 13.14. Psalm. 118. v. 10, 11, 12. Isa. 59. v. 16 17, etc. chapter 63
v 4.5.6. Mic. 4. v. 12, 13.
Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, the Kings of the earth, and of the whole
world, shall be all confederate against the Jews only. And as such a
confederacy shall be a means of multiplying marriages, and consequently of the
more liberal and immoderate eating and drinking: So such an unequal war
shall breed the stronger hopes in these Princes of obtaining their designs,
and consequently the greater security. But when they shall say, 2 Thessalonians. 5. v.
3,
Peace and safety (when they shall say, Psa. 83 v. 4.
Come, and let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the Name of Israel may
be no more had in remembrance) then Luke 21. v. 35.
sudden destruction shall come upon them, as upon a woman in travail, and they
shall not escape. Then shall our 2 These. 1 v. 7.8.
Lord Jesus be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, and in flaming fire
take vengeance on them. And their Rev. 11 v. 15.
Kingdoms shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ.

Next therefore to this Authors Querie, I answer, first, that it is altogether
contradictory to the foresaid Text of Scripture: For if at our Saviors
appearing, men shall be found eating and drinking, marrying, and giving in
marriage, out of a carnal security (out of an opinion, that That Day, is
either 2 Pet. 3. v. 3.4.
not to be at all, or not near Matthew. 24. v. 48. Luke 12. v. 45
at hand) then it cannot be, that at his coming, the faithful shall be
rejoicing and pra^sing God for their greatest enemies overthrow, (which ever
were, and shall be, men most carnally secure.)

Secondly, I say, that this demand is grounded upon a false supposition, viz.
that our Savior shall make no stay on earth; when as indeed his 1000. years
reign is to begin at his next appearing, and not before.

And lastly, I say, that seeing the last temporal judgment which shall befall
the adversaries of Christ and his Saints, is to be when the 1000. years reign
is fulfilled; and that there is no mention of any space of time, which is to
intercede that destruction, and the summons to the last resurrection: Seeing, I
say, that God is silent in this matter, it is not for vain man, to fasten his
own fancies on Gods Word: And to promise a longer abode to the Saints on this
earth, then God has revealed: And that too for no other end, but to praise him
for their greatest enemies overthrow; which doubtless they shall not forget to
do, nor without great joy perform, when they are translated into that place,
where it shall be all their employment to magnify and extol Gods Name, for
all the blessings they have both here and there received of him.

The Third, and last Question, asks, Whether any intimation of the prosperous
and pious estate of the Jews after the judgment of the Kings in Armageddon,
can be found in the Apocalypse. Which is the presumption of the fifth Parallel.
Ezekiel and Joel, after the general judgment of God upon all the Nations,
that shall seek the re-inthraldome or extirpation of the Jews at their
return, the great and impregnable Dan. 2. v. 44. chapter 7. v. 14. Isa. 2. v. 1,
2, 3, 4.
restoration of Jerusalem is immediately revealed: So in the Apocalypse, the
very next vision to that of the destruction of the Armies to be gathered
together by the Beast and false Prophet, is the binding up of Satan, and the
rising and reigning of the Saints with Christ a thousand years. And that this
thousand years reign shall be accomplished in the Land of Judea, and so
concur with the happy establishment of the Jews, foreshewne Dan. 7. v. 27.
Isa. 51. v. 1, 2, 3, etc. chapter 61. v. 1, 2. Psalm. 47. Psalm. 98.
by the Prophets, me thinks these reasons do demonstrate. For,

First, it being manifestly declared in the 4. and 6. ver. of this chap. That
the Saints shall And that on earth too; for how else can they reign with him
but a 1000 years precisely, seeing it is well known that Christ has been
bodily present in heaven, ever since his Ascension. And why he should not begin
his reign there. at his It entrance thither, rather then any time since that;
or give up his Kingdom again, before he comes from thence to judgment; as the
spiritual interpretation of the first resurrection does make him to do: are
doubts, I think, which the oppugners of Christ's reigning here on earth, will
be as unwilling to hearken to, as they are unable to satisfy.
reign with Christ a thousand years, (which necessarily proves his corporal
presence amongst them) and in the 8, and 9. ver. That the Nations in the four
quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog shall be gathered together against the
Saints, when the thousand years are expired (which necessarily proves their
Kingdom to be on Rev. 5. v. 10. Romans 4. v. 13.
earth:) All this, I say, being unquestionable, the inferences hereupon must
needs be these.

1. That the time of the Saints thousand years reign is to succeed their
bodily resurrection: for how else can they reign so long on earth? or how else
can Christ be amongst them here in his humane nature? and

2. That the place of the Saints residence all that while, is to be in no other
land but Judea. For how else can Christ (with whom the Saints must 1 These. 4.
v. 17.
be) sit on the Throne of his Father David, and reign over the house of Jacob?
which was promised him by an Angel sent from God, before his conception. Yea
why else has God left upon record so many predictions of the Jews general
and unaccomplisht deliverance, and of the wonderful restoration of Jerusalem
and Judea at that time? comparing the future fertility and pleasantness of
that now desolate Country, even with the Garden of Isa. 51. v. 3, Ezekiel. 36. v.
35.
Eden it self.

Secondly, that which does confirm the 1000. years reign of the Saints in
Judea, is the express mention of the beloved City, in the 9. ver. For either
these words must be taken mystically and improperly, for the This way runs
the wholstream of Expositors. And admit that they were mystically to be
expounded; yet how such a Church as shall reign a thousand years without
disturbance, and when the 1000. years are expited suffer no harm by those that
shall then gather them selves against her (and only such a Church is set forth
unto us, by the beloved City, and the tents of the Saints as the precedent and
subsequent verses do, clearly show) how such a Church I say, can be taken for
the Church, that now is, which is to continue an afflicted and persecuted
Church, until our Saviors appearing, I cannot conceive.
Militant Church: or literally and properly for some particular City. Now if
they should be taken in the first sense; then because the Nations, Gog and
Magog are to compass the tents of the Saints about, and the beloved City, we
must grant, That all the Christian, or at least all the Protestant Nations
(which possess many large Dominions, whereof some are severed from the rest,
by great and wide seas) shall yet at last be all environed by their enemies;
which is very unlikely, if not impossible. And because the Saints adversaries
are to come from the four quarters of the earth, we must grant also, that the
Kingdoms where these Christians inhabit, are no part of the four quarters of
the earth; which were to swallow an apparent untruth. Wherefore seeing the
consequences of the mystical interpretation are no better; I hope we may the
more boldly embrace the literal sense of the words, which, for ought I
perceive, does draw after it no such harsh and uncouth doctrines. And in this
sense, we may upon good grounds affirm, that by the Beloved City, no other
City but Jerusalem, can be meant. For,

First, it is evident, that the faithful City, the holy City, the City of God;
are several periphrases and individual expressions of Jerusalem. And why then
should not the beloved City be so too? seeing the Epithet [beloved] may well be
applied to Jerusalem, which has all the former titles: but cannot in reason be
given to the Cities of the Number. 23. v. 9. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 43. Ps. 95. v. 5. Luke
12. v. 30. Rev. 2. v. 29 chapter 11. v. 18. chapter 16. v. 19.
Nations, which are no where called by such names.

Secondly, we find in the 11. chap. of the Apocalypse, that Jerusalem is
entitled, the holy City, in a prophecy, which concerns the very time of its
desolation; this present time, wherein it is Luke 21 v. 24.
trodden under foot of the Gentiles. And much rather then may it be called,
the beloved City, in a prophecy which concerns the time of its exaltation: the
time wherein it shall become the royal City of Christ, and the Saints in his
Kingdom.

Thirdly, Jerusalem is by ancient Geographers termed the Navell or Center of
the habitable earth: Yea, it is said in the fifth of Ezekiel. at the 5. verse. This
is Jerusalem, I have set it in the midst of the Nations and Countries round
about her. And where but near the midst of the earth can that City be, which
the Nations of the four quarters of the earth shall beset?

Fourthly, and lastly, In a prophecy which contemporates with this (and such
prophecies do best expound each other) it is thus written. Out of Zion shall
go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem, and therefore by the
[Beloved City] here, Jerusalem must needs be understood. Now the foresaid
prophecy is delivered by Isaiah in the beginning of the second chap. and by
Micah at the entrance of the 4. chap. And as the title and superscription in
Isaiah, does infallibly prove the literal interpretation of the prophecy: So
does the subject thereof, the impossibility of its accomplishment, until the
things foreshewne here by Saint John, shall come to pass: to wit, until the
shutting up of Satan a thousand years, and the living and reigning of the
Saints with Christ all that time. For seeing Satan is to be bound up for no
other end but this, That he may not deceive the Nations; and seeing, that when
he must be loosed again, he shall presently deceive the Nations: it
necessarily follows, that no other time, but the time of Satan's imprisonment,
can concur with that pious and peaceable condition of the world which Isaiah
speaks of: hear his words. It shall come to pass in the last days, says
he, that the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of
the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall flow
unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the
Ezekiel. 43. v. 12.
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us
of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Sion shall go forth
the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And be shall judge among the
Nations, and shall rebuke many people, and they shall beat their swords into
ploughshares, and their spears into pruning books: Nation shall not lift up
sword against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more. And is not this
the time then, of which it is said in the 10. of the Revel. at the 7. ver. That
in it the mystery of God shall be finished, as he has declared by his
servants the Prophets? And is not this the Rest also, which Saint Paul in the
4. of the Heb. at the 9. verse. concludes to be yet remaining to the people of
God? Surely in my conceit, if the Rest promised to that people, the people of
Israel, were not to be enjoyed in the Isa. 8. v. 8.
Land whither Joshua led them; then the Apostle went a wrong way to work, The
first resurrection, and the thousand years reign of the Saints on earth, more
fully examined^ confirmed
when he endeavored to prove a Rest yet remaining to them, because Joshua gave
them none. For no man can once imagine, that by bringing them into Canaan, he
either did, or could bring them to that Rest, which was never to be had there.

And thus much may suffice in answer to the Querie it self. But to make good
what has been said, against all contradiction; we must take into our
consideration the thousand years reign of the Saints, as it is founded upon
the spiritual interpretation of the first resurrection. And because some
Scriptures urged against the opposite Tenet, are the only props of this
exposition, I shall by the way, propose a saying, upon which the maine
confidence of the Antimillinarians does rely; it being taken by them, to be
altogether inconsistent with a double resurrection of the dead; and
consequently with the literal sense of the first resurrection. The words are
in the 5. chap. of Saint John, at the 28. verse. and run thus. The hour is
coming, in which all that are in the graves shall bear his voice, and shall
come forth, They that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, and they
that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. I must confess, if
touching the matter in question, we had no light but from this present text; or
that the word [(...)] were of a simple signification only, the place alleged
might pass for an undoubted proof of a single resurrection, a resurrection of
all men's bodies at one time. But as we know, that there are many passages in
the Apostolical writings, which make more for us, then this does against us,
(and which ought therefore rather to be the measure of this, then this of them)
so we know also, that the word [(...)] is of large use even in the Scripture it
self. For though it properly signifies that artificial part of time, which is
called an hour, as Matthew. the 20. at the 6. verse. Yet sometimes it is
metonymically taken for a dangerous time, as John the 12. at the 27. verse. and
sometimes synecdochically contracted to a moment, as Luke the 12. at the 12.
verse. or lengthened to a day, as Mark the 6. at the 35. verse. or stretched out
to months, years, and ages, and then it is usually interpreted by the word
(Time.) And there be nothing in this place of Saint John's Gospel, repugnant to
such a translation; nor in such a translation, to the Millenarian assertion;
why should not we as well read, The time is coming, as others do, The hour?
For, if the same word does in the first Phil. 4. v 5. James 5. v. 8.
Ep. of Saint John the 2. chap. at the 18. verse. comprehend all the time from
our Saviors death, unto his coming again, which amounts already to above one
thousand and six hundred years; much rather may it here include all the time,
from the beginning of our Saviors reign, unto the last judgment, which is to
be but a thousand and odd years: and consequently, this text may very well
agree with a double resurrection, and be thus ex ounded, The time is coming,
in which (that is, within the compass whereof) all that are in the graves
shall hear his voice, and come forth; they that have done good, unto the
resurrection of life (when this time begins) and they that have done evil,
unto the resurrection of damnation (when this time shall end.) And surely,
seeing the same Apostle has in the 20. chap. of the Revel. plainly recorded
this first and second resurrection; I am persuaded, that the repetition of the
word here, would have been enough to have suggested unto our Adversaries this
construction of the text, had they as seriously sought the manifestation of the
truth, as they have done the advancement of their own erroneous fancy. But
whilst they have wrested this place in the Gospel, to make it seem
irreconciliable with the literal interpretation of that in the Rev. they have
at once quite lost the true meaning of both places: Chapter 20. v. 4.5.6.
and chained up their understandings, lest they should lanch out, to descry the
true latitude of a principal Article of Christian belief. For had they been
willing to know so much, 1 Cor. 15. v. 22. etc.
they might have found Saint Paul also thus voting for us. As in Adam all die,
even so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every man in his own order.
Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's, at his coming. Now
as it is evident, that the word [Order] does imply a distance of time betwixt
the rising of Christ, and of those that are Christ's: so doubtless, there being
no intimation of the rising of any others at his coming, besides those that
are his; it does imply a distance of time too, betwixt the resurrection of
these, and of those that are not his. For the next words, Then comes the end,
have no relation to Christ's coming, but to his delivering up the Kingdom to
God even the Father, when once the last enemy shall be destroyed, which is
death: whereby, and not by Christ's coming, the last resurrection of the dead
is intimated. And betwixt the accomplishment of this judgment, and the
resurrection of those that are Christ's at his coming: and not before the one,
or after the other, there is express mention of Christ's putting down all
rule, authority, and power, over the whole world, and of his reigning. Which
last employment does necessarily presuppose a time befitting the Majesty of so
Ps. 48. v. 2. Ps. 47. v. 2.3 Matthew. 5. v 35. Luke 1. v. 32.
great a King; and consequently the Order holds as well, betwixt the
resurrection of those that are Christ's, and those that are not Christ's; as
betwixt the resurrection of Christ himself, and those that are Christ's. And
this Apostle elsewhere speaking of the resurrection which is to concur with
our Saviors descension from heaven, has not a word of the rising of any but
of them that are dead in Christ. 1 These. 4. v. 16.
Whereby he closely shows, that the resurrection of those that are Christ's at
his coming, is that first resurrection, in which whosoever have part, the
second death has no power on them: Rev. 20. v. 6.
but they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a
thousand years. Which last words of Saint John do no way thwart Saint Paul's
in the verse following (where he tells us, that the Saints shall meet the Lord
in the air, 1 These. 4. v. 17.
and so shall ever be with the Lord) for the thousand years reign is to be
measured by the time of the Nations subjection to Christ and the Saints, before
their seduction again by Satan; and not by the time of the Saints abode with
Christ, which shall never have an end; nor by the whole time of Christ's and the
Saints tarrying on this earth, which besides the thousand years, contains
also that little season which is allotted for the falling away, and destruction
of the Nations before the last resurrection.

And so having shown, that the Antimillinarians can find no firm footing in
the Scriptures, to withstand the literal interpretation of the first
resurrection: I proceed to what they say concerning the thousand years reign
of the Saints.

And hear I find them at odds about the meaning of the words: some taking
them indefinitely, for a long time, to wit, for all the time from the first
going forth of the Gospel, till Antichrists reign. Others definitely, for a
thousand years and no more (for which acknowledgement we are beholding to the
emphaticall affix, the special article [(...)] which in the compass of five
verses, is four times added to this number, being never prefixed where the
number (or word otherwise implying a certain time) is to be taken in an
unlimited sense.) Again I find these that agree upon a thousand years
precisely, very much disagreeing about the placing of them, for one will have
them begin at the Incarnation, another at the Passion, or Resurrection of our
Savior, a third at the Preaching of Saint Paul, a fourth at the destruction of
Jerusalem, and a fifth confuting all these, will not have them begin till the
days of Constantine the great, about the 300. year after Christ, and some
also not till Luthers time: and yet all of them will have a part of Antichrists
reign included within the compass of the thousand years reign, because some
of them that are to reign with Christ, are particularly described by their not
worshipping of the Beast. And thus as the former sort of Antimillinarians do
grossly err in placing Christ's reign before Antichrists, whereas a great part
of them which should reign with Christ, were to suffer under Antichrist: so
do these other Antimillinarians err as much, in confounding the time of
Christ's reign, with the time of Antichrists reign. From whence it does
necessarily follow,

First, that the Saints which are to reign with Christ, shall suffer in the
time of Christ's reign. Secondly, that but a part of those which shall suffer
under Antichrist, are to reign with Christ. And, Thirdly, that some (if not
the most) of them which shall be slain by Antichrist, are to suffer after
Christ's thousand years reign.
All which is either beside, or flat against the text. For,

First, it is flat against the text to affirm, that any of the Saints which
are to reign with Christ, shall suffer in the time of his reign. For we read,
That Satan is to be shut up, that he may deceive the Nations no more, till the
thousand Hujusinodi mill vel quinquaginta vel etiam centum annos a Christo
nato nobis obtigisse, quibus a seductione Satanae Gentes immunes, ab ejusdem
persecutione libera fuerit Ecclesia in terris bisce militans, equidem at credam
vix adduci possum. Et de persecutione q^^dem res ita manifesta est, ut non
putem e sanis fore, qui contradicat: siquidem hanc ecclesiae militantis
perpetuam fore sortem ipse Christus praedixit, and eventus a nato Christo ad
haec usque tempora abunde testanis est. Ante ortum Antichristi quid non
adversus ecclesiam per haereticos tentavit Satan? Quae non bella and
persecutiones adversus eam excitavit? Sedulam ipsi operain navantibus Romany
tyrannis and Caesaribus. Post ortu^^t ejus perpetuos and crudelissimos hosts
habuit Pontifices Romanos, a quibus in desertum per aliquot annorum centurias
ita fuit compulsa, ut nusquam fere apparuerit. Locupletissimos testes habemus
afflictissimae hujus sortis, catalogos martyrum, seu martyrologia; necdum finis
est. De s^ductione Gentilium res quoque manifesta est: etsi enim post Christi
in coeles ascensionem, per Apostolos, in maxima orbis habitabilis part inter
Gentes Evangelium juit praedicatum, mansit mihilominus ecclesiae grex pusillus,
respectu multitudinis Gentilium qui evangelium repudiarunt, and a Satana
seducti Christianos afflixerunt. Itaque difficultatem non videtur expedire,
illa quorundam responsio: alligationem Satanae non absolute intelligendam esse,
quasi tum nihil ecclesiam laeserit Satan; sed secundum quid, in quantum gentes
seducere amplius, quo minus fidem Christi reciperent, and ad ecclesiam
accederent, prohibitus fuit: ad Satanae igitur ligationem satis fuisse, quod
propagationem evangelii ad Gentiles, tum per tyrannos Judaeos and philosophet a
plius impedire non potuerit, gentibus magno ubique locorum numero ad Christum
conversis, and Satanae regno inter Gentiles corruente: quod post ascensum
Christi in coelum, and destructam Hierosolymam contigit. Haec, inquam,
responsio difficultati non videtur satisfacere: non enim tantum ligandus, sed
and in abyssum conjiciendus dicitur Satan; quibus cerie verbis non aliqualis,
sed absoluta and omnimoda ligatio denotatur, per quam non tantum Gentes non
seducere, sed nec persequi ecclesiam poterit, ut supra ostendimus. Hujusmodi
vero alligati^ hactenus nondum observata fuit. Quod si vero aliqualis saltem
ligatio sit intelligenda, utique ad vetus quoque testamentum ca erit
extendenda. Nam ne in veteri quidem testamento habenae ita laxatae sunt
Satanae, ut omues Gentiles aditu ad ecclesiam prohibere potuerit: subinde enim
aliqui, etsi pauci, ad ecelesiam se aggregarunt. Deinde cum in nov^ Testamen
to, post vocationem Gentilium solennem, plures nihilominus in gentilismo
retinuerit, quam ad Christianismum accesserint, quis (...) ipsum ligatum, and
in abyssum eum conjectum fuisse dixerit? aliquo enim respectu semper fuit
ligatus, quatenus eos, qui inter Gentiles electi fuerunt, finaliter ab ecclesia
arcere nunquam potuit: horum enim respectu contritum est ipsi caput; Itaque
absoluta ligatio omnino videtur intelligenda, quam adhuc expectamus, quam
Patres quoque Theologi expectarunt. Mar. Frider. Wendel. contemp. phys. sect.
2. cap. 16. p. 354.355.
years be expired. And can there be a greater and worse deceiving of men
(especially of such as profess themselves Christians, as Antichrist and his
followers are known to do) then to make them the persecutors of the true
worshippers of God? and that such willing persecutors of them too, that they
shall think they do God good service in shedding of their blood? John 16. v. 2
Can there, I say, be a more dangerous deceiving then this? if not, then such
doings cannot happen within the space of the thousand years reign; and
consequently, none of the Saints can suffer all that while. Yea, doubtless no
other wickedness shall then reign amongst men; for seeing Satan is to be cast
into a bottomless pit, and a seal to be set upon him, that he may not
deceive the Nations: not only his power to tempt men, is to be restrained; but
even his liberty also is to be taken from him, that he may not go to and fro
in the earth, and walk up and down in it, as hitherto he has done. I say as
hitherto, for when had the best of men, even the Saints themselves, any rest on
earth, not only from wrestling against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against rulers of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickednesses in high places? or at what time has Satan
been so straightened, that he could not walk about like a roaring Lion, seeking
whom he might devour? and of whom he might get an advantage? or what age
either before or since Christ's coming, has not stood in great need of our
Saviors counsel and practice; of watching and praying lest they should enter
into temptation, into temptation from without? and of watching and praying, to
be delivered from evil, even from the Father of all evil, that evil one the
Devil, called the old Serpent, and the Prince of this world and of the power
of the air? if no time, no age has ever been thus happy, then Satan has not
been yet bound up, neither has Christ yet reigned, and consequently, none of
those that are fallen a sleep in Christ, have suffered in the time of his
reign.

Secondly, it is quite beside, if not against the text, to say that but a part
of those, which shall suffer under Antichrist, are to be with Christ in the
time of his thousand years reign. For we read, that S. John saw the souls
of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God;
and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither his image, neither had received
his mark upon their forehead, or in their hands: and they lived and reigned
with Christ a thousand years. Now whether these words do not rather
comprehend all the Martyrs, then a part of them: or (which comes all to one
reckoning) whether they show not also, that all of them were to suffer, before
any of them Rev. 6. v. 10.11.
were to reign: that the whole time, I say, of the Martyrs temptation and
persecution was to precede the whole time of the thousand years reign; and
not in part to precede it, in part to succeed it, and in part to accompany it,
as our Adversaries doctrine does make it to do, let any indiffernt man judge.
And surely, if by the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of
Jesus, and for the Word of God: all that were slain before the time of the
beast, (to wit, the second beast) are to be understood, as Comment. in novum
Test. page 1569. col. 2.
Piscator takes it, and the 9. verse. of the 6. chap. of the Rev. does seem to
expound it: then it follows, that by the souls of them that had not
worshipped the beast, nor his image, neither had received his mark upon their
forehead, or in their hands, all that were to suffer under this beast, must
needs be meant, as the 11. verse. of the foresaid chap. does express. And
besides, none of the Saints were to suffer, either in the time, or after the
time of the thousand years reign, but before it: and consequently, not a
part, but all of them are to be with Christ, when he does reign.

Thirdly, and lastly, it is point blank against the text, to hold, that any of
them which shall be slain by Antichrist, are to suffer after Christ's thousand
years reign. For although it is said, that the Saints shall be compassed
about by the Nations, which Satan shall deceive, when the thousand years are
fulfilled; yet there is no mention of the death of any of the Saints, but only
of an extraordinary and sudden destruction of their enemies.

And so it is plain, that these Antimillinarian consequences do all cross
the text. And of the same color and suitable unto their fancy of the thousand
years reign; is the application of Gog and Magog in the 20. of the Rev. to
the Pope and the Turk both, as some; or to the Turk only, as others of them
interpret it. For we read not, that Gog and Magog are to make war asunder, in
several parts of the world, as the Pope and Turk do. Nor that their war is
to be a long continued war, in which many battles are to be fought, and new
supplies raised one after another to maintain it, as it is in the Popes and
Turks wars. Neither do we read, that only one particular Empire, or a few,
or many Nations are comprehended by these words; but all the Nations, even the
Nations of the four quarters of the earth: who as they are speedily, and at
once, to be drawn together against the Saints, by the procurement of the
Devil, so they are even in a moment to be overthrown by the power of God, by
sire sent down from God out of Heaven.

And whereas the Antimillinarians would have this Gog and Magog to contemporate
with the battle in Armageddon, it cannot be. For seeing the Beast and false
Prophet are mentioned as partners with Satan, in the gathering together of the
army which is to be destroyed in Armageddon, it is altogether unlikely, that
they should have been here left out, and none but Satan spoken of, if this Gog
and Magog were to be understood of the same army. And that which does confirm
this, and which I would have all Antimillinarians to lay to heart, is because
the destruction of this Gog and Magog does follow after that battle, which is
to be in Armageddon, as well in the order of its execution, as in the order of
its Revelation. For in the 10. verse. of the 20. chap. of the Rev. it is said,
That the Devil which deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where the Beast and false Prophet are, that is, are to be, when
Satan shall be cast in thither to them, and consequently, they are to be there
before him. Which should not be true, if the destruction of this Gog and Magog,
and of the army in Armageddon were all one; for then they should be cast in all
together, (seeing the casting in of Satan at the destruction of this Gog and
Magog, is as expressly delivered, as the casting in of the Beast and false
Prophet is, at the destruction of the army in Armageddon:) or if none should be
cast in thither, till the last judgment, who were so likely to lead the way
to the place of eternal torment, as he for whom that burning lake was chiefly
Matthew. 25. v. 41.
prepared, as he and his Angels I say, who first fell irrecoverably themselves,
and shortly after drew man into sin also?

This then being undeniable, that the Beast and false Prophet are to be in the
lake of fire and brimstone, before Satan shall be cast in thither: who dares
define, that the time betwixt the casting in of the beast and false Prophet,
and the casting in of Satan, shall be either more or less, then that which the
holy Ghost has left upon record? to wit, the whole space of the Saints reign,
and of the little season in which the Nations are again to be seduced. And
consequently, the first resurrection is to be literally understood. The
thousand years reign is to be on earth. And this Gog and Magog in the 20. of
the Rev. is to be the multiplied posterity of those that shall be left of the
Nations at the beginning of the thousand years, when the army of the beast and
false Prophet, and of the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world (who as
the parallel declares, are the Gog and Magog foretold by Ezekiel) shall be
destroyed in Armageddon. And as this does necessarily follow upon the foresaid
text, upon the casting of the beast and false Prophet into the lake of fire and
brimstone, so long before the casting in of Satan: so it is intimated too, in
that at the time of the gathering together of this Gog and Magog, there is no
mention of any Kings (nor allusion to any eminent person or persons) that shall
then bear any sway amongst the Nations; to whom Satan may first and chiefly
apply himself, and of whom he may make such use in the gathering of them
together, as he shall do of the Kings, beast, and false Prophet, at the
gathering of the first Gog and Magog. And again, it is employed, in that it is
said, that Satan shall go out to deceive the Nations; by which it appears,
that all the time of his imprisonment they are not to be deceived; and
consequently, they are neither to be ignorant, nor negligent of their duty
toward Is. 2. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. Chapter 60. v. 12 14. Chapter 61. v. 4, 5, 6. Chapter 66. v.
19 20, 23, 24. Chapter 14. v. 1, 2. Zech. 8. v. 20, 21, 22, 23.
God or man; but to live peaceably and piously under the Saints. Whereas the
beast and false Prophet are always to be deceived, and to deceive: and from
the first hour of their rising, to the time of their destruction, to persecute
and make spoil of the Saints.

And thus, I hope, I have made it manifest, that the three paralleled
prophecies do all foreshew the same Great Day of God Almighty; and
consequently, that the Nations which shall oppose the Jews at their expected
return, are to be the Gog and Magog prophesied of by Ezekiel. And also that
those which shall be left alive of the Nations, when this first Gog and Magog
is destroyed, and which shall in their generations for a thousand years space
together enjoy the happiness of the Saints reign; that the last, I say, of
their posterity shall be the Gog and Magog foretold in the 20. chap. of the
Revelation.

And now, seeing that in lanching into the depth of so great a mystery, I have
done but as my Savior commands me; Search the Scriptures, John 5. v. 39
for in them ye think ye have Rev. 1. v. 3.
eternal life, and they are they which testify of me. And seeing that my
conscience (informed and confirmed by such an harmonious consent of Scriptures,
such a Diapason of prophetical voices) does bear me witness, that (besides
the irreconciliable jarring of divine dictates) this mystery cannot without the
loss and denial also of some most comfortable, remarkable and (if not now,
yet for future times) Romans 11 v. 25.26.
necessary truths, be otherwise understood: I shall as well for the 1 John 4.
v. 1. Isa. 8. v. 20. Acts 17. v. 11
liberty of mine own belief, as for the restraint of others unjust censures,
conclude with the words of our Church in the 20. Article, where she determines.
That though the Church has authority (to judge) in controversies of faith; Yet
it is not lawful for the Church, so to expound one place of Scripture, that it
may be repugnant to another. And that although the Church be a witness and
keeper of holy Writ, yet beside (or contrary to) the same, it ought not to
enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of salvation.

Malachi 3. v. 6.

I am the Lord, I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.

Nahum 1. v. 2. etc.

God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth: the Lord revengeth and is furious, the
Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his
enemies.

The Lord is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all acquit the
wicked: the Lord has his way in the whirlwind and in the storm, and the
clouds are the dust of his feet.

He rebukes the Sea, and makes it dry, and dries up all rivers; Bashan
languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon languisheth.

The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth is burnt at his
presence, yea the world and all that dwell therein.

Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of
his anger? his fury is powered out like fire, and the rooks are thrown down by
him.

The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them
that trust in him.

But with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end of the place thereof,
and darkness shall pursue his enemies.

What do ye imagine against the Lord? he will make an utter end: affliction
shall not rise up the second time. For while they be solden together as
thorns, and while they are drunken as drunkards, they shall be devoured as
stubble fully dry.

Obadiah v. 15. etc.

The day of the Lord is near upon all the Heathen: as thou have done, it shall
be done unto thee, thy reward shall return upon thine own head.

For as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, so shall all the Heathen drink
continually: yea, they shall drink, and they shall swallow down, and they
shall be as though they had not been.

But upon Mount Zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be holiness; and
the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions. And the house of Jacob
shall be fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for
stubble, and they shall kindle in them, and devour them, and there shall not
be any remaining of the house of Esau, for the Lord has spoken it.

And they of the South shall possess the Mount of Esau, and they of the
plain, the Philistines: and they shall possess the fields of Ephraim, and the
fields of Samaria, and Benjamin shall possess Gilead.

And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel shall possess that
of the Canaanites, even unto Zarephath, and the captivity of Jerusalem, which
is in Sepharad, shall possess the Cities of the South.

And Saviors shall come up on Mount Zion to judge the Mount of Esau, and the
Kingdom shall be the Lords.

Habakkuk 3. v. 3. etc.

God came from Teman, and the Holy One from Mount Paran, his glory covered the
heavens, and the earth was full of his praise.

And his brightness was as the light: he had horns coming out of his hand, and
there was the hiding of his power. Before him went the Pestilence, and burning
coals went forth at his feet.

He stood and measured the earth: he beheld and drove asunder the Nations, and
the everlasting mountains were scattered, the perpetual hills did bow* his
ways are everlasting. I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction: and the
curtains of the Land of Midian did tremble.

Was the Lord displeased against the rivers? was thine anger against the
rivers? was thy wrath against the sea, that thou did ride upon thine horses,
and thy charets of salvation?

Thy bow was made quite naked according to the oaths of the Tribes, even thy
Word. Thou did cleave the earth with rivers.

The mountains saw thee and they trembled: the overflowing of the water passed
by: the deep uttered his voice, and lift up his hands on high.

The Sun and Moon stood still in their habitation: at the light of thine
arrows they went, and at the shining of thy glittering spear.

Thou did march through the Land in indignation: thou did thresh the heathen
in anger.

Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with
thine anointed, thou woundedst the head out of the house of the wicked, by
discovering the foundation unto the neck. Selah.

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti: si non, his utere mecum.
If ought thou know that is more true then this,
Shew't, Gentle Sir: if not, take mine as it is.
Jude ver. 24.25.

Now unto him that is able to keep us from falling, and and to present us
faultlesse before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy;

To the only wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power,
now and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Errataes.
PAge 2. line 16. for of r. to p. 4. l. 1. by that r. that by p. 5. l. 12. for
time r. times p. 6. l. 10. for Judges r. Judge l. 21. for vacation r. vocation
p. 7. l. 31. for imperial r. empyriall p. 10. l. 7. for And at r. And in (p.
11. l. 25. the phrase is changed. to wit, [No way] put for [by no means
referred] which seeing it is the same in sense, may pass without noting) p.
11. l. 25 for Is r. It remains etc. p. 14. l. 6 for of the beasts r. of all
etc. p. 17. the letter (k) is misplaced, for it is put in the 7. line before
these words [yee are not my] and it should have been put in the 8 line, before
these [yee are the sons, etc.] p. 24. l. 5. for verse. 17. r. verse. 37. p. 37.
l. 16. for to pray before the Lord of Hosts r. to pray before the Lord, and to
seek the Lord of Hoasts p. 37. l. 33. for I know the r. I know that p. 38. l.
last. for turn r. return p. 44. l. 12. for their happiness r. their former
happiness p. 48. l. 2. pericitari r. periclitari.

Faults escaped in the Margent.
PAge 1. (c) for John 2.2. r. 1 John 2.2. p. 19. the letter (o) in the margent,
which should have been put before these words in the text, [It is confest] is
left out p. 19. (q) Id. l. 7. c. 7. r. cap. 12. and in this margent quot. Id.
l. 9. c. 9. which should have been referred to the word [Dan.] in the last
line, is wholly left out p. 21. for quoquo modo adversan. r. adversant^^ and in
the second note, for (...) r. (...) p. 47. for fourthly the river r. fourthly
in this City the river p. 20. (s) Cor. a tap. in c. 3. for Hof. r. Hos.


