News from the City of NORWICH: OF Certain passages which happened there on
Monday last, relating the number of the Cavaliers which are dispersed in sundry
Villages near the City.

Also showing the resolution of the Inhabitants of Northamptonshire, being
4000 men ready armed, in the opposition of the Cavaliers, who are Enemies to
the Parliament, and the Protestant Religion: Also how some Parliament men of
Northamptonshire, have in two days the last week, taken subscriptions of of
plate and money, to the value of 3000 pounds, and 480 Horse brought in by the
Contrymen into Northampton.

Also a Manifestation how the Gentry and Train Bands in Yorkshire do begin
to fall away from the King, and many of the Lords Soldiers by twenties do run
away, and many of the Princes likewise.

With the true Relation of the siege of Coventrie, and the joyful news from
the Citizens on Wednesday, in their prosperous proceedings, which God continue:
Showing how they took three Pieces of Ordnance from my L. of Northamptons men,
and a load of Arms the last week.

Ordered that this be printed.

Hen. Elsin. Cler. Par. D. C.



London, Printed for Th. Clapham. Aug. 26.

News from the City of Norwich.
FRom Norwith on Monday last it is certified by a Factor who lives there, that
there are many Cavaliers scattered up and down, who have plundered many men's
houses living in villages near unto Norwich, being supposed to be about 150
Horse, and 300 Foot; but God be thanked we are above 2000 able armed men within
the City, and we do not doubt but in short time to drive them away; Captain
Sandly, Sir Tho. Owfield, and Captain Ogle are gone to meet them, to stop
their proceedings with 100 Horse, and 200 Foot; and the whole County does
gather Forces together continually, and there are Writs sent out into every
Hundred, to know the strength of the County, which very shortly when it is
certainly known I will give you intelligence: I do hear for certain, that
this county will live and dye in the defense of the Parliament, for the
maintenance of the Protestant Religion.

Yours C. M.

From Northamptonshire.
There are good and prosperous informations brought from Northampton shire; for
the town of Northampton is very strong having 4000 men in Arms, and 400
Horse for the defense thereof: and as soon as the Earl of Peterborough comes
down, whom they very earnestly do expect, they hope to declare their
magnanimity and fidelity to the Parliament, for being animated with standing
in their defense, they intend with much cheerful alacrity against my Lord of
Northampton and his Cavaliers. Coventrie (whither of late the King is marched
to set up his Stand^rd) has a thousand men in Arms; that will lose their
lives in repelling any hostile violence that shall be offered by the Kings
Forces, having taken away a Piece or two of Ordnance, and a load of Arms from
my Lord of Northamptons men last week. The general and inclinations of this
county do stand right and full of integrity to the Parliament, so that some
of our Parliament men being come down, they have so well confirmed them in
their resolutions to stand for the Parliamen, that by taking subscriptions of
plate, money, and horse, they have found the cheerful bounty of the County, so
ample and affectionate, toward them, so that in a days sitting they have got
to the value of 1000 l worth of plate, and twice so much money, and about 2 or
3 hundred horse, many yeoman men coming in with 10 l and a horse, and 20 l and
a horse, and the Parliament have subscribed so many horse, and so much money in
the County as they did in London; the commissioners for the Array finding that
Northampton is so well replenished with men and Arms, do grow somewhat
timorous and fearful to execute their office, and there is nothing lacking for
the defense of the Town, but Ordnance, whereby they might be able to defend the
money and plate, gathered and collected by subscription, being a booty that
will be much aimed at to instigate the ravenous Cavaliers, who are ready to
attempt anything especially being drawn on by the temptation of getting and
obteyning any considerable prize.

In this great and general distraction of several Counties, there is most
certain note given by credible information, that there are great store of
Troops upon Dunsmore Heath, who do violently take away Arms by night, and
thereby strike a great terror into the Inhabitants: it being also for certain
reported, that the King intends to be there on the 24 of this month. But
though his Majesty do thus prosecute his intentions in several places, the
whole adjacent Counties being much perplexed by his sudden determinations, and
by the many insolent and outrageous inrodes of the Cavaliers; yet there is a
kind of defection, or falling off from the King in Yorkshire, the Gentry and
Trained Bands forsaking and relinquishing the matter, as cold and discouraged
therein; the Lords Troops running away by twenties, and from the Princes Troop
the last week from Lincoln ten: so that now the chief Abettors and Supporters
of these designs are the Papists, who are much necessitated, and I hope will
be more hereafter; so that though they buy many horses, yet they are such mean
ones, and of low prices, and so unserviceable, that they appear rather
Carriers jades, than light horses for the cutting Cavaliers, though their
number of subscription was very great.

All the Shire are called and summoned to appear this week, concerning the
Commission of Array, together with the Trained Bands and Freeholders; and it
is generally exclaimed on, and cried out amongst the best of our people, that
Altar-Priests have poisoned the best of the people, which does not a little
take with the worst. The former informations and relations were sent up in a
Letter to Mr. Newton living in the Old Jurie, from his brother dwelling at
Coston in Leichestershire: and from another brother of his living at
Northampton.

The King being highly incensed, and full of indignation against the City of
Coventry, for denying him admittance into the Town with his whole company of
Cavaleers, departed much discountented, threatening to convert their City into a
heap of ruin and and dissolution, and accordingly brought diverse pieces of
Ordnance, and with them made many shot against the gate of the City, which at
last was by the continual playing of the Ordnance laid open, but before that
could be done, some shot not being rightly levelled, did beat down part of the
Lady Hales house in white Friars, so that the Lady, and old mother Johnson who
had laid Bedridden 5 years before, in a place called the tower, adjoining to
white friars, were both killed, in this great affright and amazement, the
thundering noise of the Cannons made the Citizens full of courage and
resolution, and as it often happens that extremity of danger does necessitate
the wit to invent and put somewhat in execution, that may be advantageous to
the present occasion, sothe Cityzens of Coventry very fortunately to the great
joy and admiration of all people well affected to the Parliaments party,
watching a fit and convenient opportunity to attempt their design, when the
Kings forces were retired and expected nothing less than that which happened,
these resolute Citizens of Coventry with one unaminous consent sallyed and
issued out of the town, and behaved themselves in such a valiant manner, that
they compelled the Kings forces to retire and forsake their Ordnance, and so
prosecuting their good success hitherto so prosperous unto them, they at last
cleerd the Ordnance from all encumbrance, and took 2 of them into their own
possession, whereby the Kings intents for the battring of the City of Coventry,
were altogether disappointed, and besides the Citizens thus valiantly and
fortunately issuing out, most magnanimously performed their parts against the
Cavaleers, and encountering with them, gave them such a violent onset, that in
short time threescore and ten of them at least were slain, and the rest that
survive to do more mischief, were forced to notice, and save themselves by
flight; and thus the Citizens of Warwick have by their own valor, seconded
with fortunate success took (...) pieces of Ordnance froth the King, and
lessened the cruel and insolent number of the Cavaleers, whereby it appears
that a just cause, such as the Parliament does undertake, need not fear any
strength or opposition, for the justice of Heaven can not let it suffer, but
will at last crown it with renowned victory, for magnaest veritas and
praevalebit, great is truth, and those that stand in defense of the truth shall
prevail.

The City therefore of Coventry, being now somewhat animated and encouraged by
their fortunate taking of the Kings Ordnance, and the killing of 70 Cavaleers,
with whom they viliantly encountered, do now seek further to improve their
good success, and to prevent any second attempt that may be made against them,
not knowing when they shall again by the kings forces and the Cavaleers
beeassaulted, they have therefore to prevent any second violence, if the king
should plant any Ordnance against the City; being as they suppose as much
discontented as he was at the first, whereupon the Citizens have resolved to
sortify the City as much as they can, and for their better security, they have
with much labor and industry raised a mud wall against Newgate, to dampe and
daunt the shot if any should hereafter be made against it, and they intend also
to make the like) fortification of eartherne rampires to strengthen the walls,
they being very joyful in regard of their late happy proceedings against the
Kings undeserved attempt, and the cruel Cavaleers, and no doubt the Relation
thereof, will be very grateful and acceptable to all well affected people. And
moreover if the Cavaleers should hereafter appear again, and make another
attempt to enter the City as they formerly have done, they have continued a
very pretty politiek means to disappoint the insolency of their malicious
fury, for that they might hinder their passages, and plunder them at their
coming into the City, they have brought forth their tables, chests, Stools,
and harrowes, and laid them in the street to prevent the horse, if the
Cavaleers should oppose again unto the City.

FINIS.

