THE DECLARATION OF Major Genesis Massey UPON His Deathbed at LEICESTER: WITH His
Protestation, Acknowledgment, and Proposals, concerning the King of Scots,
Religion, and Covenant; Together with his Remonstrance, or Letter, Written by
his own Hand; and subscribed EDWARD MASSEY.

ALSO, The Scots Kings Speech to the said Major Genesis upon his departure from
him near Worcester; the total routing of the rest of his Forces in Cheshire:
Col. Humes, Col. Hambleton Col. Heart, and diverse other Officers and Soldiers
taken prisoners: With the number killed; and the manner how Charles Stuart
forced his passage through forty Club-men, and so escaped toward Scotland.

LIKEWISE, Captain Sympkins Speech at the place of Execution in Chester, who
was shot to death on Tuesday last, for assisting the aforesaid Charles Stuart
against the Parliament.

London, printed for George Wharton, 1651.

THE Declaration of Major General Massey upon his Death bed in the Newark at
Leicester: With his Protestation and testimony touching his Master the King,
and the Parliament of England.
Honored Sir,
SInce my last of the 7 instant, it has pleased God to add further Trophies of
his Mercy to our late Victory; and has not only broken the Bonds and Snares
of the Commonwealths Enemies, but also quite dissipated and scattered them in
several parts of this Nation; as will manifestly appear by the enclosed Papers;
But in the first place give me leave, I beseech you, to present you with the
Declaration and Speech of Major Genesis Massey on his Deathbed at Leicester; For
having cast himself into the imbracements of the Right Honorable the Countess
of Stamford, Mother to the Lord Gray of Groby, she immediately interceded for
him to her Son, whose Lordship ordered his removal from Broadgate Manor to the
Newark in Liecester, from whence he was guarded by a party of horse; and on
Tuesday last was brought into the said Town being very much wounded, and scarce
able to sit on his horse back; But all possible means was used for his
Recovery, and the best Chyrurgions sent for, who dressed his wounds, which lay
both in the head, hand, and thigh, but upon their searching the depth thereof,
they found them to be not only putrified, but also mortal; which indeed proved
to be so; For this morning it is affirmed that he departed this life, and made
a very Christian end; who finding a sudden inward change, declared to those
that were resident with him, That his hour was almost come, and desired that a
Minister might be presently sent for, which was granted; and according M: Angel
had notice thereof, and gave him a visit, making a very pious prayer, and
heavenly exhortation: After which, Major Gen: Massey gave him thanks, and
declared himself as follows:

That he blessed God his hour was so near, that he was in a great measure
sensible thereof, that his heart was full of joy and peace in believing, that
he had pursued those ways for which he blessed God he had no blackness upon
his Conscience, and that his Engagement tended only for the inthroning of his
young Master, the settling of Religion, according to the Covenant, which with
his hands and heart lifted up to the most high God, he was bound to preserve,
and not to violate. Having ended these Declaratory expressions, M. Angel, took
his leave of him, and suddenly after it is advertized that he died. During his
life time he was in great misery and anguish, and mere pain and weariness
forced him in to a surrender of his person; as appears by the ensuing Letter to
the Countess of Stamford, written with his own hand.

Thrice noble and most virtuous Lady,
These are the humble request of your poor servant, whom it has pleased God at
present deeply to afflict; and by his providence being cast into these parts,
full of anguish and painly reason of my wounds and weakness got before the
defeat at Worcester; I resolved to cast my self upon the favor of my Lord
Gray, which by your Ladyships intercession (and of which I dare presume,
knowing your charity to all men) I hope I shall find from his nobleness, That
I may have leave as his prisoner to stay and repose my sick body, and refresh
my wounds, either herel hr where his Lordship shall please to command, being
unable to ride or trave further at present, I shall be afaithfull Prisoner,
either under or without a Guard as his Lordship shall please.

Thrice virtuous Madam This is the most humble request of Your Ladyships most
humble and devoted servant Ed. Massey.

To the right honorable and thrice noble, and virtuous Lady, the Countess of
Stamford these humbly.

Immediately upon the receipt of this Letter, notice was given by the Countess
to her son my Lord Gray, that care might be taken for the securing of his
person till farther order be taken by the Parliament or Council.

Some of the prisoners taken affirm, That the said Major Genesis rode about 6
miles from Worcester with their King; but not being able to keep pace with any
longer, the King took his leave of him, with tears trickling down his cheeks,
saying; Farewell my dear and fa^thful Friend, the Lord bless and preserve us
both: And so they parted, the King posting on with Scoutmaster Genesis Hind, the
grand Thief of England; and the Major Genesis wheeled off by the way of Bromsgrave.

Wigson September. 12. 1651.
Honored Sir,
ON Thursday last there marched by our Town about 1000. of the routed Scots,
who randevouzed on Cangleton Moor, there taking up their quarters for the most
part of that night, lying in their close order; but about 3 of the Clock in the
morning, Major Cibson (a Country Gentleman) with about 300 Club men and
others, allarmed them, which the Enemy perceiving, endeavored to make good his
drawing off; but by the great forwardness and gallantry of the said Major, he
fell on with his men in their Rear, killed about 300. and took above 100
prisoners with little loss: for indeed so great is the spirit of fear amongst
them, that 10 men will chase 100. the rest of the enemy escaped; but we hear
since are taken. On Friday morning, another party consisting of about 500.
marched by us, but the Country pursued them so close, that the enemy were
forced to face about, and dispute the place, which conflict lasted for the
space of half an hour, till at last the Country men fell in with their Clubs,
Sythes, and but end of Muskets, and totally routed them, killing about 60.
took diverse prisoners of quality: amongst the rest Col. Hamilton, Sir William
Heart, and Colonel Humes, (Son to the Lord Humes) are taken. Having secured the
prisoners, we farther pursued the enemy, and about Diddesbury overtook them,
where we killed, took, and totally routed the whole party, with the loss of 11
men, so that now (blessed be God) most of the enemies of this Commonwealth,
that got off from the fight at Worcester, are all killed and taken: but Charles
Stuart their Captain General has again narrowly escaped, and out run them all,
being habited in mean Apparel, with only four men to attend him: he is gone
toward Scotland with a great and pannick fear, by reason of the disaffection
of the Country toward him: for in diverse places where he came, the
Inhabitants rose both against him and his followers, and fell upon them with
their Clubs, and at Diddesbury he was constrained to force his passage through
the midst of 40 Club men, who laid at him with their Clubs, and yet could not
bring him to the dust. However there is all diligence used for the way la^ing
and intercepting of him before he gets over Tweed: In many places where he came
where the people were gathered together, He us^d these expressions Good people,
take commiseration on him, who is your true and lawful King, but words took
these little impression in their hearts, for they made a general resistance
throughout all parts, and unanimously declared against him and his followere,
for which, I doubt not, but they will have a rich reward of mercy with God, etc.

From Chester we hear, That Col. Dackenfield (the Governor) has sentenced ten
of the King of Scots Captains at a Counsel of War to be shot, and accordingly
on Tuesday last they were brought to the place of execution, where most of them
deported themselves with much resolutenesse of spirit, and amongst the rest
Cap. Man, and Sympkins, seemed not in the least to be daunted, and withal, as
they were guarded along from the Castle, Cap. Sympkins called the Officers that
went on each side of him, his two Bridemen, protesting, That he was filled with
as much inward joy to receive the bullets, as if he was to receive a Bride; and
when he came to the place of execution, he expressed himself further to the
spectators.

Christian Gentlemen, and People,
I Am this day brought hither to die for Treason, and to be cut off from doing
any further service for my Master the King: However I am not in the least
sorry, and for the cause in which I have now waded, I must need say, my
continuance or engagement in it has laid no scruple upon my conscience, it was
upon the interests of Religion and Loyalty; and I humbly desire that God would
be pleased to honor that side that has right with it, and that you may enjoy
peace and plenty when I shall enjoy peace and plenty beyond all you possess
here: As for my Judges I freely forgive them, being in free peace with all the
world, as I desire God for Christ's sake, to be at peace with me: And so the
Lord bless you all. Then turning to the Musketeers, said, Gentlemen when I
stretch forth my arms do your office; and so immediately he unbraced his
doublet, and stretching forth his arms they all fired, (being 6. in number) and
so patiently receiving these tokens of death, he departed this life. Sir,
having no more at present, I remain

Your oblibed and faithful friend, Robert Cotton.
Manchester, Septem. 11. 1651.
FINIS.

