ISREAL'S REDEMPTION Redeemed. OR, The Jews general and miraculous conversion
to the faith of the Gospel: and return into their own Land: And our Saviors
personal Reign on Earth, clearly proved out of many plain Prophecies of the
Old and New Testaments. And the chief Arguments that can be alleged against
these Truths, fully answered: Of purpose to satisfy all gainsayers; and in
particular Mr. Alexander Petrie, Minister of the Scottish Church in Roterdam.

By ROBERT MATON, the Author of Israel's Redemption.

Divided into two Parts, whereof the first concerns the Jews Restoration
into a visible Kingdom in Judea: And the second, our Saviors visible Reign
over them, and all other Nations at his next appearing.

Whereunto are annexed the Authors Reasons, for the literal and proper sense
of the plagues contained under the Trumpets and Vialls.

To the Law, and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to this word,
it is because there is no light in them,

Isaiah 8. v. 20. LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, and are to be sold by
George VVhittington at the blew Anchor near the Royall-Exchange. 1646.

ISAIAH 49. v. 13. etc.

SIng, O Heaven, and be joyful, O earth, and break forth into singing, O
mountains: for God has comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his
afflicted.

But Sion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me.

Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on
the Son of her womb? yea they may forget, yet will not I forget thee.

Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are
continually before me.

Thy children shall make haste, thy destroyers and they that made thee waste,
shall go forth of thee.

Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these gather themselves
together and come to thee: as I live says the Lord, thou shall surely cloth
thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on thee sa a Bride does.

For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the Land of thy destruction shall
even now be too narrow by reason of the Inhabitants, and they that swallowed
thee up shall be far away.

The children which thou shall have after thou have lost the other, shall say
again in thine ears, The place is too straight for me: give place to me that
I may dwell.

Then shall thou say in thine heart, Who has begotten me these, seeing I have
lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? and who
has brought up these? Behold, I was left alone, these where had they been? etc.

ROMANS 11. VER. 28. etc.

As concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your sake: but as touching the
election, they are beloved for the Fathers sake. For the gifts and calling of
God are without repentance.

For as ye in times past have not believed God, yet have now obtained mercy
through their unbelief:

Even so have these also now not believed, that through your mercy they also
may obtain mercy.

For God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon
all.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THere are two main obstacles which debar men from the apprehension of Gods
word: the one, a strange language; the other, a strange interpretation. The
first is proper to Papists; the other is common to Protestants and Papists: and
is indeed the more dangerous, seeing an unknown tongue does only hide the
truth from the unlearned, and so may somewhat easily be avoided: but a false
interpretation does equally deprive both the wise and the simple of it: and so
causes the blind to lead the blind. For whatsoever text of Scripture is
expounded any otherwise then God meant by it, it is according to its
interpretation, the word of man, and not of God, and consequently in adhering
to such interpretations, we believe not what God says, but what man does make
him say. Now of Scriptures that are misunderstood, some are so difficult, that
it is not possible to give a peremptory interpretation of them, of which sort
are some passages in Daniel, in the Revelation, and here and there in other
parts of the Scripture) and in these we should either confess our ignorance,
or deliver our thoughts as evidences only of our desire to attain to the
perfect knowledge of Gods word. Others again are so plain, that every common
and ordinary understanding, if left to it self, cannot choose but take them in
their true sense; and not in that which is thrust upon them by a false gloss.
And of these some have been a long time controverted; and others have as long
past unsuspected, amongst which are the many Prophecies which God has revealed
touching the future restoration of the Jews, and the personal reign of our
Lord Jesus Christ on earth. And surely whatsoever was the ground of the
misinterpretation of these Prophecies at the first, (whether an hatred of the
Jews, whom alone in their proper sense they do concern, or some sinister and
selfe-respects) whatsoever, I say, was the ground of it at the first, the
continuance of it has been occasioned by the inconsiderancie of the ungrounded
application of the words [Jew and Israelite] indifferently to the Jews and
Gentiles: and of the words [Israel, Sion, and Jerusalem] to the Church of the
Gentiles, when as there is not one text in all the Scripture, wherein a Gentile
is called a Jew, or an Israelite; or wherein the Church of the Gentiles is
called, Israel, Sion, or Jerusalem. Those texts, Romans 2. ver. 28. and 29. and
chap. 9. ver. 6. and 7. are both by Piscator and Pareus understood of the Jews
only. And these words Gal. 6. ver. 16. [upon the Israel of God] are both by the
ordinary and interlineary glosses understood likewise of the Jews only: so
that it is, as if the Apostle had said, And as many as walk according to this
rule, peace be on those Gentiles and mercy, and peace and mercy on those Jews.
And surely if that text be not thus distinctly understood of the faithful
Jews and Gentiles; there will either be a tautologie in the words: or else the
last words must be understood of the Israel in blindness, to whom the Apostle
does here also wish mercy, according to that which he says of them, Romans 10.
ver. 1. That his hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel was, that they
might be saved. And that the Tribes of the children of Israel, Rev. 7. ver. 4.
are properly to be understood, Ribera and others acknowledge, and Pareus though
he enclines to an allegorical interpretation of them in his commentaries on the
Revelation, yet in his explication of the 18. doubt of the 11. chap. to the
Romans he thus resolutely determines against it. Quod Oraculum ad literam de
conversione Judaeorum plane intelligendum videtur, quoniam Israelitae signati
in frontibus, ibi diserte discernuntu^ a (signatis) gentibus, populis, and
linguis reliquis, ver. 9. Which Prophecy, says he, does plainly seem to be
understood of the conversion of the Jews according to the letter: because the
sealed Jews, are expressly distinguished from the (sealed) Nations, people,
and tongues, ver. 9. To which we may add, and because the sealing of these
Jews all at once, before the execution of the ensuing plagues, does imply that
they should be all living when the plagues begin, and while the plagues
continue, as we find them at the sounding of the sift Trumpet, chap. 9. ver. 4.
And because also the plagues are not ordinary plagues, but extraordinary: not
such plagues in which the sealed persons are to be any way sharers with the
unsealed; but such plagues as were brought on Pharaoh and his people, when
Israel was wholly exempted from them. Moreover St. Paul, Gal. 4. ver. 25. etc.
is so far from making Jerusalem that was then ( Jerusalem in her legal and
Mosaicall estate) a type of Heaven, or of the Christian Church; that he
plainly affirms she was an enemy to the children of promise, the children of
Jerusalem which is above, ver. 26. that is, of Jerusalem which is to be
restored from above: for seeing Interpreters acknowledge, that this free
Jerusalem, is not to be understood of a Jerusalem which is locally in Heaven;
but of a Jerusalem on earth: called Jerusalem which is above, in respect of its
original and spiritual endowments from thence, as Pareus observes: seeing I
say, they acknowledge thus much, they might, in my conceit, have seen as well,
that it could not be understood of the Church of the Gentiles, the Christian
Church that now is. First, because this could not be called Jerusalem, unless
Jerusalem had been a type of it; which the Apostle denies. Secondly, because
the Apostle, ver. 25. distinguishes [Jerusalem in bondage] as well in time, as
in condition, from the [free Ierusalem] calling her [Ierusalem that now is,]
which argues that the [free Jerusalem] was not then; and consequently could
not be meant of the Christian Church then also in being. And thirdly, the
Prophecy which he alleges, ver. 27. out of Isaiah chap. 54. ver. 1. Isa 49.
ver. 13, 14, 15, 16. etc.
Rejoice thou barren that bear not, etc. does infallibly declare, that he
meant by the [free Jerusalem,] which is the mother of us all, the Jerusalem,
which shall be rebuilt and inhabited by Christ himself at his coming from
Heaven with all the Saints. For first, this barren and desolate Jerusalem, is
opposed to the Gentile Nations, ver. 3. who are not said to be her seed, or
natural people: but to be inherited by her seed, that is, to be held
tributaries by the Jews, as other Prophecies do abundantly testify. And
secondly, this barren Jerusalem, ver. 6, 7. is called, a wife of youth, when
she was refused: and said to be forsaken, but for a moment in respect of the
everlasting and immovable kindness with which she shall be received, which
cannot possibly be meant of the Gentiles, to whom the Lord was not married, and
whom he took not for his people, till this wife of youth was refused and
forsaken. And because she was to be a long time barren and desolate after her
destruction by the Romans, therefore the Apostle, Heb. 13. ver. 14. says of
her, For here we have no continuing City, but we look for one to come, which
City to come, is the City the Prophet here speaks of, as remarried, and more
fruitful after her barren and desolate estate, then before: and which the
Apostle calls, [Jerusalem which is above] and the [free Jerusalem,] and of
which also he says, Heb. 12. ver. 22. But ye are come unto Mount-Sion, and
unto the Psalm. 46. v. 4. Psalm. 48. v. 1.2. Psalm. 87. v. 3. Isa. 60. v. 14.
Ezekiel. 48. v. 35.
City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company
Mat. 16. ver. 27. 2 Thessalonians. 1. v. 7. Joh. 1^ v. 51.
of Angels, to the Ephesians. 1. v. 10, 11.13, 14. Rev. 10. v. 7. Joh. 10. v. 16.
general Assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are written in Heaven,
etc. which doubtless may well be applied to the Church triumphant on earth
under Christ her Head, with whom the Angels shall come, and on whom they shall
visibly attend at his next appearing: but not to the Church now militant on
earth, as Piscator and Pareus apply this also. And this may serve as a [Lydius
lapis,] as a touchstone to show how unadvisedly the words [Jew, Israel, Sion,
and Jerusalem] are figuratively expounded, of the faithful in general. And
indeed seeing the Jews before the incarnation of Christ, did never call the
Converts of the Gentiles, Jews, but always Proselytes: it is not likely, that
the Apostles would then begin to call them Jews; when the believing Jews
themselves were (in respect of their Faith) to be called Christians, and not
Jews. Neither is it likely, that the words [Israel, Judah, Sion, Jerusalem,
etc.] should have been so often used in the Prophets, without any intimation of
a figurative sense, yea with such evident circumstances and contents showing
the contrary, if they had been mystically intended: this also I say, is nothing
likely, seeing in the Revelation the mystical sense of Sodom and Egypt, but
once spoken of; and of Babylon, but seldom mentioned, is plainly intimated
unto us in the 11. and 17. chap. And for my own part I am persuaded, that the
mystical interpretation of the plain Prophecies which concern the Jews
future restoration in their own Land, and our Saviors and the Saints visible
reign over them and all other Nations has been the occasion of the various
and unsatisfactory interpretations of most part of the Revelation, and of some
part of Daniels visions: and that Divines will neither concur in Judgment,
nor come near the truth in much of these obscure Prophecies, till they agree
upon the proper exposition of the foresaid plain Prophecies; as Mr. Mede that
renowned Author calls them, in the 293. and 294. pages of his Comment, on the
Apocalypse, where he commends this to the consideration of them that are
learned, and able to judge of the mysteries of Divinity, to wit, Whether it be
not the best and easiest way of dealing with the Jews; not to wrest the most
clear Prophecies touching the affairs of Christ's second and glorious coming,
to his first: but to persuade them, that they are to expect no other Messiah,
to accomplish all those things, then that Jesus of Nazareth, whom their
forefathers crucified -- For while we thus wrest those most clear Prophecies,
says he, the Jews deride us, and are the more hardened in their unbelief. And
doubtless this, and the Idolatry of Papists are the principal motives, which
keep us at such a distance in affection, that the ordinary means of salvation,
the preaching of the Gospel, is neither exercised by us amongst them, nor
sought unto by them amongst us. But yet these stumbling blocks shall neither
hinder, nor delay the extraordinary means of their salvation, at their
general conversion. For the Isa. 32. ver. 13, 14, 15.
time is set, in which the Spirit shall be poured on them from on high: and in
which their so plentifully and so plainly foretold deliverance shall be fully
accomplished at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore, beloved
Reader, seeing thou know these things before, beware that thou be not still
led away with the error of an unwarrantable (and indeed pernicious)
intepretation, by reason whereof the way of truth is evil spoken of; but grow
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory both now and for ever. Amen. Farewell.

Thine in the service of the Lord, ROBERT MATON:

AN ANSWER TO Mr. PETRIE'S Preface.
Preface. FIrst, Some Prophecies speak plainly of Christ, and cannot be
understood of another; Esa. 9.6. Unto us a child is borne, unto us a son is
given, his name shall be called Wonderful, etc. Some are typical, or
delivered with covers of things signifying Christ, his offices and benefits.
And of these some are spoken of the type, or thing signifying, and can be
understood only of the thing signified; and some are true both of the type and
of Christ, either in the same, or in a different manner, that is, some are true
of both in a proper sense; some are true of both in a tropicall or figurative
sense; and some are true of the one properly, and of the other figuratively.
All these sorts are manifest in sundry Prophecies: here I touch one for all, 2.
Sam. 7.12. When thy days be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy Fathers (
says the Lord unto David) I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall
proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish his Kingdom. This was true in
the person of Solomon, and of Christ too properly. v. 13. He shall build an
house for my name. This was true of Solomon in the proper acceptance of the
word [house] and figuratively of Christ, who said, Matthew. 16.18. Upon this rock
will I build my Church. It follows, I will establish the throne of his
Kingdom for ever. This was not true of Solomon in respect of his person, (for
he died) neither of his posterity, from whom Jacob had foretold that the
Scepter should depart at the coming of Shiloh, Genesis 49.10. but of Christ it is
true: for his Throne is established for ever and ever. Heb. 1.8. v. 14. I will
be his Father, and he shall be my son. This is true of Solomon in respect of
adoption, and of Christ in respect of eternal generation. Fifthly, it is said
there, If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of man -- but my
mercy shall not depart from him, as I took it from Saul. This is true of
Solomon, and not of Christ (who was free of sin) unless we understand his
members, or their sins imputed unto him. v. 16. Thy house and thy Kingdom
shall be established for ever before thee: thy Throne shall be established for
ever. This cannot be understood of David or Solomon's house or Kingdom ( as
experience proves now for the space of 1600. years, and more) but of Christ's
house and Kingdom, which shall never fail. By this one passage it is
manifest; First, how miserable ignorance it is, to expone all the Prophecies
after one and the same manner, or in a proper sense only. Secondly, that the
Evangelists and Apostles exponing these Prophecies in a spiritual and
figurative sense, do not wrest them, even albeit these have been fulfilled
some way before; but according to the intendment of the Spirit they bring them
unto Christ, who is the end of the Law, and scope of the Prophets.

Answer. The Prophecies which we have alleged for the Jews deliverance, and
our Saviors reign on earth, are all plain prophecies: and therefore your
distinguishing of the prophecies into plain and typical prophecies, is very
unseasonably (that I say not craftily) applied against us. However in the first
place, the Reader may observe, that we have as much reason to believe, that the
Prophecies which speak plainly of the Jews, cannot be understood of any
others; as we have to believe, that the Prophecies which speak plainly of
Christ cannot be understood of another: and consequently that you do very
erroneously interpret these Prophecies, when you understand by them, the
conversion of the Gentiles. And secondly, he may observe, that having cited 2 Samuel v. 12. When thy days be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy Fathers,
I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowls, and I
will establish his kingdom. You say [This was true in the person of Solomon,
and of Christ too properly.] Which is as much as we say, to wit, that God shall
establish unto Christ a civil and proper Kingdom, as he did unto Solomon. And
indeed it is beyond the force of these words in the 16. verse. Thy house and
thy Kingdom shall be established for ever before thee, thy throne shall be
established for ever. To prove, that Christ's reign and Solomon's, that the type
and thing typified are not both to be understood properly and in the same
manner: seeing the word [for ever] is not here to be taken in an unlimited
sense, for an infinite time, but in a limited sense, for a long time, (as we
show in our reply by many instances out of scripture) and so does intimate unto
us only, that Christ's Kingdom, a^ it is to be the longest that ever was on
earth, so it is to be the last too, it is not to be left to other people, as
Daniel says, chap. 2. ver. 44. but is by Christ himself to be delivered up to
God, even the Father, at the last resurrection. And that not only Solomon's
reign, but his building of an house to the Lord too, is to be properly
fulfilled in Christ, the Prophet Zechariah, chapter 6. ver. 13. does plainly
reveal. Behold, says he, the man whose name is the Branch, and he shall grow
up out of his place, and he shall build the Temple of the Lord, even he shall
build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and
rule upon his Throne, and the counsel of peace shall be between them both: In
which words, [the Temple of the Lord] does signify the Temple at Jerusalem, as
the verses following do show; and there is no other signification of this
phrase in all the old Testament, as we have observed in our reply to your
answer, where you expound our Saviors building of the Temple of the Lord, of
the raising of his body from the grave: and yet here you make it to foreshew
the immovable perseverance of those that were after his incarnation, to be
called to the profession of his name by a lively faith. So unstedfast are you,
and unresolved in what sense to take his building of an house unto the Lord.
And therefore although such typical prophesies as are compound oracles, were
to have a double accomplishment, yet it is questionable, whether they were to
have a different meaning. And sure we are, that this which you have alleged
for an instance does carry but one and the same sense in the type and antityp^;
And consequently, it is not miserable ignorance in us to expound the prophesies
of Christ's Kingdom, or the Jews deliverance in a proper sense only: but
rather manifest insolence in you to say so, and to affirm withal, [that the
Evangelists and Apostles expound them in a spiritual and figurative sense,]
when you can bring no plain text to demonstrate what you say.

Preface. Secondly, So the promises of deliverance from Babell had their own
accomplishment in the days of Ezra and Nehemiah: but that was not all the
meaning of these prophecies, which were in another manner and more fully
performed by Christ: for this cause it is said, Col. 1.12. Giving thanks unto
the Father, who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in light, who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has
translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, in whom we have redemption
through his blood; And Revel. 5.9. Thou have redeemed us unto God by thy blood,
out of every kindred, and people, and nation. There is our Redeemer more
glorious then Ezra or any other: there is our inheritance and Kingdom better
then Jerusalem: and there is a redemption from all nations. Now when these
prophecies are fulfilled once in respect of the type, and again in a more
transcendent manner by Christ; if we deny what God has done, we are false and
ungrate: and if we expect them to be fulfilled yet again in the type, it were
a worse returning then that of the Galatians, chap. 4.9. (that was unto the
types of his Priestly, and this unto the types of his Kingly office) and Christ
is become of none effect unto such.

Answer. As we do not doubt but that the prophecies of the Jews deliverance
from Babylon, had their accomplishment in the days of Ezra and Nehemiah: So we
cannot grant that the prophecies which we have alleged for the Jews future
deliverance from their captivity, do at all concern their deliverance from
Babylon. Nor that those which concern their Babylonish deliverance, were types
of the Gentiles conversion. And you have neither quoted any one of the
prophecies, which speak of their deliverance from Babylon, nor showed out of
the Evangelists or Apostles any one text, where the application of these
prophecies to the conversion of the Gentiles, is intimated. And therefore
though it be true, that the Father has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in ^ight; and delivered us from the power of
darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, in whom we
have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, and that
Christ has redeemed us unto God by his blood, out of every kindred, and
people, and nation; yet it is not true, that this was prefigured by the Jews
deliverance from Babylon, but by the sacrifices and ^egall Ceremonies, which
did foreshew both the death, and the ^fficacie of Christ's death, in whom alone
we have redemption from the power of finne and the grave. Neither is it true
that the Kingdom of Christ of which we are now only made meet to be
partakers, is yet in being; or that it shall be, till Christ's appearing with
the Saints in light; (as we show in our Reply) and therefore you must make
better proof of these Premises, to wit, that such prophecies as are properly
fulfilled in the type, may be figuratively fulfilled in the antitype: and that
the Prophecies which we have quoted for the Jews future deliverance, do
foreshew their deliverance from Babylon. And that those which foreshew that
deliverance, were typical Prophecies. You must make better proof, I say, of
all this, before you can conclude, [That we deny what God has done; or that we
expect that is to come which is already past.] Yea it is very absurd to think,
that the Prophecies which concern the Jews deliverance from Babylon, were
typical prophecies; First, because they are plain Prophecies, which you
confess cannot be understood of any other, but of them of whom they speak. And
secondly, because the type would not be of equal latitude with the thing
typified, the redemption of the Jews, with the redemption of themselves, and
all other Nations. And besides it is manifest, that the Prophecies which we
have alleged out of Zechary touching the Jews future deliverance, (and which
agree so well with the rest in other Prophets) were revealed after the
accomplishment of the Jews return from Babylon; and therefore cannot possibly
be understood of that, but of a deliverance not yet accomplished, and
consequently too cannot be typical prophecies, because they have not been
fulfilled in the type.

Preface. Thirdly, the elect Jews did not rest upon the Mosaicall Types, but
all the Prophets gave witness unto Christ, that through his Name, whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins, Act. 10.43. they believed
that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ they should be saved even as
we, Act. 15.11. in this faith they died, Heb. 11.13. I say this Faith, because
as Faith is one in respect of the object, Ephesians. 4.5. So the Apostle declares our
Faith by the example of the ancients. Neither did they rest on the promises as
on earthly, but they desired a better Country, that is, an heavenly, Heb.
11.16. and when they were tortured, they would not accept deliverance from
their torments, that they might obtain a better resurrection, v. 35. was that
an earthly hope? no; they believed the redemption of their souls by the
Messiah, Psalm. 34.22. that he was to be wounded for their transgressions, and
bruised for their iniquities, and the chastisement of their peace was to be
upon Him, and that they were to be healed by his stripes. Esa. 53.5. and Simeon
waiting for the consolation of Israel, when he sew him, blessed God, and said,
Lord, now let thy servant depart in peace, -- for my eyes have seen thy
salvation. Luke 2.29. He craves not longer life to reign with Christ on Earth,
but was content to depart having seen the salvation of God, the light of the
Gentiles, and glory of Israel.

Answer. The elect Jews, you say, did not rest upon the Mosaicall types,
neither doubtless did all the non elect Jews rest upon them: but having the
knowledge of the true means of their salvation, did many of them seemingly,
though not savingly, embrace it. And what though the elect Jews did believe
the remission of their sins, and the redemption of their souls by Christ; and
that he was to be wounded for their transgressions, and bruised for their
iniquities, etc. and dyed in this Faith, and could not be forced to forsake it
by any torments? Did they therefore believe no more then this? Did they
therefore not believe that Christ should reign with them, as well as suffer
for them? nor that they should reign with him, as well as suffer with him?
what! shall we think that they were not to reign on Earth, because it is said
in these texts, that they believed the remission of their finnes, and the
salvation of their souls after their departure? Certainly we are taught
otherwise. Verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed me, in the
regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit on the Throne of his glory, ye
also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, said
our Savior to his Disciples, Matthew. 19. ver. 28. In which words there is their
reign, Ye shall sit upon twelve Thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
And the time of their reign, said to be, first, in the regeneration, that is,
in the time, when the sins of the Jews shall be blotted out: in the time
when Christ shall come and turn away ungodliness from Jacob, as St. Paul
writes, Romans 11. ver. 26. and secondly, which is coincident with this, when the
Son of man shall sit on the Throne of his glory. That is, when Christ
himself shall come to reign: when at the last Trumpet, the Kingdoms of this
world shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ. This is the
Masters voice, and the voice of his servants is like unto it. If we suffer, we
shall also reign with him, says St. Paul, 2 Timothy 2. v. 12. and chapter 4.
ver. 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only,
but to them also that love his appearing. And Rev. 5. ver. 10. Thou have made
us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on Earth, says St.
John. Now the first of these texts shows, that the Saints shall be Kings; the
second, when they shall be Kings, to wit, at Christ's appearing, when they shall
receive their Crowns. And the third (besides this) shows where they shall be
Kings, to wit, on Earth. I say besides this, for it shows expressly also,
that they shall be Kings: and infallibly too, when they shall be Kings; seeing
it is said, and we shall reign on earth. Which prophetical words do signify
unto us, a reign that the Saints should enjoy on Earth, and not a reign that
they did then enjoy, and consequently, a reign to follow their resurrection,
and not to go before it. And when the Apostle Heb. 11. ver. 14.15.16. does
allege this as a reason, to show that the Patriarchs did desire an Heavenly
Country, to wit, because they did not return to the Country from whence they
came out, which they might have done if they would; what Country is this
heavenly Country so likely to be, as the Land of Canaan which they did expect
to possess, when they and it should be restored to an heavenly condition? for
doubtless had Heaven it self been meant by the heavenly Country, which the
Apostle h^^^ speaks of, they might as well have obtained the joys of Heaven in
their own Country (where their predecessors had obtained them) (...) they had
r^^^^^^d thither, as they could in th^^, w^^^^ they lived as Pil^^^m^. B^^
seeing Christ was promised to be th^^r seed, and the Land of Canaan to them and
their seed for a peculiar possession, they could not leave that Land, and
return to their Country, with any confidence to be made partakers of the
bless^^gs which God had promised to bestow on them and their seed in Canaan
only, and for the expectation of the acco^p^^^^ment of which promise, he had
called them out of their o^^^ Country, to live as strangers in that. I say, they
could not return to their country, salva fide, with a s^^^^ and steadfast
faith in the promises, made, and to be fulfilled unto them in the land, whither
God had called them: although otherwise they had opportunity to have done it:
although they had no o^tward and worldly hinderance, and inconvenience to keep^
them from returning. So that the Apostle does her^ set forth unto us the faith
of all the Patriarchs, as he did before, the faith of Abraham only, verse
8.9.10. to wit, in this, because through the hope they had, that they should
after receive that p^^ce for an inheritance, they chose rather to live as
strangers in it at that time, wh^^ they were liable to the injuries and
hostility of the C^^^^^tes, then to return to their own Country, where with
their hindered and acquaintance, they might have lived in mo^^ outward security,
and contentment. And it is observeable, that the Apostle calls not this their
desire, [an earthly hope,] as you turn the Saints hope to reign on earth, but
an Heavenly hope, a d^^^^e of an Heavenly country. And well might he call that
L^^d an Heavenly country, ^^ich as Ezekiel foresh^^^ chap. 36. verse. 35.
shall beco^^ like the (...) of Eden, and in which the glorified Saints and
Christ himself (on whom the Angels shall vi^^^ly ascend and descend) s^^^be
inhabitants. And well might he call Jerusalem also, in (...) to the time in
which it is to be re^^ored under Christ, a This I conceive to be the meaning of
these words, although in my (...) page 47. I have re^^^^^^ i^ to the new
Jerusalem; the City not made with h^^^^. For I see not why Abrah^^ s^jour^^^^
in the Land of Promise, should be a more fo^^ible Argu^^^, of his looking for
H^^^^^, then if he had remained in his o^^^ Co^^^^ey.
City whose ^^ilder and maker is God, verse. 10. because as it shall be rebuilt
by Christ, so it shall be built according to the figure and platform, which God
himself has described by Ezekiel. And this may suffice here to show how
perversely you call this hope of the Saints [an eartly hope] and how frivolously
you seek to destroy this hope, by such texts as mention their belief of the
forgiveness of their sins, and of our Saviors suffering for sin: and their
desire to depart out of this world: and their dying in the faith; as if this
were all the happiness of the Saints that is revealed unto us in the
Scriptures; whereas this is to precede their resurrection, and their
resurrection to precede their reign, and their reign to precede their highest
glory, in the new Jerusalem. And besides this, you give the Reader notice, how
apt you are to wrest the Scriptures, by the plain conversion, which you have
made of the text, Acts. 15. verse 11. for you apply it to the Jews under the
Law, saying, they believed that through the grace of our lord Jesus Christ,
they should be saved, even as we, when as St. Peter says, We believe, that
through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved, even as they, and
so shows the Jews under the Gospel, that they should as well be saved by
faith in Christ, without the ceremonies of the Law; as their Fathers had been
by this faith under the ceremonies of the Law: and the text, Psalm. 34. verse
22. which you apply to the redemption of the faithful from etternall torments
by the death of the Messiah; is meant of Gods delivering of them, out of
temporal calamities and afflictions, as the foregoing verses do plainly show.
And lastly your argument touching old Simeon, [that he craved no longer life,
to reign with Christ on earth] does make as much against his belief of
Christ's spiritual, as his personal reign, and against his belief of Christ's
suffering, as against either of these: and surely though he prayed to depart,
because it was revealed unto him, that he should not see death before he had
seen the Lord Christ; yet the testimony he gave of Christ, that he should be
the glory of his people Israel, (which does as well intimate the general
conversion of the Jews, and Christ's reigning amongst them, as his being a
light to lighten the Gentiles, does imply the conversion of the Gentiles) this
testimony, I say, does show, that Simeon did hope to live again, to reign
with Christ; although he did then desire to depart, having seen him. And to
this hope of the Saints, as well as to the hope of the glory, which shall
follow their reign, St. Paul alludes, when he says, that others of the
faithful Jews, were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might
obtain a better resurrection.

Preface. Fourthly, And nevertheless many Jews sought righteousness by the
works of the Law, and not by faith, Romans 9.32. and they looked upon the
promises with a bodily eye only, as if the Messiah were to erect an earthly
Monarchy at Jerusalem. And looking thor^^^ these spectacles they could not
think that Jesus Christ is the Messiah, and so they stumbled at his worldly
baseness, and being miscarried in their brains, they could not see his
spiritual power and benefits. After their miserable example others
acknowledging Jesus Christ to be the promised Messiah, and not considering the
difference of the promises, have not attained fully unto the truth of them, and
so have erred in mistaking his natures and benefits. Thus Eblon thought him to
be a man, and not God, as if all the promises could have been performed by a
man endowed with singular grace. Cerinthus likewise held that Christ is only a
man, and because he saw him not sitting on the throne of David, he held that
Christ is not risen from the dead as yet, but shall rise and reign in
Jerusalem a thousand years, and all his Subjects shall be satisfied with all
manner of pleasures, in meat, drink, marriage, festival days, and offer
oblations and sacrifices. Eusebius. lib. 3. chap. 25.

Answer. That the Jews were in an error, which sought righteousness by the
works of the Law, we willingly acknowledge, but that they did err, in taking
the promises touching Christ's Kingdom and their own deliverance in a proper
sense, we cannot think. For we know that the multitude would have made Christ
a King, Joh. 6. verse 15. and that Nathaniel, that righteous Jsraelite, said
unto our Savior, Rabbi, thou art the son of God, thou art the of King
Israel. Joh. 1 verse 49. and it were too in jurious to our Saviors innocence
(who came into the world to bear witness unto the truth. Joh. 18. verse 37.)
to imagine that he would not upon these occasions have showed them, that they
were mistaken in his Kingdom, if he was never to be such a King, as the Jews
thought he should be; and would then have made him, had he not avoided it, by
hiding himself from them. And indeed by the parable Luke. 19. touching the
Noble-mans going into a far country to receive for himself a Kingdom, and
return; which he put forth of purpose, because the Jews did look for the
immediate appearing of his Kingdom; by that parable, I say, he did as good as
tell them, that they did rightly conceive of the nature of his Kingdom, but not
of the time when it should appear: that they truly thought, he should reign
visibly over them on earth, though they were deceived in expecting the
accomplishment of it, then at his first coming. For what was the Kingdom of God
which the Jews thought should immediately appear? was it the glory that shall
follow the Judgment of the dead? doubtless they thought not that the Judgment
of the dead, should immediately ensue. Or was it the means of salvation that
they looked for? doubtless then they knew that they had long enjoyed this even
as their peculiar. The Kingdom of God then, which they so earnestly and so
soon expected, must needs be the Kingdom which God had foretold, that Christ
should govern personally on earth, when he should be set by him on the Throne
of his Father David. For indeed Christ can bring with him no other Kingdom for
himself, (that is, no other Kingdom to govern as man) but this, from that far
country, whither he is gone to receive for himself a Kingdom, and to return.
And therefore it was not their looking [through these spectacles] as you phrase
the proper exposition of the prophecies, that made them to deny, that Jesus was
the Christ, but rather stumbling at his mean condition only, they did to him,
what Gods hand and Counsel had determined before to be done. And as the Jews
were no example of misbeliefe, in looking for their deliverance from captivity,
and for our Saviors personal reign amongst them: so doubtless the proper
acception of the prophecies concerning our Saviors reign, did no more
occasion Ebion and Cerinthus to mistake his natures, and deny his divinity;
then the proper acceptions of the prophecies concerning his incarnation and
suffering did: and therefore seeing it is not possible that the true
understanding of one part of the Scripture, should thrust us into the
misapprehension of another part thereof; we may well think, that it was the
want of a due consideration of those texts, which do demons^^ate the divine
nature of Christ; and not the truth they held touching his reign, that drew
them into this error. For it is either through the want of a careful searching
into the Scriptures; or by reason of some sinister and by-respects only, that
all errors have both their rise and continuance in the Church of God.

Preface. Fifthly, Upon this occasion the Apostle John wrote the Gospel again,
and more largely then any other of the Evangelists speaks of Christ's Godhead,
his wonderful works, his Kingdom, resurrection, and his coming again,
especially that the Son of man is now glorified, chap. 13.31. that he has
overcome the world, chap. 16.33. that his Kingdom is not of this world, and if
his Kingdom were of this world, his servants would fight, that he should not be
delivered unto the Jews, but now is his Kingdom not from hence, chap. 18.36.
And of the condition of his Subjects, he says, Remember the word that I said
unto you, the servant is not greater then the Lord, if they have persecuted me,
they will also persecute you, chap. 15.20. verily I say unto you, ye shall
weep and lament, and the world shall rejoice, and you shall be sorrowful, but
your sorrow shall be turned into joy: these things have I spoken unto you, that
in me ye might have peace, in the world you shall have tribulation: but be of
good cheer, chap. 16.20.33. And of his coming again he says, In my Fathers
house are many mansions -- if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come
again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also,
chap. 14.2. Now you have sorrow, but I will see you again, and your heart
shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you chap. 16 22. All which words
were written flatly against the errors of Cerinthus, and teach us that
Christ's Kingdom is not an earthly Kingdom, nor delayed for one or two 1000.
years; but now is his kingdom, now he has overcome the world, his subjects
are not to live on earth without persecution and sorrow, and when he comes
again, he will receive them with him into his Fathers mansions, and their
sorrow shall be turned into joy that shall never be taken from them.

Answer. That you have made a false report of the occasion of Saint John's
writing of his Gospel, and consequently of the end and scope of the texts here
alleged, the words of our English Divines, who are the Authors of the
Annotations upon all the books of the old and new Testaments, printed 1645. do
plainly declare. For in their argument of the Gospel according to Saint John
they say. That in Domitians time he was banished into the Isle Pathmos, where
he wrote the Revelation; after which under Nerva, he was recal'd to Ephesus
(being aged about 97. years, which was the 100. year of our Lord) where he
wrote his Gospel; some say, at the entreaty of the Christians of Asia, for the
refutation of Ebion, Cerinthus, and others, who blasphemously denied the Deity
of Christ. This is their testimony of the ground of St. John's writing his
Gospel; wherein they tell us not, as you do, that it was because of Cerinthus,
and others opinion of Christ's 1000 years reign in Jerusalem; But that it was,
as history reports, because of his and others denying the Deity of Christ. Your
quotations follow, whereof the first, That the Son of man is now glorified, was
spoken by our Savior, when Judas was gone to betray him: and does signify the
glory, which was then sudenly to follow both in his death, and after his death,
as Piscator notes: and will his coming again or his reigning after his
coming, unglorify him, think you? certainly no: but will manifest unto the
whole world, the glory which he has received; For he shall come in the glory
of the Father, as he says, Mat. 16. verse. 27. And shall sit on the Throne of
his glory, when he is come, as he says, Mat. 19. verse. 28. which Throne, the
comparing of this text with the 28, and 29 verses of the 22. chap. of St. Luke,
does show to be meant of the Throne of his Kingdom. The next words, that he
has overcome the world, he spoke to comfort his Disciples against the
tribulation which they should have in the world: and they do signify, that as
in himself he had and could overcome the temptations of the world, so he
would in them too, by strengthening them to endure to the end for his sake, what
he had voluntarily resolved to endure for their sakes. And how is this his
overcomming of the world by patience, in the time of his temptation, any let or
hinderance to his overcomming of it by power, to his reigning over it, at his
next appearing? The third text, That his Kingdom is not of this world etc. was
his answer to Pilate, when he asked him, whether he was the King of the Jews.
And it does show only, that he was not to receive his authority to reign, of
men, but of God (as I observe in my reply.) This is your first file of proofs;
the second does consist of such texts, as show that the faithful most suffer
persecution in this world, as Christ did: and doubtless they must till Christ's
coming again, at which time they shall be delivered from all their oppressions,
and pressures, and become Rulers of the world themselves. And so these texts
do make directly against the reign of the Saints now, while the tribulations
of this world endure: but nothing against the reign of the Saints, when the
tribulations of it shall cease. Your last file of proofs is brought to show,
that when Christ comes the Saints shall be with him, where he is: and that their
joy shall be immovable. And what repugnancy is there betwixt these things and
our Saviors reigning on earth? certainly they shall be ever with him on earth,
when he comes again, on this earth while he reigns, and on the new earth (of
which St. Peter. speaks, 2. Epist. 3. verse 13.) after his reign; for to that
earth the new Jerusalem (in which the Saints shall live after the last
Judgment) shall descend, as it is revealed, Rev. 21 verse 2. and when Christ
himself shall be their companion, and sin and death have no more power over
them, how should their being on earth deprive them of their joy? but yet the
text chap. 16. verse 22. is by Piscator referred to the joy that the Disciples
received both through the sight of Christ after his resurrection, and through
the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, * which he then breathed on them: and not to
the joy which they shall receive at their own resurrection, when Christ comes
again. And thus it appears, that you might as truly have said, that all the
new Testament was written against Christ's personal reign on earth, as that the
Gospel of St. John was.

Preface. Sixthly, After Cerinthus we read next of Papias, of whom Eusebius. lib.
cit. Chap. 39. writes thus; he reports strange parables of our Savior, mixed
with fabulous doctrine, where he dreameth, that the Kingdom of Christ shall
corporally here on earth last the space of a 1000 years, after the
resurrection of the dead: which error (as I suppose) grew hereof, in that he
received not rightly, the true and mystical meaning of the Apostles, neither
deeply weighed the things delivered of them by familiar examples; for he was a
man of small judgment, as by his books plainly appears: yet hereby he gave
unto diverse Ecclesiastical persons occasion of error, who respected his
antiquity, namely unto Irenaeus and others, if there be any found like minded.
Then lib. 7. Chap. 22., 23. he writes of Nepos, Coracion, and others in Egypt
infected with this error about the year, 250. whom Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria, did convince in a Synod by demonstrations and doctrine of the holy
Scripture, and did reclaim them from their error. Thus he speak's ever of
these opinions as of errors contrary unto the holy Scriptures. After Lactantius
( who lived about the year, 320.) this error was universally abhorred, so that
Hierom on Esa. l. 18. and Augustine ad Quod vult. de. hae^^si 8. write of it as
a damned error, and we read of few or none in this opinion til in this last age
it comes apace with the Anabaptists and some English Novatours: few write
against it, because the arguments are so silly and rediculous, that every
understanding person reading them, finds not only the weakness of the
grounds, but even out of them do gather pregnant arguments in the contrary.
Albeit these Authors do agree in the time and place of this imagined
Monarchy, yet they write one against another in many circumstances thereof, as
is marked hereafter.

Answer. It is as possible that you may misreport Eusebius touching Papias, as
touching the occasion of St. John's writing of his Gospel, and as you do
Hierome and Augustine, who you say, [write of the millenarian Tenet as a damned
error.] whenas Sicut mundus sex diebus suit creatus, scprimus suit sabbatismus:
ita mundum sex millia annorum duraturum; postea secuturum sabbatismum in mill
annis postremis; ad hoc scilicet sabbathum celebrandum resurgentibus sanotis
Qu^ opinio esset utcunque tolerabilis, si aliquae deliciae spirituales in illo
sabbatismo affuturae sanctis per Domini praesentiam crederentur, Nam etiam nos
hoc opin^ti fu^mus aliquando. Sed cum eos, qui tunc resurrexerunt, dicam
inimoderatissimis carnalibus epulis, vacat^ros, in quibus cibus sit tantus et
potus, ut non solum nullam modestiam teneant, sed modum quoque ipsius
incredulitatis excedant, nullo modo ista possunt nisi a carnalibus credi. Aug.
lib. cit.
Augustine (lib. 20. de civ. Dei. cap. 7.) says; That it is a tolerable
opinion, if it were believed, that the glorified Saints should receive
spiritual delights by Christ's presence, which is that we hold: and he says
too, that he had been of this mind himself, but left it (as in seems, f^^ no
other cause, but) because many c^^nal minded thought, that the raised Saints
should eat and dri^ke beyond moderation. And Post captivitatem quae sub
Vespastano et Tito, et postea accidit sub'Hadriano, usque and consummationem
seculi, Rumae Jerusalem permansurae sunt: quanquam sibi Judaei auream atque
gemmatam Jerusalem restituendam putent; rursusque victimas et sacrificia, et
conjugia sanctorum, et regnum in terris Domini Salvatoris: quae licet non
sequamur, damnare tamen non possumus; quia multi virorum Ecclesiasticorum et
Martyrum ista dixerunt Hier. loc. cit.
Hierome on Jer. 19. verse. 10, having set down the opinion (though
wrongfully, as Mr. Mede affirms Comment. Apocal. page 285) says of it: which
things though we embrace not, yet we cannot condemn, because many faithful
persons, and Martyrs of the Church have said them. However, it was as easy for
Eusebius or any other, to condemn Papias for a man of small judgment, as it is
for you, to say, [that our arguments are so silly and ridiculous, that every
understanding person reading them, finds not only the weakness of the
grounds, but even out of them does gather pregnant arguments in the contrary]
it was as easy, I say, for Eusebius to write the foresaid words, as it is for
you to write these, albeit the Reader may plainly see, that you do but slander
our arguments herein. For besides the plain texts and prophecies in the new
Testament, there are far more prophecies in the old, to show our Saviors
corporal reign on earth, then there are to show his birth and death, and as
clearly delivered to the understanding. But be it as Eusebius says, [that
Papias was a man of small judgment] yet that he showed it not in being of this
opinion, not only the Scriptures, but the judgment of Irenaeus, and other
Ecclesiastical persons, who followed him in it, do attest: of whom we cannot
intertaine such an unjust belief, as to think, that they would prize the
antiquity and authority of Papias word, above the authority and antiquity of
the word of God it self. But that this truth might be universally abhorred,
and rejected as an error after the 320. year of our Lord, we easily believe.
For it is unquestionable, that many a truth and error did change titles each
with other, as popish ignorance, superstition and idolatry grew in request, and
needs then must this truth, which ascribes the accomplishment of the
predictions of Christ's Kingly Office to their right owner, soon vanish out of
men's minds, and leese its luster and repute; whenas that Man of sin was shortly
to appear, who to exalt his power above all that is called God, should as
blasphemously, as deceitfully, apply these prophecies to himself. And lastly,
that we agree not in all circumstances about this opinion, does no more
derogate from the truth and worth of it; then the differences that are amongst
other Christians do derogate from the truth and necessity of any subject
wherein they do disagree.

Preface. Seaventhly, They speak not now of feasts and sacrifices, as Cerinthus
did; but if they will maintain this opinion, I see not how they can eject
them, seeing the Prophets speak as e^pressely of them, as of Christ's Kingdom.
Jer. 33.17. Thus says the Lord, David shall never want a man to sit upon the
throne of the house of Israel, neither shall the Priests the Levites want a man
before me, to offer burnt offerings, and to kindle meat offerings, and do
sacrifice continually. See, ver. 21.22. Zech. 14.16.21. But that these and such
other texts should be expounded spiritually, it is plain by Mal. 1.11. where
incense and offerings are not restrained unto the Jews at Jerusalem, but made
common unto the Gentiles every where: and more plainly in the New Testament.
If the Millenaries will exporte with us these texts of spiritual Sacrifices,
they cannot show any probable reason, why the prophesies concerning Christ's
Kingdom should not likewise be exponed spiritually. And Hierome in Isa. 63.
lib. 18. says, If we grant these words to be exponed carnally, let them hear
the like promises made unto Sodom, as unto Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 16.53. When I shall
bring again their captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the
captivity of Samaria and her daughters, then will I bring again the captivity
of thy captives in the midst of them -- when thy sister Sodom and her daughters
shall return -- then thou and thy daughters shall return. Wherefore ( says
Jerome) these houses [ mentioned, Isa. 65.21.] must be understood of virtues,
or the diverse mansions beside the Father -- and of such houses our Savior
speaks, Mat. 7. verse. 24. I will liken him to a wise man, who builds his house
on a rock. And the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5.1. we have a building of God, an
house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. Because we cannot conceive
of Heaven in such a manner as it is, it pleases God to insinuate it into our
affections by similitudes of things pleasant unto us, and to teach us faith by
sensible things: and therefore we should not rest on these borrowed words, but
know that the thing described goes beyond the earthly similitude.

Answer. Surely Mr. Mede (loc. cit.) does make it good against Jerome, that the
primitive Christians also spoke not of sacrifices. And yet soeing that text,
Mal. 1. verse. 11. which speaks expressly of the Gentiles, can be no pattern
to expound those which speak particularly of the Jews, and of the house of
Levi: and that you allege such pregnant prophecies for the restoring of
sacrifices, why should we not believe this also? what absurdity will arise from
such a belief? certainly we know as well as you, that they are now unlawful,
but it will not follow from hence, that they shall never be lawful again:
unless it can be be proved, that God cannot again command, what he did
sometimes forbid; or that he cannot injoyne the use of a thing at several
times, for several ends: or that God has in his word forbid the use of these
things at any time hereafter, to wit, as well after the coming of Christ, as
before it: neither of which I presume can easily be maintained. And as for that
prophecy, Ezekiel. 16. verse 53. etc. which is your other maine pillar to support
the figurative sense of all the prophecies in controversy: and to bear down
our proper and natural construction of them: it has indeed not the substance
but the sound of an argument only, and makes much against you, but naught
against us. For first, it shows them to be in an error who affirm, that the
captivity of Samaria, of the ten Tribes is already returned. And secondly, it
is more forcible to disprove the Jews return from Babylon (against which also
it may be alleged) then to disprove their future return from all countries.
For the 60. and 61. verse. Nevertheless, I will remember my Covenant with thee
in the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting
Covenant. Then thou shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou shall
receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger, and I will give them unto
thee for daughters, but not by thy Covenant. These words do show that this
captivity of Jerusalem should return again, and at her return receive her
sisters Sodom and Samaria; and therefore the words, verse 53. when I shall
bring again their captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, etc.
do show only, that this prophecy does speak of the captivity and desolation
of Jerusalem and her adjacent cities and villages by the Romans; from which
they should no more be restored, til Samaria and her adjacent cities and
villages should be restored, and inhabited by the Israelites, by the ten
Tribes, whose future return is witnessed by so many evident prophecies: and
until the place where Sodom and her cities stood, should again become a
fruitful land and full of inhabitants, as the 55. verse does intimate. So that
this prophecy is equivalent with that of Isa. 32. verse 13. etc. Upon the land
of my People shall come up thorns and briers, yea upon all the houses of joy
in the joyous City: because the palaces shall be forsaken, the multitude of the
city shall be left, the forts and towers shall be for dens for ever, a joy of wild
asses, a pasture of flocks. Until the Spirit be powered upon us from on high
and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted
for a forest. And the meaning of the word [for ever] here does give an answer
also to the text Amos. 5. verse 2. The virgin of Israel is fallen, she shall no
more rise. For doubtless the negative adverbe [no more] does imply in that
place the like quantity of time, as the affirmative adverbe [for ever] does in
this, that is, a long, but not an infinite time, as the ensuing limitation of
it, Until the Spirit be powered upon us from on high, does infallibly declare.
And thus it is evident that both the prophecy of Ezekiel. chap. 16. verse 53. etc.
and the prophecy of Amos chap. 5. verse 2. do show only (what our Saviors
prophecy does, Luke 21. verse 24.) that Jerusalem should lie desolate a long
time, but not always; that is, until the conversion of the Jews by an
extraordinary effusion of God's Spirit upon them, and no longer; as Joel also
foreshews. chap. 2. verse. ^8. etc. and consequently, that which you deem an
invincible fort, is fallen of it self; and by its fall does declare, that
Jerome's expounding of the houses mentioned Isa. 65. verse 21. of virtues, is a
very vicious exposition. For as the Pharisees made the commandment of God of
none effect, by their tradition, Mat. 15. verse 6. so do you make the word of
God to be nothing, by such faithless interpretations; I say, faithless,
because they teach men to destroy the very object of faith (the plain history
of God's word) by turning it into a mere poetical fiction: and consequently
it is the ready way, to make men have less faith then the Devils have: to
bring them to that pass, that they shall be willingly ignorant, that, by the
word of God the Heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water,
and in the water, whereby the world that then was, being over-flowed with water,
parished: and that by the same word they are kept in store, reserved unto fire
against the Day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men: as St. Pet. says, 2
Epist. chap. 3. verse 5, 6, 7. it is the ready way, I say, to make men
willingly ignorant of all this; and then what can follow, but that they scoff
at the expectation of Christ's coming, saying, where is the promise of his
coming? for since the Fathers f^ll asleep, all things continue as they were,
from the beginning of the creation, verse 4. Whereas you say then, [that because
we cannot conceive of Heaven in such a manner as it is, God does insinuate it
into our affections, by similitudes of things, pleasant unto us.] Certainly it
is easy to understand, when God speaks of a thing by way of comparison, and
when he speaks of it as it is. And though the joys which God has prepared for
the Saints are unutterable; yet the place, the eternal habitation, which he
has prepared for them, is not inapprehensible. For doublesse it is that new
That this city cannot be taken mystically for the Church now on earth, it is
evident; seeing that new earth, (the ceation whereof, the descending of this
city unto it (as to the place after alleged) is immediately to ensue, if not
to contemporate with, is not yet in being as S. Peter in his 2. Epist. 3 ch^
and 13.8. does plainly declare.
Jerusalem described Revel. chap. 21. and 22. which must descend to the new
earth, after the last judgment, the judgment of the dead at the last
resurrection. For seeing the glorified bodies of the Saints shall still be
flesh and bones (as our Savior says Luke 24.39.) though neither sinful nor
corruptible, what place should such material creatures inhabit but a material
place? and if they shall inhabit a material place, what more glorious City can
we fancy to our selves, then the foresaid City is? whose foundations, walls and
gates are all precious stones, whose street is pure gold like clear glass,
whose gates are kept by Angels, and in which the Throne of God and of the Lamb
is, whence the river of water of life prooceeds, on the sides whereof the tree
of life grows. And what should move us to take this tree (and consequently any
of the other materials) in an allegorical sense here, rather then Genesis 2. verse
9, and chap. 3. verse 22. Or how can we think that God would so exactly and
fully reveal the materials, platform, and contents of this City, if there
were no such thing? what? shall we say, that God is not where he says he is?
or that these things are not such as he says they are? doubtless to do
either were an abominable presumption. And consequently the proper exposition
of such plain prophecies, is the only intended sense of the Holy Ghost; and
you do as ridiculously, as dangerously affirm, that our Savior's words Mat.
7. verse 24. and St. Paul's 2 Cor. 5. verse 1. are meant of virtues. For
according to this exposition, our Savior should have said, I will liken him to
a wise man, that builds his virtues are 4 rock; whereas indeed he compares the
lively and active faith of an obedient hearer to a house built on a strong
foundation, and not to virtues. And St. Paul should have said, we have virtues
of God, virtues not made, with hands, eternal in the Heavens; Whereas he
speaks of the immortal and glorified bodies which the Saints shall receive of
God at their resurrection, and not of virtues. Yea you might have said as well,
that the ten^a commandment, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house; is thus
to be understood, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors virtues. And that where we
read of our Savior, Luke 14. verse 1. That he went into the house of one of
the chief Pharisees, it is to be understood, that he went into the virtues of
one of the chief Pharisees. And if this be not to make the word of God a ball
of wax, a thing capable of any shape and impression, what is?

Preface. Eighthly, I know some Millenaries will take it hardly, that they are
called the offspring of Cerinthus, seeing they disser from him in sundry
particulars; and some say, it is no matter, who has said it before, whether
Cerinthus or Swenkfold, if it be true. I answer searcely any heretic did ever
renew an old heresy in all the particulars: and nevertheless it is truly
called the same heresy: and we call them so, no more then they be such: and
when any opinion has no other father, nor abettours, but heretics, it is
odious.

Answer. We were altogether unwothy to bear the name of him in whom we do
believe: and to participate of the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, if
having so sure a foundation of our faith, as the plain word of God is, we
should be any why dismayed at the Names of Heretics and heresy. Or a^ any
other opprobrious terms, that can be used against us. It is enough for the
Disciple, that he be as his Master, and the servant as his Lord; if they have
called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of
his household? says our Savior, Mat. 10. verse 25. Evil language, and evil
entreating are the Legacy of Christ's servants in this life, and whosoever shall
either for fear or shame refuse to confess Christ and his words before men,
of him will Christ be ashamed, and him will he deny, when he comes in his own
glory, and in his Fathers, and of the holy Angels. It is not then the calling
of us [the offspring of Cerinthus] or any other usage (as we tru^^) that shall
make us to neglect so great salvation, as at the first began to be preached by
the Lord, and has been confirmed unto us by them that heard him. But this
reproachful language does rather cause us to admite at your excessive and
inexcusable boldness, who not withstanding so many clear prophecies, and
infalible arguments, as we have alleged for the confirmation of this truth,
can yet give out, [that it has no other father, nor (...) bettours, but
heretics.] Surely we have intimated before, and we do often maintain in our
reply, that God has both by his prophets, his Son, and his Apostles revealed
and taught this truth unto us; and therefore Cerinthus was no more the Father of
this opinion, then he was the Author of the Revelation, which some also have
affirmed, because it does plainly reveal the thousand years reign of
Christ, which Cerinthus held. Neither were the abettours of this opinion all
heretics. For as our Savior and the Apostles taught it, so the primitive
Christians believed it, and after them some of the Fathers, and since many
worthy Divines, who were I dare say, as free from faction, and private fancies
as any in the ages wherein they lived: and doubtless as able also to judge of
the true meaning of the Scriptures.

Preface. Ninthly, By this historical narration, Beloved in the Lord, you may
see that this doctrine is no new light, revealed in this last age (as you have
heard some teach) but an old Jewish fancy and Cerinthian fable: old errors are
like old whores, that is, the more to be abhorred. What I have done here is for
your good: for 1. you have heard this error preached instead of the Doctrine of
Christ, (albeit it was first preached by the enemies of Christ) by some of the
Authors of the Apologetical-narration for Independency, who had in their
Congregation not only Millenaries, but gross Anabaptists: and so their
practice manifestly declares, what they writ obscurely in that Narration page
12. saying, we took measure of no man's holiness by his opinion, whether
adverse unto us etc. Their Dinah is liberty of conscience: their grand
ammunition is Anarchie or no discipline, and they call it a bondage to be tied
in the faith. 2. The book of M. Maton called Isreal's Redemption, has been often
put into your hands, and upon several occasions of my declaring the truth in
this point, you have been entreated to put that book into my hand; wherefore
you have need of an Autidote. Peruse this plain refutation of it: whereby I
hope, you shall see, that the reward of your serving Christ is not meat that
perishes, but everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you,
Joh. 6.27. and that the Kingdom of God comes not with observation [or worldly
respect and attendance] but behold! the Kingdom of God is within you, Luke
17.20. And as the wicked cannot have hope of long immunity from just punishment
of their bodies and souls in Hell, so our deliverance from the bondage of
corrupion, into the glorious liberty of the children of God, shall not be long
delayed. Walk you therefore in holiness with sincerity and cheerfulness, as
it becomes the heirs of so great salvation, and give all diligence to make
your calling and election sure: for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you
abundantly, not into an earthly Monarchy, but the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Answer. Beloved in the Lord, you are told here by Mr. Petry [that this
historical Narration of the original of the Millenarian Tenet, and his
refutation of my book, are for your good.] And had it been so indeed, I had
not now answered the one or replied unto the other; yea I had rather laid my
hand upon my mouth; or empoly'd it about the public retractation of mine own
opinion. But I find not in either, ought of that sincere and upright dealing,
as is pretended in these words. That which I sinde is this, that Mr. Petrie, is
too much of the mind of the Lawyers in the Gospel, of whom our Savior said,
Luke 11. verse 52. that they had taken away the key of knowledge, that they
entered not in themselves, and them that were entering in, they hindered. And,
that as the Pharisees best project to discountenance our Saviors miracles, was
to say, that he did cast out Devils through Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils:
and their most prevalent motive to disgrace his doctrine, was to say, that he
was a glutton, and a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners: So Mr.
Petrie's chiefest slight to disparage the truth we hold, is to say, [that it
has no other Father, nor abettours, but heretics: that it is preached by such
as have in their Congregation, gross Anabaptists, and are friends to
whatsoever Novellers. And that it teaches the voluptuous and carnal living of
the raised Saints, and their dying again after they are raised.] And
doubtless, beloved, if you should be as ready to receive these tares into your
hearts, as Mr. Petrie is to sow them there; your ears would be stussed with
prejudice, and your hearts choakt up with indignation against us: but as we
wish better things unto you, so we hope better things of you, even such things
as accompany salvation. We hope, I say, that you are as wise as the Bereans, of
whom the Apostle says, that they were noble, in that they received the word
with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those
things were so. And if you examine our words by this rule, by which the Bereans
examined St. Paul's (and were so highly commended by him for it) we doubt not
but you will with one consent affirm, That in the point in Question, we, and
not our adversaries, do say as God says. And that we make not the meat that
perishes, but everlasting life, the reward of the glorified Saints, although
we truly affirm, that these Saints may, and shall eat and drink after their
resurrection. As it is said, Mat. 26. verse 29. and Luke 22. verse 16.18. And
that you will affirm too, that we truly hold, that the Kingdom of God is not
yet come, although our Savior Luke 17. verse 20. answered the Pharisees, who
demanded, when the Kingdom of God should come, that the Kingdom of God was
within, or amongst them. For that which our Savior there called the Kingdom of
God, is not meant of the Kingdom it self (of which the Pharisees inquired) but
of the outward means by which that Kingdom is obtained. As it is Mat. 21.
verse 43. and thus also Romans 14. verse 17. righteousness and peace and joy in
the Holy Ghost, are called the Kingdom of God, because these things do entitle
men to that Kingdom, and manifest unto others, that they do belong unto it:
neither of which the observing, or not observing of difference in meats and
drinks can do. And in the 1 Cor. 4. verse 20. it is said, The Kingdom of God,
is not in word, but in power, that is, our interest in the Kingdom of God, is
neither obtained, nor attested by our disccursing, preaching, and professing of
the truth only, but by our careful and conscionable performance of those
things which we are commanded. And therefore, beloved, that you may not
mistake the means and evidences of God's Kingdom, for the Kingdom it self;
but may by the enjoyment and effectual use of these, be assured in your selves,
and make known unto others, that you are heirs of that; that you have an
inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God; we beseech the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that the word of Christ may dwell in you richly in all
wisdom; and that our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which
has loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through
grace, may comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word, and work.

AN answer to M. Petries Rules for interpreting of the Scripture, inserted page
8.9.10.11. after his answer to the prophecy of Amos chapter 9. ver. 11.
Be which partly because they were devised of purpose to enthrall the readers
judgment, that he might not perceive the true meaning of the scriptures; as
the preface was to persuade him that the scripture is not the ground of the
Millenarian Tenet; and partly because I would not disjoyne my replies by such a
large digression, I thought fit, beloved, to present unto thee in this place.
His introduction to them is this.

Mr Petris. And here for understanding this, and such ober prophecies, I add
these undoubted rules.

Answer.

Undoubted rules must be grounded on undoubted authority, but these for the
most have none either from Heaven, or of men.

The first rule. The land of Canaan was a type of the Kingdom of Christ: and so
was Jerusalem and Sion: and because these were types of this Kingdom, so
glorious things were spoken of them, Psalm 46.4.5. and 48.1, 2. and 87.1, 2 3.5.
which texts are more safely understood of Christ 6 Kingdom, then of that
earthly Jerusalem and Sion: yea very hardly can they be understood of them.

Answer. You have brought no text to show [that the land of Canaan was a type
of Christ's Kingdom:] but we bring many to show that it shall be the proper
inheritance of Christ, and the Saints, in the time of his Kingdom. And the
glorious things which are spoken of Jerusalem or Sion in the 46.48. and 87.
Psalms, and in many other places of the scripture, are spoken of it, because
it was to be the City of the great King, as is foretold Psalm. 48. v. 2. that is
of Christ in the time of his personal reign over the whole earth; and
therefore these words, [which texts are more safely understood of Christ's
Kingdom, then of that earthly Jerusalem and Sion, yea very hardly can they be
understood of them] are as falsely as faintly spoken by you; for is it not said
in the foresaid verse, Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is
mount Sion? and Psalm. 87. v. 2. The Lord loves the gates of Sion more then all
the dwellings of Jacob etc? how then could you say, that these, [ can very
hardly be understood of the material Jerusalem on earth?] Certainly (as they
speak of no other Jerusalem, so) they are to be understood of no other place,
or thing, but that. And being prophecies, they are not to be understood of it,
as it was then in the time of David's reign; but as it should be in the time of
Christ's reign.

The Second rule. As the Priests were types of Christ in respect of his
Priestly-office, so were the Kings of his Kingly office: and therefore as the
Kings were anointed, so Christ is called David, Ezekiel. 34.23. ( which is exponed
Ioh. 10.11.) and typified by Solomon, Psalm. 45. And he is said to s^^ on the
Throne of David, and not of Nebuchadnezzar or any other, because their kingdoms
were cursed kingdoms, and were not established on righteousness and knowledge
of the true God, as David's Throne was: and for this cause when he is said to
sit on the Throne of David, it is not to be understood that he had or shall
have the same earthly Throne of David, but that which was typified: so Mat. 2.
he is called a Nazarite, not that he did use their rites and customs, (for he
drank wine and they did not) but because he was typified by the Nazarite
Samson: for he slew more by his death, then by his life, and was severed from
all sin and pollution.

Answer. The anointing of Kings, Priests, and Prophets, was a type of Christ's
anointing, and not of his being called David. Which name was given him by God,
because he was to be borne of the seed of David, to whom he was promised. And
it is because he is the Son of David (and not of Nebuchadnezzar, or any other
heathen Prince) that he is to sit on David's Throne. And that by his sitting on
David's Throne, is meant, his government of that people which David governed,
it is evident: for what need was there, that God should bind him self with an
oath to David ( Acts 2 verse 30.) that he would set Christ upon David's Throne,
if he meant only, that he would set him upon his own Throne? Or why may we
not say also, that where it is foretold, that Christ should be the Son of
David, it is meant only, that he should be the Son of God; as well as say,
that where it is foretold, that he should sit on David's Throne, it is meant
only, that he should sit on God's Throne? And it is as strange a mistake, as
any of the rest, to quote the 2. chap. of Mat. to prove, that Christ was called
a Nazarite, because he was typified by the Nazorite Samson; for the text says
plainly, that it was because he dwelt with his Father Joseph in the city of
Nazareth. And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, that it might be
fulfilled, which was spoken by the Prophets, He shall be called a Nazarite, verse
23. And lastly, that Christ saved many both in his life and death, the Gospel
cloth abundantly declare, but that he slew many, is a tradition, I dare say,
never till now heard of amongst Christians. And of such rules as this you might
have set down as many as there are several types in the Scripture.

The third rule. It is usual in the Scriptures, to name the type, and
understand the thing signified by the type. And therefore as it is said Heb.
6.2. Christ is the Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, that
is, of that which truly was signified by the Tabernacle: so he may be said the
true David, and his Throne the true Throne of David, and his Kingdom the true
Jerusalem, and the true Sion.

Answer. We acknowledge that in the Scriptures, the sign is sometimes taken
for the thing signified; and the thing signified some times for the sign. But
yet we know too, that such figurative expressions are easily discerned from
those which are plainly and properly delivered. And therefore we cannot
acknowledge, that the Throne of David and Jerusalem or Sion, are figuratively
to be understood, of the Throne of God, and of Heaven, or of the Church, seeing
the Spirit of God does no where intimate unto us, such a sense of them, but
always the contrary.

The fourth rule. As Christ is said to be the Lamb of God slain from the
beginning of the world, Rev. 13.8. not only in the decree of God, but by virtue
and efficacy, seeing by virtue of his blood (at that time to be shed) were Adam
and Abel reconeiled unto God, and delivered from the power of Satan: So
Christ's Kingdom began then: for in Christ, Adam, Abel, and we are one body and
members of the same Kingdom, howbeit in extent and largeness it did most
flourish and appear since the Incarnation, in which respect it is said to
begin at or after his incarnation.

Answer.

It is true that the Gospel of Christ (which he calls the Kingdom of God, Mat.
21. verse 43.) began in Adam, to whom it was first preached, and by whom it was
first embraced; but it is not true, that it did flourish more at Christ's
incarnation, then it did when all the Tribes were in the land together, and
undivided, as in the times of Samuel, David, and Solomon. Nor that it did begin
again, when after Christ's ascension it was spread amongst the Gentiles: for
that was only a translating of it from the Jews to the Gentiles, as our
Savior witnesses Mat. 21. verse 43. The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you,
and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. And therefore this is
your bare affirmation, not only besides, but against the express word of God.

The fifth rule. The promise made to Abraham Genesis 13.16. I will make thy seed
as the dust of the earth: and chap. 15.5. look toward Heaven, and tell the
number of the stars, if thou be able to number them, and so shall thy seed
be. These promises (I say) are not to be understood of the children of Abraham,
according to the flesh, but as they are exponed Romans 4.15. not of that only
which is of the Law, but of them who are of the faith of Abraham, which is the
Father of us all, as it is written, I have made thee a Father of many Nations.
And Gal. 3.28. There is neither Jew nor Greele, neither bond nor free, neither
male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus: and if ye be Christ's,
then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise. And therefore
the promises made unto the children of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, are not to be
restricted unto the Jews according to the flesh ( a^ the Jews and Millenaries
expone all these promises) but of the faithful. And hither belongs that
distinction of the Jews, Romans 2.28. He is not a Jew, who is one outwardly,
neither is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew,
who is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit. And
of such inwardly Jews must the promises be understood (at least in part) that
make mention of Judah. And therefore it is a great mistaking of the prophesies,
if we shall still make an opposition twixt Jews and Gentiles: believing
Gentiles are true Jews (as we see they are called in the new Testament) and
unbeleeving Jews are Gentiles, and so are called Isa. 1.4. and elsewhere.

Answer. That the faithful in general are Abraham's seed we deny not: neither
do we affirm, that any can be partakers of the promise made unto Abraham, but
the faithful; nor that there is now any difference betwixt the believing Jew
and Greek. But yet we cannot grant that therefore there shall be no difference
betwixt the Nation of the Jews, and all other Nations, after Christ's next
appearing. Nor that the prophesies which concern the Jews righteous and
flourishing estate at that time, are to be understood of the Church of the
Gentiles now. Nor that by Isaac's and Jacob's children, any besides the Jews
are meant. And we do not herein make the unbeleeving Jews heirs of the
promises, but the believing only: seeing as all the believing Jews and
Gentiles that are departed, or shall depart before Christ's coming, shall be
brought with him, to inherit the promise made unto Abraham, so all the Tribes
shall be converted against that time: and be then acknowledged by all that see
them, to be the seed which the Lord has blessed, as it is Isa. 61. verse 9.
And consequently the distinction of the Jews, Romans 10. verse 28 (which shows
the estate of the Jews in St. Paul's time) is nothing to the pupose. Neither
is it indeed rightly applied by you to the believing Gentiles. For it does no
more prove a believing Gentile, to be a Jew; then that which you alledg, Isa.
1. verse 4. does prove an unbeleeving Jew to be a Gentile; which is only an
exclamation against the Jews for their great wickedness. The meaning then, of
the text Romans 2 verse 28. is only this, that that Jew was not a Jew beloved of
God, which was one outwardly only, by the circumcision, which is in the flesh:
but that Jew was a Jew beloved of God, which was o^^ inwardly, by the
circumcision of the heart, in the spirit. Wherefore Piscator observes in this
verse, an elegant [antanaclasis] or using of the same word in a seeming
contradictory sense, as if the Apostle had said, thou art a Jew, and not a Jew;
thou art a Jew before men, but not before God, as he expresses himself in the
close of the next verse.

The sixth rule. All the prophesies cannot be understood of the Church on earth
only, neither of the Church in Heaven only, but of both together; or partly
of the one, and partly of the other, and partly of both: and so prudence must
be had in the application of the promises. Yea and there is a gradual
performance of them, and the accomplishment of them is in several points of
time, so much as shall give content to God's children, yet always leading to a
further and further performance. As for example, God showed mercy to these
Israelites when they were in captivity: he brought them home again: they were
a poor and afflicted people, and were much bettered by their bondage: there
was a degree of performance. There was another degree in Christ's time, when he
joined the Gentiles to them, and both made one Church. But when it is said, The
remnant shall do none iniquity, and a deceitful tongue shall not be found in
their mouth, Zeph. 3.13. these promises shall have their time, when the people
shall be more thoroughly purged: and certainly the full accomplishment shall be at
the day of judgment, and so long as we are in this life, we are under an
imperfect and unperformed estate.

Answer. All the prophesies you say, cannot be understood of the Church on
earth only, neither of the Church in Heaven only. True, but yet those
prophesies which foreshew the Saints happiness on earth, are to be
accomplished on earth only; and those which foreshew their happiness in
Heaven, are to be accomplished in Heaven only. And there is no prophecy which
speaks of the happiness, which the Saints shall enjoy on earth, that is to be
understood of their happiness in Heaven too, as you chiefly understand the
prophesies, touching the Jews future restoration. Neither were those
prophesies touching the Jews to have a graduall accomplishment. For as it is
false, that the Israelites, the captivity of the ten Tribes did ever yet
return home (as the prophecy in your Preface out of Ezekiel. 16. does show:) so
it is false also, that the prophecy touching the Jews deliverance, Zeph. 3. v.
8. has bin yet accomplished, but it shall be accomplished when at their future
return, the Nations of the Gentiles shall be assembled against them to their own
confusion (as it is foreshewed also Rev. 16. and in many other prophesies.) And
as the 8. verse does show their temporal deliverance from their outward and
bodily enemies at that time; so the 13. verse shows their spiritual
deliverance from their sinful pollutions, and ghostly enemies; and their
outward safety too, which shall follow their temporal and spiritual
deliverance, for they shall feed, and lie down, and none shall make them
afraid. And that all this is to be accomplished at the same time, the comparing
of the 11. verse with the 8. verse does confirm; for whereas it is said, verse
8. Wait upon me, until the day that I rise up to the prey etc. it is said
likewise, verse 11. In that Day shall thou be ashamed, for all thy doings,
wherein thou have transgressed against me, etc. In that Day? in what day, if
not in the day before spoken of, verse 8? which day indeed is called in
Scripture, the Day of judgment, but yet it is not of so short continuance, as
you take it to be: for it contains the 1000 years and little season,
mentioned Rev. 20. all which time is to follow our Sav^ours appearing, and to
foregoe the last act of his reign the judgment of the dead a^ the last
resurrection. And consequently the accomplishment of the contents in the 13.
verse cannot be at the Day of judgment in your sense (that is, at the
judgment of the dead at the last resurrection) as the close of the same verse,
and the preceding and subsequent verses do declare: although it shall be at the
Day of judgment in the Scripture sense (that is, in the time of Christ's 1000.
years reign on earth.)

The seventh rule. Here that general rule is also remembered, when the words
of Scripture being properly taken, teach any thing contrary to the analogy of
faith, or honesty of manners, or any thing frivolous that belongs nothing to
godliness, or dissonant from the scope of the text, or contrary unto other
clear texts of the same: these words must be exponed figuratively, and a
figurative sense is the literal or primarily intended sense of these words. And
contrarily unto this rule the Jews and others expone the descriptions and
prophesies of the glory and power of Christ and his Church after an earthly
manner, and so straying from the true meaning, they transform his spiritual
Kingdom into an earthly and temporary: which as it is ungodly, so it is
repugnant unto Scripture, testifying plainly, that his Church is all glorious
within, and not of this world: and therefore these comparisons that are taken
from earthly Kingdoms must be understood figuratively, and in a spiritual
sense, at least it must be diligently observed, what portion of every passage
it to be understood properly, and what figuratively, seeing many times, that
which is spoken figuratively, is exponed by the words preceding or following,
and all figurative speeches have some tokens of the use, unto which they are
directed, or another text may be found, where the same matter is more clearly
handled. These general rules being premitted, it shall be easier to expone all
the promises of Christ's Kingdom, and especially that text Amos 9.15. They
shall no more be pulled up out of their land, which I have given them, says
the Lord thy God. For these words may be cleared by the words, Jer. 4.1. If
thou will put away thy abominations out of my sight, then thou shall not
remove. Where we have the same promise, but expressed with a condition: and it
is usual in the Scriptures that earthly promises are expressed sometimes with a
condition, and sometimes without it, but always are understood conditionally.
2. By the acceptions of the word [land] which as it is not always exponed of
the earth, so sometimes it is put for the grave, as Job 10. verse 21. The land
of darkness, and shadow of death. And for Heaven, Psa. 27.13. I had fainted,
unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living. And especially that land was a type of the Kingdom of Christ (as it is
said in the first rule,) and of the true inheritance of the Saints, and true
gift of God. Deuteronomy. 4.1.38. And so whether the word [land] be taken properly or
typically, the promise is manifestly true both before and after the coming of
Christ to suffer, for they were brought again into their land, and they who
were brought, were not pulled out of their land, and they are planted in their
true land, whence they shall no more be pulled ou^^ and hereby the large note
on the margin of Page 9. is frustrated.

Answer. Let this rule then (which is a compound of several rules laid down by
others for the right interpreting of the Scriptures) decide the matter in
controversy betwixt us. And do not say, but show, that the proper exposition
of the prophesies, which concern our Saviors and the Saints visible reign on
earth: the conversion, deliverance, and establishment of the Jews in their
own land: the destruction of their opposers, and subjection of all other
Nations unto them: in a word, which reveal unto us the chiefest events and
alterations, that shall come to pass over the whole world, til the world it
self shall pass away; does teach things contrary to the analogy of faith to
honesty of manners to other clear texts: things frivolous, and not belonging
to godliness. For surely if our proper exposition of these predictions does
teach ought of all this we may well be accounted for publishers of a new
Gospel; but if it does teach naught of this you your self are worthy to be
accounted but a partial preacher of the Gospel; a preacher but of a part of the
Counsel of God: tell us therefore what article of faith, or plain text of
Scripture, or moral duty, is destroyed or oppugned, by the belief of our
Sav^ours coming with the Saints to reign on earth: or of the Jews conversion
and return: or of the calling of all Nations to the faith of Christ, and the
knowledge of God. And tell us too, whether the knowledge of these things be a
frivolous and unnecessary knowledge, or a knowledge not belonging unto
godliness. Certainly we cannot conceive how the personal reign of Christ on
earth, should any way abridge or weaken his spiritual power, or abbreviate his
Kingdom; or that his Church should be less glorious, when he comes into the
world unto it, then it has been since he departed out of the world, or can be,
as long as he is absent from it. And we know that by our proper exposition of
these prophecies, we do make a just distribution of the word of God: that we
give unto the Jew, whatsoever belongs unto the Jew; and to the Gentile,
whatsoever belongs unto the Gentile: whereas you by your proper interpretation
of the prophecies which concern the Gentiles; and your figurative exposition
of the prophecies which concern the Jews; do keep your own things to your
self and make the mercies prepared for others to be common mercies: yea to be
as much, or more yours then theirs. And as you hereby impose a figurative sense
upon the spiritual part of the promises made unto the Jews; so you impose a
double figurative sense upon the temporal part of the promises made unto them.
For first you interpret those outward and earthly promises (as you call them)
of spiritual blessings too; and being so interpreted, you understand them of
the Gentiles, as well, or rather then of the Jews. And this you make figurative
speeches where you find none; and may indeed as easily make a figurative
speech of any speech, as thus interpret these prophecies. But it is not the
figurative and metaphorical oppression of a prophecy, that does make the
prophecy to carry a figurative sense: for both temporal and spiritual promises
may be figuratively and metaphorically expressed, but yet they are not to be
figuratively understood; that is, prophecies of temporal things (however
expressed) are not to be understood of spiritual blessings: neither are
prophecies of spiritual or temporal things (whether figuratively or properly
expressed) to be understood of any besides those of whom they are plainly
prophesied. In a word, prophecies (however expressed) are to be understood, of
what they speak, where they speak of temporal things, they are to be
understood only of temporal things: and where they speak of spiritual things,
they are to be understood only of spiritual things. And of whom they speak,
where they speak plainly of Christ, they are to be understood of Christ only:
and where they sptake plainly of the Jews, they are to be understood of the
Jews only: and where they speak plainly of the Gentiles, they are to be
understood of the Gentiles only: and where they speak generally and
indifferently of both, they are to be understood of both. And in like manner,
where they speak plainly of Canaan, and Jerusalem, or Sion, they are to be
understood of them only.

Thus much for your rules, (which whosoever shall embrace, he will doubtless
be no better friend to the truth we hold, then you your self are) that which
follows is your explication of these words Amos 9. verse 15. They shall no more
be pulled up out of their land, which I have given them, says the Lord God.
Which passage you answer; First, by that text Jer. 4. verse 1. [where you say,
we have the same promise, but expressed with a condition.] How? the same
promise? certainly the promise in Jer. was made to Israel, before she went into
captivity, before that judgment was come upon her for her abominations. But
the promise in Amos is made to Israel after she should come out of captivity,
after the wrath of God against her should cease. And whereas you say further,
[that it is usual in the Scriptures, that earthly promises are expressed
sometime with a condition, and sometime without it, but are always understood
conditionally] It is to be noted, that here you confess the promise Amos 9.
verse 14, 15. to be an earthly or outward promise, and conditionally
understood; which page 8. you interpret of [spiritual houses and benefits:] as
you do also that text Isa. 65. verse 21. in your preface, and others in other
places. And yet it is not true, that all outward and earthly promises, are
conditional promises: for those which are mixed with spiritual promises (as in
Jer. 32. verse 37. etc. and in Ezekiel. 36. verse 24. etc. and in many other
prophecies) or that do contemporate with such outward and bodily promises, as
are mixed with spiritual promises, as this of Amos does; those earthly
promises, I say, cannot be conditional promises, seeing the spiritual promises
with which they contemporate, are promises of the condition it self. And
therefore the prophecy of Amos, chap. 9. verse 11. etc. is an absolute prophecy,
a prophecy hereafter to be fullfild, when the Spirit of God shall be powered on
the Jews from on high, as it is Isa. 32. verse 15. etc. And not a conditional
prophecy, a prophecy formerly canceld for want of obedience.

Secondly, you answer the foresaid text of Amos, by showing a different
acception of the word [ land, which you say, as it is not always expounded of
the earth, so sometimes it is put for the grave, and for Heaven.] But the
instances by which you would prove this, do fail you very much; for (besides
that men's graves are in the earth) it is not the word [land] of it self, but
this phrase of speech [the land of darkenesse] that is put for the grave Job,
10. verse 21. and [the land of the living] that is used Psalm. 27. verse 13.
which does not signify Heaven, as the Authors of the English annotations on
the whole Bible printed 1645. do observe, but the surface of the earth, on
which the living are: at [the land of darkenesse] does a place under the
superficies of the earth, where the bodies of the dead remain. And happily
David spoke here of the land of Canaan, in relation to the time, in which
Christ himself and all the Saints that are to come with him, should have their
abode in it: in which respect, as it may properly, so it may very fitly too be
called [the land of the living] of the living that shall die no more. But if this
phrase did signify Heaven, as you say, yet it will no more follow from these
words, [that the land of Canaan was a type of Heaven] then it will follow from
those in the 10. of Job, that it was a type of the grave. And sure we are that
Amos prophecy is to be fullfild in the land, whither the text says that the
Israelites shall return from their captivity, and where they shall build
themselves houses, and plant vineyards, from which they shall no more be
carried captives, as they have formerly been. For the meaning of there words,
that they shall no more be pulled up out of their land, is parallel with that,
Dan. 2. verse 44. that their Kingdom shall not be left to other people. And
here also it is to be noted, that this part of your answer does cross the
former part. For there you say, that this prophecy of Amos [was a conditional
prophecy,] and so not accomplished for want of obedience in the Jews; and yet
here you say, [that they were brought again into their land, and that they
were not pulled out of their land, but are planted in their true land, whence
they shall no more be pulled out:] so that here you exalt those Jews up to
Heaven, which before you did thrust down to Hell, for not fulfilling the
condition required of them, and therefore you must know your own mind better
in understanding the Scripture, and speak more significantly, and truly, then
you do in this inference, before you can frustrate the marginal note in the 9.
page of my book.

To my book accused.
Welcome my book, more welcome unto me
With stripes and wounds, then to have escaped free.
It Is all I looked for when I sent thee forth,
That most would deem thee vile, and of no worth.
For it is the lot of truth (as it is of those
That godly live) to have the most her foes.
And sure where wrested Scripture does withhold
The beams of truth, and give us dross for gold:
There naught a truth more doubtful can conclude,
Then does the favor of the multitude:
Which had thou purchased, I should then have feared,
I had obscured, what now I hope I 've cloar'd,
And shall, by God's assistance, still make good,
Against all bawlings of the carping brood.
ISREAL'S REDEMPTION REDEEMED.
The first part.
Jsraels Redemption. THat Christ is already Mat. 1. v. 20.21. Luk 2.11. Ioh.
1.29.30. etc.
come; that as a Prophet he has Man. 4.17. Luke 4.15. etc.
called us to repentance, and a^ a Priest has been a 1 Ioh. 2. Heb. 2.17. Romans
3.25.
propitiation for our sins (and not for ours only, but also for the sins
of the whole world) having by Heb. 9.28. chapter 10.14. Mar. 8.31. Ioh. 10.15. Rev.
5.9.
once offering himself, perfected for ever them that are sanctified, is the
faith of Christians, and the infidelity of the Jews: But that he shall come as
a King to reign on earth, and restore again the Monarchy of Israel, is the
faith of the Jews and the infidelity of Christians. And I think it a matter
equally difficult to persuade either part to the mutual embracement of each
others belief.

Mr Petries answer. What new spirit is this? Whether be such persons Jews or
Christians? they oppose themselves unto all Jews and Christians. 2. Whether
do they understand the difference twixt Jews and Christians? It was never yet
heard, that the Jews do believe, that Christ Jesus shall come as a King: they
said, Away with him; we will not have him to reign over us. They say, that
the Messiah shall come, but they speak not of his coming twice or thrice;
look all the Jewish Rabbis, and ask them who are alive: they will say but
once: This conceit of Christ's coming to reign on earth, is neither Christian
nor Jewish, seeing Christians believe not such a coming, nor do the Jews
believe in Christ: and therefore it is abhorred of all Christians and Jews; So
far are they b^^h from embracing it.

Reply.

Preface, and there you tell us, that this spirit, was abroad in the world in
the Apostles days (which had indeed been otherwise but a lying spirit) and that
it continued in the Church near about 300. years after Christ. Yea you say
plainly [by this historical ^a^ation^ belo^ed in the Lord, you may see, that
this doctrine is no new light, revealed in this last age.] The more strange it
is therefore in the very entrance of the controversy, to hear you cry out so
boldly, against your own confession, What new Spirit is this? certainly that
cannot be new, which was both taught and believed on so long ago. Neither can
we easily think it to be false, seeing it was the faith not only (...) of all
that were then accounted right believing Christians (...) of the Dialogue
between Tripho the Jew, and Justine Ma^tyr the Christian, commented on by Mr.
Mede, does aver. Which being set forth together with his commentaries on ^he
Ap^caly^^, you were not doubtless ignorant of it. And yea you demand again
[whether be such persons Jews or Christians?] to which you subjoyne, [They
oppose themselves unto all Jews and Christians:] as if you would have your
reader therefore conceive them to be nor Jews, nor Christians, because they
oppose both in some few particulars. But your argument is too weak, for who
knows not, that Christians are opposed by Christians, and Jews by Jews; and
that as a Jew may oppose both Jews and Christians, and yet not cease to be a
Jew; so likewise a Christian may oppose both Jews and Christians, and yet be
still a Christian? True then it is, that we oppose all that are Jews by
profession, in confessing with all other Christians, that Christ is come in the
flesh; and hereby sure we show ourselves Christians. And true likewise it is,
that we oppose all other Christians, in confessing with these Jews, that
Christ shall come as a King to reign on earth: and yet we do not hereby show
our selves Jews, but the truer Christians: because according to plain and
express Scripture, we acknowledge and embrace for truth in both, what both do
unjustly condemn and reject as a manifest error in each other. And should we
do otherwise, we should obey men rather then God, and whether we should do
well in that, judge you.

Synagogue of the Jews, I mean having endeavored to bring us into contempt
with both, in telling them, that we oppose them both* Your next Querie is,
[Whether do they understand the differences twixt Jews and Christians?] No
doubt Sir but all of them have understanding as well as you, and that some of
them are not inferior unto you, how mean soever you esteem them; but yet
there is no need that we rehearse here any more differences, then that which
you have already heard; and do now labor all you can to make the reader
believe, to be none at all. For [ it was never yet heard, you say, that the
Jews do believe, that Christ Jesus shall come as a King.] And have you heard
so from us? we say indeed, that the Jews believe, that Christ shall come as a
King (which no writer either Jewish or Christian has hitherto denied) but we
say not that they believe, that Christ Jesus shall come as a King. For then
they should believe Jesus to be the Christ as well as we, which as yet they do
not, and by this we may see, that if you had not quite altered our meaning by
adding the word [Jesus] (and so confounded and obscured, what we have clearly
and distinctly delivered) you could have said nothing to what we say. For you
would have been ashamed I suppose, to have uttered your assertion thus, [It was
never yet heard, that the Jews do believe, that Christ shall come as a King]
which yet is all that we affirm, But having thus made your self work, you
go on and tell us [They said, Away with him, we will not have him to reign
over us] True, but this shows only, that the Jews then denied Jesus to be the
Christ; and that the Jews now continuing in the same blindness, are guilty of
the same transgression; but it shows not, that either the ancient Jews did
not, or that the modern do not believe that Christ shall come as a King. You
go on [They say that the Messiah shall come, but they speak not of his
coming twice or thrice; look all the Jewish Rabbis, and ask them who are
alive: they will say, but once.] Let them that deny it take this pains; but
what though they say, the Messiah is to come but once? what will follow from
hence? surely this will follow, that as long as they continue to believe so,
they cannot believe that Jesus shall come as a King, because they know that he
is already come. But it will not follow from hence, that they do not now
believe that their Messiah shall come as a King. And thus notwithstanding your
Magisteriall Querie, your foisted assertion, and ought else that you have said,
it is very evident, that the conceit of Christ's coming to reign, is both
Christian and Jewish: Christian, because Christians believe it, (as plainly
revealed in Gods word) although you account it no part of a Christians belief;
and Jewish, because the Jews believe, that Christ shall so come, although they
believe not, that he is already come. And therefore it is neither abhorred of
all Christians, nor of any Jews, so far are they both from rejecting it. Yea
so well do they agree in the truth of this particular, That Christ shall come
as a King: although, as yet they disagree about his person: and consequently in
all that the Gospel reveals to be already done by him.

Israel's Redemption. 2. And yet (wltih submission to impartial judgments be
it spoken) I find not in the Scriptures more voices for the one, then for the
other: and therefore do verily believe that neither Tenet apart, but both
together do make up the full and Romans 8.23. chapter 11. v. 12.15. Ephesians. 1. v. 14.
ch 4. v. 30. Rev. 10. v. 7.
complete mystery of our Redemption: which by Gods gracious assistance, I shall
to his own glory and our christian comfort, clearly prove in the examination
of the words now read unto you.

Mr Petrie's Answer. 1. Who are these impartial judgments? on the one side
are Christians, and on the other are Jews: it may be he submitts unto Turks;
but the Turks believe that Christ is come, and will not say that he will come
again. These impartial judg^^ents then must be Heathens. 2. If the
Millenaries find not more voices for the one, then for the other, it is no
marv^l: any who has the jaundies finds every thing yellow. And who have an
ague, find every meat and drink bitter; not that every thing is such, but
their senses are distempered: another who has not distempered senses, finds in
the same thing a diversity of color and relish. 3. Why doubt they here whether
there be more voices for the one then for the other, seeing afterward it is
said, p. 50. as all the Prophets speak of nothing more, so they have nothing,
which can be applied to our Saviors second coming as a comfortable effect (so
generally foresh^^n^) but this?

Reply.

1. If the heathens be a more in partial judgment then Jews or Christians
are, the greater is our shame, the more their commendation. But as I have not
hitherto, so I trust I never shall show such irreverence and uncharitablnesse
toward the Church of God, as to think, much less to say, that there are no
impartial men in it. And therefore I need not go out of the Church to seek
for such to submit to. But although there are many impartial judgments amongst
Christians: yet it behooves the reader to take notice here, that you confess
you are none of the society, and therefore to be the more suspicious of the
sincerity of your dealing, a taste where of we had in your former answer. And
it is observeable too, that you make a difference betwixt Turks and heathens,
as if Turks were not heathens.

2. That all rigid Antimillenaries find not many voices for that we plead for,
nor indeed any at all, we need not marvel; for you have told us, they have no
impartial judgments. And therefore I might return your comparisons on your
selves; but I leave them to the judicious ^^ader, to bestow them, where he sees
most cause

3. Surely these words [I find not more voices for the one then for the other]
have no doubtful sound. Neither have they relation only to a part, but to the
whole word of God. Not to one Testament only, but to both. And therefore the
Prophets being not the adequate subject of this search, you have vainly
transferred hither, what elsewhere I have spoken as from the Prophets only. Yea
and very impertinently too, for the prophecies spoken of there do concern the
restoring of the Jewe^ only, but the voices spoken of here are such as do
concern the coming of Christ only. And that first in the form of a servant,
to teach and suffer on earth; and next in Kingly glory, to reign and rule on
earth. And grant there should be more Scriptures to show one of these commings
then the other; yet seeing there is plain Scripture for them both, we have
good reason to believe both.

Israel's Redemption. For -- they asked of him, saying, Lord will thou at this
time restore again the Kingdom to Israel?

Mr. Petrie's Answer Any who is not distempered in his brains may see the
ground of this Monarchy very unsure, to wit a mere Querie, Acts 1.6. The
disciples asked him, Lord will thou at this time restore the Kingdom of Israel?
a querie neither affirms nor denies: and nevertheless how great a Kingdom
is built on it? If they can find a surer ground, why will they not choose it
for their text? better they have not, and therefore they must be doing with
this.

Reply.

No good Christian will be either ashamed, or afraid to suffer for the truth's
sake. And therefore we had much rather be defamed, reviled, and (if God has so
appointed it) worse handled by you, or any others, then (reclamante
conscientia) against our own knowledge yield to be deluded by you; this answer
being in very deed conpounded of naught but falsehood and deceit. For first,
the ground of this Monarchy is not unsure although a Querie, it being grounded,
not on what the Apostles knew not and would have known, to wit, the time when
the Kingdom should be restored; but on what they knew, and doubted not of, to
wit, that the Kingdom should be restored. Which had they not known (or at
least not thought) they could not have asked, when it should be restored. And
had they but thought it, they would (for their better assurance) first have
asked [whether,] before they would have asked, when it should be restored.
Neither can we grant this to be [a Queries (as Rhetoricians do distinguish
them) are either simple, or figurative and affected. Simple Queries, are such
as are proposed for instruction and knowledge-sake, and are either merely
simple, when there is no more in them but what is doubted of; as, what is
truth? John 18 verse 38. or not merely simple, when there is no more in them,
then what is doubted of; as, where will thou that we prepare for thee to eat
the passover? Mat. 26. verse 17. in which querie the doubt is not touching the
subject it self whether the passover should be prepared: but touching a
circumstance belonging to the subject, touching the place where it should be
prepared: and such a querie is this of the Apostles, the subject, the restoring
of the Kingdom, is not doubted of, nor the person that should restore it, but
the circumstance of time only, when it should be restored. And these queries,
though they do not expressly and formally affirm or deny, yet they do
implicitly and vertually affirm or deny.
mere querie] until you have defined what a mere querie is, for you seem to
me by this proposition, A Querie neither affirms, nor denies, to take all
queries to be alike; if you do not, you say it only fallaciously to make the
unlearned reader think so, that by this means he might the more readily
believe all you say against us; and if you do, you are very much mistaken, as
all your rhetoricians will show you, who reckon up many sorts of Queries, among
which there is one so opposite to your words, that it more certainly and
vehemently affirms, or denies, then a bare affirmation or negation can do;
and such a one is that in St. Mat. chap. 7. verse 16. Do men gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles? which is a far more forcible denial, then St.
Lukes, Of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble bush gather they
grapes, chap. 6. verse 44. so on the contrary, Is there no balm in Gilead, is
there no Physician there? Jer. 8 verse 22. does more movingly affirm, then the
bare affirmation does. And of this sort of interrogatory asseverations and
negations the Scriptures have very many: especially God's answer to Job, and
the prophecy of Micah. And therefore until you can bring better proof to show
this ground unsure, we need not seek for another text to build so great a
Monarchy on, although we bring many other to strenghthen, beautify, and finish
the building.

Israel's Redemption. The words you see are a Querie. And such propositions
imply three things, First, a person, or persons proposing it. Secondly, a
matter or subject proposed. Thirdly, a person, or persons to whom it is
proposed. The persons here are the disciples asking the question, and our
Savior answering them; as the context declares; the matter enquired of is the
restoration of the captivated Sovereignty of the Jews, as the text it self
does inform us. These are the parts, yet because it would be impertinent in
this business, to speak any thing of the persons, but only as their joint
authority may help somewhat to justify the truth of this proposal; I shall
(omitting this division) only glance at them, in the ensuing confirmation of
the subject. Which comprehends in it these two assertions. First, That the
Kingdom of the Jews shall again be restored unto them. Secondly, That our
Savior at his coming shall restore it.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. The Querie comprehends neither of the two, because (as I
said) it affirms nothing. And the asked matter comprehends them not. Not the
first, because it is of the Kingdom of Israel, and not of the Jews: and as all
are not Israelites who are of Israel, Romans 9.6. so neither are they all
Israelites or the children of God, who are of Israel according to the flesh;
but the children of the promise are counted for the seed: therefore the Kingdom
of Israel mentioned there may he another then the Kingdom of the Jews. Neither
is the other assertion comprehended it the question, because it asks not of
his second or third coming, but of now: will thou now restore the Kingdom?

Reply.

The Querie comprehended both, because both are intimated in the Querie, and
do necessarily follow from the Querie. And you have not showed us any Querie,
that affirms nothing; nor in what sense this Querie does affirm nothing. In
the asked matter, there is the Kingdom to be restored; and from hence proceeds
the first assertion. And the person that should restore it; and from hence
proceeds the second assertion. But the first is not here comprehended you say,
[because the Querie is of the Kingdom of Israel, and not of the Jewes] as if
the Kingdom of Israel, and the Kingdom of the Jews were not to be understood
of the same people. No, say you. For [ all are not Israelites who are of
Israel, Romans 9.6.] a worthy reason: for it is as if you should say; by the
Kingdom of Israel, cannot be meant the Kingdom of the Jews, because all that
are Israelites by birth, are not elect Israelites, Israelites according to the
flesh, and according to faith also. For this only i^ the meaning of the text
cited by you Romans 9.6. and so proves not, that the Kingdom in the text belongs
to any other people, language or nation, but the Jews (of whom alone
interpreters do understand it.) And therefore you should have spoken out, and
told us plainly, what the other Kingdom you speak of was. For we know of no
more but two, besides this in Question betwixt us. And these are commonly called
the Kingdom of grace, by which is meant, the Saints or Church on earth before
Christ's appearing. And the Kingdom of glory, by which is meant the Saints or
Church in Heaven. And that neither of these Kingdoms is meant in the text, I
prove thus. Not the Kingdom of grace, for at that time the Jews themselves
alone were this Kingdom: and that could not be restored unto them, which as yet
they had not lost; and not the Kingdom of glory, for that likewise could not be
restored which as yet they had not. And none can imagine that the Apostles
Querie is thus to be paraphrased. Lord will thou at this ti^^ take all the
faithful up with thee into Heaven? And therefore seeing it could not be meant
of either of these Kingdoms; it must be meant of the Kingdom of the Jews on
earth, or of none. Which is our first assertion. And the other is comprehended
here too: For although the Querie [askes not of his second coming, but of
now;] yet seeing Christ was to restore it, and did it not while he was on
earth, it necessarily follows, that he shall do it at his descending again to
the earth. Which is our second assertion: and thus both are found in the text.
And besides, if you take the word 8 [as, all are not Israel, who are of Israel]
in the Apostles meaning, i. e. all are not faithful Israelites, that are
descended of Israel: then it is an apparent tautology to add, [so neither are
they all Israelites, or the children of God, [that are of Israel according to
the flash] and if you do not take the Apostles words in this sense; then it is
notoriously false to say, that all are not Israelites, to wit, by nation; who
are of Israel by birth. And is it not a pretty inference: All Israelites are
not Israelites, [therefore the Kingdom of Israel there may be another then the
Kingdom of the Jews? Surely you might as well have said, therefore the Pope
shall be St. Peter's successor. For this conclusion has as much dependence on
the ante^eden as the other.

Israel's Redemption. CHAP. I.
Of the restoring of Jerusalem, and the Jews return.

Jews shall again be restored unto them, For they asked of him; saying, Lord
will thou at this time restore again^ the Kingdom in Israel? So evidently do
these words express an earthly Kingdom (I mean only a Kingdom to be held on
earth) that no expositor which I have met with does deny it; and therefore
seeing they could not but embrace the sense, me thinks they should not so
rashly have rejected the consequence. And that for these reasons.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. Me thinks you speak nonsense, Man^ expositours
expone these words otherwise: seek and you shall find. Secondly, why may we
not think, that the Apostles meaned as Simeon did, Luke 2.30, 31, 32. or as
the repenting thief did, Luke 23.42. or as Christ did, verse 43. certainly
these did not mean of an earthly Monarchy: neither is there my word in this
text showing that they meaned otherwise. Thirdly, albeit no expositour would
deny, that the Apostles did understand an earthly Kingdom, yet it followse not,
They thought so, therefore it shall be so. No more then it follows, The
Apostles did not (for a time) believe the calling of the Gentiles, Act. 11.3.
therefore the Gentiles are not called. But the consequence has reasons he
says, whereof the first two are topicall and by way of probability. page 5.
When the Author says, The reasons are probable, and I may say childish: will
any Christian change his faith for them? certain faith should have sure
grounds, lest the wind of tentation blow it away: and therefore I might leave
these prohabilities, as not worthy of reading or answer: nevertheless consider
them.

Reply.

1. Me thinks you might as well have showed the nonsense, as said it was
nonsense. But [many expositours, you say, expone these words otherwise] This
shows not that I have spoken nonsense, in saying, that I have met with no
such. But I doubt it shows, that you speak an untruth, which is worse then
nonsense. For you might as easily have named some of them, as have said it,
and bid me look them out. And had there been any, I presume you would too,
seeing it is not likely, that they would have brought an exposition different
from that which was commonly received by others, and have given no reason for
it, or one no better then [a why may we not think so?] 2. If you think that
these places here quoted be diversely interpreted, (as your disjunctive
conjunction [OR] intimates, and yet say, [why may not this Kingdom be taken, as
the thief meant, or as Christ meant, or as Simeon meant?] any one may
perceive, that you are altogether unresolved what sense to take it in: but had
rather take it in any sense, then that we take it in. And if you think that
all these places have but one meaning, (as the last words of this part of your
answer imply) you should have showed us what it had been. For in our Savior's
and Simeon's words, the word [Kingdom] is not found. And the words which you
take to be equivalent with it, are diversely expounded. Paradise, in our
Savior's words, is interpreted to be Heaven. And salvation and Glory, in
Simeon's song do signify, Salutis et gloriae authorem, the author of glory,
and the author of salvation; to wit, Christ himself. So that if the Kingdom
in the Apostles Querie be expounded either of these two ways, it is all one as
if they had said, Lord will thou at this time restore Heaven to Israel? or,
Lord will thou at this time restore thy self to Israel? And as for the Kingdom
the theife spoke of, we thank you for mentioning of it. And do willingly
grant, that the Apostles understood it as he did. But how was that? surely as
all other Jews did, of a Kingdom on earth, and not in Heaven. For his words in
the original are, (...), when thou come in thy kingdom (that is, in thy
Kingly power, as it is Mat. 16. verse 27, 28.) for by those words, the theife
could not mean his ascension into Heaven (as it is commonly expounded) seeing
he was wholly ignorant of it. And therefore it must needs follow, that he
understood it of an earthly Kingdom, which all Jews expected; and (as it
seems by the Apostles Querie) all believing Jews thought should suddenly
appear after his resurrection. But because it was not to be so, therefore it
was, that our Savior promised the theife the present happiness of his soul
in Heaven: where it should remain in his presence, until at his coming in his
Kingdom (of which he had spoken) he should bring it with him, to be reunited to
his glorified body: and so, according to his request he should in his whole
manhood be made partaker of his Master's glorious reign on earth.

3 You must give us leave to think, that no expositour does deny it, until
either we can find; or you, or others show us such a one. But It follows not,
you say, the Apostles thought so, therefore it shall be so. But this follows,
therefore we must believe the Apostles, before Mr. Petrie, or any others, who
think it shall not be so. Yea and this follows, the Apostles thought so, and
our Savior (who knew their meaning) reprehended them not for misunderstanding
it; therefore it shall be so. And whereas you say, that the Apostles [for a
time] believed not the calling of the Gentiles; and refer these words [for a
time] to the time after our Saviors ascension; it is not so. For doubtless
from the very time in which our Savior said unto them, Go teach all Nations,
Mat. 28.19. they did believe it (although perhaps they might not think, that
they should have been called so soon) yea if the words of St. James, Acts 15.
verse 14. should be meant of the song of old Simeon, as you do say, page, 26.
there is no doubt but they knew it from the time they first heard of that
prophecy. Neither does the text you quote speak of the Apostles doubting of
it, but of other believing Jews. And therefore you have showed your self very
bold with the Apostles, mistook the ground of your argument, and denied what
afterward you confess. And lastly, when the Author does take the Apostles
words in that sense which interpreters do give unto them, and shows by reasons
first, and Scriptures afterward, that the Apostles did not out of any carnal
mind, or misconceit of our Saviors Kingdom, u^ter this Querie; and when that
Mr. Petrie does neither flatly affirm or deny any sense of the Apostles words;
nor give a reason worth the naming (much less reading or answering) against
any of these reasons, albeit but childish, as he says, will any reader think,
that Mr. Petrie will prove a better guide to him herein, then this Author?
doubtless no man taking a journey, will choose him for a guide, that is in
doubt which way to go; and no good Christian will be less careful in his way
to Heaven. To the Law then and to the Testimony, to the plain word of God,
this is the sure ground of thyfaith: and therefore stick to it; for if men
speak not according to this, it is because there is no truth in them, Isa.
8.20.

Israel's Redemption. First, because the Authors of this demand were not
babes, either in years or understanding, but the Apostles themselves; men who
had followed Mat. 4. v. 19.
our Savior from the very time that he manifested himself to the world, Mat.
13. v. 36. Mar. 7.17.
by preaching and miracles, and suffered not so much as a parable to escape
their knowledge. Men to whom Act. 1.3.
he had showed himself alive after his passion, by many infallible proofs,
being seen of them forty days, and speaking to them of the things pertaining
to the Kingdom of God. And yet that these men should now at their last
conference with him be mistaken in a matter of such importance as this is,
which concerns the purpose of God touching the whole Nation of the Jews, is
(as I believe, and as I think you will all say) a thing altogether unlikely,
and and so it is too, that all the Apostles should be of the same mind; unless
it had been a truth formerly taught, and not (as it is imagined) an error then
newly vented by them.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. It is unlikely they could be mistaken, and therefore
it is likely, that they understood of the true Kingdom of Israel, as Christ
did. 2. And nevertheless seeing after the last conference they were mistaken
in a matter of great evidence so many times foretold, as the calling of the
Gentiles; it is not unlikely that before Christ's ascension they might been
miscarried with that opinion of the Jewish Monarchy, which was not a new opinion
invented nor vented by the Apostles.

Reply.

1. The question is not, what Kingdom the Apostles meant in their Querie, which
Divines generally consent, to be an earthly Kingdom. But whether they did not
err in meaning thus. So that this part of your answer having relation only to
what Kingdom they meant, is nothing to the purpose, and we have answered you
in that already, more then we need have done; unless you had named plainly,
what other Kingdom they spoke of, and stood to that only.

2. What you give with one hand you pluck back with the other. In the former
part of this answer you say that [it was likely the Apostles understood of the
true Kingdom of Israel, as Christ did,] and yet here you tell us that [it was
not unlikely, that before Christ's ascension they might be miscarried with that
opinion of the Jewish Monarchy.] What, and yet when they asked the Question,
understand it too of the true Kingdom of Israel, which you by opposing this
part of your answer to the former, do take to be a different Kingdom from
this? surely it is a plain contradiction; for they could not understand it
both ways at the same time. And therefore impossible it was, that they could,
and could not mean an earthly Kingdom, when they asked the Question. But, Romae
Tibur amas veniosus, Tibure Romain; you say, and unsay, because you know not
what to say. And as for the instance you bring to confirm this part of your
answer, to wit [the Apostles not believing [for a time] the calling of the
Gentiles,] it has been already showed to be false. And if by the words [as
Christ did] in the former part of this answer, you mean his reply to the
theife, which you have quoted before, it has been showed already too, that it
could not be meant of this Kingdom: but if by these words you mean otherwise,
you should have told us what it was.

Israel's Redemption. A second reason, which makes me disi ast the censure here
cast on our Apostles, is because our Savior's answer is alleged, as a
sufficient ground tor it: whereas it will appear even to a weak judgment,
that by his answer the Apostles opinion is as much established, as their
curiosity is reprehended: for they asked whether he would at that time restore
again the Kingdom to Israel. To which he answered, It is not for you to know
the times and the seasons, which the Father has put in his own power. As if
he should have said, it is enough for you to know, that such a thing shall be
done, and by whom; but as for the time when it shall be done, this the Father
has put in his own power, and therefore ought not to be enquired of by you,
nor to be revealed by me. This is the whole meaning of the reply, and now give
you your verdict, whether you find the Apostles hereby condemned for holding
of an untruth; or rather for an over curious affection to acquaint themselves
with the very day, in which they should behold the glorious accomplishment of
so great a blessing.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. This cause is a mistaking, as if the Question were
granted: for albeit they did mean so, yet Christ's words have nothing of that
point, but ^nely taxes the disciples of their curiosity; and therefore the
paraphrase following in this reason is vain.

Reply.

This cause is no mistaking, for the Question must needs be granted; and that
even because Christ's words have nothing expressly of that point; unless you
will be so irreverent, as to think, that Christ who reprehended them only for
a curious desire to know when this thing should be; would not much rather have
reprehended them, for misunderstanding of the thing it self, if it should not
have been. Yea doubtless if it should not have been, he could not have said,
It is not for you to know the times, and the seasons. Seeing that which shall
never be, can have no time nor season. And thus while you grant that Christ did
reprehend their curiosity, in seeking to know the time when Israel should be
restored; and yet deny, that he did therein grant Israel should be restored;
you make him say, that there should be a time for that which should never be:
and so in effect, put the ly upon him. So much have you over-shot your self in
denying, that the subject in the Question is granted, because our Savior does
expressly say nothing of it. And besides, if the Question be an untruth, and so
nothing meant by it; then what does our Savior's answer mean? does that mean
nothing likewise? you will not say it, for you tell us, that it taxed their
curiosity, and therefore surely it meant something: for an answer that means
nothing does tax nothing. And therefore also the Apostles meant something that
was true; for that knowledge is not curious, which thinks it knows something,
when it knows nothing, or which knows the truth; but that which would know more
then it ought to know touching some truths. And thus it appears that the
paraphrase in this reason, which you have cunningly concealed from the readers
sight, is not vain, but valid.

Israel's Redemption. Another reason which makes for our Apostles, is the
answer our Savior gave the sons of Zebedee, when they besought him, that one
might sit on his right hand, and the other on his left in his Kingdom (or as
Saint Mark paraphraseth it, Mat. 20.21 22. chapter 10.37.
in his glory) ye know not, said he what ye ask: this reproof you will grant,
goes nearer to the quick then that before used to the Apostles; and yet if you
mark what follows, you shall find, that the matter of their petition is allowed
of, and only the motives thereof condemned, to wit, their ambition in seeking
the highest room; and their unadvisednesse in supposing, that Christ could
then give that to any, which none could have but they for whom it was from all
eternity prepared of his Father. And therefore seeing this is all, Mat. 20.23.
that these two were rebuk't for by such a sharp reply, how can we mistrust
that more then this should be included in a milder answer?

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. These two spoke of Christ's Kingdom in his glory: and
therefore we may justly think, that they meaned of his greatest glory, or of
his Kingdom of Heaven; and not of an earthly Kingdom. 2. If Christ in his
answer had spoken of an earthly Kingdom, how was it not in his power to choose
his Princes in that Kingdom? and seeing they we^^ only taxed for their ambition
and unadvisednesse concerning the glorio as Kingdom of Christ, and the Apostles
were taxed for their curiosity concerning the particular time of that Kingdom,
how shall we mistrust that they understood any other Kinngdom?

Reply.

1. Not this reason, nor any other was brought to show what Kingdom the
Apostles meant, which interpreters grant to be an earthly Kingdom: but to show
they did not think amiss in looking for such a Kingdom, which is that that
interpreters do accuse them of; and that because our Savior gave them such an
answer: from which answer, my foregoing reason does show, that no such harsh
conclusion does arise; seeing the Apostles are not excepted against by our
Savior, for not rightly understanding that about which they asked: but only
for seeking to know more in it then is fitting they should know. And this
reason is alleged for the same purpose. For whereas our Savior gave a sharper
answer here to the sons of Zebedee, then he did to the Apostles, and yet
granted withal, that the thing they spoke for should be given to some, it is
altogether unlikely that where he used a milder reproof, he did thereby deny,
that the thing which was asked should at any time be done: especially seeing in
both answers, it was for the motives of their asking only, and not for the
matter, that they were reprehended. And therefore you having not answered ought
to the force of this reason, but only caught at that which was not intended; I
might well pass by all that you have thus impertinently spoken; but yet I will
say somewhat to it, though not much. First, then I grant that these sons of
Zebedee [spake of Christ's glorious Kingdom, and that the Apostles understood
the same Kivgdom:] but I conclude not from hence (as you do) that this Kingdom
shall not be on earth (which expositours say, as well these, as the Apostles
did mean) and that because Christ shall come in glory, and reign in glory, as
you may see Mat, 16. verse, 27, 28. 2 Thessalonians. 1. verse 7, 8, 9, 10. Heb. 1.
verse 6. Jude, 14, 15. ver. Rev. 11. verse 15. chap. 15. verse 4. Psalm. 72.
Psalm. 102. verse 13. etc. Isa. 2. verse 2, 3, 4. Zach. 14. verse 4, 5. etc. But
I thus conclude from hence against your answer to my former reason: that seeing
the Apostles meant the same Kingdom, that these two did; therefore they meant a
Kingdom which should be, and not a Kingdom which should not be.

2. But, if Christ in his answer had spoken of an earthly Kingdom, how, say
you, was it not in his power to choose his princes in that Kingdom? And how
does it appear that he spoke rather of an earthly Kingdom, then of one in
Heaven, if we say he had this power? for why he should have this power on
earth, rather then in Heaven, you cannot conceive. And seeing you would have
the reader take this for a current argument from you to show that Christ in his
answer to these Zebedites did not speak of an earthly Kingdom: to wit, because
he seemed to deny that he had power to choose his princes therein; will you
your self take it for a current argument from us, to show that Christ did
speak of an earthly Kingdom, if he had power to choose his princes therein? if
you will not, then you would have the reader to esteem better of your argument
then you your self do. And if you will, you must needs grant, that you have
herein argued against your self. For whereas our Savior said, it is not mine
to give, he meant not that he had nothing to do in the giving of it But this
he meant, that it was not his to give indifferently to any that should ask it,
(as the words, which you have omitted in this reason, do show) for he could
give it to none but those to whom the Father had eternally appointed it to be
given; and to them he could, and should give it. For the Father gives it by
the Son in the temporal accomplishment of it: and the Son gives it from
the Father according to the eternal appointment of it; as the text it self in
the original clearly shows. For it is (...); It is not mine to give, but to
them for whom it is prepared of my Father.

Israel's Redemption. Thus far we have argued topically, and by way of
probability. But that which seems to me clearly to quit our Apostles from
error, though not from oblivion: from error, I say, in the subject, though not
in cercumstance; in the thing demanaded, though not in the season of it is
performance; is, because I find my text to be a lesson read to them by our
Savior before his passion. For speaking of the destruction of the Jews; They
shall fall, said he, by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive
into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until
the times of the Gentiles be fullfild, Luke, 21. at the 24. verse, ^ Isa.
32.15. Act. 3.21.
and at the 28. verse (having before shown what signs should immediately
foregoe his appearing) he left them this Cordial: when these things begin to
come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption
draws nigh. Behold here, Beloved, the casting away of God's people for a
time, which we see at this day verified: and their receiving again for-ever,
which shall as certainly come to pass, plainly foretold. The Redemption, I
say, not only of their souls, from the bondage of sin, to the favor of God,
by the profession of the Gospel: but consequently of their bodies too, from
their general captivity; to the repossessing of their country, by a
miraculous deliverance. For if no more should be meant by the word
[Redemption,] but the mere conversion of the Jews, in those places where now
they live; it cannot be conceived, why this action should be accompanied with
such wonderful tokens, and perplexity of all other nations, as is here
mentioned: unless we shall admit no space of time, betwixt this conversion,
and that instant in which our Savior shall give sentence on the dead; which I
suppose few or none will yield to. And if you seriously consider the evidence
of the prophets, I am confident you will confess, That a most righteous and
flourishing estate of the Jews in their own land, must of necessity
distinguish the time of their calling, and the worlds dissolution at the last
judgment.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. Who being right in his wit will learn of one word,
Redemption, that the Jews shall have an earthly Kingdom over all nations? Our
Savior is not speaking there of an earthly Kingdom, nor of the conversion of
the Jews, but as he speaks and expones himself, verse 31. Know ye that the
Kingdom of God is nigh at hand; and this is a matter of greater encouragement
then any earthly Kingdom can be unto spiritual minded persons: and therefore
when they wrestle against the understanding of the Jews conversion in these
words, they fight against their own fancies. Now if they cannot find clearer
texts in the new Testament for this earthly Monarchy, every understang
Christian will reject the misapplying of the prophets, seeing every ground of
faith is revealed more clearly in the new Testament, then in the Old.
Nevertheless let us hear the particular proofs.

Reply.

Who that enjoyes the benefit of understanding, will not find how grossly you
abuse the Author, and dissemble with the Reader; when purposely overpassing the
main ground here alleged for the earthly kingdom of the Jews, you make as
though there were no other light for it but in this one word [Redemption] which
has in it self none but a borrowed light, to wit, as it has reference to the
words in the 21. verse, which are these: They shall fall by the edge of the
sword, and shall be led away captive into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be
trodden down of the Gentiles, until the time of the Gentiles he fulfilled.
Until then, but no longer. And because he would not tell them the precise time
of the continuance of these times of the Gentiles: and yet would have them know
too, when they were near their expiration: in the verses following, he
acquaints them with the signs immediately foregoing his own appearing, their
Redemption, and the setting up of the kingdom of God. And do the same signs
betoken all this? and yet can you say [that our Savior speaks not here of an
earthly kingdom, nor of the Jews conversion?] Doubtless in that they foreshew,
the Jews Redemption, they betoken not only their conversion, but their
deliverance out of captivity too: and consequently their earthly kingdom, even
that kingdom of which the Apostle enquired. And in that they foreshew, our
Savior's appearing, they show him to be the Author of this deliverance,
according as the Apostles spoke of him, Lord will thou, etc. And in that they
foreshew, the Kingdom of God to be nigh at hand, they show this kingdom to be
no other, but the kingdom of Israel; so called, partly because the power of God
shall mightily, and wonderfully appear to the whole world at the erecting of
it: the fearfulness whereof the very signs foreshewing only its near
approach may serve to evidence; for great and unusual signs, show great and
unusual alterations. And partly because God shall be more generally, more
constantly, and more purely worshipped in the time of this kingdom, then ever he
was since the creation of the world. And therefore there is no cause why any
spiritual minded man should be discouraged at the thought of such an earthly
kingdom. Neither therefore have we wrestled against our own fancies, in
concluding not only the conversion, but the restoration of the Jews also from
the world, [Redemption] seeing it is apparent to all that will not turn away
their eyes, that they may not see it, that as this prophecy was spoken only
to Jews, so both the misery at first, and the mercy at last was spoken only of
the Jews. We have no need then to find clearer texts in the New Testament for
this earthly Monarchy, for fear that any understanding Christian will reject
what the Prophets have delivered so agreeable thereunto. But both we and they
have good reason to suspect, that you care not what you say, nor how you tamper
with the Word of God, if thereby you can procure belief. And to this end you
cry out against the clearness of the text, when as it has no darkness but
what you put upon it: and speak any thing of your self, as an undoubted axiom.
For you tell us [that every ground of faith is revealed more clearly in the New
Testament, then the old] which is indeed not oriously false. (for where is the
Creation described, the moral Law delivered, and our Savior promised to be
born in Bethleem, of a Virgin, of the seed of David? etc.) And admit it were
true of all such things, as our Savior was to fulfill at his first coming; yet
it could not be true of all such things as are reserved to be done by him at
his second coming. Amongst which, the restoring of the Jews, and his reigning
on earth have place.

Israel's Redemption. And with what testimonies can we better begin, then with
such as are of nearest affinity with our Saviors prophecy? They shall smite
(says Micah, in his 5. Chapter and 1. ver.) the Judge of Israel with a rod upon
the cheek. And at the third ver. Therefore will he give them up until the time
that she which travaileth has brought forth: then the Cap. ejusd. v. 7, 8.
Isa. 1.9. and 10.22. Matthew 24.22. Rom 11.3.28.
remnant of his brethren shall return unto the children of Israel. What, I
pray, is meant here by smiting the Judge of Israel, but the To this
interpretation of the prophecy (suiting so well with our Savior's sufferings)
the very next verse which fore sh^ws the place where Christ the Ruler of Israel
should be born, does to my thinking directly lead us.
crucifying of Christ? whom, when they had blindfolded him, they stroke on the
face, and asked him, saying, Prophecy, who is it that smote thee? Luke 22. at
the 64. ver. And what by, Until the time that she which travaileth has
brought forth, but the whole time of the surrogated Gentiles vocation? For
blindness is in part happened to Israel, until the Whether by [fulnesse] we
understand the whole number of those Gentiles which were successively to be
called before the National conversion of the Jews: or else the full,
universal, and contemporating conversion of all unbeleeving Gentiles
whatsoever, at, and through that extraordinary restoration of the Jews (whose
Tribes are wholly comprehended by this word in the 12. v. of the fame Ch)
Whether, I say, the first or last of these interpretations does pass for
current with us (and one of them must needs pass) yet it comes all to one
reckoning, it does nothing prejudice the cause, for which our Apostle's saying
is here alleged (which is to show, that the giving up of the Jews must last,
until the time, which is appointed for the calling of the substituted
Gentiles, be fully ended) for if blindness be happened to Israel, until the
coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles, in the last sense (that is, of all
of them indifferently) shall come to pass: hen it must of necessity continue,
until the coming in of the Gentiles, in the first sense (that is, of the
substituted part of them) be quite and clean finished: seeing the total
conversion cannot take place, before the partial gives way unto it.
fullness of the Gentiles ^e come in, Romans 11. v. 25. From whence it
necessarily follows, that this prophecy, and our Saviors must be understood of
one and the same time. For the dispersion foretold by Christ, was to happen
after his passion, and so was this, as their smiting the Judge of Israel
declares; which is alleged as the main cause of it. Again, the captivity which
our Savior spoke of, is to last until the Though by the word [tunes] the
dominion and power of the Gentiles over the Jews, and their p ss^ssion of the
Holy Land, be in this place especially aimed at: yet because the time of the
Jews subjection to, and captivity amongst the Gentiles in general, is to be of
equal (though not immediately and primarily) hereby implied.
times (or calling) of the Gentiles he fulfill d; and so is this, for when She
which travaileth has brought forth, then says the text, the remnant of his
brethren shall return unto the children of Israel: which is a plain
interpretation of that which our Savior does somewhat covertly express by the
word, Redemption.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. To the thinking of any judicious Reader the words of the
same verse may lead us unto another interpretation: for he is speaking there
not of the doings of the Jews, but of their enemies, whom he calls daughter
of troops; and he shows what these enemies shall do, they shall gather
themselves in troops, and lay siege against us (says the Prophet) that is, the
Jews, and they shall smite the Judge of Israel upon the cheek: which is a
proverbiall phrase, as Psalm. 3.8. and signifies to entreat shamefully. Now
seeing the Prophet speaks there of the enemies laying siege against the Jews,
and smiting their Judge, these words cannot be understood of the smiting of
Christ, albeit it be true that the Jews did smite him. In the second ver. be
comforts the Jews against the fear of that calamity, with a promise of a more
powerful Ruler. Then by her that travaileth, ver. 3. the same Prophet gives us
to understand another thing then the calling of the Gentiles; Ch: 4.10. Be in
pain, and labor to bring forth, O daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail.
And who may not think, that the same Prophet repeating the same words in the
same prophecy understands the same persons? that is, the Jews, and not the
Gentiles, unless we understand the daughter of Zim spiritually. And therefore
this Exposition not agreeing with the text, all that follows upon it has no
ground in the text. It is said v. 3. Then the remnant of his brethren shall
return unto the children of Israel: here the children of Israel are
distinguished from his brethren, and the brethren are said to return: which is
a plain interpretation, that the Prophet speaks not there of the Jewish
Monarchy, but that the Gentiles shall adjoyn themselves unto the Church of God,
as they be called the brethren of Christ. Hebr. 2.11, 12.

Reply.

Did you not say but now, [that every ground of faith is revealed more clearly
in the New Testament then in the Old?] and did you not speak it to make the
Reader believe, that there can be no evident Scripture in the Prophets, to
prove the Jewish Monarchy; because as you say (and would have him conceive)
there is no clear text for it in the writings of the Apostles? And why then did
you only name the verses of this prophecy, as if you had been afraid to utter
the text it self? Certainly it was no otherwise. For you took the word
[therefore] in the 3. ver. to be like the bad herb in the Prophets pottage,
which spoiled the taste of all the rest: and so omitt^^ the rehearsing of the
text, partly that the Reader might take no notice of your letting of it slip in
your Comment, the independency whereof this [therefore] would have discovered:
and partly that he might not see the coherence of mine. But let us compare our
paraphrases together. Now gather thy self together, and make thy best
resistance, O populous Nation: for the Lord will certainly bring a siege
against thee, because of thy contumelious behavior toward the Judge of
Israel, even the great Ruler that Bethleem Ephratah shall bring forth unto
thee; whom thy children shall smite, and deliver up unto death: and for this
offense will the Lord give them up both to captivity and infidelity, until the
Church of those Gentiles, which during the time of thy blindness shall be
taken into thy room, has brought forth all her children: and then again shall
the remaining Israelites return both unto the faith, and inheritance of the
ancient Israelites. Thus I, and You as follows. Gather your selves together,
ye numerous enemies of the Jews, and lay siege against them, and smite and
abuse their Rulers, but yet, O ye Jews, be of good comfort, and regard not this
calansity which is coming on you, for you shall have a more powerful Ruler
then ever you had, born in Bethleem Ephrata: and therefore you shall be given
into the enemies hand, and carried away captives into Babylon, there to remain,
until the daughter of Zion, who shall be in pain and labor to bring forth
like a woman in travail, shall be delivered there of them, whom the Lord shall
redeem from the hand of their enemies, and bring into their own land. And then
shall the Gentiles adjoyn themselves to the Jews, and both shall become one
Church. And now, good Reader, (utrum horum mavis, accipe) either follow me in a
smooth and plain way, wherein no truth here foretold, and since accomplished, or
to be accomplished, is crossed, or concealed. Or else follow Mr. Petrie, who leads
thee athwart so many rubs and stumbling blocks. For first he gives thee a
[therefore] without a [wherfore] a punishment without the intimation of any
transgression. And secondly, he makes the Jews, that were to be given up: and
She that travaileth in the time of their giving up, to be one people: which is
so unlikely, that his comparing of this phrase, with that which is spoken in
the 4. Ch: v. 10. will not prove it. For although they be the words of the same
Prophet, yet they are not in the same particular prophecy, and therefore not
fit to interpret each other, unless there were withal, some other
circumstance to confirm it. Neither is it likely, that the travailing where it
is said of the daughter of Zion expressly, be in pain and labor to bring forth
like a woman in travail, is meant of such a travailing, as that is meant of,
where no such pains are spoken of. And thirdly, he affirms against the plain
history of Gods Word, that upon the coming back of the Jews from Babylon, the
Gentiles were called to the faith of Christ; for of them he understands [the
remnant of his brethren.] Whose return was immediately to succeed [the time of
her that was to travail] which he applies to Zions travailing in Babylon. And
lastly, by interpreting the [remnant of his brethren] of the converted
Gentiles, shows his willingness to take away all future hope of the National
conversion of the Jews. Whereas [the remnant of his brethren] here, being the
same with [the remnant of Jacob, in the 5. and 8. ver.] and with [the remnant
of Israel, Ch: 2. v. 12.] is meant only of the elect Israelites that should be
converted to the Christian faith, after the conversion of the surrogated
Gentiles, as Christ himself, Matthew. 24. v. 22. and St. Paul, R^m. 9. v. 27. and
Chapter 11. v. 28. do expound it. And consequently by her that travaileth here,
cannot be meant, the daughter of Zions travailing in Babylon, to which the Jews
return from that captivity did put an end. Neither will it follow, as Mr.
Petrie would have it, that by the [remnant of his brethren] here are meant the
Gentiles, because they are distinguished from the [children of Israel] for how
are they distinguished? Surely not in respect of their stock and natural
descent (which would indeed have showed them to have been a different people,
had they been thus distinguished) but only in respect of the distinct times of
their calling; the [children of Israel] here comprehending all such Israelites
as were then departed, or should afterward depart in the true faith of Christ,
before the casting off of that Nation (before the giving of it up to a general
captivity and infidelity) and the receiving of the Gentiles in their stead: and
[the remnant of his brethren] comprehending all the faithful Israelites, whose
conversion is presently to follow the accomplished conversion of the substituted
Gentiles. And besides, seeing the Babylonish captivity, whither the Jews were
carried away captives for their idolatry, is foretold in the 4. Ch: at the 9.
and 10. ver. why should we think, that here again the same captivity is
threatened, and not rather (as some Expositors say) their captivity by the
Romans for crucifying their S^ io^r, with the story of whose vile usage amongst
the n^t^ words of the Prophet do so punctually agree? For the shall smite the
Ju^^e of Israel with a ^od upon the cheek, says M^^h, v. 1 And wh^^ they had
blindfolded him, they stroke him on the face, and asked him, saying, prophecy
who is it that sm^te thee? says Luke 22. v. 64. which words you have craftily
concealed: and the words of St. Paul also, Romans 11. v. 25. alleged to show
that by [She which travaileth] is meant the calling of the substituted
Gentiles. And yet for all this, as if all were plain on your side; and nothing
so on ours, you can boldly conclude. [therefore this Exposition not agreeing
with the text, all that follows upon it, has no ground in the text.] Of which,
now the matter has been pleaded on by both, let the indifferent judge.

Israel's Redemption. And this the next verse does confirm, which tells us, that
at the time of this return, He (that is, the Judge of Israel before spoken of,
that he, I say,) shall stand and feed (or rule) in the strength of the Lord, in
the Majesty of the Name of the Lord his God, and they (that is, the Jews)
shall abide, for now (that is, at this coming of our Savior) be shall be (not
as when he took our nature upon him) of no form Isa. 53.2, 3.
nor comeliness, a man despised, and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with griefs; but he shall be Zech. 9.10. Psalm 72.8.
great unto the ends of the earth, that is, over all the world, until he and
his shall at the last judgment, exchange the earthly Jerusalem (the Throne
Jer. 3.17. Chapter 14.21.
of his Kingdom) which is to be Jer. 31.38.
built again by men, for that Rev. 21.
empireall Jerusalem, not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. He, is the ruler of Israel, mentioned ver. 2. and not
the Judge mentioned, v. 1.2. They, are not the Jews, but rather the brethren of
whose return he spoke in the words immediately preceding. 3. Now, signifies
not the time of Christ's second coming, but the time of the abiding, or of the
Christians constant persevering in the faith. And in this sense is our Savior
great over all the world, seeing all the Centiles praise him, and all people do
land him, as it is written, Romans 13.10, 11. But at his second coming men shall
not build a throne to him, but he shall judge the quick and the dead. 2 Timothy
4.1.

Reply.

1. He, is both the Ruler mentioned in the 2. verse. and the Judge, mentioned in
the 1. ver. and therefore called the Judge of Israel, and not of Judah, or
Jerusalem; because Israel comprehends all the Tribes: which in the time of our
Savior's reign, are again to be reunited. As Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel do
show.

2. They, are the Jews, and so are, the remnant of his brethren,, whose return
is mentioned in the words immediately foregoing. For the believing Gentiles can
neither be said, to return to the faith, which the Nations of whom they came
never had. Nor in respect of their faith, to the Israelites, to whom they had
before no relation. And their abiding, is meant of the place where they should
dwell, from whence they should be no more removed, as in former times: and not
of the perseverance of faith in any; from which no true believer has ever been
removed.

3. Now, is applied here to the time in which Christ shall be great unto the
ends of the earth, that is, both known, feared, and obeyed over all the earth:
and so signifies the time after his second coming, and not the time that now
is; in which he is acknowledged but of a few Nations, and amongst them too,
feared and obeyed by a very small company. And yet you can tell us without
blushing, that he is already [great over all the world, seeing all the Gentiles
praise him, and all people do land him.] What? Turks, Arabians, Chinois, and
heathens of America? I pray apply the Scriptures more pertinently. For St. Paul
did not allege those prophecies touching the Gentiles, Chapter 15. v. 10, 11. to
show that all Gentiles did praise God when he wrote that Epistle, or that they
should do so at any time before Christ should come to reign over both Jews and
Gentiles too: but to show, that God had as well appointed Christ to be a
Savior to the Gentiles, as to the Jews, that so he might move them both to
agree the better together, and to bear with the infirmities of each other; and
to receive one another, as Christ had received them to the glory of God: in
suffering for both, and in sending the Gospel to be preached indifferently to
both. And whereas you say, [that at Christ's second coming men shall not build a
Throne to him, but he shall judge the quick and the dead.] I say that as well
the first as the last must be done. And for the building of Jerusalem, see Jer.
31. v. 38. etc. and Ezekiel. 48. v. 15.30. etc. and Zech. 14. v. 10, 11. and then
hear also what Jer. has said, Chapter 3. v. 17. At that time they shall call
Jerusalem the throne of the Lord, and all the Nations shall be gathered unto
it, to the Name of the Lord, to Jerusalem: neither shall they walk any more
after the imagination of their evil heart, etc. and therefore surely more must
be done by Christ at his second coming; then you mean by the judging of the
quick and the dead.

Israel's Redemption. Another prophecy much like unto this, is that of Amos in
his 9. chap. at the 8. verse, Behold the eyes of the Lord God are upon the
sinful Kingdom, and I will destroy it from off the face of the earth, saving
that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, says the Lord. For lo I
will command, and I will fifth the house of Israel among all Nations, like as
corn is sifted with a seive, yet shall not the least grain fall upon the
earth. And at the 11. verse, In that day will I raise up the Tabernacle of
David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up
his ruins as in the days of old, that they may possess the remnant of Edom,
and of all the heathen that are called by my Name, says the Lord that does
this. I will bring again the captivity of my people Israel, and they shall
build the waste cities, and inhabit them, and they shall plant vineyards, and
drink the wine thereof, they shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of
them: and I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be pulled
up out of their land, which I have given them, says the Lord God. Now although
this prophecy took no effect on the ten Tribes at their transplantation, began
by 1 Chro. 5.6. 2 King. 15.29. chapter 16.9.
Tiglah Pileser King of Assyria, and ended by 2. King. 17.5.6.24 chapter 18.58.
Shalmaneser his successor, who also brought up strange Nations, and placed
them in their stead: which people were, from Samaria, the ancient metropolis of
that Province, called Ioh. 4.9.
Samaritans: yet who is able to maintain, that it was fulfilled on the other
two? (for not the house of Joseph, nor the house of Judah only, but the house
of Jacob wholly, is here spoken of. And why else is the Tabernacle of David
afterward expressed, as a prime agent in the restoration, if it were not before
included, as a succeeding patient in the dispersion of Israel?) who then, I
say, is able to maintain, that this prophecy was fulfilled on Judah and
Benjamin, until their overthrow by the Roman Emperor Vespasian, ever since
which time they also remain forsaken, scattered, and despised captives? yea
who dares affirm it, when God has said, that at their return from this
universal captivity, he will so plant them in their land, that they shall no
The usual answer of a conditional promise, will take no h^ld on this or the
like places of Scripture For as God has he: past his word, that he will no
more pull them up out of their land: so in the 32. chap. of Ier. at the 39 ver.
and 50. chap. at the 20. ver. in the 36. of Ezekiel. at the 27. ver. in the 37.
chap. at the 23. ver. in the 39. chap. at the 7. ver. and in the 3. chap. of
Zeph. at the 13. ver. (all which prophecies do in the times of their
fulfilling, concur with this) he has likewise promised, To give them one
way, and one heart, that they may fear him for ever. Never to turn away from
them to do them good, but to put his fear into their hearts, that they shall
not depart from him. That the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there
shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found. That he
will put his spirit within them, and cause them to w^lke in his statutes, and
to keep his judgments and do them. That they shall defile themselves no more
with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their
transg^essions. That he will make his holy Name known in the midst of his
people Israel, and will not let them pollute his holy Name any more. And that
the remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lie* neither shall a
deceitful tongue be found in their mouth. And therefore God having thus
equally engaged himself, as well to keep the Jews from sin, as to free them
from bondage, it is as impossible that the accomplishment of this prophecy
should be frustrated, and the fruition of these blessings forfeited for want of
obedience, as that God should either forger, or not regard, or be unable to
fulfill his word, and consequently, the appointed time for the finishing of
such prophecies, is yet to be expected.
more be pulled up out of it? which yet should not be true, if it had been
spoken of any deliverance before our Saviors coming to suffer.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. It is a like ground for such a Kingdom: 1. How can it be
denied that the house of Judah was destroyed, when their Kings and people were
carried out of the land? 2. How can the Tabernacle of David be called a prime
agent in the restoration? it is said, I will raise up the Tabernacle of David;
and not, the Tabernacle of David shall raise up: it is a patient, and not an
agent. And none denies that it is included in the dispersion of Israel: and
therefore that part of the prophecy was fulfilled, even before the overthrow by
the Roman Emperor, and so before that overthrow was restored again, and
afterward also were they scattered, But that promise of restoration is not of
the house of Judah, but of the people of Israel. verse 14. and who these be we
have a sufficient interpreter, Act. 15.16. where the Apostle James expones
these words of the enlarging Chrisi's Kingdom by the calling of the Gentiles,
which was begun at that time by the preaching of the Apostle: and To. Stephanus
in his notes on this text of Amos says, Almost all the Hebrews do consent,
That this is meant of the time of Messiah, and especially of the calling of the
Gentiles: and by bodily houses and benefits the Prophet understands spiritual:
and these who are begotten unto this lively hope are kept most safely through
faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. so that the gates of Hell shall not Prevail
against them, Mat. 16.18. Whereas it is asked, who dares affirm it? Zacharias
has not spared to affirm it, Luke 1.68. saying, Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel for he has visited and redeemed his people, and has raised up an horn
of salvation in the house of David his servant, as he spoke by the mouth of his
holy prophets etc. Dare any Millenarian contradict this testimony?

Reply.

1 This prophecy of Amos speaks of a deliverance of the Jews out of a
captivity, after which they should no more be pulled up out of their land. And
therefore cannot be meant of the return of Judah and Benjamin from Babylon,
since which they have fallen into a greater captivity then that was, but of
their return from the captivity they are now in. This you saw to be the
necessary consequence of the proper sense of the prophecy, and therefore you
wrest that part of it which concerns the deliverance of the Jews to another
meaning. But first you cavil, and ask [how it can be denied, that the house
of Judah was destroyed when their Kings and people were carried out of their
land?] Surely that they were in a sad condition it cannot be denied, but that
they were destroyed, it may; for how else could they have returned? yet this
thing too Haman sought to bring to pass on the Jews in his time, and you know
how well he and his adherents sped in the device. But what of all this? who
denies that they were carried captives into Babylon? I say only that this
prophecy was not fulfill d in Judah's captivity there, but in their captivity
under the Romans; and that because the deliverance after which they are no more
to be carried captives, must needs be yet to come.

2. But you have found a great mistake in me, For I have said that the
Tabernacle of David shall be a prime agent in the restoration, whereas God
says, I will raise up the Tabernacle of David, and so, [ it is to be a
patient, you say, and not an agent.] A very learned exception, for is there not
an isntrumental agent, as well as a principal agent? and amongst
isntrumental agents, do not some excel others? (as amongst David's worthies,
some were superior to the rest) although then God shall show his power in
raising the Tabernacle of David, as the first and chief cause, what hinders
but that this also may use its own endeavor to raise it self, as a secondary
and less principal cause? surely if God shall so raise it, that it shall do
nothing for it self, it may rather be said, to be a spectator of its
deliverance, then either an agent or a patient. You say further [that none
denies it is included in the dispersion of Israel] But yet you say withal,
that the Jews dispersion and restoration here spoken of were both fulfilled
before their overthrow by the Romans, which the close of this prophecy, showing
that after their restoration here foretold, they should no more be dispersed,
does deny. And these words also in the 11. ver. I will build it as in the days
of old, do show the contrary. For if you take, the days of old, for the time
immediately foregoing their Babylonish captivity; then I say, that so short a
time cannot be taken for the days of old; seeing it was but seventy years
from that time; and consequently it must imply a restoration after a captivity
of a longer date. And if you take it for the days of David and Solomon, then I
say, that it was not so restored after that captivity, for in the days of
these Kings, all the Tribes were but one Kingdom: and they were not tributaries
to other Kings, but others to their Kings; and consequently it is as yet thus
to be restored. But that you may be sure to avoid all that can be brought out
of this prophecy for the future restoration of the Jews, you will not have
the 11. verse to be meant of the restoration of Judah, but of the Israelites
in the 14. verse, and these Israelites must not be taken for the Jews, how
plain soever the text be for it, but for the Gentiles: for [ so you say, St.
James expounds them, Acts 15. verse 16.] Surely the Apostle repeates the 11.
and 12. ver. of this chapter somewhat differently from the Prophets expression,
but yet speaks not of Israel there at all. Neither does he expound the
building of David's Tabernacle, of the calling of the Gentiles, as you pretend.
But shows only in the verse following, that when it shall be built again,
the residue of the Gentiles, that are yet uncald, shall then be called; and
together with the Gentiles upon whom Gods Name is already called, seek after the
Lord. And therefore you have not learned of St James, to take the Tabernacle of
David, for the believing Gentiles. Nor can I believe that the Hebrew Doctors
do so intepret it: albeit they may grant, that the calling of the Gentiles in
the time of the Messiah, as they expect him yet to come, is spoken of in the
12. ver. And doubtless whosoever shall look into the 14. ver. of this
prophecy, he will say, that the actions here rehearst may very well agree with
men newly come out of captivity: but not that they do any way intimate the
calling of men to the Christian faith. For what relation has the building of
waste cities to inhabit them, the planting of vineyards to drink the wine
thereof, and the making of gardens to eat the fruit of them, to this?
doubtless none at all. For suppose that one should tell you of a Jew that had
lately built him a saire house; and of an other that had planted an Orchard of
choice fruit, would you think thereby, that they were become Christians? nay
would you not laugh at him, if he should have no other meaning? and yet without
any ground for it, but your own fancy as has been showed, you conclude [that
by bodily houses, and benefits, the Prophet understands spiritual.] To which
you adjoyne Scripture to prove, that the elect cannot fall away; which is not
questioned. And thus, good reader, thou have seen the first part of one and
the same prophecy historically and properly understood; and the latter part
allegorically and figuratively expounded; and that for no other reason but
because the deliverance of the Jews out of their captivity here foretold has
not been as yet properly and literally fulfilled, as their carrying into
captivity has been. And Mr. Petrie will not take Gods word for it, that it
shall be thus fulfild. And therefore whereas I have asked, Who dares affirm
that the captivity of Judah here foretold, is meant of any other but their
captivity by the Romans: seeing God has said here, that after their return
from this captivity they shall no more be pulled up out of their land? he tells
thee that Zacharias has not spared to affirm it, Luke 1 verse 68. etc. But is
it not the same God, that spoke by the mouth of both these Prophets? a God that
is not as man, that he should lie, or forget himself. And having then foretold
in Amos such a deliverance after which the Jews should no more be given up
into captivity; does he, think thou, by Zachary affirm that this was
fulfilled before their captivity by the Romans? yet thus Mr Petrie dares to
make God contradict himself: and that because Zachary says, Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people, and has
raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David, as he
spoke by the mouth of all his holy Prophets etc. and what is meant by all this
but that the Redeemer was then to be borne, as the Prophets had said, and that
therefore their redemption should as surely be fulfilled, as if it had been
done already? For it is usual with the prophets, when they would show the
certain accomplishment of a thing, to speak as if it were then effected. But
why has Mr. Petrie left our [for us] in these words of Zachary? was it not
because they show, that this prophecy does belong to the Jews, and not to the
Gentiles? and this he likes not to hear of himself, neither would he have
thee to take notice of it. And besides, it Zachary should speak of a
spiritual deliverance only, as this Author affirms, how does he show, that
this prophecy of Amos was then fulfild, which (as is before proved, and as any
one may indeed of himself perceive) does foretell only an immovable
deliverance of the Jews from their bodily captivity amongst, and subjection to
other Nations?

Israel's Redemption. The next prophecy shall be that of Joel, who mentions the
very signs, which our Savior said should be the immediate forerunners of the
Jews Redemption. And it shall come to pass afterward (says he in his 2.
chap. at the 28 ver.) that I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, and your
sins and your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams,
and your young men shall see visions: and also upon the servants, and upon the
handmaids in those days will I power out my spirit, and I will show wonders in
the Heavens, and in the earth blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke: the Isa.
24. v. 23. Mat. 24. v. 29. Rev. 6. v. 12.
Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood before the Great
not only in regard of the strangeness and dreadfulnes of events, of things
then to come to pass, but great also in regard of the long continuance and
tract of time, which God in his revelations hereafter to be fulfild, does by
the word [Day] as well without this epither as with it, frequently import.
great and terrible Ezekiel. 39.8. Mal. 4.5. Jude, 6. Rev. 16.14.
Day of the Lord come. And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall call on
the Name of the Lord shall be delivered: for in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem
shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said, and in the remnant whom the Lord
shall call. And in the 3. chap. at the 1. ver. Behold in those days, and in
that time, when I shall bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, I
will also gather all Nations, and will bring them down into the valley of
Jehosaphat (which in the 14. verse is called the valley of decision) and will
plead with them there for my people, and for my heritage Israel whom they have
scattered among the Nations, and parted my Land. And at the 15. verse, again.
The Sun and the Moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their
shining, the Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from
Jerusalem, and the Isa. 2.19. etc. Ezekiel. 38.19.20 Hag 2.22. Mat. 24.29. Rev.
16.18. chapter 6.13.14.
Heavens, and the earth shall shake, but the Lord will be the hope of his
people; and the strength of the children of Israel.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. The Apostle Peter not only makes use of these words, but
expones them, and shows the accomplishment of them in some degree; (as it is
said in the sixth rule before) for Act. 2.16. he says. This is that which was
spoken by the Prophet Joel, And it shall come to pass in the last days etc.
And verse, 22. Ye men of Israel hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth a man
approved of God among you by miracles, wonders and signs, which God did by him
in the midst of you, as ye your selves know.

Reply.

The Apostle repeats, but expounds not the Prophets words, and consequently
shows not the accomplishment of ought that the Prophet affirms shall be done.
All that he shows is this, That the thing which then happened to the Apostles,
was the work of the same spirit which Joel spoke of: but he says not, that it
was the same work. The same spirit indeed was then powered out, but it was not
the same pouring out of the spirit. And for want of distinguishing betwixt the
effusion of the same spirit, and the same effusion of the spirit; you affirm,
that those things which the Prophet says the spirit shall do not long before
the Lord's second coming, were then done at his first coming. And the reason
you bring from St. Peter's words, Act. 2. verse 22. to show, that the prophecy
of Joel was then fulfild in part, is a very strange one. For the Prophet shows
what others shall do through the extraordinary inspiration of the Spirit,
before the Day of the Lord comes; and the words you have alleged do show,
what works Christ himself did, when he was come.

Israel's Redemption. I am not ignorant, that the darkening of the Sun and
Moon, is sometimes taken allegorically and by way of allusion, but that
therefore it should be so understood here it does not follow: for where it is
figuratively applied, it signifies the judgment it self which is to befall
those people of whom it is spoken: but where it is literally used, it is put
only for a sign of an eminent destruction, which shall suddenly follow it: as
the great and terrible Day of the Lord shall do at the accomplishment of this
prophecy.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. Where the darkness of the Sun (and so it may be
understood of the Moon) is used properly, it is not put only for a sign of
an eminent and imminent destruction, as it is manifest Luke 23.45. which was a
Testimony from Heaven of Christ's innocence for conviction of the murderers:
and chap. 21.25. the signs in the Sun and Moon and in the stars, and the
distress of Nations upon the earth with perplexity, and the roaring of the sea
and waves, are all to be understood properly as signs before the great and
terrible Day of the Lord. So what is promised in the 28. and 29. verses of the
second chap. of Joel was truly (albeit not altogether) fulfilled in the days
of Peter ( even how-beit the words of the 30. and 31. verses be properly
understood) and not wholly fulfild til the time immediately preceding the last
coming of Christ.

Reply.

That the darkning of the Sun, or of the Moon properly taken (especially if
supernatural, as this here) is a sign of an eminent and imminent destruction
you confess: but that it is only so, you deny. And were this true, I have not
spoken much out of the way. But the instance you bring of the darkning of the
Sun at the time of our Saviors passion, makes nothing for you. For whereas you
say [it was a testimony from Heaven of Christ's innocence for conviction of the
murtherers] the history of the Gospel tells you no such thing, and interpreters
are against you. Sicut enim Deus tenebris involvebat terram Aegyptum, sic etiam
nunc totam Jud^^am, in signum ira^i Dei, et futurae poenae, says Pareus on the
27. chap. of Mat. at the 45. verse, that is, As God did once bring darkness on
the land of Egypt, so likewise did he now on the land of Judea, as a sign of
his wrath and their ensuing punishment. So Chrysostom too, It was an undoubted
sign of Gods anger, for that which they did against him. And Origin, It was a
presage of the future darkness which should overspread the whole Jewish
Nation. To which Dr. Mayer consents, and with Origin concludes from the time of
the darkness continuance, being three hours, that the Jewish Nation should be
in darkness, till about the Evening of the world. Although then Christ's
innocence may well be gathered from it, yet for ought I can find, you go
alone in alleging it as a reason of the darkness. And Piscator resolves the
matter thus peremptorily against you, Praeter-naturales istae trium horarum
tenebrae, quae totam terram occuparunt patiente Christo, portenderunt haud
dubie calamitates ill^s quas non multo post Deus iratus huic populo immisit,
quas et Christus supra cap. 24. discipulis praedi^it. Sunt enim Tenebrae signum
irae Dei, ut perspicitur ex eo quod signum erunt adventantis Christi ad
judicium, ut ipse testatur supra cap. 24.29. Et passim in Scriptura nomine
Tenebrarum calamitates significantur etc. in cap. 27. verse 45. Mat. In which
words he does not only say, that this darkness was a token of those miseries,
which shortly after befell the Jews: but also that the word [darknesse] in the
Scripture (whether properly or improperly taken) does every where signify
calamities. And in your next instance out of the 21 chap. of Luke ver. 25. you
your self do say, that the signs there rehearst are all properly to be
understood, as signs before the great and terrible Day of the Lord. But
amongst the rest, you reckon the distress of Nations with perplexity, for a
sign: whereas it is rather an effect of the signs, which shall be so
extraordinary, that they shall bring men into great perplexity and fear of the
things, which they shall show to be coming on the earth. But whereas you say [
that what is promised in the 28. and 29 ver. of the 2. chap. of Joel, was
truly (albeit not altogether) fulfilled in the days of Peter ( even howbeit
the words of the 30. and 31. ver. be properly understood) and not wholly
fulfilled, till the time immediately preceding the last coming of Christ.] It
is utterly false, as has been already showed: and may further thus be showed.
To wit, because the pouring out of the Spirit spoken of by Joel, is to precede
(or at least to accompany) the darkning of the Sun and Moon, and both to
precede the great and terrible Day of the Lord: whereas the darkning of the Sun
at our Savior's first coming, did precede the pouring out of the Spirit; and
neither of them did precede the day of his birth. For the Sun was darkened,
when he was about to leave both his life and the world together. And the Spirit
was not powered out, til after his ascension. And thus (besides that there was
not then any unusual darkening of the Moon) the very different order of the
accomplishment of these things, from that mentioned by Joel, and their not
preceding our Savior's first coming as signs thereof, do abundantly show
the grosnesse of your interpretation.

Israel's Redemption. Neither have I forgotten, that the first of these
prophecies was made use of by S. Peter, to stop the mouths of such as jeered
the Apostles, when by the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them, they began to
speak with tongues: Act. 2.4.
but that this prophecy was then fulfilled I deny. For when some mocking, said,
These men are full of new wine, S. Peter replyd', ye men of Judea, and all ye
that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hearken to my words; for
these are not drunken as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the
day: but this is that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel. And it shall come
to pass in the last days (says God) I will power out my Spirit upon all
flesh. As if he had said, My brethren, these are not the effects of wine, but
of the Spirit of God, which is now powered out on the first fruits of the Jews,
as a pledge and assurance of that bountiful effusion of it, which (as Joel
has said) shall one day happen to the Isa. 32.15. Ezekiel. 39.29. Zech. 12.10.
whole Nation. And that this is all St Peter meant, it may thus appear. First,
because the chief and most remarkable effect of the Spirit in the Apostles,
at this time, was the gift of tongues, of which the Prophet makes no mention.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. If this exception were true, it would prove, that the
Apostle cites the words impertinently, and the Jews might have challenged him
of babbling: and so these authors fight against the Apostle, and the Spirit of
God, who has registered this argumentation of the Apostle, as good and valid.
2. The chief and most remarkable work of the Spirit at that time, was a
sound from Heaven as of a mighty rushing wind, which filled all the house, and
there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each
of them, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost: and this was noised
abroad. Whereby it is evident that the Apostle speaks especially not only of
the effect, (which is their speaking in strange languages) but of the cause,
the pouring down of the Spirit, of which Joel speaks expressly: and
therefore Peter cites the words pertinently.

Reply.

1. That the Prophet speaks not of any whom the Spirit should endue with the
gift of tongues, is so evident, that you could not deny it; and yet you dare
say, [If this exception were true, it would prove, that the Apostle cites the
words impertinently.] Belike then the Apostle must be out in citing them,
rather then you in showing to what end he cited them. No, Sir, the Apostle
alleges it very pretinently, in that he shows by it, that the disciples
spoke not thus out of drunkenness, as some accused them, (and consequently
from an evil spirit) but by reason of the effusion of that Spirit on them, of
which Joel had spoken. And therefore the mistake is in you, who do very
impertinently conclude from hence; that the same effusion of the Spirit, which
Joel spoke of was then fulfilled. For although the same Spirit may be powered
out diverse times, yet that pouring out of it which Joel speaks of, can be
fulfilled but once: and consequently, not at our Savior's first coming, and
second coming too. And now who fights most against the Apostle, and the Spirit
of God, he that understands them rightly, and endeavors to make others do so
too; or he that misunderstanding them himself, had rather condemn them both,
and draw all others into an error with him, then yield to the truth? and here I
would entreat thee, reader, to take notice, that when Mr Petrie has little or
nothing to say, he commonly breaks out into the more violent speech, thereby to
disgrace what he cannot answer.

2. This part of your answer, is as much to the matter as the former* For
whereas I speak of the gift of tongues, as the most remarkable effect of the
Spirit in the Apostles: you speak of the manner of the Spirits descending upon
them, as the most remarkable work of the Spirit. But do you know what you
say? was it not a greater work to make the Apostles speak diverse languages,
then to cause the sound of a mighty wind, or the appearance of tongues, which
were only outward signs of the extraordinary gift, which the Spirit then
wrought within them? I can hardly think, that any man but you will say
otherwise. And by your leave, it was the Apostles speaking with other tongues,
which made the Multitude come together, and at which they were confounded, as
the 4, 5, 6, 7. ver. etc. do show. And not the sound of the rushing wind,
that filled the house where the Apostles were sitting, when the appearance of
cloven tongues, like as of fire, came and sat upon each of them. For this was
past: and St Peter speaks not of it, but shows only, that their speaking
thus in diverse languages, was the work of the same Spirit, of which Joel had
spoken. And your conclusion [therefore Peter cites the words pertinently]
(which I dare say, none is so likely to doubt of, as your self) hangs as
loosely to your premises, as the premises do to that which I have said.

Israel's Redemption. And secondly, because as the Prophet revealed, so he
repeates the pouring out of the Spirit, as a contemporary event with the
wonders which shall be shown, in the Heavens, and in the earth, before the
great and terrible Day of the Lord come. Which Day can no way be referred to
the first coming of Christ, when he came to save Luke 19.56. chapter 19.10. Ioh.
12.97.
sinners, and not to destroy them. When he would not take upon him to be a Luke
12.14. Ioh. 6.15.
Judge and Ruler over them. For then too the donation of the Spirit must have
been an antecedent of his birth, of the time he lived: and not a subsequent of
his death and departure, which has no analogy with a day. It remains then,
that it is an expression of his second coming, which is called a great and
terrible Da^ in regard of the general destruction which shall be brought on
all Nations, that oppose themselves against the Jews at that time. For in mount
Zion, and in Jerusalem (as you have heard) shall be deliverance, and in the
Remnant whom the Lord shall call.

Mr Petrie's Answer. 1. Joel says not, that the pouring out of the Spirit
shall not be til the great and terrible day of the Lord come, but he shows so
many things preceding the coming of our Savior: neither may we think that
all these things shall be fulfilled in the same juncture of time; if all be
accomplished, even in several times, the prophecy abides true. 2. That day or
time was terrible: for it is written, Act. 2.6. the multitude came together and
were confounded or troubled in mind, because that every man heard them in his
own language, and they were all amazed and marvelled; and verse 22. a man
approved among you by miracles, wonders, and figues. Whereby, it is manifest
that even to the sight of these Jews that time of Christ's coming was
terrible, albeit his second coming shall be more terrible in regard of the
general destruction, which shall ^e on all Nations, not for opposing
themselves against the Jews (as they imagine) but for their not acknowledging
God, and not obeying the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.

Reply.

1. Now you tell us [that Joel says not, that the pouring of the Spirit shall
not be til the great and terrible Day of the Lord come.] Neither have we said
he does; for had he said so, the Spirit could not at that time have been powered
on the Apostles. But yet Joel says that that particular pouring out of the
Spirit of which he speaks, is to be a sign of the near approach of that
terrible Day; and therefore cannot til that time be accomplished. Although then
we think not, that all the things which Joel speak of [are to be fulfilled in
the same juncture or moment of time*] yet we think, that they shall be all
accomplished in a very short time. But to say that one of these things shall be
accomplished in one age, and another in the next, or some hundreds of years
after, and so of the rest, is to make the word of God of none effect. For Joel
speaks of these things as immediately to ensue, if not to contemporate with
each other: and speak but of one pouring out of the Spirit; and that also to
be a forerunner of the Day of Christ's second coming: and therefore it can be
but once fulfilled, and that only in its proper season.

2. But you will make good all that you have said by and by. For the Day of our
Savior's first coming [ was terrible, you say. And that because, it is
written Act. 2.6. The multitude came together and were confounded, because
every man heard them speak in his own language, and they were all amazed and
marvelled, and verse 22. a man approved amongst you by miracles, wonders, and
signs.] And did this make him terrible? what then could make him comfortable?
If to save sinners, to cast out Devils, to raise the dead, to open the eyes of
the blind, the ears of the deaf, to loose the tongues of the dumb, the feet
of the lame, to heal the lunaticke, and them that had palsies, in a word, to
cure all diseases, did terrify the Jews, what could he do to make his presence
delightful unto them? O what a terrible message the Angel came with, when he
said, Behold, I bring you tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people,
Luke 2.10.11.
for unto you is borne this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord! O what a terrible noise was made, when a multitude of heavenly
Spirits praised God, saying, Glory to God in the Highest, on earth peace, good
will toward men! O what terrible doings there were, ver. 13 14.
when Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching
the Gospel of the Kingdom, Mat. 4.23.
and healing all manner of sickness, and all manner of diseases among the
people! O what a terrible sight it was, when so many thousands of hungry souls
were sed with five loaves and two fishes! These were wonders indeed; but all
things that are wonderful, chapter 14.23.
are not terrible, but such only as are either punishments, or signs of
punishments: otherwise though they cause amazement at the first, as surpassing
the reach of natural causes, yet being intended for man's good, they occasion
gladness and not fear, unless it be a pious fear, which well consists with
joy in the Holy Ghost. For shame then recall this doctrine, and think not to
make any one believe, that the sick person will be afraid to hear of his
health, or the condemned prisoner of his pardon; and til you can do this,
persuade not your self, that you can prove our Savior's presence terrible in
the Day of his humiliation, wherein he was approved for so many signs,
miracles, and wonders, wrought only to make men lay hold on the means of
their eternal happiness. And if the history of these things be so wonderfully
pleasant unto us, what was the performance to such as saw them, and the benefit
of the miracles to such as felt the virtue of them? You go on, and say [ that
the time of Christ's second coming shall be more terrible then his first was.
And surely the great destroyers of the earth should else have greatest cause to
climb up to the tops of the mountains to meet him first, (if such a thing
might be) as railing Shimei was the first of all the house of Benjamin that met
King David in his return after Absoloms conspiracy; and no need at all, to
call for the mountains to hide them from his presence. But you will not have
that day accounted terrible in regard of a general destruction to be brought
on the Nations, for opposing the Jews, but for their not acknowledging God, and
not obeying the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, as it is in the 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
and had you confirmed this by showing, that the Nations should not at that time
oppose the Jews; you had said the whole truth: but seeing you have not, and
indeed could not do this (for the prophecies following do show the contrary)
you have affirmed one half of the truth to exclude the other half of it. And
therefore you must give us leave not only to imagine, but to believe, that the
foresaid destruction shall be for both: that those, I say, which shall then
oppose the Jews, shall be the very same which the Apostle here speaks of under
another notion, and in other terms. For though Christians may not, you faith
we know shall then be very scarce amongst the Gentiles, as our Savior has
said of them, Luke 18. verse 8.

Israel's Redemption. And to put it out of doubt, that God's bringing down of
the Heathen into the valley of Jehosaphat, is meant only of his gathering them
together to a battle, and consequently of a judgment on the living, and on
the dead: to put this out of doubt, I say, the Prophet makes it to be a
concomitant of the Rev 16.12.13.14.
Jews return from their captivity: and in the 9, 10, 11, and 12. ver. provokes
the Gentiles to prepare war, to assemble their mighty men, and to break
their plowshares into swords, and their pruning-hookes into spears: a
preparation, which as it would be fruitless, so doubtless they shall neither
have time, power, or will to make, when they are summoned to receive the
dreadful Sentence of, Go ye cursed. And for my own part, I am persuaded,
that this great Army here spoken of, is the very same that shall be gathered
together to the battle of that great Day of God Almighty, by the three
unclean spirits like frogs, which St John saw come out of the mouth of the
Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false
Prophet, Rev. 16. at the 13. ver. Of this Psalm. 2.1.2. 3 Ps. 46.6.8. Psalm.
68.30. Isa. 2.12.13. etc. chapter 24.21.22. chapter 26 20.21. ch 34.1.2.3.4.5 etc. ch
40.20. chapter 66.14.15.16. Mic. 4.12.13.
destruction also speaks Zeph. in his 3 chap. at the 8. ver. Therefore wait
upon me, says the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey, for my
determination is to gather the Nations, that I may assemble the Kingdoms, to
power upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger, for all the earth
shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy: for then will I turn to the
people (meaning to the Jews) a pure language, that they may all call upon the
Name of the Lord. And at the 19. ver. Behold at that time I will und^e all that
afflict thee, and I will save her that halteth, and gather her that was driven
out, and I will get them praise and fume in every land, where they have been
put to sham^. At that time I will bring you again, even in the time that I
gather you: for I will make you a Name, and a praise among all people of the
earth, when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, says the Lord. And
yet more fully Zech. in his 12 chap. at the 3. verse. In that Day will I make
Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all that burden themselves with it
shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered together
against it. In that day will I smite every horse with astonishment, and his
rider with m^dnes, and I will open mine eyes upon the house of Judah, and will
smite every horse of the people with blindness. In that day will I make the
Governors of Judah like a hearth Obad. 15.16.17.18.19.20.21.
of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheafe: and they shall
devour all the people round about, on the right hand and on the left: and
Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, even in Jerusalem. The
Lord also shall save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of the house of
David, and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, do not magnifte
themselves against Judah. In that Day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among them at that Day, shall be as David: and
the house of David, shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them. And
in the 14. chap. at the 12. ver. This shall be the plague wherewith the Lord
shall smite the people that have fought against Jerusalem: their flesh shall
consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume
away in their holes, and their tongues shall consume away in their mouth: and
it shall come to pass in that day, that a great tumult from the Lord shall be
among them, and they shall lay hold every one on the hand of his neighbor, and
his hand shall rise up against the hand of his Ezekiel. 38.21. Hag. 2.23.
neighbor: and Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem, and the Mich. 4.13.
wealth of all the Heathen round about shall be gathered together, gold, and
silver, and apparel in great abundance; and so shall be the plague of the
horse, of the mule, of the camel, and of the ass, and of all the beasts that
shall be in these tents, as this plague. And in the 38. and 39. chap. of Ezekiel.
the same Army is foretold, under the names of Gog and Magog.

Mr Petrie's Answer. 1. That these words are not meaned of the temporal
Monarchy after Christ's coming, it may be learned by the paralleld text where
it is said, And for my own part I am persuaded that this great Army here
spoken of, is the very same that shall be gathered together to the battle of
the great Day of God Almighty by the three unclean spirits like frogs, which
St. John saw come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the
false Prophet, Rev. 16.13. If he be persuaded, that this is the same battle, he
might likewise be persuaded, that the text of Joel 3. is not after the coming
of Christ; nor immediately at his coming, for that battle is in the time of
the sixth vial, after which follows another vial and time of trouble mentioned
in the rest of that chap. of the Revel.

2. We may be persuaded that the gathering of the Nations Joel 3.2. is not to
be understood of a battle after the coming or at the coming of Christ, if we
consider the words of the first verse. for behold in these days and in that
time etc. Heknitteth this chap. with the preceding, and shows the contents of
both to be at the same time: which is not any particular year or age, but
comprehends the whole deliverance of Israel or people of God, which was begun,
when the captive Jews were brought from Babylon, and continues til Christ's
second coming, as if the Prophet had said, When the Lord shall deliver his
people it shall not be a short and moment any deliverance, but this protection
shall continue til he have avenged him of all the enemies of his Church. As for
the Name of the valley of Jehoshaphat, there is no necessity to understand
thereby the valley of blessing, 2 Chro. 20.26. seeing that valley never has
this name in the Scripture: neither is it possible that all the Nations of the
world can conveen in that place: but the name may rather be taken appellatively
for the valley of God's judgment, as the Hebrew word imports, and the words
following allude thereunto: whereby the Prophet teaches us to consider the
etymology of the Name: and nevertheless he would have us to consider the
gracious deliverance of Jehoshaphat, that he will as certainly deliver his
people in all ages, as he did Jehoshaphat. And this is a more glorious trophee,
then if any one Nation were kept a thousand years in worldly prosperity.

Reply.

1. My words do show, that this prophecy of Joel, cannot be meant of the time
of Christ's Judging the dead (when they shall be all called out of their
graves) as it is commonly expounded; and that because it speaks of the
gathering together of a great Army against the Jews; but not after Christ's
coming (which opinion you falsely attribute to me) although against his
coming, as the parallel prophecy Rev. 16. at the 12, 13, 14. ver. does show,
for that Army is to be gathered into Armageddon in the time of the sixth vial,
and to be destroyed at the pouring out of the seventh vial, by our Savior and
his Heavenly Host, as the 15. ver. of the same chap. and the latter part of the
19. chap. of the Rev. from ver. the 11. etc. do plainly declare.

2. That which you here begin with was the ground of the former part of your
answer, but on what ground I know not; for I deny that this prophecy does
speak of a battle after Christ's coming, albeit I do affirm, that our
Savior's coming shall be when this great Army is gathered together against
the Jews as ready to destroy them. And your showing the coherence of this
chapter with the precedent, does make more against you then you are aware of,
for it is remarkable, that you rightly conclude from hence, [that the Prophet
shows the contents which I have urged out of both (being in the Hebrew all in
one chapter) to be at the same time.] And yet you say presently after [ that
this same time is not any particular year or age, but comprehends all the time
from the Jews return from Babylon to the second coming of Christ] which is as
if you had said, This particular time, is not a particular time, but many
particular times; yea thousands of particular times. This same time, is not the
same time, but more then the same time: yea as much more then the same time, as
is from the Jews return from Babylon to this same time. For the text in the
original points emphatically to one particular time, as the separate pronounes
((...) and (...)) subjoined to their substantives with the praefix (...) do
show. So that it is as if the Prophet had said, In those self same days, and
in that very time, in which I shall bring again the captivity of Judah and
Jerusalem, I will also gather all Nations, etc. And besides, how I pray can the
signs, that are to be showed more often then any man knows: or in any part of
so large a time as you speak of (all which your exposition grants) foreshew
the neernesse of the terrible Day of the Lord? which yet is the only end of
the wonders, that Joel says shall be showed, in the Heavens and in the earth
at that time. For our Savior Mat. 24. Luke 21. speaks of the same darkening of
the Sun and Moon that the Prophet does: and if his word may be taken, these
signs shall as infallibly show the near approach of his second coming, as
the shooting forth of the leaves of the figgtree does show that the summer is
nigh at hand. And thus the emphasi^ of the Hebrew text, and our Savior's
intimation of the true extent of the time betwixt these signs and his
appearing (the accomplishment of which signs you confess to be at the time of
the deliverance which the Prophet foretells) does both discover how notoriously
false your exposition of the [same time] is. And therefore the sense which you
by this means would thrust upon the prophet must needs be your own likewise,
and not the Prophet's. For the Prophet speaks here but of one Army, and the
parallel prophecy Rev. 16. speaks but of one Army, and Ezekiel. who foreshewes
the same battle, speaks but of one Army, and they all say that the Jews only
are to be opposed by this Army, and that a sudden destruction shall come on
this Army; and consequently the deliverance here spoken of, is to be short and
sudden, and the people to be delivered by it, are the Jews: And so here is
nothing at all touching God's special protection of his Church in all ages, or
of many deliverances, but here is an extraordinary Judgment foreshewing the
dreadful overthrow and downfall of all the enemies of the Jews, and the then
faithful Christians. And as concerning the place where this Army is to be
gathered together, this is chiefly to be taken notice of, that the prophecy
speaking but of one Army, it can be meant but of one place, and that to be in
the land of Judea, whither the Nations shall come up against the Jews shortly
upon their return, as the valley of Jehoshaphat here does intimate, and Ezekiel.
does plainly declare. Neither is the doubt you bring, about the possibility of
so many Nations meeting together in one place, of any consequence; For it is
not usual for a people wholly to leave their own country when they invade
their enemies land (for that were the ready way to lose their own land and to
starve themselves) but to send forth such a strength, as they may well raise
and maintain, and the Prophet here calls for their men of war, and their
mighty men; but not for all the men of these Nations, much less for all the
people of these Nations: and who knows not, that many hundred thousands may
against the time of a battle be drawn together within the space of a few
miles? and at once to overthrow so mighty an Army as the Prophets speak of,
and thereupon to make all tha^ are left of the Nations willingly to submit
themselves as tributaries to the Jews; and to settle not only one Nation, but
the whole world in a godly peace and prosperity for a thousand years after,
will doubtless set forth the Justice, mercy, and power of God in a more
glorious and wonderful manner, then all the victories of Christians or
Protestants put together, can do. Yea it will even abolish the memory of all
the miraculous victories and benefits, which God has wrought for the Jews
themselves, since the time, that they grew up into a Nation. And yet you fear
not to say, that this general and extraordinary deliverance, and exemption
from future calamities, will not so much declare Gods glory, as their
particular deliverances in formen ages do.

Israel's Redemption. Now how can we forsake the literal interpretation of
these prophecies, if we do but consider that the Jews are here distinguished
from all other Nations, of which we Gentiles who are now converted, were then a
part; and are by this name in the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles
still distingushed from them? If we consider what gross absurdities would
follow from the tropical construction of these or the like prophetical
revelations, wherein the event of things, is so plainly and distinctly
attributed to the Jews, who I am sure, did never since the prophets days
return from any captivity, with such an high hand, and with such a wonderful
victory over their enemies as is here foretold. And as for the Church that now
is, let the lamentable experience of all ages witness, whether she has not
been more often crowned with Martyrdom, then victory: whether the blood-thirsty
Mohammedan has not gotten much ground upon her. Yea whether He who claims to
be her Head, has not and does not, most of all waste and devour her.
According as it is written of him in the 13. of the Rev. at the 11. ver. And
therefore these prophecies can have no relation to the times of the Gentiles:
nor so much to the time of the Maccabees, as Cornelious a Lapide endeavors to
make these of Zechariah, to have for neither were their enemies smitten with
such plagues, nor brought into such subjection, as is here foretold: neither
was the house of David then so highly exalted, as is here promised; and Judas
and his brethren, who did then bear the chiefest sway, were not of the Tribe
of Judah, but of Levi; neither was the wealth of all the Heathen round about
then gathered together: neither did the Lord then Zech. 14.5.
descend and all the Saints with him. Unless we will say (as our Commentatour
does) that this was fulfilled, when the five comely men upon horses appeared
unto the enemies from Heaven, as it is in the 2. of the Maccab. the 10. chap. at
the 29. and 30. ver. Which apparition does as well expound these words, as he
does that other prophecy of Zephaniah, by which he would have us to understand,
God's calling the Gentiles to repentance by the preaching of the Gospel, when
as the text says plainly, that God's determination is to gather the Nations,
and to assemble the Kingdoms, that he may power upon them his indignation, even
all his Lam. 4.11.
fierce anger.

Mr Petrie's Answer. 1. We forsake not the literal interpretation of these
prophecies: for that is the literal interpretation, which is principally
intended, whether it be proper or figurative: but we forsake that restricted
interpretation, as only belonging to a temporal Monarchy of the Jews.

2. The Jews are not to be understood (in these promises) in way of opposition
to all Nations: for then all other men without exception shall be consumed in
the valley of Jehoshaphat: but the Jews and Israel are to be exponed of the
elect people of God, according to the fifth rule mentioned before, and the
Gentiles are all the enemies of the Church. And the faithful are called Jews
not only typically, but likewise for the special comfort of the Jews, because
they were hated of all Nations every where: which might have been unto them
occasion of despair: and therefore the Lord says unto them to this purpose,
How many or great soever your enemies shall be, I will judge them. And for the
same are the Jews often named in the promises of the new Testament, to show their
particular interest in the Kirk of Christ, notwithstanding their unworthiness
and contempt of the Gospel at the first preaching thereof. Now if the
prophecies be exponed this way (as they must be) of believers whether Jews or
Gentiles: and their enemies whatsoever, the enemies of the faith in any age,
none of these absurdities shall follow which are rehearsed here as in a
catalogue.

Reply.

1. You do not only forsake the literal sense, which as it is opposed to a
figurative is always meant of a proper sense (and is by Divines commonly used
for this, where no other sense is mentioned) but in forsaking this sense, you
forsake also the sense principally intended in these prophecies: And that it is
not a [restricted interpretation] which understands prophecies only of what,
and of whom they speak: but that is a loose and licentious interpretation,
which understands them of what, and of whom they speak not.

2. The only reason that you bring to prove, that in these prophecies the Jews
are not to be taken by way of opposition to all other Nations, is, [because
then without exception all other men should be consumed in the valley of
Jehoshaphat,] But though God says in the prophecy, I will gather all Nations
etc. yet he says not, I will gather all of all Nations, and consequently it is
to be understood only of some of every one of these Nations, and not of all
the men of all these Nations, as the words in the 9. ver. of the same chap. and
the parallel prophecy of Ezekiel. chap. 38. do show. And some few of these also
are to escape, as we may see Isa. 66. ver. 19, 20. And so we have no need to
seek out a figurative sense to solve this argument, although it be your
chiefest drift to make us do it. And therefore had rather take pains to
obscure, what is plainly delivered, then to open what is doubtfully spoken, as
by your words following we may perceive. For [ if these prophecies, say you, be
expounded of believers, whether Jews or Gentiles, then none of these
absurdities shall follow which are here rebearst] and so you take them in this
figurative sense without any other warrant for it, but your ( sic vol^, or) so
it must be: for testimony from Scripture you can bring none. And the reason you
allege to show why the faithful are called Jews, is a very strange one. For
[they are so called, you say, for the special comfort of the Jews, because
they were hated of all Nations everywhere, which might have been unto them an
occasion of despair.] But what likelihood is there that the Apostles (who
tried all ways and means to win the Gentiles unto, and to confirm them in
the faith) would call them by that Name which; you say, was so odious unto
them? and what comfort could it be to the Jews, (yea what readier way could
there be to make them distrust the truth of the Gospel, then) to conceive that
their Name, and the prophecies delivered in their Name, did belong to others,
and not to their own Nation? yet that which you add presently after [that the
Lord says unto them, How many or great so ever your enemies shall be, I will
judge them] was indeed an effectual remedy to keep them from despairing of
God's mercy, and their future deliverance; and consequently too from
acknowledging the figurative sense of these prophecies, or of the words [Jews,
Israel etc.] And whereas you say further, [And for the same are the Jews often
named in the promises of the new Testament, to show their particular interest
in the Church of Christ etc.] you herein in contradict what you say before,
that the Jews and Israel are to be exponed of the elect people of God. For if
they are thus to be exponed, they are not to be taken properly for the Jews as
here you affirm (and in which exception only they do show the Jews
particular interest in the Church of God.) And if these words are used both
properly and improperly in the new Testament, I pray tell us how we shall know,
when and where, they are to be taken properly, and literally, and when, and
where improperly, and figuratively. But it is time to leave this wavering
discourse, and to survey your answers to the objections you allege out of my
somer words.

The first objection. The Jews did never since the Prophets days return from
any captivity with such an high hand, and with such a wonderful victory over
their enemies, as is here prophesied.

Mr Petrie's Answer. Neither ever shall they return in such a manner, if ye
understand a worldly and civil pomp: for these promises cannot be understood
(as I have said) of any one exploit, nor of any age. The promises of God are
more glorious and more large.

Reply.

But these prophecies, as I have proved, may and must be properly understood:
and may and must be accomplished in one age, and in less then one age too. And
doubtless these Prophets [yea] is of more weight, then your [nay.] Neither
will these promises of God be the less, but the more glorious, for being
fulfilled in so short a time. For is it not more glory for a King to subdue his
enemies speedily then to be a long time about it?

The second objection.

As for the Church that now is let the lamentable experience of all ages
witness, whether she has not been more often crowned with martyrdom, then
victory.

Mr Petrie's Answer. This is as bad an opposition as the former: for Christ in
suffering did triumph over his enemies, Col. 2.15. and martyrdom is victory,
Romans 8.37. In all these things we are more then conquerours. Spiritual victory
consists with bodily suffering. Next, albeit the Church were oftener crowned
with martyrdom then victory, yet in several ages she has been crowned with
glorious victory, and her full glorification is a coming, and her enemies have
been and shall be smitten, and brought into subjection; and the house of David
is exalted in the person of Christ, and his members, and all the wealth of the
Nations has been employed or shall be employed for the use of the faithful
(albeit not in any particular year or age) and the Lord shall descend and the
Saints shall be with him.

Reply.

To this objection, which says that the Church of the Gentiles has not been
thus victorious, and by consequence is not spoken of in these prophecies, you
answer, [ that Christ in suffering did triumph. And martyrdom is victory; and
next, that albeit the Church were oftener crowned with martyrdom then victory,
yet she has been crowned with glorious victory.] So that as before by the Jews
and Israel you understood the Gentiles, to avoid the force of that reason; so
here for the like end, you would willingly put a figurative sense too upon the
victory mentioned in the prophecies: but it may not be; for these prophecies
do not foreshew the death and affliction of God's people by their enemies (as
it is in persecution and martyrdom) but their great deliverance, and their
enemies wonderful destruction. Yea such a destruction as never yet happened to
the enemies of God's Church, either Jewish or Christian. And therefore as your
spiritual conquering is very impertinently inferred, so no glorious outward and
bodily victory that the Church of the Gentiles has had, will match with this
that the Prophets speak of, nor indeed all that she has had. To my next
reasons which show that these prophecies of Zecha. were not fulfilled in the
times of the Maccabees, as Cornelious a Lapide expounds them, you say nothing:
but huddle them up together with that which you have said touching the Church
of the Gentiles. For [ the house of David, you say, is exalted in the person of
Christ and his members; and all the wealth of the Nations has been employed,
or shall be employed for the use of the faithful (albeit not in any particular
year or age) and the Lord shall descend and all the Saints shall be with him.]
But by the house of David is meant the lineage of David that are in captivity
(as by its being opposed to the tents of Judah it is manifest:) and as the
faithful Gentiles are not of the lineage of David, so though Christ be
descended of David as touching his humane nature; yet he is not in captivity,
but in Heaven; there to abide, til the time of this deliverance of his brethren
according to the flesh. And so your exposition of the [house of David] wholly
fails; for though the faithful in general are called in Scripture the seed of
Abraham, yet neither Gentiles nor Jews are in this respect called the house or
seed of David. And what made you take the wealth of the Nations in a proper
sense, when as you take all that is spoken of in the prophecies besides this,
in a figurative sense? doubtless had it been the wealth of the Jews, you would
have so expounded it as well as you did their houses, Vineyards, and gardens in
the 9. of Amos at the 14. ver. But though you do not so expound it, yet you
understand the text of such heathen only upon whom Gods Name is not called: and
by your words too, you seem to conceive that you have a better title to their
wealth then they themselves, which would be a hard matter for you to prove. And
that you may not think you have any interest in it by reason of this prophecy,
you must know that the gathering together of the wealth spoken of in Zech. is
against the time when the Lord shall descend, and all the Saints with him.
Which being at the time of the victory there foretold, shows your application
of this prophecy to the spiritual and corporal victories of the faithful
Gentiles, to be a mere wresting of the Scriptures.

Israel's Redemption. And if this be not to cry, Peace, peace; when there is no
peace. If this be not, to call evil good, and good evil; to put darkness for
light, and light for darkness; bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; What
is?

Mr Petrie's Answer. This is a pitiful exclamation, if it were true, but
exclamations are not always victorious. When we teach it shall be well unto
the children of God, and there is no peace unto the wicked: and set your hearts
on things above, and not on things on earth; is this to cry peace, when there
is no peace, or to call good evil? or is it not rather to put darkness for
light, when spiritual promises are restrained to a temporal prosperity of a
carnal people? and when God teaches faith by sense, that because we cannot
understand heavenly things til he insinuate them into our affections by
pleasing and known things, should we think that God has no higher sense in
these promises? All the earth belongs unto Christ, and in the midst of
Scythia some have lived happily, even more happily then many have done in
Judea. The promises then are not tied to Judea but belong unto all them who are
mentioned Joh. 11.51. he prophesied, that Jesus should die for that Nation, and
not for that Nation only, but that also he should gather together in one the
children of God that were scattered abroad, that is, through the world, as the
same Apostle expones himself, 1 John 2.2. But it may be, that this exclamation
was made against the conjecture of Cornelius a Lapide; then he should
distinguish the persons.

Reply.

Having spent your store and your stomach so vainly, that any one may perceive
your wilful mistake, you are forced in the close, to shift it off with this
pitiful excuse: [ but it may be that this exclamation was made against the
conjecture of Cornelius a Lapide; then he should distinguish the persons.] How?
it may be? and he should distinguish the persons? Surely there is no other
Commentatour spoken of; and almost a whole page is spent to show, that he is
out in his exposition of the Prophecies of Zech. which I have rehearst, and so
contrary to the true meaning of the Prophecy, which I have alleged out of
Zeph. that he interprets, the pouring out of Gods fierce anger on the Nations:
of his great mercy in sending the Gospel to be preached unto them: upon which
groundless exposition, I have inferred the words you are so much offended
with. And it may be you had more reason to be so, then you will be known of,
however (in stead of confirming that exposition, which perhaps you may too much
favor) you take occasion to tell us how conscionably you dispense the word of
God. And may we believe you? what made you then so scornfully to call that
remnant of the Jews, whose temporal prosperity the Prophets have so
frequently foretold, [a carnal people?] when as God himself says of them: I
will bring it health and cure, and I will cure them, and I will reveal unto
them abundance of peace and truth: and again, I will put my fear into their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me: and the remnant of Israel shall not
do iniquity, nor speak lies, etc. Yea, the regeneration of their persons, is
almost as often foretold, as the restoration of their Land, their deliverance
from captivity, or their Lord-ship over other Nations. And when you call them
[carnall] whom God so often calls spiritual, yea, spiritual in a far greater
measure then we Gentiles are, do you not put evil for good, darkness for
light, and bitter for sweet? And to what purpose do you tell us [ that some
have lived more happily in the midst of Scythia, then many have done in Judea?]
Does this prove that these Prophecies shall not be historically fulfilled? or
that when they are fulfilled, the Jews shall not live so happily in Judea, as
the Nations shall in other Countries? And it is to as much purpose, that you
tell us out of the 11. chapter of John at the 31. ver. that Caiaphas prophesied,
that Christ should die for the Jews, and not for them only, but that he
should gather together in one the children of God, that were scattered abroad
through the world, for does any one deny this? or does this prove, that the
Prophecies touching the Jews, are not to be understood of the Jews?
doubtless it does rather prove, that they can be no otherwise understood,
seeing the Jews cannot be made partakers of the benefits of Christ's death,
till they be called out of the darkness of unbelief (in which they have lived
so many hundred years) into the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, by the
effectual working of Gods Spirit in them, as the Prophets have said.

Israel's Redemption. But enough of the perplexity which shall happen to other
Nations when the Jews return. Now again of their return, and of the
prosperity which shall then happen to themselves. And it shall come to pass in
that day (says Isa. chap. 11. ver. 11. etc.) that the Lord shall set his hand
again the second time, to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be
left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Paphros, and from Cush, and from
Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the Islands of the Sea: and he
shall set up an Ensign for the Nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of
Israel, and Isa 49. ver. 12.25. chapter 30. uer. 18, 19. chap. 62. ver. 10, 11, 12.
Ezekiel. 20. ver. 32, 33, 34. etc.
gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the Earth:
the envy of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut
off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim: and the
Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian Sea, and with his mighty
wind shall he shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the seven
streams, and make men go over dry-shod, and there shall be an highway for
the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria, Mic. 7. ver. 15.
etc.
like as it was to Israel, in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.
You see here that the Prophet speaks plainly of a miraculous recovery of Gods
people: of the recovery, I say, of Judah, not from Babylon, but from the four
Jer. 16. ver. 14, 15. chap. 23. ver. 7, 8.
corners of the Earth: and together with Ephraim, with the ten Tribes from
Assyria, which as Joh. 7. ver. 35.
yet never came back, and therefore this is not yet fulfilled.

Mr Petrie's Answer. 1. There is no mention of returning here, but of
recovering of the remnant of his people. 2. Who be these his people? Look the
tenth verse, In that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for
an Ensign of the people: to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be
glorious: And behold how the Apostles expones these words, Romans 15.12. Esaias
says, there shall be a root of Jesse, and he that shall rise to reign over
the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust. Now whereas the Apostle expones
his people to be the Gentiles, may they not be ashamed, who will understand
only the Jews? so that there is meaned the recovery of Gods people, or the
Gentiles from Assyria, Egypt, or wheresoever they be.

Reply.

1. There is mention of recovering the remnant of his people from Assyria,
Egypt, Paphros, Cush, Elam, Shinar, Hamath, and the Islands of the Sea, and of
smiting the River, that men may go over dry-shod, and of a highway, for the
remnant of his people that shall be left, from Assyria, like as it was to
Israel in the day that he came up out of the Land of Egypt. And how much does
this recovering differ from a returning?

2. Who the people be that are meant in this Prophecy, the words Israel,
Judah, and Ephraim do show, and not the tenth verse where the Gentiles are
mentioned. For why should those things which concern the Jews here, be
understood of the Gentiles, which are only mentioned by the by as it were;
rather then that which is said of the Gentiles, be understood of the Jews, of
whom so much is spoken in this Chapter? And where have you learned to take
Judah, and Ephraim, or Israel for the Gentiles? Surely the Apostle expounds not
the Jews by the Gentiles, nor the Gentiles by the Jews, but rehearses the
10. ver. of this chapter, to show that Christ was to bring salvation to the
Gentiles, as well as unto the Jews (and this Prophecy of the Gentiles being
mixed with that which concerns the Redemption of the Jews, is more likely to
be meant of the coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles at Christ's next
appearing, then of the coming in of the substituted part of the Gentiles, in
the time of the Jews blindness.) And therefore seeing God has made mention
of the Gentiles by name, in those Prophecies which concern them; and of the
Jews by name in those which concern them: it behooves us to give to the Jew,
the Prophecies that bear the Image and superscription of the Jews: and to the
Gentile those which bear the Image and superscription of the Gentiles: and not
so needlessely, so irrationally, and so unjustly to give unto the Gentiles, all
that belongs unto the Jews. Whereas then the Apostle quotes this Prophecy out
of Isaias, only as a testimony to prove, that Christ came as well for the good
of the Gentiles as the Jews: if you had any regard of what you say, you would
never have called it an exposition: nor have published it to the world as a rule
to interpret the Prophecies, which concern the Jews, of the Gentiles. The
objections which you have alleged against your self out of the foresaid
Prophecy, are these.

The first objection. It is said, He shall assemble the outcasts of Israel,
and the dispersed of Judah.

Mr Petrie's Answer. The Gospel (which is Christ's Standard) has been preached
unto them, Jam. 1.1. and so their assembling is into the bosom of the Church.

Reply.

And so you separate these words from the rest of the Prophecy, and apply them
to the calling of the Jews at the first preaching of the Gospel, of purpose to
delude the Reader; for the Prophecy speaks of their return into their own
Country, and not at all of the preaching of the Gospel unto them in other
Countries, as any one may perceive. And yet although the Gospel was in the
first days thereof preached to the Jews scattered abroad, what effect had it
amongst them? surely St. Paul Act. 13. ver. 45, 46. and in the 1 Thessalonians. 2. ver.
14, 15, 16. does testify, that such was their malice against the Apostles for
preaching of it, that they labored all they could, to raise up enemies against
them, thereby to hinder the growth of the Gospel, not only amongst their own
Nation, but amongst the Gentiles also: so that even in this sense, Israel and
Judah, the twelve Tribes are not yet assembled. And it is observable how
palpably you here contradict your former words, for here you expound Israel and
Judah properly of the Jews only, as your quoting of the first chap* and first
ver. of the Epistle of St. James does show, and yet in the second part of your
Answer you tell us, that both the Prophet and St. Paul do expound [his people]
to be the Gentiles.

The second objection. It is said, the envy of Ephraim shall depart, and the
adversaries of Judah shall be cut off, etc.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. The meaning is, whereas there had been contentions
twixt the Tribes one against another, and both against the Gentiles, and
Gentiles against them both: under Christ shall be an end of that malice.

2. In the citation of this Prophecy the 14. ver. is omitted, because they
cannot see, how it can be verified of the peaceable Kingdom, which they
imagine: but seeing the words preceding and the words following contain one
and the same Prophecy, and these words in the middle part cannot be exponed of
that Monarchy, it is evident, that no part of this Prophecy can be understood
of that Monarchy, but the meaning is plain, if they be exponed of the
Christian Church, thus, The Apostles flee, that is, quickly preach unto other
Nations, and brought them in a short space unto the obedience of Christ: not
going in troops from Province to Province, but at the same time they went one
by one into severe^ Nations.

3. This ver. being omitted, the 15. ver. is quoted, and out of it they do
imagine, that a way shall be made for the Jews through the Sea, and all floods
shall be dried up before them. But if these words shall be exponed properly,
what kind of Miracle shall that be? shall the Jews who are scattered into all
the corners of the Earth, have a dry passage through every river? and the
Egyptian, or Red Sea be destroyed? Or is it not rather in a spiritual sense,
that the Lord will remove all impediments, which may hinder the course of the
Gospel: and he has opened a way into that Kingdom of Heaven, from which we
were exiled in Adam, and spiritual Pharaoh is drowned, or destroyed in the
Red Sea or bloody death of Christ; and by a mighty wind of preaching, the Lord
has made his power known every where, even as sensibly, as when he brought
Israel out of Egypt.

Reply.

1. In this first part of your answer, you say, [ that whereas there had been
contentions twixt the Tribes one against another, and both against the
Gentiles, and the Gentiles against them both, under Christ shall be an end of
that malice.] All which is very true, and here the Reader may see you at once
confess, all that we affirm: for you take Ephraim and Judah properly, and
affirm, that they are again to be united under Christ; and not only one with
another, but with the Gentiles too, all malice being laid aside. And is not
this to say with us, that it is not yet fulfilled? for can you prove that the
twelve Tribes are already converted, and united? or that all malice is at an
end twixt Jews and Gentiles? certainly you cannot, and what need we then any
further witness? for (habemus confitentene reum) your own mouth has
condemened you, and quitted us.

2. This part of your answer has no relation to the objection, but is a
quarrel against us for omitting the 14. ver. in the citation of this
Prophecy, which we did you say [because we saw that it could not be verified
of the peaceable Kingdom which we imagine.] But this Kingdom is plainly held
out unto all in the word of God, and is not the fruit of our imagination, which
is nothing worth but as it is enlightened from hence. And though the 14. ver.
will not consist with the peace of this Kingdom, yet it will very well consist
with the return of the Jews before this Kingdom, who in their passage to
their Land may have many particular victories over their Enemies, as well in
this return, as in that out of Egypt only; and this is all that the 14. ver.
does show, with which the verses preceding and following speaking only of
their return (and alledgd to show their return) do better agree then with
the Apostles preaching of the Gospel to several Nations, whereof there is not
a word spoken in this verse, nor in any other that I have alleged: and seeing
you have interpreted Judah and Ephraim in the 13. ver. of the Jews in
opposition to the Gentiles, how could you expound the 14. verse. there the same
persons are meant of the Apostles? or understand by their spoiling them of the
East, the preaching of the Gospel?

3. That the tongue of the Egyptian sea shall be utterly destroyed, and the
river give a passage to the Jews (as Jordan did in time past) is the express
word of God in this chapter, and is the hand of the Lord shortened, think you,
that he cannot do such Miracles now, as he did heretofore? or is his mind
changed, that he will not do what he has said? or has he forgotten what he
spoke by the Prophets so long ago? I know you dare not affirm ought of this,
and yet surely some such impious thought does seem to be the best ground that
you have, for the strange metamorphosis that you make of this Prophecy, by
your mystical application of it: For [what kind of Miracle say you, shall that
be? shall the Jews who are scattered into all corners of the Earth, have a dry
passage through every river? and the Egyptian (...) Red Sea be dried up?] But
you forget your self, for the text says [River] not [Rivers] and the [the
River] is in the Scripture by way of excellency put for Euphrates, and yet
admit it were in the Text, as you say; it were but the reiteration of the same
Miracle, and cannot God as well make all rivers yield them a dry passage as
any one river? has he power to do it once, and has he not power to do it
again? yea as often as he pleases? or can he not do greater Miracles then any
here foretold? or then any that he has hitherto done? Why then should your
Faith strain thus at a gnat, at the drying up of a river, or the destroying of
the tongue of the Egyptian Sea; when as it can so easily swallow a Camel, in
destroying the plain history of Gods word, by incredible allegories, and
incongruous interpretations?

Israel's Redemption. Such another Prophecy is that of Ezekiel. in his 37. chap.
at the 19. ver. Thus says the Lord God, I will take the stick of Joseph, which
is in the hand of Ephraim, and the Tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put
them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick in my
hand, and at the 21. ver. Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among
the Heathen whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and will
bring them into their own Land: and I will make them one Nation in the Land
upon the Mountains of Israel, and one King shall be King to them all; and they
shall be no more two Nations, neither shall they be divided into two Kingdoms
any more at all, neither shall they defile themselves any more with their
Idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions:
but I will save them out of all their dwelling places, wherein they have sinned
and will cleanse them: for they shall be my people, and I will be their God.
And, in Hosea, 1. ver. 10. Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as
the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered, and it shall come to
pass that in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people,
there it shall be said, Ye Ier 24. v. 6, 7. c. 32. ver. 37.38. Zech* 13. ver. 9.
are the Sons of the living God. Then shall the children of Judah, and the
children of Israel be gathered together, and appoint themselves one Head, and
they shall come up out of the land, for great shall be the Day of Jezreel. In
both which Prophecies the Lord has promised, that the Jews shall again live
under one King only (as they had done before the division of the Tribes) and
that in their own land too, which has not been yet performed, and therefore
the time of these Prophecies is yet to come.

Mr Petrie's Answer. 1. The like Prophecy is likewise exponed: but for further
clearing of these I add. That of Ezekiel. 37. is exponed by Christ Joh. 10.14.16.
I am the good Shepherd and know my sheep -- and other sheep I have which are
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice, and
there shall be one fold and one Shepherd. Where you see that Christ is the
Shepherd (and by consequence the King too, unless they will understand the 24.
ver. of Ezekiel. 37. of two different persons) and the people over whom he
reigns are his sheep, not only of the Jews, but of another fold, whom
Christ brings into the same fold, that is, into the same Church. 2. The same
words speaking of Christ and calling him David and King and Shepherd, show that
they must he spiritually understood. 3. The 25. ver. may be more easily
understood in the spiritual then earthly sense, to wit, the land that I have
given unto Jacob, and they shall'd well therein for ever, and my servant shall
be their Prince for ever: for that land was not given unto Jacob, neither do
the Millenaries say, that the Jews shall dwell for ever in Jerusalem, but for a
1000 years, and then Christ's Kingdom shall cease. But expone that one word
[land] typically for the thing typified thereby, and all the other words go
currently, even to the end of the chap. as we see the Apostle expones the 27.
ver. of the Corinthians as a part of these people. 2 Cor. 6.16. Now seeing
certainly Christ is the King and Shepherd, and the people are the Jews and
Gentiles, who were strangely divided, but now are one Church by faith in
Christ, therefore the people of Israel and Ephraim (who after the division were
always idolatrous) may well be exponed typically for the Gentiles, and so the
union is easily understood, which otherwise very hardly or scarcely can be
conceived, seeing now through many ages Ephraimites are not known in any part
of the earth. As for that text of Hosea, it is exponed of the Gentiles Romans
9.25.26. and therefore the Prophet changes the word Israel into Jezreel, that
is, the seed of God; signifying that the time wherein the Lord shall gather his
seed or the faithful in all Nations from the bondage of the Devil, shall be
very great and wonderful to all the world.

Reply.

1. Surely your further clearing is no other then a further clouding, as the
very reading of this prophecy, and that which our Savior has said, Joh. 10.
ver. 14. and 16. is of it self sufficient to discover. For Ezekiel. speaks of
uniting the Jews together under one King in their own land, and our Savior
speaks of uniting the Jews and Gentiles into one Church, after a certain
number of elect Gentiles should be called. Other sheep, says he, I have which
are not of this fold, (that is, other elect servants which are not of this
Nation) them also I must bring, and there shall be one fold and one Shepherd.
Where it is to be noted by the words [them also I must bring] that he speaks
only of such elect Gentiles as were to be called before the Jews and Gentiles
should make one sheepfold, and not after they were one sheepfold. For when they
are all brought, then it is, that there shall be one sheepfold, and not while
they are bringing. No, the words of our Savior Mat. 21. at the 43. ver. will
not admit of such a meaning, for The Kingdom of God, says he, shall be taken
from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruit thereof. Whereby it is
evident, that the [Other sheepe] he speaks of in the 10 chap. of St. John,
should be brought to the faith, when the Nation of the Jews should be deprived
of the means of salvation: and consequently when it could not possibly be one
Church. And therefore in saying that the Jews and Gentiles are at this time
one sheepfold, you contradict our Savior, and affirm that the Jews are now
saved without the ordinary means of salvation: For this they have not, but
shall have it when the time comes, in which the Jews and Gentiles shall be one
sheepfold. And then also the Jews shall be one Kingdom agane in their own
land, and Christ shall reign over both Jews and Gentiles together. And thus
our Savior's words do neither expound Ezekiel. prophecy, nor show that the Jews
and Gentiles are now one sheepfold. But rather point out the time when Ezekiel.
prophecy shall be fulfilled, to wit, when the Jews and Gentiles shall be one fold
under one Shepherd. So much have you mist your aim in alleging these
prophetical words of Christ.

2. The words, David, King and Shepherd, will no more prove that the temporal
prophecies (or temporal part of the prophecies) in which they are used, are to
be spiritually and figuratively understood, then Gods words to David, Thou
shall feed my people Israel 2 Samuel 5. ver. 2. will prove, that David's Kingdom
was not a temporal Kingdom; nor he a temporal King. Or then David's own words
of his people, But these sheep what have they done? will prove that the whole
Kingdom of the Jews were all faithful persons.

3. Being conscious, that all which you have said before, to make men take
these prophecies in a mystical sense will naught avail you, if the word
[land] in the prophecies should be properly understood, of the land of Canaan;
you now endeavor to persuade them to take this figuratively also, and your
first reason to induce them to it, is (like to that by which Jereboam dissuaded
the Israelites from going up to Jerusalem,) because [ it may be more easily
understood, you say, in the spiritual then an earthly sense] But what is that
spiritual sense which may so easily be understood, and yet was so hard to be
described, that you could not tell us what it was. But sure I am, that God has
told us by the Prophet what land he minds to join the Tribes together in; even
in their own land, ver. 21. in the land upon the mountains of Israel, ver.
22. in the land that he gave unto Jacob his servant, ver 25. which
circumstances do infallibly manifest, that it can be meant of no other land or
place but Judea. And therefore the second reason you bring to show, that it is
best to take the word [land] spiritually, is both false and impious. For [ that
land, you say, was not given to Jacob.] No? did not God say to Jacob in a
dream; The land whereon thou lie to thee will I give it, and to thy seed
etc. Genesis 28.13. and has he not said here in this prophecy, the land that I
gave unto Jacob my servant? no marvel th n that you can so lightly reject all
the plain texts of Scripture that speak for us; when as you dare thus affre^r
God himself, and tell him to his face, that he did not do that which he says
he did do. Neither will the words [for ever] in the text any whit excuse you,
seeing the Lord says plainly, that he gave [That land to Jacob,] of which he
says, that they and their children, and their childrens children should dwell
in it for ever. And yet the very next words [wherein your Fathers have dwelt]
do put it out of doubt, that it is meant of Judea, and consequently, the
dwelling of their childrens children in it for ever; is to be understood of
their dwelling in it successively: and the word [for ever] is to be taken
finitely, for a long time; to wit, as long as men shall succeed each other on
the Earth (as it is in many other places of Scripture) and (...) fi^i^^ly, for
time without end. And whereas you say, that (...) in the 2 Cor. 6.16. expounds
the 27. verse of this Prophecy, of the Corinthians [as a part of the People
the Prophet here speaks of] it is not so, for as the words which St. Paul makes
use of, are rather taken out of the 26, of Leviticus, at the 13. ver. where
they are more fully delivered, then out of this Prophecy: so they are not
alleged by the Apostle to make the Corinthians think, that they were part of
the people spoken of in those places, where any of the words, that the Apostle
quotes, are used, (which is evidently false) but to show that the Faithful
(whether Jews or Gentiles) had all the same spiritual fellowship with God, and
therefore should have the like care not to defile their bodies, which are the
Temples of God; with the unfruitful works of darkness, of which he gives a
particular instance to the Corinthians, touching the consorting with
unbelievers and Infidels, in their Feasts and rites celebrated in honor of
their Idols, and that these words were only thus applied in the Epistle to the
Cor. the very next verse in Ezekiel. does declare, wherein the Israelites are
opposed to all other Nations; so far were other Nations from being included
in the Prophecy as a part of them. And therefore this proof is too weak also
to support your conclusion [that the Jews and Gentiles, who were strangely
divided, are now one Church by Faith in Christ] yea doubtless they were never
divided with greater hatred one against the other, then they have been since
the preaching of the Gospel, and our Savior has told us, that the means of
salvation was to be taken from the Jews, that a part of the Gentiles, (even
the Gentiles that have been a long time the Church of God) might be saved by
it; before it should be given to them again, and St. Paul in the 1 Thessalonians. 2.
ver. 16. says also, that wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. And can yet
all the spiritual and temporal Prophecies which concern them, be at the same
time (the time of their unbelief, and of Gods wrath against them) fulfilled in
them? these are gross contradictions, and it is not the conversion of a few
Jews in many ages, or of all that have hitherto been called by the Gospel, that
will solve the doubt, for the Prophets speak of a National conversion and
deliverance. And besides you your self do tell us [that through many ages
Ephraimites are not known in any part of the Earth] and how then can they help
make one Church with the Gentiles (as you say) if there are now no such people
on the earth? can there be a union betwixt something and nothing? But this slam
was brought in as a reason wherefore the people of Israel and Ephraim should be
expounded typically for the Gentiles. And if there were no Jews left; yet why
should these Prophecies be the rather expounded of the Gentiles for that? were
it not better to say, that they were conditional Prophecies, and should have
been fulfilled if the Jews had been obedient to Gods word, then without any
necessity to make them types of the Gentiles salvation? And yet we do not
grant, that there are no Ephraimites now, although none are called so; for none
of the Jews are now called after the names of their particular Tribes, at least
by the Gentiles; and why should that Tribe rather then the rest? or why should
this prove that Tribe to be consumed, rather then the rest? doubtless it is
sufficient to prove them remaining, if the twelve Tribes are remaining: and
they were remaining in the Apostles days, as St. James, c. 1. v. 1. and St.
Paul, Act. 26 v. 7. do witness, and St. Joh. Rev. 7. reckons them up as
remaining near the time of Antichrists confusion, and as then called to the
Faith, as some Interpreters understand that vision, where though Ephraim be not
mentioned, yet Joseph is, which is all one, and Mr. Mede says that he is called
by this name as unworthy to be called by his own name, in that catalogue of
Converts, because he had been a ringleader to Idolatry: and perhaps also now
the Tribes should again become one Kingdom, his name was concealed, for that
he had formerly been the occasion of the dividing of the Tribes into two
Kingdoms, and how could you tell us here, that through many ages Ephraimites
are not known in any part of the earth, when as you say but a little before,
page 18. that all malice betwixt the Tribes, and betwixt them and the Gentiles
should be at an end under Christ? For if this bealreadie fulfilled (as you
teach) what should consume the Ephraimites after all malice betwixt them and
all others was departed? and if it be not yet fulfilled (as indeed it is not)
you must either recall what you before affirm should be done under Christ, or
else confess, that the Ephraimites must needs remain to the accomplishment of
it. Now as for the Prophecy of Hosea, it is to be understood of the Jews, as
well as this of Ezekiel. and the word Jezreel, which signifies the seed of God,
will help you nothing. For shall we think that God will make his power known
after a wonderful manner in the redeeming of an unbelieving Nation? nay, but
because the Jews shall then be even the whole Church on earth: because I say,
they shall be believers when almost all others are fallen into unbelief;
therefore great shall be the day of Jezreel, of the deliverance of this seed of
God.

Israel's Redemption. For though this of Hosea be understood by some
Expositours of the vocation of the Gentiles, that is, of the Christian Church
in these our days; yet doubtless, they are much mistaken in this exposition,
for seeing this and the former Prophecy concern one and the same thing, to
wit, the uniting of all the Tribes under one King, therefore they must needs
receive their accomplishment at one and the same time: and so this must be
referred to the Jews, as well as the other.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. This is a quarrel against the Apostle: and now let all
the world judge, whether he or the Millenaries being contrary shall be
followed, especially seeing now we have found, that our Savior exponing the
former Prophecy of Ezekiel, and the Apostle exponing this like Prophecy of
Hosea, do accord harmoniously.

Reply.

That we neither quarrel with the Apostle, nor with any man else, may be seen
by our words; for of the Apostle we speak not, and the worst that we say of
others, is, that they are mistaken: and whether this be so worthy to be called a
quarrel, as your calling it a quarrel against the Apostle, is to be called an
egregious untruth, [let all the world judge,] and let it judge it too, whether
our Saviors words in the 10. chap. of St. John, do expound the former
Prophecy of Ezekiel, of which he speaks not a word. And though the Apostle
alleges some of the words of this Prophecy, yet it is not to show that the
Prophecy is to be understood of the Gentiles, but to show that God did reject
some and choose others of the Israelites, as he pleased.

Israel's Redemption. And besides, how can that belong to the Gentiles, which
was prophesied only of the Jews, as is declared by the Prophets wife of
whoredoms, and children of whoredoms, which he took of purpose to upbraid
the Idol-worship, and spiritual whoredoms of the Israelites, ver. 2? and
therefore when she conceived, and bare him the second son, Call his name,
said God, Loammi: for ye are not my people, and I will not be your God; the
Israelites then they were, to whom this Prophet was sent, and of whom it was
said, Ye are not my people.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. It was not prophesied of the Jews only: for it is
plain, that Hosea speaks of the Israelites, as well us of the Jews: and
generally the Apostle speaks Romans 10.12. there is no difference between the Jew
and the Greek: for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him.
So that albeit the Prophet was sent personally unto the Israelites, yet his
words were no less true and meaned of the Gentiles, who then were not the
people of God, but now through Christ are the people of God: for whosoever
shall call upon the Name of God shall be saved.

Reply.

I have here called the ten Tribes Jews in opposition to the Gentiles, and you
say that [this was not prophesied of the Jews only, for it is plain that
Hosea speaks of the Israelites, as well as of the Jews] A wild exception, for
are not these Israelites, Jews? certainly Israelites and Jews, are the proper
names of that Nation. And though after the division of the Tribes, Israel and
Judah were often used to distinguish the two Tribes from the ten, and the ten
from the two; yet the word [Jews] was never thus used. For by this Name all the
Tribes are called in the History of Hester, and in many other places, and in
that instance that you bring out of the Romans chap. 10. ver 12. the word [Jew]
is taken indifinitely for any Jew. And wherefore is it that you urge these
words of the Apostle? do you think that it proves the name [Jew] to be
indifferently taken for a Jew or a Gentile? surely these words show, that the
believing Gentile is as acceptable to the Lord as the believing Jew: and that
there is nothing in the Jew which can move God to bestow grace on him, rather
then on the Gentile, as the following words confirm: but they show not that
God takes a faithful Jew for a faithful Greek, nor a faithful Greek for a
faithful Jew. And therefore you cannot conclude from hence [that albeit the
prophet was sent personally unto the Israelites, yet his words were no less
true and meaned of the Gentiles] for though through Christ all believers are
the people of God, yet through Christ a believer of one Nation, is not made a
believer of another Nation: and though every one that (confidently) calls upon
the name of the Lord shall be saved; yet every one that calls on the name of the
Lord shall not thereby become a Jew. And how can you take Israelites for
Gentiles, who are of different Nations from them; and yet will not take
Israelites for Jews, which is a Name belonging equally to all the Tribes? But
you herein condemn St Paul, who sometimes calls himself a Jew, and sometimes
an Israelite; and could he be both, if these Names do not equally belong to
the same Nation?

Israel's Redemption. And the place where they were told so was their own
land, and therefore in that place it shall again be said unto them, Ye are the
sons of the living God, ver. 10. And this Piscator grants to be the meaning
of it here in the Prophet: but withal he holds, that it is applied in the 9.
of the Romans to the conversion of the Gentiles, because the Israelites being
thus rejected of God, were become like unto the Gentiles, who until the
preaching of the Gospel were not his people: but notwithstanding this reason,
me thinks it is very unlikely, that the Apostle should borrow a prophecy from
the Jews, to prove Gods mercy toward the Gentiles, which is in sundry places
of the Scripture, so properly and distinctly foreshewne, as you may see by the
authorities which are urged to this purpose in the v. 19.20
10. and v. 9.10, 11.12.
15. chap. of the same Epistle.

Mr Petrie's Answer. 1. Where it is said ver. 10. in that place, ye may read
on the margin, in stead of that it was said etc. and therefore that word
proves nothing.

2. It is no less true, that the Gentiles are the people of God even in the
same lands where they did not serve God. 3. This is no applying by way of
similitude, but accommodating ( as Piscator speaks) to another particular, that
as the Israelites by Idolatry became like unto the Gentiles, so the Gentiles
receiving the Gospel are Jews or the people of God. And this exposition is not
only likely, but very certain, seeing the Apostle expones these prophecies of
God's mercy toward the Gentiles, as you may see by the authorities, which are
urged to this purpose in the 10. and 15. chap. of the Epistle to the Romans and
elsewhere.

Reply.

1. Arias Montanus renders the original (Et erit in loco, quo) without any such
marginall note at all. And the Septuagint reads it ((...)) and it shall come to
pass, that in the place where, etc. And this expression agrees best with the
scope of the Prophecy, which foretells their return again to their own
Land; in which it had been said unto them, ye are not my people, yea, the
Apostle too alleges these words, agreeable to the translation in the text:
and in the latter part of the sentence relates to them with an ((...)) illic
vocabuntur, there they shall be called, etc. And therefore this proves so much,
that of force you must grant the accomplishment of the Prophecy in its proper
sense.

2. And what though (the Gentiles are the people of God even in the same Lands
where they did not serve God?) shall not therefore the Jews be called again,
the people of God, in the same Land where once they forsook God? or shall this
Prophecy be therefore understood of them, to whom the Prophet was not sent to
say, as he did to the Israelites, Ye are not my people?

3. I think not that the Apostle did apply this Prophecy by way of similitude
to the Gentiles, and much less that he did accommodate it to them, as to those
of whom it was meant by the Holy Ghost. For the Holy Ghost fore-shewes not the
calling of the Gentiles under the name of the Israelites, but in their own
name. And surely if it cannot be proved, that the Apostle expounds these
Prophecies of Gods mercy toward the Gentiles, till the Authorities alleged in
the 10. and 15. chap. of this Epistle to the Romans do show it, it will never be
proved: for those Prophecies speak only of the Gentiles, and how then do
they expound in any degree the Prophecies of the Jews in Ezekiel. Hosea, or any
other Prophet?

Israel's Redemption. And therefore I should rather take it to be brought in by
St. Paul, as a testimony establishing the freeness of Gods election, which is
the Doctrine he there maintains, and does in these words (as he did before in
the example of Jacob and Esau) give an instance of it touching the Israelites,
whom God had for a long time rejected, and would yet again receive; and that
because (as the Potter has power over the clay to make of the same lump, one
vessel to honor, and another to dishonor, so) He has mercy on whom he will
and whom he will he hardneth.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. This subterfuge will not serve, for he says in the
preceding page, that the Prophecy, Hosea 1. is meant of the Jews; and if that
be true (which I have proved to be false) it is not meant of the Israelites.

2. The Apostle verse 24. is speaking expressly of the Faithful, not of the
Jews only, but also of the Gentiles, and hitherto be uses that testimony of
Hosea.

3. Of the Gentiles does he expone the same testimonies in other texts, where
he is not speaking of election, nor of the freeness thereof, as 2. Cor. 6.16.

Reply.

1. In the preceding page I have said, that the Prophecy Hos. 1. is meant
only of the Jews, [ and if that be true, say you, it is not meant of the
Israelites.] O rare criticisme! O profound subtletie Jews are not Israelites,
and Israelites are not Jews. But surely if it be meant of the one it must
needs be meant of the other: for they are both the names of the same people,
and the Apostle calls them by both in the 9. chap. of the Romans ver. 4. and 24.
Yea, they are indifferently used one for the other in the last part of your
former Answer, for [ as the Israelites by Idolatry became like unto the
Gentiles; so, say you, the Gentiles receiving the Gospel are Jews.] So ready
are you to censure that for an error in another, which you allow for a truth,
when spoken by your self.

2. It Is true that the Apostle speaks expressly of the Jews and Gentiles, in
the 24. verse, but it is not true ( that hitherto be uses the testimony of
Hosea,) for the 24. ver. has relation only to the preceding verse, and not to
that which follows, so that it is as if the Apostle had said, And that (...)
might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, even on us
(as on a part of them) which he had before prepared unto glory, and has now
called, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles. For the 19, 20, 21,
22, 23, and 24. verses are brought in by way of digression, to satisfy such as
might from the discourse of the freeness of Gods election, be ready to
dispute against his Justice: and at the 25. v. he returns again to confirm
this Doctrine, partly by other Scriptures in Hosea, and Isaiah, which show Gods
eternal purpose, in passing by some, and receiving others of the Israelites:
and partly, by Gods receiving the Gentiles even in the time of his passing by
the Israelites, as the 30, 31, 32, and 33. verses do manifest.

3. You said before, that the words alleged in the 2 Cor. 6. chap. at the 16.
ver. I will dwell in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my
people, were taken out of Ezekiel. chap. 37. ver. 27. and are they now taken out
of Hosea too? but what is it that you will not say, to make a show of
answering, and to puzzle the unlearned Reader? for the Apostle neither mentions
Ezekiel. nor Hos. and it is most likely that he took these words out of the 26.
chap. of Levit. at the 13. ver. (as I have said) and he makes no other use of
them, but to show that the faithful Corinthians were become Gods people, and
therefore should no longer yoke themselves with the servants of Belial, either
in the observance of their Idolatrous Feasts and pastimes, or in any
extraordinary familiarity.

Israel's Redemption. And this the 14. verse seems to confirm, where it is
said, Isaiah also cries concerning Israel: For what makes the copulative
[also] here, if the Apostle understood not the former Prophecy of Israel, as
well as this? And yet in what sense soever you please to take it here, I hope,
it is already sufficiently declared, that it concerns the Israelites only in
the Prophet, which is as much as the subject of my discourse requires.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. The copulative knitteth the testimonies, and shows that
they must both be understood of these people, ver. 24. this is yet more cleared
by the 30. ver. what shall we say then? that the Gentiles who followed not
after righteousness have attained to righteousness, but Israel who followed
after the Law of righteousness has not attained. There it is manifest, that
he speaks of the Gentiles attaining to righteousness, and of Israel not
attaining it: and nevertheless the opposition is not simply of the two people,
but of their seeking righteousness two contrary ways, to wit, by Faith, and
by works of the Law. And now ye see it sufficiently declared, that these
Prophecies do not belong unto the Jews or Israelites only.

Reply.

The copulative knitteth the testimonies, and shows that the testimonies of
Hosea must be understood of the Israelites, as well as the testimonies of
Isaiah; and if these are not properly to be understood, why says the Apostle,
Isaiah also cries concerning Israel, and not rather concerning the Gentiles,
or the Nations? And this is fully cleared by the 30. and 31. verses, where the
Gentiles and Israel are plainly opposed; and that that passage is inferred upon
the former Prophecies of Hosea and Isaiah, these words in the 30. verse
immediately following them, What shall we say then? do clearly show, and
therefore those Prophecies must needs be understood of the Jews only. And if
this be not enough, consider also what the Apostle says in the 3. and 4.
verses of the same chapter, I could wish says he, that my self were accursed
from Christ for my Brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh, who are
Israelites; where as he shows his great heaviness for them, because they were
cast off; so in the following dispute about the freeness of Gods election, he
alleges those Scriptures which do foreshew their passing by, and receiving
again; and therefore if we know who those Israelites are, that are St. Paul's
brethren according to the flesh, we need not doubt what Israelites Hosea and
Isaiah speak of.

Israel's Redemption. There is yet in the 3. chapter of Hosea, at the 4. v. one
more material Argument for the Jews deliverance. The children of Israel,
says he, shall abide many days without a King, and without a Prince, and
without a sacrifice, and without an image, and without an Ephod, and without
Teraphim: afterward shall the children of Israel return, and seek the Lord
their God, and Isa. 9. v. 6, 7.
David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter
days. Which Prophecy cannot possibly be as yet fulfilled, for if it be meant
only of the ten. Tribes, amongst whom Hose^ prophesied, it is Hier. Zanch.
Pareus, Rivetus, Lyra, Dr. Mayer.
confessed that they did never yet return, and if of the other two, it must be
meant of their captivity since our Savior's coming, for till then, the
Scepter could not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, as
Jacob foretold, Genesis the 49. at the 10. verse, and therefore till then they
could not be without a Prince, or Governors of that Tribe, although they were
long before tributaries to other Nations. And this also is intimated by those
words (the latter days) which are no where put for the time before the
incarnation of Christ.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. This argumentation fails in both parts, but first
mark that all these words cannot be meant properly: for the word David cannot
be understood of Salomons Father, but of Christ the son of David, or typified
by David: and therefore that Prophecy could not be fulfilled till the
incarnation of Christ, and then it might be fulfilled.

2. And consequently these words, the latter days, though they be no where put
for the days before the incarnation, yet they are often put for the days of
the Gospel, seeing in the last days God has spoken unto us by his Son. Now
the first part of the dilemma is false: for if that Prophecy be meant of the
ten Tribes, as they abode many days without a King etc. so, who dare deny,
that they did return, and seek the Lord their God and Christ their King? when
the Gospel was preached to the scattered strangers not only through Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, 1 Pet. 1.1. but likewise to Syria, Assyria, etc. and
expressly to the twelve Tribes scattered abroad, Jam. 1.1. who can hold the
negative, that the children of Israel did never return and seek Christ? and
the other part is no less faulty: for Christ came not till the Scepter was
departed from Judah: and these words, the latter days, are not to be referred
unto the 4. verse, ( as if the Israelites should abide many days without a
King, and sacrifice in the latter days, and then return) but unto the fifth
ver* in the end whereof they are, and so in the latter days they shall return
(not into their Land, this Text says not so, but) and seek the Lord their God
and Christ their King, as they did Act. 2.4.1. and 4.4. and in several ages.
And so both the parts of this Argument being false, the words of Hosea 3. are
more against the temporal Monarchy then for it.

Reply.

1. That by David here Christ is meant, is not to be doubted, but that
therefore this Prophecy was fulfilled at Christ's incarnation, it is to be
proved, and so it is too, that the Rhetorical and tropicall sense of some
words and phrases in a Prophecy, does fasten a mystical meaning upon it; for
the sense of a Prophecy takes not its denomination from the words in which it
is spoken, but from the things it speaks of, if it speaks of material things
(whether in a proper or figurative strain) it is a material Prophecy; if of
spiritual things (whether in a proper or figurative strain) it is a
spiritual Prophecy, if of both, it is partly material, and partly spiritual,
and the title of a Prophecy takes its denomination, from the place, person, or
people of which it is spoken.

2. There is a great difference betwixt the last days, and the latter days.
For the (last days) Heb. 1. ver. 2. and the (last times) 1 Pet. 1. ver. 20.
do comprehend the whole time under the Gospel; the time I say, from Christ's
first coming to his second: but the [latter times] 1 Timothy 4. ver. 1. do
signify only the latter part of the last times. And as the last times, or
days, have their latter times; so again the [latter times] have their [last
dayes] as we may see in the 2 Timothy chap. 3. ver. 1. and in the 2 Pet. chap. 3.
ver. 3. and of the end of these [last dayes] of the [latter times] are the
[latter dayes] in this Prophecy to be understood; as St. Paul's words in the
11. chap. of the Epistle to the Romans at the 25. and 26. verses do evidence.
For I would not Brethren, says he, that you should be ignorant of this
mystery, that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of
the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved, etc. And yet it is
enough to confirm the first part of the Dilemma; that the [latter dayes] in
this Prophecy, cannot be taken for the first days of the preaching of the
Gospel, in which only the Gospel was preached unto the Jews, and therefore the
Israelites that sought the Lord in those first days of the Gospel, cannot be
the same Israelites which the Prophet says shall seek the Lord in the latter
days of the Gospel, that is, not long before Christ's appearing. And basides,
what effect the word of God took amongst the Israelites, even in the days in
which it was preached unto them, we have formerly showed out of the 13. chap.
of the Acts, at the 45. and 46. verses, and out of the 1 Thessalonians. 2. at the 15.
and 16. ver. to which we may add the same Apostles great heaviness and
continual sorrow for them, Romans 9. ver. 2.3. and his words concerning Israel,
in 31, 32, and 33. ver. of the fame chapter, and his prayer for them, and
record of them, chap. 10. v. 1, 2, 3. and his words, chapter 11. v. 8, 9,
10.12.15.25. and 28. in which places he says, that they stumbled at the
stumbling stone (that is, at Christ preached unto them) that they submitted not
themselves unto the righteousness of God: that they were enemies to the
Gospel, and that God had given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they
should not see, and ears that they should not hear, and therefore we dare not
but to affirm that Israel did not then return thus the Lord; to wit, by
repentance and embracement of the Gospel. For the Prophet speaks not of the
return of some particular Families, or of some particular persons of diverse
Families; but of all the children of Israel, that were to be so long without a
King, that is, of the whole body of the ten Tribes at least. And of the whole
Israel of God it is (that is, of all the Tribes, though not of all of every
Tribe) that the Apostle speaks of in the foresaid Texts of Scripture, and how
then can it be said of any of the Tribes, that they have as yet sought the
Lord? and if none of the Tribes are converted, where is the union you boast of
betwixt the Jews and Gentiles? How are they one Christian Church, when as not
one of the Tribes has been hitherto joined to this Church? And further though
it be not said expressly here, that the children of Israel shall return into
their Land, yet other parallel Prophecies do show, that the word (return)
does imply this: and so do some of the contents of this Prophecy. For whereas
it is said (they shall be many days without a King) it is to be understood,
that after the end of these days, they shall again have a King; to wit, one
to reign over them in a temporal Monarchy, as before they had, when David did
reign over them: for such a King it is that the Prophet says, they shall be
without, and he says not, that they shall be without him always, but many
days, and therefore after the expiring of these days, they shall again enjoy
such a King: and consequently they shall again become a Kingdom on Earth too.
As for the other part of the Dilemma, you had nothing at all to say to it, and
therefore you fight with your own fancies only; first in saying that Christ
came not till the Scepter was departed from Judah) which (though it is not
easily to be maintained) I have neither affirmed, nor denied, but only urged
the Prophecy of Jacob, to show that the Scepter could not depart from Judah
till Christ's coming (for whether it was to depart immediately before, or
shortly after, it is not material in this Argument) and consequently, that if
this Prophecy were to be understood of the two Tribes, the punishment in
abiding many days without a King, and without a sacrifice, etc. could not be
fulfilled on them, till their Captivity under the Romans, at the destruction
of their City: from whence also it will follow, that their return here
foretold must needs be as yet to come. And secondly, in saying, that the latter
days are not to be referred unto the 4. v. (as if the Israelites should abide
many days without a King and sacrifice in the latter days, and then return)
but unto the 5. v. in the end whereof they are.) For I never thought that the
(latter days) did comprehend the (many days) spoken of in the 4. v. but I
know that they do show what a long continuance and space of time the (many
days) do imply, for it is not before but afterward, that is, at the end of the
(many days) that the (latter days) do begin; in which the contents of the
latter part of the Prophecy are to be fulfilled: as the contents of the first
part of the Prophecy are in the (many days.) And as I have already proved,
these (latter days) not to be begun: so you your self seem to confess as
much, saying, ( and so in the latter days they shall return, and seek the
Lord their God, and Christ their King, as they did, Acts 2.41. and chap. 4.4.]
but whereas you add, [and in several ages] surely the conversion of the Jews
did even wholly wear away in a very short time after the preaching of the
Gospel. For they were St. Paul and Barnabas that told them: It was necessary
that the word of God should first have been spoken unto you, but seeing ye put
it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn
to the Gentiles, Act. 13. ver. 46. and that their behavior was the same
toward the Apostles in other places, as well as at Antioch in Pisidia, you may
see, in the 1 Thessalonians. 2. chap. at the 14, 15, and 16. verses. And therefore
their conversion held not one ago, so short was the continuance of the Jews
joining with the Gentiles in the Christian Faith, yea too short and too small
to prove, that the uniting of the Jews and Gen^^^es into one Church, is
already accomplished and so the truth of both parts of this Argument does
appear the more firm, by your indirect and slight answer.

Israel's Redemption. CHAP. II.
Of the Jews pious and prosperous estate after their return.

BUt we are yet to show the Jews pious, peaceable and prosperous estate after
their return. Read then what Jeremiah has written in his 23. chap. at the 3.
ver. I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all countries, whither I
have driven them, and will bring them again to their folds, and they shall be
fruitful and increase, and I will set up Shepherds over them, which shall
fe^de them, and they shall Isa. 33.20, 21, 22.24. Zep. 3.14.15.
fedre no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking, says the Lord.
And in his 31. chap. at the 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.27.28.31, 32, 33.34. verses. And
in his 32. chap. at the 37, 38, 39.40, 41, 42. verses. And in his 33. chapter at
the 6, 7, 8, 9. ver. And in his 46. chap. at the chapter 30. v. 10, 11.
27, 28, Deuteronomy. 32.26, 27.36.43. Psa. 89.31, 32, 33, 34. Psalm. 94.14, 15.
ver. and 50. chap. at the 19, ^0. ver. Read I appeal here to the consciences
of all men that shall read these, or the like prophecies in the word of God;
whether they can think it possible, that the time appointed by God for the
dispensation of such extraordinary blessings, should be the very fame, in which
the world, and especially the Christian part of it was to groan under the
continued plagues written in the Revelation: which yet we must needs grant to
be so, if we rest on those interpretations, by which all such prophecies are
only, or chiefly applied to the anticipated conversion of substituted
Gentiles.
also what Ezekiel. has written. In his 28. chap. at the 25, 26. verse. And in
his 34. chap. at the 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.25, 26, 27, 28, 29. verses. And in his
36. chap. at the 8, 9, 10, Isa. 45.25. Ezekiel. 37.11, 18. etc. chapter 39.25. Ier.
12.14, 15. Romans 11.32.
11, 12, 13, 14, 15.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.30, 31, 33, 34, 35, 36. verse. And
in his 39. chap. at the 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. verses. And lastly look what is
said in the 10. chap. of Zech. at the 6, 7, 8, 9. ver.

Mr Petrie's Answer. 1 All these prophecies are to the same purpose, and
therefore it was needless to have rehearsed so many of them, unless he had a
mind to muster them all. But number prevails not in this case. 2. None
says, that these prophecies were only accomplished at the some time of the
plagues: but we deny that the plagues were continued, seeing the Christians
have their own times of joy, as well as of mourning, and the woman is clothed
with the Sun, howbeit at other periods she be forced to f^ee into the
wilderness: and therefore both the appeal at the beginning, and the
supposition in the closure of this marginal note, is a vain brag. Why should
one appeal in this manner to the consciences of all, seeing interpters from
the beginning of the Christian Church ( except a few Millenaries) till this
time have exponed these texts not of the Jews only, but of the Christian
Church? and it may be easily understood that those have written according to
their consciences: and therefore if these be Judges, this author has lost the
cause.

Reply.

1. Had not these prophecies been to the same purpose, you might well have
thought, that I had had as little regard what sense I wrested the Scriptures
to, as you your self have. And seeing they are all to the same purpose, you
had the less reason to quarrel at the number of them. But it was a great
eye-soare unto you, to see such, and so many witnesses together, all
maintaining the truth we hold, and you oppose. And because you could not reply
unto them, by any credible interpretation in your allegorical way; you slide
from them, with no more, nor weightier words then those [but number prevails
not in this case.] Surely it is a poor case, that you, who have labored all
this while to persuade the reader that we can bring no plain proofs for what
we say, should now be afraid to let him hear what God has said for us, and
what you could answer for your self. But you saw very well, that these
prophecies were too clear to be obscured with the veil of a figure^i^^ sense:
and too eminent to ^e put on the roll of conditional prophecies: because many
of them do as well contain spiritual blessings, as temporal blessings: and
there can be no doubt of their doing God's will, to whom that Spirit, and those
graces are promised, by which alone men are enabled to do it. And for a cast
of what I have said, take the prophecy of Jeremiah chap. 32. at the 37. ver.
Behold I will gather them out of all countries whither I have drivers them in
mine anger, and in my fury, and in great wrath, and I will bring them again
unto this place, and I will cause them to dwell safely. Here is an outward and
temporal promise. And they shall be my people, and I will be their God, and I
will give them one heart, and (...), that they may fear (...) for ^ver, for
the good of them, and their children after them. And I will make an everlasting
Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but
I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Here
is an inward and spiritual promise; after which it follows, yea I will rejoice
over them, to do them good, and I will plant them in this land assuredly, with
my whole heart, and with my whole soul. For thus says the Lord; like as I
have brought all this great evil upon this people, so will I bring upon them,
all the good that I have promised etc. And the like prophecy is in the 33.
chap. of Jer. at the 6. ver. etc. and in the 36. chap. of Ezekiel. at the 24. ver.
etc. and in the 39. chap. at the 25. ver. etc. And in the 36. chap. at the 8.
ver. this prophecy is made to the Mountains of Israel. O ye mountains of
Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches, and yield your fruit to my people
of Israel, for they are at hand to come: for behold I am for you, and I will
turn unto you, and ye shall be tilled and sown, and I will multiply men upon
you, all the house of Israel even all of it, and the Cities shall be inhabited,
and the wastes shall be builded; and I will multiply upon you man and beast,
and they shall increase and bring fruit, and I will setle you after your old
estates: and I will do better for you, then at your beginning, and ye shall
know that I am the Lord. Yea I will cause men to walk upon you, even my people
Israel, and they shall possess thee, and thou shall be their inheritance, and
thou shall no more henceforth bereave them of men etc. Now as none of the
former prophecies will bear the title of conditional prophecies, so neither
will this; for the land it self could neither do any thing, for which God
should make such a promise unto it, nor for which he should refuse to fulfill
unto it, what he has promised. And I am persuaded, that he who will deny, that
these prophecies are to be understood of the prosperity and happiness of the
Jews only: that will deny I say, that they are properly and historically to be
taken; or that they are as yet to be fulfilled, will not stick to say any
thing.

2. If they affirm, that these prophecies were partly, though not only
accomplished in the time of the plagues; that, I say, their accomplishment did
continue as well then, as at other times; they affirm that which is altogether
inconsistent with the uninterrupted prosperity of these prophecies, which show,
that none of the people of whom they are spoken, shall be left in captivity
among the Heathen, or be a prey any more to the Heathen; but that they shall
dwell safely in their own land, without fear and without sorrow. And that
they shall have such increase of cattle, come, and other fruits of the earth,
that there shall come no more famine upon them. And who sees not by this that
these prophecies cannot possibly belong to the troublesome and distressed state
and condition of the Christian Church? or to any other people but the Jews. who
alone live dispersed in captivity? But you [deny that the plagues spoken of in
the Rev. were to be continued plagues.] you should then have showed what
intervalls of joy the Church has had from the time that the Dragon began to
persecute the woman which brought forth the man child. And went to make war
with the remnant of her seed. Rev. 12.13.17. For doubtless persecution has
bin a constant attendant on the servants of God ever since the first preaching
of the Gospel. It Is true indeed that the Gospel at the first made a great
conquest on the Gentiles; but how was it done? surely not by the contentious
hearts, and bloody hands of the Apostles and their successors, but by a
constant lifting up of their hearts and hands in prayer, and by an undanted
offering up of their lives in persecution. And it is hard to say when all
Christian Churches together have had rest from open persecution. But grant that
there had bin no such persecution at all in any Christian Kingdom unto this
time, yet doubtless that maxim of St. Paul in the 2 Timothy at the 12. ver. Yea
and all they that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, had
stood firm, and passed still for an undoubted truth. For the servants of God
might nevertheless have bin mo^^t, reviled, hated, and oppressed, albeit they
had not bin haled to prisons, to ^^nres, and death it self, and yet let that
Hell on earth, the devilish Inquisition witness, whether this also might not
have bin effected, in a more cruel and barbarous manner in a secret, then in
an open persecution. You say next that [ all interpreters from the beginning of
the Christian Church ( except a few Millenaries) till this time, have expo^^^d
these texts, not of the Jews only, but of the Christian Church:] which is as if
you had said, that all interpreters do write for you, besides those that write
against you. And do you not remember what you said before (even of the
scriptures themselves) that number prevails not? why then do you urge us now
with the greater number of interpreters? I am sure you will not be content,
that the trial of the truth shall be put to most voices betwixt Protestants
and Papists; if not, why would you have it so here? But were the prophets thus
interpreted from the beginning of the Christian Church? no, it could not be,
for we have learned from the Dialogue betwixt Tripho, and Justine Martyr, that
then no other Christians weree steemed orthodoxe, but those of the Millenarian
faith; and therefore it may easily be conceived how the Prophets were expounded
in those days; and that they then began to interpret the scriptures my
stically, when error had taken hold, not only on the most, but the most
powerful patrons in the Church also: on such who by their place and authority,
could force the truth either wholly to hide it self, or to be known no
otherwise then by the ignominious name of an heresy: which was not till some
ages after the Apostles days, as you your self confess in your Preface. But
you say that [these Interpreters have written according to their consciences.]
And so our Savior ^^d the Disciples, that they should be put out of the
Synagogues, yea that they should be killed, by such as should think that they
did God service, Joh. 16.2. and St. Paul was moved by his conscience to raise a
very tyrannous persecution against the Saints, as he confesses Acts 26.9. I
verily thought with my self, says he, that I ought to do many things
contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, which thing also I did, etc. and so
although he went not against his conscience, yet he went against the truth, for
his conscience was a blind and ignorant conscience, as he says in the 1 Timothy
1.13. but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbeleefe. And such
consciences, no doubt, were the consciences of many (if not of all) of those
Interpreters in relation to the truth in controversy; who had they first made
diligent search after this truth of the Jews general conversion and return;
and of our Saviors personal reign on earth; they would never, I presume,
have spent their time and pains in such Expositions. But these Interpreters
are dead for the most part long ago, and there is scarcely one of them now
living; and we appeal not to the dead, but to the living, who are or may be
acquainted with what is said on both sides, and therefore cannot pass sentence
against us out of ignorance, although they may out of prejudice, and so not
according to conscience. And who ever heard till now, that it is a [vain^
bragge] to appeal to men's consciences in giving their judgment about a truth?
certainly he that fears to appeal unto this Judge, does fear the
uprightness of his own cause; for what says Saint Paul in the 2 Cor. chap.
4. ver. 2. We have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in
craftiness, nor handling the Word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of
the truth, commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.

Israel's Redemption. Which Prophecies, as they do contain many evident and
unanswerable arguments for a future restoration of Israel; I mean a
restoration yet to come, so they have such correspondence with that of Isaiah
in his 59. chapter at the 20. ver. and with that of Amos in his 9 chapter at the 11.
ver. (both which Prophecies are alleged by the Apostles St. James Act. 15.16.
and St. Paul Romans 11.27.26.
for the conversion of the Jews after the fullness of the Gentiles is come in,
that is, after all those of the Gentiles, which are appointed to be called
before Christ's coming again, be c^^verted; or rather, perhaps, when the
fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, that is, when the time shall come, in
which (not a part as now, but) all the Gentiles that are left shall through the
wonderful deliverance of the Jews, together with them serve the Lord) that
seeing these are not yet fulfilled, neither can any of the other: betwixt which
and that of Amos, there is not any material difference; and no other betwixt
them and that of Isaiah, then there is betwixt a Comment and the Text, betwixt
a brief Intimation, and large explication of one and the same thing.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. We grant that these Prophesies contain evident arguments
for a future restoration of Israel, if you will acknowledge that which is
before clearly proved by the testimony of the Apostles, and by experience,
that is, that they are begun already in part: we grant also, that they have
such correspondencie with these Texts of Esaias and Amos and many more too: but we
deny, 1. Your manner of restoration, and we hold that the spiritual
restoration is more glorious for the honor of God and weal of Israel. 2. We
deny that the Apostle James alleges the prophecy of Amos for such a
conversion of the Jews: for he speaks expressly of visiting the G^^tiles, to
^^ke out of them a people unto his name, Act. 15.14. and of this visiting he
expones the words of Amos, and the other Prophets: he speaks not ^^^ly of Amos,
but says generally, and to this agree the words of the Prophets. 3. We deny
that the Apostle Paul alleges the prophecy of Esaias, to that pretended
purpose, for he says not, and then all Israel shall be saved; but, and so all
Israel shall be saved: he shows no order and distance in time, but makes a
conclusion out of the former words, where he says, Blindness in part is
happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in: and then
he infers, And so all Israel shall be saved: and therefore the conclusion
must be exponed according to the preceding words, that is, all Israel are the
called of Israel and of the Gentiles: there is a distinction twixt Israel, and
all Israel; and all Israel is more then Israel, seeing it includes likewise the
faithful Gentiles: and in this signification the proof following in the cited
testimony must necessarily be understood, and not of all calling of the Jews
after the full calling of the Gentiles: and far less of that calling, which
(he says) shall perhaps be (not in part, but) of all the Gentiles that shall
be left. Yea these conjectures destroy one another: for if the calling of the
Jews shall be after the fullness of the calling of the Gentiles, then all the
Gentiles that are left cannot be called through the wonderful deliverance of
the Jews. And this last conjecture destroys a maine tenet of the
Millenaries, who say, that the Jews shall rule over all Nations, and hold them
in subjection till the end of the 1000. years, and then these profane Nations
shall rise again in arms against the Jews. Now seeing betwixt these above
named Prophecies of Jer. 23. and 31. etc. and these two of Esaias and Amos, there
is not any material difference, and no other difference then betwixt a brief
intimation and large explication of the same thing: and seeing these Prophecies
of Esaias and Amos are to be understood of the Christian Church and estate
thereof from the beginning till the end, as the Apostles James and Paul expone
them, this conclusion follows, These above named Prophecies give no ground for
the earthly Monarchy of the Jews. And so much the rather may every one embrace
this conclusion, that we find the greatest part of these Prophecies so exponed
in other passages of the New Testament, as that of Jer. 31.1. in 2 Cor. 6.18.
and Jer. 31.31. till 35. in Heb. 8.8. and chapter 10.16, 17. and Jer. 32. contains
the same words which chapter 31. so does that of chapter 33.8. and to the same purpose
is that of chapter 50.20. and that of Ezekiel. 34. concerning the gathering and
feeding the sh^epe exponed by our Savior, Joh. 10.11.16. and that of chapter 39.
is correspondent with the Prophecy of Joel, whereof we spoke before: and that
of Zach. 10. is one with Jer. 23.6.8. and other that are handled before. It is
to be marked that in the testimony Jer. 33. is omitted ver. 12, 13. where is
Prophesied, that in all the cities of the land shall be an habitation of
Shepherds, causing their flocks to lie down there, even in the cities of the
mountains, the cities of the valleys, the cities of Benjamin, and the cities
of Judah. What is this the glory of Christ's Kingdom, that sheep shall lie in
his cities? Or does not rather the Lord understand the spiritual sheep of
Christ, whom he will have gathered by his spiritual Pastors every where? as he
exponeth it, Ezekiel. 34.31. Ye flocks of my pasture are men, and I am your God,
says the Lord. Likewise this Author slippeth over ver. 18. and 22. where
perpetuity of Sacrifices and Levites is promised as plainly, as the Throne of
David. Shall in the last days the meat offerings, and burnt offerings, and the
house of Levi be restored? I think, they will not say it, lest they contradict
the Gospel, which has abolished that order; And nevertheless the Lord says
so in Jeremie. Has the Lord said it, and will he not perform it? Yea, he has
performed it, as the Apostle witnesses, 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye also as lively stones
are built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices to God by Jesus Christ. And as the promises of the Priesthood are
fulfilled spiritually, and not in a proper sense; so we must think of the
promises concerning the Kingdom, seeing they both are conjoined and mixed
after the same strain, as we have them there, ver. 17, 18. and ver. 21.22. Thus
says the Lord, David shall never want a man to sit upon the throne of the
house of Israel, neither shall the Priests, the Levites want a man before me to
offer burnt-offerings, and to kindle meate-offerings, and to do sacrifices
continually, etc. But all this evidence cannot satisfy selfe-conceits:
therefore it is added.

Reply.

You grant first [ that the foresaid Prophecies do contain evident arguments
for a future restoration of Israel] whereby if you mean no more then a future
restoration in relation to the time in which it was foretold, you grant only
what you could not possibly deny, seeing Prophecies speak not of things already
done, but to be done: and if you mean a future restoration in relation to the
time that now is; you contradict your self in saying presently after [that it
is already begun in part] seeing that which is as yet to begin, cannot be
already begun; and that which is already begun, cannot be as yet to begin: and
if you mean by a future restoration, such a restoration as was to begin at
the first preaching of the Gospel, and to continue to the coming of Christ:
besides that it is somewhat an harsh expression, it is not true [that you have
before clearly proved this by the testimonies of the Apostles, and by
experience,] for you have not brought any at all, much less any clear
testimonies out of the Apostlesr to prove that this restoration which the
Prophets speak of is to be wrought successively, and by degrees, in many ages;
or that it is meant only of a spiritual restoration; or that by the
Israelites, any of the Gentiles are to be understood: neither can experience
show you any one Tribe converted to the Christian faith, but that all the
Tribes are of a different Religion from us. You grant also [ that these
Prophecies do agree in their contents with the Prophecies of Amos and Isaiah
alleged by the Apostles, but you deny, 1. Our manner of restoration, for you
hold (you say) that the spiritual restoration is more glorious for the honor
of God, and weal of Israel.] And did you consider what you said in all this?
do we speak of a corporal restoration only, and not of a spiritual too?
certainly that we hold not only a bodily restoration of the Jews from their
captivity, is very well known unto you, by our words you here answer; and your
very next words do confirm it, where you deny [ that the Apostle James
alleges the Prophecy of Amos for the general conversion of the Jews,] and
what is it to contend for their conversion, but to hold their spiritual
restoration? so that although you hold only a spiritual restoration to be
meant in the Prophecies, we hold both to be meant in them. And is it most for
their [weale] think you, to be restored from the bondage of their bodies and
souls both; or from the bondage of their souls only? and is the
accomplishment of one or of both these [most glorious for the honor of God?]
But it had been a sign of far more discretion, and of some Christian modesty
in you, if you had only forborne to teach God so often what course he should
take to make himself appear the more glorious; for doubtless it is most for
Gods glory to accomplish what he has promised to do, and we cannot imagine,
but that he has promised to do what should make most for his glory.

2. You deny that the Apostle James alleges the Prophecy of Amos for such a
conversion of the Jews: for he speaks expressly (you say) of visiting the
Gentiles, etc. The Apostle James by your own confession alleges two
Prophecies, one (as you say after page 27.) of old Simeon, Acts 15. at the 14.
verse. and the other of Amos, ver. 16.17. where there is express mention of
building the Tabernacle of David (as in the former there is, of visiting the
Gentiles) and yet you would have this last Prophecy to be no more then an
Exposition of the former (which we have once already showed to be false) and
were it not to expound Notum per ignotius, to make the Comment more obscure
then the Text, to say that by [the building of the Tabernacle of David] James
meant the [visiting of the Gentiles] before spoken of? Thus then whatsoever
talk you make of the present conversion, and union of the Jews with the
Church of the Gentiles, yet when you come to apply the Scriptures, you debar
them of all interest in those Prophecies, or that part of a Prophecy which
concerns them alone, so much do you favor their conversion, or esteem their
company. But as you hold the words in the 14. verse. to have reference to
Simeons Prophecy, so you must remember, that Simcon says of Christ, that he
should be a light to lighten the Gentles; before he says of him, that he
should be the glory of his people Israel; and what does this imply, but that a
substituted part of the Gentiles, were to become the Church of Christ, before
the Nation of the Jews should receive the Gospel? for being endued with the
spirit of Prophecy, he could not speak at random; and therefore the very
order of these words is observeable; with which Saint James his changing of the
first words of the Prophecy [In that they] into [After this] does very well
agree; which might else as well (if not better) have been alleged according
to the Prophets expression, had this Prophecy been no more but a larger
explanation, and further confirmation of the Gentiles calling. And if you look
into the latter part of Amos Prophecy recorded by St. James, you may see, that
at the building again of David's Tabernacle, there is not only mention of [the
residue of men] that should then seek after God, but of the Gentiles too, upon
whom God's Name is called, before that (for why else should they be thus
distinguished from other Gentiles, that are then to seek the Lord as well as
they?) And what will follow from hence upon your expounding [the building of
the Tabernacle of David] of the first calling of the Gentiles? certainly this
will follow, that the first calling of the Gentiles, was not the first calling
of the Gentiles, seeing [ the people upon whom God's name all is call'd] is
always meant of a people that does worship the true God. And consequently from
the words [ after this I will return and will build again the Tabernacle of
David] inferred upon the foresaid [visiting of the Gentiles] in the 14. ver.
and from the words [ that the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and
all the Gentiles upon whom my Name is call'd] referred to the time when it is
again to be built, it must needs follow, that here is an express mention, as
well of the National conversion of the Jews after the visiting of the
Gentiles, as of the calling of a substituted part of the Gentiles before such a
conversion of the Jews: for as the Tabernacle of David cannot possibly
signify the Nations of the Gentiles, so the building again of it, cannot be
meant of God's receiving those Nations for his people, which were never before
his people. And thus this Prophecy of Amos shows not the calling of the Jews
only, nor the calling of the Gentiles only, but the order of both; for which
purpose it was alleged by the Apostle, to wit, to show, that a substituted
part of the Gentiles should be called, before the general conversion of the
Jews; and that all Gentiles whatsoever, that were then left both of the called
and uncalled, should make one Church with the Jews, when the Tabernacle of
David was again built, that is, upon the conversion, deliverance, and settling
of the Jews in their own land, according as the foresaid Prophecies do
declare. And whereas you seem to deny, that this Prophecy was taken out of
Amos only [ because the Apostle speaks not only of Amos, but says
generally, to this agree the words of the Prophets,] you show great weakness
in it, for (besides that it is an usual manner of speaking, to put the plural
number for the singular, and the singular for the plural,) he might very well
say, to this agree the words of the Prophets, because other Prophets also
foretell the same thing, although he brought an instance only out of one of
them: for I am sure that this prophecy is wholly in Amos, with a little
difference from this translation according to the original, but none according
to the Septuagint, as Doctor Mayer affirms. And why do you say before [Iames
alleges the prophecy of Amos,] if you did not think it to be the prophecy of
Amos? and if you knew that but a part of it was his, why did you not show what
words were spoken by him, and what words by some other Prophets? But you could
not: for [to this agree the words of the Prophets,] is indeed as if he had
said, to this agree the words of Amos in the book of the Prophets. For the
minor (or lesser Prophets, were all in one volume, called the book of the
Prophets, and therefore when a testimony is brought out of any of them, it is
most commonly alleged as from the whole book, and not from that prophecy
where they are written in the book. And thus you may read, [ As it is written
in the book of the Prophets, Acts 7.42.] instead of as it is written by Amos
in the book of the Prophets. And Acts 13.40. [which is spoken of in the
Prophets] that is, by Habbakkuk in the book of the Prophets. And in all this I
hope I have fully answered this great doubt, the mentioning whereof does either
show your little insight in Divinity, if you were not able to satisfy your
self therein: or your great delight to wrangle, if you knew the answer to it.

3. You deny that the Apostle Paul alleges the prophecy of Isaiah to show the
general conversion of the Jews, after the conversion of the substituted
Gentiles: for he says not, (you say) and then all Israel shall be saved, but,
and so all Israel shall be saved. But though he says not [and then,] yet
Paraeus tells you, that this, and more then this is understood: for he says
there is an [Ellipsis] of the antecedent; a defect or leaving out of something
that should have been spoken before. So that the full rehearsing of the
Apostles mind herein had been thus. For I would not brethren, that you should
be ignorant of this mystery: that blindness is in part happened to Israel,
Until the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in: and then when the fullness
of the Gentiles shall come in, the blindness shall cease, and so all Israel
shall be saved. And doubtless this is the true meaning of what the Apostle
has more briefly uttered. And yet we do not grant, [that the Apostle shows
no order and difference in time,] because he says not [and then] but [and so.]
For the distance of time betwixt Israel's casting off, and calling again, is
expressed by the words [Vntill the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in:]
without which or the like words in the premises, the word [then] in the
conclusion had been of little force: as the want of it after such a plain
mark and boundary of Isreal's blindness, is not considerable; for seeing the
Apostle says, blindness is in part happened to Israel, until the fullness of
the Gentiles shall come in, and adds presently after, and so all Israel shall
be saved; and confirms it too with a Prophecy which concerns the pardoning
and purifying of the Jews only; who that calls his wits about him, can
believe, that the Apostle meant nevertheless, that blindness should never
depart from that Nation? which doom your expounding of [all Israel] of none
but of the called of Israel and of the Gentiles, does necessarily put upon it.
For by the words [and so all Israel shall be saved] you do not understand a
further calling of any, but the accomplishment of the whole number of the
believing Jews and Gentiles formerly called: and therefore the blindness
being to continue, until the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, and then
(according to your opinion) the calling of men to salvation, to cease; it must
needs follow, that in your sense, there is to be no other end of Israel's
blindness, then the eternal condemnation and perdition of almost that whole
Nation. Whose general conversion, many of the Fathers, and the most and most
learned men amongst Protestants and Papists do acknowledge to be both plainly
foretold here by St. Paul, and abetted by the Prophecy alleged out of Isaiah,
which you grant to be the same in sense with the Prophecies before recited, and
yet the want of this poor particle [then] must sway the scales on your side,
against so many evident authorities of God and man. And seeing you prize your
conceit so highly, you might very well have afforded us a paraphrase of the 25.
and 26. verses of this Chapter; that so we might have known your meaning
fully, and seen how you could make all St. Paul's words here suite with that
mystical sense which you take Israel in. But to say no more of a Text, which
is one of the maine pillars of the Tenet you so much condemn, then [ therefore
the conclusion must be expounded according to the preceding words, that is, All
Israel are the called of Israel, and of the Gentiles:] is to bring the Reader
into a wood, or labyrinth rather, and there to leave him, to seek his way out
himself. For the preceding words are, that blindness is in part happened to
Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in; and the meaning of
them (you say) is, All Israel are the called of Israel and of the Gentiles; and
the conclusion is, and so all Israel shall be saved: and the meaning of this
also (you say) is, All Israel are the called of Israel and of the Gentiles. For
the conclusion, you say, must be exponed according to the preceding words, that
is, All Israel are the called of Israel and of the Gentiles. A^ditum admissi,
risum teneatis amici? is this to help or hinder the Reader in the
understanding of the Apostle? And yet for all this stir about [ All Israel]
it is not your distinction betwixt Israel and all Israel, that can prove the
word [Israel] to be mystically taken. For besides that there is an apparent
opposition betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles throughout this Chapter: and that
the Israel which is to be saved, has relation only to the Israel that is
before said to be in blindness (and not to the words, until the fullness of
the Gentiles sha'd come in, which are added to show the distance of time
betwixt the blinding and saving of Israel) besides all this, it is not
generally true, that [all Israel] is more then [Israel] seeing the word Israel]
alone, is more often used for the whole Nation, then [all [Israel] is. Neither
is it true that [all Israel] here, does comprehend both Jews and Gentiles; for
he uses the universal note [all] in the last place, and not in the first;
because all, none excepted, were to be converted, although all, none excepted
were not to be blinded. And lastly, it is not true, that [all Israel] here is
more then [Israel] here, for Israel to whom blindness is happened in part,
comprehends both the believing and unbeleeving Israelites, and consequently all
Israelites, and although [all Israel] be more then the blinded, or not blinded
part of Israel, that is, then Israel divisively taken, yet it is not more then
Israel indivisively taken, then Israel to whom blindness is happened in part,
and in part not happened: for thus Israel in the 25. v. is [all Israel] too,
because it contains all believers and unbeleevers of the Jews together;
although it be not [all Israel] as it is applied to the believing or
unbeleeving Jews severally, and apart; and therefore in saying, that [all
Israel] is more then [Israel to whom blindness is happened in part] you do say;
that [all Israel] is more then all Israel: and though it be more then the
believing or unbeleeving part of Israel; yet to argue thus from hence, all
Israel, is more then the blinded part of Israel, therefore it comprehends the
Jews and Gentiles both: is just such an argument as this, all England is more
then almost all England, therefore it is England and Scotland too; or, all your
wit is more then the greatest part of your wit, therefore it is your wit and
your folly both. And whereas you say [that in this signification the proof
following in the cited testimony must necessarily be understood] you do hereby
closely endeavor to put the like mystical meaning upon the words [Sion and
Jacob] in Isaiahs Prophecy: but it is not the delivering of your meaning so
darkely, nor the pressing of it upon the Readers belief with such an
irrational necessity, that will ought avail you. For [Sion] does signify in
this place, the people of the Jews, of whom the Deliverer, that is, Christ our
Savior was to be borne; and [Jacob] is never used but for the person of Jacob,
or the posterity of Jacob: which last acception is the meaning of it in this
Prophecy; and how then shall the turning away of ungodliness from Jacob be
understood, but of saving [all Israel] the whole posterity of Jacob by calling
them out of the blindness in which they are? And consequently this Prophecy
also does show the National conversion of the Jews after the fullness of the
substituted Gentiles is come in; or when the time comes in which thorough the
wonderful deliverance of the Jews, (not a part, as now) but) all that were
left of the Gentiles shall together with them serve the Lord. But [ these
conjectures (you say) destroy one another, for if the calling of the Jews shall
be after the fulness of the calling of the Gentiles, then all the Gentiles that
shall be left cannot be called through the wonderful deliverance of the Jews.]
Thus no doubt you would have it, although you cannot thus apprehend it; for I
have before in a marginall note, which you would take no notice of, (nor of
some others which would have given good light to the reader in the total
discovery of this truth) I have there, I say, as well as he here distinguished
betwixt the full number of the elect that were successively to be called out of
the Nations of the substituted Gentiles before the conversion of the Jews: and
the full calling of all unbeleeving Gentiles whatsoever at and through the
extraordinary restoration and deliverance of the Jews. Now to say that the
Jews shall be converted after, or at the filling up of the full number of the
elect of the substituted Gentiles, that are appointed to be called before, and
at the Jews general conversion (and before our Saviors coming, which shall
be at the deliverance of the Jews, not long after their calling, and even
suddenly after their return) and that the Jews shall be converted before the
calling and coming in of all unbeleeving Gentiles whatsoever, that are to be
converted through their wonderful deliverance at our Savior's descending; is
not to affirm, that all Gentiles shall be called to the Christian Faith before
the Jews conversion, and yet many of them left to be called through the Jews
deliverance; as any one, that is not more willing to have the truth mistaken,
then to satisfy himself or others therein, may easily perceive: For that the
Christian Nations have been the people of God in the Jews stead, ever since
the Apostles turned from them to the Gentiles, is known to all Christians that
endeavor to know any thing; and that there are far more Nations then these,
that as yet embrace not the Christian Faith, experience at this day witnesses.
The coming in of all which Nations both called and uncalled to make one Church
with the Jews, the Prophecies of Isaiah 66 at ver. 19. etc. and of Zech. chap.
14. at the 12. ver. etc. do clearly prove to be through the wonderful
deliverance of the Jews, from the destruction which these Nations shall
endeavor to bring upon them, and God shall in a most terrible and mavelous
manner turn upon their own heads: and that the Nations which are yet aliens
from the Christian faith, shall not till that time become Christians (besides
the great probability thereof) the foresaid Prophecy of Amos does manifest it.
For by [ the building of the Tabernacle of David] is meant the restoring of the
Jews; by [ the Gentiles on whom Gods name is call'd] are meant the Christians;
and by [the residue of men] are meant the Nations which shall not till then be
called to the Christian faith: and of this coming in of all Gentile Nations
together upon the foresaid deliverance of the Jews, I do indeed take [ the
fullness of the Gentiles] which St. Paul speaks of, to be understood. So that
until the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in; is, until the time in which
God has appointed thus to bring in all Gentile Nations together, be near at
hand, be shortly to begin: then shall the Jews be converted, that this may be
effected: and thus the Apostle does prophecy of the general conversion of the
Jews and Gentiles too: and that Mr. Mede (whom you your self commend for a
renowned Author) did thus understand the Apostle you may see page 54 of his
Commentaries on the Apocalypse: where affirming, that from the time of the Jews
rejection, the Church of the Gentiles has been taken into Isreal's room, he
says, Foque loce apud Deum tantisper babenda, dum veteri populo suo denuo
misericordiam consecuto, plenitudo gentium introierit; and indeed the Apostles
own words in the 12. and 15. ver. of the same Chapter do confirm this; for
there he shows, that as the fall and casting away of the Jews, was an
occasion of the conversion of the substituted part of the Gentiles; so their
fullness, their receiving again, should be an occasion of the coming in of
all other Gentile Nations whatsoever. And though you say [ that this last
conjecture (to wit, touching the coming of all Gentiles whatsoever through the
deliverance of the Jews) does destroy a maine Tenet of the Millenaries, who
say that the Jews shall rule over all the Nations and hold them in subjection
till the end of the thousand years, and then these profane Nations shall rise
again in arms against the Jews,] it is only spoken not proved: and though you
will not believe God in all this; yet if you will believe what long experience
has verified in others, you must needs believe this also. For why may not the
Jews rule over them, that shall embrace the same faith, and worship the same
God with them: whenas one Gentile Nation does thus rule over other Gentile
Nations of the same belief? and why also may not these Nations fall away, and
rise in arms against the Jews, at the end of the 1000. years, at the loosing
again of Satan? when as it is not only ordinary for one Nation to rise in
arms against another of the same faith, and many times against such as bear
sway over them: but they who reject our Tenet do hold too, that the Christian
Church shall be far more enlarged, and more flourishing, then ever it was
since ^^e preaching of the Gospel, and yet before Christ's coming even wholly
fall away again? and therefore you have only slandered what by reason of the
evidence of Gods word, and of common experience you could not possibly
disprove. And yet you have not done, For [ the greatest part of the prophecies
(which show the Jews prosperity after their return) are exponed of the
Christian Church (you) say in other passages of the new Testament.] Surely if
there be no better passages in the new Testament to expound them so, then the
prophecies of Amos and Isaiah are, there be none at all; as the reader does by
this time, I think, plainly understand. But [ Ier. 31.1. is exponed (you say)
in 2 Cor 6.18. and Ier. 31.31. in Heb. 8.8. and chapter 10.16, 17. and Jer. 32.
contains the same words with chapter 31.31. so does that of chap. 33.6. and to the
same purpose is that of chap. 50.19. and that of Ezekiel. chap. 34. concerning the
gathering and feeding the sheep, is exponed by our Savior John 10 11.16. and
that of chap. 39. is correspondent with the prophecies of Joel, whereof we
spoke before. and that of Zech. 10. is one with Ier. 23 6.8. and other that are
handled before.] And what other were they? certainly you have not answered one
of all these prophecies that are alleged to show the Jews peaceable and
prosperous condition after their return. And the answer that you have made to
them which concern their return, do leave the reader as doubtful and
unsatisfied, as your shuffling together of these prophecies here does. For the
first words which I have alleged, out of Jer. 31. are at the 10. ver. and not
at the first ver. but this verse was quoted in the margent of your Bible in the
2 Cor. chap. 6. at the 18. ver. and that was enough to make you say, that the
whole chap. of Jeremiah is meant of the Gentiles: and yet the word^ in Jer. 31.
at the 1. verse, are not the same with those in the 2 Cor. chap. 6. verse 18.
and what if they were? what though that which is common to the faithful in
general, (as that God should be their Father and their God; and they his
people, Sons and daughters, and the like) be applied as well to the Gentiles
as to the Jews, it will not follow from hence, that where God says he will be
a God to the Jews, and they shall be his people, he means in that place the
Gentiles, and not the Jews; or the Jews and Gentiles both. And much less will
it follow, that any thing which is prophesied as proper to the Jews in
particular, or as opposed to other Nations, should yet be understood of other
Nations. For doubtless, if such prophecies belong not to the Jews only, no
promises can be so properly, distinctly, and plainly made to any Nation, which
can assure that Nation that they belong to it, and to no other. You say next [
that the prophecy Ier. 31. at the 31. verse is exponed in Heb. 8. ver. 8. etc.]
There indeed it is wholly repeated, but expounded it is not, unless the same
prophecy does expound it self, which is to make it both the text and the
comment: such poor shifts are you put to, whilst you had rather say any thing,
to win the unstable, or to hide the truth from the unlearned, then
acknowledge it for a truth. And to whom did the Apostle allege this prophecy,
but to the Jews of whom it was spoken by the Prophet? and why did he allege it
to them, but to show that Christ Jesus was the Mediator of the new Covenant,
which God had promised to make with them, and that the ordinances of the old
Covenant, were by his death become void and unprofitable? that hereby he might
at once establish the faith of the believing Jews; and, if it had been
possible, have moved the whole Nation at that time to embrace the Covenant of
the Gospel; of which this prophecy does plainly witness they shall be one day
partakers; even the whole house of Israel and Judah together. And as this
prophecy cannot expound it self (and is indeed so plain that it needs no
exposition) so it does no more expound the other prophecies (which you say, are
the same with it) as it is repeated by the Apostle, then it does as it is
delivered by the Prophet. And they being all to be accomplished to the Jews at
the same time, at the restoring of their Kingdom, this prophecy is as much
expounded by the others, as the others are by this, if not more. For whereas
this contains spiritual benefits only, those Jer. 32. at the 37. ver. etc.
chap. 33. at the 6. ver. etc. and chap. 50. at the 19. ver. etc. do contain
spiritual and temporal benefits both: for they foreshew the Jews withal,
their return unto, and prosperity in their own country; and so declare both
where and when the new Covenant shall be made with them. It follows [ and that
of Ezekiel. 34. at the 12 etc. is exponed by our Savior, John 10. ver. 11.16.]
These words of our Savior you have before alleged as an exposition of the
prophecy Ezekiel. chap. 37. at the 19. ver. etc. because our Savior prophecieth
of uniting two sorts of people, the Jews and Gentiles, into one Church, after
the calling of the substituted Gentiles; and the Prophet of uniting the
Kingdoms of Judah and Israel, which were one people, into one Kingdom again in
their own land. And you will have our Savior's words to expound this prophecy
too, because our Savior and the Prophet do use the same Metaphor, to wit, the
word [sheepe] to express men by. But the sheep the Prophet speaks of, are
the scattered Jews and none else: and the sheep our Savior spoke of, were the
Jews impli'd in the words [of this fold,] and the substituted Gentiles,
expressed in the words [other sheepe] and all Nations together intimated in the
words [one fold:] for after the calling of the [other sheepe] the substituted
Gentiles, there shall be one fold and one shepherd, that is, one Church and
Kingdom over all the world, under one King, to wit, Christ Jesus; and
therefore when you can prove this prophecy in Ezekiel to be meant of Jews,
and Christians, and all other Nations, you may have some color to say, that
our Savior's words Joh. the 10. do expound it. And [ that of chap. 39. is
correspondent (you say) with the prophecies of Joel etc.] And therefore it is
not yet accomplished, for I have showed before, that the prophecies cited out
of Ial are not to be fulfilled til the great and terrible Day of our Saviors
coming, (to wit, that in the 2 chap. at the near approach of that Day: And
that in the 3. chap. partly immediately before, and partly at the very time of
Christ's descending) and this prophecy of Ezekiel. does so plainly declare the
return of the whole Nation of the Jews to their own land, none excepted;
that you could neither prove it to be already fulfilled; nor deny that it shall
be fulfilled; because God, who has promised so to pow^e out his Spirit upon
them, that he may no more hide his face from them, has therein promised both
their conversion from sin, and continuance in obedience. And [ that of Zech.
10. at the 6. v. etc. is one (you say) with Jer. 23. at the 6.8. v.] you should
have said at the 3. and 4. v. But does it prove, that they are therefore
fulfilled already, because they have one meaning? because they were to be
fulfilled to the same people at the same time? then you may say too, that the
Prophecies which concern our Savior's coming, or the day of Judgment, are
already accomplished, because they foreshew the same thing. And thus it
appears by the three Prophecies which you have barely referred to three
passages in the New Testament, whereof the first is mistaken, the second the
selfsame Prophecy that is referred; and the third neither spoken of in the
Text to which it is referred, nor of any affinity with it, in the contents
thereof; by this I say, it appears, that being unable to give a considerable
answer to any of these Prophecies, you had no other way to hold up your credit,
amongst your friends, but by a subtle pretending [that the greatest part of
these Prophecies are exponed to their hands in the writings of the Apostles:]
but whatsoever the rest may do, I presume the learned of your opinion, will be
ashamed of the few and mean instances, which you have brought to make good
your assertion: for doubtless by such references, with which you have answered
these Prophecies, you may shun the force of any Argument, and expound any text
of Scripture, as you list. Now in the last place you tax me for [ omitting the
12. and 13. ver. in the testimony of Jer. chap. 33. and for overslipping
likewise the 18. and 22. ver.] But not one of these verses was in that part of
the chapter, which I have cited; and therefore they were neither overslipt, nor
purposely omitted; as you have purposely omitted in the 12. verse these words,
[againe, in this place which is desolate, without man and without beast;] and
in the 13. verse these, [and in the places about Jerusalem -- shall the flocks
pass again under the hands of him that tells them] that so you might make
way for your mystical interpretation, in the entrance whereof you do so
sawcily flout at the glory of Christ's Kingdom, saying [what? is this the glory
of Christ's Kingdom, that sheep shall lie in his City?] certainly the chiefest
glory of Christ's Kingdom is, that mercy and truth shall meet together; and
peace and righteousness kiss each other: but yet the promised fertility and
pleasantness of the Land of Canaan, and the increase and prosperity of man and
beast upon it, shall help set forth the glory thereof also, seeing the glory of
a Kingdom on earth does as well consist in the abundance of outward and
temporal blessings, whereby the evils that would come through want and
povert^ are prevented; as in the abundance of inward and spiritual blessings,
whereby the evils that would follow upon riches and plenty are avoided: yea it
is more glory for the servant of God to keep himself holy and righteous in the
midst of prosperity and delight, then when there is a scarcity of the creatures
which conduce to the pleasure and welfare of his body. And whereas you say
further, [ that the Lord understands here the spiritual sheep of Christ, etc.
as he expounds it, Ezekiel. 34. v. 31. Ye flock of my pasture are men, and I am
your God.] You do herein apparently belly God; for although God does in that
chapter of Ezekiel. call the Jews his sheep, and his flock; yet it does not
therefore follow, that by [flocks] in this chap. of Jer. he understands men
also, yea the words, which you have omitted do clearly show, that this word is
here to be taken properly, for why does God say in the 12. verse; Again in
this place which is desolate without man and without beast, and in all the
Cities thereof shall be an habitation of shepherds causing their flocks to lie
down; but to show, that there should be again an increase of men and of
beasts in that land? and what does God mean when he says, in the 13. ver.
that in the Land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the
Cities of Judah shall the flocks pass again under the hands of him that
tells them? Does he mean that Ministers should tell their Congregations, as
Shepherds tell their flocks? or rather that there should be again both flocks
and men to look to them, and to tell them as formerly they had done? and so
the concealing of these words does plainly witness against you, that you made
the foresaid impious flourish against your own Conscience. And as you could
not be ignorant, that by [flocks] here cattle are meant, and not men; so you
had no ground in the Text, wherefore you should conceit that sheep shall lie in
the Cities, as the inserting of the words [there even, etc.] into the Text does
declare: for the Lord says, In this place -- and in all the Cities thereof
shall be an habitation of Shepherds causing their flocks to lie down. Whereby
it is manifest, that Shepherds shall dwell in the Cities, but not that their
flocks shall have their folds there, but by the Cities where their ^^^ding
shall be; and in that there shall then be Shepherds as well in the cities as in
other places, it shows what a great increase of cattle shall then be; and
besides who knows not that cattle may be driven into Cities to be sold there
(or for some other occasion) and so may pass under the hands of him that
tells them, in the cities themselves? But suppose that these words in Jer.
were mystically to be understood, what would you gain by it? when ask is
expressly said, that for the Shepherds of these flocks shall be an habitation
[in this place] that is, in the Land of Judea? and afterward more particularly
in the Cities of the Mountains, in the Cities of the Vale, and in the Cities
of the South, and in the Land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem,
and in the Cities of Judea: does not this prove, that these faithful
Congregations (if the Prophecy were to be mystically taken) must needs be
Inhabitants of Judea, and not of other Countries? And yet you can show no
reason, wherefore we should take spiritual promises in these Prophecies for
spiritual I blessings, and not temporal promises for temporal blessings: and
must we think nevertheless, that when God says, I will strengthen the house
of Judah, and will save the house of Joseph, and I will bring them again to
place them, and they shall be as though I had not cast them off: And I will
cause you to dwell in the Cities, and the wastes shall be builded, and the
desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all
that passed by, and they shall say, This land that was desolate, is become like
the garden of ^^en, and the waste and desolate and ruined Cities are become
fenced and inhabited. And I will cause the shower to come down in his season,
then shall be showers of blessing, and the tree of the field shall yield her
fruit, and the Earth shall yield her increase, and they shall be safe in their
land, and shall know that I am the Lord when I have broken the bands of their
yoke, and delivered them out of the hands of those that served themselves of
them: and they shall no more be a prey to the Heathen, neither shall the beasts
of the Land devour them, but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them
afraid. Must we think, I say, that in these and such like promises God has
the same meaning as he has, where he says, I will cleanse them from their
iniquity whereby they have sinned against me: and I will pardon all their
iniquities whereby they have sinned against me, and whereby they have
transgressed against me. And in those days and in that time the iniquity of
Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none, and the sins of Judah,
and they shall not be found, for I will pardon them whom I reserve, I will
sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your
filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you, and I will put my
spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and you shall keep
my judgments and do them? Has God in those first promises the same meaning
that he has in these last? then show us how we shall know, when God does make
a temporal promise, and when not; if the former promises be not to be
understood of outward and temporal blessings, as well as the last of inward
and spiritual blessings: for sure it is not the manner of the Holy Ghost to
obscure what is plainly delivered, but to explain what is obscurely revealed.
But in the 18. and 22. verses of the 33. chap. of Jer. [ the perpetuity of
sacrifices and Levites (you say) is promised as plainly, as the Throne of
David, whereupon (you demand) shall in the last days the meat offerings, and
burnt offerings, and the house of Levi be restored, etc?] This is indeed your
palmarium argumentum, your maine fort, your principal Argument: by which
doubtless you suppose, that you have stopped our mouths for ever, and given the
Millenarian Tenet a mortal blow, an irrecoverable wound. But what think you?
If Adam had not fell, and so sin had not entered into the world; should there
not have been eating and drinking, buying and selling, Judgment and Justice,
marrying and giving in marriage? you will not deny it: and might there not also
have been offerings and sacrifices made unto God; as of incense, in token of
Gods hearing and being delighted with their prayers: and of the best of their
fruits, and of their cattle, in token of men's praising of, and thanksgiving
unto God for the increase of them? doubtless there might. And what hinders
then, that in the Kingdom of the second Adam, there should not be such
sacrifices offered also? For as it is not the use but the abuse of the foresaid
actions, that makes a Kingdom to be accounted more or less carnal and
voluptuous: so neither is it the offering of a material sacrifice, when
required and as required, but the superstitious invention of man, that makes
the worship of God a carnal and sinful worship; and the careless and cold
performance of a prescribed worship, that makes men carnal and sinful
worshippers. But you will say, are not then sacrifices abolished by the death
of Christ? has not the substance swallowed up the shadows? true, they are
ceast in regard of that end to which they were formerly used: they can no
longer show, that Christ shall come to suffer again, (and therefore the place
where alone they could be offered, and the people by whom alone they could be
offered, are both forsaken, the Temple is destroyed, and the people scattered)
but seeing the Prophets have frequently declared, that at our Saviors
appearing, the City and Temple shall be rebuilt, and the people and Priesthood
restored; why should we not think, that as sacrifices of praise and
thanksgiving may again be required, so other sacrifices may also? but how?
surely not as in time past, to show what Christ should do for sinners, but to
witness to the generations then to come, what he has done for sinners, or
perhaps to be a testimony of the public acknowledgement of, and repentance for
sin. For whereas it is said, Heb. 10. at the 18. verse. Now where remission of
sins is, there is no more offering for sin: it is to be understood in
relation to Christ's satisfaction for sin, who by one offering has perfected
for ever them that are sanctified: and shall appear again the second time,
unto them that look for him, without sin unto salvation; that is, without
sin any more to be imputed unto him, whereby he should be constrained to lay
down his life again for sinners; so that it is as if the Apostle had said,
where remission of sin is already procured through the death of the Mediator,
there is no more offering for sin by way of satisfaction, or as representing
any satisfaction again to be made: but yet there may be offering for sin by
way of signification, and manifestation of an atonement formerly made, or at
least of public confession of, and repentance for sin. And why then should
the restoring of this thing amongst the rest, give distaste to any, and (upon a
groundless mistake of being restored as types of a Mediator to suffer for
sin, which were to offer them according to the Law) become an occasion of
rejecting so many other things yet to be fulfilled: as namely, the calling and
restoring of the Jews, the rebuilding of their City and Temple, the making of
their Land more fruitful then ever, the descending of Christ to deliver them
from their enemies and to reign over them, and the coming in of all Nations
to worship God with them? all which are so plainly and so often foretold; that
for my own part, could I give my self (much less another) no satisfaction in
this particular about sacrifices only: I should yet think it should be done,
because God has said it; though I knew not to what end and purpose, rather
then think that the things before mentioned, should not be properly fulfilled,
which as they are frequently foretold, and that as well distinctly and by
themselves, as together with this; so also they are so clearly foretold, that
it is not possible any thing should be more plainly spoken. And thus I have
given my Judgment in this matter, which I submit to the whole Church of God,
hoping not to be censured for that, which the importunity of an adversary has
put me to, who presuming that the Prophecies touching the restoring of
sacrifices, are altogether incapable of a proper Interpretation, does (because
they are conjoined and mixed with the others after the same strain, as he
says) hereupon take occasion to wrest all other Prophecies to a mystical
meaning.

The marginall note page. 30. The words in the 15. chapter of the Acts at the
14. ver. upon which the prophecy of Amos is inferred, are taken by Dr Mayer, to
be meant of the song of old Simeon, and not of the former speech of Simon Peter.

Mr Petrie's Answer. Is there not a difference twixt Simeon and Simon? James
names Simeon, and not Simon: wherefore not without reason it may be thought,
that homeant old Simeon, especially seeing Luke is the writer of both books;
and if the words of Simeon do hereunto agree more then the words of Peter, who
should doubt that James spoke of him? wherefore consider the words of old
Simeon. Luke 2.30. It is said of him, not only that he was a just man and
devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Ghost was upon him,
but likewise, It was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should not
see death before he had seen the Lord Christ, and he came by the Spirit into
the Temple. All which particulars serve very much to purchase credit unto his
testimony, who says: Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have
prepared before the face of all people, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and
the glory of thy people Israel. We may see that he declares there the
fulfilling (at that time) of the prophecy of Isa. 49.6. And he said, It is a
light thing, that thou should be my servant, to raise up the Tribes of Jacob,
and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light unto
the Gentles, that thou may be my salvation unto the ends of the earth: and
cha. 52.9. Break forth into joy, sing together ye waste places of Jerusalem:
the Lord has made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the Nations, and all
the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God. To the same purpose
is chap. 60.1.3.19. and chap. 62.1, 2.11. where we see the faithful are
bidden rejoice at the coming of Christ; and so did Simeon, when he saw him:
Christ is called the salvation of the Lord, and Simeon speaking unto God, says
of Christ, my eyes have seen thy salvation: the Messiah is called a light unto
the Gentiles into all the ends of the earth, and Simeon says, which thou have
prepared before the face of all people, a light to lighten the Gentiles: Christ
is called the glory of Sion and Jerusalem; and Simeon says, Christ is the
glory of thy people Israel. And so by the testimony of old Simeon (which is
approved and registered by the Spirit of God) these and the like prophecies
should not be restricted unto the second coming, but were in part fulfilled at
the first coming of Christ, and therefore also all that follows in that long
tailed note is a frivolous discourse, as we may see by the unanimous consent in
the true worship of God, betwixt the Jews and other Nations in the same 15.
chapter of the Acts, where the Jews and Gentiles conveene in the general
Synod, howbeit the odds continue betwixt the obstinate both Jews and Gentiles
on the one part, and the seed of Abraham, believers both Jews and Gentiles on
the other part, both in their opinion and practice of religious duties.

Reply.

Whether St. James meant Peter, or old Simeon, I left it as doubtful; and your
maine reason touching the [difference twixt Simon and Simeon,] is of no force
to decide the Question. Seeing Peter is (in his 2. Epist. 1. chap. at the 1.
ver.) according to diverse readings in the original, called both Simon and
Simeon; as you may see in the edition of the New Testament with Stephanus,
Scaliger's and Casaubons notes, printed London 1622. And Casaubon, who was as
confident that he Apostle meant Peter, as you are, that he meant old Simeon,
feared not to say, in his note on the 14. ver. of this chap. of the Acts, that
your opinion in this matter, is an ancient error grounded on the diversity of
writing this Name. His words are, Simeon hic voca tur, qui alibi Simon dicitur,
quae diversitas (...) fecit, ut magno errore existimarius quidam ^verteribus
non Petrum hic intelligi, sed Simeonem -- verum errasse eos qui ita senserunt,
notius est, quam ut longa refutatione opus habeat. And doubtless if the
Apostle had meant old Simeon, he would not have said, Simeon has declared how
God at first did visit the Gentiles. But that God would first visit the
Gentiles. For Simeon showed only, that they should be called, and not that they
were called, and therefore the Apostle's words [how God at first did visit the
Gentiles] having relation only to the actual performance of it by Peter, who
had told in what manner God had by him begun to visit them, must needs be
understood of Peter, and not of Simeon, who only prophesied, that it should be
done. And yet if it had been meant of old Simeon, it would have made the more
with me: seeing the word [first] alone compared with the order of Simeons
words, [a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel]
had plainly showed, that a substituted part of the Gentiles should be called,
before the National conversion of the Jews. From this you proceed to show,
that Simeon spoke by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, which no Christian can
doubt of: and then repeating the prophecy, you say. [Wee may see that he
declares there the fulfilling (at that time) of the prophecy, Isa. 49. ver. 6.
and chap. 52. ver. 9. and chap. 60. ver. 1.3.19. and chap. 62. ver. 1, 2.11.]
How? at that time? certainly amongst prophecies touching the same thing, one
may be more plainly delivered then another, and so may give some light for the
true understanding of the other. But to say that one prophecy does show the
fulfilling of another, is a ridiculous untruth: seeing it is not the
prophesying of the same thing, but the actual performance of it, that shows
the fulfilling thereof. And therefore Simeon who prophesied of the calling of
the Gentiles, and restoring of the Jews, as well as Isaiah, could not herein
declare the fulfilling (at that time) of Isaiah's prophecies; unless you can
prove, that to foretell what should be done, is to declare what was done. And
thus Simeon's words which you have alleged to prove that Isaiah's prophecies
were then fulfilled, do indeed most evidently show, that they were not
fulfilled. And the reasons which you bring to confirm your doctrine, are as
mean, as the doctrine is maimed. For [ the faithful (say you) are bidden to
rejoice at the coming of Christ; and so did Simeon when he saw him.] No doubt
but the faithful, that saw Christ when he was come, did rejoice? that he was
come, and so did the faithful too before Christ's coming, and before Isa.
prophesied, rejoice that he should come: for Abraham, says our Savior, saw my
day and rejoiced. Yea this was a thing ever performed by the Saints from the
beginning of the world. But yet it is not expressed in the text, that Simeon
rejoiced; neither does the Prophet in any of these texts which you have cited
bid the faithful rejoice at the coming of Christ, but chap. 52. at the 9.
ver. he calls to the waste places of Jerusalem to break forth into joy -- for
the Lord, says he, has comforted his people, he has redeemed Jerusalem.
Where the Prophet uses the like form of speech, as Zacharias does in his
prophecy, Luke. 1. ver. 68. etc. And therefore Zacharias speaking in the preter
perfect tense. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and
redeemed his people, does no more prove that Israel was then redeemed (for
which purpose you have before alleged it page. 8.) then this prophecy of
Isaiah does, that it was redeemed when Isaiah prophesied. And in confessing,
that this prophecy of Isaiah (which agrees so well both in matter and form
with the first words of Zacharias) was not fulfilled before Christ's first
coming, you do as good as confess, that it is not to be fulfilled til his
next coming. For seeing the Prophet calls to the waste places of Ierusasalem to
rejoice, and speaks of God's redeeming Jerusalem, as well as of comforting his
people; it is manifest, that this prophecy cannot be fulfilled, til the city it
self be again restored, as is employed in our Savior's prophecy, Luke 1. ver.
24. and expressed, Jer. 31. ver. 38. and Isa. chap. 60. and 62. and in many other
places. This is your first parallel, for which you had no ground in the text.
The rest are these. [Christ is called the salvation of the Lord; and Simeon
says, My eyes have seen thy salvation. The Messiah is called a light unto the
Gentiles: and Simeon says, a light to lighten the Gentiles; Christ i^ called
the glory of Sion, and Jerusalem; and Simeon says, the glory of thy people
Israel.] And will it follow from this, that Isaiah's prophecies were at that
time fulfilled? surely no more then it will, that they were fulfilled when
Isaiah spoke the same words, but this will follow, that these texts of Isaiah
and Simeon's prophecy are one in their contents; and that the fore Simeon's
words do no more show, that Isaiah's prophecies were fulfilled at Christ's
first coming, then Isaiah's do, that Simeon's prophecy was then fulfilled.
Which do indeed show that Christ is to be [the glory of his people Israel] at
his next appearing, and not before. For seeing to be the glory of his people,
implies a greater happiness to belong to the Jews of whom the Redeemer came;
then to the Gentiles, to whom he is said to be a light; is it likely that this
should be fulfilled, when now and then a Jew should seek God amongst the
Gentiles, or rather when the Gentiles in general should seek God amidst the
whole Nation of the Jews? or rather I say when (as Isaiah speaks) the Tribes
of Jacob shall be raised up, and the preserved of Israel restored; when they
shall come from the North, and from the West, and from the land of Sinim. When
the waste and desolate places, and the land of their destruction shall be even
now too narrow by reason of the inhabitants, and they that swallowed them up
shall be far away. When the Lord shall feed them that oppress them with their
own flesh, and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet
wine, and all flesh shall know, that the Lord is their Savior, and their
Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob. When the glory of the Lord is risen upon
Sion, and the Gentiles shall come to their light, and Kings to the brightness of
her rising. When the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto her; and the
forces of the Gentiles shall come unto her. When the multitude of Camels shall
cover her, the Dromedaries of Midian and Ephah, and all they from Sheba shall
come, and shall bring gold and incense, and show forth the praise of the Lord.
When all the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto her, and the Rams
of Nebaioth shall minister unto her, when they shall come up with acxceptance
on God's altar, and God shall glorify the house of his glory. When the glory of
Lebanon shall come unto her the fur tree, the pine tree, and the box tree
together, to beautify the place of God's Sanctuary; and when God shall make the
place of his feet glorious. When the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve
Sion shall perish, yea shall be utterly wasted. When violence shall no more be
heard in her land, wasting nor destruction within her borders, but she shall
call her walls salvation, and her gates praise. When the Gentiles shall see her
righteousness, and all Kings her glory, when she shall be called Heph-Zibah, and
her land Benlah. In a word, when the Jews shall be called, The holy people, The
redeemed of the Lord: and Sion shall be called, Sought out, a City not
forsaken. When the time comes wherein all this, and much more (which is
revealed in the chapters of Isaiah cited by you) shall come to pass; then, and
not til then shall our Savior declare himself, to be the glory of his people
Israel, as Simeon has foretold. And so by the testimony of these prophecies,
that part of Simeon's prophecy, which concerns the glory of the Jews, is to
be referred wholly to our Savior's second coming; when as well [the residue
of men] the Gentiles, that are yet uncal'd, as the Gentiles [on whom God's Name
is already cal'd] shall all go up to worship the Lord at Jerusalem: shall all
seek salvation amongst the Jews, and not the Jews amongst the Gentiles: And
therefore when the Jews and Gentiles shall be so united, as these and many
other prophecies do foreshew; there is to be no disagreement at all betwixt
the Jews, or betwixt them and any other nation in the practice of religious
duties. Which thing too this marginall note does so clearly prove out of the
prophecy of Amos alleged by St. James, that you could make no better reply to
it, then to call it a long tailed note, and a frivolous discourse. And whereas,
you say [ that there was an unanimous consent in the true worship of God,
betwixt the Jews and other Nations, when they did conveen in the general
Synod Act. 15.] Surely there was not one whole City, and much less was there
any one Nation of the Gentiles, at that time converted. And if a few Turks
should become Christians, you might as well infer from this, that there were an
unanimous consent in the worship of God betwixt Christians and the Turkish
Nations: as you can conclude from that meeting or from all that were then
converted, that the Jews and (any, much less all) other Nations were united
in the true worship of God. And indeed the uniting of the Jews and Gentiles
into one Church, so often and so plainly foretold by the Prophets, and
confirmed by our Savior Ioh. 10. ver. 16. is not of some Jews and Gentiles
only, as it was in the first days of the Gospel: nor of some Nations of the
Gentiles and a few Jews, as it has been since the conversion of the
substituted Nations of the Gentiles: nor of all the Jews and some Gentiles, as
it was under the Law; nor of all the Jews, and a part of the Gentile Nations:
but of all the Tribes of the Jews, and all the Nations of the Gentiles.

The marginall Note. But it matters not much, which of the two is here spoken
of; for seeing the Prophet does plainly show a future restoring of the Jews;
and yet the intent of the Apostle was only to prove, that God had then called
the Gentiles: it cannot otherwise be, but that the words [after this] in the
prophecy, being applied to the foresaid visiting of the Gentiles by the
preaching of the Gospel must needs conclude, that the extraordinary
restoration of the Jews foreshewne by the Prophet, was to follow the calling
of the Gentiles, then begun by the Apostles.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. The Prophet Amos in that chap. before ver. 11. speaks
not of the calling of the Gentiles, and the Apostle cites the same words of
ver. 11. for the calling of the Gentiles: neither has the Prophet these words,
after this, but, in these days: and howbeit the Apostle cite them so, yet this
must be understood of the order of things mentioned by the Prophet, which is a
restoration after the destruction of Israel, and not a Monarchy of the Jews
after the calling of the Gentiles. Whereby it is manifest, that in this note is
a twofold error; one inserting the words in the prophecy, which are not in it;
another in misinterpreting the words of the Apostle.

Reply.

The Prophet Amos does neither before nor at the 11. ver. speak of the calling
of the Gentiles, but at the 12. ver. where they are expressed. And it has been
showed before, that the Apostle cites not the 11. ver. for the calling of the
Gentiles, but for the conversion and deliverance of the Jews after the calling
of the substituted Gentiles. For the Apostle having said, Simcon has declared
how God at first did visit the Gentiels to take out of them a people for his
Name: confirms it by this prophecy of Amos, which in the 12. ver. shows, that
there should be some Nations of the Gentiles, upon whom Gods Nune should be
called, or who should be called by Gods Name, whilst David's Tabernacle lay
waste, whilst the Jews were to continue in blindness. And surely seeing there
are so many prophecies which show the general conversion of the Gentiles at
the restoring of the Jews, the Apostle in passing by them, and alleging this
prophecy to show, that God would at that time take but a part of the Gentiles
to be a people for his Name; does to my thinking, thereby plainly show, that
the Jews were then to be given up, and to be no mo^e God^ people, until that
day in which he has appointed to build again the Tabernacle of David: at
which time, the residue of m^n also shall seek the Lord, as well as the
Gentiles on whom God's Name is already called. You tell us next [that the
Prophet has not these words [after this] but, in these days.] But though the
Prophet has not these words, yet the prophecy has as the Apostle cites it;
who says, to this agree the words of the Prophets, i^ it written, After this
and^. And the prophets words are not [in these dayes] but [in that Day] in that
Day, (...), in that great Day of Christ's Kingdom. Neither is it likely that the
Apostle cited the words [after this] in reference to what the Prophet had said
(which was not questioned,) bu^ rather to what he himself had said. And if we
should refer these words to the foregoeing destruction of Israel, how does
this prove that their restoration shall not follow the calling of the
substituted Gentiles, whenas it is evident, that their threatened dispersion and
sifting among all Nations, after which they should be again restored, was more
to be fulfilled upon them in the time of the substituted Gentiles calling, then
before? and seeing you confess, that the preceding destruction was denounced
against the Jews only, how could you believe, that by [the raising of the
Tabernacle of David, that is fallen, and building of it as in the days of old]
is meant the calling of the Gentiles, and not the restoring of the Kingdom and
people of David, whom the foresaid judgment should ruin? And yet you seem to
be so confident of the currantnesse of this exposition, that you thus
peremptorily conclude [It is manifest that in this note is a twofold error,
one inserting the words in the prophecy, which are not in it; another in
misinterpreting the Apostle's words] Certainly it is very manifest what spirit
was predominant in you, when you penned these bold and loud untruths. For did I
insert the words [after this] into the prophecy? or did the same Spirit who
revealed the prophecy by Amos, rehearse it thus by the Apostle? search and see.
Nay do you not say before [and howbeit the Apostle cite them so?] whom then
do you here accuse of error, me, or him? And as for misinterpreting the words
of the Apostle, it is already shown, that you would feign father your
misinterpreting of it on the Apostle. To which this may be added, That the
Prophet does make a plain distinction betwixt the people meant by [the
Tabernacle of David] and the people meant by [the remnant of Edom, and all the
heathen which are called by Gods Name.] For he says that those meant by the
Tabernacle of David shall possess these. What? can the same people be the
possessours and the possessed? surely so it must be according to your
interpreting of the [building of David's Tabernacle] of the calling of the
Gentiles: seeing in the 12. ver. not only the remnant of Edom, but the heathen
that were to be called in the Jews steed are plainly spoken of. Or take it as
the Apostle delivers it. And then in your sense it will be thus. After this I
will return and call again the Gentiles, that the residue of men (that is,
the Gentiles which are not yet to be called) may seek the Lord: and all the
Gentiles upon whom my Name is (now to be) called. Or thus, that the residue of
men (that is, all the Gentiles, that are now to be called) may seek the Lord:
and all the Gentiles upon whom my name is (already) called* And what sense is
there in either of these interpretations? one of which must needs follow upon
your interpreting of [the building of David's Tabernacle] of the calling of the
Gentiles by the Apostles: seeing the conversion of the Gentiles [upon whom
God's Name is cal'd] in the prophecy, was to precede the conversion of the
Gentiles meant by [the residue of men.] And besides, [The building of the
Tabernacle of David as in the days of old,] does infallibly show the restoring
of a people to that estate and condition they were formerly in; which cannot be
said of the Gentiles, who were never before God's people.

The Marginall note. And consequently, that the Jews endeavor to hinder the
growth of the Gospel (1 Thessalonians. 2.14.15.) was a sure proof of the conversion
of the Gentiles, and their own rejection, who unto the death of Christ were
the peculiar people of God, and not wholly cast off, until by their wilful
unbeleife, they forced the Apostles to turn from them to other Nations (Act.
13.44, 45, 46.) to whom God had not formerly revealed himself, and therefore
could not at that time be said [to returne] unto the Gentiles, whom he had but
then received no, nor to the Jews, whom he had then (and not til then) quite
forsaken. So that if we consider the [Returning] of God here mentioned in the
prophecy, to be appliable only to the Jews, to whom alone God had so long
before made himself known: and yet that the Jews were shortly after the
calling of the Gentiles, quite forsaken, we must needs grant, that their great
happiness here foretold has not been yet enjoyed, but shall be, when the
fullness of the succedaneous Gentiles is come in. And wherefore did the Apostle
change the Prophet's [in that day will I raise up] into [After this will I
return and build?] wherefore, I say, did he, or rather the Holy Ghost in him,
make choice of this paraphrase in place of the text, if not of purpose to make
that which has been said, the more plainly appear? to wit, that the day of
the Jews deliverance, is to await the accomplishment of the surrogated
Gentiles vocation. For though this consolatory prophecy, according to the order
of the things revealed to the Prophet, has relation only to a foregoing
judgment denounced against the Jews, yet it is not therefore misinferred here
by the Apostle, as a subsequent too of the anticipated conversion of the
Gentiles: and that because the very same time, which was foreappointed by God,
for the execution of that punishment upon the forsaken Jews, was also
foreappointed by him, to be the time for the promulgation of his mercy, toward
the substituted Gentiles: as these next words [that the residue of men might
seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles upon whom my Name is cal'd] do most
clearly intimate. For what is meant by [the residue of men,] but the remainder
of those Nations, which are not to be converted, til the foresaid redemption of
the Jews? (their redemption I say, as well out of all countries into which
they are scattered, and from all Nations amongst whom (as was foretold) they
have been sifted (so many hundred years) as from all their sins, which moved
God to use such severity toward them. And what by [the Gentiles on whom Gods
Name is cal'd] but the remnant of those Nations, which are now already (or
shall, if any more shall) while David's Tabernacle lies waste, become the
people of God in the hardened Jews stead? So that this prophecy does as well
prove a profession of the Gospel, by a great part of the Gentiles, before the
Jews deliverance, and in the time of their blindness, as by all that are left
of them afterward. For that by a people [on whom God's Name is called, or,
which is called by God's Name,] is to be understood, a people beloved of God,
and called out from other Nations to serve him, (as the Jews were heretofore,
and as Christians are now) I think none will deny: or that [ by the residue of
men, and all the Gentiles upon whom God's Name is called,] all other Nations
besides the Jews, are meant. And was there then ever a^ yet such an unanimous
consent in the true worship of God, betwixt the Jews and all other Nations as
is here foretold? surely never betwixt them and any one Nation: No, nor long
betwixt themselves. And (the more the pity) no less odds has a long time
been, and still is amongst Christians, both in their opinion and practice of
religious duties. Vide Commentationum Apocalyp. partem primam de sigillis page
55. 56.

Mr Petrie's Answer. This is mere cavilling. Before the calling of the
Gentiles was not God averse from them, and they from him? and therefore when he
looked graciously upon them, he is truly said to return unto them. Again in
the words of Amos immediately preceding we see that the Lord was offended with
Israel, and when he sent the salvation of God, and glory of Israel among them,
it may be as truly said; that he returned unto them. Thirdly, it is often in
this note repeated, that he had quite forsaken the Jews: but the Apostle
cannot suffer this phrase, Romans 11.18. Has God cast away his people? God
forbid, for I also am an Israelite, etc. but more of this purpose hereafter.

Reply.

This is mere carping; for to [returne] does necessarily imply a former abode
in that place, or among that people, to which the returning is; or a former
possession of that thing, which does return. For can it be said, that you are
returned to a place where you never were before? or could Neb^tchadnezzar have
said, I lift up mine eyes unto Heaven, and mine understanding returned unto
me: if he had not been formerly endued with understanding? It is not a
sufficient reason therefore to prove that God did return unto the Gentiles,
when he looked graciously upon them [because he was before their calling averse
from them, and they from him,] unless it can be showed withal, that God was
sometime before that averseness, not averse from them. And whereas you say
further [ that in the words of Amos immediately preceding, the Lord was
offended with Israel, and when he sent the salvation of God and glory of Israel
among them, it may be truly said, that he returned unto them.] If you had said,
and when he shall raise up the Tabernacle of David, that is fallen, and close
up the breaches thereof, etc. he may be truly said to return unto them; you had
said the truth: for the Prophet says it is this, and not the first coming of
our Savior, that declares Gods return to Israel after the full accomplishment
of the wrath before denounc't against it, which wrath had not wholly seized
upon them, until Judah and Benjamin were dispersed also at the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Romans: and before this the Apostles were turned from the
Jews to the Gentiles, so that God had then ceased to be their God, as our
Savior had said, Matthew. 21. ver. 43. and therefore when he shall again become
their God, as he has foretold he will, at the rebuilding of David's Tabernacle,
then shall this [Returne] the Apostle speaks of, be fulfilled unto them: for as
God cannot be said to return to a people in respect of a donation of outward
and temporal blessings, unless they be first taken from them; so neither can
he be said to return to a people in respect of a participation of inward and
spiritual blessings, unless they be first deprived of the means of
salvation, which formerly they enjoyed. And it is very remarkable here, how
wavering you are both in your interpretation and application of God's
[Returning] mentioned by the Apostle: for first you understand it of Gods
returning to the Gentiles, in calling them by the preaching of the Gospel, and
presently after you understand it of his returning to the Jews, in sending
Christ among them; of whom nevertheless, you have hitherto denied, that this
Prophecy does speak. But I have said that the Jews were [quite forsaken] and
[ the Apostle (you say) cannot suffer this phrase, Romans 11. ver. 1. Has God
cast away his people? God forbid, etc. And yet the same Apostle in the same chapter
at the 15. ver. says, If the casting away of them be the reconciling of the
world, what shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead? and ver.
32. For God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon
all: and was not the Nation of the Jews quite cast off, when all the Tribes
were thus concluded in unbelief? or will you say, that they have still
continued the people of God under the Gospel, as well as under the Law? if you
will not, you must needs grant, that the Nation is quite forsaken, quite cast
off; although not so forsaken, not so cast off, as never again to be received
to mercy; although some particular Jews be not cast off, as some particular
Gentiles were not secluded before Christ's coming. And thus having made a shift
to pass through almost half this note, you leave the Reader in the briars,
and step over all the rest, as too rough for your handling.

Israel's Redemption. And yet there want not some, who by the words [All
Israel] in the 11. of the Romans, understand only the Church of the Gentiles,
to which some of the Jews should be united: but if the obvious and simple
meaning of the 28, 29, 30, 31, and 32. verses following, will not suffice to
discover the weakness (that I say not wilfulness) of this interpretation; yet
surely to any man that is not without reason, the reasons which Wendelinus (in
the 19. chap. and 2. Section of his natural contemplations, at the 391. page)
brings to the contrary, will give abundant satisfaction. For first the Apostle
does apparently distinguish the Jews from the Gentiles, by the word [Israel]
when he says, that blindness is in part happened to Israel, until the fullness
of the Gentiles be come in. And therefore I much doubt, whether he would in the
very next line, by the same word indifferently comprehend both Jews and
Gentiles: especially seeing the Israel that is to be saved must needs have
relation to the Israel, that was before said to be in blindness. And then too,
what is become of the mystery here spoken of, if the words, And so all Israel
shall be saved, should not signify such a conversion of the Jews, as must
follow the vocation of the Gentiles? for that some particular Jews were at
that time to be gathered to the Church, they knew before, seeing many such were
then amongst them, some of which did first conveight the Gospel to them. And
therefore in my judgment, those Divines deal most sincerely with the text,
who acknowledging the literal sense thereof, do send us to that of Isaiah in
his 66. chap. at the 8. ver. as to a plain proof of this opinion. Who (says
he) has heard such a thing? Who has seen such things? shall the earth be
made to bring forth in Zech. 3. v. 9.
one day, or shall a Nation be borne at once? for as soon as Sion traveled
she brought forth her children. Where the wonderful and unheard of conversion
of a whole Nation at once (such as never happened to any Nation of the Gentiles)
together with the express mention of Sion, and the evidence of the following
verses should, me thinks, be motive enough to make my impartial Reader
understand this Prophecy of the Jews; which yet implies not so much a return
of the whole Nation to their Country as to their God, and therefore could not
be fulfilled by the return of a part of them from Babylon; at which time too,
the Kingdom of God, (that is, the true worship of God, the means by which
that Kingdom is obtained) was amongst them only, but has since (according to
our Saviors Prophecy in the 21 chap. of Matthew. at the 43. ver.) been taken
from them: and shall again according to this, be suddenly and ex^raordinarily
restored unto them: as Joel also before intimated, by the plentiful
distribution of Gods Spirit in the last days.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. All this Section sights against vain imaginations: for
(as it is said) by all Israel we understand not the Gentiles only, but the
seed of the Promise, that is, the faithful Jews, and others in all Nations.
As for that Prophecy, Esa. 66.8. was it not fulfilled truly (albeit not fully)
when the believing Church traveled, and brought forth so great multitudes in
one day, as may be called a Nation, as 3000. and 5000. converted in a day. Act.
2.41. and 4.4. and the people with one accord give heed unto these things,
which Philip spoke, and they who all had given themselves unto Simon Magus from
the least to the greatest, believed and were baptized both men and women, chap.
8.6. and chap. 19.17.18. this was known unto all the Jews and Greeks dwelling
at Ephesus, and fear fell on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was
magnified, and many believed, and ver. 20. so mightily grew the word of God and
prevailed, not only at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, ver. 10. and
26. besides many other passages, and other great and miraculous conversions,
whereof we read in Ecclesiastical Histories. So that what was a wonderment
unto Esa. or the faithful in his time (who has heard such a thing!) has been
truly done many a day before these our days, the evidence whereof me thinks,
should be motive enough to make any partial or unpartiall Reader understand
that Prophecy generally; and so much the rather that (by this Author's own
confession page 33.) it implies not so much the return of the whole Nation to
their Country, as to their God: it is certain, it was in part fulfilled at
their return from Babel: for then they reared up their walls, they planted
Vineyards, etc. but it is a gross opinion to think, that all the particulars
of these Prophecies should be fulfilled (in a proper acceptance of the words)
at one and the same juncture of time: and it is as vain to think, that that
Prophecy of Joel concerning the plentiful pouring down of the Spirit could
not be fulfilled by the accomplishment of our Saviors Prophecy, Matthew. 21.43.
There is no dependence of this Prophecy on the words of Joel, and every one
who has eyes may see, that our Savior speaks not there of the temporal
Kingdom of the Jews, but of the Gospel, seeing he calls it the Kingdom of
God, and he says, It shall be taken from them, and another Nation shall bring
forth the fruits of it: their temporal Kingdom was taken from them already;
and these last words cannot be understood of any temporal Kingdom: neither
were these Romans who destroyed Jerusalem, more devoute then the stubborn
Jews.

Reply.

As the last part of the note, so the first part of this Section was too strong
for your pallet, and therefore it was high time for you, to cry out, [all this
Section fights against vain imaginations,] of which kind of answers you have a
very pregnant fancy. But as vain as they are, they have made the greatest
Scholars in Christendom to confess, that a general conversion of the Jews
is here foretold by the Apostle; and to deny, that no more but a partial and
successive conversion of them with the Gentiles, throughout the whole time of
the Gentiles calling, is here meant, as you would have the Apostle understood.
For I would not Brethren that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, etc. says
St. Paul, what? was it a mystery, that some Jews were then joined with the
Gentiles in the Church of Christ? or shall we think, that the Apostle would
admonish them not to be ignorant of that which they could not be ignorant of?
to wit, that some Jews as well as the Gentiles, were then to be converted. No
doubtless, but to be mindful of that which being a mystery they were
ignorant of, until he had now revealed it unto them; to wit, the conversion of
All Israel, of the whole Nation when the fullness of the Gentiles should come
in. And as I have before showed, that Israel here is properly to be taken, so I
dare say, that you cannot allege any text of Scripture, that will justify the
mystical acception of it, if it be thoroughly scanned. And whereas you say [
that the Prophecy, Esa. 66. ver. 8. was fulfilled truly (albeit not fully)
when the believing Church traveled, and brought forth so great multitudes in
one day, as may be called a Nation, as 3000. and 5000. Acts 2.41. and 4. ver.
4. and chap. 8. ver. 6. and chap. 19. ver. 10.17, 18.20.26. besides other great
and miraculous conversions, whereof we read in Ecclesiastical Histories;]
Certainly your application sails you very much. For first the Prophet speaks
of the conversion of a whole Nation, not of half a Nation; and much less of
so small a number, as you (to maintain your cause) would persuade us to take
for a Nation. Secondly, he speaks but of one Nation (to wit, the Nation of the
Jews) and not of the Jews and Gentiles both; as you in these instances do
interpret him. Thirdly, he speaks of Sions traveling, when she should return
from her unbelief (as the contemporating Prophecies in the same chapter do
show) and not before she fell into unbelief; as the conversion of the Jews
which you mention, was. And fourthly, the conversion he foreshewes, is to be so
sudden, that it is said to be performed [at once] which connot be affirmed of
a conversion of any ordinary continuance, and how then can it be affirmed of a
conversion of so many years and ages, as you understand it of, in applying it
to the whole time under the Gospel? For suppose that a great sum of money were
to be paid to you [at once] would you give the creditour leave to make this
construction of it, that it was to be paid by him and his heirs, to you and
your heirs, until it were all paid? doubtless you would not: and yet as if
all the time betwixt Christ's first and second coming, were not time enough to
be understood by [one day, and at once] you tell us too [ It is certain, it
was in part fulfilled at their returning from Babel, for then they reared up
their walls, they planted Vineyards, etc.] Who ever heard of such a large [at
once?] of an [at once] to begin at the deliverance of the Jews from Babylon,
and to continue to the next appearing of Christ? what? could the Prophet have
made the speedy execution of that he speaks of, a matter of so great
admiration, if it should have been any long time in fulfilling? or shall we
say, that Adino the Eznite, who lift up his Spear against eight hundred, whom
he slew at one time, did it at so many several times as there were men slain
by him? 2 Samuel 23. ver. 8. or that when Abraham said, Let not the Lord be
angry, and I will speak yet but this once, Genesis 18. ver. 32. it is to be
understood that he spoke more then that once? or that when the Lord said unto
Joshua, Ye shall go about the City once, Josh. 6. ver. 3. it was to be done
many times together? (for in all these texts there are the same words in the
original, as are here in the Prophet) were not this most wilfully to
contradict the text? and yet you can very modestly, reverently, and righteously
affirm that [ It is certain this [once] was in part fulfilled at the Jews
returning from Babel.] But where are the reasons that prove this certainty,
seeing there is neither in this verse, nor in the whole chapter, any mention of
Babylon, or of walls and Vineyards? and if there had been mention of rearing up
their walls and Vineyards: how could you understand it properly here, who take
it figuratively, Amos 9. ver. 14.? so that all this being laid together, to
wit, that this Prophecy does speak of the conversion of a whole Nation, of
but one Nation, of a Nation formerly given up to unbelief, and at once again
to return to the truth; it should me thinks, be motive enough to make any
partial or impartial Reader, to understand the accomplishment of it
particularly of the National conversion of the Jews only, by the plentiful
effusion of Gods Spirit upon on them before the great and terrible Day of the
Lords appearing, as Joel has prophesied. And as for that which follows, any
one that has but half an eye may perceive how well your eyesight served you,
when you conceived, that the Prophecy Matthew. 21. ver. 43. was alleged by me
to prove the temporal Kingdom of the Jews; who have alleged it only as a
reason to show, that this Prophecy of Isaiah could not be fulfilled at the
returning of the Jews from Babylon, because the means of salvation (the
Kingdom of God, as our Savior calls it) was then amongst them only, of which
they were to be destitute before the accomplishment of this Prophecy, which
shows their conversion to it again. And he may perceive too how you take non
causa pro causa, how injuriously you impute unto me the alleging of the
accomplishment of our Saviors Prophecy; to show that Joels Prophecy was not
fulfilled, which was indeed before proved by such reasons as you could not
answer.

Israel's Redemption. CHAP. III.
Of the surviving Gentiles subjection unto, and communion and fellowship with
the Jews, in the knowledge and worship of God.

Jews only; I shall now acquaint you with their partakers, which shall be
such as are left of the Nations, that are then to be destroyed, as you may see
in the 66. chapter of Isaiah at 15. and 19. verses. Behold, the Lord will come
with fire, and mith his Chariots like a whirle-winde, to render his anger with
fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire, for by Ezekiel. 39. v. 4, 5, 6. etc. Mal
4 ver. 1. Psalm. 50. v 3. 2 Thessalonians 1. v. 7, 8, etc.
fire; and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh, and the slain of
the Lord shall be many. And I will set a sign among them, and I will send
those that escape of them unto the Nations, to Tarshish, Pull, and Lud, that
draw the bow, to Tubal and Javan, to the Isles a far off, that have not heard
my fame, neither have seen my glory, and they shall declare my glory among the
Gentiles: And they shall bring all your brethren for an Isa. 18. v. 7.
offering unto the Lord, out of all Nations, upon horses, and in Charrers, and
in Litters, and upon Mules, and upon swift beasts to my holy Mountain
Jerusalem, says the Lord, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a
clean vessel into the house of the Lord. And I will also take of them for
Priests, and for Levites, says the Lord. For as the new Heavens, and the new
earth, which I will make (to wit, at the judgment of the dead, when this
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, as it is in the 20. chap. of the Rev. at the
11. ver. and in the 21, chap. at the 1. ver. as these) shall remain before
me, says the Lord, so shall your seed and your name remain; (to wit, after
their foresaid return from captivity) And it shall come to pass, that from
one new Moon to another, and from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come
to Psalm. 68. ver. 29.31. Psalm. 100. v. 1, 2.4.
worship before me, says the Lord, and they shall go forth and look upon the
carcasses of the men that have transgressed against me; for their worm shall
not dye, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring
to all flesh. Read also in the 61. chap. the Isa. 53. v. 12.
4, 5, 6, 7. verses, and in the 60. chap. the 9, 10, 11, Jer. 12. ver. 14, 15,
16, 17.
12, 13, 14, 15, 16. verses, and in the 49. chap. the 22, 23. ver. and in the
25. chap. the 6, 7, 8. verses, and in the 14. chap. the Dan. 7. ver. 18.21.27.
1. Isa. 55. v. 5. Zech. 2. v. 9.11.
2. Ezekiel. 39. ver. 10.
3. ver. and in the 2. chap. the Isa. 49. v. 6. chap. 60. v. 3. 1 Timothy 2. v. 4.
2, 3, Psalm. 46. v. 9. Hosea 2. v. 18.
4. verses. The same Prophecy also you may find in the 4. chapter of Micah,
at the 1, 2. verses; and not much unlike unto this, is that in the 8. chapter of
Zechariah, at the 20, 22, 23. verses, and that in the 1.4. chap. at the 16, 17.
ver. etc.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. It is now manifest, that these forenamed Prophecies are
not of the earthly prosperity of the Jews only, and we know certainly, that
the Gentiles are partakers with the Jews: so that the proof of this point is
needless, and nevertheless he fills up some pages with Prophecies to this
purpose.

Reply.

Now we are come to the Prophecies that decide the difference, for the very
ground of the controversy is; Whether the Jews and Gentiles are already
joined into one Church; which you affirm, and we deny, and yet both agree
that these Prophecies do foreshew their uniting. And what then do they say of
it? certainly they say not, that the Jews and Gentiles were united into one
Church, whilst the Church was amongst the Jews only, and some Gentiles were
called into it; as i^ was before Christ's coming: neither do they say, that
they are united into one Church, whilst the Church is to be amongst the
Gentiles only, and some Jews called into it: as it has been since Christ's
coming: but this they say, that at their uniting, the whole Nation of the
Jews, and all Nations of the Gentiles that are left shall worship God after
the same manner at Jerusalem. This they show of themselves, and compared with
the Prophecies which concern our Saviors reign on earth they infallibly
declare too, that at their uniting, all Nations in the world shall make but one
Church and Kingdom under the government of our Lord Jesus Christ: which is
enough to show, that in the ensuing discourse you do but vainly kick against
the pricks, and manifest an obstinate apostasy from the truth. But lest the
unlearned Reader should mistake molehils for mountains, and shadows for
substances, we must proceed to examine your Answers. And first you tell us [
It is now manifest, that these forenamed Prophecies are not of the earthly
prosperity of the Jews only.] What? is it manifest that these forenamed
Prophecies speak not only of the prosperity of the Jews, because the
prosperity of those days belongs not to the Jews only? because I say, these
Prophecies here do show that the Gentiles shall be partakers with them in the
peace, piety, and plenty of that time? who sees not this non sequitur, the
independencie of this inference? These last Prophecies show, that the
prosperous estate of the Gentiles shall be dependent on their voluntary
submission to, and union with the Jews; therefore those forenamed Prophecies
touching the Jews return unto; and prosperity in their own Land, are not of
the prosperity of the Jews only: such bald untruths and sophistical
Arguments do stop many a breach in this work of yours; and help very much to
gain the simple, and to hold up the considence of the prejudio^te Christian.
You go on, and say [ we know certainly that the Gentiles are partakers with
the Jews.] Partakers? of what? of the happiness which the accomplishment of
the Prophecies here alleged, was to bring forth unto them? You must first
prove, that these Prophecies are fulfilled, before you can affirm, that they
are partakers of the contemporating happiness revealed in them, and unless
you mean that they are partakers with them of the happiness foreshewed in
these Prophecies, you do but equivocate, in saying, [ that the Gentiles are
partakers with the Jews.] And yet you conclude, [so that the proof of this
point is needless, and nevertheless he fills up some pages with Prophecies
to this purpose.] Doubtless this is spoken of purpose to b^ffle the Reader
from a serious consideration of the union which these Prophecies speak of,
which is so obvious, that every ordinary apprehension may of it self perceive,
that it is not yet accomplished; and this you knew very well, and therefore
have not so much as quoted the Chapters, or books where these Prophecies are
revealed. Was not this after all your braving, to plead guilty? For if this
point was needless, you might so much the rather have afforded the Reader a
sight of, or at least a direction unto the Prophecies so needlessely alleged,
seeing you could not have wished for a greater advantage against me. But when
you pass over the former Prophecies untoucht, and keep these wholly out of
sight, who will not conclude from hence, that you could not possibly disprove
the proper and historical accomplishment of them? and consequently, that the
time of their accomplishment, is not yet come?

Israel's Redemption. I know that most of these Prophecies are chiefly
interpreted of the joining together of the Jews and Gentiles in one Church,
and rightly.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. If they be chiefly, and rightly interpreted so, why
should we not acquiesce? shall we go about to inerpret them unrightly? that
were to put out our eyes, and deceive our selves and others.

Reply.

As I say, that Interpreters do rightly affirm, that these Prophecies do
concern the joining together of the Jews and Gentiles into one Church: so I
say also that they do wrongfully apply the accomplishment of these Prophecies
to the time of the substituted Gentiles calling. And therefore by your
fallacious dividing of these words from that which follows, you do wilfully
put out your own eyes, that so you may the better beguile others of the truth.
For first the union foreshewed in these Prophecies is not to begin, until the
Nations which shall oppose the Jews after their return be miraculously
overthrown at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, as the foresaid Prophecy
of Isaiah, chap. 66. at the 15, 16, 19. ver. etc. compared with the 38. and 39.
chapters of Ezekiel. with the 3. chap. of Joel, and with the 19. chap. of the Rev.
at the 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, etc. does plainly declare. And secondly, at the
accomplishment of the union foreshewed by these Prophecies. All Nations must
go up to worship before the Lord at Jerusalem; as the latter part of the 66.
chapter of Isaiah does show, to which we may add the Prophecies in the 8.
chap. of Zecha. at the 20. ver. etc. and in the 14. chap. at the 16. ver. etc.
The words are, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, it shall came to pass, that
there shall come people, and the Inhabitants of many Cities: and the
Inhabitants of one City shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to
pray before the Lord of Hosts, I will go also; yea many people, and strong
Nations shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before
the Lord. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, In those days it shall come to pass,
that ten men shall take hold, out of all Languages of the Nations, even shall
take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for
we have heard, that God is with you. And it shall come to pass, that every one
that is left of all Nations which came against Jerusalem shall even go up from
year to year, to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, and to keep the feast
of Tabern^cles: and it shall be that who so will not come up of all the
Families of the earth unto Jerusalem, to worship the King the Lord of Hosts,
even upon them shall be no rain. And thirdly, at the accomplishment of this
union, the Jews shall not seek unto the Gentiles, but the Gentiles in
general unto the Jews only, for instruction in the ways of God, as Isaiah
says, chap. 2 ver. 2. and 3. and Micah. chap. 4. ver. 1. and 2. It shall come
to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lords house shall
established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills,
and all Nations shall flow unto it; and many people shall go and say, Come
ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths, for
out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.
And fourthly, at the accomplishment of this union (and throughout the whole
time of its continuance, which it expressed Rev. the 20. ver. 2, 3.) there is to
be an uninterrupted peace over all the world, as the following words of the
foregoing prophecy of Isa. and Micah, do manifest. And he shall judge amongst
the Nations, and shall rebuke many people, and they shall break their swords
into plow shares and their spears into pruning books, nation shall not lift up
sword against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more. With which
agrees that of Hosea chap. 2. ver. 18. In that day I will make a Covenant for
them, with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of Heaven, and with the
creeping things of the ground. And I will break the bow, and the sword, and
the battle out of the earth; and will make them to lie down safely. And to
this we adjoyne the prophecy Psalm. 46.8, 9. Come behold the works of the
Lord, what desolations he has made in the earth. He makes wars to cease
unto the ends of the earth, he breaks the bow, and cutteth the spear in
sunder: he burns the chariot in the fire. And fifthly, at the accomplishment
of this union, the converted Jew shall not be governed by the ecclesiastical
and civil laws of the Gentiles, as it is now; but the Gentiles by the
ecclesiastical and civil laws of the Jews; as is before showed by their
going up to Jerusalem to worship, and to be instructed in the ways of the
Lord. And as touching their civil grovernment, it is further evidenced by the
prophecies in which the Gentiles great subjection to the Jews is revealed. Of
which sort are the prophecies, Isaiah chap. 14.1, 2. chap. 49.22, 23. chap.
60.9, 10, 11, 12. etc. and chap. 61.4, 5, 6, 7. And thus, good reader, thou
have the true sense and scope of the prophecies, with which (as Mr Petrie
says) I have needlessly silled many pages; and doubtless it was very needful
for him to say so, seeing their perspicuity is so irresistible, that he could
find no mystical paraphrase against it, to puzzle thee withal.

Israel's Redemption. But to say, that this is now fulfilled, in the time of
the substituted Gentiles vocation, is to overthrow what was before affirmed,
and to take great pains to beguile our selves and others of the truth: it is,
I say, to put out our own eyes, and bid others follow us; for St Paul in the
11. of the Romans tells us plainly, that the Jews ^re broken off from their
Olive tree: and that we are graffed in for them: that they are cast away: that
they are hardened: that God has concluded them all in unbelief: and that
through their fall salvation is come unto us, to provoke them to Deuteronomy. 32.21.
jealousy. And therefore it cannot possibly be maintained, that the Jews and
Gentiles are as yet, one Ioh. 10.16.
sheepfold.

Mr Petrie's Answer. The Apostle says not, that all the Jews are broken off,
but rather the contradictory, ver. 1. and 5. neither says he, that God has
shut up all the Jews in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all the
Jews: but (us our former translation says, conform to the original) God
has shut up all in unbelief that he might have mercy upon all: whereunto the
words of the same Apostle Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has coucluded all under
sin, that the promise by says in Jesus Christ might be given to them who
believe. Here the Apostle is not speaking of the Jews only, but generally
both of Jews and Gentiles; and so far must his words be extended thereto,
seeing he is speaking of them, ver. 30. and 31. and so the meaning of ver. 32.
is; It was the counsel of God to suffer both Jews and Gentiles to fall into
unbelief or disobedience (as the mond Apeitheia likewise imports, and the word
sin teaches Gal. 3.) that he might save all his elect both of Jews and
Gentiles after one way, not by their works, but of his mercy only. And
therefore I cannot possibly conceive, how a man of understanding, can bring or
receive such a conclusion out of these words, as this, It cannot possibly be
maintained, that the Jews and Gentiles are as yet one sheepfold. For besides
the fallacy of the consequence, the conclusion is contrary to the express
words of Scripture, especially, Ephesians. 2.11. Remember that ye being in time
past Gentiles in the flesh, who were called uncircumcision by that which is
called the circumcision in the flesh made by hands -- but now in Christ Jesus
ye who sometimes were facre off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ: for he
is our peace, who has made both one, having broken down the mid-wall -- for
to make in himself of twain one new man. And who will deny, that the
believers now living among the Gentiles are members of the same body and Church
waiversall, whereof Abraham, Jacob, David, Ezekias, Paul and others were? now
then, even now Jews and Gentiles are one fold.

Reply.

What the Apostle affirms we deny not, and therefore we say not that every
family amongst the Jews, and every Jew of every family, was cast away, was
broken off from their Olive. But whereas the Apostle says, If the fall of them
be the riches of the world, ver. 15. and, As concerning the Gospel they are
enemies for your sakes, ver. 28. and, God has concluded them all in unbelief,
ver. 32. These passages we understand with the Apostle to be meant of all the
Tribes, though not of all of every T^ibe. I say, with the Apostle, for so
general was the unbel^efe of the Jews even in St. Paul's time, that chap.
10.1, 2. he says, Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Jsrael is,
that they may be saved. For I bear them record, that they have a zeal of God,
but not according to knowledge. And in the 13. and 14. verses of this chap. he
has these words of them. For I magnify mine Office; if by any means I may
provoke to emulation them which are my flesh, and might save some of them. Not
any one Tribe, but here and there some, (yea but some in all, here and there)
amongst the Tribes. And your flying to the former translation of the 32. ver.
as to a refuge against the evidence of the last translation, will not serve
your turn; seeing the words in the original are (...), which are more fully
and more fitly rendered by [them all] then by [all] only. And the [them all] in
the 32. ver. must needs have relation to the Jews only expressed in the third
person by [their, these, and they] in the 30. and 31. verses. And not to the
Gentiles expressed in the second person, by [ ye, and, your.] And the reason you
bring to prove, that the 32. ver. must be extended to Jews and Gentiles both,
to wit, [because the Apostle in the 30. and 31. verses is speaking of both,] is
of no force at all, seeing he speaks of the Gentiles as believers, and of the
Jews as unbeleevers. And therefore might well say of the Tribes who were then
left in unbelief, For God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might
have mercy upon all. But of the Gentiles who had then obtained mercy (through
the Jews unbelief) he could not affirm this. Neither will the text which you
have alleged out of Gal. 3.22. (as parallel to this in the former
translation) any thing avail you. For there is a vast difference betwixt these
propositions. The Scripture has concluded all under sin. And, God has
concluded all in unbelief. The first is universally, and actually true; se^ing
all men are sinners; as well believers, as unbeleevers. But the last is not
universally, and actually true; seeing all men are not unbeleevers, nor ever
were since the first promise of a Savior. Yea the Apostle says Gal. 3. that
the Scripture has concluded all under sin, for this very cause, to wit, that
the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. That
is, to them that are not concluded in unbelief, albeit they are concluded
under sin. And therefore it must needs be granted, that the 32. ver. Romans 11. is
applied by the Apostle to some men only, and not to all; to wit, to the
unbeleeving Jews in opposition to the believing Gentiles. And consequently
must of necessity too be meant of all the Tribes, none excepted; because it
cannot be meant of all Jews, none excepted. And if this be not evidence enough
to make you understand the 32. ver. of the Jews only, we have undeniable
experience to help clear your eyesight: For tell us, what are the many
numerous multitudes of the unbeleeving Jews dispersed at this day amongst the
Nations of the Gentiles? are they the Nation of the Jews, or are they not? if
they are, then were all the Tribes concluded in unbelief; if they are not,
then tell us what Tribe, or Tribes are wanting, that fell not, or continued not
in unbeleife with the rest. For surely in the opinion of great Divines the Holy
Ghost has reckoned up by St. John Rev. 7. all the Tribes as remaining, and to
be converted, not long before the destruction of the Beast and false Prophet.
And therefore it is somewhat hard to conceive, how a man of such understanding
as you conceit your self to have, could notwithstanding so much evidence of
Scripture and experience condemn this conclusion. Therefore it cannot possibly
be maintained, that the Jews and Gentiles are as yet one sheepfold. And as for
the fallacy of consequence, let the reader judge, whether it be on our part,
who say, that the Jews and Gentiles shall not be united into one Church, until
the whole Nation of the Jews be converted, and the foresaid prophecies
accomplished: or on yours, who granting, that these prophecies do foreshew
their uniting, do affirm that they are already thus united, although not one
of these prophecies be fulfilled, nor any one Tribe converted. But to prove
that the Jews and Gentiles are united into one Church, you allege [ Ephe. 2.
ver. 11. etc. Remember that ye being in times past Gentiles in the flesh --
that at that time ye were without Christ -- but now are made nigh by the blood
of Christ -- who has made both one, and broken down the midwall of partition
between us -- for to make in himself one new man.] And is St. Paul then
contrary to himself? what? would he have wished himself accursed from Christ
for his brethren, his Kinsmen according to the flesh, Romans 9. ver. 3.? or would
he have said, that going about to establish their own righteousness, they had
not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. chap. 1. v. 3. or Even
so have these also now not believed, that through your mercy they also may
obtain mercy, chap. 11. ver. 31. would he have said all this of the Jews
(and much more to this purpose) if the Jews and Gentiles had then equally
embraced the Gospel? if the Tribes had been already one body, or then likely
to become one body with the believing Gentiles? doubtless he would not. And
therefore, First I may say, that these words [who has made both one] are to be
referred to the meriting cause or purchase of their union already wrought on
Christ's part, by the shedding of his blood for them: and not to the actual
accomplishing of this purchased union in them; which was to be performed in the
time fore-appointed by God for it. For as in the 6. ver. of this chapter, where
the Apostle says likewise in the pretertense. And has raised us up together,
and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. The words could
not be meant de facto, of the actual possessing of these heavenly places by
the Saints then on earth: but de jure, of their right unto them by Faith in
Christ, in like manner he might say, that Christ had made the Jews and
Gentiles [one] by purchasing their union, by paying the price of their
reconciliation with God, and amongst themselves, although it were not to be
fulfilled by an actual dispensation of it unto them, until the fullness both
of the Jews and Gentiles should come in, as it is Romans 11. ver. 12.25. Or
secondly, I may say (as you your self determine of the union betwixt the two
people in your answer to my next words) that the union the Apostle here speaks
of, is not to be understood of an actual union betwixt the Jews and Gentiles
then living: but of an actual union betwixt the Church of the Gentiles then
begun under the New Testament, and the Church of the Jews formerly gathered
under the Old Testament, (both which were to make one new man, that is, that
one glorified Assembly and mystical body of Saints which shall come with
Christ their head at his next appearing. Whereas the union which we treat of,
and which is fore-shew'd by the preceding Prophecies, is to be of all Nations
on earth in one visible Church. And thirdly as I say not, that all the Jews,
but all the Tribes were concluded in unbelief, so I deny not that the first
fruits of the Jews under the Gospel are joined unto the Church of the
Gentiles; but I deny that this is such an uniting of the Jews and Gentiles as
the preceding Prophecies do reveal, or that it is any more an uniting of them
into one Church, then the calling of the believing Gentiles before Christ's
coming, was an uniting of the Jews and Gentiles into one Church, and
therefore I thus retort your following Argument against your self. Who will
deny, that the believing Gentiles living amongst the Jews before Christ's
coming (yea before the foresaid Prophets days) were members of the same body
and Church universal, whereof Abraham, Jacob, David and others, were members
also? then therefore (by this Argument) even then the Jews and Gentiles were
one fold.

Israel's Redemption. And as for those which were converted at the first
preaching of the Gospel, and at other times since, they are but the first
fruits, and root (as I may say) of the branches, and lump, which shall follow
after them by a general conversion: and therefore the calling of these can no
more be accounted a conversion of the Jews, then the calling of those Gentiles
which were gathered to the Church before Christ's nativitie can be taken for the
conversion of the Gentiles; who were (as time has shown us) but the [(...)]
the forerunners and pledge as it were of all those Nations, which were a long
time after converted, by the ministry of the Apostles and their successors.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. These who were converted at the preaching of the Gospel,
howbeit they may be called the first fruits of the Gospel preached since the
incarnation of Christ, yet they cannot be called the first fruits of the
sheepfold, seeing the Patriarchs are the root and members of the same body of
Christ, as they are expressly called, Romans 11.16. being conferred with ver.
28. They are beloved for the Fathers sake. Next, there is a vast difference
twixt the calling of the Gentiles under the Old Testament, and the calling of
the Jews under the New: for very few Gentiles were converted, even nothing in
comparison of the converted Jews; and albeit not so many 1000. have been
converted as may be converted, yet that is no impediment of the union twixt the
two people, which consists in the union of the Church under the Old and New
Testament, even albeit never a Jew were converted.

Reply.

In the first words of this answer, you say with me that the Jews which were
converted at the preaching of the Gospel, may be called the first fruits of the
Gospel: but whereas you add [yet they cannot be call d the first fruits of the
sheepfold:] you speak of your own; howbeit in such a manner, as if I had
affirmed, that they were the first fruits both of the Gospel, and Sheepfold;
(which had been a mere contradiction.) You say next, [ that there is a vast
difference betwixt the calling of the Gentiles under the Old Testament, and the
calling of the Jews under the new: because the Gentiles then converted, were
very few, even nothing in comparison of the converted Jews since the Gospel.]
And suppose the Jews were more, yet seeing no one Tribe of the Jews has been
converted since the incarnation of Christ, as no one Nation of the Gentiles was
before the incarnation, why should these first fruits of the Jews (though
more) be taken for the conversion of the Jews, rather then those first fruits
of the Gentiles (though fewer) be taken for the conversion of the Gentiles? But
yet it is but supposed by me, and but said by you, that the Jews converted
under the Gospel, are more then the Gentiles converted under the Law were. For
most of the Jews converted under the Gospel are mentioned in the Acts, and
besides the many Gentiles, that became Proselytes in the flourishing and
powerful estate of the Jews, we read Hester the 8. ver. 17. that in the very
time of their captivity, many of the people of the Land did Judaize (as the
original has it) that is, did turn to the Jews Religion: and these [many]
must needs be a great multitude, seeing the Land which Ahasuerus reigned over,
was divided into an hundred and seven and twenty Provinces, in all which the
Jews inhabited, as the Letters sent into these Provinces, by Haman for their
destruction, and by Mordecai for their deliverance do witness: and it is not
unlikely, that as in all these Provinces the fear of the Jews fell upon them,
so in all these Provinces some were converted unto them. And in the very last
days of the Jewish Church, the multitude which came together to hear the
Apostles speak with other tongues, were partly Jews, and partly Proselytes,
Acts 2.10. And therefore doubtless the number of the converted Gentiles before
Christ's coming does not come so much short of the number of the Jews
converted since Christ's coming as you pretend: yea for ought that you or any
man else can tell, they do not only equal but exceed the number of these
Jews. And lastly, in saying [ that the union of the two people, of the Jews
and Gentiles, consists in the union of the Church under the Old and New
Testament;] You do herein grant, first, that the Church under the New
Testament, is the Church of the Gentiles; and so not of the Jews and Gentiles
both, as it should be, if it did proportionably consist of the Jews and
Gentiles. And secondly, you do herein grant, that the Apostles words, Ephesians.
2. ver. 11. etc. are meant of this union: for you cannot conceive, [that the
union betwixt the two people consists in the union of the Church under the Old
and New Testament:] unless you do conceive withal, that the places which
speak of their union are so to be understood. And thirdly, you do herein
contradict the preceding prophecies (which you grant to foreshew the same
uniting of the two people) for these Prophecies do plainly declare the
uniting of the whole Nation of the Jews with all the Nations of the Gentiles
on the earth: and not the uniting of Gentiles under the Gospel with Jews under
the Law; not the uniting I say, of one part of Christ's mystical body the
Church then in heaven, with another part thereof newly called to the Faith on
earth.

Israel's Redemption. And besides, how the bringing of the Jews out of all
Nations upon horses, and in Litters, and in Charrets, and upon mules, and upon
men's shoulders, can bear any other but a literal sense; or how the veil that
is spread over all Nations, can now be said to be destroyed, when as so many of
them run a whoring after their own inventions, I cannot conceive. Yea, Even
unto this day, says St. Paul of the Jews in his time, when Moses is read, the
veil is upon their heart. Nevertheless, when it shall return unto the Lord,
the veil shall be taken away. 2 Cor. 3. ver. 15. and 16. But we see not yet
Israel returned (yea we see it fallen into more gross ignorance and
superstition) and therefore the veil is not yet taken away, and consequently
is not yet destroyed from all Nations.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. Whether he cannot or will not conceive it may be doubted:
many 1000. have conceived both those: he gives no reason of his doubting in the
former; and the cause of his doubting in the other is naught: for albeit the
veil be not taken away from all the Jews, and from all of all the Nations (in
which sense it shall never be taken away, seeing the Church on earth is always
a mixed company) yet certainly it is taken away from the Jews and all the
Nations, to wit, so many of them, as turn to the Lord, which are so many as
the Stars in heaven, that is, innumerable to men. For the grace of God that
brings salvation has appeared unto all men, Tit. 2.11. And God who has
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ: so writes a Jew unto the Gentiles, 2 Cor. 4.6.

Reply.

The reason of my doubting in the former passage, is because neither you, nor
any other can give a reason sufficient to prove, that the bringing of the Jews
for an offering unto the Lord out of all Nations, upon horses, and in Litters,
and in Charrets, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, etc. to his mountain
at Jerusalem, is not to be taken in a proper sense for the best reason you can
show, is (as it seems) that many thousands have conceived these words in
another sense, which is as good a reason to prove that other sense to be the
true sense of them, as it is to say; that Mahomet was no false Prophet, because
many millions have and do erroneously conceive him to be a true Prophet. And
why did you not afford us a sight of that other sense, which so many 1000. have
taken these words in: and of the important reasons, that moved them so to do?
seeing you confess page 10. that the Scripture is properly to be taken,
unless the proper sense be dissonant from the scope of the text, or contrary
to the analogy of Faith, or honesty of manners: neither of which has been
proved of the proper sense of these words; nor of any of the Prophecies upon
which you strive so much to impose a figurative sense. And as you have not
brought a reason to remove my doubting in this former passage: so you have not
proved, the reason of my doubting in the other, to be naught. For in saying, [
that albeit the veil be not taken away from all the Jews, and from all of all
the Nations (in which sense it shall never be taken away, etc.) yet certainly
it is taken away from the Jews, and from all Nations, to wit, so many of them
as turn to the Lord, etc.] In saying thus, you say nothing to the purpose: for
was it not thus when the Prophet spoke these words? was not the veil then
taken away from as many of the Jews, and of other Nations, as were then turned
unto the Lord? And when St. Paul said, Even unto this day, when Moses is read,
the veil is upon their heart, nevertheless when it shall return unto the
Lord, the veil shall be taken away: were there not then more Jews converted
to the Christian Faith, then have been ever since? and yet the Apostle says,
that the veil was then upon their hearts, and speaks of the removing of it
from them, as of a thing to be done, and not then done; although those were
then converted which God had appointed to be then converted. And therefore the
Apostles words are to be understood of the removing of the veil from all the
Jews, and not from some only. And the Prophet says likewise, that God will
destroy the Covering cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over
all Nations; which cannot be fulfilled when only a part of the veil is
destroyed, as you understand it: but shall be, when the whole veil is
destroyed. And that it shall be wholly destroyed, the Prophecy of Isaiah,
chap. 2. v. 2, 3. which shows, that all Nations shall go up to the mountain
of the Lords house, to be taught in his ways; and the same Prophets words, chapter
11. v. 9. for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the Sea. And the Prophecies which show that all Nations shall go
up to Jerusalem to worship, do with the preceding Prophecy jointly testify:
and therefore this first clause of your parenthesis does flatly deny, what God
does frequently affirm. And the Scripture which you have alleged, is used
only as a daring glass to dazzle the eyes of the heedlesse or unlearned
Reader, for that of Tit. chap. 2. ver. 11. has relation to the several ages,
Sexes, and conditions of men, as the preceding verses do show: so that [to all
men] there, is no more then to all sorts of men, young, and old, male and
female, Master and servant. And yet it might he true too, that the grace of God
that brings salvation, had then appeared unto all Nations, in regard of the
report and publishing of it amongst them; as St. Paul says, Romans 10. ver. 18.
although not in regard of any effectual participation of it by them. And as
for that text, in the 2 Cor. chap. 4. ver. 6. what does it show, but that God
had revealed unto the Apostle and his Assistants, what they preached unto
others; to wit, the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ?
and Quid hoe ad Rhombum, what can you conclude from hence?

Israel's Redemption. Again, I know no reason, why we should give more credit
to the metaphorical interpretation of these Prophecies, then to the figurative
exposition which some presume to put upon those word^ in the 12. of Zechariah,
at the 10. ver. although St. John in his 19. chap. at the 37. ver. has
alleged them as the only Joh. 12. v. 39.
cause that our Saviors side was pierced: of which fact doubtless there had
been no necessity, if the Prophecy were not to be understood in a literal
sense; and to say with others, that it was thus fulfilled in the Disciples, who
beheld our Saviors sufferings, is not only to rob the Prophecy of its right
end, but also to make the Disciples guilty of their Masters death: for the text
says expressly, They shall look upon me whom they have Psalm. 2^. v. 16. etc.
pierced. Where also it follows, And they shall Mat. 24. v. 30.
mourn for him, as one that mourns for his only Son, and shall be in
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first borne. In that
day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of
Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Megiddon. But who can at the same time earnestly
bewail that man's death, whose punishment they themselves do not only
procure, but scoff at? as all that murdered Christ, did at his.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. He uses, here rhetorical terms, but certainly it
cannot be conceived by his words, whether he takes them properly, or
improperly: but we give no other interpretation of the Prophecies then be
literal, that is, chiefly intended as he confesses, page 37.

2. The Evangelist shows that Prophecy of Zechariah to be properly fulfilled
in that part, that the sides of our Savior were pierced, and no Interpreter
says, that the rest of that Prophecy was fulfilled at that instant; but we
may justly think, that many of them who consented unto his death did mourn
for that their fault; seeing our Savior prayed unto his Father to forgive
them, Luke 23.34. and the same Evangelist bears witness, that they who had
crucified him, were at the preaching of Peter pricked in their hearts, Acts
2.23.37. whereby we conceive that that Prophecy was not fulfilled in the
Disciples, neither in respect of the piercing his sides, nor of looking to him
at that time, ( for they all fled away, except John) but in the Jews, who
indeed by wicked hands did crucify him, and looked upon him, and afterward
did mourn for him, as one who mourns for his only Son: and the mourning
was great, when 3000. were together pricked in their hearts. Now consider
whether this exposition be more consonant unto these words of the Prophet, or
that other, whereby it is alleged, that all the Jews who did not see him
pierced, shall after so many hundred years mourn for their Fathers cruel and
malicious contrivance: the former is fulfilled in the same persons within the
space of seven or eight weeks; and the other is not of the same persons,
neither within the space of 1600. years, if at any time it shall be verified.

Reply.

1. This is the second time that you cavil at my using of the word literal,
for proper, although I herein speak but as Divines commonly speak, out of
whom it were easy to fill up many pages with instances for the confirmation of
this sense of the word. For what is the meaning of it in this Question, An
dogmata fidei ex solo Scripturae sensu literali, non autem mystico, figurato
and parabolico stabilienda sint? thus it is proposed by S^agmannus: and by
Brochmand thus, An dogmata fidei e solo sensu literali, non autem mystico
stabiliri commode atque tu^o possint? and in the abridgement of the substance
of Religion set forth by Amandus Polanus, page 127. concerning typical
Oracles, are these words. Of the first sort are they which are understood of
both of them, that is, the type and the substance together, and are to be taken
properly, or as they use to speak, literally, as Ex. 12.45. Ye shall not
break a bone of it. And now who has showed himself the novice? have I, in
following Divines in the use of this word? or you in carping at me for it? And
whereas you boast [that you give no other interpretation of the Prophecies,
then be chiefly intended,] it were well if you did not: but surely you cannot
prove your mystical sense to be the sense chiefly intended: neither do I say
that it is, in telling you, that Interpreters do chiefly expound the preceding
Prophecies of the joining together of the Jews and Gentiles into one Church:
for as I grant that they do rightly conceive of the subject of these
Prophecies, in affirming that they concern the uniting of the two people; so I
allow not of the application of this union to the time of the substituted
Gentiles calling, by their mystical interpretations of them.

2. That the Evangelist alleges this Prophecy of Zech. as then fulfilled,
only touching the piercing of our Saviors side, I willingly grant; and as the
rest of the Prophecy was not at that time fulfilled, so that it has not been
since fulfilled, I do also affirm. And yet if you look into Cornelius a
Lapide you shall find, that some have said it was then wholly fulfilled in the
Disciples: of whom there were more present then St. John, as St. John himself
records; I say more of the Disciples, if no other of the twelve, and therefore
it is false, that our Savior was not beheld by the Disciples. But as I say,
that this exposition is quite contrary to the evidence of the Prophecy, which
speaks of the piercing of Christ by his enemies, and not by his friends; so I
say too, that your expounding of it as fulfilled by the Jews that were pricked
in their hearts at Peter's preaching, Acts 2. ver. 23.37. is not so consonant to
the words of the Prophet, as you imagine. For albeit that many, if not most, of
these Jews were consenting to his death, and upon their conversion were sorry
for their sin; yet the occasion of all this sorrow was St. Peter's preaching,
was the hearing I say, of what they had done, and not the beholding of their
pierced Savior, which the Prophet mentions as the only occasion of their
sorrow by whose mourning this Prophecy is to be fulfilled. And our Savior
himself also has foretold, Matthew. 24. at the 30. ver. that this mourning is
to be fulfilled at his next appearing, his words are, Then shall appear the
sign of the Son of man in Heaven, and then shall all the Tribes of the earth
mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the Act. 1. v. 11.
clouds of Heaven with power and great glory. Whom then shall we believe, our
Savior and the Prophet? or you? For what though the Jews which shall mourn
for him so long after his suffering did not in their own persons, either
pierce, or see him pierced? yet as Levi is said to pay tithes in the loins of
his Father Abraham, so these are said to have done what their Fathers did? and
Mr. Brightman in his exposition of the 7. ver. of the first chap. of the Rev.
understands that too of the accomplishment of these words of Zech. which he
expounds almost in the same terms as I have done, page 16. 17. of his Rev. of
the Apocalypse.

Israel's Redemption. And what comparison is there, betwixt the grief of a few
fearful and scattered Disciples, for a day or two; and the solemn mourning of
all Judah and Jerusalem, and that to every Family apart and their wives apart?
As therefore this Prophecy does concern the Jews only, and chiefly the
Tribes that crucified their Savior: so doubtless it shall then receive its
accomplishment, when God at their general conversion, shall pour upon them
the Spirit of grace and supplications, Zech. 12. v. 10.
that so they may at once obtain the forgiveness of their sins; and thus
lament their forefathers malicious and cruel contrivance, and their own
hereditary and wilful approbation of the death of Christ; who shall then
descend unto them, to restore their Kingdom, and to reign over all the earth,
as it is in the 14. chap. of the same Prophet at the 5. and 9. ver. etc.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. It is said, ver. 11. There shall be a great mourning in
Jerusalem, and ver. 12. and the Land shall mourn, every F^mily apart, etc.
whereby is intimated a distinction of the mourning in respect of place: and as
they did mourn at Jerusalem publicly, so we may easily conceive that these
who had resorted at these public Feasts unto Jerusalem, did likewise mourn
apart after their returning, and were not contented with one days mourning
(all facts that are credible are not written;) And therefore this Prophecy
does concern the Jews ( but not only; seeing even the Gentiles may be said
to have pierced his sides by their sins meritoriously, and to look on him by
faith, and mourn for their guiltiness, etc.) and chiefly the persons that
crucified their Savior: So doubtless it is great impudence to affirm, that
the same Prophet chap. 14.5. and 9. ver. says Christ shall descend unto the
Jews to restore their Kingdom, for there is not one word of restoring, nor of
the Jews Kingdom in these two verses.

Reply.

As in the preceding answer you have applied the accomplishment of Zech. words,
chapter 12. ver. 10. to the Jews converted by St. Peter's first Sermon: so in this
you endeavor to parallel their mourning, with the great and solemn mourning
so largely expressed in the following verses of the same Prophecy. For it is
said ver. the 11. There shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, etc. and ver.
12. The Land shall mourn, every Family apart, etc. [ whereby is intimated
(say you) a distinction of the mourning in respect of place: and as they did
mourn at Jerusalem publicly, so we may easily conceive, that these who had
resorted at these public Feasts unto Jerusalem did likewise mourn apart after
their returning -- (all facts that are very credible are not written.) And
therefore on the contrary you have written here what is not credible. For is it
credible that the mourning of 3000. is any way comparable to the solemn and
universal mourning of all Judah and Jerusalem for Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35. ver.
24, 25. to which the mourning in this Prophecy is compared? Or is it credible
that any of these Jews who resorted unto Jerusalem out of so many Countries as
are rehearst, Acts 2. ver. 9, 10, 11. were of the Families of David and Nathan,
when as the Tribe of Judah wat not then carried into captivity by the Romans?
And if they mourned after their return into their several Countries, into
Mesopotamia, Cappadocia, Pontus, and Asia, etc. this was out of the Land,
whereas the mourning the Prophet foreshewes is to be fulfilled only in
Lerusalem, and in the land of Judea, and it is to be observed by men and their
wives apart, and what circumstance is there in the 2. chap. of the Acts from
which you can gather, that any of the 3000. you speak of, were women? yea it
is to be observed by all the Families of the Jews that remain, that is, that
are living at the accomplishment of this Prophecy, and therefore the
repentance of these 3000. could not possibly be the mourning here spoken of by
the Prophet. You say next [ that this Prophecit does concern the Jews, and
chiefly the persons that crucified their Savior, but not only, seeing even
the Gentiles, etc. And did you not tell us even now, [that you give no other
interpretation of the Prophecies then is chiefly intended?] How then can you
say here, that this Prophecy is chiefly meant of the Jews in a proper sense;
and yet meant also of the Gentiles in a figurative sense? is not this to give
another sense besides that which is chiefly intended? and do you think that
both these senses are intended? if so, how shall we know certainly which is
chiefly intended? Surely to affirm that the Holy Ghost does intend a double
sense in these Prophecies, is no small error; seeing it makes God to have, as
it were a heart and a heart; to be I say, as a double dealer, who speaks one
thing and means another: and shall we conceit thus of God? God forbid. Yea,
let God be true and every man a liar: as truth then is but one, so doubtless
there can be but one true sense of any place in the Scripture, but one sense
intended by God; and thefore to make the Scripture Janus-like to look two
ways, is from man and not from God, and it is the readiest way that I know to
foment division amongst men. But there is yet the heaviest charge behind, for
[ it is great impudence, you say, to affirm that Zech. chap. 14. ver. 5. and
9. says Christ shall descend unto the Jews to restore their Kindome, for
there is not one word of restoring or of the Jews Kingdom in these two
verses.] And yet his descending and reigning over all the earth is expressly
foretold in these two verses, and shall he come to be King over all the earth,
and yet not restore the Kingdom of the Jews? what City then shall be the
royal City of this great King, if not Jerusalem, whose extraordinary
restoration is promised in the verses immediately following, and to which all
the Nations shall go up to worship, as the latter part of the chapter does
foreshew? And what people shall be the choycest subjects of this great King, if
not the Saints that shall come with him, and the Jews (his brethren according
to the flesh) whom he shall then deliver from their enemies, as the judgment
revealed in the 12, 13, 14, and 15. verses does declare? Certainly you must
needs grant, that the Prophet has here foretold the restoring of the Jews
(though he uses not these very words, which I say not) unless you will deny
that the 9. verse is meant of our Saviors reigning on earth as man, and how
can you do this, when as the Prophet says plainly, that our Savior shall be
King over all the earth after his descending to the earth, and not while he is
in Heaven? Thus then the great impudence of my innocent assertion, is nothing
but the graceless imprudence of your choleric accusation: and this one
Prophecy which first shows our Saviors coming with all the Saints, and then
his reigning over all the earth, does infallibly prove all your answers to the
other part of the Treatise, to be (as the answers to this) but mere shifts,
and evasions.

Israel's Redemption. CHAP. IIII.
Of the restoring of the whole Creation to its original perfection.

Jews return. Now a word or two of the alteration of the sensitive and
senseless creatures at that time. The wolf, says Isaiah in his 11. chap. at
the 6. ver. shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with
the Kid: and the calfe, and the young Lion and the fatling together, and a
little child shall leadt hem. And the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young
ones shall lie down together; and the Lion shall eat Genesis 1.30. chapter 6.20, 21.
straw like the Ox. And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the aspe,
and the weaned child shall put his hand on the Cockatrice den. They shall not
hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be Hab. 2.14.
full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. And in the 65.
chap. at the 25. ver. The wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the lion
shall eat straw like the bullock: and Genesis 3.14.
dust shall be the serpents meat, they shall not hurt, nor destroy in all my
holy mountain, says the Lord. Where we may observe against such as
understand by these expressions, the effects of preaching on the hearts of
cruel minded men; that they are a part of those prophecies, which concern the
Jews deliverance, and therefore can have no relation to the calling of the
Gentiles.

Mr Petrie's Answer. As we have nothing as yet of the felicity of the Nations
at that imagined time; so these ensuing prophecies make nothing to that
purpose, for in Isa. 11.10. immediately after the forecited words it is said,
In that day there shall be a root of Iesse, which shall stand up for an
ensign of the people: to it shall the Gentiles seek, etc. Mark 1. he says,
In that day: so he conjoyneth the preceding and following things into the same
time. 2 He speaks expressly of the calling of the Gentiles, as it is also
cited Romans 15.12.3. In the words preceding ver. 1. he speaks of the first
coming. of Christ; A rod shall come forth out of the stem of Iesse, and a
branch shall grow out of his roots. 4. In the words following that testimony,
he speaks of the calling of the Jews and Gentiles together, as was exponed
before. And therefore this prophecy concerns not the Jewish Monarchy, and
these words may be better exponed allegorically then properly.

Reply.

As it is very untrue that you have had nothing from us of the felicity of the
Nations in the day of the Jews deliverance, for we have brought you many
unaccomplished prophecies out of Gods word to confirm it; so it is very true,
that the reader has had nothing from you of this felicity, seeing you have
wholly concealed from him those prophecies in which it is revealed. And these
ensuing prophecies do speak of the restoration of the creatures both
sensible and insensible at that time, for which purpose they were alleged, and
not to show the felicity of the Nations; which yet may well be gathered from
the large mercy which God keeps in store even for the dumb and insensible
creatures in that Day; in that day, I say, so frequently foretold by God, and
not falsely imagined by us. But to prove that these prophecies do not concern
the restoring of the sensible creatures to their primitive innocence at the
redemption of the Jews, you bring four raw and trifling reasons. For reciting
the 10. verse, In that day there shall be a root of Iesse, which shall stand
for an ensign of the people, to him shall the Gentiles seek. You bid us,
[Marke first, that he says in that day, so he conjoynes the preceding and
following things to the same time.] And we say that the restoring of these
creatures to their original perfection; the coming in of the fullness of the
Gentiles; and the redemption of the Jews are all to be performed in that day.
[ Secondly (you say) that he speaks expressly of the calling of the Gentiles,
as it is cited Romans 15.12.] And we say, that as some Nations of the Gentiles
were for long ago called to the knowledge and obedience of the Gospel; so at
our Savior's next appearing, all other Nations of the Gentiles shall be called
unto it. [ Thirdly, you say, that in the 1. ver. he speaks of the first
coming of Christ, A rod shall come forth out of the stem of Iesse, and a
branch shall grow out of his roots.] And this we say too, and yet we say
with all, that as the four verses immediately following may as well, if not
rather, be understood of his actions at his second coming, then at his first:
so all that follows in the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.12, 13. ver. etc. is to be fulfilled
only at his second coming, which the first part of the 10. ver. speaks of.
And you may not think it strange, that both the first and second coming of
our Savior are revealed in the same chap. whenas we find them elsewhere
revealed within the compass of two or three verses, as Isa. 9.6, 7. and chap.
52.13, 14, 15. and in other prophecies. Yea you do seem to me to acknowledge
it, in that you forsake the 10. verse (cut of which you gather your two former
observations, and) in which the root of Jesse is expressly mentioned, and
fall back to the first verse, as the only place in this chap. that shows the
first coming of our Savior. And [fourthly, you say, that in the words
following that testimony, he speaks of the calling of the Jews and Gentiles
together, as was exponed before.] And we have before showed this exposition to
be notoriously false: and that from the 11. ver. to the end of the chap. naught
but the wonderful redemption of the Jews is foretold. As then you have not
yet disproved the proper sense of these prophecies; so doubtless you cannot
fit them with an allegorical paraphrase. For first, as here are many several
kinds of beasts mentioned, so you must find out as many several degrees, or
dispositions of men to expound them by. And secondly, seeing in an allegorical
sense these prophecies are applied to the conversion of men, you must tell us,
why after their conversion some are called, Wolves, Leopards, Lions, Bears, and
Cockatrices: and others, Lambs, Kids, calves and oxen. I say after their
conversion, for these names they are distinguished by, when they are said, to
lie down together, and to feed together, and to do no hurt. And thirdly, you
must give us the meaning of these phrases. The sucking child shall play on the
hole of the aspe, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice
den. The Lion shall eat straw like the Ox. And dust shall be the Serpents
meat. And fourthly, seeing here is mention, not only of irrational
creatures, but of rational also; of mankind, as well as of beaster, you must
tell us first what Converts are alluded unto under the names of these several
sorts of beasts, and what Converts are meant by the little child, the sucking
child, and the weaned child: and secondly, why the names of these beasts are
not to be taken properly for the beasts themselves, whenas the things here
rehearst do so well agree with them, and they are plainly distinguished from
mankind too. And unless you can give us reasonable satisfaction in all this,
you do but vainly say, [that these words may be better exponed allegorically,
then properly.] Yea the proper sense of these Prophecies is further confirmed
by the food which God created for every beast of the earth, and every foul of
the air, and every thing that creeps on the earth to live by, to wit, the
green herb, Genesis 1. ver. 30. and by restraint of the wild beasts and fowls,
both from their ravenous disposition and feeding, the whole time of their being
in the Arc: for seeing Noah was to provide food for them as well as for
himself and his Family, Genesis 6. ver. 21. it must needs be granted, that as the
Wolf, the Lamb, and the Leopard; the cow, the Lion and the Bear etc. did then
lie down together, so they did feed together too: and that the Lion did eat
straw, (or hay) like the Ox: this, I say, must needs be granted, unless we
can imagine that Noah did take in flesh into the Arc for the ravenous
creatures to live by at that time.

Israel's Redemption. And besides, is there no hurt nor destruction in all the
Christian world, that we should thus flatter our selves with such vain
fancies? or rather when was there none? or where is, the Nation shall I say, or
the City, yea the village amongst us, where cruelty is not practiced, where
such mischiefs are not to be found, as can scarcely be parallelled in the
Commonwealths of the most barbarous heathen? And as for those words, for the
Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, which seem to have been the
occasion of the former interpretation, in my conceit, they imply but this, that
therefore God will restore to these creatures their primitive obedience, and
cause them to be no more offensive to his people; because he has determined to
make himself at that time so well known over all the earth, that his people
shall no more offend him, and so the fear of God shall at once be put again
into the hearts of men; and the fear of men into the hearts of the creatures:
for the enmity of the creatures, is but the issue of man's sin, and therefore
when God shall pardon the house of Jacob, and cleanse them from all their
iniquities (as has been said) the sins of men which are the cause, and the
curse of the creatures, which is the effect, shall depart together.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. Albeit this Author will not give glory unto God in
fulfilling his promises, yet we see, that others are not so ingrate: as Act.
9.31. Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea, and Galile^ and Samaria:
and in other times we find, that the Christians had their hal^yonian days
twixt these ten great persecutions, and afterward in the days of Christian
Emperors and godly Kings.

2. Neither do the Prophets, or Revelation speaking of these times say, There
shall never be hurt nor shall ever any man destroy one another: but rather the
property of the Church in this world is to be militant, and nevertheless
Wolves and Lions forsake their cruelty in the person of many converts, and
therefore these byberbolicall complaints might well been spared.

3. It does puzzle the Author, that Esaias says, chap. 11.9. For the earth shall
be full of the knowledge of the Lord, and therefore fancieth a private conceit
for exponing these words, of which he gives no reason: but we have given
sufficient reasons for the allegorical interpretation, which is confirmed by
these words, to wit, that the abundance of the knowledge of the Lord is the
cause, why wicked men leave their wickedneffe, and adjoyne themselves unto the
meek of the earth: as our Savior says, Matthew. 10.16. I will send you as sheep
among Wolves. Of whom certainly many became sheep of Christ's fold, which is a
more proper effect of knowledge, then the changing of beasts affections.

Reply.

1. We think that God is best pleased with us, and most glorified by us, when
we confess the truth, albeit against our selves: and therefore as we are not
so ingrate to deny, that God has given pa^ticular Churches rest, not only
from foraigne enemies but homebred also; not only from heathenish persecutors,
but from heretical too; so we are not so ungodly to deny our own
unrighteousness, and unthankfulness toward God notwithstanding such mercy
conferred upon us. For even when these Churches have had such rest, then have
they provoked God afresh, by more then heathenish impieties and oppressions; so
that rest from persecution has been the very seed-time in which the tares of
all impiety and injustice, of all manner of misgovernment and mi^beliefe have
been sowed afresh amongst us; and the springtide, in which that oursed and
numerous brood of the flesh, which St. Paul reckons up, Gal. 5. ver. 19. etc.
has been manifest in us: as adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
lasciviousness, Idolatry, witcheraft, hatred, variance, emulations, strise,
seditions, Heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revilings,
covetousness, and such like: For it was in the time of Israel's rest, that the
faithful City became an harlot, and full of murderers, that her Princes grew
rebellious, and companions of thieves, that every one of them loved gifts, and
followed after rewards: that they judged not the fatherless, nor the cause of
the widow: that they joined house to house, and field to field, till there was
no place: that God looked for Judgment, but behold oppression; and for
righteousness, but behold a cry: that the Harp, and the Viol, and the Tabret
and Pipe, and wine were in their Feasts, but they regarded not the work of the
Lord, nor the operation of his hands, Esa. the 1. and 5. chapter 8. And have
Christians made any better use of their rest from persecution and destruction?
surely no. For it was in the very infancy of the Church, that Ephesus was
threatened for leaving her first love; Pergamos for the Doctrine of Balaam, and
the Doctrine of the Nicholaitans: Thyatira for suffering Jezabel to seduce the
servants of God to commit fornication, and to cate things offered to Idols:
Sardis for that her works were not found perfect before God, that is, to
proceed from a sincere heart and an upright affection; and Laodicea for her
lukewarmenesse in Religion, Rev. the 2. and 3. chapter. And seeing it was thus
in the first and best age of the Christian Church, how bad, think you, has it
been since? surely the same Apostle will tell you, chap. 9. ver. 20, 21. And
the rest of the men that were not killed by these plagues, yet repented not of
the works of their hands, that they should not worship Devils, and Idols of
gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and wood, which neither can see, nor
hear, nor walk: neither repented they of their murders, nor of their
sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts. And it is this great
wickedness of Christians themselves, it is their envying at, their contention
with, and their defrauding of each other; it is the mischief they devise
against, and the hurt they daily do one to another, that I have spoken of; and
not of the hurt they receive from others; not of suffering by their heathenish
neighbors before the whole Empire became Christian, or by heathenish Nations
since that time; and therefore in this part of your answer you have quite
mistook the mark, and brought a record of some particular Churches rest from
suffering, instead of their rest from sinning.

2. In the next you give but a false fire; for we are discoursing of what does
inevitably follow from these Prophecies according to the allegorical
interpretation of them: and therefore if the Rev. or the Prophets do speak
otherwise of the times, to which you refer these Prophecies, then these
Prophecies do; it is an undeniable evidence against you; that either the
allegorical sense is not the true sense of them; or that these Prophecies are
not to be accomplished in the time to which you apply them: as indeed they are
not: for they shall not burt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, says the
Lord, which words do infallibly show, that the innocence of the creatures
whom this is spoken of, shall be such, as cannot possibly consist with the many
mischievous (that I say not unnatural) actions of Christians amongst
themselves: but may very well be fulfilled in the general agreement and
gentleness of the dumb creatures at the appearing of our Lord Jesus; at which
time it is, that these Prophecies which reveal the Jews pro^ritie in their
own land, and those which reveal the joynt-embracement of the truth by all
Jews and Gentiles, and these which reveal the reducement of the dumb and
insensible creatures to their original perfection, are all to be
accornplished; and therefore although it be the property of the Church to be
militant in this world, that is, until the appearing of Christ; yet in that
new world she shall be triumphant; she shall be rid of all her adversaries, of
all her disturbers, as is plentifully declared by the Prophets, and implied in
the first part of the 20. chap. of the Rev. But whereas you have alleged these
words, as a reason to prove, that there shall be always hurt done by
Christians in this world (for these you say are the beasts of whom these
Prophecies are to be understood) certainly you are much mistaken in this
argument; for it will not follow, that Christians must needs be hurtful to
themselves, because [it is the property of the Church to be militant in this
world,] that is, till our Saviors coming to receive hurt from others. And yet
though we deny your Argument, we deny not what you would infer from it, to
wit, that Christians are hurtful to each other; yea we say (and that without
an hyperbole) that they are so hurtful, that even for this very cause these
Prophecies cannot not be understood of them. For we dare not with you first to
make them contradict other Scripture by wresting of them to a false sense, and
then to uphold our error by a flat denial of that which God has spoken in
them: by affirming I say, that these words, they shall not hurt nor destroy in
all, my mountain, are thus to be understood, they shall hurt and destroy in
all my holy mountain. Yea, we hold it much safer to deny the allegorical
sense of them, and so their present accomplishment withal (neither of which
any other Scripture, or any circumstance in these Prophecies does enforce) then
to deny what God has so plainly revealed in them.

3. And yet you go on like a Conqueror, and bear the Reader in hand [ that
the words in the 9. ver. for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the
Lord, do puzzle the Author, and that therefore he fancieth a private conceit
for expounding these words, of which he gives no reason.] But surely it does
not puzzle the Author so much, as to make him contradict any thing that God
does say; as you have done to justify the allegorical interpretation of these
Prophecies; and therefore it is evident, that your exposition is the private
conceit, seeing it crosses the text, and not mine, which though you accuse,
you could not show to be contrary unto the text. Yea, the reason which I have
given for it (for you wilfully belie me, in saying, I have given none) is not
only very agreeable unto the proper sense of these Prophecies, but to reason
it self: for what could more illustrate the wisdom, Justice, and mercy of
God in the restoration of these creatures, then to ordain, that man, the
creature whose disobedience had been the occasion of subjecting all other
inferior creatures unto vanity, should again by his obedience (springing
from the abundant knowledge of his maker) become the occasion of delivering
them from this bondage of corruption? and therefore though it be true, that the
saving knowledge of the Gospel has made and does still make wicked men to
leave their wickedness; yet it is not true that the calling of men out of the
state of nature into the state of grace is foretold in these Prophecies, and
the words of our Savior, I send you as sheep amongst Wolves, Matthew. 10. ver.
16. are flat against you, for they are meant of the most obstinate enemies of
the Gospel: they are meant, I say, not of such as should become sheep, but of
such as should kill the sheep, and use their utmost endeavor to keep all
others out of the sheepfold: as the verses following do declare, and
interpreters acknowledge: and albeit there has been now and then one such
Wolf as St. Paul was, that of a savage persecutor, has become a pious Saint,
yet besides all these Wolves, that have still kept their own hue and habit
(and befides those who being bred up in the Church, have still retained their
innocent garments) there have been many, who being without the Church, have
exchanged their habit for sheeps clothing for no other end, but to have the
benefit of the Sheeps pasture, and the better opportunity to destroy the
sheep, and to destroy the more sheep. And befides, although the word [Wolves]
does in the saying of our Savior, signify men, yet it follows not from
hence, that it is so to be understood in these Prophecies: for it must be some
circumstance out of the Prophecies themselves that must prove this, and not the
allegorical acception of this word in another place. And as I say not, that
the change of beasts affections from bad, to better, from evil, to good, is to
be the proper effect of any knowledge of God in themselves; so I say, that God
has here revealed, that this change shall as well be the effect of man's
pleasing him by obedience, as the change of them from better to worse; from
good to evil, was of man's displeasing him by sin.

Israel's Redemption. As then there can be no sufficient reason alleged for
the allegorical interpretation of these Prophecies; so, if we believe Gods
revelations touching the Jews return, there can be no reason urged to the
contrary, that will force us to forsake the literal sense of them. By which
sense I am sure, that passage of St. Paul in the 8. chap. of the Romans at the
21. ver. is so well explained, that the great strife about the signification of
the word [Creature] there, may be soon decided, and by which too, the opinion
of those, who from that place would make the sensitive creature copartners with
us, of that glory which follows the last resurrection, falls to the ground.
For is not the exchange of a ravenous disposition for a quiet and peaceable,
and the freedom from the abuse of sin, A delivery of the sensitive creature
from the bondage of corruption? and the glorious Dan. 7. ver. 21.22.
liberty of the Sons of God, what is it, but the flourishing estate of the
Jews (before spoken of) under Christ their Head? who accompanied with all the
Saints departed, and then living, shall come and receive dominion; and Dan. 7.
ver. 14.27. chap. 2. ver. 44. Rev. 15. v. 4. chapter 20. v. 4.6.
glory, and a Kingdom, that all people, Nations, and Languages may serve him;
as you shall hear anon.

Mr Petrie's Answer. 1. The truth of God needs not the boulstering of man's
devises.

2. The Apostle is speaking there of the final deliverance of the creature
from the bondage of corruption: which is not cleared by that cohabitation of
beasts, unless we will be content with a small portion of deliverance, for
the general deliverance of the creature: which kind of contentment these
Authors will not acknowledge in the accomplishment of the promises, no, not in
a fuller measure. The Author collecteth nothing particularly from that text
Isa. 65.25. neither is there any word there of the Jewish Monarchy; and seeing
it has the same allegory with that chap. 11. we go forward.

Reply.

1. The truth of God, say you, needs not the houlstering of man's devices. And
man's devices, say we, are not a boulstering, but a bereaving; are not an
upholding, but a destroying of the truth of God. But what is the device which
you have found here? is it not the comparing of one place of Scripture with
another, which speaks plainly of the same thing? and is not this warranted by
the general approbation of Divines, for a very remarkable rule in the right
interpreting of the Scriptures? you cannot deny it. The device then which you
speak of, is but a device of yours to make the Reader baulk the only light
Gods word holds out unto him for the true discovery of the Apostles meaning,
that so he may stick the closer to that sense, which man's device has put upon
it.

2. The Apostle says, the creature it self also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, etc. and the Prophet says, the Wolf shall dwell with
the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid -- and the Cow and the
Bear shall feed together. Whereby he shows both what these creatures bondage
of corruption is, and what their deliverance from it: whereby he shows, I say,
that the wild, untamed, and hurtful disposition which these creatures are now
subject unto, is their bondage of corruption: and that the re-estating of them
into that mild, peaceful, and harmless condition in which they were first
created, shall be their deliverance from it. And when shall this be fulfilled?
shall it be after the general judgment of the dead mentioned, Rev. 20. ver.
12, etc.? surely no, for then this earth out of which these creatures were
made, shall pass away, and be no more found, Revel. 20. ver. 11. then this
earth and the works (the creatures) that are therein shall be burnt up, 2 Pet.
3. ver. 10. And we read not of any Stars in the new heaven, or of any beasts
on the new earth; yea, besides men and Angels, we read of no more creatures
then of a tree of life, and of a river of life in that holy Jerusalem which
shall descend from God unto the new earth; the earth with which there shall be
no Sea created: and consequently these creatures deliverance is to be fulfilled
at the restoring of Judea and Jerusalem, called here by Isaiah, the holy
mountain, and chap. 2. the mountain of the Lords house, and the mountain of
the Lord. And thus by conferring these two Prophecies of Isaiah and St. Paul,
it is manifest, what these creatures deliverance from the bondage of corruption
is, touching which you say only [that the Apostle is speaking of the final
deliverance of the creature from the bondage of corruption: which is not
cleared by that cohabitation of beasts, unless we will be content with a
small portion of deliverance for the general deliverance of the creature.] So
that you grant, that the cohabitation of the beasts is their deliverance from
the bondage of corruption (and consequently, that the foresaid Prophecies in
which it is revealed, are properly to be understood, which before you so
stoutly denied) but you say withal, that it is [a small portion of the
creatures deliverance,] that it is a deliverance but of a part of the
creatures: and surely we do not say, that the deliverance of the sensitive
creatures is the deliverance of all the creatures; but we say that all the
insensitive creatures too shall be restored to their Primitive perfection (and
so delivered from the bondage of corruption) when these are, as other
Prophecies do foreshew of them. And seeing you acknowledge the Renovation of
the creature to be its deliverance, we marvel what you mean in saying that
[the Apostle is speaking there of the final deliverance of the creature:] For
if you mean by [the final deliverance] a further renovation of it; surely we
know but of one renovation of the creature that the Scriptures speak of, and
that is to be a perfect renovation of it: but if you mean annihilation and
dissolution of it; you hold one more deliverance of the creature then any other
Divine does, to wit, a deliverance by renovation, and a deliverance by
abolition, but we deny that the Apostle speaks there of the dissolution of
the creature; and that this is called a deliverance of the creature from the
bondage of corruption in any place of the Scripture: Yea, we see not how the
creatures deliverance from the bondage of corruption, should be a delivering of
it into a greater corruption; nor how the creature should rather earnestly
expect such a deliverance from the bondage of corruption, by which all the
kinds of it shall be destroyed; then desire to continue subject to this
bondage, under which all the kinds are preserved. And seeing the creatures
bondage of corruption, is the vanity to which it was made subject by reason of
man's sin, after its creation; and so cannot be meant of that corruptible
condition of the creature in which it was created subject to death and
dissolution; it must needs follow, as we conceive, that the creatures
dissolution cannot be its deliverance. For such as the bondage is, such must
the deliverance be: but the bondage was the alteration which befell it through
man's sin: after its creation (which was adventitious to it) and not its
corruptibilitie, which was made natural to it by creation: and consequently
the deliverance must be a restoration of it; the deliverance of the sensitive
creatures a restoration from their hurtful and untamed disposition to a mild
and harmless, and of the insensitive, of the Stars and Heavens from a
malignant influence to a favorable, and from a dimmer to a clearer
brightness, etc. And whereas you say, [ that the Author collecteth nothing
particularly from that text, Isaiah 65. ver. 25.] Surely he collects as much
from that Prophecy, as from the other; and to this end has alleged both
together, because both do reveal the same thing: but if you want a particular
observation from this text, you may take notice that he says, And dust shall
be the Serpents meat, whereby he shows, that when the Lion shall eat straw
like the bullock, when all other beasts and creeping things of the earth, and
fowls of the air, shall live by that food which was appointed for them at the
creation, Genesis 1. ver. 30. the Serpent only shall feed still on the
nourishment of his curse, Genesis 3. ver. 14. as a memorial of his being the
instrument of man's fall, and so of subjecting his fellow creatures into vanity
thereby. And how could you say [that there is not any word of the Jewish
Monarchy in this Prophecy;] whenas these are the verses immediately foregoing?
And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people, and the voice of weeping
shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. There shall be no more
there an infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled his days: for
the child shall dye an hundred years old: but the siner being an hundred
years old shall be accursed. They shall build houses and inhabit them, and
they shall plant Vineyards, and eat the fruit of them, they shall not build
and another inhabit, they shall not plant and another eat: for as the days of
a tree, are the days of my people: and mine elect shall long enjoy the work
of their hands: they shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for trouble:
for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with
them: and it shall come to pass, that before they call I will answer: and
while they are yet speaking, I will hear. The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed
together, etc. What think you of all this? does it not plainly show the future
establishment and prosperity of the Jews in their own Land, as the latter
part of the 11. chap. does their return to it? and are not the dumb creatures
as plainly distinguished here from the Jews, as in the 11. chap. from the Jews
and Gentiles? what then shall we say of you, who have so little care of your
credit, and regard of your Conscience, as to deny, [ that here is any word of
the Jewish Monarchy? surely you have need of such Readers as will swallow all
you say with an implicit faith: for if they take the course of the noble
Bereans, and search whether it be as you say or not, you will often be found a
traitor to the manifest truth of God; a crime doubtless of no low rank, a
sin of no light dye.

Israel's Redemption. Another Prophecy touching the renewed estate of the
creatures, is to be seen in the 30. chap. of Isa. at the 23. v. Then shall be
give the rain of thy seed, that thou shall sow the ground withal: and bread of
the increase of the earth, and it shall be fat and plenteous: In that day shall
thy cattle feed in large pastures. The Oxen likewise, and the young Asses that
ear the ground, shall eat clean provender, which has been winnowed with
shovell and with the fan, and there shall be upon every high hill, rivers and
streams of waters, in the day of the slaughter when the towers fall. Moreover,
the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the
Sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the Day that the Lord
Mal. 3. ver. 17, 18.
binds up the breach of his people, and heals the stroke of their wound.
But the great increase of the light of the Sun and Moon here spoken of, is
in the 60. chap. at the 19. ver. plainly gainesayed, the words are these. The
Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the Moon
give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and
thy God thy glory. Where if it had been said, that the Sun should no more burn
them by day, nor the Moon by night, as it is in the 121. Psalm. or smite them,
as it is in the 49. chap. of Esa. at the 10. ver. I could have sent you for an
answer to the fourth chap. of the same Prophet at the 5. ver. The Lord will
create upon every dwelling place of Mount Sion, and upon her assemblies a cloud
and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night, for upon all the
glory shall be a defense. And there shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the
day from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for covert from storm and
from rain. But seeing it is said, The Sun shall be no more thy light by day,
these places will be better reconciled, if we acknowledge, that in the 60.
chap. there is a mixed rehearsal of those blessings, which are proper only to
the heavenly Jerusalem (which as it is, Rev. 21. ver. 23. and chap. 22. ver. 5.
has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it) with those
which the Jews shall receive at the restoration of their earthly Jerusalem:
for such a mixture of things, which shall in their execution be many
generations apart, is very usual in the Prophets.

Mr. Petrie's Answer Here he shows no Argument for this purpose, but gives a
buze for reconciling the 26. ver. with chap. 60.19. but all this travel might
have been saved, if he had considered, that Isa. in chap. 30. has a particular
warning for the Jews in his own time: he speaks not there of any returning
of the people, but in the beginning he reproves them for their confidence in
Egypt, and for their contempt of the Word, and in the midst he foretells the
mercies of God on them, and lastly assures them of the destruction of their
enemies the Assyrians by name: all which were accomplished in his own time, as
we may find in chap. 37. and for these causes nothing in that 30. chap. can
make for the restoration of the creatures at that imagined Monarchy.

Reply.

How, you say, he shows no Argument for his purpose, but gives a buze for
reconciling the 26. ver. with chap. 60. ver. 19. And do you speak this in
good earnest? I pray then tell us, when the light of the Moon shall be as the
light of the Sun: and when the light of the Sun shall be seven fold, as the
light of seven days; if it shall not be fulfilled at the time of our Saviors
reign on earth. For as yet it has not been thus, and after the last
resurrection it cannot be, because then the day and night shall come to an end,
as it is Job. 26. ver. 10. because then these Heavens in which the Sun,
Moon, and Stars are set shall pass away, shall be no more found, as it is,
Rev. 20. ver. 11. and Job. 14. ver. 12. And therefore it must needs be thus at
the restoring of the Kingdom to Israel, or as the Prophet here expresses it,
in the Day that the Lord binds up the breach of his people, and heals the
stroke of their wound, and so here is not only [a buze] but such an argument
too for our purpose, as you knew better how to avoyde, then answer, how to
conceal, then to reconcile with your opinion: (and yet if you like not the
buze you speak of, I can give you another buze, for perhaps that text in the
60. chapter may be thus understood, to wit, that the cloud which chap. 4. the Lord
has promised to create upon every dwelling place of mount Sion, shall both
defend it from the heat of the Sun, and be it self a light unto it by day,
and that the shining of the flaming fire, which he will create, shall be in
stead of the brightness of the Moon unto it by night) But [all my travel in
the reconciling of the 26. verse of this chapter, with the 19. ver. of the 60.
chap. might have been spared, you say, if I had considered, that Isa. chap. 30.
had a particular warning for the Jews in his own time, and so repeating the
several heads of the chap. you conclude, all which were accomplished in the
Prophets own time, as we may find in chap. 37.] And what do we find^ there?
do we find that the threatening against the Jews, chap. 30. for their
confidence upon Egypt, and their contempt of Gods word, was fulfilled in
Sennacheribs threatening to come up against Hezekiah? no, but the contrary, that
Sennacherib was disappointed of his purpose by Hezekiahs prayer unto the Lord.
Do we find then that the destruction of the Assyrian which is foretold in the
30. chap. was fulfilled in that slaughter of an hundred and fourscore and five
thousand of Sennacherib's Army mentioned chap. 37? no, for that slaughter was
an extraordinary Judgment of God by an Angel sent in the night to destroy
them: but the destruction spoken of in the 30. chap. was to be in more then one
place, and to be performed with Tabrets and Harpes: and in battles of shaking,
as the 32. verse does declare. Do we find then that the mercies of God
foretold in the midst of the 30. chap. -- for the people shall dwell at Sion in
Jerusalem, thou shall weep no more. -- And there shall be upon every high
mountain, and upon every high hill rivers, and streams of water -- Moreover
the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, etc. Do we find it
recorded in the 37. chapter that these things were fulfilled in the Prophets days?
no, we find not a word there touching ought of all this Prophecy; and
therefore the 37. chap. is only a Chronicle of that which passed betwixt
Hezekiah and Sennacherib; and no Register of the accomplishment of what is
foretold in the 30. chap. and consequently Mr. Petrie in affirming this, of
purpose to shift off the invincible evidence of that which we have alleged
out of the 30. chap. for the restoration of the creatures, has showed
himself a teacher fit for none, but such as the Prophet mentions, chap. 30.
ver. 10. who said unto the Prophets, Prophecy not unto us right things; speak
unto us smooth things, prophecy deceits.

Israel's Redemption. And it is the more likely to be so here (not only
because the words immediately following in both Prophecies, are in sense all
one; for they show the same reason wherefore the Sun and Moon should no more
give light unto them, but also) because the happiness which the Jews shall
then be made heirs of, shall never again be interrupted by any misery. For
the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Sion with songs and
everlasting joy upon their heads, They shall obtain joy and gladness and
sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Esaias the 35. at the 10. ver. And lest one
should conceit that the Judgment of the dead (plainly described in the 20.
chap. of the Rev. at the 11, 12, etc.) shall either suspend or disturb this
joy, Saint Paul in the 1. Epist. to the Cor. the 6. chap. the 2. and 3. ver.
has told us, that the Saints shall judge the world These first words may not
unfitly be referred also to the time of the Saints reign on earth: for it is
their privilege at their entrance into their Kingdom, and throughout the
whole space of their reign, to judge the world, that is, all Nations of the
Gentiles with the Judgment of Government and Reformation: with the exercise of
a Civil and temporal power over them: as in the Prophecies of the Gentiles
subjection unto them, it may plainly be seen. And it is their privilege at
the last resurrection, to judge the world, and the Devil, that is, all evil
as well Angels, as men, by a joint approbation of their final and perfect
condemnation, of the full accomplishment I say, of their eternal reprobation.
, that is, the wicked men that have been their oppressors; and judge the
Angels, that is, the evil spirits, that have been their tempters; and
therefore shall not be thrust down to the bar amongst them, but advanced to
the bench against them; an addition doubtless to their former happiness, and
no abatement of it.

Mr Petrie's Answer. Some word of Isaiah 35.10. must be taken in another then
the proper signification: for if the word Sion be not taken for the Christian
Church, but for that bill within. Jerusalem, and the word Return be meaned of
bodily returning of the Jews, the words everlasting joy, (being taken for
worldly joy) ^oo^er ^dicts the ^^ne^ of the thousand years Monarchy, which
shall end with an insurrection of the Gentiles against the Jews: but if the
redeemed of the Lord be expoued s^n the faithful, whom Christ our Lord has
redeemed with his blood, and their returning and coming to Sion, be their
repenting and joining to the society of the Saints, then the everlasting joy is
clear by the words of our Savior, John 16.22. Ye now have sorrow, but I will
see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take
from you. And as the Judgment is unquestionable, so it is justly doubted,
whether the Apostle means the Jews, 1 Cor. 2.3. seeing our Saviou^ says,
Matthew. ^9.28. Ye who have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of
man shall si^ on the Throne of his glory, shall sit upon twelve Thrones judging
the twelve Tribes of Israel; where the twelve Tribes are not Judges but judged.
But certainly be means not of their judging in the temporal Monarchy, seeing
the Angels shall not be judged before the universal Judgment: And the Apostle
says, how much more things appertaining unto this life? whereby it appears,
that in the first part of the verse he understands a Judgment not in this
life. And in both respects these words of the Apostle are a diminution
doubtless, unto that imagined Monarchy.

Reply.

Without doubt if the Reader will take all to be true that you say, he shall
never find you in an error: But if you have no better reason to prove, that
the words [Sion and Returne] must be taken in another then a proper
signification: but because you conceit, that the word [everlasting joy] cannot
consist with the insurrection of the Nations at the expiration of the thousand
years; you do but deceive your self with this reason. For though the
thousand years peaceful reign shall be terminated, by the Gentiles
insurrection at the loosing again of Satan: yet the joy of the Jews (here
revealed) is not limited by it. For we read indeed of the surrounding of the
Saints by the Nations, Rev. 20. ver. 9. but we read not there of any fear in
them, or hurt done unto them: yea we read only of the final overthrow of
their enemies. And whereas the better to countenance your Argument, you call
the [everlasting joy] here, a worldly joy; I pray what reason moves you to
imagine that the joy promised by God to the converted Jews (whom he calls his
elect, and whom others, he says, shall call the holy people, and the seed
which the Lord has blessed) should rather be a worldly joy then such a joy, as
our Savior promised his Disciples, John 16. ver. 22. Is it because the Jews
are to be Inhabitants on the earth, after they receive this everlasting joy?
and were not the Disciples Inhabitants of a more sinful world, then these
Jews shall be, when they were made partakers of the joy which no man could
take from them? This reason then cannot prove your Epithet to belong rather to
the joy of the Jews, then to the joy of the Apostles; and yet unless this be
the reason of your calling it a worldly joy, I cannot conceive why you should
think, that after the Jews are so plentifully inspired with the Spirit of
God, as the Prophets do foreshew they shall be, their joy should not be as
spiritual and inseparable as the Apostles was. And although it be
unquestionable from the passage of St. Paul, in the 1 Cor. chap. 6. ver. 3.
that the Judgment of all evil as well Angels as men, is at the last
resurrection to be passed on them by the joynt-approbation of the whole number
of the elect: yet seeing it is not unlikely, that by [the world] ver. 2. the
Apostle means rather the Nations of the Gentiles in the time of Christ's reign
on earth, then the number of the reprobate at the general Judgment of the
dead; it may justly be doubted, whether by the word [Saints] in that place
also, the Nation of the Jews be not comprehended with the faithful which our
Savior shall bring with him, as well as in the 20. chap. of the Rev. where it
is foreshewed, that the Nations of the four quarters of the earth shall be
gathered together against the Saints at the end of the thousand years. And the
words of our Savior to his Disciples, Matthew. 19. ver. 28. Ye who have followed
me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit on the Throne of his
glory, shall sit upon twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, do
help to confirm, and not to confute the Government of the Gentiles by the
Jews. For as the Apostles shall be made the supreme Governors of their own
Nation under our Savior: so doubtless shall other glorified Saints both of
the Jews and Gentiles be chief Governors under our Savior over other
Nations, according as it is satd, Rev. 5. ver. 10. and chap. 20. ver. 4. and as
the parable, Luke the 19. of the Noble-mans distributing of ten Cities to one
servant, and five to another does imply: for who is that Nobleman, which is
gone into a far Country to receive for himself a Kingdom, and to return,
but our Savior? whom the Heavens must receive until the times of restitution
of all thing, etc. Act. 3. ver. 21. who also spoke that Parable, because he was
nigh unto Jerusalem, and because the Jews erroneously thought that the
Kingdom of God should immediately appear, should be set up then at his first
coming. And as the glorified Saints shall be chief Judges under Christ, so
we may well think, that many of the unglorified Saints of the Jewish Nation
shall be employed by them in the administration of their Government, seeing
Isaiah chap. 14. ver. 2. says plainly, that they shall take them captives
whose captives they were, and shall rule over their oppressors. And suppose
that none of the unglorified Jews should be employed in this government, yet
when our Savior himself shall be King over all the earth, and all the Saints
that come with him, Princes under him: when the Nation of the Jews shall be
his natural Subjects, and all other Nations tributaries and servants unto
them: when they shall be comprehended by the name of Saints, with those
undefiled ones that Christ shall bring with him: when all this shall be, what
Nation shall the Gentiles be said to be governed by, but by that which they
live in subjection unto, and of whom their King came, and amongst whom he shall
reign? And thus much touching your first pretense, that the Gentiles shall not
be judged by the Jews; because the Jews are to be judged by the Apostles.
Which is all one as if you should say, that a Nation that live under any
government it self, cannot govern other Nations that are in subjection unto
it. Your next pretense is [that our Saviors words are not meant of the
Apostles judging in a temporal Monarchy, seeing the Angels shall not be judged
before the universal Judgment.] But where do you find, that our Saviors
promise to the Apostles, is not to be fulfilled, before the judging of the
Angels? And what shall we understand by [the twelve Tribes of Israel] according
to your opinion? shall we^ take them for the rest of the glorified Saints? no
no, they cannot, for they shall be all Judges at the universal Judgment as
well as the Apostles. Shall we take them then for the reprobate of the Jewish
Nation? Surely we find no such signification of these words in all the
Scripture, neither do we find it taught by any, that the reprobate of one
Nation, shall be judged by some of the Saints only, and the reprobate of
another Nation, by others of the Saints: but that all the Saints shall jointly
judge all the reprobate both Angels and men, only by assenting to the
Judgment that our Savior himself shall give against them: and this may be
gathered from the Apostle, who says not thus, Know ye not that the Apostles,
or Prophets: but, know ye not that we shall judge the Angels? he speaks of
all, and not of some Saints only: seeing then the twelve Tribes of Israel, as
you apply this saying to the universal Judgment, can neither be taken for the
rest of the glorified Saints, nor for the reprobate Jews, it must needs
follow, that you are out in your application, and consequently, the twelve
Tribes of Israel, must be taken for the Nation of the Jews, over which the
Apostles shall sit as Judges in the time of our Saviors reign on earth. And
how else should this promise of our Savior implie a privilege to the Apostles
above the rest of the glorified Saints, for their following him in the time of
his temptation, if it did not constitute them alone to be supreme Judges under
him over that Nation which shall be nearest and dearest unto him in his
Kingdom? for seeing all other Saints shall join with them in judging of the
reprobate Angels, much more shall they in judging the reprobate Jews, which
cannot be so much honor unto the Disciples, as the judging of the reprobate
Angels: and so the great privilege which our Savior promised the Disciples
shall according to your opinion, be far inferior to that which St. Paul
affirms to be common to all the Saint^. And whereas you s^^ [that the Apostle
says, how much more things appertaining unto this life? whereby it appears,
that in the first part of the verse, he understands a judgment not in this
life.] We grant your conclusion, for we know that the Angels were not to be
judged by the faithful Corinthians and the rest of the Saints, before their
departure out of this life, or before the redemption of their bodies at our
Saviors appearing, but that they shall be judged by them after their reigning
with Christ, after their judging of the world a thousand years. And so the
glory of the Kingdom of Israel is not yet diminished, by any of your feeble
falicies, and indigested imaginations.

Israel's Redemption. And this is as much as I need say, though not above half
that the Prophets say, concerning the Kingdom in the t^^^. I will therefore
shut up all with that solemn protestation of God, in the 31. chap. of Jer. at
the 35. ver. Thus says the Lord, which gives the Sun for a light by day,
and the ordinances of the Moon, and of the Stars, for a light by night;
which divides the Sea, when the waves thereof roar, the Lord of Hosts is his
name. If those Ordinances Jer. 33. ver. 20.25.
depart from before me, says the Lord, then shall the seed of Israel also
cease from being a Nation before me for ever. Thus says the Lord, If heaven
above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, I
will also cast off all the seed of Israel, for all that they have done, says
the Lord. And with that humble complaint of Israel, whom God in the 7. of
Mioah, at the 8. ver. mak^^ to prophecy thus of her self. Rejoice not against
me, O mine enemy, when I fall, I shall rise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord
will be a light unto me. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I
have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute Judgment for
me. He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold (...)
righteousness.

Mr Petrie's Answer. We acknowledge both in their own sense and tr^th, (...)
no^^ing (...) in them, nor collected out of them for proof of this purpose.

Reply.

If you will acknowledge them both in their own sense, you must acknowledge
them to be for our purpose* for you must acknowledge, that the Nation of the
Jews, which now s^^ in darkness, which now hears the indignation of the
Lord, because she has sinned against him; shall again be brought forth to the
light by him: as Micah says here. And the foresaid protestation of God by Jer.
chap. 31. touching the preserving of the Jewish Nation will force you to
acknowledge your error page 20. where you say [that now through many ag^s
Ephraimites are not known in any part of the earth.]

Israel's Redemption. And so I pass from the thing to be restored, which is
the Kingdom of Israel: to the Person by whom it is to be restored, which is
Christ the Lord, at his next appearing. For they asked of him, saying, Lord,
will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel?

Mr. Petrie's Answer. If the temporal Kingdom of the Jews could be
demonstrated out of the Scriptures, the question a nent the King might more
easily be resolved: and nevertheless these few millenaries cannot agree
concerning the person of their King: for Mr. Maton thinks, that Christ shall
continue visible King of this Kingdom, and Mr. Archer thinks, that Christ
shall restore the Kingdom unto the Jews, and return into the Heavens till
the thousand years be whered, and in the mean time the Jews shall be Kings.
Till these into questions be decided, we might supersede, and nevertheless let
us hear what they can say for a temporary Kingdom of Christ, whether over
Jews and Gentiles.

Reply.

The temporary Kingdom of the Jews has been already demonstrated by such
evident Scriptures and unanswerable Arguments from them, as you durst not to
examine, and it is now (praised be God for his good leave and assistance)
delivered also from that darkness which your deluding allegories, and far
setcht interpretations do draw over it, and thereby set free from that
disgrace and contempt, which you strive so much to bring is into amongst the
Gentiles. And our next task is to discover the like fraudulent dealing in your
Answers to those texts and reasons, by which we have proved, that our Savior,
who shall restore this Kingdom, shall also reign over it on earth. And first
that the Reader may not take distaste at us before he hear us, you tell him
here that these sew Millenaries agree not concerning the person of their King:
for Mr. Maton thinks that Christ shall continue visible King of this Kingdom,
and Mr. Archer thinks that Christ shall restore the Kingdom unto the Jews,
and return unto the Heavens.] Herein indeed we agree not, and as I heartily
wish, that all Christians did so rightly understand the word of God, that there
might be no difference at all amongst them: so seeing offenses must needs come,
and that there must be heresies and divisions amongst us, that they which are
approved may be made manifest, 1 Cor. 11. ver. 18, 19.) I had rather differ
from any man in opinion, then for any by respect to depart from one jot or
title of the truth, which is either plainly revealed in the Scripture, or may
be gathered from it by infallible consequence. And sure I am, that as we find
often mention of our Saviors coming again, so Job tells us, chap. 19. ver.
25. that his Redeemer shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, to wit, at
the day of his next appearing and the Saints resurrection, as these words
immediately following do declare, And though after my skin, worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, etc. And St. Luke, chapter 1. v. 31,
records, that the Lord shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David: and
Jer. chap. 23. ver. 5. that he shall reign and prosper, and shall execute
Judgment and Justice in the earth; and so say Isaiah, and Zechary; (yea and we
conceive it to be for this reason, especially, that Judea is called the Land of
Immanuel, Isaiah 8. ver. 8.) and we read not of his departure from the earth
again, until the earth it self shall pass away at the last resurrection.
Yea, unless our Savior should as well reign over the Jews as restore their
Kingdom to them, we cannot conceive, why he should descend before the
universal Judgment, seeing he can as well restore the Kingdom of the Jews
in Heaven, where he is, as if he should descend unto the earth to do it* But
yet your collection from this difference, to wit, [that ^till these two
Questions be decided, you may superside,] is a very dangerous Doctrine For
though [superside] be a very fine word, yet as you use is, it has a very soul
consequence, for you would have the Reader conceive, that there is no truth in
the subject we treat of, because there is some difference betwixt us in the
stating of it: whereas indeed all truth is made the more firm and manifest by
difference: else what shall we say of our Religion there being scarce any one
head or Article in Divinity, about which there has not been, or is not now
some difference or other amongst Christians: if then we must superside from,
if we must let pass, if we must have nothing to do with those things in
which there is not a full agreement amongst us: we must omit the use of the
Lords Supper, because Papists differ from Lutherans, and Calvinists from both
about the presence of Christ in the Sacrament. We must not believe our
election or Justification, because Divines do differ about the material and
formal canses of the one, and the moving and meriting causes of the other: and
because there is a difference betwixt you and us about the manner and place of
our Saviors Kingdom, we must not believe that he has any Kingdom, yea, we
must quite cast off the worship of God, because we cannot agree about the form
of it, some being for a set form and others against it; some again for
premeditated, and others for extemporary prayers. And thus to make one truth
odious, you stick not to make a shipwreck of the faith: even at once to destroy
our whole Christian practice and belief: so contrary is your advice to that of
the Apostle in the 1 Thessalonians. chap. 5. ver. 21. Prove all things, hold fast that
which is good. Now for conclusion of this first part, I will add Mr.
Brightmans words touching the 7. and 8. ver. of the 66. chap. of Isaiah, and
the 3. ver. of the 110. Psalm. Many such places of Scripture, says he, might he
brought to this purpose; (he means to show the general conversion of the
Jews) and perhaps it would be profitable to bring them, at least for this end,
that our Writers might have occasion thereby given them, to consider more
diligently of these places, from the right interpretation whereof, I fear me
that we wander, when as we make them to speak of things that he past, whereas
they do foretell of things yet to come In his Revel. of the Apoc. chap. 19.
on the 8, and 9. verses page 791. and his words on the 11. ver. of the 6. chap.
of the Cant. Time, says he, will teach many things to be in the Prophets,
which we commonly interpret as though they were past, whose event is yet to
come: and especially (as it seems to me) in the calling of the Jews: which
verily little confidered of ours, has darkened (I will not say perverted) the
proper and natural meaning of the Prophets in many places.

1 COR. 4. v. 8. etc. NOw ye are full, now ye are rich ye have reigned as
Kings without us, and I would ^o God ye did reign, that we also might reign
with you.

For I think, that God has set forth us the Apostles last, ^s it were men
appointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to Angels,
and to men.

We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ: we are weak, but
ye are strong: ye are honorable, but we are despised.

Even unto this present hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are
buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place,

And labor, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being
persecuted, we suffer it:

Being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the
offscouring of all things unto this day.

I write not these things to shame y^u, but as my beloved sons I warn you.

2 TIMOTHY 2. v. 12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him.

REV. 5. V. 10. And have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall
reign on earth.

DANIEL 12. v. 6, 7. -- How long shall it be to the end of these wonders? And I
heard etc.

Therefore, so is the end of the wonders, when all these things shall be
fulfilled, that is to say, when the resurrection shall be, the glory of the
Saints shall shine, the glory of the teachers shall be chiefest, and all other
things brought to perfection, whereby Christ's Kingdom shall have the
pre-eminence over all; which things if any man judge to be meant of the
internal Kingdom already obtained, he destroys the Prophecy, which is
specially conversant in foretelling things which shall be accomplished, being
proper to certain places and times, and not alike common to all: whereof what
observation, or prediction, or admiration can there be, as is of these things,
which in the former verse are called wonders?

Mr. Thomas Brightman in his Exposition of the last and most difficult part of
Dan. Prophecy. page 954. on the 7. ver. of the 12. chap. ISREAL'S REDEMPTION
REDEEMED. The SECOND PART.
Isreal's Redemption. CHAP. 1.
That Christ shall reign personally on Earth, proved necessary consequence.

THat our Mediator has undergone the Offices of a Priest and Prophet, the
Gospel is our witness: but considering that the Jews are yet to receive a
Kingdom, a Kingdom in which they shall hold them captives, whose captives
they are; Isai. 14. ver. 1, 2, 3.
and in which peace and righteousness shall flourish on the earth: considering
this, I say, we may justly doubt, whether our Savior has as yet executed the
office of a King, and so much the rather, because he took our nature upon him,
as well to perform his Kingly office therein amongst us, as either his
Priestly or Prophetical; the glory of this being indeed the reward of that
contempt and torment which he suffered in the others, and though it cannot be
denied, That he has already Col. 2. v. 15.
spoiled Principalities and powers, (that is, the evil spirits) and has made
a show of them openly triumphing over them in his Cross: nor that he is Ephesians.
4.8.
ascended up on high, and has led captivity captive, and given gifts unto m^n.
No^ that he is become the Col. 2.10.
Head of all Principality and power, (that is, of the Saints and holy Angels)
and is Heb. 1. v. 3. chap. 8. v. 1. chap. 10. v. 12. chap. 12. v. 2.
set down at the right hand of the Throne of God: so that he is Phil. 3. v. 21.
able even to subdue all things unto himself. Yet that he does not now reign
in that Kingdom, which he shall govern as man, and consequently in that of
which the Prophets speak, his own words in the third of the Revelation at the
one and twentieth verse do clearly prove, To him that overcomes, says he,
will I grant to sit with me in my Throne; even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father in his Throne: f Heb. 2. v. 8. chap. 10. v. ^2, 13.
From whence it follows, that the Throne which here he calls his own, and
which he has not yet received, must needs belong unto him as man. because the
place where he now sits, is the Fathers Throne, a Throne in which he has no
proper interest but as God. Again it follows, that seeing he is now in his
Fathers Throne, therefore neither is this the time, nor that the place, in
which his Throne is to be erected: Not the place, for in one Kingdom, there
can be but one Throne: and not the time, for then he should sit in his own
Throne, which now he does not do.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. He grants, that Christ is now a King, and that he has
executed the Kingly office, but he denies that he has reigned in an earthly
Kingdom, as m^n: in all which we agree: but we disagree in two particulars.
First, That the Prophets have spoken of such a Kingdom, this remains as yet
to be proved. Secondly, That he s^^ on a Throne in heaven as man: If these
words, as man, be understood according to the Logical acceptance, it may be
granted: for what agrees unto any man as man, belongs unto all men, and
indeed it belongs not unto all men to sit on the Throne of Majesty: And
nevertheless Christ sits at the right hand of the Father as God-Man or
Mediator; and in this sense we deny this assertion, as (it seems) this Author
takes it.

Reply.

What a miscellany of untruth and contradiction is here? we need not then
enquire what spirit had the guidance of your pen. It is evident enough, that it
was he, who once undertook to be a lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs
Prophets. For that Christ is a King, it is unquestionable: Where is he that is
borne King of the Jews? said the wise men, Matthew. 2. ver. 2. And Saint
Matthew, and Saint Luke have given us his regal genealogy, have registered his
princely parentage. At his birth then he was a King authoritative, as Divines
speak. The Authority of a King did then of right belong unto him: but he was
not then, nor has been since, a King executive, by putting his royal
Authority in execution, Neither have I said it, but the contrary, for my words
are [but -- considering this we may justly doubt, whether he has as yet
executed the office of a King,] yea that our Savior as man, as the Son of
David, has not yet executed the office of a King, is the very hinge of the
difference we are now entering upon; for you hold that our Saviors reigning as
the Son of David, is to be fulfilled while he is in heaven, where and when he
was not to restore the Kingdom to Israel: and we hold, that his reigning as
man, as the Son of David, is to be fulfilled on earth, at his next appearing,
when and where he is to restore the Kingdom to Israel: In this then, is our
disagreement, and not our agreement, as you report. And seeing you affirm [
that he has executed his Kingly office, for you say, (though falsely) in all
which we agree] How can you conceive, that he does now reign? when as that
which is already done, cannot possibly be as yet in doing, or to doing. It
seems by this therefore that you neither rightly understand what we, nor what
your own side do hold of our Saviors Kingdom: and yet as I take it, you are
the man, that uttered this selfe-conceited query, [ Whether do they understand
the differences betwixt Jews and Christians? page 1.] This is one untruth, to
wit, [That I have granted, that Christ has executed his Kingly office,] The
next is, [That I have said, that he sits on a Throne in heaven as man] which
though it be in it self a truth: for Christ himself says of himself, and am
set down with my Father in his Throne, Rev. 3. ver. 21. Yet it is not true,
that I have said these words; for thus I have said, [that the place where he
now sits is the Fathers Throne, a Throne in which he has no proper interest,
but as God.] These are your misreports of what I have idsa to which we may
add, your affirming that it has not been proved, that the Prophets have
spoken of a Kingdom on earth; when as the Prophecies which I have alleged for
it, are so plain, that you left them, as one afraid to behold their evidence.
Now your contradictions follow: for having also falsely affirmed that this
Proposition, [Christ sits on a Throne in heaven, as man,] is one thing about
which we disagree, you thus descant on it. [If these words, as man, be
understood according to the Logical acceptance it may be granted.] Thus far
you affirm that according to the Logical acceptance, Christ sits on a Throne
in heaven, as man: and yet you subjoyne presently [for what agrees unto any
man as man, belongs unto all men, and indeed i^ belongs not unto all men to
sit on the throne of Majesty.] Whereby you deny, that according to the Logical
acceptance, Christ sits on a throne in heaven as man; It follows, [and
nevertheless Christ sits at the right hand of the Father as God-Man, or
Mediator.] Here likewise you affirm, that Christ sits on a Throne in heaven
as man, though not only as man, but as God too: and yet you immediately
subjoyne [ and in this sense we deny this assertion (to wit, that Christ sits
on a Throne in heaven as man) as it seems this Author takes it.] But surely
this Author has not spoken the words, and yet he will not deny that Christ
does fit there as man, lest he should deny what Christ himself, and the
Apostles have said, neither will he affirm that Christ sits there any
otherwise then as God-man, or Mediator; although his sitting does properly
belong unto him as man only. But you have said, [that Christ both sits, and
sits not there, in a logical acception, and that he sits there as God-man, and
yet not as man.] Thus contrary are you to your self, and withal as contrary
to the truth in misapplying your distinction. For whereas you say [It may be
granted, that Christ sits on a throne in heaven as man, if these words be
understood according to the logical acceptance of them] it is notoriously
false: for the words [as man] in this sense do imply somewhat essentially
belonging unto man which cannot be affirmed of Christ's fitting on a Throne in
heaven, to wit, that it does essentially belong unto his humane nature; for
then it should inseparately belong unto him, and to all other men besides; this
then you should have denied, and affirmed only that he sits there, as such a
man as Mediator. Put you, out of your great skill in Logique, (in which you
will allow me no insight) have first affirmed both members of your distinction,
and presently denied both: such a subtle or rather simple discourse have you
extracted out of your logical principle. And that the Reader may see how
unseasonable and unreasonable you have alleged this Philosophical rule, as
well as the Prophetical and Apostolical writings and revelations, he must
know; that this maxim, [what agrees unto any man a^ man, belongs unto all
men,] is generally true only of mere man in opposition to other creatures;
and not of our Savior, who is both God and man; and so as well distinguished by
his humane properties from his divine nature, and by his essential attributes
from other creatures, as by his mediatory offices from other men. Wherefore it
follows not, that what belongs unto Christ as man, belongs unto all men:
because we usually say, that all that belongs to Christ, as man; which belongs
not to him as God; which appertains to his humane, and not unto his divine
nature. Whether it be proper to him as man, in opposition to other creatures,
as to laugh, and to be borne of a woman, or common also to other creatures, as
to be hungry, and thirsty, to eat and drink, to walk, to weep, to groan,
etc. Or proper to him as such a man, as Mediator, in opposition to other men:
As to be borne of a Virgin, to dye for our sins, to rise again for our
justification, to sit on a Throne in heaven, and to reign visibly on earth
over all Nations. These and such like we say, do not in propriety of speech,
belong unto Christ as God, but as man because they are the properties of his
humane nature. As on the contrary, it belongs unto him as God, and not as man,
to be equal with the Father, to be infinite, omnipotent, omniscient, etc. And
thus much for your answer in gross, which is indeed a very gross answer. You
go on to catch at particulars, which you thus allege.

The 1. Particular. That the Jews are yet to receive a Kingdom, in which they
shall hold them captives, whose captives they are.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. Here a little change of a little word makes a great
difference: for the text says, whose captives they were. And now they say,
they are. The Prophet is speaking by name of the Assyrians, whose Monarchy is
now destroyed, and the Interpreters show the acomplishment of that Prophecy
according to the Prophets morning a but that prophecy speaks not of them whose
captives the Jews now are: neither know we whose captives they are seeing they
live as free Subjects, wheresoever they live.

Reply.

It is true that the text says [whose captives they were] but seeing the
deliverance which the Prophecy foreshewes has not been hitherto accomplished,
we may truly say [whose captives they are] and therefore there is no such
great difference in this change, as you pretend For unless you can prove, that
the whole Nation of the Jews* whose redemption this Prophecy does conceane, as
these words [ for the Lord will have mercy upon Jacob, and will yet choose
Israel,] do show: Unless, I say, you can prove, that the whole Nation, that
all the Tribes have been set in their own I and, and a^ their return thither
have brought strangers with them, whom they have, possessed there for servants
and handmaids, and have ruled there over their oppressors, over those who
formerly ruled over them, (which I am sure you cannot do) it is not very
material, whether we say, whose captives they were, or, whose captives they
are. And if there be any difference in the change, it is only because the
Prophets expression does seem to point to that last generation of the Nations,
under whom the Jews shall remain captives immediately before their
deliverance. But because you could not show the accomplishment of this Prophecy
touching the Jews, you tell us that Interpreters do show the accomplishment
of the Prophecy touching the Assyrian, at the end of this chapter; and that
that Prophecy speaks not of them, whose captives the Jews now are, No? Do
none of the Jews then continue captives in Assyria? surely the reports and
writings of Travelers and Traffickers in those parts do testify the
contrary. And what though the Imperial power has been translated from one
Nation to another, since the Jews were carried captives by the Assyrian? yet
may we truly affirm that the Jews remaining in that Country, are now
captives to the Assyrian, because by the Assyrian in the Prophecy, is meant the
Inhabitant of Assyria (whither the Jews were first carried captives) of whom
the Lord has said, I will break the Assyrian in my Land, and upon my
mountains tread him under foot, th^^ shall his yoke depart fr^^^ off them
(that i^, from off the Jews) and his burden from off their shoulders. And have
Interpreters showed the accomplishment of this according to the Prophets
meaning? Me thinks then you should not have hid it from us; for the story is
worth the hearing, which can show when the Jews were in their own Land,
wholly set free from the bondage which the Assyrian first brought them into;
and the Assyrian himself made subject to them. And what though no Jews were
now captives in Assyriae? what were this to the aforesaid Prophecy touching the
Jews redemption, which speaks indefinitely of their deliverance from their
oppressors: and of their taking them captives, whose captives they were, and
not particularly of the Assyrian, or of any other Nation? It follows [neither
know we whose captives they are, seeing they live as free Subjects wheresoever
they are.] But do you know that God calls them captives? and their dwelling in
strange Countries a captivity? this then would have made you account them
captives too, if you had had but a grain of that divine reverence toward Gods
word, of which you would make others believe that you have no small measure.
And what was it that made the Jews captives at first? was it not the loss of
their Country, and their living under the dominion of another people? and does
not this still continue upon them? wherein then are they now less captives
then they were heretofore? what privileges have they now, which they enjoyed
not under Nebuchadnezzar; Cyrus, D^mius, Artaxenxes, Ahasuerus, and others? It
seems then, that you take them not for captives, unless they should be put
under great slavery, under an Egyptian bondage. This indeed were to make their
captivity more grievous and burdensome unto them, but captives they are without
this; and God only knows how soon also the civil power under which they live
may be turned against them.

The 2 Particular. He took our nature on him, as well to perform his Kingly
office therein amongst us, as his Priestly or Prophetical: the glory of this
being, etc.

Mr. Petrie's answer. It is manifest, that he reigns in us, se^ing the
faithful can say with the Apostle, Gal. ^.20 The life which I now li^^, I live
by faith in the Son of God, and Christ lives in me: but that the glory of an
earthly Kingdom is the reward of his contempt and torment, we cannot think,
seeing such a glory is not answerable to his sufferings, who being equal with
God, made himself of no reputation, and humbled himself even to the death of
the Cross. Wherefore his reward is not deferred so long, but now God has
exalted him highly, and given him a name, which is above every name, Phil. 2.
And he for the joy that was set before him endured the Cross, and is set down
at the right hand of the Throne of God, Heb. 12.2. which is a greater honor
then of an earthly throne.

Reply.

It is manifest, that the faithful before Christ's incarnation, could say also
as well as we, The life which we now live, we live by faith in the Son of
God, and Christ lives in us. For they were baptized unto Moses in the cloud,
and in the sea: and did eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same
spiritual drink which we do, (for they drank of the spiritual rock that
followed them, and that rock was Christ) 1 Cor. chap. 10. ver. 2, 3, 4. So
that if you will call the adoption, sanctification, regeneration, and
justification of the Saints [a reigning,] which the Apostle calls [a living,]
Christ does no otherwise reign over them now, then he did from the beginning
of the world, to wit, by his holy Spirit. But the reign in qu^stion, is his
reigning visibly in his humane nature on earth: In which sense it is, (and for
which end it was) that he was borne a King, an heir apparent to the Throne of
David. For unless he had been to reign as man on earth, and as the Son of
David over Israel, there had been no more necessity of his being borne of that
Tribe and Family of the Jews, which had sole interest, and title to the Crown
of Israel; to qualify him for the execution of his Kingly office in your
spiritual sense (for the distributing of his Spirit unto, and the guiding of
the Church therewith) then there was of his being born of the Tribe of Levi, to
fit him for the execution of his Priestly office, in laying down his life for
our sine, and making intercession for us now unto the Father. And as Herod's
destroying of the Infants of purpose to destroy our Savior, that he might
thereby translate the Kingdom of Israel from the House of David, and fasten it
to himself and his Posterity: had been a plot as sottish, as it was savage, if
he had not understood that the Scepter did belong only to our Savior: So
doubtless if he had not therein truly conceived what King Christ should be,
the Evangelists would as well have recorded, that Herod's misapprehension of our
Saviors Kingdom, was the occasion of his bloody fact, as he has related his
malicious attempt, to defeat our Savior of his right. And although we do not
say, that this Kingdom of our Savior on earth, is all the reward of that
contempt and torment which he has endured for us: yet we say, that it is all
the reward which he is to have here on earth. And we say also, that this reward
is very agreeable, though not equal to his sufferings: that, I say, God has
very righteously appointed, that our Savior should by the Posterity of the
same persons be there worshipped and obeyed, where by their Predecessors he
had been so scornefully and despightfully handl^de and that at the end of this
reign, he should there judge those persons also, who had formerly adjudged him
to death. And the scriptures which you have brought, do not gain say this;
for that Heb. 12.2. does show only what reward he has a^ready in heaven; and
so does the 9 ver. of the 2 chap. to the Phil. but the 10. and 11. verses do
rather show what reverence he shall have in the Day of his reign on earth,
then what he has already.

The 3. Particular. His own words do clearly prove it, Rev. 3. ver. 21.

Mr. Petrie's answer. Can any man see in these words any thing for an earthly
Kingdom? for albeit the Throne of the Father, and the Throne of our Savior
were diverse, yet may they not be both in heaven?

Reply.

Can any man choose but see in these words, two distinct Thrones? and will any
man besides you say, that they may be both in heaven? What? Can our Savior
have an idle Throne in heaven? Throne in which he does not now sit? For he now
sits in his Fathers Throne; and when then shall he sit in that other Throne
which you say may be in heaven besides his Fathers Throne? Certainly you
cannot tell us; To put you out of doubt then, that the Throne which our Savior
here calls [my Throne] is a distinct Throne from the Fathers, and yet not in
heaven: you must remember first, that this Throne is our Saviors Throne of
judgment, which he shall receive, when he comes to judge the quick and the
dead, and therefore is to be on earth, and not in heaven. And secondly, That it
is the Throne in which the Saints that overcome shall fit with him; and
therefore also not the Throne where he now fits, because no man can sit in that
but himself. And therefore also the Throne as well of his Monarchical
government, as of his judging the dead at his delivering up of the Kingdom to
the Father: because it is in the time of his reign only, that the twelve
Apostles shall sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, as
has been showed before.

The 4. Particular. That which he calls his own Throne he has not yet
received, Heb. 2.8. and Chapter 10.12, 13.

Mr. Petrie's answer. The words Heb. 2.8. are, Thou have put all things ^^^der
his sees. For in that he has put all things in subjection under him, he lofe
nothing that is not put under him, but we see not yet all things put under him.
Here is a twofold Universality, all things are put under him, and, nothing is
not put under him. What more would you have? The last words say, all things are
not put under him. If the idst words say so, they must be contrary to the
former words: but the words are, we see not all things put under him: we^ther
is the word, Receive, there which is the point in hand. No^ these two are f^rre
different, we see not all things put under him, and he has not received all
things to be under him. So this Text in stead of proof convinces the foolish
Ten^s. It way be this is more ^^^are in c. 10.12, 13. where it is said, He sa^
down on the right hand of God (There the height of glory) expecting from
henceforth till his enemies be made his foot stool. What is here for an
earthly Throne, or another Throne? his enemies are made subject unto him, even
his greatest enemies, as it is granted before: but as ^^ng as this world
contun^es, new enemies shall be arising, and can be not subdue them as be has
done others, unless he erect and sit on an earthly Throne?

Reply.

You have here strived all you could to obscure two texts, which I have quoted
in the margin of my book out of the 2 and 10 chap. of the Epist. to the Heb.
that Heb. 2. ver. 8. is this, Thou have put allthings (...) subjection under
his seete. For in that he put all in subjection under him, be left nothing
(says the Apostle) that is not put under him. But now we see not yet all
things put under him. Out of which words you frame your objection thus [Here is
a twofold Universality, all things are put under him, and, nothing is not put
under him. What more would ye have? The last words say. [All things are not
put under him] This is your form all argument, and your wise answer is this,
[If the last words say so, they must be contrary to the former words: but the
words are, we see not all things put under him.] No, the words are, But now me
see not yet all things put under him. And if they were as you here allege
them, why did you object before, that the last words say, [All things are not
put under him] seeing you deny that they say so in you answer? I^ not this,
first to speak otherwise then the text speaks, and then to reprehend your self
for mis-alledging of it? yet, this I hope, is neither false Logique, nor false
Divinity in you. And what, I pray, is the meaning of these words? But now we
see not yet all things put under him, if this be not the meaning of them, that
all things are not put under him? And yet (by your leave) they are not contrary
to the former words: for the Apostles former words, have relation to the
Prophetie all expression of the Psalmist, who speaks of that which was to
come, as if it had been then done. Who fore shows only what great power was
designed unto our Savior by the Father; and not when the manifestation and
exercise thereof should be. So that, the whole meaning of Saint Paul's words is
this, For in that God (has fore appointed to) put all in subjection under,
Christ, he (has) left nothing. (he has exempted no creature,) that is not (to
be) put under him. But now we see not yet (this fulfilled, we see not yet) all
things (actually) put under him. But we see (already) Jesus -- for the
sufferings of death crowmed with glory and honor. And thus the Apostle shows
what of that Prophecy of David was then fulfilled in Christ after his
ascension, to wit, this; that he was then ^^^nod with glory and honor. And
what was not then fulfilled, to wit, this, the actual subjection of all
creatures unto him: which is not to be fulfilled till the manifestation of [the
world to come,] to which time it is that the Apostle referres the
accomplishment and exercise of Christ's dominion over the creatures, which the
Psalmist reveals; as the comparing of the 5. verse of this chapter, with that
which follows, does evidently declare. For having said in the 5. ver. For unto
the Angels has be not put in subjection the world to come, whereof he speaks,
he presently assumes, But one in a certain place testified, saying, What is
man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of man that thou visitest him?
etc. And thus this text shows not our Tenet to be foolish, but you to be as
fallacious in seeking to obscure it, as your own mouth does pronounce you
profane, in calling that truth foolishness, which Christ, the Prophets, and
Apostles have so plainly, and plentifully set forth. In the other Text, Heb.
10. ver. 12, 13. it is said, But this man after he had offered one sacrifice
for sins for ever, sat down at the right hand of God, from henceforth
expecting till his enemies be made his footstool; that is, looking for the
time in which his enemies shall be subdued unto him, as the 1. ver. of the 110.
Psalm. does manifest, where the words are these. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit
thou at my right hand (donec ponam) until I shall make, (not, until I have
made) thy enemies thy footstool. So that he sits not there while it is doing,
but until it must be done, until the time ordained for the accomplishment of
it. All then that the Apostle affirms in this text likewise to be already done
is this, That Christ is sat down at the right hand of God, as was foretold;
but as for the other part of this prophecy, he says plainly, That Christ now
expects only when it shall be fulfilled; and if this be not sufficient to make
you confess, that the enemies which David here prophesied of, are not yet made
subject unto Christ; that which follows in the Psalm will put it beyond
exception, for he nominates what enemies are here meant, the time when, and the
manner how they are to be made Christ's footstool. The enemies he speaks of,
are men, the Kings and Heads of the earth, as we find ver. 5, 6. The time
when, is [the day of his powder.] The day in which the Jews shall be as
willing to receive him, as in the day of his poverty they were to be rid of
him; as we learn ver. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the dry of they power.
The manner how, is by an eminent destruction brought on these Kings, and their
forces, as the 5 and 6. verses do inform us also: which being compared with
the latter part of the 19. chap. of the Revel. do plainly show that this
destruction which David foretells, is the very same with that which Saint John
there reveals: for that is to be effected at our Saviors descending from
heaven, and so is this; for it is to be at his coming again from the right
hand of the Father. And therefore here is a good ground too for another Throne,
and that a Throne on earth. And your answer to this text is a mere
contradicting of it; for whereas the Apostle says, That Christ being sat
down at the right hand of God, expects till his enemies be made his
footstool. You say plainly, [that his enemies are made subject unto him, even
his greatest enemies.] And for want of scripture to justify this answer, you
subjoyne, [as it is granted before,] and so father it on me. But you show not
where it is granted, neither can I imagine what you mean by it, unless you
mean that it is granted by my alleging of the same Apostles words, Phil. 2.
ver. 15. to wit, That Christ having (by his passion) spoiled principalities and
powers, made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in himself. But
surely though it may be true, That Christ after the accomplishment of the work
of our Redemption on the cross, triumphed over the evil spirits in his own
person, making a show of them openly, that is, leading them captives in the
time of his triumph; (as some expositours understand it) yet it is not true,
that these principalities are the enemies recorded in the 110. Psalm, whence
Saint Paul took the foresaid text. Neither is it true, that the evil Angels
were then held in a continued subjection by Christ, for the space of a 1000.
years (as they shall be in the time of his reign on earth, when he casts them
into the bottomless pit, when he shuts them up from deceiving the Nations, as
it is foretold Revel. 20.2, 3.) For as before Christ's passion, Satan could no
more deceive the elect, then he can since; so he has been no more straitened
of his liberty in walking up and down in the earth, nor of his power in
tempting men unto sin, since Christ's triumphing over him in his own person;
then he was before, (if he has so much) for it is of the time under the
Gospel that it is said, Revel. 12.12. Woe to the Inhabitants of the earth, and
of the sea, for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because
he knows that he has but a short time. It Is of this time, that Saint Peter
says, Our Adversary the Devil, as a roaring lion walks about seeking whom
he may devour, 1. Ep. chap. 5. ver. 8. And it is that we may be able to stand
against the wiles of this enemy, that Saint Paul advises us, to put on the
while armor of God, Ephesians. 6.11. etc. Yea it is in the Christian Church, that
some were to give heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils, as Saint
Paul writes, 1. Tim. 4.1. and that there should be false teachers who privily
should bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them. As
Saint Peter writes, 2. Ep. 2. chap. 1. ver. etc. And they are the Christians of
the last days, of whom S. Paul foretells, 2 Timothy 3.1. That they shall be
lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to Parents, unthankefull, unholy, without natural affection, truce
breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are
good, traitors, heady high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of
God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof. And if these
be the fruits of Satan's subjection and in prisonment, what then are the
fruits of his power and freedom? Doubtless Satan cannot be held in
subjection, to be bound up, (as he must be in the time of Christ a reign) as
long as new enemies do arise against Christ, in his poor members, seeing it
is only through the liberty and power that this Arch-makebate has in the
world, that good men suffer for the truth, and evil men oppose it; that I say,
men are kept from a general peace and unity over the whole earth. And
therefore in confessing, [that new enemies still arise against Christ] you do
Italy gainesay, what you before falsely affirmed, to wit, that the evil Angels
Christ's greatest enemies are now held in subjection by him that they are now
deprived both of their power and liberty to do, hurt, to rebel against
Christ, and to raise persecution against those that are Christ's; as they shall
be, I say not in this time of the world, but in that in which Christ shall
reign personally on earth. Yea if Christ's enemies mentioned in the foresaid
Psalm, be now made his footstool, if they be now wholly subdued unto him,
(for this is the meaning of their being made his footstool) how can new ones
still arise?

The 5. Particular. Seeing be sits now on his Fathers Throne, therefore neither
is this the time, nor that the place, in which his Throne in to be erected: not
the place, because in one Kingdom there can be but one Throne: and not the
time, for then he should sit on his own Throne, which now he does not.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. If this be not to deceive with words, I know not what it
is to deceive. One and the same throne, is called the throne of God, and of the
Lamb, Revel. 22.5. and therefore his Fathers throne, is his own throne, as he
says generally, John 17.10. All my things are thine, and all thine are mine:
and so both parts of the proof fall to the ground. Is one Kingdom is but one
throne, and that throne belongs to the Father, and to the Son, and now
befits on his own throne, as it is said expressly unto the Son, Heb. 1.8.
Thy throne is for ever and ever, and he prays for no other glory, but that
which he had before the world was, John 17.5.

Reply.

It does ill become a deceive to cry out against deceit. Our Saviors words
Revel. 3.21. are very plain, they are no parable: To him that overcomes,
(says he) will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, (lo here a Throne in
which the Saints shall sit with Christ, it follows) Even as I also overcame,
and am set down with my Father in his Throne. (Lo here a Throne in which no
man can sit but himself,) and therefore here are two distinct Thrones. But you
object, [ That one and the same throne, is called the throne of God, and of the
Lamb: and therefore say you, his Fathers throne is his own throne.] And
therefore say we, you are slipped from the matter in question: for whereas you
should prove, that the Throne, which Revel. 3. Christ calls, [my throne] is not
a distinct Throne from that which he calls [the Fathers throne] you prove only
that the Fathers Throne, is Christ's own Throne, which no Christian will
gainsay. For it is his, by proper interest, as he is God: and by purchased
interest, (as I may say) as the Lamb of God, as a crucified Savior: and yet
it is not that Throne which properly belongs unto him as he is man; as he is
the Son of David. For this he is to receive on earth, where others, where
they that overcome shall sit with him. And in opposition to this Throne on
earth it is, that he calls the Throne in heaven, the Fathers throne, Revel.
3.21. which Throne Revel. 22.3. (after the expiration of the time of his
reign, on David's Throne) he calls the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. And so
your argument being mistaken, the scriptures alleged to confirm it, are of no
force to bear down the truth of a double Throne mentioned, Rev. 3.21.

The 6. Particular. He has a throne which belongs unto him as man, and to
the throne of the Father he has no proper interest, but as God.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. Show then any text that speaks of his two thrones: yea
if he have, or shall have any throne as man, and not as God, it must be given
unto him: but it is now given unto him to sit on his Fathers throne, and his
given throne is the throne of his Father.

Reply.

You here fall back to somewhat that you had left behind; but unless you had
proposed a wiser challenge, it had been more for your credit to have let it
alone. For is it not strange, that one so well read in the scripture, as you
seem to be, should call on us to [shew any text that speaks of Christ's two
thrones?] Surely we have showed you already one unanswerable text, Rev. 3.21.
and yet you will not believe it. To shame you then, if not to satisfy you, we
will show you others. For what are the Thrones of which Saint John says, Rev.
20.4. And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto
them? Are not these the Thrones in which they that overcome shall sit with our
Savior? And are not the Thrones on which the Disciples shall sit, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel, some of these Thrones? deubtlesse they are. For as it
is said, Matthew. 19.28. That the Disciples shall sit on thrones, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel, which necessarily shows a government over others: so
it is said, Revel. ^0.4. That they sat on thrones, and judgment was given unto
them; not, on them: that is, They were made Judges over others, not others over
them. And where should the Saints departed sit on seats exercising judgment
over others, but on earth? and when but in the time of our Saviors Kingdom,
(who shall bring them with him) when, I say, but in the time of his 1000.
years reign, as it is Luke 22.29.30. and Rev. 20.4? For in heaven they cannot
sit judging any, because there are none to be judged by them there are none but
themselves; and at the judgment of the dead, they shall not judge any, (any
otherwise then by way of approbation) because this is our Saviors privilege
only, as his words, John 5.22.27. and the single throne, Rev. 20.11. do
declare: (and indeed it is not likely, that the Saints who are saved only by
our Saviors righteousness, shall pronounce glory to themselves, and perdition
unto others.) The time therefore in which our Saviors Throne shall be
accompanied with the Thrones of the Saints, must needs be the time of his
1000, years reign on earth, after which time, and the little season of the
selfe-ruining insurrection of the Nations that must follow it; he is to sit
alone on the white Throne spoken of Rev. 20.11. to give sentence on the dead,
and (taking the full number of the elect with him into the new Jerusalem) to
sit again in the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, in the height of glory, Rev.
22.3. And thus we have laid before you other texts, which show that our Savior
shall have a Throne on earth: and consequently, that he has another Throne,
besides that where he now si^s. And that his Throne on earth is a Throne given
unto him, the words of the Angel Gabriel, Luke 1.32. do witness, And the Lord
shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David. And his own words, John 5
27. And has given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the
Son of man. But you by your wily, if not rather weak arguing, would persuade
us to think, that Christ cannot have another Throne given him, because the
Throne where he now sits, is a given Throne. Which is just as true a reasoning
as this; King James was first crowned King of Scotland, therefore he could not
afterward be crowned King of England.

Israel's Redemption. And the reason of it, (as is intimated in the first
words) is because the time in which all that shall overcome, are to be called,
is not yet at an end; and this also the answer which was made to the souls
under the Altar, (who cried for vengeance against their persecutours) does
fully confirm. For it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a
little season, until their fellow servants also, and their brothren, that
should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled, Revel. 6.11. and when this
i^ done, Rev. 11.15.17.
then shall Christ sit in his own Throne, and they that overcome shall sit with
him; For he that overcomes, and keeps my words unto the end, to him (says
he) will I give power over Nations, (and he shall rule them with a rod of iron,
as the vessels of a Potter shall they be broken to shivers,) even as I rreeived
of my Father, Rev. 2.26.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. The force of this reason is, Christ shall not be a
King till all his Subjects be called and overcome; but his Subjects are not all
yet called: which form is alike with this. Ferdinand shall not be Emperor,
till all his Subjects ^e bo n^, and he victorious, whereas some of his Subjects
are coming daily into the world, and it may be more of them are daily
departing. This is a rediculous reason, and so is the other. 2. Neither does
the prayer of the Saints make mention of his earthly Kingdom, but of subduing
or rivenging their enemies, which shall be without an earthly Monarchy, to wit,
by punishing them in hell. 3 That text Rev. 11.15. speaks not of a proper
Kingdom of Christ, (and far less of an earthly Kingdom,) but of the
Kingdom of our Lord and his Christ: if (...) had been said, of our Lord and
Christ, or, of our Lord Christ, it might be thought to be the proper Kingdom
of Christ, which he as man governes, or shall govern: but when it is said, of
our Lord, and of his Christ, we see a distinction of persons, and unity of
power: And therefore it is clear, that the text Rev. 2.26. is impertinently
cited for proof of that thing which is not, and is imagined to be on earth:
whereas that power is in heaven.

Reply.

1. Doubtless you take this for a very witty comparison; but the truth is, it
is a very ignorant one. For the force of this reason is not as you make it say,
[that Christ shall not be a King till all his Subjects be called, and
overcome.] But it is this, That Christ shall not receive his Kingdom, till all
those Subjects, those glorified Saints which shall come with him in his
Kingdom, are called, and have overcome. So that the form is like this,
Ferdinand shall not be Emperor, till all those Subjects, those Nobles that
shall wait on him at his coronation, be borne, and able to attend him. And
Ferdinand being a mortal King, is to be accompanied by mortal attendants; but
our Savior being an immortal King, is to be accompanied with immortal
attendants; with all those believers which have already, or shall hereafter
overcome the temptations, and afflictions of this world, before his appearing,
and his Kingdom: which Saints being but a part (though the choicest part) of
our Saviors Subjects, are indeed ridiculously compared by you to all
Ferdinands Subjects borne and unborne.

2. Though the prayer of the Saints, Rev. 6.10. does not mention our Saviors
Kingdom on earth, yet seeing the revenge they call for, is deferred till the
number of those that shall be slain for the word of God, be fulfilled; we know
that it is not to be executed till our Saviors coming. And in what manner it
is then to be done by him, the 14. chap. of the Rev. from the 14. ver. to the
end, does declare. And the 19. chap. also at 17. ver. etc. Where the fowls of
heaven are summoned to the Supper of the great God: to eat the flesh of Kings,
and the flesh of Captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of
horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all both bond and free,
both small and great. And surely this judgment on the Saints enemies, is to be
a temporal judgment on earth: at our Saviors coming with the Saints to
receive his Kingdom, as the 11. and 14 verses of this Prophecy do show, and
not an eternal judgment on their bodies and souls in hell: which is not to
se^ze on them, till the giving up of Christ's Kingdom at the Judgment of the
dead, till above a 1000 years after this overthrow, (in which the fowls are
to feast on their carcasses,) as in the 20 chap. of the Rev. at the 11 verse,
etc. it is revealed.

3. That text Rev. 11.15. [speakes not, you say, of a proper Kingdom of
Christ, but of the Kingdom of our Lord and his Christ] And by this reckoning
our Savior has no proper Kingdom at all, and consequently is not properly a
King: for what Kingdom belongs to Christ, which may not as well be called the
Kingdom of our Lord, as the Kingdom of his Christ? But certainly the Kingdom
which this text says shall become the Kingdoms of Christ, are the Kingdoms
of this world: and therefore Kingdoms on earth, and proper Kingdoms, both
which you deny. And they are to become Christ's Kingdoms at the sounding of the
seventh Trumpet, and not before, that is, at the time of his appearing again:
and therefore they are to be his to govern as he is man; and so by your own
confession, to be properly his. Although then we grant, that these words, [the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, do intimate a distinction of
persons, and unity of power,] which is more then Pareus grants, (who enclines
to a distinction of natures, and unity of persons,) yet it will not follow from
hence, that the Kingdoms of this world, which our Savior at his coming shall
receive into his own possession, as he is man, shall not be his proper
Kingdoms. For they are said to become the Kingdoms of our Lord, not because
they are not now his: but first because at the accomplished donation, and
actual subjection of them unto Christ, God shall more marvellously declare his
supreme power over them, then ever he did. And secondly, because they shall
then be his after a more special manner, then they are now his; because I say,
he shall then be worshipped and obeyed in them all, according to the righteous
rule of his own Laws. And yet they are said to become the Kingdoms of Christ
only, in regard of the administration, of the immediate government of them.
For Christ alone shall then be visible King over them, as now others are: and
therefore shall be as properly a King on earth, as any of them who now bear
rule in these Kingdoms. And this the next words of the text do confirm,
which say not, and they, but and he, (that is Christ alone) shall reign for
ever and ever. And therefore that text Rev. 2.26. is very pertinently cited,
for proof of that thing which shall be on earth, and is not now in heaven. For
our Savior (though then in heaven) did not say, that he had given the Saints
in heaven, or Saints on earth, power over the Nations on earth, but that he
would give them power over them. And surely we cannot think, that the Martyrs,
Rev. 6.10. would call on God to hasten the time for the avenging of their
blood, on them that dwell on the earth: if they could now do it themselves, if
they could now rule the Nations with a rod of iron, and break them to shivers,
as a Potters vessel. Yea, why have the Saints on earth been so long time
persecuted, afflicted, tormented, and still are, if the Saints in heaven have
power to deliver them, and tread down their enemies? And why are there still so
many large heathen Kingdoms, not yet subdued to the faith, or government of
the faithful, if the Saints in heaven can rule them as they please? Certainly
if you can make this good, that our Savior has already given to the Saints in
heaven, that power over the Nations which he here speaks of, to wit, a
conquering and commanding power, a power to rule them with a rod of iron: you
will help the Papists to a better ground for their supplication unto Saints,
then was ever yet thought of by themselves. For doubtless if the Saints in
heaven have now command over this inferior world, they must needs be
acquainted with all passages of importance in it, as Kings and their Agents are
with the affairs of State in the Kingdoms over which they rule: and so may
well be sought to, if nor for spiritual, yet for outward and temporal advice,
succor, and defense.

Israel's Redemption. The like encouragement he gave also to his Disciples
before his passion. Ye are they (said he) which have continued with me in my
temptations, therefore I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has
appointed unto me, that ye may Matthew. 26.29. Mark. 14.25. Luke 14.15. cha.
22.16.18. cha. 24.42.43. Acts 10.41.
eat and drink at my table, in my Dan. 2.44. cha. 7.14.27.
Kingdom, and sit on Dan. 7.22. Revel. 20.4. Matthew. 19.29.
seats, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, Luke 22.28.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. It might be more for his purpose to have concealed this
text, which makes the 12 Tribes of Israel the persons judged: and all the texts
quoted on the margin speak of the Kingdom of God, except that of Luke 24.42,
43. where is mention of no Kingdom, but of eating and drinking after Christ's
resurrection: and if that be the Kingdom, whereof our Savior speaks, eb.
22.29. that Kingdom is come already.

Reply.

It might have been more for my purpose, you say, to have concealed this text.
And why? because you have nothing to say to it, [that it makes the twelve
tribes of Israel the persons judged?] What? do you think then that in our
Saviors Kingdom, in the restored Kingdom of Israel, there shall be no
government? or that it is a token of the unrighteousness of a Kingdom to have
governors in it? Certainly unrighteous Judges are a ready means to make a
Kingdom unrighteous: to make charity wax cold, and envy and contention grow
hot. But upright Judges are as effectual a means to preserve righteousness
in a Kingdom, to cherish and strengthen love and unity, and to chase away all
hatred and dissension: and how righteous then shall that Kingdom be, where our
Savior himself shall be King; and the Disciples and other Saints governors
under him? And surely seeing the twelve Tribes of Isael cannot be taken for the
reprobate, nor for the Saints already departed, and to depart, or to overcome
before our Saviors appearing, (for these must be Judges, as well as the
Disciples, as our Savior himself does testify, Rev. 3.21. To him that over
comes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, that is, to have power over
Nations, as it is Rev. 2.26, 27. and to reign on earth, as it is Rev. 5.10.)
Seeing, I say, the twelve Tribes of Israel can be taken for neither of these;
they must needs be taken for the Kingdom of Israel, which is again to be
restored on earth, where only the glorifi^d Saints can sit as Judges over
others. For in the new Jerusalem they are all to be partakers of the same
glory, (though not of the same measure of glory,) they are all to have equal
interest in the tree of life, and river of life; and therefore there shall
neither be need of judging, nor any temporal possessions, and affairs to be
judged of. For the heavens and the earth that now are, and all the creatures on
the earth, (being to last no longer then the first death shall last) shall be
then all dissolved. And those new ones mentioned, Rev. 21.1. (that new heaven,
I say, from which, and that new earth to which the new Jerusalem shall
descend,) created in their place. You tell us next, [that all the texts quoted
on the margin speak of the Kingdom of God, except that of Luke 24 42, 43.
where is mention of no Kingdom, but of eating and drinking after Christ's
resurrection, etc. But do not the other texts speak also of something to be
done in the Kingdom of God, as well as of the Kingdom of God? Surely our
Savior says Matthew. 26.29. I say unto you, that I will not drink henceforth
of the fruit of the Vine, until that day, when I shall drink it new with you
in my Fathers Kingdom, (as it is Mark 14.25. in the Kingdom of God,) and
Luke 22.15. he says, I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you
before I suffer, for I say un^o you, Henceforth I will not ease of it any more,
until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God. And he took the cup, and gave
thanks, and said, Take this and divide it among you, for I say unto you, I
will not drink of the fruit of the Vine, until the Kingdom of God become.
Loc, here is mention of eating and drinking too: and that of our Saviors
eating the Passover, and drinking wine again with his Disciples, but not
until the Kingdom of God be come; And therefore unless you will deny, that
the Kingdom of God shall come, you cannot deny that our Savior and his
Disciples shall again eat and drink together: nor consequently that the
Kingdom of God, is meant of our Saviors Kingdom on carth. Of that Kingdom,
of which he said to his Disciples, Luke 22.28. Ye are they which have
continued with me in my temptations, therefore I appoint unto you a Kingdom,
as my Father has appointed unto me, that ye may eat and ^rinke at my table in
my Kingdom, etc. For where is a Lamb for the Passover? where grows the
Vine, but on earth? and when could the Disciples eat the Passover, and drink
wine again, with our Savior at his table, but after the resurrection of their
bodies? And that text Luke 24.42.43. was quoted only to show that glorified
bodies can eat, and consequently, that the denial of this can be of no force
against the proper sense of our Saviors words: whose single affirmation of his
eating and drinking with his Disciples, after his next appearing, ought to be
of more account with us, and to gain more belief from us, then all other men's
negation of it. And this self same Kingdom of our Savior on earth, is
sometimes called, the Kingdom of the Father, because it is appointed unto him
by the Father: and sometimes Christ's Kingdom, because as man he is to reign
visibly in it: and sometimes the Kingdom of God, because Gods power shall be
revealed after a wonderful manner at the setting of it up, and because none
but God, Laws shall be observed in it: and sometimes the Kingdom of heaven,
because the chief governors of it shall come from heaven, and because it
shall be of an heavenly condition, in regard of the holnesse and righteousness
thereof: for as our Savior and the glorified Saints shall then as perfectly
do Gods will on earth, as it is now done by them in heaven; so shall their
righteous judgment occasion a more righteous dealing amongst all others over
the whole earth, then was ever yet observed in any particular Kingdom.

Israel's Redemption. I know these words are taken by Interpreters, for a
metaphorical expression of those joys which we shall receive in In heaven
where the holy Jerusalem is that great City, ( Rev. 21.10 etc.) distinguished
to Ezekiel. chap. 4. ver. 2. etc. chap. 45. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. (which I
take to be the model and platform of the city that is to be built at the
Jews redemption by these and many more differences. First, because the builder
and maker of the one is God ( Rev. 21.2.) but the other men shall build ( ^er.
31.38. Ezekiel. 40.8.) Secondly, the materials of Jerusalem which is above, are
all gold and precious stones, ( Rev. 21.18, 19, 20, 21.) but the materials of
that other Jerusalem shall not be such ( Ezekiel. 40.16, 17, 21, etc.) Thirdly, in
this city, there is no Temple, for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the
Temple of it ( Rev. 21.22.) but that city shall have a Temple ( Ezekiel. 40.41,
etc.) Fourthly, in this city, the river of water of life proceeds out of the
Throne of God, and of the Lamb, Rev. 21.1.) but in that city, waters (not the
river of life, though endu'd with healthful and nourishing qualities, because
of the place whence they are to proceed, Ezekiel. 47.9.12.) shall issue from under
the threshold of the Temple: for the forefront of the house shall stand toward
the East, and the waters shall come down from under the right side of the
house, at the South Side of the Altar, ( Ezekiel. 47.1. etc.) Fifthly, in this
city, the tree of Life only grows on either side of the river, and bears
twelve manner of fruits monthly, ( Rev. 22.2.) but by the river that shall
issue out of the Sanctuary of that city, shall grow all trees for meat ( Ezekiel.
47.12.) Sixthly, in this city there is no night, they need no candle, nor light
of the Sun, for the Lord God gives them light, and the Lamb is the light
thereof, ( Rev. 21.23.25. chapter 22.5.) but in that city there shall be night, and
the light of the Sun shall then be sevenfold ( Isa 30.26. chapter 60.11.)
Seventhly, this city shall descend to the new earth, with which there shall be
no sea created, ( Rev. 21.1.2.) but the waters which shall come from that city,
shall go into the sea, and being brought forth into the sea the waters shall be
healed, ( Ezekiel. 47.8.) and therefore that city is to be built, before the
annihilation of the first earth with which there is a sea.
heaven; but it is a current axiom in our Schools, ( Non esse a litera, sen
propria scripturae significatione recedendum, nisi evidens aliqua necessitas
cogat, and scripturae veritas in ipsa litera periclitari videtur,) That we must
not forsake the literal, and proper sense of the scripture, unless an evident
necessity does require it, or the truth thereof would be endangered by it: and
I am sure, here is no such cause for which we should leave the natural
interpretation of the place, yea we are by many other passages in the
scripture, rather compelled to stick to it.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. It may be doubted, whether this Author has been bred in
schools, or what he calls our schools, seeing he so abuses rhetorical
terms, (as literal sense, for proper sense: metaphorical sense
contra-distinguisned to figurative sense,) and keeps no logical canons in his
arguing, and I think, he did never learn such interpretation of scripture in
any approved school. As for this rule, he may see partly by that is said, and
shall see more hereafter, that these words cannot be understood of an earthly
Kingdom: neither do these fore cited compel us, (as he boldly says) to
stick unto the earthly sense of this text in hand.

Reply.

It may well be doubted, whether pride or choler did most oversway your
judgment in this answer. For though I willingly confess my self to be a man
not worthy to be numbered amongst the learned: yet unless I should make as
little conscience of lying for an advantage, as you do; you cannot choose but
know what schools I was bred in: for the title page of my Book does publish it
to the world. And doubtless these schools have ever yielded men as eminent
for judgment, as righteous in their life, and as zealous for the truth, as
those that you have been bred in; or any other schools in Christendom
besides. But that which you here first indict me for, is this [T^ar I abuse
rhetoric all terms, as literal sense for proper sense.] And I pray, what
Divine does not as often, or oftener, use literal sense for proper sense, then
for the true sense, whether proper or figurative? and what is the meaning of
literal sense, in this approved Axiom, but a proper sense? For doubtless
there is no necessity that can compel us to leave the true sense of the
scripture, although it may to leave the proper sense. And yet the axiom runs
thus: We must not forsake the literal or proper sense, etc. which being
rendered (according to your acceptance of the word literal) the true or proper
sense, what sense will there be in the axiom? Your next censure is, [That I
have contra-distinguished metaphorical sense to figurative sense.] But it had
been honest dealing to have showed the place, or else not to have said so: for
an accusation without proof does only declare the plaintiff a slanderer.
Your third complaint is [That I keep no Logical canon, in arguing.] No Sir,
it is not for every one to do this; it is for such as you are, for such as are
scholars; such men will observe a canonical method in arguing: and make as
excellent use of logical maxims, as you have done page 30. of this maxim,
[What agrees unto any man as man, belongs unto all men.] The last censure
is, [That I never learned such interpretation of scripture, in any approved
school.] Surely the interpretation of scripture, is to be learned from God,
and not from man; for that interpretation is most true, and infallible, when
the coherence of the text does point out the sense, or when one scripture does
expound another of the same nature. And yet I go not alone, but am accompanied
with many approved Authors, bred in approved schools, who have all confessed
the same truth that I speak for, and stuck to that proper interpretation of
these scriptures, which I follow. For not to speak of the primitive
Christians, or of many of the Fathers after them, there have been many approved
men for learning in these latter t^nes, that have been witnesses of this truth,
amongst whom, are Brightman, Alstedius, Wendelinus, and Mede, whom you your
self page 14. commend for a renowned Author, although you shake off his
choicest proofs, as easily as Sampson shook off the Philistines cords: and
break through his strongest arguments, as forcibly as Sampson did through the
gates of Azzah, which he carried away in a triumphing manner: such wonders do
you work by your canonical, (or rather careless) arguing. And yet for all
this, you must give me leave to make so bold with you again, as to tell you:
That as the plainness of this text in hand, and of the forecited scriptures,
does compel us to acknowledge the proper sense of them; so I trust both the
love of the truth, the fear of God, and a desire to keep a good conscience,
will ever constrain us to stick to it. For it is manifest by your taunting
terms, that you could find neither scripture contradicting, nor necessity
forbidding the proper sense of our Saviors words; for the confirmation
whereof, this rule is here alleged.

Israel's Redemption. For besides, that there is little analogy and resemblance
betwixt a perpetual Rev. 22.3.
praising and worshipping of God, and the business of a politic government
here spoken of: besides this, I say, we are already informed, that though our
Savior be now in heaven, yet he sits not there in his own Throne, and
consequently, is not yet in the Kingdom which the Father has appointed him.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. What impudence is here! Does not David say, Psalm. 16 11.
In thy presence is the fullness of joy, at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore? and Psalm. 17.15. I shall be satisfied when I wake with thy likeness,
and Psalm. 36.8. They shall be abundantly sitis fied with the fullness of thy
bouse, and thou shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. These and
many more are spoken of the joys in heaven by resemblance with earthly
Kigndomes; and we have already showed that he bath been misinformed (or
misinformeth) of another Throne and another Kingdom.

Reply.

Here you startle the Reader with a very foul exclamation, but an evil
tongue, as it does not become you, so it will nothing benefit you. Yea it
deeply stains you innocence before God, very much impaires your reputation
amongst men, (especially upright men) and sets up your wounded conscience as an
irreconcilable Judge against you. Look into the Epistle of Saint James, chap.
3. ver. 6. and you may see both the abominable off spring and original of it.
So is the tongue, says he, amongst the members, that it defiles the whole
body, and settethou fire the course of nature, and it is set on fire of hell.
That therefore it may not burn hereafter in those flames, from whence it is
now too much inflamed, think seriously on this passage, and from henceforth
give better language to others, though your enemies, then you have done to me
for telling you the truth. Now as for your answer, I con^sse these texts to be
David's words, and that there are some metaphorical phrases in them. But I deny
that they have any resemblance with the civil affairs of an earthly Kingdom,
or that there is any comparison to be made betwixt them and our Saviors
saying, Luke 22.28. so that the impudence you speak of may well recoile on
your self. For the text Psalm. 16.11. shows only, that the fullness of alljoy
and delight, is in the enjoyment of the sight of God, and to be [at the right
hand of God] does betoken the highest place of honor and glory in heaven,
which is proper to our Savior, who is said to sit at the right hand of God, in
allusion to a custom amongst men, who are wont to set those whom they will
most honor, whom they most delight in, at their right hands. And that Text
Psa. 17.8. shows that David after the resurrection, when he shall have a
glorified body, as Christ now has, shall be perfectly happy, shall be as he
would be. For these words [to awake after thy likeness,] are all one with
those of Saint Paul in 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44. To rise in incorruption, in
glory, in power, to rise with a spiritual body. For if we have been planted
together in the likeness of Christ's death, we shall be also in the likeness
of his resurrection, says the same Apostle, Romans 6.5. and because we are laid
into our graves as one that lies down in his bed to sleep, and shall be
raised out of them, as one that rises out of his bed from sleep, therefore it
is, that the Prophet uses, [awake] in stead of [arise] And the text Psalm.
36.8. is referred by Musculus to Gods bountiful provision in this life for all
men indifferently; and by Calvine better, as well to the outward and temporal,
as to the spiritual and eternal benefits of God toward the faithful, his
words are, Some restrain it to spiritual graces, but unto me it seems a
more likelihood, that under it are comprehended all Gods benefits, that
pertain as well to the use of this present life, as to the eternal and
heavenly blessedness. And so refers it as well to joys on earth, as to joys
in heaven. And happily seeing the Prophet makes mention here of the house of
God, it is best understood of the great comfort which men shall receive through
Gods loving kindness toward them, in the time of our Saviors Kingdom on
earth, when Jerusalem and the Temple of the Lord shall again be rebuilt, and
all Nations shall flow unto it, as it is, Isai. 2.2. or as it is, Zech. 14.16.
shall go up from year to year to worship the King the Lord of Hosts, and
to keep the feast of Tabernacles. When I say, in the mountain of the Lords
house, in the restored Jerusalem, the Lord of Hosts shall make unto all people
a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of
marrow, of wines on the lees well refined; And shall destroy the face of the
covering cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over all Nations,
Isai. 25.6. etc. And besides, every understanding man knows, that [to drink
of the river of thy pleasures] is a metaphorical expression, seeing pleasures
are not the nourishment of the body, and so properly, and corporally drank of;
but belonging to the soul, to which they are as comfortable, as sweet and
wholesome waters to a thirsty body. But to drink wine, to eat the Passover,
to eat and drink at our Saviors table, to eat bread in the Kingdom of God,
to sit on seats, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, are all proper
expressions, and so quite different from the other. And as spiritual pleasures
appertain to the Saints on earth, as well as to the Saints in heaven; so do
eating and drinking agree as well with glorified, as unglorified bodies, as
well with the state of immortality, as with the state of mortality. For our
Savior did eat on earth, (at his Disciples table) after his resurrection; and
he says, that the glorified Saints shall eat and drink with him at his
table, after their resurrection. And further he says, that after the last
Judgment, there is in the new Jerusalem the fruit of the tree of life, to be
eat of; and the water of the river of life to be drank of; his words are, To
him that over comes will I give to eat of the tree of life in the midst of
the Paradise of God, Rev. 2.7. and again, Rev. 22.14, 15. Blessed are they
that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life. And
whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely. And indeed seeing God
creates nothing in vain, it were vain to think, that the tree of life should
bear twelve manner of fruits monthly, unless they were to be fed on: or that
the river of the water of life should run through the midst of the street in
the holy Jerusalem, if it were not as well to be drank of by the Saints in
glory, as to nourish the tree of life on the sides of it. And therefore unless
you can bring better proofs to show that I am misinformed, or do misinforme,
then these texts of the Psalmist, or any you have cited hitherto, you your
self will be found an overhasty misinformer against the truth.

Israel's Redemption. And as it is evident from his own words, that the Throne
of his Kingdom is not now in heaven: so it is plain from Saint Paul's, in 1
Cor. 15.12. that it shall not be thereafter the judgment of the dead; his
words are these, As in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made alive:
But every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits, afterward They that
are Christ's at his comming-If there were not to be some distance of time
betwixt the resurrection of these, and other men, it had been as easy for the
Apostle to have said, they that are dead, or, all that are in the grave. And if
there shall be a precedencie of time, then no doubt but it shall be such a
precedence, as may bring some advantage and honor unto the Saints: and
therefore not only of a few hours or days, but of a more notable
continuance, and length of time; of many years. For if Christ should descend
for no other purpose, but to call all men to judgment, then as there would he
need of none, so there could not well be any priority of time to distinguish
their resurrection; because in that act, both good and bad must be assembled
before him at the same time: and the wicked doubtless should then be raised as
soon, to see his coming, as the just, to meet and accompany him therein.
they that are Christ's at his coming, (and therefore not the Zech. 14.5. 1
These. 3.13. chap. 4. ver. 14, 15, 16. 2 These. 1.10. Col. 3.4.
Martyrs only.) Then comes the end, (what, presently after his coming? no,
but) when he has delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, (and when
shall that be?) when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority, and
power. For he must reign till He, (that is, the Father,) has put all his
enemies under his feet: which will be fully accomplished, when the last enemy
shall be destroyed, which is death, and when all things shall be thus subdued
unto him, then (shall follow that inutterable glory, that height of happiness,
where) the Son also himself shall be subject unto him, that did before put
all things under him, that God may be all in all.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. Whether the Apostle might have said so, or so: Can any
man gather necessarily out of these words so great a distance of time, betwixt
the resurrection of the godly, and of the ungodly? Here the Apostle names the
godly, and not the ungodly, not importing any notable distance of time: but
because he had said, ver. 22. In Christ all shall be made alive, which words
cannot be properly and univocally meaned of the ungodly, whose rising shall be
for the accomplishment of the second death: therefore here ver. 23. he justly
^mits the mention of the ungodly, and speaks of the godly, as also he does, 1
These. 4.16, 17. where we find expressly an order among the godly, saying, The
dead in Christ shall rise first, and then we who are alive and remain, shall
be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air.
The Apostle in both texts speaks of the same coming of Christ, (as this
Author acknowledges and applies the words to the same purpose, page 50.) As
none will say, that there shall be any notable priority in time betwixt the one
and the other sort meeting Christ: so, and far less do these words speaking
only of them that are in Christ, import two resurrections, different the one
from the other, the space of a 1000 years. Yea, and the Apostle saying, That
we shall be caught up, and meet the Lord in the air, and so shall be ever
with him: How can any imagine that we shall come down again from the air to
abide so long a space upon the earth: and therefore he speaks there of the
general resurrection, when they who are in Christ, shall be ever with him, not
in a temporal, but everlasting glory. And seeing the Apostle speaks both here
and there of the same resurrection, certainly he speaks not here of a
resurrection before the time of the general judgment. 2. page 49. After these
words of Paul, at his coming: Mr. Maton inserteth, and not the Martyrs only.
Why inserteth he these words? does any (who denies this earthly Monarchy) say,
that the Martyrs and no more shall come with Christ? no, but some Millenaries
say so. And here he would mark a word against them. Be it so. 3. He wresteth
the words thus, Then comes the end, ( what presently after his coming? no,
but) when he has delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father; and when
shall that be? when he shall have put down all rule, and authority, and power,
etc. Here instead of explication is a very contradiction of the text by
inserting a negative, and conveighing it closely with a query: The particle
Then has relation to the words preceding, and the word Comes, is not in the
original, as ye may see by the diverse characters in the translation, and it
may as well be rendered, Then, or at that time is the end, when he shall have
delivered up, etc. So that the very time when he shall deliver the Kingdom, is
when they who are Christ's shall arise at his coming: And therefore there shall
be no notable distance of time betwixt the resurrection and the general
judgment, and consequently these words of Paul do clearly prove, that the
reign of Christ as God-man does not begin after his next coming, nor can
(without contradiction unto the Apostle) any notable space of time be betwixt
his next coming, and the last subduing of all things. The 25 verse proves the
same: for when it is said, For he must reign till he has put all his enemies
under his feet; thereby is teached (more clearly in the original language)
that now he reigns, and continues reigning, and consequently, he is not to
begin his reign, ( even as it is said, Heb. 2.8. Thou have put all things
under his feet,) and when they who are in Christ shall be made alive, death
the last enemy shall be destroyed, and then is the end of administration.

Reply.

1. The reason which you allege against the distance of time betwixt the
resurrection of the godly and ungodly, to wit [that the last clause of the 22
verse, So in Christ shall all be made alive, is not properly and univocally
meant of the ungodly, whose rising shall be to the accomplishment of their
second death;] this reason is a mere mistake, or rather a groundless untruth.
For as in Dan. 12.2. the words, [Sleepe and Awake,] are indifferently applied
to the death and resurrection of the just and unjust; as in this chap. ver. 20.
the word [Sleepe] is indifferently applied to all that are dead; and ver. 12,
13.15, 16 21.29. [The dead] are opposed to the living in general, to all that
live a natural life on earth; and so are meant of all that are departed out of
this l fe, both elect and not elect. In like manner the word [Sh^ll be made
alive,] ver. 22, is opposed only to the first and natural death of the body,
to the corruptible state of it in the grave: and not to the spiritual death of
the soul, or to the second and supernatural death of the body; and
consequently does equally comprehend the resurrection of the good and bad: as
the 21 verse does further confirm, For since by man came death, (to all, both
good and bad) by man came also the resurrection of the dead (of all, both good
and bad.) So that the Apostle discoursing here of a proper and bodily
resurrection, speaks only of such a death, as is common to all, (which is a
bodily death,) and such a resurrection as is common to all; (which is a bodily
resurrection.) And having proved the resurrection, and showed also in what
order it shall be fulfilled: toward the end of the chapter, he tells the
Saints with what bodies they themselves shall arise, to wit, with
incorruptible, with glorified, with spiritual bodies. And as for the text, in
1 These. 4.16, 17. it does show only that the Saints which are living, at our
Saviors coming, shall not be caught up to meet Christ, before those that are
dead. For when the Saints who are dead, shall be raised out of their grayes,
then the Saints that remain alive shall together with them be caught up into
the clouds to meet the Lord. So that this order, (as you call it) is an order
betwixt the Saints remaining alive at our Saviors coming, and the Saints
deceased before his coming: and not an order touching the distinct rising of
all those that are dead, which is that which Saint Paul affirms in the 1 Cor.
15.23. etc. And whereas you would make it a matter incredible, that our Savior
and the Saints shall come down again, from the air, to abide so long space
on earth, only because it is said, [That they shall meet the Lord in the
air, and so shall ever be with the Lord.] You do show your self to be either
very forgetful of what you have read in Gods word, or that you took but
little notice of it, when you did read it; For does not Zech. 14.5. tell us,
That the Lord shall come and all the Saints with him? Seeing then the Saints
shall meet the Lord in the air, as Saint Paul says: and seeing also when
they are met, the Lord shall come, and all the Saints with him, as the Prophet
says, whither shall they come, but from the air to the earth? Surely
whatsoever you or any other through your persuasion may imagine of it, Job
makes no doubt of it. For chap. 19. ver. 25, 26, 27. he says, I know that my
Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: and
though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see
God: whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not
another, though my reins be consumed within me. And Jeremiah seconds him,
chap. 23. ver. 5. in express terms touching our Saviors abode on earth. Yea
seeing our Savior at his coming with his heavenly host, shall take the Beast
and false Prophet alive in battle, and make a feast of their Armies for the
fowls of heaven, as it is revealed in the 19 chap. of the Revel. and tread
them in the winepresse of his wrath, that the blood shall come even unto the
horse-bridles, by the space of a 1000 and 600 furlongs, as it is foretold
Revel. 14.19, 20. Shall he descend to the earth to do this, think ye, or
shall he not? And why also may not the Saints, when they have met the Lord, as
well be ever with him, though he first descend with them to reign on earth, as
if he should go immediately back with them into heaven? Nescis, haud dubio
nescis.

2. You might well have spared this passage, unless you could have showed,
that I had marked any thing against the truth. But does the Apostle prove them
only to be in an error, who hold that none besides the Martyrs shall rise and
reign with Christ at his coming? Surely he marks a word against those too, who
hold that all the dead shall rise at Christ coming; for -- every man, says
he, in his own order, Christ the first-fruites, afterward they that are
Christ's at his coming. Lo here the order of the Saints that dye before
Christ's appearing, is, to be the next that shall rise after Christ himself.
And when then is the order of the rest of the dead; but when the time of
Christ's 1000 years reign on earth, is finished? when the last enemy is
destroyed, which is death? which shall not be utterly destroyed till the last
resurrection, till all men be raised from the dead. For seeing the Apostle
without any relation to the several estates of the just and unjust, after
their resurrection, speaks here only of the rising of their bodies, which
equally and univocally belongs to them all; why should we think, that he would
not as well have mentioned the resurrection of the just, if they were to rise
at the same time with these? if the words [But every man in his own order] do
not intimate any order? do not intimate a priority of time betwixt the godly
and ungodly, as well as they do betwixt Christ and them?

3. If you were as able to justify your accusations, as you are forward to
accuse, there were no contending with you; but it is so common with you to awe
the Reader with great words, when you have least to say to the purpose, that he
is by this time well acquainted with your craft, and therefore your bare
affirming that here is a contradiction, will be taken for no evidence. Although
then the word [commeth] be not expressed in the original, yet to make the
sense complete, this word, or a word equivalent to this, (as your own
translation does witness) is here to be understood. For then, [or at that
time, say you, is the end.] I pray at what time? at the time of our Saviors
descending? surely the Apostle answers not so: but when he shall have delivered
up the Kingdom to God, even the Father: When he shall have put down all rule,
and all authority, and power, etc. So that the [Then] here is referred by Saint
Paul, to these [Whens] which follow it, and not to the words foregoing, as you
wrest it. And besides whereas the Apostle shows us, when the end shall be by
these convertible expressions, When he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to
God: When he shall have put down all rule, and all authority, and power: you
skippe from this, and falsely and fallaciously infer, [That the time when he
shall deliver up the Kingdom, is, when they who are Christ's shall rise at his
coming:] so that according to your explication of the text, the words, [Then
comes the end] are superfluous, and the text should run thus, Christ the
first-fruites afterward they that are Christ's at his coming, when he shall
have delivered up the Kingdom, etc. And thus it appears, how much this place
of the Apostle does puzzle you. And yet you tell us also, [That the 15 ver.
does teach us that Christ reigns now, because it is said there, for be must
reign, etc.] But this is no truer then the rest that you have said. For the
Apostle referres these words to the time after his coming, and not to the time
that now is; so that the full meaning of his words, is this. Afterward they
that are Christ's at his coming, Then comes the end, when (after his coming)
he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God; When (after his coming) he
shall have put down all rule, and all authority, and power; When (after his
coming) the rest of the dead are risen. For he must reign (after his coming)
till he has put all his enemies under his feet: And the last enemy that shall
be destroyed is death, at the last resurrection of the dead. And whereas you
add that text Heb. 2.8. [Thou have put all things under his feet, to prove
also that Christ does now reign;] You do very unadvisedly contradict your
own Tenet, and the Apostles words. For if all things are now actually put
under him, then he does not now reign, seeing the Apostle says, That he must
reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet, and no longer. And
therefore it is evident that those words, Heb. 2.8. are spoke in relation to
Gods fore-appointment of it, and not to the actual performance of it: to Gods
committing of that power to the Son by which he is now able to subdue all
things unto himself, as it is Phil. 3.21. and not to the Suns putting of
this power in execution, which shall not be till his coming again, as both
the order and sense of Saint Paul's words here do show; and the voices in
heaven at the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11.15. And the thanksgiving
of the Elders, ver. 17. do confirm. And so the beginning and not the end of
the administration of Christ's Kingdom is to be when they who are dead in
Christ, shall be made alive. And though these Saints shall dye no more, yet
death the last enemy shall not be then utterly destroyed, for as much as none
but these Saints shall then rise: and that the Jews which are then to be
delivered, and the Gentiles which shall be called at and through their
deliverance, and those who are borne in the time of our Saviors reign, shall
be subject unto death as well as we, though not to the like persecution by men,
or temptation from Satan, who is then to be bound up for the space of a 1000
years.

Israel's Redemption. Thus far Saint Paul, whose words do clearly prove,
that the reign of Christ as man, (of which alone we treat) does neither
begin before his coming, nor extend it self beyond the death of Death the
last resurrection. And therefore cannot without a palpable contradiction, be
taken for the time, when he shall give up his Kingdom to the Father: nor for
the time that now is; betwixt which and his Kingdom too our Savior in my
conceit, has put an irreconcilable distinction, calling this, the time, not
of a Kingdom, but of temptation; that is, a time of persecution for
righteousness sake; a time wherein his Disciples must be delivered up to be
afflicted, killed, and hated of all Nations for his Name: that thus fulfilling
the rest of the afflictions of Christ, for his bodies sake, which is the
Church, they may at last wholly, and together, (for shall not their bodies as
well reign with Christ, as their souls? but these we know, are, and shall be
yet captives to the grave: or, are the Saints that shall be found alive at
Christ's coming exempted from his Kingdom? for if he should reign till then,
and then give up his Kingdom to his Father, they are exempted; but if, as our
Apostle she ws, his reign begin not till his coming, then as the living
shall at that time These. 4 15, 6, 17.
together with the dead in Christ, be caught up to meet him; so the Saints
shall then, and till then they cannot wholly, and altogether reign with him) I
say together and at once be made partakers of their Masters Kingdom, which as
it appears is not to be in heaven, and therefore must needs beheld on earth;
where all things which our Savior promised his Disciples may well be
accomplished in a literal sense.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. What God by his word and experience has conjoined, let
no man call irreconcilable: for he says Psalm. 110.2. Reign thou in the midst
of thy enemies: and Romans 8.37. In all these things (that is in the midst of our
sufferings) we are more then conquerours: so that when the enemies do rage and
persecute, even then does Christ reign, and the godly are Kings, or if there
be any title more transcendent.

Reply.

Certainly experience does join nothing together, but declares only to us
what God has conjoined, and doubtless what God has conjoined, Christ would
not separate: and yet Luke 22.28. he says, Ye are they which have followed
me in my temptations, therefore I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father
has appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my
Kingdom, and sit on seats judging the 12 tribes of Israel. Which words, as
they do plainly distinguish the time of Christ's temptations, from the time of
his Kingdom; so they do show too, that the Apostles Kingdom was then only
appointed unto them by our Savior, and not then enjoyed by them. And you
cannot deny it, unless you will say, that the Disciples did then sit on
seats, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel: or that Christ himself did then
reign; for it is his own Kingdom which he here appoints unto them. Neither
will the texts which you have cited, prove that the time of our Saviors and
the Saints persecution and affliction does contemporate with the time of their
reign. For that Psalm. 110.2. Reign thou in the midst of thy enemies, does
show only, that he shall reign amongst those who shall declare themselves
enemies to him and his, both before and when he comes to reign; and not that
his enemies shall have any power to molest (much less to raise persecution
against) him, and his when he does reign: for the 1 verse does manifest that
these enemies are to be made his footstool at his very entrance into his
Kingdom: at his coming from the right hand of God, at which time it is, that
he is to reign amidst them, and not before. And that text Romans 8 37. does show
only, that through Gods special love toward us, we are enabled to conquer
a^l tribulation, distress, peril, (or whatsoever else) that can be brought on
us for our faith in Christ: and consequently that we do now contend for a
Kingdom, but not that we do now reign; for who will say, that when two
strive for the mastery, either of them is conqueror, ^ill one be vanquished: or
that when two Princes contend for a Kingdom, either does reign over the
other, till one be quite subdued unto the other? and such certainly is our
condition in this life, and no other. For now ye are full, now ye are rich,
ye have reigned as Kings without us, and I would to God ye did reign, that
we also might reign with you, says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 4.8. where he goes on,
For I think that God has set forth us the Apostles last, as it were men
appointed to death, for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to the
Angels, and to men, etc. What! would the Apostle have thus denved that he did
reign, only because many tribulations did attend him, if the reign of the
Saints and their sufferings were consistent? Doubtless he would not: and
therefore though they depart out of this life, as conquerours over all
temptations, through the grace of God that is in them: yet they live not here
as Kings, but as combatants: neither do they finish their conquest, till the
appointed time of their life be finished. And when should they be Kings, but
when they receive their crowns; which is not while they fight, nor presently
after they have overcome, (but when they receive their bodies again to wear
them) but at the day of Christ's next appearing, which shall be a Coronation day
to all them that love that day; as the same Apostle's words do witness, 2 Timothy 4.7.8. I have fought (says he) a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith. Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me
only, but to all them that love his appearing. And in the 2 chap. of the same
Epistle also ver. 11.12. he thus plainly distinguishes the time of the Saints
reigning from the time of their suffering. It is a faithful saying: for if we
be dead with him, we shall also live with him. If we suffer, we shall also
reign with him. Here Mr. Petrie further excepts against two particulars in the
parenthesis of my foresaid words.

The 1 Particular. And shall not their bodies as well reign with Christ as
their souls? but these (we know) are, and shall be yet captives to the grave.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. When Christ shall come, the last enemy shall be
destroyed, and the bodies (and not the Souls, which dye not) shall be made
alive, and both shall be with him for ever.

Reply.

You should here have told us, whether the bodies of the Saints shall not
reign with Christ as well as their souls; in stead whereof you tell us, [that
their souls dye not, and that when Christ comes, their bodies shall be made
alive, and both bodies and souls shall be with him for ever.] I dare say this
answer was never learned in any approved school: and I believe indeed, that
this Querie did put you to a stand. For if you should have denied, that the
bodies of the Saints must reign as well as their souls, you could show no
reason for it. And if you should have granted it, you had herein denied your
own Tenet, to wit, that the Saints do now reign, because while they are in
this life, they suffer in their bodies all manner of distress, they are
hungry, thirsty, naked, scourged, buffeted, banished, tormented: and when their
souls depart out of this life, their bodies are left behind to moulder into
dust. So that neither while they are in the body, nor when they are out of the
body, are their bodies in a condition agreeable to a regal estate; to the
quiet, free, honorable, powerful, and delightsome estate of Kings; of such as
rule over others. Yea it is in regard of their bodily afflictions only, that
they are here of all men most miserable: and the spiritual conquest of their
souls, is indeed the principal occasion of men's tyrannizing over their bodies,
and of their conquering and destroying the life thereof.

The 2 Particular. Are the Saints that shall be found alive at Christ's coming
exempted from his Kingdom? for if he should reign till then, and then give up
his Kingdom to his Father, they are exempted.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. He is a King till then, and governs all who are, and
shall be: and when he shall come, they who shall be found alive, shall be
caught up to meet him. And because the clearing of this point, may serve for
clearing the whole matter, I add by way of explanation. As the sin of Adam
was committed against God the Father, and his revolting or apostasy was a
diminution of the Fathers Kingdom, so the bringing of the faithful into his
obedience, is the rendering of that Kingdom. It is true, the offense was
against the Son, and Holy Spirit: but the work of the creation, being the
work of the Father in a special manner, (as it is intimated in the Creed)
the sin was directly against the first Person. When obedience was not given,
the Father might have executed his justice on the offenders, as he did on the
Angels. Now as when a part of an earthly Kingdom rebelleth against the King
directly, and indirectly against his Son, as a friend, and heir of his
Fathers Crown: the Son may undertake to regaine the rebels unto his Father,
and the Father may be well pleased to commit unto his Son that part of the
Kingdom for that effect with full power, which the Son accepts, and
reigns, and prevails powerfully: so that, albeit, the arch-traitour
gain-stand in malice to the honor of the Ring, and his Son, yet many of the
rebels are reconciled with the King, who by this means regaineth his Kingdom:
So the Son of God has undertaken for so many as it pleased him, and
beseeches men to be reconciled with the King of heaven and earth, showing that
he has appeased the Fathers wrath, and has power to receive into, and exclude
from the Kingdom of heaven: which power he has received of the Father; and he
shows that there is a time determined for receiving men into grace again; So
that if that time shall expire, there is no more grace to be showed unto any;
Satan envieth the glory of God, and man's reconciliation, and therefore opposes
by deceiving some, and vexing others, who hearken unto the word of
reconciliation: nevertheless Christ prevails by his preaching, so that a
great many repent, and crave mercy, and others not: when the determined time
comes, these who have been received into mercy, are presented unto God the
Father, and as if they had not rebelled, he accepts them into his Kingdom:
when the Son says, Here am I, and these whom I have brought into
acknowledgement of their offenses: I have satisfied justice for them, Thou O
Father have thine own Subjects, and let them have the Kingdom prepared for
them: The Father will not say, thy reward is not in heaven, but on earth:
therefore let them go again to the earth, and inherit glory there for a 1000
years: but receives them into the inheritance reserved for them in the heavens.

Reply.

This answer is as much besides the question as the other: for the argument is,
That if Christ does now reign, and shall reign only till his coming, then
those Saints which shall be found alive at his coming shall be exempted from
his Kingdom, shall not reign with him, as the Saints departed did reign with
him. To which you say no more but this, [That they shall be caught up to meet
him.] And besides, seeing our Savior is not to give up his Kingdom to his
Father, till after his next appearing, and that the time of his reign is to be
but a 1000 years; it must needs follow, (according to your opinion) that not
only all the Saints before his incarnation, but that the Apostles themselves
too, and all the rest of the Saints that have been converted within the first
six hundred years and upwards since his incarnation, must be excluded from his
Kingdom. And yet doubtless both the Saints before Christ's first coming, and
the Saints under the first ages of the Gospel, have all reigned spiritually,
as well as the Saints since that time. They have been conquerours I say, over
sin, and over sufferings for obedience unto Christ, in as eminent manner, as
any Saints since have been, (if not more eminently,) as in the 11 chap. to the
Heb. the Acts of the Apostles, and the Ecclesiastical histories do testify.
And therefore that reign of the Saints revealed in the 20 chap. of the Apoc.
as a reign to come, and to be but of a 1000 years continuance, must needs be
meant of some other reign: and consequently of a proper and politic reign on
earth, at the redemption of their bodies. But lest the reader should take
notice that you have nothing to say to these arguments, you annexe unto your
indirect answer, a long discourse; whereof that of the Apostle, Romans 5.19. As
by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one
shall many be made righteous: is the whole sum. And in this discourse which
you call [a clearing of the whole matter.] There are these notable passages.
For first you rell us, [that Adams revolting was a diminution of the Fathers
Kingdom.] whereas indeed it made way for the salvation of those whom God had
predestined unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, of which number
not one was diminished by Adams apostasy: for as many as God had purposed to
save before man's fall, so many and no more will he make heirs with Christ,
will he make partakers of the Kingdom prepared for them from the beginning of
the world. Secondly, you tell us, [That the bringing of the faithful into the
obedience of the Father, is the rendering of the Kingdom unto him.] And so you
make Christ's reign, and the rendering of his Kingdom to the Father, to be all
one, and to contemporate; whereas the giving up of his Kingdom, must needs
succeed the time of his reign: for to cease from governing a Kingdom, must
needs presuppose a preceding government of it. Yea and you your self say
afterward, [That when the determined time comes, these who have been received
into mercy, are presented unto God the Father -- when the Son says, Here I
am, and these whom I have brought into the acknowledgment of their offenses, I
have satisfied justice for them, Thou O Father have thine own Subjects, and
let them have the Kingdom prepared for them.] Wherein you plainly
acknowledge, that the rendering up of the Kingdom to the Father, is to be when
the number of the elect is fulfilled, when these who have before been received
into mercy, are all presented unto God the Father, with spotless and
incorruptible bodies and souls. Which is a flat contradicting of your former
words, to wit, That the receiving of the faithful into mercy, that the
bringing of them into the Fathers obedience at their conversion, is the
rendering of Christ's Kingdom. Thirdly, you tell us, [That Adams revolting was a
sin directly against the Father.] Whereas the works of power being chiefly
attributed unto the Father, the works of wisdom unto the Son, and of love
unto the Holy Ghost; The sins of infirmity, and weakness are most direct
against the first Person: the sins of ignorance and unadvisednesse most
direct against the second Person: and the sins of wilfulness and malice,
most direct against the third Person. And did Adam fall out of weakness, when
(as all Divines agree) he had ability to stand? or out of ignorance, when he
knew that he did what he was forbid to do? or rather out of wilfulness, when
notwithstanding his power to have withstood temptation, and his knowledge of
the unlawfulness of the act; he yet yielded to do what he should noth^ve
done? Fourthly, whereas the rebellion of mankind against God is general: you
compare it only with the rebellion of a part of an earthly Kings Subjects.
Fifthly, from this defective comparison, you make Christ to reign but over a
part of his Fathers Kingdom; whereas he is to deliver up a whole Kingdom to
the Father, and not a part of a Kingdom only; and doubtless he must reign
over all that he delivers up. Yea although you here make Christ to reign only
over a part of his Fathers Kingdom, and say also, [That the areh-traytour
gain-stands in malice to the honor of the King and his Son: that Satan still
opposes by deceiving some, and vexing others:] yet you say page 7. That Christ
is great over all the world, seeing all the Gentiles do praise him, and all
people land him. And page 52. That he has made all Kingdoms of the world
acknowledge his authority, and has put down all contrary power and authority,
etc. And page 58. That now is no Kingdom but our Lords and his Christ's. And
page 40. That his enemies are made subject to him, even his greatest enemies.
So contrary are you to the truth, and to your self. Sixthly and lastly, you
tell us, [ That at the delivering up of our Saviors Kingdom, the Father will
not say, Thy reward is not in heaven, therefore let them go again into the
earth, and inherit glory for a 1000 years.] And doubtl^sse he will not. For
when our Savior shall give up his Kingdom to the Father, his own Kingdom on
earth shall be fulfilled. And we say, that his Kingdom is to begin at his
appearing, when none but the Saints then departed shall rise: and not at the
last judgment, when all others shall rise, as you to delude the reader do
purposely misunderstand us. And so your pretended explication of the whole
matter, is indeed no other, but an intended implication of a plain truth.

Israel's Redemption. Of this Kingdom also speaks Saint Peter, in Acts 3.19.
Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out,
when the 1 Pet. 1.13.
times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and he shall
send Jesus Christ, which was before preached unto you, Luke 19 11, 12. etc.
whom the heavens must receive until the times of restitution of all things,
which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Rev. 10.7.
prophets si^ce the world began: where if by [the times of refreshing, and
times of restitution of all things] nothing else can be meant, but the Jowes
inhabi^ing ag^ine of their ow^e land, and the bringing of all other Nations
into subjection to them, (with which a blessed and wonderful change of the
creatures shall concur) then it is evident, that when Christ comes at this
time, he shall accomplish this thing to Israel; and consequently receive his
appointed Kingdom: but that these words can have no other meaning, a small
acquaintance with the Prophets will inform you: who as they speak of nothing
more, so they have nothing which can be applied to our Saviors second coming,
as a comfortable effect so generally foreshewne, but this.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. I am sure, no man can imagine that these words in
themselves import, that our Savior shall reign among the Jews as an earthly
Monarch: which is the point. page 45. And therefore this, if by the time, etc.
is as if one would say, If I be a King, I am a King. 2. That the Prophets have
another meaning, may be seen by all interpreters, and partly by that is said
here. 3. It is wonder, if any Jew will say, that the Prophets speak of nothing
more; for if his meaning be, They speak not more of any other thing, it is
questionable, seeing there is much spoken of Gods precepts: But if he do
mean, (as it seems) that they speak not of any other thing that can be
applied unto our Saviors coming, I will cite one Prophet for all, Dan. 2.1,
2. Where is mention of the great Prince, of great trouble even to the time of
deliverance, and then awaking of some (not for a space of time, but) to
everlasting life, and of others (at the same time) unto shame and everlasting
contempt. And is not this a more comfortable effect foreshewne generally unto
every one, that shall be written in the book? Now the cause why the Prophets
write so much of Jerusalem, and that Kingdom to be restored, was, That the
godly hearing of the destruction of that Kingdom, did greatly fear, that that
Commonwealth should never be restored, wherein Christ our Savior was to be
borne, and perform the work of redemption: we may justly think, that their
fear was not so much the want of bodily liberty, as the not coming of our
Savior: and therefore the Prophets insist much upon that point for the comfort
of the godly, that howsoever that Kingdom shall be ruined, yet it shall be
restored, and all Nations shall by the preaching of Jews come into the
obedience of Christ, and so receive laws from the Jews, as being captives
unto them, whose captives they might be for a time. But to imagine that the
faithful did expect, and the Prophets did speak of no other thing but this
earthly Monarchy, is too gross, and directly contradicting the Apostles
bearing another testimony of them, Heb. 11.16. They desire a better country,
that is, heaven. And 1 Pet. 1.9, 10. Receiving the end of your faith, even the
salvation of your souls: Of which salvation the Prophets have enquired and
searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should came unto you, etc.

Reply.

1. If these words in themselves import not, that our Savior shall reign
among the Jews as a Monarch on earth: yet compared with the prophecies to
which they do direct us for an explanation of [the times of refreshing, and
times of restitution of all things,] ^hey do certainly import as much. And
this form, If by the times of refreshing, and times of restitution, etc. the
Jews restoring to, and prosperity in their land, must needs be meant, th^n it
is evident, that when he comes at these times, he shall accomplish this unto
Israel, is not to prove (idem per idem,) the same thing by the same thing, as
you untruely affirm. But this form, If by the times of refreshing etc. the
Jews restoring to, and prosperity in their land be meant, then by the times of
refreshing, etc. the Jews restoring to, and prosperity in their land is meant.
And your silence touching the meaning of the times of refreshing, and the times
of restitution of all things does manifest, that you did thus traduce the form
of this argument, only because you could not g^insay the evidence f it.

page 23. T at a^l interpreters (except a few Millenaries) have expounded the
prophecies touching the Jews future prosperity in their own land, of the
Jews only. And you say here, [That all (without exception) have said, that
the Prophets have another meaning.] But surely we have showed that such
interpreters cannot prove what they say. Yea seeing it is evident by Saint
Peter's words here, That our Savior shall not come again till the times of
refreshing, etc. and that it is as evident by the writings of the Prophets, (to
which the Apostle directs us for an interpretation of these times) that nothing
appliable to our Saviors second coming, (as a comfortable effect) is
foreshewed by them all, besides the pious and prosperous establishment of the
Jews in their own land: It necessarily follows, first, That this is meant by
the times of refreshing, etc. And secondly, That the prophecies touching this
subject, are properly and historically to be understood. I say historically,
for what is a prophecy, but an history of things to come, as a Chronicle is an
history of things past?

Jews; so naught which can be applied to our Saviors second coming as a
comfortable effect, is foreshewed by them all, but this. Which last words you
purposely misapprehend, that you might have somewhat to say. For whereas I have
said only, That there is no comfortable effect belonging to Christ's second
coming, which all the Prophets have foreshewed, but this. You make me say,
that none of the Prophets have spoken of any other thing, that can be applied
to our Saviors coming, but this. And then you bring an instance out of Dan.
12.1, 2. [ Where, you say, is mention of the great Prince, of great trouble,
even to the time of deliverance, and then awaking of some, (not for a space of
time, but) to everlasting life, and of others, (at the same time) unto shame
and everlasting contempt.] But surely as the matter of the first Parenthesis is
not affirmed by us, so the contents of the last are but a false gloss. For
though the Proph^t s^ith, That many of them that sl^epe in the dust of the
earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt; yet he says not, that all these shall ^ise at the same particular
time. And the first verse, which shows that the great Prince shall stand for
the children of Daniels people, and that they shall at that time be delivered,
(every one that shall be found written in the book, that is, That God has
appionted to be delivered) does plainly intimate, that the Jews shall be then
greatly hated and oppressed by other Nations (as the two last verses of the
preceding chapter compared with Rev. 16.12, 13, 14, 16. and with the 7 chap. of
this prophecy, and other prophecies do plentifully declare) and consequently
it does foretell, that which we affirm to be meant by the [times of
refreshing,] to wit, the deliverance of the Jews, (of Daniels people,) both
from their spiritual and bodily bondage: For why else is the deliverance of
the Jews only spoken of, who have so long been, and still are captives both
to unbelief, and to other Nations? strangers to Christ, and to their own
country? And whereas you tell us, [That the restoring of the Kingdom of
Israel, was so often revealed by the Prophets rather to keep the Jews from
the distrust of our Saviors coming, thou to comfort them against the loss of
their bodily liberty, and native inheritance.] Doubtless it was rather for
this, then for the other; seeing they did reveal also many particular
prophecies, touching our Saviors incarnation; which revelations did more
directly confirm their belief of Christ's coming, then those touching the
deliverance of their posterity, and the restoring of their Kingdom to them,
could. And seeing you confess here, [That the prophecies touching the
restoring of Jerusalem, and that Kingdom, did concern the Commonwealth of
Israel, which was afterward destroyed,] You do herein apparently admit of
that proper sense of the prophecies, which you have before so much opposed. For
the d^struction of a temporal Kingdom cannot be repaired, but by the
regaining of that freedom, and command which it formerly enjoyed. And yet you
presently recall this; for having said, [That howsoever that Kingdom shall be
ruined, yet it shall be restored*] you add immediately, [And all Nations shall
by the preaching of the Jews come into the obedience of Christ, and so receive
laws from the Jews, as being captives unto them, whose captives they might be
for a time.] So that you speak forward and backward, all in a breath, and are
as one in the midst of a bog, who knows not where to fix his foot. For first
you grant, that the Kingdom of whose restoration the Prophets write so much,
was the temporal Kingdom of the Jews; and by and by you make the restoring
of this temporal Kingdom, to be the converting of the Gentiles by the
preaching of the Gospel, which is a very ridiculous impossibility. And as this
your inconstancy, so your expression is observable: for first, though you
understand that which you speak of, to be already past, yet you deliver it in
the future tence, and as hereafter to be fulfilled; And secondly, yoy say,
[That the Nations shall by the preaching of the Jews -- become captives unto
them.] But surely the state of grace is very unfitly termed a captivity, seeing
it brings with it the greatest freedom, the freedom of the conscience. For
where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, says the Apostle, 2 Cor.
3.17. And if the calling of men to the faith of Christ, should make them
captives; I pray, what will become of the spiritual reign of the Saints,
which is all the reigning that you allow them under Christ? And besides, the
Prophets words, That the Jews shall possess the Gentiles in the land of the
Lord for servants, and for handmaides, that they shall take them captives,
whose captives they were, and shall rule over their oppressors; do plainly
show that the Gentiles shall be captives to the Jews, in the like manner as
the Jews were to the Gentiles; to wit, by a bodily subjection, and captivity:
which cannot be wh^le the Jews themselves remain captives under the Gentiles.
And therefore we do truly imagine, that the faithful did expect, and the
Prophets in their revelation touching Jerusalem, and that Kingdom to be
restored, did speak of a monarchy on earth. Neither does this imagination
contradict any testimony of the Apostles, touching the expectation of the
faithful before Christ's incarnation. For who will say that this antecedent of
S. Paul, Heb. 11.14, 15, 16. The Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, did, in
their corruptible condition, when they lived as strangers and pilgrims on the
earth, desire a better country, that is, a^ heavenly (for so the Apostle
interprets himself, and not as you do) will bear this consequence; Therefore
when they shall rise in incorruption, they shall not reign on earth a 1000
years? Or that this, proposition of Saint Peter, 1 Ep^st. chap. 1. ver. 9.
etc. The believing Jews did by faith in Christ receive the salvation of their
souls; (of which salvation, when it should be purchased by the sufferings of
Christ, (and when conferred upon the whole Nation of the Jews,) the Prophets
which prophesied of the grace that should come unto the Jews, did enquire, and
search diligently) will infer this conclusion; Therefore at the redemption of
their bodies, at the perfecting of their salvation through the revelation of
Jesus Christ, they shall not reign with Christ on earth?

Israel's Redemption And here we may call to mind too, our Saviors words to
James and John, when they requested that one might sit on his right hand, and
the other on his left in his Kingdom. To sit on my right hand, and on my left,
said he, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them, for whom it is
prepared of my Father.

Mr. Petrie's answer. We may call to mind too his words, ye know not what you
ask, Matthew. 20.22. and the words of the Evangelist, ver. 24. When the ten
heard it, they were moved with indignation against the brethren. Which words
show that howbeit Christ had spoken of his Kingdom, yet at that time James and
John were both ignorant and ambitious.

Reply.

You tell us here, that we may call to mind too our Saviors reprehensive
words, Matthew. 20.22. and the Evangelists words, ver. 24. touching the
indignation of the ten against the brethren. But surely it is best to call to
mind the truth, which as it is plainly taught in our Saviors direct answer,
ver. 23. so it is necessarily employed in the other disciples indignation, who
doubtless would rather have marvelled at the strangeness of their suite, then
have been any whit offended with them for it, had they sought that which no man
should at any time enjoy. And therefore although you may charge the two
brethren with ambition, for seeking to be preferred above the other disciples:
and with an erroneous conceit touching our Saviors unlimited choice of the
persons, that should sit at his right and left hand; yet you cannot charge them
with ignorance touching the subject and matter of their request, to wit, that
there were such places to be had, which they aimed at.

Israel's Redemption. Which saying, as it does show that our Savior had before
acquainted the Apostles of his Kingdom: so it intimates, that his Kingdom is
to be held on earth, where only this may be fulfilled: for in heaven it cannot
be done, unless we will grant, that other men shall be as highly exalted
there, as our Savior is, to wit, to the right hand of God.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. Albeit never one shall sit on his right hand nor his
left, yet nothing in these words is for this purpose, seeing he says not
there, that any shall sit, but only, To sit on my right hand -- is not mine to
give. 2. Matthew. 19.28. he speaks of sitting on the Throne of his glory, (which
must be in heaven, seeing he speaks absolutely, his glory, and his glory is
greater in heaven, then can be on an earthly Throne.) And he says unto his
Disciples, When he shall sit on that Throne, ye who have followed me in the
regeneration, shall sit upon twelve thrones. And may not some of these thrones
be on his right hand, and some on his left hand? I enquire not now, what these
thrones may be, but there ye see multitude of thrones in glory, as Kings in
their State may have thrones for their greatest Peers.

Reply.

1. Doubtless if never one shall sit on Christ's right hand, nor his left:
there can be nothing in our Saviors answer to prove this; for no scripture
does teach, that that shall be done, which is never to be done. But how shall
we know whether any shall sit at his right hand, and his left, but from
scripture? And if the scripture is to be sole Judge in this case, (as indeed it
is,) our Saviors answer is an unquestionable evidence to prove this. For he
says, not only (as you answer for him) It is not mine to give; but he says,
It is not mine to give but to them for whom it is prepared of my Father. What!
were the places on his right hand and on his left, then prepared of his Father,
to be given by him to some; and yet can you say, that never one shall sit on
his right hand, nor his left; and, that nothing in these words is for this
purpose? Alas, that of all Gentiles, a Christian: of all Christians, a scholar:
of all scholars, a Divine should so wilfully and presumptuously bear false
witness against Christ himself.

2. It Is true, that Matthew. 19.28. our Savior speaks of sitting on the Throne
of his glory: and that he said unto his Disciples, when he should sit on that
Throne, they also should sit (not on multitude of Thrones, but) on twelve
Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. And therefore that Throne of his
glory is not to be in heaven, (as you say,) but on earth, (as we say,) seeing
neither our Savior, nor the Disciples shall judge any in heaven And we
willingly grant that some of these Thrones are to be on his right hand, and
some on his left. And therefore we say also, that they cannot be in heaven,
because then some of the disciples, (if not all) should be as highly exalted
there, as our Savior, to wit, to the right hand of God. Which is a dignity
that no creature but the Son of man shall have.

Israel's Redemption. Which is a Prerogative peculiar to the Son alone, a
pre-eminence, I say, which the chiefest of the Angels never enjoyed. For to
which of the Angels said he at any time, Sit on my right hand, until I make
thine enemies thy footstool, Heb. 1.13.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. Christ sitting on a Throne, sits on the right hand of
God: but to speak absolutely, To sit on a Throne in heaven, is not to sit on
the right hand of God, no more then any Prince is advanced to the right hand of
a King, albeit be sit on a Throne, and inferior to the King, and his eldest
Son.

Reply.

It Is true, that Christ sits on a Throne in heaven, as he himself says, Rev.
3 21. and it is true likewise, that he sits on the right hand of God, as the
Apostle says, Heb. 1.13. and chap. 10. ver. 12. but it is not true, that I
have said, To sit on a Throne, is to sit at the right hand of God. And
therefore this instance, (as it is alleged by you) being a mere perverting of
my words: you answer your self, not me. And yet your answer is but a bundle of
superfluous words. For who knows not, that to sit on a Throne only, is one
thing; and to sit on a Throne at the right hand of a King, is another thing?
and therefore that though to sit on a Throne only, be not to be advanced to
the right hand of a K ng: yet to sit on a Throne, (or out of a Throne) at the
right hand of a King, is to be advanced to the right hand of a King. As
Bathsheba was to the right hand of her son Solomon, 1 King. 2.19.

Israel's Redemption. And the same Apostles words, in 2 Timothy 4. may not be
forgotten: I charge thee, says he, before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearing and his Kingdom. For why
should Christ's appearing, and his Kingdom be joined together: yea, why should
his Kingdom be added, as the end of his appearing, unless both were to
contemporate? unless his Kingdom were to begin at his appearing, and not
before it?

Mr. Petrie's Answer. The men^ioning these two together and in that order, does
no more import such a beginning, then the end of glory is the beginning of
virtue, because the Apostle says, in the same order, he has called us unto
glory and virtue, 2 Pet. 1.3. howbeit glory be named before virtue glory is
after virtue.

Reply.

Although the end does always precede the means to the end, in the intention,
and in this text of Saint Peter in the expression also: yet (as we say not that
Christ's appearing is the like medium to his Kingdom, as virtue is to honor,
so) we deny, that the order of Saint Paul's words, in 2 Timothy 4.1. is like to
this of Saint Peter's; and that our Saviors appearing is the end for which he
is to reign. For that our Savior is to reign, that he may appear, there is
no scripture to testify: but that he is to appear that he may reign, not
only this text of Saint Paul, but many prophecies do witness, as that of
Zech. 14.4. etc. which shows that he shall reign on earth after his coming
with the Saints. And that Rev. 11* 15. which shows that at the time of his
descending, the Kingdoms of this world are to become his: and that Rev. 19,
which shows in what manner the Kingdoms of this world are to become his, to
wit, by destroying the Kings and mighty men on the earth in battle, and giving
their flesh to the fowls of heaven. And that Rev. 20.2.3. which shows that
after these Kings are thus destroyed, and their Kingdoms obtained, Christ
shall shut up Satan in the bottom^esse pit the space of a 1000 years. And
lastly, that prophetical parable, Luke 19 11. etc. which was purposely spoken
against the false opinion of the Jews, who even generally thought, that
Christ's Kingdom should immediately appear. For it declares plainly, that the
Nobleman went into a far country, (not to reign, but) to receive a
Kingdom, and to return: and that when he was returned, and had ^eceived his
Kingdom: h^ gave to one servant authority over ten cities, and to another ^^er
five, etc. And slew those that would not that h^ should reign over them. and
is not this all one as if he had said, that he was not to reign then whilst
he was among them, (as they expected,) nor in the time of his absence from them
in heaven: but when he should return to them again from heaven? And besides,
that our Saviors Kingd me is to begin at his appearing, and not before (and
so according to the order of the Apostles words) it is evident, in that it is
said, Who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearing, and his
Kingdom. Where by the judging of the quick and the dead, (which necestarily
follows his appearing,) is showed to be his employment in his Kingdom. The
judging, I say, of his enemies that would not that he should reign over them,
by a temporal, (but terrible) destruction at the beginning of his Kingdom,
(as the foresaid parable, and the prophecies of Zech. 14. and John 19. and
others do declare.) And the judging of his Subjects, by a civil judgment in
the time of his reign, (as the same parable likewise, and the Thrones of
judgment promised to his Disciples, and to them that overcome, and all the
Prophecies of his and the Saints reign on earth, do manifest.) And the
judging again of his rebellious subjects by a temporal, (but total)
destruction, when his 1000 years peaceful reign is expired, (as the Prophecy
Rev. 20.7, 8, 9. does show.) And lastly, his judging of all both good and bad,
at the delivering up of his Kingdom to God even the Father, at the last
resurrection of the dead: when he shall pronounce the definitive sentence of a
perfect and complete salvation to the one part, to the elect: and of a perfect
and complete condemnation to the other part, to the reprobate. According as it
is largely exp^est, Matthew. 25.32. etc. and as it is employed Rev. 20.15. in
these words, And whosoever was not found written in the book of life, was cast
into the lake of fire.

Israel's Redemption. And to my seeming, that prophetical image in the 2 of
Dan. ver. 13. which represented both the orderly succession, and diver
secondition of all the then following Kingdoms of this world, unto the Kingdom
of Christ, (shadowed there unto us, by the stone that was cut out without
hands,) does give good light to this of Saint Paul. For in what manner those
Kingdoms have succeeded each other: in the like manner is the Kingdom of
Christ to succeed them, as appears by the same phrase of speech, which is
attributed as well to the setting up of this Kingdom, as to any of them, to
wit, That it shall break in pieces and consume all those Kingdoms. Ver. 34,
35 44, 45.
And therefore s^eing these words are meant of a conquest, and succession by
force of Arms in all the former Kingdoms; how can they be otherwise
understood, in this of Christ, which is to succeed them all, (as they have
succeeded each other) both in time and place, as ver. 35. does fully declare?

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. In the seeming of many millions, that image does not
signify a temporal Monarchy of the Jews, which is the point in hand: and the
seeming of so many, contrary to the seeming of one, might satisfy for all that
long discourse following: nevertheless I add, albeit these four Kingdoms
did succeed one another, ye^ the Kingdom of Christ did not succeed, or was the
last of them, or after them in time: for it is written, ver. 41. In the days
of these Kings, [not after them,] shall the God of heaven set up a Kingdom,
which shall never be destroyed, and it shall break in pieces the iron, the
brass, the clay, silver and gold. It shall break the silver and the gold:
then it shall be before the brass and the iron. And of what King can that be
understood but of Christ, who says Isai. 10.12. I will punish the stout heart
of the King of Assyria, and chap. 37.29. Because of thy rage against me -- I
will put my hook in thy nose, etc. 2. Whereas it is alleged, that the 35.
ver. does fully declare that succession in time and place: certainly the 35.
ver. is not contrary to the 44. ver. which shows plainly that this Kingdom
shall be in the days of these Kings, and break them in pieces: and therefore
these words, shall break them in pieces, signify a conquest by power, but
neither by succession in time, nor by force of arms.

Reply.

1. You were here a little too hasty in your answer, for surely I do not say,
That this image does signify a temporal Monarchy of the Jews: but I say,
That our Savi^ur (prefigured by the stone, that brake the image in pieces, and
became a great mountain filling the whole earth,) shall set up in the place of
the four Monarchies, (represented by the gold, the silver, the brass, and the
iron,) and of the Kingdoms (represented by the mixture of iron and clay,) into
which the last, and iron Monarchy was to be divided; a Kingdom over all the
world; (which is the point in hand.) And whereas to prove that the Kingdom of
Christ here foretold, was not to succeed these Kingdoms, you allege ver. 44.
in which it is said, In the days of these Kings shall the God o^ heaven set up
a Kingdom, which shall never be dest^ yed: and the Kingdom shall not be^^eft
to other people, but it sh ll break in pieces, and consume all these
Kingd^mes, (the iron, the b ass, the clay, the silver, and the gold,) and it
shall stand forever. Certai^ely you could not have urged a plainer text to
prove the contrary. For first seeing the Prophet says, that the Kingdom here
spoken of, is to be set up in the days of these Kings, that is, after the iron
Roman Empire should be divided, (as the preceding verses declare,) the setting
of it up, cannot possibly be meant of a Kingdom to be set up at our Saviors
first coming; and consequently not of the preaching of the Gospel by the
Apostles. For this was done while the Empire was entire, and in its height: it
being in the reign of Augustus Caesar that Christ was borne, and of Tiberius
that he was crucified. And therefore the Kingdom that was to be set up after
this Empire should be divided into several Kingdoms; and yet not pr^sently
after, but in the days of these Kingdoms; that is, after they should be of
some remarkable continuance, must needs be understood of ou^ Saviors visible
reign on earth, to whose kingdom, these Kingdoms shall give place, as the
former Kingdoms did successively to each other. And secondly, seeing the
Prophet says, That the Kingdom shall not be left to other people: It
necessarily follows, that when the God of heaven shall set up this Kingdom,
some one people shall have the sway over all other people, from whom the
dominion shall not be taken away, as it was from the successively prevailing
Nations of the four severa l Empires. And what people should this be, (in
whose hands the rule shall continue so firm and steadfast,) but the Jews, the
people of whom Christ (the person, prefigured by the stone cut out without
hands, har should smite the image) was to be borne? And to wh^m (at the
expiration of the time allot^^d to the four Kingdom s, revealed in another
vision, chap. 7.) The Kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of the
Kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given, ver. 27? And thirdly, seeing
the Prophet says, That this Kingdom shall break in pieces, and consume all
other Kingdoms, to w^^, the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the
gold it is ma^ifest, that it is by it self alone to succeed, and follow after
all these: for how shall all these be broken in pieces by it, if this be not to
succeed them in the place where it breaks them in pieces? And how shall all
these be so consumed by it, that no place shall be found for them; if either of
them shall continue with it? And fourthly, seeing it is unquestionable that the
Kingdoms which the image represented, and which this Kingdom should break in
pieces, were all temporal and visible Kingdoms: It must needs be granted,
that this Kingdom by which these temporal Kingdoms were to be destroyed, and
succeeded in their place, (for the stone having smote the image filled the
whole earth,) must it self be a visible, and (for the place and manner of
government) a temporal Kingdom also, Because no temporal and political
Kingdom can be overthrown, and succeeded in its place, but by another of the
like nature overmastering it. You go on and say, [ It shall break in pieces
the silver and gold, then it shall be before the brass and iron: And of what
King, say you, can that be understood, but of Christ, who says, Isai. 10.12. I
will punish the stout heart of the King of Assyria* and chap. 37. ver. 29.
Because of thy rage against me, I will put my hook in thy nose, etc.] Here are
a few words, but full of very gross and contradictory untruths. For first,
h^ving immediately before recited out of the Prophet, It shall break in pieces
the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; You presently
affirm, [It shall break the silver and the gold, then it shall be before the
brass and the iron.] And shall we believe you when you speak against the
Prophet, or when you speak with the Prophet? When you say of your self, It
shall break in pieces, and succeed but two of the four Empires; or when you
say, as the Prophet does, that it shall succeed and break in pieces the whole
image, all four Empires, and the Kingdoms of the last divided Empire?
Secondly, in saying that the stone (the type of our Saviors manhood) was to be
before the brass and the iron, you make Christ to be borne before the Grecian
Empire was in being; whereas it is evident by the history of the Gospel, that
he was borne in the days of the Roman Empire, to which the Jews were then
tributaries. Thirdly, by the instances which you bring out of Isai. 10.12. and
chap. 37. ver. 29. etc. to co^s^^ me your argument. You first make the stone to
be Christ in his Godhead, (to whom you attribute this threatening,) and not in
his manhood, of which alone it is to be understood (For the stone cut out
without hands, is Christ borne of a Virgin: and the mountain out of which he
was cut, is the Jewish Nation, the Inhabitants of Mount Sion, the place which
God had chosen to put his Name there.) And secondly, you hereby make the
accomplishment of the vision, (which showed things then to come) to be before
the revelation of it. For the threatening against Senacherib was fulfilled
before Judah's captivity: and this vision was in the time of their captivity
under Nebuchadnezzar, who was the head of gold in the image. And thirdly, you
make the destruction of the Assyrian Empire to be by an extraordinary means,
by an Angel sent from God; whereas it was by an ordinary means, by the army of
Cyrus Prince of the M^des and Persians: And what could you have said more
contrary to the dream, and the interpretation thereof, then all this?

2. You have nothing to say against the evidence of ver. 35. which shows that
the Kingdom of Christ was to succeed the four Empires in time and place, as
they had succeeded each other, (to wit, by force of arms,) but this, [ that
ver. 35. is not contrary to ver. 44. And doubtless it is not, nor ver. 44. to
such a setting up of our Saviors Kingdom, as we hold. For whereas you say,
That this Kingdom shall be set up in the days of these Kings, and not after
them.] It is as if you had told us, That a King cannot overcome, and succeed
other Kings in their Kingdoms, while they reign, but after their reign. When
as indeed they cannot lose their Kingdoms, but while they have them: but in
the days of their reign, and not after them. And so you have not yet showed
us any reason, why this phrase, [It shall break in pieces and consume these
Kingdoms,] should not as well be taken properly, when it is attributed to the
setting up of our Saviors Kingdom, as when it is attributed to the setting up
of the other Kingdoms. And therefore we have still good reason to believe,
that the forcible and destroying fall of the stone upon the image, does betoken
no less then a conquest and succession by force of arms.

Israel's Redemption. And as the falling of the stone upon the feece of the
image, upon the last, and divided Kingdoms of the iron Empire does probably
imply.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. The dream implies nothing contrary to the exposition:
and therefore leave probabilities that are contrary to certainties.

Reply.

Doubt less the dream implies nothing contrary to the exposition: but both
dream and exposition do point out our Saours personal reign on earth. For
the confirmation and manifestation of which truth, we bring not probabilities
only, but certainties too; yea such certainties, as all your wit and wiltnesse
are not able to answer, or obscure: and therefore me thinks you have no cause
to be offended with such variety of testimonies. And had I said also, that
this, which I called only a probability, had been more then a probability, I
had not overlasht. For seeing God by this image foreshewed Nebuchadnezzar what
Kingdoms should succeed his unto the second coming of Christ: (all which time
the Jews should remain captives, and tributaries.) And that the falling of
the stone on the feet of the image, did intimate both the second appearing of
Christ, (for the first was when he was borne of a Virgin, when he was cut out
without hands:) and the expiration of the time allotted to the Kingdoms
represented by the image: It necessarily follows, that when the stone should
fall on the image, (when the Kingdom of God should be set up, as it is
expounded,) the Kingdoms prefigured by the image, should be no longer, should
all be subdued: and that the mountain filling the whole earth, the visible and
Monarchical Kingdom of Christ on earth, should succeed alone.

Israel's Redemption. For if the Kingdom of God there spoken of, were to be
understood of a Kingdom, which should so be set up, in the days of these
Kings; that their reign should notwithstanding continue together with it, (as
not only these, but all former Kingdoms also have done with the Church
militant, with the Kingdom of grace: which therefore cannot be the Kingdom
there foreshewne,) then doubtless it should have been represented by some part
of the image it self, (as the contemporating Kingdoms of the divided Empire
are, by the mixture of iron and clay,) and not by a thing so different from it,
and adverse unto it; by a stone I say, so wonderful for it, beginn^ng,
operation* and increase. For it was cut out without hands: and when it had
smote the image, became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth. (Which
the Churches as yet never did,) whose fall and growth too, as they import a
more powerful, speedy and general conquest over these Kingdoms, by this
Kingdom, then either the gold received from the silver, the silver from the
brass, or the brass from the iron: so they imply the utter extirpation and
total abolition of that mann^r of policy, and government which these Kingdoms
have us^d; of which it is said, That they became like the ch^ffe of the Summer
threshing-flores, and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for
them, ver. 35. And with this sense of the interpretation of the vision, very
well agrees that in the second Psalm, ver. 8. Ask of me, and I shall give
thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth
for thy possession. Thou shall b^eak them with a rod Rev. 2.27. chapter 19.15.
of iron, thou shall dash them in peec^s like a p^tters vessel. And tha^ in
Psalm. 110.2. The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou
in the midst of thine enemies. The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through
Kings in the day of his wrath. He shall judge among the heathen, he shall sill
the places with dead bodies: he shall wound the heads over many Countries. He
shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall be lift up the head.
Yea, and that too, in Psalm. 149.2. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: let
the children of Zion be joyful in their King. Let the high praises of God be
in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand: to execute vengeance upon
the heathen, and punishments upon the people: To bind their Sam. 1.9.10, Psalm.
47. Psalm. 99.
Kings in chains, and their Nobles in fetters of iron, to execute upon them
the judgment written: This honor have all his Saints.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. Then teach God how he should^ eveale his will. 2. It
is revealed in express words, ver. 44.3. There was reason to express it by a
different thing, because the four were of one quality, and this was of another
quality: My Kingdom, (says he) is not of this world, John 18.36. It is more
wonderful, more powerful, and more general then any of them, and all the
Kings who will not serve this King shall perish, he shall break them with a
rod of iron, Psalm. 2.8. he shall strike them though in his wrath, Psalm. 110 5.
and bind them with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of iron, Psalm. 149.8.

Reply.

1. We leave this presumption to your self, who have so boldly told God, what
is most for his glory, page 15, 16. and what is most to the praise of his mercy
and bountifulness, page 68.

2. It is revealed in express words, ver. 44. That God shall set up a Kingdom
in the days of these Kings. But not that these Kings and the Kingdoms which
God shall set up, are to continue together. Yea the Kingdom of God could not
break in pieces these Kingdoms, could not succeed them by conquest, unless
they should be in the possession of their several Kings, when the Kingdom of
God is thus to be set up. And seeing these Kingdoms are to be broken in
pieces, are to be consumed, by the Kingdom which God shall set up; how can you
once imagine, that their conversion, and not their confusion: that their
instruction, and not destruction: that their amending, and not their ending, (I
mean only in respect of their former distinst titles and governments,) should
hereby be meant? Certainly you cannot find in all the scripture, nor in any
humane writer, such a signification of these words. And as for the Christian
belief, it does not alter the form of civil government in any Nation. But be
it Democraticall, Aristocraticall, or Monarchical, it agrees alike with all of
them. Yea it consisted in the primitive times with the profession of Pagans:
and does now consist in the Eastern Churches in the religion of the
Mahometans, so far is it (in its purity and integrity,) from teaching us to
disturb the peace of any Kingdom: to seek, I say, the suppression and
removeall of the government or religion thereof, by outward violence, by the
help of the sword. And therefore it cannot be said of the preaching of the
Christian faith, that it breaks in pieces, and consumes the Kingdoms in which
it is professed.

3. There was reason, you say, to express the Kingdom of God, ver. 44. by a
thing different from the image, because the four Kingdoms were of one
quality, and this of another. But doubtless, (as the four were no more of one
quality, then gold, silver, brass, and iron, are all of one quality, so)
though they were all of different qualities from this, yet this could not be
the reason wherefore the Kingdom of God, ver. 44. was represented by no part
of the image, but by a thing different from it: For if notwithstanding their
different qualities, they had been to continue together, (as you say) they
might notwithstanding this difference of qualities have been represented
together also: (as well as the contemporating Kingdoms of the divided Empire
are, by the mixture of iron and clay,) but the reason was, because the setting
up of this Kingdom should be the beginning of a new world; of a world in which
all the Kingdoms on earth should make but one Kingdom under Christ, when once
the time comprehended by the image, should be at an end, as it is said, ver.
35. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken
in pieces together, and became like the chafe of the Summers threshing-flores,
and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for them; And the
stone that smote the image, became a great mountain, and filled the whole
earth. And again ver. 44. But it shall break in pieces, and consume all these
Kingdoms, and it (not it with any other, but it alone) shall stand for ever.
And that text, John 18.36. My Kingdom is not of this world, does help also to
confirm this: for it either points out unto us the time of our Saviors
reign, or the authority by which he is to reign. And so is as if he had
either said thus, My Kingdom is not (to be now, in the time) of this world: in
the time before my next appearing: but hereafter in the time of that world to
come, spoken of Psalm. 8. that is, at the time of my appearing again: when all
creatures shall be actually put in subjection unto me. Or thus, My Kingdom
(that is, the authority by which I must reign,) is not (from hence, is not to
be given unto me,) of the world, (that is, of men,) but I am to have it from
God; I am to fetch it from him, and to come again, as it is in the parable,
Luke 19.11. etc. and in this sense the expression agrees very well with that
Querie, Matthew. 21.25. The baptism of John whence was it, from heaven, or of
men? And besides all this, the Kingdom of grace, of which you understand the
Kingdom which the God of heaven should set up, ver. 44. was set up at the
first promise of Christ, as you confess page 9. and so was in the world even
from the beginning: whereas that Kingdom ver. 44. was then to come, when this
vision was revealed to Nebuchadnezzar. And if you say, that the Kingdom, ver.
44. did represent the Kingdom of grace, as it was to be set up amongst the
Gentiles, at the preaching of the Gospel to them after our Saviors ascension:
Surely it was set up thus also before the division of the Roman Empire, and
therefore it cannot in this sense be the Kingdom meant in ver. 44. which was
to be set up after the division of the Empire: and when some of the Kingdoms
into which it was divided should be Christian, or rather Protestant Kingdoms,
as these words ver. 43. do intimate. And whereas thou saw iron mixed with
miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men: but they shall
not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay. And in the
days of these Kings (to wit, of these amongst whom some that are Christian or
Protestant Princes, shall mingle themselves with the seed of men, shall join
themselves in marriage with unbeleeving or misbeleeving Princes,) shall the God
of heaven set up a Kingdom which shall never be destroyed. And at the setting
up of this Kingdom it is, that the contents of Psalm. 2.8. and of Psalm. 110.2.
etc. and of Psalm. 149.2. etc. (which agree so well with the breaking of the
image in pieces,) shall be accomplished. And if their very expression does not
sufficiently declare, that they are properly to be understood; yet certainly
all the prophecies which foreshew the Gentiles subjection to the Jews do
render it unquestionable.

Israel's Redemption. And that naught else is meant by the world to come, in
Heb 2.5. but this Kingdom of our Savior, it is evident by the authority there
alleged out of Psalm. 8. which prophecy is therefore made use of by the
Apostle, as a plain proof, that Christ's manhood is exalted above the chiefest
of the Angels: because it shows, that it is to Christ as man, and not to any
of the Angels, that God has put in subjection the world to come.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. None denies it.

Reply.

If none denies, that the Kingdom of our Savior is to be in the time of the
world to come; why do you so much condemn us for believing this truth? and
why also do you affirm, flat against this truth, that it is now in this
present world?

Israel's Redemption. And if there be yet a world which is to be put in
subjection to Christ as man, then it must needs be a distinct world, from that
in 1 Cor. 15.24.28. Rev. 21.^.
which as man he shall give up the Kingdom to his Father.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. The Kingdom or the World, whereof the Apostle speaks
there, was then to come, not in respect of Christ, but of the Apostle: for he
means the Kingdom of heaven, as appears by these words, [whereof we speake]
which have relation to the words preceding, ver. 3. If we neglect so great
salvation: where he opponeth the Evangelicall promises unto the typical
promises: these was an earthly Canaan, and this is heaven. Christ at the time
of writing this Epistle, was in possession of it, and the Apostle did then hope
for the house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. And
therefore that world is not a distinct world, but even the same in which as
Mediator he shall give up the Kingdom to the Father.

Reply.

That the Apostle speaks of a world to come, as well in respect of Christ, as
of himself, it is evident, first from Psalm. 8.4. etc. which shows, that the
world, which the Apostle calls [the world to come,] is the world, in which
those works of God are, that he made for man to have dominion over: is the
world, I say, in which the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and the
fishes of the sea do inhabit. And secondly, it is clear from the original
word, by which it is expressed: which is not [(...)] the superior world, the
third heaven, (as you take it,) but [(...)] the inferior world, the
terrestrial globe, the dwelling place of men, and all other mortal creatures:
as we read Matthew. 24.14. and Acts 17.6.31. And therefore the Kingdom of heaven
in your sense, that is, Christ's possession of heaven, and his reigning over the
Saints departed, cannot possibly be meant by it; but the Kingdom of heaven in
our sense, that is, the heavenly Kingdom which Christ shall here visibly
reign over in time to come, In the day, (the great day) in which God has
appointed to judge [(...)] the world in righteousness by him, as it is Acts
17.31. that is, to execute judgment and justice on the earth, as the Prophet
Jeremiah expresses it, chap. 23. ver. 5. So that the Apostles words are, as if
he had said; For not unto the Angels has be appointed this inferior world,
(of which we spoke before chap. 1. ver. 6.) to be subject in time to come, but
unto Christ; as one in a certain place testified; saying, What is man that
thou art mindful of him, or the son of man, that thou visitest him? Thou
made him a little lower then the Angels, thou crownedst him with glory and
honor, and did set him over the works of thy hands, etc. And thus it is
manifest, that your referring of the words, [whereof we speak,] to ver. 3. is
but a private fancy crossing the Apostles explication of [the world to come,]
by the prophecy of David, Psalm. 8.4. etc. And imposing such a signification on
the word [(...)] as is not to be found in all the Scripture. And therefore we
still conclude, that the world which the Apostle speaks of, is to be a
distinct world in time, from this we now live in; and both in time and place,
from that in which our Savior shall give up his Kingdom to the Father. And as
for those, who by [the world to come,] do understand the time of the Gospel
betwixt Christ's first and second coming: they do hereby make the Apostle
either to call the time in which he himself lived, [the world to come,] or to
distinguish the time betwixt Christ's first and second coming into two worlds
at the least. Whereas the scripture does divide the whole time appointed to the
heavens and earth that now are, but into three worlds, or parts of time; the
first whereof contains the time from the creation to the flood, and is the old
world of which Saint Peter speaks, 2 Epist. chap. 2. ver. 5. the world long
since past. The second contains the time from the flood to our Saviors next
appearing, and is the world that now is. The third contains the whole day of
judgment, the 1000 years, and little season mentioned Rev. 20. which is to
begin at our Saviors next appearing, and to end with the world it self at
the last resurrection; and this is [the world to come] of which the Apostle
here speaks.

Israel's Redemption. For that which is to be given up, is already past.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. That which shall be given up is not past as yet: neither
shall it be given up altogether, but in some manner, as the Millenaries
acknowledge, at the end of their 1000 years.

Reply.

That which shall be given up is not past as yet, you say; true, and that which
shall begin, is not come as yet. But surely, it is false to say that we
acknowledge Christ's Kingdom shall not be given up altogether: that we
acknowledge I say, that Christ as man, as the Son of David, shall not then
cease to reign, when the generations of men, over which he must reign, shall
cease. And this earth on which he must reign, shall pass away. In a word,
when at the last resurrection he shall take the elect with him, into eternal
glory and delight, and turn the reprobate from him into endless horror and
contempt. For we know that the Apostle, in 1 Cor. 15.24.28 teaches otherwise,
saying, Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to
God even the Father, etc. And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then
shall the Son also himself he subject unto him that put all things un der
him, that God may be allin all.

Israel's Redemption. And it is no where said, that the new Jerusalem, the City
of eternal glory, shall be subjected to Christ as a creature: but that Christ
as a creature shall (after the judgment of the dead) be there subject to the
Father.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. He as God-man says, Matthew. 28. To me is given all power
in heaven and on earth. And thus all the consequences for proving the carthly
Monarchy of the Jews are naught.

Reply.

That the [(...)] the power our Savior speaks of Matthew. 28.18. was given to
him as man, and not as God, (for so he had it from all eternity) interpreters
agree. And what though all power in heaven and on earth was then given to
Christ as man? What does this make against my words, which affirm that Christ
as man shall after the judgment of the dead, after all things are subdued unto
him, surrender again this power, (as having no further use of it,) and in the
new Jerusalem, (not reign as man, but) be himself subject to the Father? Or
what does it make against Christ's 1000 years reign on earth, that he had then
all power in heaven and on earth given unto him? unless it will follow from
hence, that if he had been to reign visibly on earth, he might, and would have
done it at that time. But certainly this will not follow, for though our
Savior had then all power given him, yet he was to exercise it, to do all
that was to be done by it, in that order and manner which God had appointed it
to be done, and no otherwise. And therefore as we acknowledge, that God had
from all eternity the same power of creation, which in the beginning of this
world, be first of all put into act and exercise; so we acknowledge likewise,
that Christ has now that power by which he shall reign visibly on earth;
although he cannot put it into act until he descend to take the Kingdoms of
this world unto himself. Thus we find that he had power to lay down his
life, and power to take it again, before he did either, John 10.18. And that
all judg^ment, even the judgment of the great day, was committed unto him at
his first coming John 5.22. And thus it appears, that a^l your answers to the
consequ^nces by which we have proved our Saviors visible reign on earth, are
of no consequence at all.

ISREAL'S REDEMPTION. CHAP. II.
That Christ shall reign personally on Earth proved by express Prophecy.

Behold; says the Angel to the Virgin Mary, thou shall conceive in thy womb,
and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name Jesus: he shall be great, and
shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the Lord shall give unto him the
Matthew. 2.6. Acts 2.30.31.
Throne of his Father David, Luke 1.31. Behold, (says Jeremiah, in chap. 23.
ver. 5. etc.) the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a
righteous Branch, and a King shall Chapter 33.15.16.
reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment, and justice Isa. 8 8. Job
19.25. Hob. 1.2.
in the Whatsoever loss Luke 19.11, 12, 13.14. etc. Acts 3 19.20.21 Revel.
11.15. Romans 4.13. the disobedience of the first Adam brought on himself, and
his posterity, that no doubt the second Adam has recovered with advantage for
himself and his chosen. But the first Adam lost not only hi^ right to heaven,
but the happy estate too, which an innocent life would for a long time, have
continued to him, and his on earth. And therefore that intercourse and
familiarity with God, that rule and command over men, and all other creatures,
which Adam (before the advancement of mankind to it, highest happiness,)
should have here enjoyed, if he had not fell; that, and fore more then that,
shall Christ with hi^ chos^n inherit at his next appearing. And now seeing even
reason it self does thus strongly ^^ation for our Saviors future sovereignty,
what unreasonablenesse were it in us, any longer to ^bt the literal
accomplishment of these, and all other sacred revelations which so fully
describe, and ^^^^^earely confirm it?
earth. In hi^ days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and
this is his name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness.
Behold, (says Zech^^riah, in chap. 6. ver. 12.) the man whose name is the
Branch, and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the Temple of
the Lord, even he shall build the Temple of the Lord; and he shall bear the
glory, and shall sit and rule upon his Throne, and he shall be a Priest upon
his Throne, and the Counsel of peace shall be between them both. And in Ezekiel.
34.22. etc. I will save my flock, and they shall no more be a prey: and I will
judge between cattle and cattle, and I will set up one Shepherd over them:
and he shall feed them, even my Servat David, he shall feed them, and he
shall be their Shepherd. And I the Lord will be their God, and my Servant
David a Prince among them, I the Lord have spoken it. And in chap. 37. ver. 24.
etc. David my Servant shall be King over them, and they shall have one
Shepherd, and they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe my Statutes,
and do them: and they shall dwell in the Land that I have given unto Jacob my
Servant, wherein your Fathers have dwelt, and they shall dwell therein, even
they and their children for ever, and my Servant David shall be their Prince
for ever. And in Isai. 9.6. etc. Unto us a child is borne, unto us a Son is
given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder, and his Name shall be
called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the
Prince of peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no
end. Upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to
establish it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth even for ever:
the zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this. And in chap. 52. ver. 13.
etc. Behold my Servant shall deal prudently, he shall be Psalm. 118.22.23, 24.
etc.
exalted and extolled, and he very high. As many were 1 Luke 2.34, 35.
astonished at thee, ( his visage, (to wit, at the time of his suffering.) was so
marred more then any man, and his form more then the sons of men,) So (to
wit, at his next appearing,) shall he sprinkle many Nations, the Kings shall
shut their mouths as him: for that which had not been told them, shall they
see, and that which they had not heard, shall they consider. And in Micah 4.6.
etc. In that day, says the Lord, will I assemble her that halteth, and I will
gather her that is driven out, and ber that I have afflicted, and I will make
her that halted, a remnant; ^^^^ber that was cast far Rom (...) 15.32.
^ff, a strong Nation: and the Lord shall reign over them in Mount Zion from
henceforth even for ever. And in Psalm. 72.6. etc. He shall come down like
rain upon the mowne grass: as showers that water the earth* In his days
shall the righteous flourish: and abundance of peace so long as the Moon
endures. He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river to
the ends of the earth. They that dwell in the wilderness shall how before him:
and his enemies shall lick the dust. The Kings of Tarshish, and of the ^fles
shall bring presents: the Kings of Sheha and Seba shall offer gifts. Yea all
Kings shall fall Ps. 68.29.31. Isa. 45.22.23.
down before him: Psalm. 22.27.28. Phil. 2.10. Rev. 14.6, 7. chap. 15.4.
all Nations shall praise him. And in Psalm. 102.13. etc. Thou shall arise and
have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favor her, yea, the set time is come:
for thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof. So
the heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord, and all the Kings of the earth
thy glory. When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory.

Now that these prophecies conc^rne the reign of Christ alone, I think, no
man doubts: and that they are already fulfilled, it cannot be proved.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. These texts may prove something against your fellow Mr.
Archer, who thinks that Christ after he has put the Jews in possession of
their Monarchy, shall ascend again into the heavens, and the Jews in the
mean time shall reign till his third coming: But they prove nothing against
us, who hold that Christ reigns on the true Throne of David.

Reply.

This answer is a double confession of the truth you oppose; for first in
s^ying [ That these texts prove something against Mr. Archer, who thinks that
Christ after he has put the Jews in possession of their Monarchy shall ascend
again into the heavens,] you plainly acknowledge, that they prove his abode
amongst them to govern their restored Kingdom. And consequently, that you
your self are in an error, in denying the restoration of their Kingdom, as
well as Mr. Archer was in denying Christ's personal and immediate government of
it. And secondly, in saying, [That they prove nothing against you, who hold
that Christ reigns on the true Throne of David.] You acknowledge likewise,
that these prophecies do prove, that our Savior was to reign on the true
Throne of David: and consequently, that (seeing he has not yet,) he shall
hereafter reign over the whole Nation of the Jews in their own d land, ^^er.
33.15, ^6, 17.
The Throne of Israel, on which David reigned being the true Throne of David,
and no other. But to say, that Christ now reigns on the true Throne of David,
is to affirm, that he is now reigning over the Jews in the Land of Judea: and
what can be further from truth then this?

Israel's Redemption. For neither did Christ at his first coming, sit on
David's Throne, nor any other of David's lineage, or of that Tribe, (or of the
other Tribes,) For the Scepter was then departed from Judah, and a Lawgiver
from between his feet.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. He sits on the right hand of the Throne of Majesty in
heaven, Heb. 8.1. which was typified by the Throne of David.

Reply.

You told us even now, [That Christ reigns on the true Throne of David.] And
you tell us here, [That he sits on the right hand of the Throne of Majesty in
heaven, which was typified by the Throne of David.] And does he reign then on
both these Thrones at once? on the true Throne of David, (the type) and on the
Throne of God, (he antitype,) too? But I pray, what scripture does teach you to
call the Throne of David, a type of the Throne of God? Surely if this were so,
Christ must needs have reigned on the Throne of his Father David. before he
could have been exalted to the right hand of the Throne of Majesty on high.
Because the possession of the typical Throne, must needs pr cede the
possession of the typified Throne. This therefore is an unwarrantable conceit:
and we know that these prophecies speak only of his reigning on the Throne of
his Father David, and not of his reigni g on the Throne of God. And if by the
Throne of David which is promised to Christ, is meant the Throne of God; what
then is meant by the Throne of the House of Israel, which is promised to him,
Jer. 33.17? Is not this all one with the Throne of David? if it be, then by the
Throne of David cannot be meant the Throne of God: unless you will say, that
by the Throne of Israel, the Throne of God is meant also. And if the Throne of
Israel be not meant of the Throne of David, then tell us what it is; and why
you take it to be all one with the Throne of David, page 26. where you allege
this text of Jeremiah, to show that the promises of the Priesthood, and of the
Kingdom, are conjoined and mixed after the same strain. And tell us too what
is meant by the Kingdom of David, upon which Christ's government is said to be,
as well as upon the Throne of David, Isai. 9.7. And besides, what reason can
you allege, wherefore we should not as well take that part of these prophecies
in a proper sense, which speaks of our Saviors reigning on the Throne of
David; as that part which speaks of his being borne of the seed of David, the
one being revealed unto us in as plain terms as the other?

Israel's Redemption. Neither were Judah and Israel, then in the Land together.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. There is neither Jew nor Greek, neither bond nor free,
neither male nor female, but we are all one in Christ Jesus: and if ye be
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise, Gal. 3
28.

Reply.

In the 23 chap. of Jer. we read this prophecy, Behold the days come, says
the Lord, that I will raise unto David, a righteous Branch, and a King shall
reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice on the earth. In
his days Jud^^h shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his
name, whereby he shall be saved, The Lord our righteousness. In which words
there are these particulars foretold: first, that Christ should be borne of the
seed of David, I will raise unto David, a righteous Branch. Secondly, that he
should reign, And a King shall reign and prosper. Thirdly, how he should
reign; to wit, civilly, as other Kings: which is set forth, first, by the
quality of his administration, And shall execute judgment and justice.
Secondly, by the place where he should do it, On the earth Thirdly, by the
people amongst whom, the Jews, the Tribes of Jud^^h and Israel. And fourthly,
by the time when, to wit, when the Jews should be redeemed out of captivity
and s^tled in their land: When Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell
safely. Now of all these particulars, there is but one already accomplished,
which is that touching our Saviors incarnation: and the rest remain to be
fulfi led ^t his next appearing. Amongst which, I have alleged only the last,
to prove that our Saviors reigning here foreshewed, was not fulfilled at his
first appearing, to wit, because Israel was not then in the land with Judah. To
which you give no other answer but this, [ There is neither Jew nor Greek,
neither bond nor free, nor male, nor female, but we are all one in Christ
Jesus: and if we be Christ's, then are ne Abraham's seed and heirs according to
the promise.] And what then? does this make the prophecies o^ God of none
effect? may the reader conclude from hence. Therefore Judah and Israel shall
not dwell safely in the land together, nor Christ be sent to reign over them
on the Throne of David? Surely he may as well conclude, Therefore amongst
Christians, there are no men, nor women: no masters, nor servants: no Jews,
nor Gentiles. But the Apostles words will countenance no such contradictory
infe^ences: for his meaning is, That grace does conjoyne and assimulate those
whom natural and civil respect do difference and div de. For they that have
put on Christ, are not distinguished in him, (he says) as they are in the
world, by nation, fexe, and condition, but they are all one. They are one in
denomination and title, being all Christians; they are one in rank and
society, being all of one mystical body; they are one people, being all
Abraham's seed, and they have one inheritance, being fellow-heires according to
the promise. And what though the believing Gentile be one in Christ with the
believing Jew? was he not so before Christ's incarnation, as well as since? was
he not Abraham's seed before as well as since? was he not heir according to the
promise before as well as since? What hinders then but that the Jews may
(notwithstanding this spiritual union and fellowsh^p with the believing
Gentiles,) be (as heretofore, so) at their general conversion again advanced
above all other Nations by many not only outward favors and privileges but
by a greater measure of inward gifts and abilities also?

Israel's Redemption. Neither was the Temple then destroyed, but afterward:
and therefore the things here spoken of, are all to be accomplished at his
second coming: and that not in heaven but on earth. On earth I say, and in e
Jerusalem, where f David's Throne was. For his feet shall stand in that day,
Isai. 33.20. ^hap. 50. ver. ^, 2, 3.9, 10. Psalm. 122 5.
(to wit, when he comes, (or if God himself be here by an [(...)] figuratively
described, when he brings him) to receive his appointed Kingdom,) on the Mount
of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the East, (from which Mount our Savior
ascended,) and the Mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the
East and toward the West, and there shall be a very great valley, and half the
mountain shall remove toward the North, and half of it toward the South. And
ye shall fl^e to the valley of the mountains: for the valley of the mountains
shall reach unto Azal; yea ye shall flee like as ye fled from before the
Earthquake, in the days of Uzziah King of Judah. And the Lord my God shall
come, and all the Iu de ver. 14, 15. Rev. 19.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Saints with the^: And it shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall
not be clear nor dark, but it shall be one day, which shall be known to the
Lord, not day nor night: but it shall come to pass, that at evening time it
shall be light. And it shall be in that day, that Psalm. 46.4. Eze. 47.1. etc.
Joel. 3.8.
living waters shall go out from Jerusalem: half of them toward the former
sea, and half of them toward the hinder sea: In Summer and in Winter shall it
be? and the Lo^d shall be King over all the earth. In that day shall there be
one Lord, and his Name one. All the Land shall be turned as a plain from Ceba
to Rimmon, South of Jerusalem; and it shall be lifted up, and inhabited in her
pl ce: from Benjamins gate unto the place of the first gate, unto the corner
gate, and from the Tower of Hananiel unto the Kings wine-presses: And men shall
dwell in it, and there shall be no more utter destruction: but Jerusalem shall
be safely inhabited, Zech. 14.4, etc.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. Christ said, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I
will raise it up again. Then said the Jews, Forty and six years was this
Temple in building, and will thou rear it up again in three days? but he
spoke of the Temple of his body, says the Evangelist, John 2.19, So the true
Temple is Christ's body, which the Jews destroyed, and he raised it up again:
and in this sense the Disciples did believe the Scriptures after the
resurrection of Christ, ver. 22. And therefore the things spoken in these
Scriptures are accomplished at his first coming, not only in heaven, last on
earth, according to the different portions thereof: In heaven, and on earth, I
say, and in true Jerusalem, and on the true Throne of David: for his feet
stood in that day, [to wit, when he went to receive the fuller accomplishment
of his Kingdom,] on the Mount of Olives, which is by Jerusalem on the East,
[from which also he ascended,] and the Mount or Olives has been cloven in the
midst thereof toward the East, and toward the W^st [when not only the members
of the Church, but all the world was shaken at the powerful preaching of the
Gospel, (even more gloriously then at the giving of the Law, Heb. 12.26.) So
that nothing could hinder the course thereof.] And the Jews have fled to that
valley of the mountains, [when they did embrace the Gospel, which is low in
worldly men's esteem, and of high esteem before God.] And the valley of the
mountains has reached unto Azal. [ For the preaching of the Gospel has been
an excellent stone mark showing the righ way, (as it is exponed, 1 Samuel 20.19.
on the margin of the late translation,) to the Kingdom of heaven.] Yea they
have fled, like as they did flee from before the earth quake in the days of
Vzzi^h King of Iudan, [to wit, they have been astonished at the wonderfulnesse
of Gods works.] And the Lord has come: And so forth, as it follows in Zach.
14. where he shows the perpetual light of the glorious Gospel, ver. 6, 7.
and the continual flowing of the wholesome waters in the Kingdom of Christ,
ver. 98. and the removing of all impediments for the security of the elects
conversion and salvation. You see here that our Savior came not only to
conquer death, (which is the last enemy that he shall destroy, and therefore
not to be destroyed till the last resurrection,) but also to take the Kingdoms
of the world unto himself, and has made them all acknowledge his authority,
and has put down all contrary power and authority, ( for all Nations have
praised Christ, and given laud unto him, Romans 14.9* 10.11.) That there is one
shepherd and one sheepfold, that the Dominions, Kingdoms, and greatness of
the Kingdoms under the whole Heaven, have been possessed by the People and
Saints of the most High: that is, (as the Gospel has exponed it,) by the
faithful Israel, Romans 14.12) bowbeit all has not been possessed at the same
period of time.

Reply.

Was ever scripture more apparently wrested, more impertinently alleged?
Behold, says Zechariah, the man whose name is the Branch, and he shall grow up
out of his place, and he shall build the Temple of the Lord, even he shall
build the Temple of the Lord, etc. chap. 6. ver. 12. This is the prophecy, and
your interpretation this, Christ said, Destroy this Temple, and in three days,
I will raise it up again, etc. John 2.19. And interpretation doubtless as
wide from the sense of the Prophet, as the Jews apprehension was from the
meaning of our Saviors words. For show us where [the Temple of the Lord,] is
in all the old Testament, (which was then all the scripture,) taken in any
other sense, then for the house of Gods worship at Jerusalem. Or, [the building
of the Temple of the Lord,] in any other sense, then for the building of that
Temple. Yea, look but into the 14 and 15 verses immediately following, and it
is unquestionable, that the same words are there taken for the Temple of the
Lord in Jerusalem. And besides, seeing the Prophets show so plainly, that our
Savior shall reign over the Jews, in their own land, and that Jerusalem
shall again be built; Why should we not believe, that both the building of the
Temple of the Lord, and his reigning on the Throne of his Father David, shall
be as properly fulfilled, in Christ (the antitype,) as they were in Solomon
(the type?) Whereas then you say further, [That in this sense the Disciples did
believe the Scriptures, after the resurrection of Christ.] I pray, what
scriptures? this prophecy? Surely it is false, that they did any where cite
this prophecy to prove our Saviors resurrection from the dead. And the words
of the Evangelist are plain, When therefore he was risen from the dead, (says
John,) his Disciples remembered, that he had said this unto them, (to wit, that
he had said to the Jews, Destroy this Temple, etc.) and they believed the
Scripture, (that is, the scripture which foreshewes our Saviors resurrection,
as Psalm. 16. alleged by Saint Peter, Acts 2.25. etc. and Psalm. 2.7. alleged
by Saint Paul, Acts 13.33. etc.) And the word which Jesus had said; (that is,
and they believed also, that this saying of his to the Jews, was meant of the
resurrection of his body: and not (as you say they did,) that it was an
interpretation of Zechariah's prophecy, which for shows indeed the building of
the Temple of the Lord, but not the destroying of it by the Jews: nor the
building of it in three days; no, nor the building of it until the man whose
name is the Branch should sit and rule on his Throne. Neither did our Savior
say plainly, Destroy the Temple of the Lord, (as the false witness^s ac^used
him,) nor absolutely, destroy the Temple: but darkely, and inrelation to his
own body, destroy this Temple: as his words touching the raising of it in
three days do intimate, and the Evangelist does afterward expound it. And he
said also, I will raise it, and not, I will build it, which shows the making
of a Temple, where was none before; and therefore cannot be applied to the
quickening of our Saviors body, a temple then in being, and not to be
corrupted in death. And as for your confused exposition of the prophecy of
Zech. 14.4. etc. it is not only contrary to the truth, but to reason it self.
For first, (which is flat against the truth,) you ascribe the accomplishment of
this prophecy to our Saviors ascending to the Saints in heaven, and to the
time succeeding his ascension: whereas it is manifest by the words in the first
verse, (which you have concealed) And the Lord my God shall come, and a^l the
Saints with thee, that it is to be fulfilled at his descending with the Saints
from heaven, and in the time succeeding his descension. And secondly, (which is
not only against the truth, but against reason also) you affirm [ That by the
cleaving of the Mount of Olives toward the East, and toward the West, is
meant, the shaking of all the world at the preaching of the Gospel.] And [
That by the Jews flying to the valley of the mountains, is meant, their
embracing of the Gospell] Which is as if you had said, that the Jews did then
embrace the Gospel, when they fled from it; or that the Jews in flying from
the Gospel, fled to the Gospel. For as you interpret the cleaving of the
Mount of Olivers, (from which the Jews were to fly,) of the preaching of the
Gospel: so you interpret the valley of the mountains, (to which the Jews
were to flee,) of the same also. And who sees not by this, and by your
expounding of the 6 and 7 verses [Of the perpetual ^ight of the Gospel,] and
the 8 verse, [Of the continual fl^^wing of the doctrine of the Gospel,] and
all of the Gospel, and of nothing but of the Gospel: that by such a liberty
of interpreting, any one may make the plain^st scripture that is, to say only
as he faith: and so to patronize and defend any dangerous opinion against the
truth clearly revealed in it. The truth therefore of this prophecy, is no
other then that which the Prophet himself has plainly told us: to wit, that
the Mount of Olives shall be cleft in the midst by an earthquake at the coming
of our Savior with all the Saints: and that the Jews which are gathered
together near unto it, shall then fly for fear of this earthquake, as they
fled for fear from before the earthquake in the days of Vzziah King of Judah.
And the effect of this earthquake is described, ver. 10. where it is said, And
all the Land shall be turned as a plain from G^ha to Rimm^n, South of
Jerusalem, and it shall be lifted up, and inhabited in her place: from
Benjamins gate unto the place of tho first gate, unto the corner gate, and from
the tower of Hananiel un to the Kings wiae-presser. And man shall dwell in it,
and there shall be no more utter destruction, but Jerusalem shall be safely
inhabited. And as this part, so all the rest of the prophecy is to be
understood likewise according to its own style and language; which is so
obvious, that it needs no inter preration: and the light thereof cannot be
more obscured, then by such a gloss as you have put upon it. And thus it being
undeniable, that this prophecy of Zech. does foreshew our Saviors second
coming, his coming with all the Saints, and the things then no be performed
by him: it necessarily follows, That he shall come, not only to conquer
death, first in part, at the resurrection of the Saints, that shall rise to
meet him, and to come with him; and then wholly at the resurrection of all
others, when he shall pass the sentence of salvation on the elect, and of
damnation on the reprobate: but in the interim, in the space betwixt this first
and second resurrection, to be King over all the earth, as this Prophet says,
ver. 9. to take the Kingdoms of this world unto himself, as Saint John
reveals Rev. 11.15. to put down all rule and all authority, as Saint Paul
affirms, 1 Cor. 15.24. and to set up that dominion, glory, and Kingdom, at
the manifestation whereof, all people, nations, and languages, shall serve him,
as Daniel foreshewes, chap. 7. ver. 14. which he shall do by an extraordinary
destroying of the most and greatest of his enemies in batte'l: and by causing
every one that is left of the Nations, to go up from year to year to
Jerusalem, to worship the King the Lord of Hafts, as Zech. here, and many other
Prophets besides do declare.

Israel's Redemption. You see here that our Savior comes not only to conquer
death, (which is the last enemy that he shall d stroy, and therefore not wholly
to be destroyed till the last resurrection) but also to take the Kingdoms of
this world unto himself, to put down (as Saint Paul has said) all the
authority and power of other Nations: that there may be one shepherd and one
sheepfold: Dan. 7.27.
that the Kingdom, and dominion, and greatness of the Kingdom under the
whole Heaven, may be possessed by the people of the Saints of the most High. That
is, (as the former prophecies do expound it,) by the i people of Israel. Psalm
148.14.
And this, as I think, is the time of which he spoke these words, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Ioh. 1.51. Heb. 1.6.
Hereafer shall ye see heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and
descending upon the l son of man.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. That these words shall be fulfilled, or have been
fulfilled, it is most certain; and it is as certain, that they shall never be
fulfilled in the proper acceptance of the words, seeing the body of Christ is
not so tall, as that (...) shall reach from heaven to earth: for this cause
some, ( as Cyril on this place, have exp^ned unto for upon in this sense, as if
the Heavens were open, the Angels shall come down, and ascend unto my Service:
So does Chrysostom apply these words to the Angels ministering unto Christ in
time of his passion, and resurrection. Others think it to be an exposi ion of
that vision of Jacob, Genesis 28. whereby was signified, that Christ is the
Mediator making way betwixt heaven and earth, Col. 1.10. And these expositions
(for the matter) do agree with other Scriptures.

Reply.

It seems by your first words, that you are doubtful of the accomplishment of
this prophecy, for [that it shall be fulfilled, or has been fulfilled, it is
most certain,] you say. And your next assertion, [that it shall never he
fulfilled in the proper acceptance of the words,] does appa^ently contradict
that which follows: for by and by after, you tell us, [ that Cyril has
exponed it, as if the heavens were open, the Angels shall come down, and
ascend unto my Service: and that Chrysostom does apply it to the Angel
ministering unto Christ, in time of his passion and resurrection.] And is not
this a proper exposition of the prophecy? then show us one more proper. And
doubtless it is to be understood, as Cyril understands it, of the Angels
ministering to our Savior. But yet we believe not, that it was fulfilled, when
in his agony there appeared an Angel unto him, strengthening him, Luke 22.43.
and much less when after his resurrection and Angel appeared at his sepulcher,
Matthew. 28 2. For it is evident, that when this proph^cy shall be fulfilled,
they that are in our Saviors presence, shall as plainly see heaven open,
[(...)] the starry firmament part asunder, and the Angels ascending from, and
descending ^o him, as they shall see each other: as plainly, I say, as Saint
Stephen, looking steadfastly into heaven saw [(...)] the heavens open, and the
Son of man standing on the right hand of God, Acts 7.55, 56. And as Saint
John Baptist saw the heavens opened unto Christ, and the Spirit of God
descending li^e a dove, and lighting upon him, Matthew. 3.16. And Saint Paul
assures u^, Heb. 1.6. That when God again brings in the first begotten into
the world, he says, And let all the Angels of God worship him. And to what
time then can our Saviors [Hereafter] can this visible attendance of the
Angels on him belong, but to the time of his next appearing, of his coming
again into the world? the time, and place of which God has said, that all the
Angels of God shall do homage unto him. And besides, it is more then probable,
that the Evangelist would as well have recorded the accomplishment, as the
prediction of this thing, if he had known of the fulfilling of it. But the
acute reason of your denying the proper sense of the prophecy, is yet behind,
and may well remain to posterity, as the wonder of your work, and the
monument of your wit: For [ the Angels, you say, shall not ascend and descend
upon the Son of man, seeing the body of Christ is not so tall, as that it
shall reach from heaven to earth.] Doubtless a very tall proof: and yet it
comes short of the mark you aim at. For surely the proper acceptance of the
prophecy, as it depends not on, so it is not proved, but infallibly disproved,
by the proper acceptance of the word [upon:] which preposition having relation
only to the participle [descending,] the full expression had been thus,
ascending from, and descending upon, (or unto,) which is meant by [upon,] in
this place. And which the original word [(...)] does as well signify, as
[upon,] and might have been here so expressed, as well as it it is Luke 10.6. and
chap. 19. ver. 5. (and in other places,) had there been any likelihood of a
modes^ Christians misunderstanding of this prophecy, by reason of the word
[upon.] However the learned had need beware, that in translating the
scriptures, they follow not the common liberty of speech, in the smalest word;
when as the wilful are so ready to make it an occasion of venting their vain
conceits.

Israel's Redemption. For that this may be fulfilled, it is requisite, that he
be on earth, whither these messengers may descend unto him, and from whence
again they may ascend: which argues too, his continuance here, for a greater
space of time, then the judgment of the dead requites.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. A poor proof: for as it is requisite, that he be on
earth, whither that these messengers may descend unto hint, so I may say, it is
requisite, that he be in heaven whence they may descend on him, and whither
they may ascend to him: and so taking the words in that sense, they may be
fulfilled, albeit he never were on earth: even as they may be fulfilled when he
is on earth, and not in heaven: but according to the first exposition he was on
earth, when they were fulfilled, far less it his ^ominuance on earth
necessary for these words.

Reply.

A poor proof, you say: And surely were it not much more powerful then the
answer, it were poor indeed. For may you say as well from the order of our
Saviors words, [That it is requisite he be in heaven, whence the Angels may
descend from him, and ascend to him,] as we may, that it is requisite he be on
earth, whence they may ascend from him, and descend to him? Certainly nothing
can be said more direct against the truth. For such a conclusion does
necessarily change and pervert our Saviors words into this contrary form.
Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the Angels ascending to, and descending
from the Son of man. Whereas our Savior said, ascending, and descending to
the Son of man, which necessarily proves, that he is not to be in heaven at
the accomplishment thereof; seeing he must be the terminus a quo, the person
from whom, (and not to whom,) the Angels shall ascend: and the terminus ad
quem, the person to whom, (and not from whom) they shall descend. And therefore
taking these words no otherwise then our Savior spoke them, they may be
fulfilled on earth, as we say: but it is not possible, that they can be
fulfilled both in heaven and earth, as you say.

Israel's Redemption. And although it be said, that Christ shall reign over
the house of Jacob for ever: and that of his Kingdom there shall be no end.
Yet it is not meant, that he shall always reign as man: or that the earthly
Jerusalem, the place of his Throne, as man, shall always stand. But this only
i^ means, that the Kingdom of the Saints, which Christ as he is man, shall
govern a Isai. 65.22.
long time on earth, shall after the Judgment of the dead, (at which time this
heaven and earth shall pass a way,) be delivered up to God even the Father, in
the new Jerusalem, where it shall ever remain, and where God shall be all in
all: yet so that Christ too as man shall still retain the dign^ty and
pre-eminence of a King, a Priest, a Prophet, though he shall have no need to
make use of either office. And thus a late and learned Mr. Down on the 17. chapter
of St. Ioh page 157. of his Treatises published 1633.
Divine of ours does reconcile the former words of Saint Luke, in chap. 1. ver.
33. with that of Saint Paul, in 1 Cor. 1^.24.28. We are to know, says he, that
the Kingdom of Christ contains in is, two things. The mediatory function of
his Kingly office: and his Kingly glory. That he shall lay aside, for then (to
wit, after the judgment of the dead,) there will be no further necessity, nor
use thereof. But this be shall bold for ever, as being by the acts of his
mediation justly acquired, and according to covenant bestowed upon him by his
Father. And furthermore it may be observed, that the words, Psalm. 72.17. Psalm.
89.28, 29.36.37. Psalm. 145.13.^ Isa. 32.14.15. ch 60 15. Ezekiel. 37.25.
For ever, Evermore, and Everlasting, are in the Scriptures, ^ften joined with,
and put for these and the like sayings, Through all, or many generations:
through all ages; or, as long as the Sun and Moon endure. And therefore can
conclude no more but this; That Christ's reign as man, shall continue, as long
as there shall be men to succeed each other on the earth: ^or as long as this
heaven and earth shall last; that is, until the time which God has
foreordained for the judgment of the dead. When the heavens that are now Rev.
20.11. Chapter 21.1.
shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent hea^e:
the earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3.10.
And to this purpose, when the Prophet Daniel had said, His dominion is an
everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away: he adds presently by way of
exposition, And his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. And in another
place more plainel^, The Chapter 2.44.
Kingdom shall not be left to other people. So that when the Prophets say,
that Christ shall reign for ever, and that his Kingdom shall stand for ever:
^or be a^ everlasting Kingdom; it is all one, as if they had told us only,
That neither Christ nor his Kingdom shall have any successors: that no son
of man shall succeed him in his Throne: that no humane Kingdom shall be set up
in the place of his Kingdom, as his shall be in the place of the four
Monarchies; but that in spite of all opposition both of men and devils, hi^
dominion shall endure, until the upshot and period of all temporal and humane
government: that is, until the last resurrection, when with a venite
benedicti, he shall give up the number of the elect full and whole, (as we say)
unto God himself.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. They will change the signification of the words, when
they please, and so far as it makes for their purpose, and no more: but when
they shall prove by scripture, that the earthly Jerusalem shall be the place of
Christ's Throne, we may agree upon the exposition of the words, [for ever, and
shall be no end:] and till that be shown, I omit further enquiry of them: but
as yet we have seen neither necessary consequence, nor evident expressim for
it. Follows another point, that the restoration of Jerusalem, and
resurrection shall concur.

Reply.

Here is the accusation, but where is the evidence to confirm it? doubt less
you sought narrowly, but could find none. And therefore the reader may first
take notice, how for want of proof against us, you confute your self. For [
they will change the signification of the words, you say, when they please,
etc.] And a little after, [till that be shown, I omit further enquiry of the
words.] How? further enquiry? did you then enquire of them? if you did, where
are your reasons to show that we have changed the signification of the words?
if you did not enquire, or enquired in vain, how can you tell that we have
changed their signification? and would you say that we have, when you could not
tell? yea you would do worse then this, for you say we have done it, although
you know we have not done it. For we have quoted on the margin no less then
seven texts to show that the words [for ever, and everlasting, etc.] are in the
scripture taken as well in a limited, as in an unlimited sense, and they are
these Psalm. 72.17. Psalm. 89.28, 29. and again ver. 36, 37. Psalm. 145.13. Isai.
32.14, 15. and 60.50. Ezekiel. 37.25. in all which places the foresaid words are
taken only for a long time. And shall the reader believe, that you, (who do
so frequently catch at the marginall quotations in other places.) did not see
these here? doubtless you saw them, and saw so much in them, that you could
say nothing to them. And besides, do you not your self allow of the same
signification of these words, when as you tell us, [ That Christ as Mediat^ur
shall c^^^ to reign, shall deliver up the administration of the Kingdom to
his Father, s^ying, Thou O Father have thine own Subjects, and let them have
the Kingdom prepared for them, page 46?] For that which is delivered up, is
already past. And whereas you say, [Th^^ we may agree on the exposition of the
words, for ever, etc. when it can be proved by scripture, that the earthly
Jerusalem shall be the place of Christ's Throne.] H^th not this been done more
then once? then show us what scripture sp^akes more plain^ly of any thing then
Jer. 31.38, 39, 40. an^ Zech. 14.10, 11. do of the building and inhabiting
again of Jerusalem. Or then the foresaid prophecy of the Angel Gabriel, Luke
1.31, 32, etc. and of Isai 9.6, 7. and of Jer. 23.5, 6 do of our Saviors
reigning on earth, and upon the Throne of his Father David. Or then many other
do, some par^icularly of his reigning over the Jews, and some of his reigning
over the Gentiles, and some of his reigning over both. Su^ely you can show no
text, in which any truth is mo^e clearly delivered, then all this is in the
texts which we have brought, and can bring for it. And therefore we both have,
and can prove by scripture, even express scripture; that the restored
Jerusalem shall be the place of Christ's Throne: although it be beyond our power
to make you acknowledge, that we can and have proved it: it being the p^culiar
act of the Spirit of God to do this: of that Spirit, I say, whose apparent
testimonies you so presumptuously resist, and so lightly esteem.

ISREAL'S REDEMPTION. CHAP. III.
That the Kingdom of Israel, and the thousand years reign of the Saints
shall concur.

Zech. does clearly unfold, all that we aver touching our present subject,
to wit, That our Savior shall reign on earth, and in Jerusalem. For as it
tells us, That the Lord shall be King over all the earth, that in that day,
there shall be one Lord, and his name one. So it says too, that at the very
instant of our Saviors descending, All the Land shall (by an earthquake) be
turned as a plain from Geba to Rimmon, south of Jerusalem: and it shall be
lifted up, and inhabited in her place: from Benjamins gate, unto the place of
the first gate, unto the corner gate, and from the tower of Hananiel unto the
Kings wine-presses, etc. Moreover another notable content of this prophecy is,
That when our Savior comes to reign over all the earth, he comes not alone,
but brings all the Saints with him.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. We see neither that be shall come to reign, (after that
manner) over all the earth: neither that he shall bring all his Saints with
him, and for this last point be alleges no text of scripture, but will have it
to be taken on his bare word: which we refuse to do. We read that when be
shall come to judge, he shall bring all the holy Angels with him, Matthew. 25.31.
and all Nations shall be gathered before him, and that be shall send his Angels
to gather the elect from the four winds: but that they shall come with him
into an earthly Monarchy, we find no where. And nevertheless as if it were
unquestionable he adds.

Reply.

Unless you had made a covenant with your tongue to deny every thing that we
prove, you could not have said [That we allege no text of scripture, which
shows that Christ shall bring all the Saints with him.] For what is the
meaning of these words, Zech. 14.5. And the Lord my God shall come, and all the
Saints with thee. Or what means Saint Paul, when he says, 1 Cor. 15.23.
Afterward they that are Christ's at his coming? does he not mean that all the
Saints departed shall then rise? and can they rise in their bodies at Christ's
coming, and yet not come then from heaven to be reunited to their bodies?
These t^xts we have alleged in expr^sse terms: and do you take them for
canonical, or apocrypha? if for canonical, then surely your foresaid report
of us is apocrypha. And yet this is not all that we have to say touching this
point, for as you read Matthew. 25.31. That Christ shall bring all the holy
Angels with him; so you may read too in 1 These. 3.13. these words, At the
coming of our Lord Jesus with all the Saints. And chap. 4.14. Them also that
sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. And Jude ver. 14. out of the prophecy
of Enoch, Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints. And
therefore that Christ shall bring all the Saints with him, is not our bare
word. but the plain word of God. And so it is too, that they shall come to
reign with him on earth, as we have already proved, and the texts following
do further declare. And besides, how can you choose but believe, that Christ
shall bring all the Saints with him, though there were no express scripture
for it, seeing you bele^ve, that all the dead shall rise at the same time?
surely you must either deny this, or grant that.

Israel's Redemption. Which words as they do establish the literal sense of
the Luke 14.14. chapter 20.35, 36. Ioh. 6.39.40.44, 54. Phil. 3.11. 1 Thessalonians. 3.13.
chapter 4.14. etc. Ezekiel. 37.12.13.
first resurrection, mentioned in the 20 chap. of Rev. So they make the
Kingdom of Israel, and the 1000 years reign of the Sain^s there spoken of,
to synchronize, and meet together: for why shall the Saints come with him, but
because they have a share in his Kingdom, and are to be his assistants in it,
as he told the Disciples, Luke 22.28?

Mr. Petrie's Answer. The first resurrection of bodies imports a second
resurrection: and so either these who rise shall dye again, and rise again at
the second resurrection: or they who shall rise at the first shall not dye at
all, and others shall rise again at the second resurrection. This Author
makes it no where manifest, which of these two be holds, and Mr. Archer
holds the first opinion: but neither of them has any warrant from Scripture,
and the testimonies that are cited here on the margin, show that there shall
not be such a resurrection of the righteous: for it is said, Luke 20.35. They
who shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from
the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage, neither can they dye any
more: for they are equal unto the Angels, being the children of the
resurrection. If they can dye no more, and be equal unto the Angels, then they
shall not rise at a second resurrection, neither shall they live an earthly
life, which in the best degree is inferior unto the life of the Angels. John
6.39. This is the Fathers will, that of all that he has given me, I should
lose nothing, but should raise it up at the last day: and ver. 44. No man can
come unto me, except the Father who has sent me, draw him, and I will raise
him at the last day. If the last day be the day of the general judgment, ( as
certainly it is, even supponing the temporal Monarchy for a 1000 years,) and
the elect shall not be raised till the last day, (as these words imply,) then
there shall not be a first and second resurrection, unless the second
resurrection be after the last day: and consequently, there not being a
resurrection of the children of God till the last day, the first resurrection
mentioned, Rev. 20. cannot be understood of the bodies, but rather arising from
sin, whereof mention is made, Ephesians. 5.14. and Col. 3.1. He cites also Phil.
3.11. If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead. These
words name the dead generally, and make nothing for a first and second
resurrection: but ver. 20. it is said, Our conversation or freedom is in
heaven, whence also we look for the Savior, who shall change our vile body,
that it may be like unto his glorious body. If the freedom [POLITEVMA] of the
godly be in heaven, then they expect not a Monarchy on earth: and if the bodies
shall be like unto his glorious body, they shall not live an earthly life, nor
dye again. He quoteth 1 These. 3.13. and chap. 4.14. etc. but the first has
nothing of a second resurrection, and chap. 4.14. says, We shall be ever with
the Lord, to wit, in another manner then now: now by grace, and then in glory.
If we shall ever be with the Lord, then we shall not dye again, and rise
again, unless the L rd dye too: which, I think, they will not say. Lastly,
he cites Ezekiel. 37.12, 13. which words certainly are allegorical, and show the
return of the Jews from their captivity, notwithstanding the ext^eamity of
their misery, and after these words he takes occ^sion to spe^ke of the
spiritual Kingdom of the Chu ch, as is said before: but neither first nor
last speaks the Prophet of a first and second resurrection at or about the
last day. And so in all these testimonies, nothing is to this purp^se of the
concurring of the Jewish Monarchy with the first resurrection.

Reply.

The first resurrection of bodies imports a second, you say; True, but of
other bodies, not of the same bodi^s. And I dare say, that the conceit
touching the dying again of them that rise, to rise the second t^me; is your
proper fancy. Sure I am, it is very sland^^ously imputed to Mr. Archer, who
holds in deed, tha^ the raised Saints shall be made governors over our
Saviors Kingdom in his absence, but not that they shall again be subject unto
death. And when I say here, that these Saints shall have a share in Christ's
Kingdom, and be his assistants in it. And elsewhere, page 121. that the time
of these Saints abode with Christ shall never have an end: yea when you your
self confess, that the testimonies on the margin do prove the contrary; do
I hold their dying again, think you, or do I not? Certainly, (as we know
not to what end, the Saints should rise, if they were to dye again, so) we
know, that the bodies of the dead, though they be sown in corruption shall be
raised in incorruption, (even the bodies of the greatest sinners, who could not
otherwise live in eternal torments,) and therefore it is manifest, that you
have here laid an error of your own devising* to another man's charge, partly
that you might not seem to take so much pains and confute nothing: and partly
to disgrace the truth we hold touching the order of the resurrection. For as it
is true, that the dead shall rise but once: so it is true also, that they shall
not rise all at once. And this the prophecies of Saint John Rev. 20.4. etc. and
Saint Paul in 1 Cor. 15.22, 23, 24. do so plainly reveal; that we may well
wonder, why so many learned Interpreters should rather strive to extinguish
th^se greater lights, then by the brightness of them to discover the true
meaning, not only of such texts as concern the resurrection, but of those
also that concern the prerogatives and privileges, which they who have part
in the first resurrection, are to enjoy on earth. And now let us see how you
deal with the texts on the margin: of which the first that you allege,
(though not the first that is quoted,) is in Luke 20.35, 36. But they which
shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the
dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage, neither do they dye any more,
for they are equallanto the Angels, and are the children of God* being the
children of the resurrection. This is the text, and your ^^ferences these, [If
they can dye no more, and be equal unto the Angels, then they shall not rise
at a second resurrection.] And who says that they shall? [ neither shall they
live an earthly life, say you,] And so say we, if by an earthly life, you mean
a sinful life, or a mortal life: but if you mean only, that they shall not
live on earth: we deny your s quelli For our Savior lived on earth before his
death, and yet h^ lived not an earthly, that is, a sinful life. And he lived
many days on earth, after his resurrection, in which he showed himself openly
to his Disciples, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead,
Acts 10.42. And yet his glory was not diminished by it, nor he made lower then
the Angels, or the more liable unto mortality for it. Neither shall the raised
Saints be less equal unto the Angels, in their immunity from copulation, in
their holiness of conversation, or in the immortality of their bodies, while
they abide on earth, then when they are carried into the presence of God
himself. And seeing our Savior says here, But they that shall be accounted
worthy to obtain [(...)] that age, or that time of the world, and the
resurrection from the dead: does he not plainly point out unto us, a time in
which none of the dead shall be raised, but such as shall be accounted worthy
of some peculiar happiness, which is kept in store for them against that time?
Certainly if we compare these words of our Savior, with the 14 and 15 verses,
of the 14. chapter of Luke, we cannot think otherwise. For what is the
resurrection, which none but they that are accounted worthy shall obtain, but
the resurrection of the just, spoken of chap. 14. ver. 14? (which you pass
over in silence) and what did our Savior mean, when he said not only thou
shall be recompensed at the resurrection, but, at the resurrection of the just?
Did he not mean that he should receive a recompense at that time, when all the
just then dead, and none but the just should be raised? And what is the [(...)]
here, [That age, or that time of the world,] but the time of the Kingdom of
God spoken of, chap. 14. ver. 15? And what is this Kingdom of God, of which it
is said, that he is blessed which shall eat bread in it, but the Kingdom
which God shall set up under Christ as man, when he brings him again into the
world? For whereas it is recorded, chap. 14. that when one that sat at meat
with our Savior heard him tell the Pharisee, who bad him to eat bread at his
house, that if he made a feast, he should not call his rich kindred, friends,
and neighbors, but the maimed, the blind, and them that could not recompense
him, and that he should be recompensed at the resurrection of the just:
whereas, I say, it is written, that when one heard these things, he said unto
our Savior, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God: What
correspondence could there be betwixt these words, and our Saviors touching
the recompencing of the charitable at the resurrection of the just, unless the
Kingdom of God here spoken of, should contemporate with the resurrection of
the just? unless the just, I say, should rise to receive their recompense,
when this Kingdom of God shall begin? And it being evident from the text,
that this Kingdom of God, is to be a Kingdom in which there shall be eating
of bread, that is, (according to the signification of this phrase in the
Gospel,) of such creatures as God has ordained for man's food on earth: this
Kingdom of God must needs be meant of a Kingdom on earth; and consequently,
the recompense our Savior spoke of, is to be given on earth, and the
resurrection of the Saints to enjoy this Kingdom, is to precede the rising of
all others, which shall not be, till the time of this Kingdom be sully
expired. The second testimony is in Joh. 6.39, 40 44.54. of which the last ver.
is this, Who so eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and
I will raise him up at the last day. And these last words are the close of the
other verses also, whence you argue thus, [ If the last day, be the day of the
general judgment, (as certainly it is, even supponing the temporal Monarchy
for a 1000 years, and the elect shall not be raised till the last day, (as
these words imply,) then there shall not be a first and second resurrection,
unless the second resurrection be after the last day.] And what coherence is
there in this argument? what appearance of truth? certainly it savours not of
your great skill in Logique. For neither the first not the last resurrection
shall be till the last day, and yet both shall be in the last day: seeing the
last day shall begin with the first resurrection, and end with the last. But
yet we have good reason to believe that our Savior spoke here only of the
first of these resurrections, because in v. 54. he speaks only of raising
them that should be worthy partakers of the Sacrament of his body and blood,
which Sacrament is to show forth the Lords death till he come, as Saint Paul
affirms, 1 Cor. 11.26. and for ought we yet know no longer. If therefore you
have no better arguments to support the spiritual interpretation of the first
resurrection, Rev. 20.4, 5, 6. then this, it were far better, that you did
lay your hand on your mouth, then plead for it. And indeed how could you
imagine, that God should reveal unto S. John [the rising of men from sin*] as
a secret then unknown unto the world? that I say, he should foreshew this as a
thing then to come, which began ^n Adam himself; and was at that time the
daily effect o^ the preach ng of the Gospel? The third text is that of Saint
Paul in Phil. 3.11. If by any means I might a^t ^ine to the resurrection of
the dead. To which you answer, [these words name h^ dead generally, etc.]
Certainly no more generally, then the same Apostles words in 1 Cor. 15.42,
etc. do. Where he says, S^ also is the resurrection of the dead, it is sown
in corruption, it is raised in incorruption: it is sown in dishonor, it is
raised in glory: it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power: it is sown
a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. And do any besides the just
rise in glory, in power, and with spiritual bodies? or do you think, that it
was need full for Saint Paul to use his utmost care and endeavor, that he
might attain to rise at that time, when the unjust should rise? The
resurrection therefore which the Apostle strove so much to attain unto, was no
other then the resurrection of the dead in Christ, then the first resurrection;
of which it is said, that he who has a part in it, the second death has no
power over him. As on the contrary, all that dye before this resurrection and
are not raised in it, shall perish everlastingly. But because you had no more
to say to the text which I have quoted: you allege the 20 ver. of the same
chapt. out of which you raise these arguments, If the (Politeuma) the freedom
of the godly be in heaven, then they expect not a Monarchy on earth. And if
their bodies shall be like unto Christ's glorious body, they shall not live an
earthly life, nor dye again.] But as we allow your last argument, (for we know
not who does affirm the contrary, to wit, that the Saints shall after their
resurrection be either mortal or sinne^ull,) so in your first argument, we
first deny your translation of the word [(...)] which you make the ground of
your argument. For it signifies not there [a freedom or privilege,] but a
manner of living, as by the Apostles opposing of his own conversation, to the
conversation of some carnal minded Ministers of the Gospel, it is apparent;
and therefore it is rendered by Piscator, word for word, for our civil life (or
behavior) is in heaven; that is, is as temperate, as if we were inheaven in
the presence of God and the holy Angels. And secondly we deny the argument it
self. For though we suppose that the godly have now no outward freedom on
earth, (for an inward and spiritual freedom you must needs grant them,
seeing he that is called in the Lord, is the Lords freeman, as it is said, 1
Cor. 7.22. and all the royal dignity which you allow the Saints, consists in
this) though then we suppose, I say, that they have now no outward freedom,
(for this also they have, as appears in 1 Cor. 7.21. and chap. 9. ver. 19.)
yet it will not follow from hence, that they exp^ct none on earth hereafter,
when Christ shall change their vile bodies, that they may be like unto his
glorious body. The two next texts are one in 1 These. 3.13. and the other chap.
4. ver. 14, 15, 16, 17. in both which the Apostle speaks of the rising of none
at Christ's coming, but of the dead in Christ. And seeing the resurrection of
their bodies does equally belong to the godly and the ungodly, why should we
not think, that he would as well have spoken of the resurrection of these
also, as of the other: if they had been to rise at the same time with the
other? Doubtless you could show no reason, why the Apostle should speak so
much, (and so often) of the resurrection of the godly at Christ's coming and
nothing of the resurrection of the ungodly, if they had been to rise all
together. And therefore you have here also strugled only with your own fancy;
and now the third time strangled this deformed issue of your slanderous
imputation; to wit [that the raised Saints shall dye again, and rise again.]
For this opinion is indeed altogether inconsistent with the truth which we hold
touching the reigning of the raised Saints with Christ a 1000 years, before
the last resurrection. And suppose any one had vented this error, yet it is an
argument of your malice to prosecute the confutation of it in your answer unto
me. I say thus to prosecute it, as if it were the common opinion of us all. But
as yet I know no father of it besides your self, unless it be that father of
lies, who suggested it unto you. And therefore the reader had need beware how
to take your words upon trust: for doubtless if he hearken to your bare word,
he shall never believe what God has foretold, nor know what we hold. The last
text is Ezekiels vision of the dry bones, chap. 37. And if it betokens the
Jews return from their captivity, as ver. 11. does seem to interpret it,
where it is said, These bones are the whole house of Israel. Yet it is
observeable, first, that the deliverance here foreshewne, is of all the Tribes,
of the whole house of Israel. Secondly, that it is to be after such a long and
re^^ us captivity, as should make them even despair of a deliverance, as ver.
11. does declare. And thirdly, that at the time of their deliverance, they
shall become an exceeding great Army, us it is said, ver. 10. which
observations do infallibly manifest, that this prophecy has not been yet
accomplished, and consequently, that when you say, this vision [doth foreshew
the return of the Jews from their captivity, no withstanding the ex^reamity
of their misery;] you do unawares confess, that they are not yet returned,
but shall return at the accomplishment of this prophecy. For when were the
Jews delivered out of a captivity of such a long continuance as it here
intimated, by these very dry hones, and by the raising of them our of their
graves? or when did all the Tribes, the whole house of Israel return to their
land? or when did any of them (that I say not all, that I speak not of so
great an Army as is here foretold,) make their way into their own country by
force of arm), since their forty years march into Judea out of Egyp^^* And
therefore as all the other texts have relation to the first resurrection only;
so has this last to the future Redemption of the Jews out of captivity: to
their return again into their own land, against the time of their redemption
of the Saints bodies out of their graves, at our Saviors appearing. And that
which follows in the chapter does as plainly reveal the uniting of all the
Tribes in their own land under one King; and our Saviors personal reigning
over them there, as the vision of the dry bones does their return to their
land.

Israel's Redemption. And as the Elders in Revel. 5.10. said in the hearing of
Saint John, Thou best made as unto our God, Kings and Priests, and we Romans
5.17. chapter 4.13. Luk 19.17.19. 2 Timothy 2.12. chapter 4.8. 1 Pet. 5.4.
shall reign on Sanctorum super terram regia dignitas and authoritas in ho^
mundi statu nulia est: sed exti^u^ and perpetue calamitates ac persecutiones,
qu^s a tyra^^is mu^^^ bujus regibus patiuntur De alt^r^ igitut m^nd^ statu hoc
accipi ^^um. Quod siver^ super terram regnabunt sancti, utique ea non a (...),
^n id^^i^ quod non est, creaturae domin^^^ non est Eodem videtur Chr^stus
respexisse, Matthew. 5.5. Est and h^^ observandum, quod sanct (...), regnab mus,
non, regnamu^. Quo digitum intendunt ad alterum seculum. N^^^ sanct (...)
constituti, ^^m regnant super terram: qu^^ cum pat entia adhuc expect^^^
liberationem (...) quam accelerare non possunt. Apo^. 6. v. 16.21. They are the
words of Mar. Frid Wendelinus. ( cha. 2^. of the 2 ^^ct of his Natural
Contemplaticas, page 429.430. urged in defense of an accidental change of the
world against the essential abolition of it; both which Tenets are, as I think,
very true, if referred to their proper seasons, if (shunning both the
improvident confounding and pernicious wresting of Scripture) we affirm a
mavelous renovation of this Heaven and Earth at the beginning of our Saviors
Kingdom, and a creation of new, at the end thereof, that is, at the last
judgment when as it is in the 20. of the Revel. and the 11. ver. This heaven
and earth shall fly ^r^^y, and no place be found for them: and if they shall
have place no more, then surely they can have being no longer, for place is an
inseparable affection of their being, and consequently this Scripture proves an
absolute annihilation of the first world, which I suppose, no man will deny, If
he does observe when this passing of the first heaven and earth is to be
accomplish^ to wit, above a thousand years after the renewing of them, for
they are to be renewed at our Saviors entrance into his Kingdom, but they are
not to pass away, till the giving up thereof to God the Father at the last
Judgment, and so it stands firm, that these words imply no less then a
perishing: which yet may further be established by three other undeniable
testimonies. One of the same Apostle, in the next chap. at the 1. verse. And I
saw (says he) a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first
earth were passed away and there was no more sea. Which last c^^se expressly
affirming an utter abolition of the sea, does plainly inform us, that by the
dying and passing away of the first earth (which with the sea makes but one
globe) is meant a substantial perishing of it. Another of Moses in the 8.
chap. of Genesis at the 22. verse. While the earth rema^neth, seed time and
harvest, and cold and h a^, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not
cease; and therefore when seed-time and harvest, and summer and winter, and day
and night shall cease, as it is most certain they shall at the last Judgment,
the earth it self must of necessity then cease also. A third of Job in his 26.
chap. at the 10. verse. He has compassed the waters with bounds, until the day
and night come to an end. ( Deuteronomy. 11. verse. 21.) which words being compared
with the precedent testimony, wherein day and night are shown to be of equal
duration with seed time and harvest: and with that of the 22. of the Revel.
where it is said of the new Jerusalem and the inhabitants thereof; there shall
be no night there, and they need no candle, neither light of the Sun; must
needs be taken for a plain and positive proof, that the day and night shall
come to an end, and consequently, that the stars, and so the sublunary
creatures too, whose generation and continuance do more or less depend upon
celestial influences (being all made only for the use of man, while he is to
have his re^^^ency and abode on this earth) shall (at mankinds removal from
hence) together with this earth with which they were created, be brought again
to nothing.
earth.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. That these words Rev. 5.10. signify the honor and
privileges of the godly on earth, it is out of doubt. But the question is,
whether John saw these Elders in heaven, and whether they shall come from the
heaven to the earth again; or whether John signifies by them the godly on
earth? If these words make any thing for this purpose, these Elders were in
heaven: but all the interpreters, (even the Author of Commentat. Apocalypt.
page 8.) expone them to be the godly on earth. The words Romans 4.13. are, The
promise that he should be the heir of the world, was not to Abraham, and to
his seed through the law, but through the righteousness of faith. Certaintly
albeit the Land of Canaan was promised to Abraham, and his seed, yet he (never
having possession of that land,) and his seed or the faithful are more
properly called the heirs of eternal life. Tit. 3.7. And heirs of that
Kingdom which he has promised unto them that love him. Iam. 2.5. And heirs
of God, and joynt-heires with Christ, Romans 8.17. Which Kingdom was typified by
Canaan: and of this promise without doubt speaks Paul there. The words of Luke
19.17.19. are a part of a parable, and we know that every part of a parable is
not argumentative. These texts then serve nothing for this Monarchy. On the
margin is cited also a testimony of Windelin: but we regard not the testimony
of parties in their own cause, (and far less do we regard the consequences of
that testimony, wherewith the next page is filled, and with that question of
the essential or accidental change of the Elements,) seeing for one we may
bring five thousand testimonies in this urpose.

Reply.

The question is, you say, whether Saint John saw these Elders in heaven? And
that he did the text it self does witness. For that these Elders were the
same with the Elders in chap. 4. the continuation of the vision does infallibly
evince. And that Saint John saw those Elders in heaven, the 1 ver. of the 4
chap. does clearly prove, where it is said, After this I looked, and behold a
door was opened in heaven, and the first voyes which I heard, was as it were
of a trumpet, talking with me, which said, Come up hither, and I will show
thee things which must be hereafter. Now what heaven was it in which Saint John
saw a door opened, but the starry heaven, the same heaven, which Saint Stephen
saw opened, Acts 7.56? And what heaven was it, from whence he heard a voice
talking with him, but the third heaven? in the third heaven it was then
(whither Saint Paul was once caught up,) that Saint John heard and saw such
wonderful visions, and revelations, as soon as he was in the spirit, that is,
as soon as he was carried up by the spirit, whither he was before called by
the voice. And consequently, he saw these Elders in heaven: and this also the 6
and 7 verses of the 5 chap. do confirm, which show that these Elders were
there, where our Savior (represented by the Lamb that had been slain) was,
when the book of Revelation was given unto him. And as Saint John faw these
Elders in heaven, so Pareus makes report also of two sorts of interpreters, who
by these Elders do understand Saints in heaven. One, which takes them for
four and twenty and no more, for twelve Patriarchs, and twelve Apostles.
Another, which takes them for all the Saints then in heaven, to which
interpretation he himself enclines. And Piscator understands by them all the
faithful under both Testaments, under the Law, and under the Gospel; and so
makes these 24 Elders to represent not only the Saints then departed, but all
others also which should depart before Christ's appearing. And now seeing the
text shows that Saint John saw these Elders in heaven; and interpreters say,
that they represented the Saints departed, how can their words, we shall reign
on earth; be understood any otherwise then of their reigning after their
resurrection? Yea let them be taken for the Saints on earth, and yet their
words cannot be otherwise understood. For if they did represent the Saints
militant on earth, they did then reign spiritually when they spoke these
words. And therefore seeing notwithstanding their spiritual reign, they said
not, we do, but, we shall reign on earth; it is evident, that their words
cannot be meant of a reign which they should enjoy on earth, while they were
in their bodies before their death, (which by your own confession can be no
other but a spiritual reign) but of a reign, which they should enjoy on
earth, when they are again reunited to their bodies after their death. And
whereas the words in Romans 4.13. For the promise that he should be heir of the
world, etc. are by you thus interpreted, [ That he should be heir of eternal
life, Tit. 8.7.] When you can prove that [(...)] the visible world does
signify, eternal life: we shall approve of this exposition. In the mean
while, we shall understand it of the joynt-government of the world, by Abraham
and the rest of the raised Saints, in the time of Christ's reign on earth. At
which time also, they may well be said to be heirs of eternal life, and
coheires with Christ, seeing they shall rule the world with him, and can dye no
more. The other words Luke 19.17.19. [ are a part of a parable, and every part
of a parable is not argumentative, you say,] true, that part which crosses
some truth plainly delivered in the scripture, but that which agrees with the
plain scriptures as this does with the prophecies touching our Saviors and
the Saints regin^ing on earth, is argumentative. ^i^e why i^ i^ said, that our
Savior taught them in par^^^es, if parables do com^^^e no certain truth? And
what is the scope of this parable, but to show, that Christ was not to reign
over the J^w^ then a^ his first coming (when the Jew^s should refuse to have
him ^eign^ ^ver them, saying, We have no king but C^sar but at his coming
again from heaven with power and great glory? at which time he would make
those that had in their life time improved his spirit all stock, governors
under him. And lastly your s^^ighting of Wendelinus testimony, as a party: and
of this murg^^^ll note, as too mean for your meditation, is a fine sleigh^ to
excuse your not answering of them. To which doubtless you had nothing to say,
for else we may well think, that you would have been nibling at this marginall
note too, as well as you are at others: and that among so many thousand
opposite testimonies, you would have picked out an answer to this single
^^stimony of Wendeli^us.

Israel's Redemption. And this will appear to a diligent eye, even out of the
controversed place in Rev. ^0. for besides, that the opposition betwixt the
first and last resurrection, does impose the same sense on both; besides this,
I say, the vision represented not unto St. John, perfect men, (at the first,)
that is, men that should be beheaded for the witness of Jesus, but souls
only, and that a^ of men already beheaded: which most manifestly shows ^^at
the resurrection after mentioned, did follow their death, and not go before
it. And therefore, may not be taken spiritually, for their regeneration, for
the renewing of their minder, which is to precede their persecution, (and may
more probably be referred to the sealing of the servants of God in their
fortheads, spoken of in chap. 7.) But materially and properly, for the
quickening of their bodies, when once the number of the persecuted is fulfilled:
whose consummation and glorious exaltatition, this vision did represent.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. This form of discour song shows manifestly, that the
Author is a strange wrangler: for 1. There is no more opposition, nor
agreement betwixt the first and second resurrection, then is betwixt the first
and second death: but (...) will say, that the first and second deaths are in a
like sort bodily: and therefore there is (...) n^cessity to expone the first
and second resurrections in the same sense. 2. What p^rfection of wit is it to
i^^^gin^, that men who shall be beheaded for the witness of Jesus are more
perfect then the souls of them that are beheaded? 3. If by these s^ules he
under stou^^s the spiritual p^rt of ^^n, are they were ^^dap^^^ f^^^, the^ h^
must understand the souls other before they entered into the bodies, or after
they entered into the bod^^s before their regeneration: but both these
conditions are before the first resurrection. 4. If the first resurrection be
their forsaking of Antichris^i^^ e^^ours, or (as it is said there) their not
worshipping the Beast, and their not receiving his marks (as all interpreters,
except Milk^aries ex^one i^,) then the first resurrection follows not their
death, but goes before it.

Reply.

1. Surely he is a wrangler (and no other) who multiplieth words without
knowledge: and against all ^eason and evidence still persists in his error. To
make good then what I have said touching the opposition betwixt the first and
second resurrection, to wit, that it does impose the same sense on both, there
is this logical rule, Quod in omni legitima distributione, membra inter se
opp^^untur sub^eodem genere, That in every legitimate distribution, the members
are opposed under the same genus: that is, do divide the same thing, which
according to your expounding the first resurrection, of a bodily resurrection,
is so here. For we make the resurrection of the dead, or a bodily resurrection
to be the genus, the thing divided. And the first and second resurrections, to
be the members dividing this genus. And this ^^position these words in ver. 5.
But the rest of the dead, (that is, of them whose bodies were in the g^^ve)
lived not till the 1000 years were finished, do confirm. Seeing they do
necessarily imply that some of those that had been in the grave, were then
risen: for the partitive pronoune [(...)] the rest, does show, that they who
were risen, were before their resurrection held in the same condition, in which
these other were left, that is, under the power, and bondage of a bodily death,
as well as they. From which death these other also were to be deli^^^ed at the
last resurrection of bodies, described, ver. 12, 13. etc. But your expounding
the first resurrection, of a spiritual resurrection; and the second, of a
bodily resurrection does make the first and second resurrections, the members
of no resurrection. But parephruses only, and equivalent expressions, of a
spiritual and bodily resurrection; that is, the first resurrection to be all
one with a spiritual resurrection: and the second resurrection to be all one
with a bodily resurrection And yet in your answer here you acknowledge, what we
affirm, to wit, that the first and second resurrection are to be expounded in
the same sense. For [ there is no more opposition nor agreement, (you say)
betwixt the first and second resurrection, then is betwixt the first and second
death.] True, and are not these opposed under the same genu^? are not the first
and second death, both bodily deaths? doubtless the second death is not
opposed to the spiritual death of the soul, (which is a death in sin,) but
to the natural death of the body (which is the first death of it for sin,) and
this these words ver. 6. On such the second death has no power, do confirm;
for they do plainly intimate, that the first death of the body, the natural
death thereof had had power over them, as well as over others; although the
second death of the body, the supernatural death thereof, (which is its
destination to eternal torments,) should have no power over them.

2. Look again, and you shall find that there is more perfection of wit in
my words, then there is in yours. For furely I make no comparison betwixt the
spiritual perfection of men, who shall be beheaded, and the souls of them
that are beheaded, (but betwixt their natural perfection) for all that I say,
is this; That John saw not at first, perfect men, that is, men that should be
beheaded for the witness of Jesus; but the souls of men only: and that as of
men already beheaded. And what perfection of wit is it, to imagine, that a part
of a man (the soul only,) is a more perfect essence then the whole man, (then
the soul and body both?)

3. In the preceding words, you ask [ what perfection of wit it is to imagine,
that men who shall beheaded -- are more perfect then the souls of them that
are beheaded.] And so in that passage you grant, that I do take the souls
which Saint John saw, for the souls of men beheaded. And yet here you make
your self ignorant of the sense in which I take them. For you say [If by these
souls he understand the spiritual part of men ere they be made perfect, then
be must understand the souls before they entered into the bodies, or after they
entered into the bodies before their regeneration.] But surely I understand
neither of these by them, but the souls departed from their bodies, as the
text says they were: (and as any man may perceive by my words.) And what
perfection of wit were it, by souls only to understand souls entered into
bodies? Or what are both these parts of your answer, but a vain wresting of
the words [perfect men,] which (to avoid the answering of my argument) you
purposely mistake, for regenerate men: for men perfect in grace. Whereas
[perfect men,] opposed to the souls of men only, must needs signify, men
perfect in essence, men consisting both of bodies and souls. And therefore
that the reader may see how poorly you have shifted off the force of my words;
I will lay it before him in this Syllogism. If Saint John at first saw the
souls only of them that were beheaded, and not men that should be beheaded,
then by the word, [they lived,] is meant the living again of them that had
been beheaded, (the rising of men after their death,) and not the regenerating
of them that should be beheaded, (the rising of men before their death.) But
Saint John saw only the souls of them that were beheaded, and not men that
should be beheaded. Therefore by the word [they lived,] is meant the living of
them that had been beheaded, (the rising of men after their death,) and not the
regenerating of them that should be beheaded, (the rising of men before their
death.) For the word [(...)] they lived, must needs be opposed to the death of
the body, to the death of the b^headed, the death here mentioned: and not to
the death of the soul, the death of men before they are regenerated, a death
not here mentioned.

4. This argument is a mere petitio principii, a begging of the point in
question, for it supposes, that the first resurrection is to be understood
spiritually, which in the very subject of the controversy. And therefore it is
just as if you had said, If the first resurrection be that which we say it is,
then it goes before the Saints death, as we say it does: and surely if
interpreters do expound the first resurrection of the Saints, [of the forsaking
of Antichrist's errors, of their not worshipping of the Beast, nor receiving
his mark, and of their constant profession, etc:] then they do understand it
of the effects and consequents of the spiritual resurrection, and not of the
spiritual resurrection it self; For the regeneration of the Saints, is the
change and renewing of their souls by the infusion of sanctifying and saving
graces of their regeneration. And they do herein put a tautology upon the
text, which according to this interpretation must be thus paraphrased, And I
saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for
the word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither his image,
neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands, and
they lived, that is, and they worshipped not the Beast, not his image, nor
received his mark, etc. And if for the word, [they lived,] you say, they were
regenerated; I demand, when they were regenerated, were they regenerated again,
after they were beheaded, etc. and after they had in their life time refused to
worship the Beast, etc? For all this was revealed as past when St. John saw
their souls: and yet it was after he saw their souls, that they lived, and
reigned with Christ a 1000 years. Thus then is the text by your interpretation
deprived both of truth and sense, which taken in its proper signification, does
of it self speak in this manner to every understanding. And I saw the souls
of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus -- and (the souls of
them) which had not (in their life time) worshipped the Beast, neither his
image -- and they lived, that is, and they (that were thus beheaded) lived
again in their bodies; they rose from the dead, and reigned with Christ a 1000
years. But the rest of the dead lived not till the 1000 years were finished.
That is, till the resurrection of the dead described, ver. 12, 13. etc. And now
who has showed himself the [strange wrangler,] has this Author, or Mr.
Petrie?

Israel's R^demption. It is said also, that they lived and reigned with Christ
a 1000 years. But how can it be that they should reign immediately after
their resurrection: or begin their reign all at ouce: or continue it but a
thousand years, (which things these words imply,) if by their resurrection,
should be understood their regeneration: and by their reign, their being in
heaven? Or if by the word [they lived,] should be meant only, they were
converted: how can they reign so long as a thousand years, seeing the place
of their reign must be on earth? for if they should be any where else, how can
they be encompast again with war, when the thousand years are expired, as
ver. 9. declares they shall?

Mr. Petrie's Answer. If by their living and resurrection be meant their
constant profession, (as is said) and by their reigning their prevailing over
these heresies, all these mists are soon scattered; to wit, they reigned
before their death, and not after their resurrection: they began their reign
not all at once, but in their several ages, (even as the Millenaries do
imagine, that the Saints in that conceited Monarchy shall not live all at once,
but in their several ages dye again, and succ^ed one age to another for the
space of a 1000 years,) and so they reign not every one throughout the 1000
years, and so long space have some ever opposed the errors of the Beast: and
they reigning on earth have been encompast with war again, as it was
foretold, and Ecclesiastical histeries declare.

Reply.

This answer is a fallacy of the same strain with the fourth part of the
former answer. So that all it signifies unto us, is this, That if you say the
truth, then you say the truth. And seeing you affirm that by the Saints
[living and resurrection,] is meant [their constant profession,] and by their
reigning, [their prevailing over heresies;] I pray tell us, whether amongst
Christians there were to be constant professors, and prevailers over heresies,
the space of a 1000. years only, and no more? if there were to be such longer,
then this cannot be the meaning of the Saints living and reigning with Christ a
1000 years. And if there were to be such no longer, then when did the 1000
years begin, in which these constant Professors should be? if they began in
the time of the Apostles, then there are no constant professions and prevailers
over heresies now; nor have been in some hundreds of years before this. If
they began not at that time, then you will exclude the Apostles themselves out
of the number of constant professors, and prevailers over heresies: unless
you will divide the 1000 years, and say, that it is not meant that they lived
and reigned a 1000 years together, but at several times: and yet thus also
you must exclude some ages from having any constant professors in them, which
is quite contrary to the word of God, which shew^, that when Satan should most
prevail, should have most power to deceive, there should be some elect whom he
should not deceive. And whereas you say, [That those constant professors
reigning on earth, have been encompassed with warr^ again;] I pray tell us
when they were exempted from it the space of a thousand years? or when they
have been only encompast with it? Surely they have known but little peace,
and have not been only encompast, but often destroyed, and made away, by the
fury of their adversaries, whereas in the time of the Saints 1000 years reign
on earth with Christ, they are to enjoy peace so long, and when after these
years they shall be encompast by their enemies, not one of them shall perish,
but their enemies shall wholly be destroyed by fire from God out of heaven, as
Rev. 20.7, 8, 9. do manifest. And consequently all that you have said, or can
say, touching the present accomplishment of this prophecy, touching the
fulfilling of it before our Saviors appearing, neither has, nor can have any
truth in it. And lastly, as for the contents of your parenthesis, certainly we
do not imagine that the raised Saints, the Saints which the Lord shall bring
with him, (whom alone Rev. 20.4. does concern,) shall not live throughout the
whole space of a 1000 years reign: for we know that they can dye no more
after their resurrection. But we believe, that the converted Jews, and all the
Gentiles that are lest, (to wit, after the extraordinary destruction, which,
for their general opposing the Jews, shall light on them at our Saviors
appearing*) we believe, I say, that these, and their posterity shall live in
the like mortal condition as we do now; though they shall live much longer
then we do now.

Israel's Redemption. And lastly, The reign of Christ does not begin till
Antichrist is destroyed, so that a metaphorical interpretation of the first
resurrection, would make good this conclusion: That most of the Saints shall
rise many hundred years before their reign: there being no less distance of
time betwixt the hour of their calling, and Antichrists confusion.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. I have before made it clear, that Christ's Kingdom is
already begun: for he reigns in the midst of his enemies, not only by his
power overruling, disappointing and turning all their plots upon their own
pates, but also in comforting the hearts of the godly, so that they are a
terror to the whole earth, even to their enemies (who are many times more
afraid at the prayers of the godly, then at the cannons of other enemies,) and
subdue the spirits of the world, and bind Kings in chains stronger then iron:
And therefore that assertion falls. The reign of Christ begins not till
Antichrist be destroyed: and that absurdity following that assertion, is
falsely imputed to that interpretation.

Reply.

You have before alleged, Psalm. 110. to show that Christ does now reign in
the midst of his enemies; and we have showed, that that prophecy is not to be
fulfilled, until he comes from the right hand of his Father: and therefore you
have only said, and not proved that Christ's Kingdom is already begun. And
[That he does now by his divine power, overruled, and dispose of the actions of
men, and by his Spirit comfort the hearts of the godly,] is nothing to the
question in hand. For thus he governed the whole world, and his Church in the
world, as much before his incarnation, as he has done since. But the
prophecies which foreshew our Saviors Kingdom on earth, do clearly
manifest, that he is to reign over the world in the same manner as temporal
Kings do over their Subjects, to wit, visibly and civilly: that in the time of
his Kingdom, I say, the acts of his government are to be the immediate acts of
his manhood only, (although they proceed originally from his Godhead.) And
surely this Kingdom is not yet begun, nor shall begin till Antichrist be
destroyed, and consequently, the foresaid absurdity touching the great distance
betwixt the rising and reigning of the Saints, does inevitably follow upon the
spiritual interpretation of the first resurrection. And whereas you say, [That
the enemies of the godly are many times more afraid of their prayers, then at
the cannons of other enemies,] you herein contradict experience it self; for
what do the Mahometans, or any Pagan Nations regard the prayers of Christians,
whose very faith they account foolishness? or what do persecuting Christians
themselves regard the prayers of the persecuted, whom they think to be
worthily punished by them? doubtless they are no more afraid of them, then
Saint Paul was, when through a mistaken zeal, he was so exceedingly mad
against them, that he punished them in every Synagogue, and compelled them to
blaspheme, de persecuted them to strange cities. And therefore though the
prayers of the righteous may prevail very much with God, for their own, and
their enemies good: or for the disappointing of their enemies devic^s and
attempts; yet certainly their enemies can neither see, nor regard this,
unless God open their eyes, (as he did Saint Paul's,) to behold the
perverseness of their own ways, and the innocence and uprightness of them
whom they so much despise.

Israel's Redemption. The assumption is grounded on Rev. 11.15. which shows,
that till the time of the seventh Trumpet, (with the beginning whereof the last
vial does concur.) The Kingdoms of The Kingdoms of this world. It is not
said, The Kingdom of heaven, to wit, of the third heaven (the incorruptible
habitation of Saints and Angels) or of another world, I say of another in
substance. But the Kingdoms of this world, that is, this world which is now,
and shall till then be divided into many Kingdoms, shall wholly become
Christ^, and be made by him one heavenly Kingdom, a Kingdom, in which men
shall live after an heavenly estate and condition: a Kingdom, in which Gods
Will shall be done on earth, as it is in heaven. For seeing that cannot
possibly become any man's possession, which does utterly cease to be; what other
construction can be given of these words, but this; That the government of all
the Kingdoms of the world, is hereafter to be taken into Christ's own hands as
he is man? And indeed how else should they then become his, after such a
manner as they are not now his, if not by a subjection to his manhood? for as
he is God, they were always his, and all will grant that this Scripture does
plainly foreshew, a deposing of all the Kings of the earth at the
accomplishment thereof. A deposing of them, I say, in such a way, that their
Kingdoms may become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, which cannot
be by abolishing and dissolving the earth, on which they must reign: but may
and shall be by subduing and conquering them, and the Kingdoms over which they
must reign.
this world do not become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. The assumption, [he would say, assertion; but it is
marked before the Author is no Logician,] is grounded on Rev. 11.15. the words
are, The Kingdoms of this world, are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ. Here it is not said, Our Lord and his Christ shall not reign till
this time; but this is all that the words import, N^w is no Kingdom but our
Lords and his Christ's; And if it be objected, It is no where said so of Christ's
reign till this time of the seventh trumpet: and therefore it cannot be true,
that our Lord and his Christ do reign till then. I answer, ye have heard
before, that in the midst of these Kingdoms does Christ reign, even among
them* and over them, But all their Kingdoms shall be utterly destroyed, and
his Kingdom shall be for ever and ever, says John, and therefore not for a
thousand years only. Now if we lay together what is said of the Jews reign
bare, and this answer, we shall likewise see the vanity of that observation on
the margin upon these cited words: which is, It is not said, the Kingdom of
heaven, to wit, of the third heaven, or of another world, I say, of another in
substance, but the Kingdoms of this world, that is, which is now and shall
till then be divided into many Kingdoms, shall wholly become Christ's, and be
made by him one heavenly Kingdom, etc. For if we remember what is said, that
here John speaks of the Kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ: he speaks not
of the Kingdom of the Jews on earth: seeing he makes a distinction of two
persons, our Lord, and his Christ, that is, the Father, and the Son, and that
Kingdom is for ever and ever.

Reply.

As little Logic as the Author has left, he can tell that [Assertion] is not
a logical, but rhetorical term. And he does remember also, that in the
schools where he was bred, they were wont to call the [minor proposition,] the
[Assumption,] as he has done here; and can make it evident by this syllogism.
If the reign of Christ as man, does not b^ginne till Antichrist is destroyed,
then the spiritual interpretation of the first resurrection does make most of
the Saints to rise many hundred years before their reign. But the reign of
Christ as man does not begin till Antichrist is destroyed. Therefore etc. Now
what will you call this minor proposition? will you call it an Assertion, or an
Assumption? if an Assertion, you call it as no Logician calls it: if an
Assumption, then why may not I call it so too, without any off^nce to the
learned in Logic? Your answer follows, in which you say, [It is not said
here, our Lord and his Christ shall not reign till this time. But this is all
the words import, now is no Kingdom but our Lords and his Christ's.] And surely
this comment is a great deal more obscure then the text. For if you mean
only, that at the accomplishment of this prophecy, there shall be no Kingdom
over which the Lord and his Christ shall not reign; this is no more then what
you affirm to be done by our Lord and his Christ already: for you say, [That
at this present time Christ reigns, in the midst of these Kingdoms, even
among them, and over them;] But you must needs acknowledge a difference
betwixt his reigning over them now, and his reigning over them then; or else
you make this prophecy to be no prophecy, to foreshew nothing at all. And
wherein can this d^fference consist, but in his reigning over these Kingdoms
hereafter in his humane nature, which he does now over rule only by his divine
providence? for if by your foresaid words you should mean, that at the accompl
shment of this prophecy, there shall be no Kingdom but a spiritual Kingdom,
(which is all the Kingdoms you will allow Christ,) this is not only contrary
to the light of the text, but of reason it self. For there can be no
spiritual Kingdom on earth, unless there be withal a temporal, a civil
Kingdom, in which it may be set up. And the text speaks not of spiritual
Kingdoms, but of temporal; for it says, The Kingdoms of this world, that
is, the temporal and civil Kingdoms, which the Kings of this world do
reign over. These Kingdoms, it says, (be they the Kingdoms of Christian, or
of heat hen Princes,) shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, that is, shall by the Lord be put under the government of his Christ,
as he is man. And therefore the Kingdoms themselves shall not be then utterly
destroyed, as you say, but be made one Kingdom under Christ, as we say. And
indeed if we do but call to mind the time when this prophecy is to be
fulfilled, which is at the sounding of the last trumpet, when Christ himself
shall descend from heaven; we cannot imagine, that the Kingdoms of this world
should then become the Kingdoms of Christ, any otherwise then by a subjection
unto his manhood: then by submitting themselves to the ^ules of that
Ecclesiastical and civil policy, which he their King shall then command to be
observed by them. And now if the reader consider this, and remembers also what
clear prophecies there are for the restoring of the Kingdom of the Jews, he
will plainly perceive, that the time when the Kingdoms of this world shall
become the Kingdom of Christ, is to be the very same, in which he shall
restore again the Kingdom of Israel. And your precious subtilty touching [a
distinction of two persons, our Lord and his Christ, that is, the Father and
his Son,] does make nothing against this synchronisme. For they are said to
be the Kingdoms of the Lord; partly, because he shall them make it more
manifest, then ever he did, that they are his to dispose of; and partly,
because no other Laws but the Lords shall be observed in them. And of his
Christ, because no man but he shall be supre^me Head and Governor over them.
And surely the Kingdoms [(...)] of this world, cannot be the Kingdoms of the
Father and the Son for ever, if you take this word in an unlimited sense,
seeing neither this world in which they are, nor the civil societies of men of
which they do consist, shall be of an infinite duration. And I think too,
that you will not say, that by the Kingdoms of this world, that Kingdom of
eternal glory is meant, in which the Son also himself, shall after the
judgment of the dead, be subject unto the Father: unto him that before put all
things under him.

Israel's Redemption. And this also is intimated, by the binding up of Rev.
20.1, 2, 3. etc.
Satan a thousand years, (with which the reign of the Saints contemporates.)

Mr. Petrie's Answer. He said before, This chapter is controverted (to wit, by
the Millenaries on the one part, and all Christians on the other,) and now he
says, This his conceit is intimated in the binding up of Satan: which is as if
he had said, It is all undoubted what he says, and all is false that all
Christians say; whereas Christians have given better warrants of their
exposition, then Millenaries are able to do.

Reply.

I say not that the whole chapter is controverted, for doubtless no Christian
will deny, that the latter part thereof does speak of the judgment of the
dead at the last resurrection. But I speak of a controverted place in this 20
chapter, which is that touching the first resurrection. And yet suppose the
whole chapter had been controverted, I might nevertheless say, that this, or
that truth is not only intimated, but plainly expressed in it, as the first
bodily resurrection is plainly expressed in ver. 4, 5. notwithstanding the
disagreement of expositours about it. And as the deliverance of the Jews, the
restoring of their Kingdom, and our Saviors personal reign on eath, are all
so plainly expressed in the prophetical scriptures, as that nothing can be more
plainly spoken; although the proper interpretation of them be called in
question by most expositour^. Yea if we should say, that no more is plainly
delivered in the scriptures, but that which is not controverted by any, what a
small ^^^ance of scripture should we acknowledge for plain scripture? And
doubtless you your self will say, that most of the texts controverted betwixt
Protestants and Papists, and betwixt orthodoxe and heretical Protestants, are
plain texts: for difference in opinion, (for the most part) proceeds not so
much from the obscurity of the text, as from the obstinacy of such, who either
out of prejudice, or self-conceit, or for self ends, wrest it from the scope
and purpose of the Holy Ghost to countenance their private and perverse
fancies. And whereas you say, [That Christians have given better warrants of
their expositions, then Millenaries are able to do.] The reader may well
guess at the soundness of these words, by the state of your charity. For as
without any warrant you exclude all Millenaries from the communion of
Christians: so the truth is, that we justify our expositions, either by other
scriptures, or by the coherence of the precedent and subsequent verses, or by
the plainness of the texts themselves, (which are undoubtedly the best
warrants,) whereas you without any necessity enforcing thereto, do strain the
words of the text from their proper mean^ng: and so do impose upon them a
sense not minded by the Spirit of God, not warranted by other scriptures, and
whereof they are scarcely, yea in many places not at all capable: as your
answers do sufficiently testify against you.

Israel's Redemption. Which vision, as it is the next to that of the battle,
wherein the Beast and false Prophet are taken: so doubtless it shall not till
then receive its accomplishment; for seeing Antichrist is but the devils
instrument, we cannot imagine, that his power shall out-last the devils
liberty; especially if we consider, that while Satan is in hold, there shall be
a general peace over the world, as the Isai. 2.4. Mich. 4.3.
Prophets say expressly: and as is here employed, in that as soon as he is
loosed again, Rev. 20.7.8.
presently he shall gather all the rest of the world to fight against the
Saints. But their malicious attempt shall find no better success, then that
of the Beast, the false Prophet, and the Kings of the earth, (their
predecessors) had done at the beginning of the 1000 years. For fire shall come
down from God out of heaven, Ver. 9.
and devour them.

Mr. Petrie's Answer: This vision is ne^^^ that battle in order of writing:
but it follows not, that it shall not begin to be accomplished, till the
former vision be fully accomplished: for albeit Antichrist be the devils
instrument, it may be understood, (as histories do verify,) that his power
may be in the time of Satan's imprisonment, that is, while Satan is not
permitted to rage and persecute openly, as he did in the days of the
heathenish Emperors, in the mean time Antichrist may sit in the Church of
God, and deceive the world with lies, and fained miracles; so that even when
peace is in the world from wars, there be not peace from the children within,
( as Bernard complains in his time in Cantic. ser. 33.) and when he has
deceived the greatest part of the world, (except some few persons in comparison
of them who are deceived,) then Satan may stir up Antichrist to wage war
against the disclosers of his deceits, as he did against the Albigenses and
Tolosani about the year 1220. and against the Bohemians about the year 1420.
in the days of the Emperors Sigismund, Albert, and others: and so the
malicious attempt of Satan may have the same success with that of the Beast; I
say not the like, but, the same both in place, time, and number.

Reply.

That the binding up of Satan, and the thousand years reign of the Saints
were to contemporate, you do not deny; but that the binding up of Satan is to
succed the destruction of the beast and false prophet as well in the execution
thereof, as it does in the order of its revelation [it does not follow] you
say; and yet you bring no reason against it, whereas we have these unanswerable
evidences in the Text for it. First, that upon the binding up of Satan a
thousand years peace is to follow in the world: and secondly, that throughout
this time, Satan is to be withheld from deceiving the Nations; neither of which
was ever yet accomplished: For when was there amongst men such a time of rest
from war as this? or any time at all of immunity from Satan's temptations?
Whereas therefore you understand by Satan's imprisonment, no more then his
restraint from [raging and persecuting openly,] it is flat against the Text,
which says, that when Satan is shut up, he shall not deceive the Nations: and
not that he shall not stir them up to open persecution: which is but a
particular effect of his deceiving of them. And besides may not a secret
persecution be far worse then an open? And is not a power to deceive
Christians [by lies, and fained miracles,] more obnoxious to the Church of God,
then both these? What comfort then could this prophecy afford the faithful,
if, notwithstanding Satan's imprisonment, Antichrist should still prevail so
much amongst men? Or what new thing had been here revealed unto Saint John, if
no more but this had been meant, by the binding up of Satan? But indeed when
Satan shall be cast into the bottomless pit, and a seal set upon him, he
shall be debarred, not only from tempting, but from walking up and down
amongst men; and therefore it is no better then mere nonsense to say, that
when Satan is bound up, and withheld from deceiving man, he may yet have an
instrument [sitting in the Church of God, deceiving the world, etc.] For can
any man be an instrument to Satan, when Satan himself shall neither have power
to deceive him, nor liberty to come near him? Thus then your conceit of
Antichrists existence, and continuance in the Church after Satan's imprisonment,
and restraint, does plainly cross not only the order of this Revelation, but
the evidence of the Text. And your historical narration holds no
correspondence with this prophetical history of Saint John.

ISREAL'S Redemption. CHAP. IV.
The chief doubts Answered.

John ver. 36. may be objected, For there he says plainly, My Kingdom is not
of this world, and in Matthew. 25.31. he says, When the Son of man shall come
in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the
Throne of his glory: And before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall
separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides the sheep from the
goats. With which agrees that of Saint Peter, in his 2 Epist. chapter 3. ver. 7.
But the heavens and earth which are now, by the same word are kept in store,
reserved unto fire, against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men.
And many other places there are of the like nature. But to the first, I answer,
that those words of our Savior do only distinguish the time and condition of
his Kingdom, from the time and condition of the Kingdoms of this world: at
the setting up of whose Kingdom, there shall be such an Nec enim dubium, quin
maxima rerum naturalium and humanarum mutatio regni hujus auspicia sit
antecessura. Antichristus enim cum tota sua Synagoga abolebitur, extinguetur
hominum pars maxima, gentilibus non nisi paucis relictis, [qui in posteris
suis, non extra, sed intra regnum hoc mill annis supererunt, ut prophetiae
supra memoratae, cum aliis in Scriptura passim occurrentibus, abunde testantur;
sub decursum vero mill annorum mirum in modum aucti, and a Satana e carcere
suo saluto iterum seducti, Sanctorum castra oppugnabunt, sed incassum.] Nec
dubium est, quin rerum quoque naturalium, quae regni huius incolis
ministrabunt, long alia sit futura facies, quam impraesentiarum est: siquidem
beatissimum and tranquillissimum erit regni istius seculum, omnis (...), quae
in natura modo decurrit, expers. Mar. Frid. Wend. Contemp. Phys. Sect. 2. cap.
17. page 375, 376.
alteration over the whole frame of Psalm. 46. Isai. 2.12.19.21. chapter 11.6. etc.
chapter 30.25, 26. chapter 41.18, 19. chapter 55.13. Ezekiel. 38.19, 20. Matthew 24.29.30. Mar.
13.24, 25. Luke 21.25, 26. Rev. 6.12, 13. etc. chapter 16.18.19. etc.
nature, and such a change of government on the earth; that this time shall
then as well be accounted the time of another world, as the time before the
flood, is now taken for the old world by us; and was long ago so styled by
Saint Peter, in his 2 Epist. chap. 2. ver. 5. And therefore notwithstanding
this proof, the place of his Kingdom shall be the earth that now is, though
this be not the time, nor any humane policy the pattern of his reign.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. Our Savior distinguishes not betwixt the time of his and
other Kingdoms: for he says in the same verse, My Kingdom is not from hence,
that is, My Kingdom is at hand, as he said unto his Disciples, Matthew. 16.28.
Verily I say unto you, there be some standing here, who shall not taste of death
till they have seen the Son of man come in his Kingdom, that is, reigning
powerfully by the preaching of the Gospel: and Matthew. 24.14. This Gospel of
the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all
Nations, and then shall the end come. There is his Kingdom before the end of
this world: and now is the time of his reign; albeit no humane policy be the
pattern thereof. 2. If he had said to that purpose, (as the Millenaries say,)
that in time of his Kingdom, (being so nigh) the Kingdom of the Romans
should be no Kingdom, they might had more pretext of law for condemning him:
wherefore he distinguishes the condition of the Kingdoms, and not the time of
them: so that Caesar might been Emperor, and Christ a mighty King, both at
once. Non eripit mortalia, qui regna dat coelestia.

Reply.

1. That our Saviors Kingdom is to be a distinct Kingdom, both in time and
condition from the Kingdoms of this world, is a truth apparently delivered in
the scriptures. And for ought you have said to the contrary, we may still
think, that these words of Christ do intimate as much. For though you first
deny, [that these words do distinguish betwixt the time of his Kingdom and
other Kingdoms,] yet you presently give this sense to them your self, when
you say, [My Kingdom is not from hence, that is, My Kingdom is at hand.] And
therefore it was not then in the world; and if not then, sure I am, it has not
been yet: and so it is distinct in time too from other Kingdoms, as well as in
condition. I say it has not been yet, for what Kingdom of Christ has been
set up in the world since he spoke these words, which was not in the world when
he spoke these words? Certainly his spiritual Kingdom was as much in the
world at that time, though not spread so much over the world, as it has been
since. That Kingdom therefore, which you say was not then, but was at hand, is
not yet come; as the testimonies which you have alleged to prove that it was
then at hand, do testify against you also. For that text Matthew. 16.28. does
speak of a Kingdom to begin at Christ's appearing, and not before it: of a
Kingdom, I say, when the Son of man shall come, as it is in the same verse;
and when the Son of man shall come in the glory of the Father with his
Angels, as it is in the preceding verse. And therefore doubtless these words
of our Savior, Verily I say unto you, there be some standing here, which shall
not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his Kingdom, do
reveal a strange and extraordinary preservation of some then present, till
Christ's next appearing. For what does the [comming of the Son of man]
signify, but Christ's descending from heaven? and why did he subjoyne these
words to his speech, touching his coming in the glory of the Father with his
Angels, but because they are meant of the same coming? And besides the Gospel
had been before preached, by the Baptist, by Christ himself, and by the
Disciples; and not some, but all the Disciples lived to see it preached among
the Gentiles also; and therefore the seeing of this could not be the meaning of
our Saviors words. Thus then this first text does show, that the Kingdom of
our Savior is not yet come. And the other text Matthew. 24.14. does show only,
That the Gospel of the Kingdom, (that is, which makes report of the Kingdom,
or by which men are made partakers of the Kingdom of Christ,) should be
preached in all the world before the end should come: that is, the end and
destruction of Jerusalem, as the subsequent verses do declare; and not the end
of the world, as you affirm. For would Christ, think you, have advised them
to fly out of Judea into the mountains, from his presence at the end of the
world? Or how should it be worse for women with child, and for them that give
suck at his coming then for others? And now as for your exposition of these
words, [My Kingdom is not from hence, that is, My Kingdom is at hand] I pray
what interpreters do you follow in it? or what color have you for it? What!
are [from hence,] and [at hand] all one? or is [(...)] an adverbe of time, or
of place? Doubtless these words, My Kingdom is not from hence; are to be
understood, as if Christ had said, My Kingdom is not from beneath, but from
above. I am not to be made a King by the power of mortal men, but by the power
of the immortal God only. So that in his former words, My Kingdom is not of
this world; the preposition [(...)] of, does not indeed intimate any difference
in time or condition betwixt our Saviors Kingdom and other Kingdoms, but in
the cause and author of them; which sense it carries in our Saviors word,
Matthew. 2^.25. The baptism o John whence was it, from heaven, or of men? and in
the saying of Saint John 1 Epist. chap. 2. ver. 16. For all that is in the
world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is
not of the Father, but, of the world. And thus, My Kingdom is not of this
world, is no more but my Kingdom is not of men, if my Kingdom were of men,
then would my Servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews, but
now is not my Kingdom from hence, from the men of this world. 2 You tell us
next, [That if Christ had said, that in the time of his Kingdom, the Kingdom
of the Romans should be no Kingdom, they might have had more pretext for
condemning him.] But surely Christ had no need to answer to that which was not
asked: neither did the Romans, but the Jews desire his death: And yet as
before he spoke openly to the world, so now he spoke plainly to Pilates demand
too: for when Pilate said unto him, Art thou a King then? he answered, Thou
say that I am, etc. Which form of answering, was taken for an affirming of
that which was asked. (And therefore where Saint Matthew writes, Jesus said unto
him, Thou have said, chap. 26. ver. 64. Saint Mark has, And Jesus said, I am,
chap. 14. ver. 62.) And doubtless Pilate by this answer took him for such a
King to whom the Throne of Israel did belong, and yet he made it not a pretext
to condemn him, but sought to deliver him. And it is false also to imagine,
that the Kingdoms of this world shall not be taken out of the hands of their
several Governors, of their mortal Kings, when they shall become the
Kingdoms of Christ himself, when they shall be governed by him, and the
glorified Saints that shall come with him.

Israel's Redemption. And to all such places that mention only the dissolution
of the elements, and the last judgment; I answer, that these are but a part of
those things, which shall be done by Christ at his next appearing; and that as
other scriptures show only that he must reign on earth, and what shall be
done at the beginning of his reign, so these show only what shall be left
undone, till the close of his Kingdom, when he shall deliver it up to God,
even the Father.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. This shift will not serve their turn; for the soriptures
teach us, That at Christ's coming shall be the end, and he shall deliver up his
Kingdom, 1 Cor. 15.23, 24. etc. (I forbear to write any more of Mr. Petrie's
objections here, because I shall repeat them all in my reply.)

Reply.

You alleged even now such scripture against our Saviors reigning after his
coming, as does infallibly prove it to be then and not before, to wit, that
text, Matthew. 16.28. which shows that the Son of man's coming in his
Kingdom, is when he comes in the glory of the Father with his Angels; as by
comparing it with the former verse, it is evident. And yet here you call it [a
shift,] to say that some of the prophecies which concern the Day of our
Saviors appearing, are to be accomplished at the time of his coming, and some
in the time of his abode on earth, and some at the close of his Kingdom. And to
countenance your censure you heap up these objections following against us.

That the Scriptures teach us, that at Christ's coming shall be the end, and he
shall deliver up his Kingdom, 1 Cor. 15.23, 24.

That the end shall be, when after his coming he has reigned, till God has
put all his enemies under his feet; which will be fully accomplished when death
the last enemy is fully destroyed at the last resurrection: as we have showed
before.

That Christ shall come in a time when men look not for him, and all shall
rise again, both godly and ungodly, and then is the shutting of heaven, as the
parable of the ten Virgins teaches, Matthew. 25.

Matthew. 24.30, 31. of the gathering of none but the elect at his coming to
take possession of his Kingdom. And as for the day and hour of his coming,
we know that it is unknown to any; but it will not follow from hence, that he
shall not reign after his coming. And the parable of the ten Virgins does
show only, That those which at our Saviors coming are thought to be
faithful Christians, and are indeed but hypocrites, shall not be partakers of
his Kingdom. Hypocrites being of all others, most odious to our Lord and his
Christ.

That where Christ is, the faithful then shall be with him, John 14.3.



That the heavens must contain him till the time of the restitution of all
things, which God has sp^ken by the mouth of all his Prophets since the world
began: But the Prophets have foretold the last judgment, and that he shall
conv^^ce all the ungodly, Jude ver. 14, 15. Therefore he shall not return till
that time. And that is most plain, Psalm. 110.1. Sit at my right hand till I
make thy enemies thy footestoole: That sitting at Gods right hand is his
reigning, and it is not said, His enemies shall be subdued, and then he shall
reign, but, he shall reign till then: so that he reigns conquering, and he
conquereth reigning.

Psalm. 110. to show that Christ shall not come till the last judgment; it is
false that this Psalm does teach us any such thing: for it shows only, that
Christ shall not come till that day, in which God has appointed to make his
enemies his footstool; of which day, the last judgment is but the last act.
And it is false also, that Christ's sitting at the right hand of God. is his
reigning: For the Apostle Saint Paul says, That he sits not there reigning
over his enemies, but expecting the time in which they shall be made his
footstool, Heb. 10.13. that is, in which God shall bring him to reign over
them. And that which follows, in the Psalm, does show what is to follow
Christ's coming from the right hand of God, and not what is to go before it,
as is showed before.

That Christ's Kingdom is an heavenly Kingdom, 2. Tim. 2.17. and the reward of
the godly is in heaven, Matthew. 5.10, 11. as our Savior spoke of it, and never
of an earthly Kingdom, unless by way of aversation, Who made me a Judge?
says be, Luke 12.14. and the godly have prayed and wished to be with him in
the heavens, and never prayed to reign in his earthly Kingdom, 2 Cor. 5.1.6.
Phil. 1.3.

of the godly departed before Christ's coming, is to be both in heaven and on
earth. Although the text Matthew. 5.10. is meant only of Christ's Kingdom on
earth, called the Kingdom of heaven, partly because of the heavenly
constitution thereof, but especially because the God of heaven shall mightily
manifest his power in the setting of it up, and because Christ and the Saints
now in heaven, shall come from heaven to govern it. And we confess that
Christ at his first coming refused to be made a King, and to undertake the
actions belonging to his Kingly office, because that was not the time in which
he was to sit on the Throne of David, but when he should come again into the
world, as has been plentifully proved. And as Saint Peter, Acts 2.30, 31. does
plainly prove from the prophecy of David, Psalm. 16. That Christ's sitting on
David's Throne was not to foregoe, but to follow his resurrection. And what
though the godly living in this world have prayed and desired to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ in heaven? did they not therefore expect and wish to come
with him again from heaven? certainly it is notoriously false to affirm,
that the godly never prayed to reign in Christ's Kingdom on earth. For what is
it that Christ taught them to ask in these petitions, Thy Kingdom come; Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven? and what was it, that the sons of
Zebedee, and the penitent theife sought for? or what was it that the Elders
sang praise to the Lamb for, Rev. 5.9, 10? was it not because by his death he
had purchased for them a Kingdom then to come on earth?

That God has raised up Christ from the dead, and set him at his right hand in
the heavens far above all principality and power, and every name that is
named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come; and has put
all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things, Ephesians.
1.20, 21, 22. Whence it is manifest, that seeing our Savior governs his
Church, and all Spirits are subject to him, (which authority is given unto him,
and so as God-man) his Kingdom is not to begin as yet.

under his feet: or that all things are now (thus) subject to his manhood. For
who can better expound the Apostles meaning, then the Apostle himself? who in
Heb. 2.9. says, We see Jesus, who was made a little lower then the Angels for
the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor; that is, raised from the
dead, and set at the right hand of God in the heavenly places, far above all
principality and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named,
not only in this world, but also in that which is to come: as it is expressed in
Ephe. 1.20, 21. But now we see not yet all things put under him, says the
Apostle too, Heb. 2.8. which words are quite contrary to these, And has put
all things under him etc. Ephesians. 1.22. What shall we say then? that the Apostle
speaks contradictions? God forbid. For they are put under him in a
prophetical sense, by a certain appointment of it, which is the meaning of
the Apostle in the Ephesians, where he speaks (as the Prophet does) of what
God intends to do, as if it were already done: And they are not put under him,
in a proper and grammatical sense, by an actual performance, and visible
manifestation of it, which is the meaning of the Apostle in the Hebrews, nor
doubtless shall they be thus put under him, until that world to come, (of
which the Apostle speaks, Heb. 2.5. etc.) shall be put under him. And then
also he shall be visible Head over all things to the Church. For then he shall
sit and rule upon his Throne, (on the Throne of David, on which God has sworn
with an oath to set him, Acts 2.30.) And shall be a Priest upon his Throne, as
Zechariah has foretold, chap. 6. ver. 13.

That when Christ shall descend from heaven with a shout, and voice of the
Archangel, with the trumpet of God, the dead in Christ shall rise first, and
they who are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the
clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall be ever with the Lord, 1
These. 4. Here he is speaking of the same resurrection, whereof be speaks, 1
Cor. 15. as appears by ver. 52. and here he shows the rising of the dead, and
change of the living to be together, and that they both together shall meet the
Lord, and be ever with him.

shall neither stay with him there, nor ascend with him to heaven from thence,
but come with him, as Zechariah affirms, chap. 14. ver. 5. And the Lord my God
shall come, and all the Saints with thee. And as the Apostle in 1 These. 3.
says, At the coming of the Lord Jesus with all the Saints, and chap. 4. Even
so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. Bring with him?
when? but when they with the living in Christ have met him in their bodies. And
whither? but to the earth whence they were caught up to meet him; and where he
has appointed them to reign with him.

And that the Saints being raised shall not abide on earth to reign with the
Jews in earthly pleasures, it is manifest, because the Apostle teaches us, 1
Cor. 15.42. they shall rise in incorruption, ver. 43. in glory and in power,
ver 44. in spiritual bodies: And when Christ shall appear, we shall appear
with him in glory, Col. 3.4. But it is certain, that incorruptible, glorious,
powerful and spiritual bodies cannot live a nainrall life.

Mahometicall Paradise, to consist of chambering and wantonness, of riotous
and voluptuous living (this agrees not with the holy and righteous government
of Christ and the Saints,) and much less do we think, that the glorified
Saints shall be defiled with such doings, or that they shall live again such a
life as they did before their death, (this is your slanderous imputation.) And
therefore if you will conclude any thing against us, you must prove, that the
glorified Saints shall not live on earth any more, nor eat and drink any
more, (which things we affirm.) And not, that they shall dye no more, or marry
no more, or sin no more, all which we deny as well as you.

Neither can the faith of Christians, that Christ is come already, stand with
that imagination of Jews and Chiliasts.



Mr. Petrie's 1 proof of the 9 Object.

Seeing Jacob said, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, till Shiloh come,
and unto him shall the gathering of the people be. This place cannot be
understood of the departing of the Scepter for a time, as it was in the
captivity of Babylon; which because it was but a short time, and the Scepter
was restored again, it was not thought to be the accomplishment of the
prophecy: but now seeing the Scepter is departed, and the Nations have been
gathered unto Christ, who should doubt of the accomplishment thereof? and so
that Scepter cannot be restored unto the Jews.

Answer.

What? not restored? does Jacobs prophecy then foreshew, that the Scepter
should no more be restored to the Jews after Christ's coming? or does it
foreshew only, that it should not depart till Christ's coming? certainly it
foreshewes this last thing only. And therefore the accomplishment of Jacobs
prophecy has no affinity with your argument. And in saying that the Scepter
was departed from Judah in the captivity of Babylon, you plainly contradict
Jacobs prophecy, which says, that it should not depart from Judah till Shiloh
came. And as this prophecy shows, that it was not to depart till then, so
others do show, that it was to return again, as that of Hos. 4.5. which
shows that the Israelites should abide many days, (but not always,) without
a King, and without a Prince, and without a sacrifice, etc. And all the
prophecies which foreshew the Jews deliverance, the uniting of the Tribes
under one King, and our Saviors reigning over them, do witness the restoring
of the Scepter. And Saint Paul's application of that prophecy, Romans 11.26. does
show when the Scepter is to be restored, to wit, When the fullness of the
Gentiles shall come in. For then he says, All Israel shall be saved, as it is
written, There shall come out of Sion a Deliverer, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob. And so he plainly declares, that the accomplishment
of this prophecy shall be at Christ's last coming, at his coming, I say, after
the the gathering of the substituted Gentiles, (who were in the Jews stead to
become Gods people in the vacancy of the Scepter,) and at the gathering of all
other Gentiles, who are to become Gods people with the Jews, at the restoring
of the Scepter. And agreeable to this are Saint Peter's words to the Jews, Acts
4.31. Him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and Savior, for
to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins. And his words to
them, in his 1 Epist. chap. 1. ver. 13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your
mind, be sober, and hope to the end for the grace, that is to be brought unto
you, at the revelation of Jesus Christ.

Mr. Petrie's 2 proof of the 9 Object.

The Apostle says, 1 These. 2.16. Wrath is come upon the Jews to the
uttermost. This is not understood of spiritual wrath, seeing as yet the Lord
has mercy upon them, as the Apostle witnesses, Romans 11.5.28. and therefore it
must be understood of temporal wrath: and consequently a temporal Kingdom
shall not be restored unto them.

Answer.

Did you confider what you said, when you thus expounded the Apostles words?
Certainly the Apostle speaks of a wrath which was come upon the unbeleeving
Jews, who persecuted their believing brethren, and not of a wrath which was
come upon the believing Jews that were persecuted, whom the loss of their
country, and the departing of the Scepter did concern as well as it did the
other Jews. And therefore doubtless the wrath is to be understood of a wrath
peculiar unto the unbeleeving Jews, (of whom alone the Apostle speaks,) and
consequently of a spiritual wrath especially, and of a temporal wrath no
otherwise then as it is an inseparable effect and concomitant of the spiritual
wrath which is come upon them. And though this expression of the Apostle does
imply that a great wrath, and a wrath of long continuance was come upon them:
yet it does not show that the wrath which was befallen them, should be an
endless wrath. And therefore whatsoever the kind of it be, it will no more
follow from this passage of the Apostle, that the temporal Kingdom of the
Jews shall not be restored unto them, then it will, that their spiritual
blindness shall never be removed from them. Of the departure whereof, the
Apostle Romans 11. speaks so much, and so manifestly: showing that as there was
a diminishing and casting away of them; so there should be also, a fullness of
them, a receiving of them again. And the 5 and 28 verses of this chapter,
which you allege to show that the foresaid words in 1 These. 2. are not to be
understood of a spiritual wrath, do indeed rather confirm, then confute this
exposition. Seeing it is plain that the Apostle in ver. 28. speaks of such
Jews only, who for the Gentiles sakes that were to be received into their
room, were become the enemies of the Gospel of Christ: and consequently not
of such on whom God had mercy, or would have mercy, any otherwise then in
making of them instruments for the fulfilling of his promise made unto the
Fathers, touching that elect remnant of their posterity, whom he purposed to
call by a general conversion.

That the estate of the Church is described such, that the godly shall be mixed
with the ung^dly even till Christ come, and gather the tares from the wheat to
be burned, Matthew. 13.39.

ver. 41.) shall not be a Kingdom of such carnal delight, as you, to vilify
the truth, ascribe unto it. It being the only scope of this parable, and
anonother in the same chapter, to set forth the righteousness thereof.

Your last words are, All these and such like passages the Millenaries
willingly pass over. But let the reader judge, whether you have not more
cause, to be ashamed of such arguments, then we have to be afraid to answer
them.

Israel's Redemption. And in my conceit, Saint Peter in the very next verse
does intimate as much; for having before used the word [Day,] he warnes them
not to be ignorant of this one thing, That one day is with the Lord as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. As if he had told them, that
the day he spoke of, was indeed a thousand years, the Holy Ghost always using
it in this sense, when it is emphatically applied to our Saviors coming, or
the Jews redemption. (Which as it is already proved, shall happen at the same
time.) And though God, as he is eternal, cannot be measured by time: and as he
is immutable, feels no alteration in time: a thousand, (yea ten thousand times
ten thousand) years, and one day, (hour or minute of a day,) being in this
respect all one to him: yet this shift cannot void the exposition already
given; seeing the apparent dependence of these words on the former, does
clearly prove, that Saint Peter intended not to show, what a thousand years,
and one day were to God in regard of his nature, (which it is like they knew
before,) but only what is usually meant by one day in the word of God. And
indeed to what purpose had this sudden and serious advertisement been inferred,
if the Apostle did not hereby discover unto them, (besides the largest definite
and limited acception of the word) such a special relation of a thousand
years to one day, as cannot belong to any other number? when as touching Gods
immensity and immutability, one day might as well have been compared with ten
thousand times ten thousand, and thousands or thousands, (as I said) as with
one thousand years.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. Whatsoever be your conceit, you may see, that the Apostle
has another purpose there: for ver. 4. he tells of scoffers jeering at the
promise of Christ's coming, because all things continue as they were, and so
all things seem to have subsisting in themselves: he refutes this imagination,
and shows that the world both was made, and continues by the word of God, who
is able to destroy, (as sometimes he did,) and has appointed a day of
judgment and perdition of ungodly men. Here he puts the day of judgment
and perdition of ungodly men, for that the scoffers say where is the promise of
his coming? so that at his coming he will judge and punish the ungodly: which
is contrary to the opinion of the Millenaries. Then ver. 8. he answers to
that opinion of delay, saying, One day is with the Lord as a thousand years.
He says not one day is a thousand years, (as the Millenaries make the
commentary shorter then the text,) but is as a thousand years: and therefore
here is no exposition, but comparison, as if he had said; albeit a thousand
years seem a long time to us, and so the world seems to have continued
long, yet it is not so with the Lord, to whom all time is short, or none. And
then he shows the end why God delayeth that coming, to wit, in long-suffering
toward men, awa^ing the repentance of the last of them. Whereby you see another
meaning and another purpose, even contrary to that conceit of the Millenaries.
The Apostle might have named many millions of years, as one day in respect of
Gods eternity: but according to the usual custom of speech, he names a round
great number for any number.

Reply.

You had no other shift to avoid the answering of my former answer, but to call
it, a shift. And here you have dealt no better with me, then you have often
done before, to wit, left out what was most unpleasing to your self, and
instructive to the read (...), and made a flourish against the rest: and yet
all this will not serve your turn; for first it is a manifest slander, to say,
[That Christ's judging and punishing of the ungodly, is contrary to the opinion
of the Millenaries.] For do not we say, that the destruction of the Army in
Armageddon, is to be at our Saviors descending? as it is plainly revealed
Rev. 19. and alluded unto chap. 14. ver. 19, 20. and that there shall be then
also a destruction of all obstinate and rebellious sinners? as it is foretold
in 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9, 10. and Rev. 16.20, 21. and intimated in the parable of
the tares, and the net cast into the sea, Matthew. 13. and do we not say
likewise, that when the new insurrection of the Nations shall be at the end of
the 1000 years peaceful r^igne, fire shall come down from God out of heaven
and devour them, Rev. 20? And do we not hold that all this shall be before
the last act of the great day of the Lambs wrath, in which the sentence of
damnation shall be pronounced against all unbeleeving sinners at the last
resurrection? All this then being undeniable, there can be no truth in your
foresaid words. And as in ver. 5, 6. the Apostle shows the faithful why the
wicked should make a scoff at the promise of Christ's coming, and in ver. 9.
gives them the reason of Gods putting off of his coming so long; so in ver. 8.
he makes no answer to the opinion of delay, but puts them in mind of the
meaning of the day of judgment, spoken of in ver. 7; (which two verses do
seem to be brought in by way of Parenthesis.) For though a 1000 years, which
seem a long time to us, be but a short time with the Lord, (as you say;) yet
doubtless that which seems a short time to us, cannot be a long time to the
Lord. And therefore albeit the last part of Saint Peter's reciprocal
proposition may favor your interpretation, yet the first part will not suffer
it. Seeing that which is but one day with us, cannot possibly be as a thousand
years with the Lord: although the space of a thousand years with us, may be
but as one day with the Lord. And consequently the [(...)] the [one day,] in
ver. 7. must needs be meant of a prophetical day, of a day consisting of
years, (of so many years at least as the Apostle here speaks of,) and not of
a natural day, of a day consisting of hours; for how else should one day be
with the Lord, as a thousand years in regard of continuance of time? And
whereas you say, [That it is not said, one day is a thousand years, but is as
a thousand years.] I pray what difference in sense is there betwixt these
propositions? certainly the adverbe [(...), as,] does not always intimate a
comparison, but has diverse acceptions amongst which Pasor reckons its denoting
of the truth, and certainty of a thing, for one. And when it is used
comparatively, it does include an exposition also, as it were easy to prove by
many instances; and we need look no further then the 10 verse of this chapter
for an instance. But the day of the Lord will come (says the Apostle) as a
thief in the night: here the comparing of it to the coming of a thief does
show, that as it is unknown to all, so it is unexpected too of the ungodly, on
whom it shall come as a thief in the night, that is, altogether unlookt for;
and to whom also it shall be, as the coming of a thief in the night, that is,
fearful, unavoidable, and full of horror and amazement. And thus it is
evident, that our exposition of ver. 7. is the only adequate and full
exposition of the Apostles words, and that yours is but a defective and
partial exposition of it.

Israel's Redemption. This then being so, I see not, but that Gods
fore-appointment of a thousand years continuance to the world, for Sicut e
septenis annis, septimus quisque annus remissionis est: it (...) e septem
millibus annorum mundi, septimus millenarius, millenarius remissionis est. R.
Ketina. Vid. Com. Apoc. par. 2. page 287.
each several day of its first week, (the week of its creation,) might in
all likelihood, be the ground of this prophetical sense of the word [Day,]
wherein it was afterward delivered, by the infallible Penmen of holy writ.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. The certainty of all the appointments of God we
acknowledge, and the infallibility of his penmen: but where is it revealed,
that God has appointed a thousand years continuance to the world for each
several day of the first week? On the margin he cireth Rab. Ketina. comment.
Apoca. par. 2. p. 287. where are some testimonies in the Rabbines to this
purpose. Let Jews follow Jewish fables, to us Christians has God spoken in
the last days by his Son, Heb. 1.2. whom he has bidden us hear; Certainly
with a limitation, to hear none others.

Reply.

I do not say it is revealed in Scripture, that God has appointed unto the
world a thousand years continuance for each several day of its first week:
but that Gods fore-appointment of so many thousands of years continuance unto
the world, might happily be the ground of this prophetical sense of the word
[Day,] in the scriptures. Which space of time it does comprehend whenever it
is emphatically applied to the time of our Saviors appearing or the Jews
redemption, as Isai. 11.11. chap. 27.12, 13. and Amos 9.11. and 2 These. 1.10.
and 2 Timothy 4.8. do testify. And these texts in which it has the epithet
[great] annexed to it, Joel 2.31. Mal. 4.5. Jude ver. 6. Rev. 6.17. chap. 16.14.
And the learned do so understand the word [Day] too, in Gods threatening to
Adam, Genesis 2.17. because that threatening must needs be meant of a punishment
that should come on Adam for his disobedience, and consequently of a bodily
death, which yet he suffered not till near nine hundred and thirty years
after. And thus it is manifest, that we take this word in no other sense then
the Prophets do, to whom God spoke by his Spirit in time past; or then the
Apostles do, to whom God spoke by his Son first, and by his Spirit
afterward; or then God did (as many learned Divines acknowledge) in the
foresaid passage to Adam. And therefore we borrow it not from the Jewish
sables; although we will not reject any truth that the Jews hold, for fear of
being upbraided with their sables, or with the name of Jews. But what I so
much out of charity with the Jews now? Is not this the Name whose mystical
interpretation has stood you in such stead in the wresting of the prophecies
which concern them by Name, and none else? and did you not say, page 16. that
[the faithful are called Jews, not only typically, but likewise for the
special comfort of the Jews.] How did you dare then so boldly to abuse that
Name, by which (you say) the faithful are so frequently ^iled in Scripture?
And what comfort can it be to the Jews, that you lay claim to this Name in
the scriptures, where it belongs not to you: that you seem to take delight in
it there, and yet in your writings and common discourse, use it as a byword,
and term of reproach? or how can we think, that you apply the prophecies
touching the Jews, to the Christians, for any other reason, but because you
think such great and glorious mercies too good for the Jews: how, I say, can
we think otherwise, when as we see they are so odious unto you, that in mere
scorn and derision of the truth we hold, you call us Jews by way of
opposition to Christians? I pray remember what our Savior is as man, is he not
a Jew? me thinks then, (if ^^ought else could, yet) the reverence you owe to
him, should have with held you from such an uncivil usage of this Name.

Israel's Redemption To this also may be added that i^ Matthew. 24.31. which
shows that when the Son of man des^ends, He shall send his Angels with a
great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the
four winds, from one end of the heaven to the other: at which time, two shall
be in the field, the one shall be taken and the other left; two women shall be
grinding at the Mill, the one shall be taken and the other left: and as Saint
Mark record* two men shall be in one b^d* (...) one shall be taken and the
other left. chap. 17.34.
But if our Savior at his coming shall presently give ^^ntence on all that
are not written in the Book of life: if he shall make no stay on earth before
he undertake this business, then why shall the elect only be gathered
together; and the rest left behind? seeing that great Assist it to be h^ld
chiefly for the condemnation of ungodly men.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. 1. Here is nothing to prove the Monarchy of the Jews. 2.
The two Evangelists speak there of the gathering of the Elect, and taking them
up, ( as also 1 Cor. 15.23.) yet they speak not exclusively* as if the ung^dly
shall not be judged, nor raised, but they speak of separation, and ^hereby of
taking the elect into the ^are, and heavens, whereas the wicked shall not be
taken up, but left on the earth, and be condemned, and sent to hell, Matthew.
13.40, 41. and it follows. ver. 43. Then shall the righteous shine forth,
etc. The particle then shows that the w^ck^^ shall b^ ^ast into the furn^^e of
fire, as soon (if not sooner) as the righteous shall shine in the Kingdom of
the Father. 3. If the righteous shall be taken up, and the ungodly left on the
earth, that is, the one taken away from the earth, and the wicked left on the
earth, then the godly shall not have earthly do^inion. 4. If Christ at his
coming shall hold that great assise chie^ly for condemnation of the wicked;
how then shall the godly be quickened, and the wicked be left in their graves
after them for the space of a 1000 years? These things cannot agree.

Reply.

1. Here is nothing, (you say,) to prove the Monarchy of the Jews. But here is
something, we say, for the confirmation of our Sav^ours reign on earth, which
is all one.

2. The Evangelists speak here only of the gathering of the elect to meet
Christ at his coming, and not at all of the raising and judging of the
ungodly, because that is not to be done at the beginning, but at the end of his
reign. And then it is that the whole number of the elect, and of the
reprobate, shall be separated, one company on his right hand, and the other on
his left: and not one part caught up to the air, and the other left on the
earth. And we confess that the casting of the wicked into hell mentioned in
that parable, Matthew. 13.42. shall be at the entrance of the time in which the
righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. But we
deny that this casting of the wicked into hell, is meant of their casting in
after their resurrection, when they shall all at once receive the sentence of
d^mnation from Christ himself. For first, it is not said here, that they shall
be gathered together before Christ, as it is said Matthew. 25.32. etc. But that
the Angels shall gather them out of Christ's Kingdom, and cast them into a
furnace of fire: that is, shall destroy them in every place over the world
where they then are, and cast their souls into hell, as is intimated by the
binding of the tares in bundles to burn them. That is, as they find them here
and there in the field. And secondly, it is said, that they shall be gathered
out of Christ's Kingdom, and cast into bell, that is, shall be taken away from
the place where, and from among the men over whom Christ shall then reign. And
therefore this gathering of the wicked i^ to be at the beginning of Christ's
Kingdom, and before their last judgment: and not at the end of Christ's
Kingdom, when they shall be fetched out of hell again to receive their last
judgment. And that the foresaid judgment is meant of a temporal destruction
on all obstinate sinners, that are living at Christ's coming, and not of the
eternal destruction of their bodies and souls together at the last
resurrection, it is evident also from Rev. 20.9. where it is revealed, that all
the ungodly that are to oppose the Saints at the end of the thousand years
reign, shall be devoured by fire from heaven, before the last resurrection; so
that there shall be none of them living on the earth, when they are to be
gathered before Christ at the last judgment: and consequently, that gathering
of them cannot be the same with this gathering of them, when they shall be on
the earth, Matthew. 13. And so by the Kingdom of their Father, mentioned ver.
43. must needs be meant, the Kingdom of Christ, spoken of ver. 41. which in
called, the Kingdom of their Father, because Christ with whom these Saints
shall reign, shall receive it of God, who is both his and their Father.

3. The righteous shall be caught up to meet Christ, and to come along with
him to the earth. And not to stay with him in the air, or to be carried up to
heaven from thence; as has been showed already more then once. And therefore
this is but a trifling argument.

4. This argument is a supposition of that which we deny. For it is our
argument against you, That seeing the elect only shall be raised and gathered
together at Christ's coming, and the ungodly which are left in their graves,
(and that the mischievous ungodly which are living, shall be left also to
perish extraordinarily, as it is Matthew. 13.41, 42. and the rest to be
eyewitnesses of Gods wonders at that time, and to become converts by it, as it
is Isai. 66.19, 20. Joel 2.32. Zech. 14.16. Rev. 11.13. and in other places.)
Therefore the last judgment, the great Assise, (which is to be held chiefly
for the condemnation of ungodly men,) cannot be at, or presently after Christ's
coming, but shall be at the end of his reign. And so this part of your answer
is a mere perverting of my words, which agree so well in themselves, and with
the word of God, that you had naught to say against that which they prove, and
therefore you fallaciously make them to grant, what they do indeed disprove.

Israel's Redemption. Who doubtless are not to be left, that the evil Angels
may fetch them, for they shall be partakers with them of that judgment, and
therefore will be as unwilling to app^are before that bar, as they. Neither
is it likely, that they shall be left, because the good Angels cannot at once
assemble them to the place of judgment, and the elect to meet the Lord in the
air, if these things were to be done at the same particular time. And
therefore as I suppose, they shall be left, either to perish in that general
destruction, which shall come upon all Nations that fight against the Jews,
whom our Savior shall then redeem; or to be eyewitnesses of Gods wonders in
all countries at that time.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. What can either good or evil Angels do without the
Lords Authority? and what can they not do, when he wills? but certainly the
wicked shall both be witnesses of Gods wonders, and likewise perish in that
general destruction: that cause of their condemnation is touched before.

Reply.

We know that neither the good nor bad Angels can do any thing without the
Lords Authority, but what is this to the force of my words, which consists in
this; that seeing the good Angels, which can at once assemble the unjust to the
place of judgment, and the elect to meet the Lord in the air, shall yet
gather the elect only, and leave the rest behind; therefore these things are
not to be done at the same time. And consequently, that the judgment of the
dead is not to be at the time of Christ's ascending. For then doubtless the
wicked should as well be gathered to the place of their last judgment, as the
elect shall to meet the Lord in the air. And it is flat against the express
word of God, Isai. 66.19, 20. Joel 2.32. Zech. 14.16. Rev. 11.13. to say, that
all the wicked that shall be eyewitnesses of Gods wonders at the time of our
Saviors descension, shall perish in the destruction that shall then come on
the earth.

Israel's Redemption. For that by Christ's judging the quick and the dead,
mentioned in 2 Timothy 4. cannot be meant one kind of judgment, Psalm. 2.8. etc.
Ps. 110.2. etc. Ps. 149.6. etc. Isai. 30.25. Cha. 66.1^, 16. etc.
to wit, the sentence of damnation; that by his judging the quick, I say,
cannot at all be meant the last and complete, but rather a former and inchoate
judgment of ungodly men, it appears out of Rev. 20. where it is shown, that
the Saints enemies shall be all slain before the last resurrection. And we
cannot say, that these which are to be left, shall be a part of that Army there
spoken of; because that Gog and Magog is to be destroyed at the end of our
Saviors reign, that is, immediately before the last resurrection: whereas
these shall be alive, at the time of that general distress, which shall light
on the world, at his entrance into that appointed Kingdom, as the gathering
together of the elect, who are to reign with him does declare.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. Here (at before) are strange imaginations. 1. That text 2 Timothy 4.1. cannot be meant of the last, but a former judegment, Who ever said
before, that Christ shall yet appears twice to judge the quick and the dead?
For suppone, that only the godly shall be raised at Christ's coming, yet they
will not say, that he shall judge them, seeing they say, that they shall not
stand at the bar. 2. The judging of the quick and the dead, shall be before
the time of the last resurrection, as that form of arguing imports: whereby it
follows, that Christ shall judge the quick and the dead in a former and
inchoate judgment. Who shall remain then to be judged in the complete
judgment at the last resurrection? 3. I will say no mere of that fancy
concerning these that shall be left, and the destruction at the entrance of
that Kingdom: but mark that God and Magog is to be destroyed at the end of
our Saviors reign, that is, immediately before the last resurrection, or
(which is one) after the reign of the Jews. But that Army of Gog and Magog is
the same with the Army mentioned in Revel. 16.14. as Napeir proves, Prop. 32.
And Mr. Maton proves in his treatise of Gog and Magog, page 94, 95* And I have
showed before, that the sixth vi^^ll mentioned in Revel. 16.12, 13, 14. is the
same with the sixth trumpet: yea, and Clavis Apocalyp. in par. 1. synchro. 7.
makes it to concur with the destruction of the Beast and Babylon, which shall
be before the Monarchy of the Jews, as the Millenaries hold: and therefore in
this point Mr. Maton is contrary to himself, and to Clavis Apocal. as well as
unto Christians, who deny that Monarchy of the Jews. Whereby it is manifest,
that what he speaks here without reason must be wrong, and amended by these
reasons which he has lo. cit. And consequently, that great battle shall be
fought not after, but before the Jews shall reign, if ever they shall reign
in that manner.

Reply.

The truth is strange to none, but to such as make themselves strange to it. He
seems to be a sitter forth of strange gods, said the Athenians of Saint Paul's
preaching unto them Jesus and the resurrection, Acts 17.18. When as indeed
their Gods were the strange Gods, and not his God: they in an error, and not
he. And yet how strange soever our former imaginations do seem to you, we
have showed that they are not so strange as true. And that these words do
bring such strange things to your cares, was not the fault of the Author, but
the error of the Printer, and the over-hastinesse of the Stationer, who sent
his books abroad before he had received a copy of all the faults: whereof the
words here omitted were the greatest, and are to be corrected, as they are now
set down, to wit, thus. ( For that by Christ's judging the quick and the dead,
mentioned 2 Timothy 4.1. cannot be meant one kind of judgment, to wit, the
sentence of damnation: that by his judging the quick, I say, cannot at all be
meant, the last and complete; but rather of former and inchoate judgment of
ungodly men; it appears out of Rev. 20. where it is shown, that the Saints
enemies shall be all slain, before the last resurrection.) This is the true
form of my words, and in this form they do wholly disanull the two first
parts of your answer; for the destroying of the Army in Armageddon at Christ's
coming, Rev. 19. and of the Nations that shall again be gathered against him
and his, at the end of his reign, Rev. 20. are temporal judgments on the
ungodly; and before their last judgment, the judgment after their
resurrection. And therefore Christ shall not appear twice to judge the quick
and the dead, but shall twice judge these ungod^y after his appearing. That is,
once by a former and inchoate judgment in their temporal destruction, (in
their first death:) And again by a final and complete judgment in their
eternal destruction, (in their second death.) And as for the third part of
your answer, it is but a slanderous information against me. For I say not that
the Gog and Magog mentioned in Rev. 20. is the same with the Army mentioned
Rev. 16.14. but that Ezekiels Gog and Magog is the same with that Army, as the
rea^ons which I allege page 94, 95. do show. And I say that the Gog and Magog
in Rev. 20. is a different Gog and Magog from Ezekiels, as these words, page
128 do witness. [ And this Gog and Magog in Rev. 20. is to be the multiplied
posterity of those that are left of the Nations at the beginning of the
thousand years: when the Army of the Beast and false Prophet, and of the Kings
of the earth, and of the whole world, (who as the parallel shows are the Gog
and Magog foretold by Ezekiel) shall be destroyed in Armageddon.] And again
page 129. I say, [ That the Nations which shall oppose the Jews at their
expected return, are to be the Gog and Magog foretold by Ezekiel: and that the
posterity of those which shall be left alive of th^se Nations, when this Gog
and Magog is destroyed, shall be the Gog and Magog foretold in Rev. 20. to
arise when the thousand years peaceful reign is finished.] Whereby it is
manifest, that against your own knowledge, you have misreported the evidence
of my reasons, and charged me with a contradiction of your own devising. And
as it is very false, that I am in this point contrary to my self, so it is as
false, that I am herein contrary to Clavis Apocal. For the fourth synchronisme
of the 2 part does infallibly prove that the Army of the Nations mentioned
Revel. 20. is to be a distinct Army from that in Rev. 16. whose destruction is
revealed, chap. 19. The words inferred upon the second argument of this
synchronisme, page 26. are these. Mark here reader, the chronicall character;
by which it is intimated, that this whatsoever it is concerning Satan, being
taken and condemned after his second loosing, it succeeds the vision of the
former chapter concerning the Beast and false Prophet, being vanquished, ta^en,
and thereupon cast into the lake burning with fire and brimstone, by him which
sat upon the white horse, as in order of narration, so also in the time of the
thing done. For otherwise it should not have been said, that Satan was sent
thither, where both the Beast and false Prophet were, except both the Beast and
false Prophet had been sent thither first. Neither can any man of judgment say
by way of evasion, that this war ( of chap. 20.) after a thousand years, is
not different from that of the former chapter; when as not only the character
already brought, but also all circumstances on both sides are repugnant; the
parties, the battle, and the manner of the slaughter, there with the sword,
herewith fire; yea and the event of either war unlike, as anon the matter
being demonstrated, shall be made plain, there the binding of Satan only for
a time, but here a condemnation to eternal fire, etc. And Clav. Apocal. in
part. 1. synchro. 7. does speak nothing of the Gog and Magog in Rev. 20. but
of the utter destruction of the Beast and Babylon at the effusion of the last
vial.

Israel's Redemption. And to this conjecture, Isai. 27.12. does sufficiently
confirm; For the great sound of the Trumpet before spoken of in Saint Matthew,
as a warning of the gathering together of the elect, is there said to be a
warning also of the Jews return: the words are these, It shall come to pass
in that Day, that the Lord shall beat off from the channel of the river unto
the stream of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye children of
Israel, and it shall come to pass in that day, that the Isa^. 18.3. Zech. 9.11.
great Trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were ready to perish
in the Land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the Land of Egypt, and shall
worship the Lord in the holy Mount at Jerusalem.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. If this be a conjecture, how is it sufficiently confirmed
by the Prophet? or if it be sufficiently confirmed, why is it called a
conjecture? A conjecture it is, and has no warrant from the Prophet: for the
Prophet and Evangelist are not speaking of the same purpose: the Prophet is
speaking particularly of the Jews deliverance out of Syria and Egypt, and of
the t^umpet that did sound at the proclamation of Cyrus for their return,
which was past before the days of the Evangelist. And nevertheless our
Author concludes triumphantly.

Reply.

And why may not a conjecture be as well confirmed by scripture, as grounded on
scripture? yea whence can such a conjecture have a better confirmation then
from scripture? And that this conjecture, (to wit, That some of them who are
left, when the elect shall be gathered together at Christ's coming, shall be
left to perish in the great destruction which shall then light on all Nations
that sight against the Jews, and others of them to be eyewitnesses of Gods
wonders at that time,) that this conjecture, I say, is warranted by the
Prophecy of Isaiah, touching the Jews return, chap. 27. ver. 12, 13. it is
evident, first, from the identity of the sign, which is to precede the
accomplishment of this Prophecy, and that of our Savior Matthew. 24.31. For what
is the great sound of the trumpet mentioned by the Evangelist, but the blowing
of the great trumpet foretold in Isaiah? And secondly, it is evident from the
contents of the prophecy which speak not of the return of the two Tribes, of
the return of the captivity of Judah and Benjamin from Babylon: but of the
return of the ten Tribes, of the return of the captivity of the children of
Israel from Assyria; who, as Divines confess, did never yet return. And admit
it had been spoken of the return of the two Tribes, yet it could not be
already accomplished, because it foreshewes the return of the Jews out of
Assyria in a time when they shall be ready to perish there; which cannot be
affirmed of the Jews, that returned to Jerusalem upon the proclamation of
Cyrus, by whom they were so much favored. And by whose command the Jews that
returned, were so much enricht with silves, and gold, with goods, and with
beasts, etc. as it is written, Ezra 1.4. And although it be true, that Cyrus
made a Proclamation throughout all his Kingdom for the returning of the Jews,
yet we ^eade not of the sounding of any trumpet at the proclamation. And if it
had been a custom to do so, not one, but many trumpets doubtless had been
sounded at the publishing of that proclamation, which was by many messengers
sent into all the Provinces of Cyrus Kingdom, to whom God had given all the
Kingdoms of the earth, Ezra 1.2. And lastly this Prophecy does intimate a
gathering, and bringing of the Israelites to Jerusalem, by the extraordinary
power of God. A gathering of them. I say, not by the help and assistance, but
against the will and resistance of earthly Princes, as is plainly foretold
Zech. 9.12, 13.14, 15, 16. and in many other Prophecies. And seeing we have
alleged so many clear prophecies for the vindication of the truth we hold,
why may we not say, as the Apostle does Heb. 12.1. (after that he has by
diverse instances set forth the force and efficacy of a justifying faith,) to
wit, that we are compast about with a great cloud of witnesses: of which surely
every single prophecy, (as it is of it self sufficient, so it) ought to give
satisfaction to a Christian; who is as well bound to manifest his obedience
toward God, by the readiness of his belief, as by the righteousness of his
life. By his confiding on the accomplishment of Gods prophecies, as by his
conforming to the practice of Gods precepts, as it is said, 1 John 3.23.

Israel's Redemption. And thus being thr^ughly satisfied by this cloud of
witnesses, the double Jury of Prophets and Apostles, with which I find the
doctrine of my text to be encompast, I here give over the pursuit of these
meditations, and commend to as many as wish well to themselves, and to Zion,
these instructions following.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. If you be thoroughly satisfied, why have you so often used
the words of probability, conjectures, my conceit, it may be thus or thus?
these words smell not of satisfaction, nor of that certain knowledge and
steadfastness, which is required, 2 Pet. 3.17. As for that double jury, it may
evidently appear that both Prophets and Apostles are contrary to such fancies.
It may be, the Uses of this doctrine are commendable, yet if wrong premises be
powerful to persuade. Nevertheless hear all.

Reply.

We bring not only probable, but demonstrative and necessary arguments also to
justify the truth of our tenet. And besides all this, we allege for it a
large Catalogue of clear and invincible prophecies: from which as we receive
full satisfaction our selves, so (that we might shun the guilt of keeping
back any part of the counsel of God, Acts 20.27) we hold them out to others
too, that as many as God has appointed by our Ministry to call to the
knowledge of this truth, may be partakers of the like satisfaction with us. And
what though I have in some places used the word [probable,] and once, the word
[conjecture,] and sometimes said [in my conceit?] shall that therefore of which
I so speak be suspected for an untruth? I pray tell me why my conceit may not
be as agreeable to the truth, as any others? or why without any disadvantage to
the truth, I may not use such expressions, as the penmen of holy writ have
done? How much was Saint Peter beside the truth, when in answer to our Saviors
demand, touching the two creditours, Luke 7.42, 43. Tell me, which of them will
love him most? he said, I suppose, he to whom he forgave most? Certainly
nothing at all, for Christ replied, Thou have rightly judged. Or what was Saint
Paul's counsel the worse for saying, I suppose, that this is good for the
present distress, 1 Cor. 7.26? Or will you say, that it was doubtful whether
Saint Paul had received the Holy Ghost, because ver. 20. he says, And I think
also that I have the Spirit of God? Or can you imagine that the Apostles took
not the best course for the pacifying of the difference that was risen in the
Church of Antioch, betwixt the Gentiles and some believing Jews about
circumcision, Acts 15. because they wrote in this form, It seems good unto
us, ver. 25. and again ver. 28. It seems good unto the Holy Ghost and to us?
If you dare not say, or once imagine; that these words do argue
unstedfastnesse or uncertain knowledge in these, then how can that be true,
which you say here, that words equivalent with these, [smell not of
satisfaction?] And if these words argue uncertain knowledge and
unstedfastnesse in us, then what do they argue in you? who even in the second
and third pages, have your [may be: me thinks: why may we not think thus, or
thus; it is likely; it is not unlikely.] Certainly as to c^vill at words, and
phrases, shows the weakness of your cause so to blame another for that which
you your self may as well be blamed, does show the malice of your mind.

Israel's Redemption. First, to praise God for his abundant mercy, who through
the fall of the Jews, has brought salvation unto us Gentiles: that together
with them, we might partake of the root, and fatness of their Olive tree.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. Whether is it more to the praise of Gods mercy and
bountifulness, that the godly shall come again from the heavens to abide so
long on the earth; or to abide in that glory of heaven for ever and ever?
certainly the gift of the greater and uninterrupted glory deserves the greater
praise: and while they were on earth, they professed themselves to be strangers
from home, and pilgrims on their journey toward their home, Heb. 11.13. and
shall they come as pilgrims again?

Reply.

Doubtless God is not to be taught by us, [what reward is most to the praise
of his mercy and bountifulness toward the godly.] But we are to account that
reward most to the praise of his bountifulness and mercy toward them, which
we find in his word to be appointed unto them. And we do conceive, that the
glory of the Saints after their reunion to their bodies, will be greater
(because more perfect) though they live on earth: then the glory of their
souls is now without the fellowship of their glorified bodies. And we know not
what should interrupt their glory on earth, when as Christ himself, (on whom
the Angels shall visibly attend,) shall be on earth with them: and God himself
also may here manifest his glory unto them, in what measure he pleases. And
though Abraham and some other of the Patriarchs, (to whom God had promised the
possession of the Land of Canaan,) did in their corruptible estate here live as
strangers and pilgrims in that land; yet they shall not after their
resurrection possess it as strangers and pilgrims, but as heirs and coheires
with Christ. And where as you say, [That it is a greater gift of God, that the
godly should abide in that glory of heaven for ever and ever, then to come
again from the heavens to abide on earth.] You seem to me to imagine, that
the godly shall never again come from thence, (as your denying also, page 54.
that Christ shall bring all the Saints with him, does testify against you,)
which conceit is contrary to all the scriptures that affirm the resurrection,
and the Saints appearing with Christ. And I pray, where do you find in
scripture, that the Saints shall after their resurrection live in a place
separate from the earth? Certainly they are after the last judgment, to be
translated into the new Jerusalem: and that City is then to descend to the new
earth, as we read Rev. 21.2, 3. And lastly, what affinity has ought that you
have said here, with the use you answer? what! shall we not praise God for his
mercy in making us partakers of the fatness of the Jews Olive tree, while we
are here; although it were a greater happiness for us to be ever in heaven
after our departure, then to come again to the earth?

Israel's Redemption. Secondly, to beware of unbelief: which was the cause
that the Jews were broken off from their Olive. And if God spared not the
natural branches, much less will he spare us, if by faith we continue not in
his goodness.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. It is greater unbelief to despise the revealed truth of
God, then to despise the fancies of men, as this Monarchy is proved to be.

Reply.

It Is true, that it is greater unbelief to despise the revealed truth of God,
then to despise the fancies of men. And it is as true, that it is a sin but
little inferior to that against the Holy Ghost, wilfully to call a revealed
truth, an humane fancy; that it may be drawn into scorn and contempt under
this notion. And surely seeing it is a great unbelief to despise the revealed
truth of God, therefore we have great need to beware of such unbelief; as it
is said in the use.

Israel's Redemption. Thirdly, not to contemn or revile the Jews, a fault too
common in the Christian worlds and that partly, because we are unmindfull as
well of the Olive from whence we were taken, as of that into which we are
graffed, whose root bears us, and not we the root, and partly, because we
misapply the infallible promises of God, by which he has so freely, and so
feelingly: so often, and so openly declared, that he will again graffe them in.
For if we were cut out of the Olive tree, which is wild by nature, and were
graffed contrary to nature into a good Olive tree, how much more shall they
which be natural branches, be graffed into their own Olive trees Romans 11.24.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. Whether serves more for to move us to love the Jews, to
know that the Jews and Gentiles are one in Christ, whenever they shall be
converted: or to think, that the Jews shall not be converted, till Christ
come again, and thou they shall be Lords over the Gentiles a 1000 years? The
former doctrine presently throws down the partition wall, and this opinion
still holden it up, at least for a 1000 years.

Reply.

This Query as it does in it self contain an apparent untruth, so it is
grounded on a misreport of our Tenet. For first it makes us to think, that
there shall be no Jews converted, until the whole Nation be converted;
whereas we hold the partial, and (as I may so call it,) typical conversion of
them, the conversion of them, I say, in their first fruits, with you; and the
general and contemporating conversion of them, the conversion of them in the
whole lump, against you. Only we say, that the partial and successive
conversion, their conversion in some particular persons and families, has
since the Apostles days been very thin and rare. Secondly, you make us to
think, that the Jews shall not be converted till Christ comes, when as we
hold, that they shall be converted before his coming, and be wholly freed from
the opposition of the Gentiles, at and by his coming; at the judgment which
shall light on the world when he descends to destroy the Army in Armageddon.
And thridly, you make us to think, that there shall be no spiritual union
betwixt the Jews and Gentiles in the time of the thousand years reigns,
whereas there is not to be a full and perfect union betwixt them, in their
acknowledgement and worship of the true God till then, and in that time. As our
Saviors prophecy John 10.16. and Zech. 14.16. etc. and Isai. 2.2, 3, 4. and
many other do witness. And though the Gentiles shall then be tributaries to
the Jews, yet they shall be much more happy in this subjection, wherein they
shall have Christ for their King, and the glorified Saints for their chief
governors under him, then ever they were in their former liberty; which for
the most part they so much abused to the provocation of Gods everlasting wrath
against them. Even as now you account that Jew which is become the Lords
freeman, which savingly embraces the truth of the Gospel, much more happy in
his captivity under, and subjection to the Gentiles; then if he were Lord of
the whole earth, and withal a stranger from the covenants of promise, having
no hope, and being without God in the world. These are your misreports, and as
for your Query it self, it is false to imagine; that the knowledge of the
conversion of a few Jews, can move us to a greater love toward them, then the
knowledge of the conversion of the whole Nation can. And what love soever you
may grant to be due to them, in your dispute of it: we may well think, that
you make show of little toward them in your actions, as these words page 65.
[Let Jews follow Jewish fables, etc.] do manifest. In which there neither
appears any symptom of your desire of their conversion, nor of your love
toward them, or us.

Israel's Redemption. And lastly, earnestly to beseech God, that he would
speedily put into execution the means which he has appointed for their
conversion: that he would even in these our days bring this mystery to light,
by pouring on his people the spirit of grace and supplications, whereby they
may believe and repent. For their happiness will both increase and consummate
ours; Zech. 12.10.
so also the Apostle. If the fall of them, etc. Observe here, what Jews are
said to occasion the riches of the Gentiles. Not those that believed when the
Apostle wrote this, although many of them were the first instruments of the
Gentiles conversion: and much less they that have believed since that time:
for these, as they come farce short of the others both in number and
qualifications; so they may be said rather to have taken of us, then given unto
us: to have inherited the riches of the Gospel with us, but not increased them.
Not the first believers thereof, nor such which hitherto have so slowly, and
thinly followed them, but the stiff-necked and stubborn Jews, who slew
Christ, who martyred and persecuted his Disciples; They are here said, to be
the reconciling of the world, and the riches of the Gentiles. And that because
their fall and casting away moved God so soon to visit us with the tidings of
salvation. And their fullness, the receiving of them, it must be, that shall
perfect us. The receiving of them, I say, which were then cast away: but how?
not in their own persons, (for it is impossible that the same men should fall
and not fall, should be cast away and not be cast away,) but in their
posterity: and that not in part, and by sits; but wholly, and at once. For the
Apostle speaks not of particular men and families; but of all the Tribe^ of
the whole Nation. And indeed what but a general conversion of the Jews, can
bring such felicity to the Gentiles, as shall not only parallel, but exceed
the blessings which we have already received by their unbelief?
If the fall of them be the riches of the world; and the diminishing of them
the riches of the Gentiles, how much more their fullness? and again, If the
casting away of them be the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving
of them be, but life from the dead? Romans 11.12.15. Now to our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is both the light of the Gentiles, and the glory of his people
Israel; who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and
the Prince of the Kings of the earth: Unto him that loved us, and washed us
from our sins in his own blood: and made us Kings and Priests unto God, and
his Father, to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen, Amen.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. Whether can these more confidently beseech God for the
conversion of the Jews, who think, that the Jews may daily be converted; or
these who think, that they shall not be converted till the coming of Christ?
the former sort may be confident to be heard daily, which these others cannot.
And moreover the former sort sees, (as the Fathers did see, Heb. 11.13,)
everlasting glory presently at hand; and thereupon they do mind and seek
heavenly things, as they are commanded, Col. 3.1, 2. and the other sort are out
of hope of glory in heaven, (at least,) yet for the space of a thousand years,
and they set their affections on things on earth. Yea and it gives
encouragement unto the wicked, that they shall not be judged, nor their bodies
tormented these thousand years to come yet; and on the other side the fear of
imminent judgment and punishment is a more powerful motive to depart from
iniquity. For which cause the Lord would not give unto men the knowledge of
that time, but will have us to be always preparing and waiting for that
coming to judgment. Wherefore we pray unto our Lord Jesus, who even now is
King of Kings, and reigns in the midst of his enemies, and is offended at the
foolish conceits of unstable hearts, That he would make his power manifest by
conforming them whom he has called and gifted with the knowledge of his
eternal Gospel, and by reducing all his elect both Jews and Gentiles who go
astray: and that he would now, even now give us heavenly hearts, and tie us all
together in the acknowledgement and obedience of his truth, to the praise of
his Name, and our spiritual comfort both now and evermore. Come Lord Jesus,
and change our vile bodies, that they may be like unto thy glorious body
according to thy working, whereby thou art able even to subdue all things unto
thy self.

Reply.

Surely they that deny the general conversion of the Jews, as you do, cannot
pray at all for this conversion. But they that believe it, may confidently
beseech God for it; and be confident too, that they are delightfully heard of
him in it. For as we ought always to pray for that which may be done we know
not how soon; so though our prayers cannot hasten the accomplishment of any
future blessings to our selves or others, yet we are daily heard in them;
seeing by such a manifestation of out obedience toward God, who taught us to
pray for them; and of our faith and hope in his promises, which reveal them;
and of our charity toward all that are to be partakers of them; we daily
improve Gods mercy toward us here, and our own weight of glory with him
hereafter. And whereas you seem to lay claim to heaven for your self and
others of your mind only; and to shut us out of it, because according to the
tenor of Gods plain revelations, we affirm, That the raised Saints are to
begin the eternity of their immortal and glorified estate, in a regal
condition here on earth with Christ; where He and They have been formerly so
much reviled, and so vilely handled: whereas I say, you would for this exclude
us from having any portion of the joys of heaven with you, till the 1000
years reign be finished; Be it known unto you, That we hope through Gods free
mercy toward us in Christ Jesus, to be received into the society of the Saints
in heaven, even as others; if God has appointed that our earthly house of this
Tabernacle shall be dissolved, before the appearing of our Lord Jesus; if not,
we hope together with the whole number of the elect, to be made Inhabitants of
the new Jerusalem, in that time in which God has purposed to bring us thither,
and not before. And we cannot conceive, that we do set our affections on
things on earth, (in the Apostles sense, Colos. 3.2.) when we do with patience
expect the accomplishment of the promises made to us in Christ, albeit they are
in part to be fulfilled on this earth. And by the way, it is worth the Readers
observation, That to confirm [your seeing everlasting glory presently at
hand,] you cite Heb. 11.13. where it is said, These all died in faith, not
having received the promises, but having seen them afar off, etc. What I is
to see the promises a far off, all one, with the seeing of glory presently at
hand? But you go on, and tell us, that our Tenet [gives encouragement to the
wicked, that they shall not be judged, nor their bodies tormented these
thousand years to come yet.] Which is a confused and corrupt report of our
words: For though we say, That the last judgment of the wicked, the judgment
of their bodies and fowls together shall not be till the end of the thousand
years reign on earth; yet surely we believe even as others, That their souls
are cast into hell, immediately after their departure out of their bodies. And
doubtless, if they will not forsake their evil courses for fear of the
imminent damnation of their souls; for fear of this partial and particular
judgment at their death, (which does infallibly bind them over to the
eternal damnation of their bodies and souls together, at their general and
contemporating judgment,) they will neither forsake their wickedness the
sooner for their ignorance, nor continue it the longer-for their knowledge of
the large space of time that is yet to precede their general judgment. For
what comfort can it be to them, that it shall be yet so long before their
bodies be tortured in hell, when as their souls may suddenly be adjudged to
such torments as are agreeable to the number and nature of their sins: which
the more and greater they are, the more and greater will the punishment of
their bodies be too at the last? And therefore if you had said the truth, you
would have acknowledged, that our Tenet does warn all those that shall live in
the time of the Jews conversion and deliverance, not to oppose them, lest to
the augmentation of their endless woe, they thereby perish from the earth by a
fearful death. And it does persuade men likewise, to take off their
affections from things on earth, seeing it puts them in mind, that if they now
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit; if they fashion not themselves
to this present world, they shall together with their Savior, be heirs, and
inheritours of the earth, when the whole creation shall be delivered from its
bondage of corruption; and when by the means of Christ's and their government
on it, judgment shall run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty
stream. And thus the impartial reader may plainly see, what little alliance
there is betwixt the title of your answer, and the contents of it; For you
pretend to fetch him out of darkness into the light; but do indeed lead him
out of the light into darkness. And as the Syrians eyes were held by God,
that they should not know the Prophet, though they heard, and followed him; so
it has been your utmost endeavor all along, to corrupt and dazzle the readers
judgment, that he might not know the truth of the Prophecy, that is set
before his eyes, and published in his ears. Now the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, shine in our
hearts, that as of sincerity, as of God, we may give the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. That, Isay, without handling
of the word of God deceitfully, we may by manifestation of the truth commend
our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God; that God in all things
may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and dominion for ever
and ever, Amen.

Glorificetur Deus, praedicetur veritas, exerceatur pietas, restituatur
integritas.

Let God be glorified, truth taught, piety practiced, righteousness restored.

Redeat Pax, regnet Rex, regat Lex.

Let peace return, the King reign, the Law rule.

To my Book excused.
THy wounds are healed, and now thou must along,
To tell thy torturers they did thee wrong;
That thou wast no deceiver, although They
Did strain their wits, to hide thy truth away;
Lest passing John 11.48
unexcus'd, the simplest might
Have taken too much heed of the upright
Report thou make, and claspt thee with such love,
As no Acts 5.34. etc.
Gamaliel should e're remove.
Tell this to them, and after greet thy friends,
Who prize the truth, more then their private ends.
Courteous Reader,
THere was of late in this Kingdom one Mr. Mede, a grave and learned Divine of
the University of Cambridge, who in his Treatises on the Revelation, (which he
published to the world some years before his death,) does plainly profess,
that he held not only the Jews general conversion, but their return to
their country too, and the thousand years reign of Christ and the Saints on
earth. Of which reign as he has a particular Tract, so in the fourth
synchronisme of the second part of his Clavis Apocalyptica he shows by
infallible arguments, that it is to succeed the utter destruction of the Beast
and false Prophet, and to contemporate with the 1000 years binding up of
Satan; That it is, I say, to be in the time betwixt the destruction of the two
Armies revealed in Rev. 19.20. which he there clear^ly proves to be two
distinct Armies. Against this Author while he lived no man moved his pen,
although there was both time and opportunity to have done it, but since his
decease, (which is an usual course with the enemies of the truth,) as there
have been many, who have voted against him without answering any of his works;
so there have been some, who have undertaken to examine here and there a piece
of his labors, amongst whom Mr. Petrie is one, who in page 14.60.61. of his
answer to Isreal's Redemption, does assay the confutation of two of Mr. Medes
synchronismes. The first is the seventh synchronisme of the first part of
Clavis Apocalyptica, which he thus encounters.

Mr. Petrie. And here by the way observe that the renowned Author of Clavis
Apocalyptica is mistaken in his seventh synchronisme, wherein he says, that
the pouring forth of the seven vials is contemporary with the end of the Beast
and Babylon.

Answer. He says indeed that they contemporate with the ending, that is, with
the declining estate, with the total destruction of the Beast and Babylon,
which the vials shall by their several plagues gradually bring to pass; but
not that they do all contemporate with the very end, with the last moment of
the Beast and Babylon, which is proper only to the pouring out of the last
vial. For then shall great Babylon come in remembrance before God, to give
unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath, as it is
revealed, Rev. 16.19. And then shall the Army in Armageddon be destroyed, and
the Beast and false Prophet taken in battle, and cast alive into a lake of
fire burning with brimstone, as it is declared Rev. 19.20.

Mr. Petrie. For albeit it be said, chap. 15.2. That they who had gotten the
victory over the Beast, sang the song of Moses, it follows not that the Beast
was then destroyed.

Answer. Surely it follows as well, that the Beast shall be destroyed when the
song of Moses is sung by the conquerours of the Beast, as it does that Pharaoh
and his Host were destroyed, when it was sung by Moses and the Israelites. For
seeing it is again to be sung upon the like occasion, and no^ before; the
destruction of the Beast must as necessarily precede the second singing of it,
as the destruction of the Egyptians did the first. And this the fourth verse
does confirm, which shows, that by reason of Gods judgments which shall be
made manifest unto the world at the singing of this song, All Nations together
shall come and worship before the Lord, as the Prophets have said, and as Saint
Paul does intimate by the coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles, Romans
11.25. which thing cannot come to pass, while Satan the deceiver of the
Nations is at liberty, and the Beast and false prophet, his instruments, are
subsisting.

Mr. Petrie. Neither albeit the first and fifth and last vials be powered on the
Beast, follows it that they were not powered till the last time of the
destruction of the Beast; seeing the Saints in heaven, (and on earth too,) may
rejoice for their particular victory over the Beast as yet reigning, and the
vials may be powered on the Beast at several times, even some of them on the
Beast in the height of her pride to the end that men may have warnings of the
judgments of God on the Beast in her greatest pomp.

Answer. This also follows, as the 1 verse of the 15 chapter does witness,
where the seven vials are called the seven last plagues: and why are they
called so, but because they were not to be powered out till the last time, the
time of the destruction of the Beast? Impossible then it is, that these last
plagues, these plagues which were to befall the Beast in her last time only,
should befall her [in her height of her pride, in her greatest pomp,] that is,
long before her last time. For this is all one as if you had said, that the
Beast then began to be destroyed, when she was most insensible of her
destruction, when she had least cause to fear it. And therefore though [the
Saints in heaven, (and on earth too,) may rejoice for their particular victory
over the Beast as yet reigning;] yet doubtless they shall not sing Moses song
of thanksgiving, for the utter overthrow of the Beast, before the Beast be
utterly overthrown. And though the vials were to be powered out at several
times, yet as in their orderly powrings out they were suddenly to succeed each
other; so likewise they were all appointed to contemporate with the last time
of the Beast only.

Mr. Petrie. And the rather may we judge so, that we find such agreement in
the principal terms of the seven trumpets, and seven vials; the second
trumpet with the second vial; the third trumpet with the third vial; the
fourth trumpet with the fourth vial; the sixth trumpet with the sixth vial; and
the seventh trumpet with the seventh vial. Now seeing the first trumpet is of
the same time with the beginning of the Beast, ( as he says synchro. 1. par.
2.) the first vial must be of that same time also; and all the other
synchronismes and expositions of texts that are grounded on the seventh
synchronisme of the first part are wrong.

Answer. If there be such agreement betwixt, the trumpets and vials, as you
pretend; the trumpets cannot possibly contemporate with the whole time of the
Beast, as you hold; seeing the vials contain the last plagues that are to
befall the Beast, which could not begin to be powered out while the Beast was
to remain in her height, and much less could they begin to be powered out as
soon as the Beast began. Whenever therefore the trumpets were to begin,
sure I am that there is not that agreement betwixt the trumpets and vials, as
you imagine. For as the effects of the first and fifth trumpets and vials agree
not, so neither do the effects of the third, fourth, and sixth. For at the
sounding of the third trumpet, the third part of the rivers and fountains of
waters do become so bitter, that men dye of them because they are made bitter.
Whereas at the pouring out of the third vial, the rivers and fountains of
waters are turned into blood. And at the sounding of the fourth trumpet, the
third part of the Sun, Moon, and Stars is smitten with darkness; whereas
the fourth vial is powered on the Sun only, and power given him (thereby) to
scorch men with fire, so that by reason of their great heat, they blaspheme the
Name of God, which has power over these plagues. And at the sounding of the
sixth trumpet, the four Angels bound in the great river Euphrates are loosed,
who with an extraordinary and miraculous Army destroy the third part of men;
whereas at the pouring out of the sixth vial, this river is dried up, that the
way of the Kings of the East might be prepared, and the Kings of the earth and
of the whole world are then also drawn together to the battle of the great
Day of God Almighty by the Satanic all delusion of the Beast and false Prophet.
Which Army is destroyed by the plague of the seventh vial, and not in the time
of the sixth vial. And therefore there is no such agreement in the principal
terms of the seven trumpets and seven vials, as will either conclude, that
they are of the same time, or that all the other synchronismes and expositions
of texts that are grounded on the seventh synchronisme of the first part, are
wrong.

Mr. Petrie. Which I mark because the late Millenaries have been moved by the
appearance of these synchronismes, to embrace this opinion.

Answer. The many proofs and prophecies which we allege out of the Prophets,
the Evangelists, the Acts, and the Epistles, as well as out of the Revelations,
do abundantly testify, what moved us to embrace this opinion. Even the same
authority which moved this renowned Author to embrace it, and to take so much
pains for the confirmation of it.

The fifth Synchronisme of the second part follows, whose arguments Mr. Petrie
thus proposes and answers.
The first Argument.
FIrst, he says, Do not these wo^ds, Qui Bestiam non adoraverant -- show,
that this Kingdom of Christ did sacceed unto the Beast, his image, and them
that were marked with his mark? For why should it be said of the sons of
that Kingdom, that they had not worshipped the Beast, unless the Beast had
gone before? And truly, the good office goes before the reward in time, etc.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. Our former translation is more consonant unto the Greek,
which says, They did not worship the Beast, which is not the plusquamperfect
time, but so, that at the same time, the Beast is deceiving the world, and the
children of God do not worship the Beast. 2. The reward of them who worship
not the Beast is in heaven, and they follow the Lamb, whithersoever he goes.

Reply.

1. Whether it be rendered, They did not worship the beast, or They had not
worshipped the beast: the difference is not material. For if it follows from
this last translation, that the Kingdom of Christ spoken of in Revel. 20.
succeedes the Kingdom of the Beast: it will follow as well from the first
translation. For doubtless, They that did not worship the beast, had not
worshipped the beast. And indeed though it be true, [That at the same time, the
beast is deceiving the world, and the children of God do not worship the
beast] Yet it is not true, that the children of God are to receive their reward
for not worshipping the beast at the same time, in which they do not worship
the beast. And therefore seeing this vision did represent unto St. John the
reward of the Saints for not worshipping the beast, it must needs succeed the
time in which the beast had power to torment them for not worshipping of him.

2. That reward which the souls of them, who worship not the beast, are to
receive while their bodies are in the graves, is in beaver. But the reward
which is presently to follow the resurrection of their bodies at our Saviors
appearing, is to be with him on this earth for the space of a 1000 years and
upwards, as the contents of Revel. 20. do show.

The second Argument.
This appears yet more fully by the song of the Elders, and beasts, sung at
the destruction of Babylon, chap. 19.6. Hallelujah, for the Lord God Almighty
reigns, etc.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. When the Bohemians saw the Armies of the Pope and the
Empeperours, turning their backs at the touch of Ziscah's drum, had they not
just reason to sing Hallelujah: for the Lord God Almighty reigns, let us
rejoice, etc. And so may the godly at every victory over the Popish Armies,
even before the resurrection.

Reply.

No doubt but the Bohemians had great reason to rejoice, and to praise God,
when they say the Armies of their enemies fly at the sound of Ziscah's drum.
But yet as I cannot think, that those Bohemians were represented by the great
multitude which Saint John heard sing the hymn, Rev. 19.6, 7. or that they did
then sing this hymn: so I know, that this hymn of praise is not referred by
the Holy Ghost, as you refer it, to every particular victory over the Popish
Armies; but only to the victory immediately recorded in the same chapter:
which is the victory which Christ himself shall have over the beast and false
prophet, when at his descending from he^ven to enter his Kingdom on earth, he
shall cast them alive into the lake of fire. And therefore your application of
the story of Ziseah's drum to this argument, is a very ridiculous answer.

The third argument.
But most of all clearly in chap. 11. ver. 15, 16. etc. where at the sound of
the seventh trumpet, the days of the witnesses, and the mouths of the Beast
and Nations being out-runne, were great voices in heaven, saying, The Kingdoms
of the world are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, etc. This is the
consummation of the mystery of God foretold by the Prophets.

Mr. Petrie's Answer. This indeed is the consummation of all the promises
foretold by the Prophets and Apostles: and therefore it is not to be understood
of any earthly Kingdom seeing th^^full accomplishment of the prophecies is not
on earth. And so this synchronisme being false, and the like synchronismes, and
all expositions following upon them must fail with it.

Reply.

This argument shows, that the Kingdoms of this world are to become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, at the sounding of the seventh
trumpet, and not before. That is, at the time of our Saviors descending from
heaven, at which time the reign of the beast shall end. And consequently it
provs first, that this reign of Christ must needs follow the reign of the
beast, seeing it begins not till his appearing, by which the Beast shall be
utterly destroyed. And secondly it proves, that this reign must needs be on
earth, seeing the Kingdoms which shall then become his, are the Kingdoms of
this world. And thirdly, it proves, that the time in which these Kingdoms
shall become Christ's, cannot possibly be the time in which he shall deliver up
his Kingdom to the Fathers, seeing they shall then cease to be his. And so the
time of our Saviors reign over them must needs be the interim, the time
betwixt the reign of the Beast, and the delivering up of his Kingdom to the
Father. To these consequences you had nothing to say; and therefore you catch
at these words which follow the argument, to wit, [This is the consummation of
the mystery of God foretold by the Prophets,] which you thus pervert. [This
indeed is the consummation of all the promises foretold by the Prophets and
Apostles: and therefore it is not to be understood of any earthly Kingdom.]
But surely as the mystery of God foretold by the Prophets, and recorded chap.
10. ver. 7. is meant only of Christ's reign on earth at his next appearing,
when the Kingdoms of this world are to become his: so you can show us no
promise either in the writings of the Prophets or Apostles, which after the
resurrection of men's bodies, is to be enjoyed by them in heaven, in your sense:
that is, in a place of glory separate from the earth. For as the raised Saints
that are to come with Christ shall be on this earth all the time of his reign;
so at the delivering up of his Kingdom to the Father, the whole number of the
elect shall be with him in the new Jerusalem, (which is the Paradise of God,)
on the new earth whither it shall then descend. And so this synchronisme being
true, all the like synchronismes, and all expositions following upon them, must
be true also.

The Authors Judgment of the Contents of the Trumpets and Vials; which he
commends to the serious consideration of every intelligent READER.
THat the plagues of the vials should be literally and properly interpreted,
and not figuratively and mystically: Revel. 16.
these reasons do in my conceit require.

1. Because there is no necessity of interpreting them otherwise.

2. Because God has already showed many such wonders as the vials speak of.

3. Because the last plague is properly to be understood, and we may not take
one plague properly, and the rest improperly.

4. Because the pouring out of all the vialls shall not take up so much time,
as the mystical sense of them does allow, to the pouring out of one of them.
For

1. We find that on the same persons on which the first vial, (the plague of
the noysou^e sore,) is powered, on the same the sift vial is powered. For ver.
10, 11. it is said, And they gnawed their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the
God of heaven because of their pains and their sores. And at the pouring out
of the fourth vial also, ver. 9. it is said, And men were scorched with great
beat, and blasphemed the Name of God, which ba h power over these plagues, etc.
(not over this plague,) whereby it is intimated, That the men who were to feel
the fourth plague, were to feel more of the plagues besides that. And it is
very likely, that the same persons may live to be the objects of all these
plagues. For

2. The vials are not to be powered out till after the Jews conversion; whose
return to their country is apparently expressed at the pouring out of the sixth
vial, (they being the Kings of the East that are to pass dry shod over
Euphrates, as the comparing of the 12 verse with the latter part of the 11
chapter of Isaiah does prove.) And whose full deliverance from all their
enemies, is plainly revealed in the extraordinary destruction of the Armies in
Armageddon, at the pouring out of the last vial: the time of our Saviors
descending, as the ^9 chapter does evince. For what are the Armies of the Beast
and of the Kings of the earth against which our Savior is there said to
descend; but the Armies of the Beast and of the Kings of the earth, which here
are said to be gathered into Armageddon?

And indeed who can think that God, who showed such great signs and wonders
at the deliverance of his people out of Egypt, from the slavery of that one
Nation; will not show as great wonders as those, yea as great as any the vials
or trumpets do contain; at their redemption from their captivity in all
countries?

And as for the plagues of the Trumpets, it is manifest from the Text, Rev.
7.8, 9. etc.
That they were not to be powered out, till after the sealing of the 144000 of
all the Tribes of Israel. Which if it be understood of the general conversion
of the Jews, (as many learned Expositours understand it) it is clear, That
the things contained in the Trumpets are not yet begun: and consequently,
that they are literally to be taken also. Now, that the [12 Tribes of Israel,]
there, are to be properly understood, these reasons do evince.

1. Because there is no necessity to interpret them otherwise.

2. Because [ the 12 Tribes of Israel,] cannot in the same place be taken both
properly and improperly. Properly, for them that are to be saved of all the
Tribes of Israel; and improperly, for them that are to be saved of all other
Nations.

3. Because it is not probable, that by one Nation, by [ the 12 Tribes of
Israel,] all Nations and kindreds, and people, and tongues should be meant. Or
that Saint John knew not what Saints were meant by the 144000 sealed persons of
all the Tribes of Israel; although he knew not what Saints the great multitude
of all Nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues were. Of whom the
question was made to him, and not of the 144000 of all the Tribes of Israel.

4. Because these words, [ the 12 Tribes of Israel,] are always to be taken
for the Jews. And much rather are the Tribes distinctly numbered, so to be
taken.

5. Because the sealed of the Tribes, and the great multitude of all Nations,
and kindreds, and people, and tongues, are revealed as two distinct companies:
whereof one [the sealed Tribes,] is finite, 144000, and the other [the great
multitude of all Nations] infinite, a multitude which no man could number.

6. Because the Apostle only heard the number of the sealed Jews. But he saw
afterward the great multitude of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and
tongues, standing before the Throne of God, and before the Lamb, clothed with
long white robes, and palms in their hands. Wherefore by These are meant the
Saints in glory, (as the Angel answered chap. 7. ver. 14.15. etc.) to whom such
robes were appointed to be given, at the opening of the fifth seal, (the seal
which comprehend under it, the six first trumpets,) and not the unglorified
Saints: and consequently they are no^ the same persons with the sealed of the
12 Tribes of Israel.

7. Because [ the 12 Tribes of Israel,] can neither be jointly, nor severally
taken for the believing Gentiles. Not jointly, because no particular Tribe does
express any particular Church of the Gentiles: as Judah does not signify the
Church of England: nor Reuben, the Church of France, etc. For every particular
Tribe has as much relation to the believing Gentiles of one Nation, as to the
believing Gentiles of another Nation, and so may by it self as well be
understood of all believing Gentiles, as of any believing Gentiles. And not
severally, because no particular Tribe does signify all the particular
Churches of the Gentiles. And if one should, then all should, (seeing there is
the same number of sealed persons out of every Tribe,) and consequently, the
believing Gentiles, would in the sealing of the 12 Tribes, be twelve several
times expressed.

8. Because it is very unlikely, that this prophecy which contains the most
remarkable events that were to fall out in that part of the world, which the
Romans then possessed: and the chief alterations in the Church of God, from
the time it was revealed, till the appearing of Christ, should no where
intimate the general conversion of the Jews; a doctrine so plentifully and
plainly taught, by the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself.

9. Because some of the plagues under the Trumpets, are such as were wrought at
the Jews deliverance out of Egypt. And though others of them are more
wonderful then any hitherto showed: yet they are not impossible unto God; who
can as well give unto locusts a strange shape, and a strange power, as he can
suddenly create them. And cause twenty thousand times ten thousand of his
Angels in the appearance of horsemen on a strange kind of horses, to kill the
third part of men; as well as he could cause such a multitude of horses and
charets of fire to appear to Elishas servant 2 King. 6.17.

10. And lastly, Because from the descriptions of the plagues, just exceptions
may be made against any allegorical exposiition that has been, (or can be)
given, either of the contents of the Trumpets, or of the Vials: as neither
suiting with the strangeness, nor with the diversity of the plagues, or of
their events.

REVEL. 21.24. And the Nations of them which are saved, shall walk in the
light of it: and the Kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor into
it.

By [the Nations of them that are saved,] are meant, I suppose, those that
shall be saved of the Nations in the time of Christ's thousand years reign,
mentioned in the former chapter. And by [the Kings of the earth,] are meant, I
suppose, the Saints which shall govern the Nations with Christ in his thousand
years reign on earth. So that it is, as if it had been said, That the whole
number of the elect, that is, all the Saints which shall reign with Christ,
which shall be made rulers under him, when he comes to reign, and all that are
to be saved in the time of his reign, shall (at the delivering up of his
Kingdom to the Father,) be made partakers of the glory, that is to follow the
last resurrection in the new Jerusalem, where there shall be no more death, nor
sorrow, nor crying, neither any more pain, ver. 4.

FINIS.

