A REPLY TO Mr. Rutherfurd, OR, A defense of the Answer to Reverend Mr. Herles
Book against the Independency of Churches.

Wherein such Objections and Answers, as are returned to sundry passages in
the said Answer by Mr. Samuel Rutherfurd, a godly and learned Brother of the
Church of Scotland, in his Book Entitled The Due Right of Presbyters, are
examined and removed, and the Answer justified and cleared.

By RICHARD MA^HER Teacher to the Church at Dorchester in New ENGLAND. 1646.

LONDON, Printed for J. Rothwell, and H. Allen at the Sun and Fountain in
Paul's Churchyard, and the Crown in Pope's Head Alley, 1647,

The Authors Preface to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
HAving published some years ago, a small Treatise, in way of a brotherly
Answer to reverend Master Herle; I now present unto thy view a defense thereof
against such objections and answers as have been returned to sundry passages
therein, by reverend and learned Master Rutherfurd. In which undertaking it
has been far from my intention to increase or uphold the differences that
have appeared of late years in England amongst the servants of the Lord, about
matters of Church government. For I had much rather bring Prayers and tears
for the quenching of such fires, then fuel or oil for the increasing
thereof: neither shall the same I hope, be any thing at all increased by what
here I present now thy view. At the least this I may say, that I intended no
such thing but the contrary, even the promoting of truth and peace, if it were
the will of God so to bless my desires and endeavors. True it is, I have taken
the liberty to consider and try some things delivered by that reverend brother
whom here I have to do withal, but this I trust cannot be justly offensive,
in as much as the Spirit of the Prophets is Subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.
32. and the doctrine of the Apostle himself was examined by those noble
Bereans, whom the holy Ghost commends for searching the Scriptures daily,
whether those things were so Act. 17. 11. It is also true which our reverend
brother says in his Epistle to the Reader, before his Peaceable Plea, that
there is great cause of sorrow that all the Lords people should not mind one
thing, and sing one song, and join in one against the Children of Babel.
Nevertheless, this may be some comfort against this sorrow, that by the
providence of the Lord this diversity of opinions and disputes, if it be
Christianly carried as it may, may occasion and produce in the issue the
further clearing up of truth. For as our author well observes, from the
Collision of opinions resulteth truth: and disputes as stricken flints cast
fire for light. Due Right of Presbyt. Epistle to the Reader. The desire and
hope whereof, together with the advice of such brethren as I consulted withal,
was that which chiefly prevailed with me for the publishing of this reply,
wherein the reader will find sundry Scriptures and questions controverted in
these times, discussed and considered so far as the nature of a Reply or
defense did lead thereto; and I hope some or other through Gods blessing may
receive some profit thereby. And if the humble Christian who desires to know,
and love and practice the truth, shall receive any benefit or help for
attaining these ends by means of this labor of mine, it is that which I
intended and aimed at, and for which I desire that God alone may have the
praise and glory. If any shall still remain otherwise minded; yet in due time
I hope God shall reveal even this unto them. In the mean time, diversity of
apprehensions in these points ought not to bred any alienation of affection
amongst those that are otherwise Orthodoxe, and sincere. It were a thousand
pitties, if it should. For my part, I cannot but approve what this reverend
brother sometime professes, that he does both love and dispute, contradict and
reverence at once: Peaceable Plea: Epist. Yea, he counts himself a debtor for
love, charity, honor and all due respect in Christ Jesus, and a seat and
lodging in his heart and highest esteem to all those that be godly, lovers of
the truth, and sufferers for the truth against Prelacy, though possibly they
like not well of Presbyteriall government: ibid. In answer whereto (for I would
be loath that such love should be lost upon us, without due return of the like)
I would for my part profess the like dear and due respect to all those that
are qualifyed as here he does describe (of which sort I know there are many)
though possibly they may like better of the way that is called Presbyteriall,
then of the Congregationall. For those that give apparent Testimonies that they
are the Lord's, and so that they must live together in heavens, I know not why
they should not love one another on earth, what ever differences of
apprehensions may for the present be found amongst them in some things. As for
bitterness of spirit and tartness of contests, I never thought that to be
Gods way of promoting truth amongst brethren, and therefore I have endeavored
in this discourse to avoid the same. For I believe there is more hope of doing
good by solidity of argument with a spirit of meekness and love, then by sharp
and tart language, the fruit of bitterness of spirit, wherein for the most
part right of reason is wanting, the passions being there most vehement and
stirring, where the intellectuals are most ^eeble and weak.

Now if any ask why this defense has been so long deferred, it being now two
years and more since Master Rutherfurd his due right of Presbyt. came forth,
such may be pleased to consider that New England being as it is counted 3000
miles distant from old; therefore many Books may be extant in England a long
time before we that are so remote can so much as hear any sound thereof: and
those few that come to our knowledge, are commonly extant in England a matter
of a years space before, and sometimes longer. In which respect many things may
be spoken and Printed against us, whereto it cannot be expected that we should
return any speedy Answer. And though it be now twelve months ago or more
since Master Rutherfurd his due right of Presbyt. came to my hands, yet at that
time my few spare hours from my constant and ordinary employments were wholly
taken up otherwise, so that I could not attend this business any sooner: which
I desire may be accepted as a just apology for the late coming forth of this
Reply; which as it may seem late, so it is more large then in some respect I
could have desired, by reason that I do usually transcribe those words of
Master Rutherfurd, whereto I d^e apply my Answer; which course I confess I did
not unwillingly (in some respects) choose, partly to save the Reader a labor of
turning to the place in Master Rutherfurd which I am speaking too; which else
he must have done, or have taken things upon my report upon trust; and partly
that my candid and fair dealing with the Author, whom I have to do withal
might the better appear. For when a man's words are not kept, but forsaken, and
others substituted in their place, his mind and meaning may soon be mistaken,
and represented amiss unto the Reader. Which is a practice that I have often
seen, but never approved; and therefore I have not used it. For I would be
loath to wrong any man; specially a man of such worth as I take Master
Rutherfurd to be, by imputing to him what he does not teach nor deliver: and
for this cause it is that I have usually transcribed and expressed his own
words; and by this means my book is grown to the greater bulk.

One thing more I would advertise the Reader of, and then I shall quickly have
done: the figures from 185 and so forward, noting the number of the Pages in
Master Rutherfurd his Treatise, are set down twice therein, once in their
proper place, and again after the page 484. Wherefore if any of these pages be
quoted in this Reply, as some of them are, if the thing that is alleged be not
found in the page that is named, look for it in the other place of the book
where are the same figures, and there you may find it.

Courteous Reader, study the truth in a way of Piety and peace: Be zealous for
it, but lose not love to the Saints: beware, when the world is filled with
disputes about discipline, that thou be not drawn only to erroneous opinions
in maine matters of doctrine. Be sure to practice and express the power of
Godliness in humility of mind, mortification of thy own corruption, faith in
the Lord Jesus, and love to all his redeemed; and be not by any means drawn
away from these things, which do so mainly conduce to thy salvation. Finally
as the Holy Ghost says, Phil. 4. 8, 9. whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are lovely,
pure, and of good report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise,
think on these things, and do them; and the God of peace shall be with thee.
Improve I pray such interest as thou have in God through the mediator, by
affording the help of thy Prayers for me, who am

Truly desirous of thy R. M.
December. 10. 1646.
A Table of the Contents of the ensuing Treatise.
Chap. 1. OF Appeals from particular Congregations, and the true cause of
Appeals, and whether by Mr Rutherford his doctrine in this point there must
not be appeals to General Counsels, whose power of Jurisdiction he does not
yet deny. page. 2. Chap. 2. Of the power of Synods to give advite and Counsel,
and whether from thence it does follow that they have no power to command.
page. 11. Chap. 3. Of the Assembly, Acts. 15. whether they did exercise any
power of Jurisdiction, against the obtruders of Circumcision, and whether their
rebuking of them does argue the Affirmative. page. 15. Chap. 4. Of the
Dogmaticall power of Synods: And of the power of Congregations to determine
matters amongst themselves, if ability serve thereto. page. 21. Chap. 5. Again
of that Assembly Acts. 15. whether their rebuking the false teachers do prove a
power of Jurisdiction and excommunication in Synods: and whether preaching do
prove the Assembly where it is, to be a Church. page. 24. Chap. 6. Whether the
power of Synods be a power of Jurisdiction; and of the dependence of the
Synagogues upon the Synedrion at Jerusalem. page. 30. Chap. 7. Whether the
lawfulness or necessity of Appeals do prove a superiority of Jurisdiction in
Synods over Congregations, and of sundry sayings of our Author which seem to
interfere. page. 39. Chap. 8. Whether Antioch Acts. 15. had right to have ended
the controversy amongst themselves, if they had bin able, and whether their
sending to Jerusalem for help, or their knowledge that other Churches were
troubled with the like evil, or the party among themselves who were against
the truth, do prove the contrary. And of Supremacy of power in Congregations.
page. 49. Chap. 9. Whether the Congregationall way or the Presbyteriall do make
the Gospel more defective, then the Law of Excommunication by a Church that
has only three Elders, and of doing things suddenly. page. 66. Chap. 10.
Whether the necessity of discipline be greater then of Sacraments: and whether
a Congregation that has neighbors may not exercise entirenesse of
Jurisdiction, as well as one that has none; and whether a man may take on him
the whole Minestry, having no outward calling thereto; and may not as well take
on him one act of baptising or ministering the Lords Supper. page. 75. Chap. 11.
Whether the power of Jurisdiction flowing immediately from the essence of a
Church, do not agree to a Church that has neighbors, as well as to a Church
that has none; and whether otherwise neighboring Churches be not a loss. And
whether pretense of maladministration be a sufficient reason for neighboring
Churches to deprive a Congregation of its power. page. 93 Chap. 12. Whether it
be against the light of nature that the adverse party be Judge, and whether Mr
Rutherford can safely say that none of them do so teach; and whether this
saying, that parties may not be Judges, do make against entirenesse of power in
a Congregation, any more then in a General or National Council. page. 104.
Chap. 13. Whether the Churches at Thessalonica and Jerusalem, were each of them
more then one Congregation, and of Mr. Baynes his judgment therein. Of the
Assembly mentioned Luke. 12. and whether our Savior did there speak to his
Disciples only, or to all the people also. page. 112. Chap. 14. Whether the
Church at Corinth was one Church meeting distributively in sundry
Congregations, or whether it was only one Congregation. And whether 1 Cor. 14.
23. If the whole Church come together in some place, etc. do make for sundry
Congregations or for one only. page. 123. Chap. 15. Whether the Church at
Ephesus were more in number then Corinth and Jerusalem; and the judgment of Mr
Baynes whether that Church was many Congregations or one only. page. 137.
Chap. 16. Whether the Church at Antioch was only one Congregation: and whether
Acts. 14. 27. and 15. 30. do not prove the affirmative. page. 140. Chap. 17.
Whether or no liberties are given by Christ to the people, but women must
exercise the same as well as men. And of the peoples liberty about ordination,
or the calling of Ministers. page. 146. Chap. 18. Of Mr Rutherfords report of
Synodicall propositions in New England. page. 151. Chap. 19. Of the Appeals of
Luther and Cranmer, and of the power of Jurisdiction in general Councels
denied by Mr. Rutherford; whether therein be do not contradict himself, and
also overthrow the Jurisdiction of Classical, Provincial, and National
Assemblies. page. 153. Chap. 20. If it were granted that the light of nature
teaches all societies to end in Monarchies, whether would it not follow that
the Government of Churches must so end, as well as that Congregations must
depend on the Government of Synods, because the light of nature teaches a
communion in government to other societies. And whether the multitude of
Grecians and Hebrews, who ch^se the seven Deacons Acts. 6. were two
Congregations, or one only. page. 159. Chap. 21. Whether Congregations may be
excommunicated by Classes and Synods, by virtue of those words* Mat. 18. Tell
the Church, as containing a rule and remedy for all offenses, or at the least a
Church remedy for the offenses of Churches and Church members. And if yea,
whether it would not thereupon follow, that a National Church must have the
benefit of this remedy as well as others; and so have no independency of
Jurisdiction within it self, but be subject to the jurisdiction of General
Counsels, which yet Mr. Rutherford does deny. page. 164. Chap. 22. When the
supreme Magistrate is a professed enemy to Religion, whether then it be likely
and usual, that the greater part of the people are sincerely religious, and
whether when the greater part are enemies with their Magistrates, it be then
the duty of a few that are sincere, to assemble in a National Synod, and there
to enter into a National Covenant, and also to injoyne the same unto that
greater part. page. 170. Chap. 23. Whether the word Church be not given to a
single Congregation: and whether a Congregation be a company or Church-meeting
only for word and Sacraments, and not for any other spiritual duties: and
whether the diverse duties, 1. of word and sacraments, 2. of discipline, etc.
must needs argue diverse Churches. page. 175. Chap. 24 Whether those children of
Israel Numb. 8. 10. who laid hands on the Levites were Elders by office, and
as so considered did lay on their hands. And whether this Scripture do not
prove, that where there are no Elders to be had, there some principal members
though no Elders by office, may impose hands on Church Officers. page. 180
Chap. 25. Whether a Ministers calling consist in election or imposition of
hands, and whether of these is greater, and whether is prior or posterior.
Whether 1 Timothy 4. 14. Acts. 6 2, 3, 4. Acts. 13. 1, 2, 3. do prove that the
Ministers calling consists in imposition of hands by the Presbeterie, and that
such imposition of hands is not a consummatory rite or benedictory sign. Also
whether Romans 10. 15. do prove that a man cannot be a Minister, except some
Presbytery ordain him before the people choose him, and whether otherwise the
people do send a Minister to themselves. And whether the people of God may not
as well discern a man's fitness to be ordained, as his fitness to be elected.
page. 196. Chap. 26. Whether the Epistles to Timothy and Titus wherein there
are contained rules of direction in laying on of hands, do prove that this
action may not in any case be performed by Non-officers, but must be performed
only by Presbyteries; and whether the argument do not make as strongly for the
appropriating of laying on of hands to the Prelates, as to the Presbyteries,
and do not as well exclude the Presbyteries from meddling therein, as exclude
the people. page. 206.
To the Christian Reader.
IN the year 1643. there came forth a Treatise against Independency, under the
name of my Reverend and learned Brother Mr. Charles Herle, the Pastor of
Winwick in Lancashire. This Treatise, because it seemed to be written with
such a Candid and peaceable spirit as might witness for its Author that the
thing he aimed at therein was merely the disquisition of the Truth; and because
the Author thereof was many years ago of my Reverend brother Mr. Tompsons
acquaintance and mine; therefore we thought it might not be in vain if we
should lovingly communicate to the learned Author such apprehensions of ours,
whereby we were detained from concurring with his judgment in the principal
Question disputed in the said Treatise. And therefore in the latter end of the
same year, there came forth a small Script under our Name in way of a
brotherly Answer to that his loving and learned Treatise. Against this Answer
Mr. Samuel Rutherford a learned writer of the Church of Scotland, has
alleged and published many Objections. Exceptions, and Answers, in his Book
entitled The due right of Presbyteries: I may call them many, because in that
Treatise of his there are no less then 24 or 25 several places, wherein he
bring up by name the said Answer, disputing against sundry passages therein as
if they were not sound; which passages if they be indeed erroneous and unsound,
are a great many to be contained and found in so small a Work the whole Book
as it is now printed containing in it 30. leaves: So that the leaves in the
Book are not much more then the places therein which this learned Writer does
object against; which being considered, I thought it therefore needful to
peruse and weigh as the Lord should help, the several places of his
forementioned Treatise, wherein he deals against the said Answer: And having
so done, I here present my apprehentions to public view, leaving the Prudent
and judicious Reader to consider and judge; whether this Reverend and learned
Brother have sufficiently overthrown or weak'ned the said Answer, or whether
the same do not still remain agreeable to the rule of Truth, notwithstanding
his Objections against the same, or such Answers as he does return to several
passages therein.

CHAP. I.
Of Appeals from particular Congregations and the true cause of Appeals; and
whether by Mr. Rutherford his doctrine in this point there may not be Appeals
to general Councils, whose power of Iu^isdiction he does yet deny.
FIrst of all in his Page 315. (for that is the first place wherein I find him
meddling with the Answer) speaking of doubts concerning Math. 18. 17. Tell the
Church; In a 9.th Objection about that Scripture, besides other particulers he
has these words, viz. There is no reason to appeal to a higher Judicature
because the inferior may err, because all above a Congregation are Courts
which may err; Presbyteries Provincial, National, the universal Council of
the Catholic Church may err: And then for author of this part of the
Objection he subjoyneth my Name, and Answer to Mr. Herle, Cap. 2. page 13, 14.

Answ. When he is discoursing of doubts concerning that Scripture, Math 18.
Tell the Church, I know no reason why he should bring those words of mine at
such a time or for such a purpose. For though I do acknowledge that I wrote
the words which he has set down or such like, in the place by him alleged;
yet that they were brought by me for such purpose as he does report (viz. For
the clearing of Doubts concerning the meaning of Math. 18 17.) that I do
utterly deny. He that shall look upon the Chapter and Pages alleged, will
find that I do not there meddle at all with that Scripture, either for one
purpose or another; and therefore cannot be truly said to have used the words
alleged, in way of clearing Doubts concerning the same. And albeit in another
place, (cap. 3. page 22. et sequ.) I do purposely speak to that Scripture;
yet in that place there is no mention at all of the words by him alleged nor
of any such like, and where such words are to be found, there that Scripture is
not mentioned at all. Now who knows not that a man may be much wronged, when
the words which he has spoken are taken and applied to such a purpose, for
which he did never bring them nor intend them.

But to let this pass, let us hear what our Reverend Author says against the
words alleged, in his Answer.

The cause of Appeals, says he, is not because inferior Iudicatures may
err, for so we might appeal from all Iudicatures, even from a general
Council, for it may err, Page 315. lin. ult.

Answ. Is not this the very same that was said in the Answer, Page 13, 14. The
pages which he here undertakes to answer, is it not there said; As for
Classicaticall Provincial, and National Synods, there is none of these but
those Cases of deficiency and possibility of Partiality may befall the best of
them; and therefore if for these causes the single Congregations may not be
indep^ndant, but there may be Appeals from them, the Synods being subject to
the like, there may be liberty of Appeals from them also --. For as the
Congregations may be partial and err, so we suppose it will not be denied but
the Classis may err, the Provincial Synod may err, the National may err,
yea general Councils may err; and so by this reason not Synods nor general
Councils may have entirenesse of Jurisdiction, but there may be liberty of
Appeals from them also. These are our words in those very Pages which here Mr.
Rutherford pretends to Answer and disprove or confute. But in stead of a
Confutation we see we have nothing but a plain Confession or affirmation of
his own, that the thing is even so as was affirmed by us before. Now why he
should make a show of taking away or weak'ning that which we had said, and then
in stead of accomplishing what he undertakes, to do no more but only to say
the same thing again which we had said before, what reason I say he had for
this I know not; but plain it is that for the particular in hand, the Answer
which he pretends to weaken, is not yet weakened at all, but rather strengthened
and confirmed by his apparent yielding the Cause, and affirming the same that
was before affirmed by us.

But says he Page 316. The true cause (viz. of Appealing to higher Courts)
is, 1. Because they do not so frequently err. 2. They are not so inclined and
disposed to err; for many eyes see more then one, and do more seldom
miscarry in taking up the right Object: 3. Because we conceive more equality
and less partiality in higher Courts.

Answ. These three Reasons seem much what the same, or to hang one upon
another; for therefore they do more seldom err because they are not so
disposed and inclined to err, and they are not so inclined because they are
more in number, and because there is in them more equality and less
partiality: So that upon the matter it is but one reason, viz. because though
they may err, yet not so frequently and likely as the Congregation.

Yet (be they three Reasons, or be they but one) let us consider what force
there is in this saying to take away entirenesse of Jurisdiction from a
Congregation, and to establish the necessity of appealing from the same unto a
Synod, for this is the thing that should be cleared.

First of all it may be a question, whether Synods do more seldom err then
the Presbyteries of Congregations: And the reason of the doubt is; because the
Promise of the presence of Ch^^st is not made merely to multitude or greatness
of number; but if they be but two or three gathered together in his Name, his
Promise is that he will be present in the midst of them, Math. 18. 20. Now the
Promise of his presence being to so small a number gathered together in his
Name, why may not a Congregation and its Presbytery being so gathered, though
they be a lesser number then Synods and Councels; yet be partakers of the
benefit of this Promise, for the preserving of them from Error, as well as
those greater Assemblies? (...) not but in multitude of Counselors there is
safety: nor do I doubt but Synods and Council^ gathered together in the Name
of Christ, may expect the per^^^^ance of this Promise of our Saviors presence:
But the thing I doubt of is this, whether a Congregationall Church of Saints,
furnished with an able and ^aithfull Presbytery (for of such only do I
speak) may not by virtue of this Promise be as frequently preserved from
Error as those greater Assemblies of Synods and Councils, Posito that the
Synods and Counci^ls did as frequently come together as the Congregation does:
For otherwise I grant, the Synods meeting more seldom may err more seldom:
but let the Comparison be equal in respect of the time of Assembling and
coming together, and then I doubt whether Synods (...) preserved from Error
any oftener then the forementioned lesser Assemblies.

It is well known what N^zianzen said of Synods or Councils in his time, viz.
That he had never seen good and happy end of any of them, and that evils
were not so much redressed as increased thereby. Epist. ad Procop^um, Quae Est
numere 42. Referr. Whitak De Concill. Q. 1. cap. 3. True it is, Nazianzen lived
as Dr. Whi^^^ observes, Pessimis and turbulentissimia Ecclesiae Temporibus, in
very corrupt and troublesome Titues, when by reason that Valens the Emperor
was averse from the Truth, H^retickes much prevailed and Corruptions greatly
increased; and this might make the good man something more to dislike all
Councils then there was cause. Nevertheless his words do apparently witness,
that in his time Synods and Councils did not seldom err but very often; so
that he for his part had never seen good that had come by any of them. Then
which saying I suppose one would not speak more hardly of a particular
Congregation and its Presbytery; and therefore by this testimony of his my
doubt is increased; whether the matter be in (...) Mr. Rutherford does say,
viz. That Synods and Councils do Rarius erra^^, more seldom err then such a
particular Congregation as here I am speaking of.

But suppose it were so as he does affirm (and I will not deny it, only as I
said I doubt of it) yet I do not see what great matter he can gain thereby
for the furthering of his purpose, that there must be liberty of Appeals from
particular Congregations unto Classes and Synods, as unto higher Courts. For if
this be the reason (...) such Appeals, because such Assemblies do more
seldom err, because many eyes do see more, and do more seldom miscary in
taking up the right object; Then it will follow that the greatest Assemblies,
in as much as they have the most eyes, do of all others most seldom err, and
so to them there must be the most Appeals. For the learned Author well
knows, a quatenus ad Omni^ valet consequentia. And so by this means the true
cause and reason of Appeals lying (according to Mr. Rutherford his
apprehension) in the rareness and seldomnesse of erring in such Assemblies to
whom appeals are made, and the cause of this seldomnesse of Erring lying in
the multitude and great number of eyes in such Assemblies, it must needs
thereupon follow, that Universal or general Councils as having in them the
most eyes, are the Assemblies that do most seldom err, and so un^o them
there must be most Appeals. Which if it be gran^ed, the Classical, (...), and
National Synods, are all by this means deprived and stri^t of (...) of
^^^^diction as well as the particular Congregations, the Synods by (...) to
general Councils, as to those that do ra^ius c^rare, as well as the (...)
appeals unto the Synods: And so thera must be no entirenesse of (...) only in
the general Councils, but from all other Synods there must (...) liberty of
Appeals, as well as from the Congregation. This Consequence for ought I see
does unavoidably follow upon that which Mr. Rutherford lay undowne as the cause
of Appealing from a particular Congregation: and so ou^ Brethren by this means
have spun a fine thread, drawing forth a Conclusion which is every what as
prejudicial to their own Cause as to ours.

If any ask why may not this Consequence be owned? Why may we not say, there
must be liberty of Appeals from all Synods and Presbyteries, except only the
general Council? The Answer is, that we may not so say; because then Causes
would be too long depending a^ore they could come to issue, yea perhaps would
never come to issue as long as this world shall endure: For by this Rule they
may by Appeals upon appeals be protracted until they be brought to a
general Council to be determined there. Now as there has not been any such
Council for many Ages bypast, so it is very uncertain when there will be one
assembled, whether ever or never whilst this world stands. But we think
Christ Jesus has provided better for his Church then so, and has not
appointed such a necessity of Appeals upon appeals, but that Causes may be
determined before any general Council can be assembled.

Besides, if such Assemblies might be frequently attained, yet it is not yet
cleared, that when they are assembled they have any power of Jurisdiction at
all; but only a Doctrinall power to clear up the Rule, the power of
Jurisdiction remaining in some other Assembly. Sure it is, Mr. Rutherford thus
teaches expressly, for his words are these; Verily I profess I cannot see what
power of Jurisdiction to Censure scandals can be in a general Council; there
may be some merely Doctrinall power if such a Council could be had, and that
is all. Due Right, etc. page 482. and in the end of the same Page and beginning
of the next, speaking of those words, Math. 18. Tell the Church, he says
thus; Because ordinary Communion fails when you go higher then a National
Church, and Christ's way supposes an ordinary Communion --; therefore I deny
that this remedy is needful in any Church above a National Church. By which
sayings it appears, that he counts Christ's remedy to Censure Scandals not
needful in a general Council, yea and he seriously professes, that he
cannot see that such a Council if it could be had, has any power of
Jurisdiction at all to censure Scandals. Which being so, it must needs follow,
that Scandals must be censured, and Causes ended somewhere else, before they can
come (...) such end to a general Council. And if this be so, then how can
that stand which here he affirms, that the true cause of Appealing to Synods
in this; because they do rarius errare, more seldom Err, then the particular
Congregation, and having many eyes do more seldom miscarry in taking up the
right object: For this Cause is most properly appliable to the general
Council, unto whom notwithstanding he denies any power of Jurisdiction to
censure Scandals; and if they h^ve no such Power, there can be no Appeals to
them for such purpose and end.

And how these things can stand toget^er, That the true cause of Appeals to
such or such Assemlies does he in this, that they do more seldom err as
having many eyes, and yet that to general Councils there should be no Appeals
at all, as having no power of Jurisdiction, though of all others this Cause be
most properly ^ound in them, I for my part do confess I do not understand.

If any shall say, that as Mr. Ruthe^ford does make that which I have mentioned
the true cause of Appeals, so he does also hold a Power of Jurisdiction even
in general Councils; and shall therefore doubt whether I do truly report him
(...) touch the contrary, I would wish no more favor of such a one but to
peruse the places which I have here above alleged, and then I hope he will
and the words to be no otherwise, but as I have set them down.

I know indeed there are some places in him which do look another way; as
that where he says, It is by accident and not through want of inuat^ and
intrinsecall power, that the Court of a Catholic Council can not in an
ordinary and constant way exercise that Power which now we are speaking of Due
Right, page 308. And a little after he says, He sees nothing to prove that a
general Council has not power to Excommunicate a National Church. Yea and
further, that if there were a general Council at this d^y, they might
lawfully in a Iuridicall way (so are his words) do that to the faction of
Romish pretended Catholics; which he says, is Excommunication in the essence
and substance of the Act. And in the Page next ensuing he says, This of our
Savior, Tell the Church, is necessarily to be applied to all Churches and
Courts of Christ, even to a Catholic Council. These Places I confess do
seem to me not very well to agree with the either before alleged: For in the
one he plainly affirms, there is in general Councils power of Jurisdiction to
censure Scanda^s, and in the other he does as plainly deny the same. But it is
the former places and not these latter which I do stand upon; in which former
as I conceive him to hold the truth, so for ought I see, that which he says
in this place we have in hand about the true cause of Appealing from
Congregations to Synods is much infirmed thereby. For how can that be taken to
be the true cause of Appeals, which is most properly found in such Assemblies
(I me^ne in general Councils) unto whom as having no Power of Jurisdiction,
there must be no ap^eales at all?

To conclude this Chapter: When we do enquire about Power of appealing, and
unto what Courts appeals must be brought, our way is not to seek for such
^ourts as cannot Err, for such we shall never find; nor for such as we think
will more seldom err, as Mr. Rutherford would have it; for that Rule is also
subject to much uncertainty and exception, as has been already declared. But
the best way is to enquire where the Lord JESUS has placed the Power of the
last and final censuring and determining of Causes, and when that is found
therewith to rest contented. And as for Synods and Councils, it is neither
their not Erring, nor their seldom erring that can be a suffi^ient argument
to place the Power of Jurisdiction in them; unless the Lord Jesus had so
appointed and ordained, which yet does not appear.

And so much for this first place, wherein our Brother deals against the
Answer.

CHAP. II.
Of the Power of Synods to give advice and Counsel, and whether from thence it
does follow, that they have no power to Command.
THe next place wherein I find this learned Author dealing with the Answer, is
in his Page 381. Where having in the Close of a 4.th Objection in the prece^ent
Page brought in these words, viz. A Synod in dogmaticall Power arises no
higher then this (viz. a man, or a single Congregation) as that a divine
Institution does fall upon it. Amongst other things in his Answer to the
Objection he says thus, viz. I would know if a Synods dogmaticall Power be
above the power of single Congregations; I think says he, it is not by our
Brethrens tenants; for they say expressly that every particular Church has
right, jus, to decide Dogmaticall points: This right the Church of Antioch had
( Act. 15) an^ labored to end that Controversy within her self, which
shows that they had Right an^ Power: but they had not Ability; and therefore
in that case they seek for Counsel, light, and advise from other Churches --.
And then amongst other places for Proof that this is our Tenent, he alleges
in his margent my Name and Mr. Tompson^ in the Answer to Mr. Herle, Chap. 2.
and after the words above rehearsed and some others to the like purpose, he
infers thus: Hence says he, the power of Synods is only by way of
Counsel and advise.

Answ. To omit (at least for this time) the other Places alleged in his
margent, and not to examine how far his Answer reaches to satisfy the
Objection, as himself has propounded it; I will only consider of such things
as do directly Concern the answer, for that is the scope ^ayme at, and I
endeavor to keep close thereto.

First therefore I have this to say, That for the Dogmaticall power of Synods
above Congregations, for the Right and Power of the Church of Antioch in
particular, and for the Power of Synods to be only by way of Counsel and
advise, there is not in the Chapter alleged so much as one word about any one
of those (...) either one way or another; so that I cannot but marvel why this
reverend Brother should allege that Chapter for such a purpose.

2. Although in another place of the Answer, viz. Page 4^. there be words to
the like purpose with those which our Author here sets down concerning
Antioch, yet for the Conclusion and consequence which he would thence infer,
viz. That the power of Synods is only by way of Counsel and advice, as there
is nothing said ^ the Chapter by him alleged that looks that way, so there is
nothing in the Page or Chapter where A^tioch is spoken of, nor any where else
in all the Book (...) as I do remember, that can any way serve for the
proving of such a Conclusion and tenent to be ours. The Author alleges no
place that has such a conclusion in it, either in direct words or by just
consequence: and I profess that for my part I do not know of any such.

3. But this I do know that the direct contrary to what here is expressed is
plainly to be found in another place of the said answer, viz. Page 7. where
there are these words, viz. If a Synod may b^ called a Church, and if Power by
disputation and disquisition to clear up the Rule, and then to Command
Obedience thereto, may be called Government, then they (viz. the Independants
as they are called) do admit a Synod to be a governing Church, for the Power
here m^ntioned they do allow unto Synods. Now the Power here mentioned being,
as we see, not only a Power by disputation to clear up the Rule, but also a
Power to Command obedience thereto, they allowing this power unto Synods as
they do exprestly say that they do; I know not why our Brother should say,
that they allow unto Synods only a Power of Counsel and advice. For power to
Command Obedience, and power only by way of Counsel and advice, I suppose are
not the same; and if they be not, I know not how this report in this particular
can be made good. To me it seems apparent and undeniable, that they who have
Power to Command Obedience, have more then only a Power to counsel and advise;
and they who have only this latter have no Power of the ^orme^ at all. Even
interiours, as Naamans servants, 2 King. 5. have power to counsel and advise
their Master, and yet I hope they had no Power to Command their Master to yield
Obedience.

4 Suppose it be true (which I deny not) that the Answer in another place,
(though not in the place by him alleged) does say, that A^tioch had right to
have ended the matter amongst themselves, if ability had served thereto, and
that by reason of Distention and through want of Light they were forced to send
out to ^^rusalem for help, must it needs follow thereupon that his assembly at
Jerusalem had no more Power but only by way of Counsel and advise? (which is
the Conclusion which he endeavors to draw ^^om that which is said concerning
Antioch) I ^^^ceive there is no necessity at all of such a consequence.

For whence must the same (...) I suppose from one of these two, either from
this, that Antioch is supposed and said to have had Right within her self, or
else from this that Jerusalem gives Counsel and advise. Any other color for
concluding such a Conseptionce as is in question, the Answer affords none that
I know of. (...) for these two Particulers here mentioned, they are both
insufficient for such (...) purpose.

For what should hinder but there be more Power in the Synod of ^erusalem
toward them of Antioch then only by way of counsel and advise, even power to
command them to do what is their duty, though Antioch have right to end the
matter themselves, if ability serves thereto? Does right in one Person or
Assembly to end their ma^^ers if they be able, extempt them from being under
the command of others? Hoshoulders have right to govern and order their
families, if so be that they be able: does it follow therefore that Superiors
in Church or civil state have no power to command householders to do their duty
herein, but only to give counsel and advise? Or if housholdere have such
right, does it follow that therefore they are under no command, in Church and
Commonwealth? I suppose it will not follow at all. Or shall we say, that
Classes and Provincial Synods have no right to end their own matters within
themselves, if a National Synod have power to command them? Or if they have
such right, shall we therefore say they are not under the command of the
National Synod, and that the National Synod has no power over them but only
by way of Counsel and advise? We suppose Master Rutherford will not say so:
and yet he might as well say it, as say as he he does, that because Antioch
has right to and her own matter if they be able, therefore a Synod has no
power but only by way of Counsel and advise.

And though the Synod is to give Counsel and advise (which was the other
ground whereon the conclusier before mentioned seems to be built) yet neither
will Master Rutherford his conclus^on, that the power of Synods is only by way
of Counsel and advise, follow from thence at all. For who knows not that.
Counsel and advise may be administered and given by them, who have also power
to command? Not every one indeed as may advise and Counsel, may forth with
command and enjoyne: Nevertheless, Counsel and Command are not so repugnant,
but that they who may Command, may also advise. Paul had power to Command and
enjoyne Phyl^mon to do what was convenient, and yet for loves sake would rather
beseech him, Philem. 8. 9. The Lord Jesus to doubt has absolute authority to
Command, and yet we find him sometimes speaking to the Sons of men by way of
Counsel or advise. Revel. 3. ^8. I Counsel thee to buy of me Gold, that thou
may he rich, etc. shall we now infer from hence, that the power of the
Lord Jesus is only by way of Counsel and advise, and that his power cannot
amount to the nature of a Command? I suppose we would be afraid and abhor to
deduce such a consequence. And therefore, though a Synod may advise, yet their
power to Command (which is more then mere Counsel and advise) is not from
thence concluded to be Null. And so much for Master Rutherford his second
place, wherein he deals against the answer.

CHAP. III.
Of the Assembly, Act. 15. Whether they did exercise any power of Jurisdiction
against the obtruders of Circumcision, and whether their rebuking of them do
argue the Affirmative.
IN his page 388. He lays down this as a 2d. Object. viz. That there is no
censuring of persons for Scandals, and that meeting, Act, 15. Because there is
nothing there but a Doctrinall declaration of the falsehood of their opinion who
taught the necessity of Circumcision: and that all is done by way of Doctrine
and by power of the Keys of knowledge, not of Jurisdiction, is clear from the
end of the meeting, which was verse 2 and 6. To consider of that Question:
Consideration of Questions being the end of the Synod, is a thing belonging to
Doctrinall Power merely. And then he s^^joyneth my name, and in the Margent
alleges the answer, chap. 1. page 8.

Ans. Whereto I first of all return this answer. First, that the thing here in
Question being about the power of that meeting Acts 15. There is nothing in the
place alleged by Master Rutherford that can warrant him to frame such an
Objection under Master Tompsons name and mine, as proceeding from us: And the
reason is, because that meeting Acts 15, is not mentioned at all in the place
by him alleged, neither for that purpose which he sets down, nor for any
other; much loss is the Objection ours in Terminis. Now to frame an Objection,
and to allege chapter and page for proof that the Objection is ours, when as
neither page nor chapter aleadged do speak any thing at all of that matter,
what reason can be given for this I know not.

Nevertheless, because the matter contained in the Objection does not much
differ from my apprehension and judgment, and something in the answer
elsewhere may possibly intimate such a thing, though but briefly touched, I
will therefore consider of what he says for removing the Objection as himself
has propounded the same.

It is false, says he, that there is no censuring of persons here, for -- it
is more then evident that the public Synodicall censure of rebuke is put upon
those who held and urged the necessity of Circumcision, and why not
Excommunication also in case of obstinacy? For the Synodicall censure of a
public Synodicall rebuke is only gradually different, not specifically from
excommunication, and both must proceed from ou^ and the same power. So then the
sum is, the Synod had power of rebuking, and therefore of Excommunication
also.

Answ. The Consequence is not clear, for who knows not that there may be
power to rebuke, where there is no power of Excommunication? Is it not the
express Law of God, that every man shall plainly rebuke his Neighbor and not
suffer sin upon him, Levit. 19. 17? And are not our (...) words as plain, if
thy brother trespasle against thee rebuke him, and if he repent forgive him,
Luke 17. 3? Whereby it is evident that one particular person has power by the
Law of God and Christ to put a rebuke upon another, if there be occasion for
it. But will it follow hereupon that one particular Christian has power to
Excommunicate another in case of Obstinacy? I suppose Master Rutherford will
not say so; and yet unless this be said, I know not how his Consequence can be
made good, that if a Synod may rebuke, they may Excommunicate also. I know
indeed he says, the Synodicall rebuke is only gradually different from
Excommunication, and not specifically, and that both must proceed from one and
the same Power. But this would require some proof, and should not nakedly be
affirmed without any proof at all. For of it self it is not evident, that
where ^ver there is power to rebuke, there is power of Excommunication also.
The contrary I suppose is evident from that which has already been said from
Levit. 19. 17. and Luke 17. 3. and from many other Scriptures, and reasons,
which show that one man alone has power to rebuke, who cannot for that be
concluded to have any power of Excommunication. I know the learned m^n is
copious in proving from the words of verse 24. Certain men went from us, and
have troubled you with words, subverting your Souls, etc. That this Assembly
does not only in a Doctrinall way confute the false opinion and Doctrine of
these teachers of Circumcision, but does also rebuke them for another fault, to
wit; their obtruding their false way upon the Souls and Consciences of others,
and for their wilful and obstinate upholding that opinion and raising a
Schism in the Church. But if all this were granted his purpose were not gained
thereby, unless he would prove that which he does but only affirm, to wit,
That a Synodicall rebuke is not specifically different but only gradually from
Excommunication, and that both must proceed from the same power, which ye^ he
has not proved at all.

But says he, I argue thus: If the Apostles do not only in a Doctrinall way
refute a false Doctrine in this Synod, but also in Church way and by a
Juridicall power do rebuke and Synodically charge the Authors as subverters of
Souls, and Liars, then they do not only use a mere Doctrinall power in this
Synod, but also a Juridicall power: but the former is true: Ergo, so is the
latter.

Answ. With favor of so learned a man, I think this kind of argu^ng is but a
begging of the thing in question, and a proving of Idem per Idem. For if the
Synod did not only in a Doctrinall way refute a false Doctrine, but also by a
Iuridicall power rebuke the Authors of it, then it must needs be true indeed
that they did not only use a Doctrinall power, but also a Iuridicall power;
that is, If they did so, they did so: if they did use such power, they did use
it. But there still lies the question, whether they did so or no: and whether
they did use such power or not, and this kind of arguing does not clear it
all. If we on the contrary should argue thus, if this Assembly did not put
forth any power of Jurisdiction or Discipline, but only in a Doctrinall way
con^ute a false Doctrine and rebuke the Authors of it, then they did only put
forth a Doctrinall power, and not any power of Jurisdiction, one of far less
abilities then our learned Author, would soon espy the looseness of such
reasoning: at least himself, we doubt not, would soon espy it, for sometimes
we hear him say, friend your Logic is naught, page 177. And yet (be it spoke
without offense) the Logic which himself does here use is not so good, as to
be altogether without fault, no not for the form of it; and therefore, we do
not see how any thing can be concluded th^reby.

But to leave this mistake, and to consider of the matter it self. If it were
granted that this Assembly does not only in a Doctrinall way consute a false
Doctrine, but also rebuke the Authors thereof, must it needs follow that this
rebuking was done in a Iu^idicall way? Is there no rebuking of offenders for
their faults, but only in a way of ^^^^ction and Discipline? I suppose much
needs not to be said for the clearing the truth to be otherwise. For Master
Rutherford himself confesses Page 394. That there is great odds to do one and
the same action materially, and to do the same formally: and Page 393. That one
Apostle might himself alone have rebuked these obtruders of Circumcision.
Which being so, it follows thereupon that though this Synod (to call it so)
Act. 15. Had a Doctrinall power, yea and a power of rebuking these false
teachers; yet the thing that he from thence would infer, viz. Their power of
rebuking in a Iuridicall way, and their power of Excommunication, these are
neither of them proved thereby.

For if it should be said, that though rebuking do not always imply Iuridicall
power, yet if it be a Synod that does rebuke, then the power here spoken of may
be concluded thence to be in a Synod. The Answer is, that this will not help
at all, because this is nothing but the bringing in of another Efficient, viz.
The Synod, for effecting or acting the same effect. Now Master Rutherford
confesses page 393. That he does not fetch the specification of this rebuke
and of those Decrees from the efficient causes; and gives that for his reason,
which to me is unanswerable, to wit, because one Apostle might himself alone
have rebuked these obtruders of Circumcision: And in the page next ensuing he
confesses also, that actions have not by good Logic their total
specification from the efficient cause. Which being so, then though it were
granted that any Synod may, and that this Synod did perform this action of
rebuking, yet the thing in question, to wit, that the power of a Synod is a
power of Jurisdiction and of Excommunication is not at all gained thereby.

At the least wise (to end this passage) this I may say, that if this Reverend
Brother will be true to his own Principles, and not gainsay what himself has
already written, he for his part cannot conclude the Synods power to
Excommunicate from this argument of their power to rebuke, nor yet from any
other argument whatsoever: and the reason is, because he does elsewhere
confess that Synods are not to Excommunicate any, and not this Synod in
particular to Excommunicate these false teachers, but to remit the censuring of
them to other Churches, Commanding them to do it. His words as they are to be
seen in his Page 413. are these, viz. I could easily yield that there is no
necessity of the Elicit acts of many parts of government, such as
Excommunication, Ordination, admitting of Heathens, professing the Faith to
Church Membership, in Synods Provincicall, National or Oecumenicall; but that
Synods in the ease of neglect of Presbyterycall Churches, Command these
particular Churches whom it concerns to do their duty: and in this sense
Act. 15. Is to remit the censure of Excommunication to the Presbytery of
Antioch and Jerusalem, in case of the obstinacy of these obtruders of
Circumcision. In which words we have two things concerning Excommunication (to
omit other particulars) first, that there is no necessity that Synods should
Excommunicate any, but only command the Churches to do their duty therein.
Secondly, in particular concerning that Synod Acts 15. That they were to remit
the censure of Excommunication to the Presbyteries of Antioch and Jerusalem, in
case of the obstinacy of these obtruders or Circumcision. Which particulars
being most true (as I for my part so esteem of them) it follows thereupon,
that what Master Rutherford says in this place we have now in hand, is greatly
weakened thereby. For how both these can stand together, that this Synod should
have power not only to rebuke, but to Excommunicate these false teachers, and
yet neither Provincial, National, nor Oecumenicall Synods to Excommunicate
any, nor this Synod in particular to Excommunicate these false teachers, but to
remit the censure to other Churches to whom it concerned, commanding them to do
it, how these things I say can stand together, I for my part am not able to
understand.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Dogmaticall power of Synods, and of the power of Congregations to
determine matters amongst themselves if ability serve thereto.
IN his Page 396. alleging Mr. Tompsons name and mine, and chap. 1. page 9. of
the Answer. He says we there teach that there is a power of clearing truth
dogmatically, and that ultimately where the controversy is ended: but he says,
we will have this Vltimate power not in a Synod only, but also in a
Congregation; and then no answers three things which there ensue.

Answ. Our words are these, by power of Decrees we understand power to clear
up the truth Dogmatically; for the word translated Decrees is Dogmata in the
Original, Act. 16. 4. And this power we confess is in a Synod, though not all
in a Synod alone, but also in the Presbytery of a single Congregation. Now
these bring our words, if therefore this Reverend Brother would overthrow our
Tenent in this particular, he should have proved that there is not any power as
all in the Presbytery of a single Congregation to clear up the truth
Dogmatically: this indeed had been directly contrary to what we teach: But this
be neither proves, nor once attempteth to prove; and therefore our Tenent
herein does yet stand good, for any thing he has said to the contrary.

And no marvel, si^h the express words of the text do witness that every
Bishop has power and is boand by his Office and duty, by sound Doctrine both
to exhort and convince gainsayets, Tit. 1. 9. And accordingly the Presbitery of
Antioch did labor to clear up the truth in that controversy about
Circumcision; and had much disputation about it amongst themselves, before there
was any speech of sending to Jerusalem for help, Act. 15. 2. Which shows that
they had power or right to have cleared the matter amongst themselves, if
ability had served, or else this endeavor had been sinful as being an
attempting to do that whereto they had no right. So that for ought we yet so,
the power that we speak of, and which we hold to be in the Presbytery of a
Congregation is there indeed by the appointment of the Lord.

But let us hear Master Rutherfords Answer.

First, says he, they seem to make this Dogmaticall power a Church power, and
the exercise thereof formally an act of Church government; and so it must be
Church power and Church government in the Synod, as well as in the Congregation.

Answ. Whence does it seem that we do so make it? Are there any such words as
here he sets down? Or any words equivalent thereto? Or does the place make any
mention of Church Power, and Church government at all? Or is there so much as
one word that looks that way? If there be, let our Brother say that we seem
to ^each as he does report; but if there be not, we are sorry he should report
us to teach o^ seem to teach, that which to our remembrance we never said nor
thought. And sure it is, we have expressly said the direct contrary in page 7,
the Page next save one before this which here he is dealing against, where we
have these words, It seems to us (say we) that this power, viz. By
disquisition and disputation to clear up the rule (and then to command
Obedience thereto) is not properly a power and exercise of government and
Jurisdiction, but a power of Doctrine, and so a Synod is rather a teaching then
a governing Church. These are our words in the Page before alleged; wherein we
plainly express what the power of Synods seems unto us to be, even the
direct contrary to that which he says we seem to make it; we on the one side
affirming and expressing, that it seems to us, the power of a Synod is no
power of government and Jurisdiction, but a power of Doctrine: And he on the
other side reporting that we seem to make the exercise of Dogmaticall power to
be formally an act of Church Government, and so to place Church Government in
the Synod. In which report we must needs say, we are plainly mis-reported.

His second answer is this. The last period and Conclusion of the controversy
cannot be both in the Congregation by right only, and in the Synod by right
only: For two last powers cannot be properly in two Subordinate Iudicatures.

Answ. This is very true, but it touches not us at all. For we never said the
last period of the controversy is both in the Congregation only, and in the
Synod only. If we have so said, let the place be produced where we have said
it; for the place by him alleged does afford us no such thing, nor any place
else that we know of. All that the place affords concerning this point is only
this, that there is a power of clearing the truth Dogmatically in a Synod,
though not in a Synod only, but also in the Presbytery of a single
Congregation. And this Doctrine I hope our Brother will not deny. But whether
this power be last in the Synod, or in the Congregationall Presbytery, of this
we do not speaks at all; much less do we say as he does apprehend and report,
that this power is both last in the Synod and last in the Congregation too.
Wherefore our defense in this particular must needs be this; that what here he
confuteth to be outs, is such a thing as never fell from our mouths or pens,
nor for ought we know did never enter into our thoughts.

Thirdly, he says. If a controversy concern many Congregations as this does
Act. 15. I see not how a Congregation except they transgress their line, can
finally determine it.

Answ. Neither does this touch us, except we had said that a Congregation may
finally determine controversies which concern many Churches, which yet we have
not said. As for that controversy Act. 15. It is plain from verse 2, that
Antioch did endeavor to have ended it amongst themselves, so far as they were
troubled therewith. For some teaching that corrupt Doctrine amongst them, they
had much disputation about the point before they determined to send out for
help elsewhere. Now to what end was thus much disputation, if they had no
right to determine the matter? might they not better have spared their pains?
Or did they not transgress their line in attempting what they did attempt?
Sure it seems they did, if they had not right to determine the matter. But for
our part, since we do not find them in the least reproved by the Holy Ghost for
this attempt, therefore we cannot but think they did well therein. And thereupon
it follows, that if Antioch was a Congregationall Church (as it seems to us
it was, from Act. 14. 27.) either this controversy did trouble no Church but
Antioch only, or else when a controversy or corrupt opinion does trouble many
Churches, one of them may lawfully determine and end it, so far at it
concerns themselves.

CHAP. V.
Again of that Assembly, Act. 15. Whether their rebuking the false teachers do
prove a power of Jurisdiction and Excommunication in Synods: and whether
Preaching do prove the Assembly where it is, to be a Church.
THe new place where I find him excepting against the Answer, it in his Page
410. Where he proposes an Object. to this effect, to wit. Paul exercised the
Keys of knowledge upon Barbarians, and might have Preached to Indians, and did
to scoffing Athenians -- yea Paul by this power Dogmaticall rebuked the
Athenians, Act. 17. 22. Yet Paul had no power to Excommunicate the Athenians.
And then he subjoyneth my name, and cites in the Margent the 43, and 44 pages
of the Answer.

Answ. This Objection being taken from Paul's rebuking the Athenians, our
Brother had no reason to propose it under Mr. Tompsons (...) and mine, for as
much as in all that discourse of ours, the Athenians to my rememb^ance are not
so much as once mentioned: sure in the Pages by him alleged there is no
mention of the Athenians at all. And therefore why this Objection should be
proposed and reported by him as ours, we do not know. Which I do not say,
(...) though I thought the objection so weak, as though the Authors of it may
not well own it. For from whosoever the Objection came, for ought that I yet
perceive there is good weight therein. For which cause, and because in one of
those Pages we have delivered something concerning a Ministers power to Preach
to Pagans in general, (though nothing concerning the Atheni^ns in particular,
as he reports) therefore I am willing to consider what Mr. Rutherfor^ says,
for the satisfying of the objection proposed, as not willing to pass by any
thing without consideration, wherein our selves may seem to be concerned or
aimed at

I deny not says he, but there is a great odds betwixt a concionall rebuking
by way of Preaching, which may be and is always performed by one, and a
juridicall rebuking by a power Jurididicall of the Keys, which is performed
only by a Church society.

Answ. If all this were granted, you the Objection is not satisfied, nor his
purpose gained thereby. For the clearing whereof it is good to consider the
thing in Question, and how this Objection comes in, and whereto it tends, and
then we may better descerne how the objection is removed by Mr. Rutherfords
answer: The thing in question is, whether a Synod have power of Iurisidiction
and Excommunication. Mr. Rutherford his scope in that place is to prove the
Affirmative; and therefore for a dozen or 14 Pages together, he has these
words in the top of every lease, The power of a Synod a power of Jurisdiction:
and his medium to prove this Tenent is this; Because a Synod has Power to
rebuke. Whereupon ensues the Objection, that Paul might rebuke the Athenians
and yet might not Excommunicate them; and therefore enough a Synod may rebuke,
it follows not that they may Excommunicate. This is the order of the Dispute,
as is plainly to be seem by p^^^sing the place. And now comes in the Answer
which Mr. Rutherford gives to the objection; to wit, That there is a great odds
betwixt a Concionall rebuking and a Juridicall, the one being performed by one,
and the other by many; Which Answer I conceive is not sufficient, because this
Difference may he granted and many more may be added if he please, and yet
the thing in question not gained, nor the Objection removed at all. For what
though a Concionall rebuking be performed by one, and a Iuridicall by many? Yet
still it remains clear, that there may be rebuking where there is no
Jurisdiction; and therefore, though a Synod may rebuke, it follows not that
they may Excommunicate, nor have power of Jurisdiction. If our Brother would
have satisfied the Objection, he should not have satisfied himself with
alleging the difference mentioned between a Concionall rebuking, and a
Iuridicall or Synodicall; but should have proved that there cannot be any
Concionall rebuking at all, at least wise not any rebuking of Athenians who are
not subject to Excommunication, and if this had been proved, the Objection had
been fully removed. But this he has not proved at all, nor once attempted to
prove it, but plainly yields the contrary; and therefore for ought I see the
Objection remains in its strength, and so the strength of his argument
removed thereby, who would prove the Synod, power of Jurisdiction from their
power of rebuking.

But let as hear what he answers in the words ensuing.

It cannot be denied says he, but the rebuking of men because they subverted
Souls, verse 24. Is not a mere Concionall rebuking which may be performed by
one. First, it is a rebuking verse 24. Second, it is a rebuking performed by
many, by a whole Synod, 6. 22. Third, it is performed by a political Society.

Answ, And what of all this? May it not nevertheless be denied that this
rebuking was any other then in a Doctrinall way? Be it granted, that it was a
rebuking, and a rebuking performed by many; and if were granted by a Political
Society too; must it needs follow that therefore it was Iuridicall, or in way
of Jurisdiction? I see no necessity of such Consequence. Nay, Master Rutherford
himself does confess (as we heard before) in his Page 393. That the
specification of this rebuke must not be fetched from the efficient causes,
because one Apostle might himself alone have rebuked these obtruders of
Circumcision. If therefore it were granted that many persons, a whole Synod, a
Political Society, or what ever else he will call them, were the efficient
causes of this rebuke, yet all this is too little to prove that the rebuke was
Iuridicall, unless the specification of it must be fetched from the efficient
causes, which Master Rutherford himself disclaymes.

Moreover, I would put this Case: suppose a Pagan or a Christian of another
Nation and Kingdom, shall come into a Church Assembly, whether the Assembly be
a Congregationall Church, or a Synod; and in the Assembly shall openly and
Scandalously misbehave himself in one kind or other, to the dishonor of God,
and grieving of the godly, and the danger of corrupting others that shall
behold such bad example. I would gladly know whether this Assembly be it Synod
or other, may not lawfully rebuke this Scandalous practice and behavior, and
if they may, whether it would follow thereupon that they may also lawfully
Excommunicate the man, if his sin and impenitency shall deserve the same. If it
be said they may, I would know: quo jure? And who gave them such Authority to
Excommunicate Pagans, or men of another Nation, being only there present at
that time occasionally? And if they may not so proceed against such a person,
then the answer to Master Rutherfords alledgements in the Case we have in hand,
is ready and plain: For as he alleges, First, here is a rebuking. Second, a
rebuking of many, even a whole Synod. Third, of a Political Society and Body;
even so the same may be said in this Case in all the particulars; For first,
here is a rebuking. Second, rebuking of many. Third, by a Political Society
and body: and yet all this is too little to prove a power of Jurisdiction and
Excommunication in the case proposed; and therefore I see not how it can be
sufficient to prove such a power in a Synod, for which purpose Master
Rutherford brings it. Of necessity for ought that I see, one of these must be
said, either that this Assembly have no power to rebuke the man, but must
suffer his sin to be upon him, though God be dishonored, and others endangered
thereby; or else it must be said they have power to Excommunicate him as well
as to rebuke him; (neither of which I conceive can safely be said) or if
neither of these can be said, it must then follow that their may be power to
rebuke, even in an Assembly of many persons, a Political Society; and yet the
same Assembly have no power at all to Excommunicate the persons so rebuked, and
so this learned Brothers arguing is answered.

Likewise, I suppose it will not be denied, but one Congregation if need so
require, may rebuke and reprove another Congregation, though neither of them be
Superior to other, but both of them equal and Independent of each other in
regard of subjection, Mr. Rutherf. confesses, p. 294. That Congregations and
Churches may admonish and rebuke each other, And sure it is, that Scripture,
Cant. 8. 8. We have a little sister, what shall we do for her? Does show that
Churches ought to take care one for the good of another. And if they must take
care and consult for one another, there is the like reason that they should
reprove and admonish one another, as need shall require. Now when one Church
does so practice toward another, it cannot be denied, but here are the same
things which Mr. Rutherford speaks of, First, a Rebuking Second, a rebuking
performed by many. Third, a rebuking performed by a Political Society and
Body. But can any man infer from hence, that the Church thus rebuking another
Church has power to Excommunicate that other Church? I suppose none will
affirm it. And if this may not be affirmed, I do not see how rebuking
performed by many even by a whole Synod, can be any sufficient ground to prove
that the Synod has power to Excommunicate.

The Apostles and Elders (says our Author) are not considered here as merely
Preachers and teachers in the act of teaching; for why then should they not be
formally a Church Assembly, if they be an Assembly meeting for Preaching the
word? Page 411. 412.

Answ. When the text Acts 15, does mention sometimes the Multitude, verse 12.
Sometimes the Brethren, verse 23. Sometimes the whole Church, verse 22. Besides
the Apostles and Elders, we know no absurdity in it, if one should say, here
was formally a Church and a Church Assembly; in which Church-assembly the
Apostles and Elders were teachers and Preachers, though they alone were not the
Church. Yet though we think here was a Church, and a Church-assembly; we do
not think Mr. Rutherford reason does prove them so to be. For Paul and S^las
were Preachers of the word in the Prison at Philippi, Act 16. And at Mar^hill,
and the Marketplace at Athens, Act. 17. And yet we think it hard to infer
thence, that these Assemblies were formally Churches.

Yea but says our Author, the exercise of the Keys of knowledge in the
hearing of a multitude, is essentially an act of Preaching of the Word, Page
412.

Answ This is very true indeed, an act of Preaching the word it must needs be,
the word Preaching being taken in its utmost Latitude. But is not unavoidably
and always a Church-act, or an act that infallibly proves the Assembly, where
such an act is performed, to be formally a Church? This is the thing that
should have been cleared, or else the thing is not cleared; But this our
Reverend Author does not clear at all; and the contrary is very plain from
sundry instances in the Acts, where the Apostles did exercise the Key of
knowledge in the hearing of multitudes in sundry places, where yet for all this
there was not forthwith any Church; and therefore, whereas he says, The
Apostles and Elders are not considered in this Assembly as Preachers and
teachers in the act of teaching, because then the Assembly should have been
formally a Church, We rather think they that shall consider it will find that
the Apostles did, and other Elders in these days may put forth the act of
teaching and Preaching in some Assemblies (suppose Assemblies of Turks and
Indians) and yet the Assemblies not thereby proved to be Churches.

CHAP. VI.
Whether the power of Synods be a power of Jurisdiction; and of the dependence
of the Synagogues upon the Synedrion at Jerusalem.
NExt of all, in his Page 414 in a 16.th Objection in this and the former Page
he says thus, Therefore was the Synagogue of the Jews no complete Church,
because all the Ordinances of God cannot be performed in the Synagogue: and
therefore, were the Jews commanded only at Jerusalem, and in no other place to
keep the Passover and to offer Offerings and Sacrifices which were ordinary
worship: but there is not any worshiper Sacred Ordinance (says that worthy
Divine Dr. Ames) of Preaching, Praying, Sacraments, etc. prescribed, which is
not to be observed in every Congregation of the new Testament, -- and then he
subjoyneth Mr. Tompsons Name and mine; and in his Margent cites the Answer,
Page 12, 13. And further says in the Objection, That others say because there
was a representative worship of Sacrificing of all the twelve Tribes at
Jerusalem, therefore all the Synagogues were dependant Churches, and Jerusalem
the Supreme and highest Church.

Answ. To leave what is alleged a^ Objected by others, and to consider only of
that which concerns our selves. Because the Synagogues in Israel were
dependant on the great Synedrion at Jerusalem, therefore some would infer
that Congregations in these days must be dependant on the Jurisdiction of
Synods. To this Argument we are endeavoring to give answer in the place
alleged by Mr. Rutherford, where we show that the Synagogues might be
dependant and not complete Churches, because the Sacred Ordinances of God which
were of ordinary use, could not be performed in them; but Congregations in
these days complete and entire as having liberty to enjoy the use of all the
Ordinances within themselves: for both which particulars we allege the
testimony and words of Dr. Ames. The sum is thus much: If the Synagogues
could not enjoy all the Ordinances within themselves, and our Congregations
may, then though the Synogogues were dependant on the Synedrion at Jerusalem,
it will not follow that Congregations in these days must be dependant on
Synods. This is the (...) of that which is said in the answer: in the place
which Mr. Rutherford alleges.

Now what answer does he return to this passage? Truly none at all that I can
find. None will you say? How can that be? Does he not propound it in his 16.th
Objection, as that which he undertakes to answer? I confess he does so, but
nevertheless all that he has set down for answer is wholly taken up and spent
in two other things, the Objection which he proposes as ours, being wholly
left untouched. Those two things are these; the one an answer to another
passage of ours in another place of the answer, the other an answer to the last
part of his Objection, which himself does acknowledge to be the saying of
others, and not ours; and therefore he brings it in thus viz. Others say,
because there was a representative worship, etc. by those words, Others say,
plainly declaring that what he thus expresses, proceeds not from us, but
from others. And so though he return answer to this saying of others, and to
another saying of ours which we have written elsewhore, yet for this of ours
which he proposes in this h^s Objection, I find no answer thereto at all. And
therefore I think the thing remains as it was, unless we shall take his
mere proposing of it for a satisfying answer, which we see no reason to do.

Nevertheless, though he turns away from this passage of ours without
returning any answer thereto, yet there is another which he applies himself
more directly against, and therefore to this sixteenth Objection he begging
his answer thus, Surely the aforesaid Reverend Brethren of New England have
these words, but it seems to us the power (of a Synod) is not properly a
power and exercise of government and Jurisdiction, but a power of Doctrine, and
so a Synod is rather a Teaching then a governing Church: from whence (says he)
I infer, that our Brethren cannot deny a power of governing to a Synod, but
it is not so proper governing as Excommunication and Ordination performed in
their Congregations; but say I, it is more properly governing as to make Laws
and rules of governing is a more Noble, Emin^nt and higher act of governing (as
is evident in the King and his Parliament) then the execution of ^hese Laws
and rules.

Answ. So then, th^se former words of ours proposed in the Objection, are
wholly forsaken and left, and instead of answering them, he falls as we set upon
other words which we have written elsewhere, and applies himself to deal
against those other. By which dealing the considerate Reader may judge whether
the former words being thus handsomely forsaken and left, do not still remain
in their strength: and whether it had not been as good never to have proposed
them at all in his Objection, as having proposed them to turn away directly
and immediately from them unto other matters, without returning one word of
answer to the former. The wise in heart may consider what this does import.

But sich he is pleased to acquit the former and to apply himself to the
other, let us therefore leave the former in its strength and unshaken, and
consider of what he says in this other.

Wherein when he speaks of making Laws and rules of governing, either he
me^nes this making Laws and rules properly so called, or else he means it
only of a Ministerial power to clear up the Laws and rules of Christ, and
in his name to com^and obedience thereto. And it seems by the instance which
he gives of the King and his Parliament, that he intends the former sense. And
if so, then the answer is that this Noble, Eminent, and high act of governing
as he calls it, does not belong to any Synods upon earth, but only to the Lord
Jesus Christ in Heaven, the Script^res abundantly witnessing, that he only is
the Lord and Law giver to his Church, L^^. 4. 12. Isa. 33. 22. For the clearing
of which point, much needs not to be said, considering that this learned
Brother himself does elsewhere directly and in express terms confess as
much as we desire in this matter. For in one place speaking in one place of a
Power to prescribe rules and Laws, he does not only distinguish them from
Laws p^operly so called by the word Directive, calling them directive Laws,
but also for further explaining his Mind, annexeth these words. They are not
properly Laws which the Church prescribes: Christ is the only Lawgiver: Due
Right, Page 395. And in the page following speaking of a Societies or a Synods
power of making Laws, he adds for explanation thus, I take not here Laws
for Laws properly so called, but for Ministerial directories, having
Ecclesiastical Authority. So then the Church or the Synod has no power at all
to make Laws properly so called, for Christ ^s the only Law giver: And if so,
then the governing power of Sy^ods which our brother would prove by this Noble
and Eminent and high power of making Laws is not proved thereby at all, in as
much as this Noble and eminent power of making Laws does not belong to any
Synods upon earth, but to Christ only. And this may be an Answer to what he
says or a Synods power to make Laws, it Laws be taken in their proper sense.

But if he intend not this sense and meaning in the place we are speaking of,
but only the latter, viz That Synods have power to clear up the Laws and
rules of Christ, and to command obedience thereto, then I confess the answer
in the 7.th page thereof does acknowledge such power to belong unto Synods, but
how this can prove their Power of Jurisdiction and government properly so
called, which Mr. Rutherford would thence infer, we for our parts do not yet
perceive. For the power here described is but a mere Doctrinall power, and we
have given sundry instances in the Answer, Page 43. 44. To show that there may
be a power by way of Doctrine to clear up the rules and Laws of Christ, and
to command obedience thereto, where yet there is no power by way of
Jurisdiction and Discipline to punish the breach of those rules; which
instance, this Reverend brother does not satisfy at all. And therefore though
Synods have power to clear up the rules and Laws of Christ, and to command
obedience thereto (which power we deny them not) yet that which he from thence
would infer, that they have also a power of government and Jurisdiction, does
not follow from thence at all, unless we shall say, that Doctrine and
Discipline, Doctrine and Jurisdiction or government are the same.

Briefly thus: a power of mak^ng Laws properly so called is a Noble and
Eminent kind of government, but this power does not belong unto Synods, but to
Christ. A power of clearing up Christ's Laws, and commanding in his name
obedience thereunto does belong unto Synods, but this is no power of
Jurisdiction and government, but a Ministerial power of Doctrine, and so still
our Tenent does stand, that a Synod if it may be called a Church, is rather a
teaching then a governing Church.

Secondly, says our Author, Our brethren incline to make a Synod a teaching
Church.

Answ. We never yet absolutely yielded that a Synod might be called a Church,
(...) on the contrary, We have said, that unless it could be proved that in
Scripture the name of a Church is given to a Synod, we are not to be blamed
though we give not a Synod that name. Answ. Page 1. The most that we have
yielded in this point is this, that for the name we will not contend, and that
if a Synod may be called a Church, then since they have Power by disputation to
clear up the rule, they are rather a Teaching then a governing Church. Answer
Page 1. and 7. This is all we have said, and we desire our words may not be
stretched beyond our intent and scope therein. But let us hear what our
Brother would hence infer.

I infer, says he, that Synodicall teaching by giving out Decrees, tying
many Churches, as our brethren of New England and the forenamed Authors teach,
is an Ordinance of Christ, that can be performed in no single Congregation on
earth, for a Doctrinall Cannon of one Congregation can lay any Ecclesiastical
tie upon many Churches, Ergo by this reason our Congregations shall be
dependant as were the Jewish Synagogues.

Answ. When he says the Brethren of New England and the Authors of the Answer
do teach a Synodicall teaching by giving out Decrees tying many Churches, and
aledgeth for proof in his Margent, Answ. 7. to 32. q. 9. 14. page 43, 44. and
Answer to Mr. Herle, Chap. 4. Page 40. 41 with favor of so learned a man, we
must return this Answer, that neither of the palces alleged will make good
his purpose, in as much as neither of them does make any mention at all of the
thing which he reports them to teach, viz. Such Synodicall teaching as gives
out Decrees tying many Churches. Let the places be viewed and the thing will be
found as I say. And therefore how they can be said to teach that which they
neither teach nor mention, does surmount my ability to conceive. If the Reader
would know what it is that is taught in the places, it is no more but this,
that in some Cases it is requisite that Churches should seek for light and
Counsel and advice from other Churches, as Antioch, did send unto Jerusalem in
a Question which they wanted ability to determine amongst themselves, and that
there ought to be Synods, and that we think that meeting Act 15. might be such
an one. The first of these is taught in the form^^ of the places, and the other
in the other. But for giving out Synodicall Decrees tying many Churches, this
same be it within the power of Synods or otherwise, is (...) taught at all in
either of the places, except we shall say (which we think were unreasonable)
that there can be no Synods, nor consulting of other Churches for light and
Counsel and advice, but there must be in those other Churches so consulted
withal, a power to give out binding Decrees, yea Decrees that shall bind or
tie many Churches. We think this latter does no ways necessarily follow upon
the former; and therefore though the places alleged do speak to the former,
yet the latter which this Author reports them to teach, they do not teach at
all.

Secondly, I Answer further, that if such a Doctrine were indeed taught in the
places by him alleged or any other, yet the inference which he would thence
bring in, That then our Congregations shall be dependant as were the Jewish
Synagogues, Th^s same does not follow at all: and the reason is, because the
Synagogues were dependant on the Supreme Synedrion not only for light and
Counsel, no nor only for Doctrinall Cannons or Decrees, but also for
Jurisdiction and Discipline, that Synodrion being their supreme Court, to
whose sentence they were all bound under pain of Death to submit, as is
clear, Deuteronomy. 17. 11, 12. And therefore if it were granted (which yet we do not
see proved) that Synods may give out Decrees and Doctrinall Cannons, that shall
tie many Churches, it does not follow that our Congregations shall therefore be
dependant as were the Jewish Synagogues, except it were also proved that they
must depend upon Synods in point of Jurisdiction and Discipline, as well as in
point of Doctrine, yea and so depend as that the sentence of those Synods must
be obeyed under pain of death. Sure the Synagogues and every member of them
were in this sort dependant upon the Supreme Synedrion: but we hope (...)
Reverend brother will not say that Congregations must in this sort be dependant
upon Synods. At the least wise this we hope he will not deny, that every member
of a Church is bound to depend upon the Pastor of that Church in point of
Doctrine; and yet it will not follow that he must depend upon one Pastor alone
in point of Jurisdiction and D^scipline. And the reason is, because Doctrine
may be dispensed by one Pastor alone, but Discipline must be dispensed by a
Church, which one Pastor alone cannot be. And therefore if Congregations were
to be dependant upon Synods in point of Doctrine, it would not follow that they
must be dependant in point of Jurisdiction and Discipline.

Thirdly, says he, It is a begging of the question to make Jerusalem the
Supreme Church and the Synagogues dependant Churches; because it it was
lawful only at Jerusalem to Sacrafice; for I hold that Jerusalem was a
dependant Church no less then the smallest Synagogues in all their Trybes. And
so he proceeds largely, to show that sacrificing at Jerusalem did not make
Jerusalem Supreme.

Answ. It this were even so as is pleaded, yet that which we have said of the
compleatnesse of the Synagogues and of their dependancie is not at all removed
thereby: and the reason is, because we do not make the Synagogues dependant nor
Jerusalem supreme, merely upon this ground, because Jerusalem alone was the
place of Sacrificing, but this is the ground upon which chiefly we go, that at
Jerusalem was the Synedrion upon whom all Israel must depend for judgment,
and from whose sentence there was no appeal, which ground we still think
does prove both the incomplearnesse of the Synagogues, and the supremacy of
the Synedrion, and the contrary to this must be cleared if our Tenent in this
matter be removed. True it is, we think it some argument of the Synagogues
incompleatnesse and imperfection that they were not permitted to enjoy all the
Ordinances which were of ordinary use: but the supremacy of Jerusalem we do
not place in this only, that there was the place for Sacrifice but in this
withal that the supreme Iudicatory was there, upon which all Israel must
depend, and from the which there must be no appeal. And yet this supremacy we
do not place in Jerusalem considered a part from the Synedrion, but in the
Synedrion it self.

And therefore, whereas he says, Page 415. That we might as well conclude that
all the Cities and Incorporations of England are dependant upon London,
inasmuch as the Parliament uses there to sit, I conceive the comparison does
not suit, because as we do not place the supremacy in London or in
Westminster, considered apart from the Parliament, but in the Parliament which
uses there to sit, so we place not the supremacy amongst the Jews in
Jerusalem considered apart from the Synedrion, but in the Synedrion it self,
which was there seated. But because our Reverend brother in the latter end of
this 16.th Objection brings in this particular of Ierusalems supremacy by
reason of the Sacrifices, with Others say, therefore I conceive he intends not
us therein, but some body else, and therefore I will proceed to the next
wherein our selves are concerned.

CHAP. VII.
Whether the lawfulness or necessity of Appeals do prove a superiority of
Jurisdiction in Synods over Congregations, and of sundry sayings of our Author
which seem to interfere.
IN his page 422. he propounds a 19.th Objection to this effect, If the
Government of consociated Churches be warranted by the light of Nature, then
this light of Nature being common to us in civil as in Ecclesiastical causes,
it will follow that every City governed with rulers within it self* must be
subordinate to a Class of many Cities, and that Class to a National meeting
of all the Cities: and the National government to be a Catholic or
Oecumenicke civil Court --. And because by the same light of Nature there must
be some final and supreme Judgment of controversies, least Appeals should
be spun out in infinitum, it must be proved that this supremacy lies not in a
Congregation. And in the Margent he cites Mr. Tompson and my self in page 16
and page 10, of the Answer, as Authors of this last bassis in the O^ectjection.

Answ. It is true that in one of those pages alleged we speak to the like
purpose as here is reported. For we there suppose it to be clear by the light
of Nature, that there must be some final and supreme judgment of Causes, and
that unless it be determined where that supremacy does lie, (which we account
the very thing in question) we say the usefulness and necessity of Appeals
may be granted, and yet we shall be still at uncertainty about the thing in
question, and as much to seek as before, because that there ought to be
appeals til you come to the highest is one thing, and that a Synod and not a
Congregation is the highest is another. To this purpose we have written in one
of those Pages, the sum whereof is this much; that though the usefulness of
Appeals till you come to the highest be granted, yet the supremacy of Synods
over Congregations in matter of Judicature is not concluded thereby.

Now what does our Reverend Brother return in his Answer? Does he prove the
contrary to what is here affirmed by us? Does he clear it sufficiently, that
if it be once granted that there must be Appeals till you come to the
highest, then the supremacy of Synods over Congregations must inevitably
follow? I conceive the necessity of this consequence had need to be cleared, if
that which we have said be sufficiently answered. But does our Brother clear
this? Or does he so much as once attempt the clearing thereof? Surely to speak
freely what I find, I find nothing that looks that way, and therefore cannot
but wonder why our opinion should be alleged in this Objection, and so his
Reader be led into expectation of some sufficient Answer thereto, and then the
answer which he returns to be taken up in other matters, our opinion proposed
in the Objection, being wholly in his Answer left untouched. If that saying of
ours be not sound, why does he not return some answer? If it be sound and
good, why does he make an Objection of it, and so breed an apprehension in
weak Readers of its unsoundnesse, and put them in hope of a confutation, when
no such thing is performed? I leave it to the wise in heart to consider what
this does argue.

Nevertheless, let us consider of what he does return for Answer, Page 423.
First he says, Appeals being warranted by the Counsel which Iethro gave to
Moses -- cannot but be natural?

Answ. Suppose this be so, what can there be concluded hence, that makes
against us? cannot appeals be Natural, but the supremacy of Synods over
Congregations must needs follow? If there must be an highest, must it needs be
yielded that the Synod and not the Congregation is that highest? I conceive
this needs not to be yielded at all, and therefore though Appeals be Natural,
I see not what is gained thereby.

Again, he says, God has appointed that the supremacy should lie within the
bounds of every free Monarchy or State, so that there can be no Appeal to any
Oecumenicall or Catholic civil Church, for that is against the independent
power that God has given to States.

Answ. Let this be granted also, and are we not still where we were before? Is
there in this any thing at all that does make for the removal of our opinion,
as himself has see it down in his Objection? We may truly say we see it not.

No, nor in that which does follow, viz. But in the Church it is far
otherwise, for God has appointed no vissible Monarchy in his Church, nor no
such independency of policy within a Congregation, Classical Provincial or
National Church.

Answ. For that which is said of a visible Monarchy in the Church, I confess
it is true, God has appointed none such. But for the rest, of these words,
since they contain an express denial of the supremacy of all Ecclesiastical
Iudicatures, except it be the general Council, I would gladly know how our
Tenent before expressed is disproved, or how the necessity of that Consequence
before mentioned is at all cleared hereby. If there be no independencie of
policy in Congregations, nor yet in any Synods exc^pt it be the Oecumenicall,
does this prove that the supremacy does lie in Synods and not in the
Congregation? Nothing less: for how can our Brother prove that it lies in the
one and not in the other, by saying as here he does, that indeed it lies in
neither? Or how is that Consequence made good, that if there must be appeals
till we come to the highest, then the Synod is the highest? How is this I say
made good by affirming, that neither the Congregation nor the Synod is the
highest? For my part I must confess it passes my understanding to conceive,
how the denying of a thing should be the proving and clearing thereof. And yet
except this be admitted, I know not how our apprehension in the matter we have
in hand is at all disproved. For whereas we say, Appeals may be granted and
yet the supremacy of Synods over Congregations will not follow, Mr. Rutherford
for the disproving of what we apprehend herein, does bring nothing in the
place we have in hand but only this, that the Supremacy does neither lie in
the Congregation nor in the Synod. Which is no disproving of us all, except as
I said, that the denying of a thing may suffice for the confirming and clearing
thereof. For I conceive if we be disproved the supremacy of Synods must be
proved and cleared, which here our Brother does not, but on the contrary denies
the same.

Furthermore, if there be no independency of policy within a Congregation, a
Classical, Provincial or National Church, As here our Brother affirms,
then what shall become of that which he tells us elsewhere, viz. Page 483. That
that remedy of our Savior, Tell the Church, is not needful in any Church
above a National? For sure if there be no independencie of policy in any of
the lesser Churches, nor yet in the National Church, one would think that of
our Savior should be needful in some Church above the National. Or if it be
nor needful in any Church above National, then one would think there should
be some indepencie of policy in the National Church, or in some of the
former. For my part I know not how this difficulty will be expedited, I mean
how both these sayings of our Brother can stand good, except we shall say that
which I suppose he will not say, viz. That independencie of policy is no
where. And yet I cannot see but this must be said, if both the other sayings
stand good? For if independencie of policy be neither in the National Church
nor in any Church above it, nor in any Church below it, I know not where we
shall have it.

Again, if there be no independencie of policy in any of the Churches before
named, what shall we say to that passage where our Brother does verily
profess, That he cannot see what power of Jurisdiction to censure Scandals can
be in a general Council, affirming further, that there might be some merely
Doctrinall power if such a Council could be had, and that is all, Page 482. For
if there be no Independencie of policy in any Church below a general
Council, one would think there should be in the general Council some power
of Jurisdiction to censure Scandals, yea and an independent power too* Or if
there be not such power in the general Council, nor yet in the National
Church, nor in any Church below the National, we must then say there is no
independent Power of Jurisdiction to censure Scandals in any Church upon earth.
Which latter if it be not owned, as I conceive our Brother will no^, I know not
how the other two can both stand.

Though appeals be warranted both in Church and State by the light of Nature,
yet appeals to Exotique and foreign Judicatures is not warranted by any such
light, but rather the contrary.

Answ. Let this be granted also, and are we ever a whit nearer to the point,
then before? Is this good arguing, appeals to exotique Indicatures are not
warrantable, Ergo a Synod and not the Congregation is the supreme Judicature?
Is this Consequence strong and clear? If it be not, how is our Tenent removed?
If our Brother intend it not for a removal thereof, why is it brought in for
answer to an Objection proposed by himself as ours?

Further, let this sentence be compared with the former immediately preceding,
and more difficulties still arise. For in this he tells us we see, That appeals
to foreign Judicatures are not warrantable; And in the other he tells us as
we heard before, That there is no independencie of policy within a
Congregation, a Classical, Provincial, or National Church. Now to find how
these things do agree, I am at a loss, for if there be no independencie of
policy in the Congregation, nor the other Churches mentioned, I should have
thought, it might have been lawful to have appealed from them to others. For
why may there not be appeals from them in whom no independen^ie of Policy is
seated? Yet now we are restrained from such appeals, for that all other
Iudicatures are accounted foreign and Exotique. So that of two sentences the
one immediately following upon the other, the former tells us there is no
independencie of policy in any of the Churches mentioned, which are
Domesticque and near, and the other tells us that other Churches are so
Exotique and foreign, that appeals to them are unwarrantable: and what to
say for the reconciling of these things, I must confess I find not.

I grant it is true, Appeals to Exotique and foreign Iudicatures are not
warrantable. But why are we not certified what Iudicatures are to be accounted
Exotique and Foreign? For here I conceive lies the pinch of the question; and
unless this be determined, the thing in question is still left at uncertainty.
For as in civil states there are many Cities and Towns which have independent
power within themselves, as Geneva, Strasburgh, Zuricke, Basil, and many
others, and Appeals from any of these, though to the City or Town next
adjoining, would be to a Judicature Exotique or foreign, so some are apt to
conceive the like of Congregationall Churches. And therefore it had need to be
cleared that Appeals from such Churches is not to Exotique and foreign
Iudicatures; for if this be not cleared, the unlawfulness of Appeals to
foreign and exotique Powers may be granted, and the question will remain
uncleered.

Church Appeals though warranted by the light of Nature, yet it is supposed
they be rational, and grounded on good reason, as that either the matter
belong not to the Congregation, or then it be certain or morally presumed the
Congregation will be partial or unjust, or the business be difficill and
intricate; and if appeals be groundless and unjust, neither Christ nor
Natures light does warrant them. Yea in such case the supremacy from which no
man can lawfully appeal, lies sometime in the Congregation sometime in the
Classical Presbytery, so as it is unlawful to appeal for Illud tantum
possumus quod jure possumus.

Answ. The short sum is thus much, that appeals are then lawful when there
is just ground and reason for them, otherwise they are unlawful. Now first of
all how does this prove (for we would still keep to the point) the necessity of
that Consequence whereof we speak before, viz. That if appeals be lawful, then
there is a supremacy of Syno^s over Congregations. I conceive it is not proved
hereby all; but contrarily appeals may be granted lawful, when there is just
reason and ground for them, and yet the supremacy of Synods over Congregations
is still uncle^red. Nextly, it still remains a question, who must be judge of
the reasonableness of the Appeal and of those cases that are put to show when
they are reasonable, viz. That the matter belongs not to the Congregation and
the rest that are named: and unless it be cleared to whom it belongs to judge
these things, we are still left at uncertainty, in the maine matter, viz. In
whom the supremacy does lie, from whom we may not appeal. For to say as our
Reverend Author does, That in some case the supremacy from which no man can
lawfully appeal, lies in the Congregation, and sometimes it does not:
Appeals when they are grounded upon good reason are warrantable, else they are
not: when the matter belongs not to the Congregation or the Congregation will
be partial and unjust, or when the business is diffic^ll and intricate, then
we may appeal from the Congregation, else we may not, These things I say do
not clear the matter at all, because still the question remains who must be
judge of these things, whether the party appealing, or the Congregation from
whom, or the Synod to whom the appeal is made: and unless this be determined,
the things mentioned alleged by our Brother do afford us small help in the
matter for the clearing of it. And therefore, what we said in the Answer does
still for ought I see remain sound, viz. That there must be some final and
supreme judgment that controversies may not by appeals after appeals be
spun out in infinitum, and to determine where that supremacy does lie, is the
maine question, which unless it be determined, the usefulness of appeals may
be granted, and yet we shall be still at uncertainty about the thing in
question and as much to seek as before, because that there ought to be
appeals till you come to the highest is one thing, and that a Synod and not
the Congregation is the highest is another. Now whether our Brother in that
which we have hitherto heard have sufficiently cleared it unto us, that we may
know where this supremacy does lie, I leave it to the Judicious to consider.

CHAP. VIII.
Whether Antioch, Act. 15. Had right to have ended the controversy amongst
themselves, if they had been able; and whether their sending to Jerusalem for
help, or their knowledge that other Churches were troubled with the like
evil, or the party among themselves who were against the truth, do prove the
contrary. And of supremacy of power in Congregations.
But though our Author do not clear it to us where the supremacy does lie
yet in this page 423, and 424. He uses an argument from the practice of the
Church of Antioch, Act. 15. And our own Doctrine concerning the same to prove
that it does not lie in the Congregation, which argument we are willing to
consider. His words are those. That supremacy of power should be in a
Congregation without any power of appealing, I think our Brethren cannot
teach. For when the Church of Antioch cannot judge a matter concerning the
necessity of keeping Moses Law, they by Natures direction, Act. 15. 2. Decree
to send Paul and Barnabas and others to Jerusalem, to the Apostles and Elders,
as to an higher Judicature, that there truth may be determined: and then he
adds that Mr. Tompson and my self do teach that the Church of Antioch had
jus, power to judge and determine the controversy, but because of the
difficulty, had not light to judge thereof (alleging for this in the Margent
the answer, Chap. 4. Page 42.) Ergo says he, they must acknowledge Appeals by
Natures light warrantable, as well as we.

Answ. That appeals are warrantable, and warrantable by Natures light till we
come to the supreme judicatorie, this we deny not, but have formerly yielded
no less. But for that our Brother here aims at, viz. Appeals from a
Congregationall Church (as not being supreme) to another Iudicatory, this we
conceive is not proved by the example of the Church of Antioch, nor by any
thing that we have written concerning the same And the reason it because
Antioch had right and Authority to have ended the matter amongst themselves if
ability had served thereto: and their sending to Jerusalem for help may argue
want of agreement, or imperfection of light, but argues no want of Authority or
right within themselves. For it is plain verse 2, that Antioch did endeavor to
have ended the matter amongst themselves, and had much disputation about it for
that end, before there was any speech of sending to Jerusalem. Now this
endeavor does argue their right; for otherwise it had been sinful, as being a
presuming to do that which did not belong to them. This reason we have rendered
before in the place which our Author alleges, and he does not at all remove
it; and therefore we are still of the same mind as before, that Antioch was not
dependant upon the Jurisdiction of other Churches, but had independent power
within themselves, as many may have who yet need the help of light from others,
for their direction in using their power. Great Kings and Monarchs have
received light from their Councillors without any impeac^ment of their
independent power, which they have in themselves, and without any ascribing of
that power to those their Counselors. As we said in the place alleged,
Antioch may send to Jerusalem for help, and yet this sending neither prove
right of Jurisdiction in them who are sent unto, nor want of Jurisdiction in
them who do send.

And therefore whereas our Brother says, Antioch because of the difficulty of
the controversy, had not light to judge thereof, Ergo we must acknowledge
Appeals to be warrantable, We would rather argue thus, Antioch wanted light,
Ergo Counsel and light is to be sought elsewhere; and thus we conceive the
inference will hold: but to say, Ergo there must be Appeals from the
Congregation to others in matter of Jurisdiction, this we conceive will not
follow at all. No more then it will follow, Kings or other supreme civil
Rulers must seek light and direction from their Counselors, Ergo there lies
an appeal from them to those Counselors, which Consequence none will
maintain nor affirm.

If the Scriptures had said that Antioch did never attempt to and that
controversy, as knowing that the ending thereof belonged not to them but to
others: or if it had said, that the censuring of these obtruders of
Circumcision had been performed by them of Jerusalem, and not by them of
Antioch as not belonging to Antioch but to them of Jerusalem, then our Brother
might have had some ground from Antioch to prove the necessity or
warrantablenesse of appeals from Congregationall Churches to other
Iudicatories: but such no such thing is said, we see not how this example can
be any ground for the establishing of such appeals, or the taking away from
Congregationall Churches their power of Jurisdiction within themselves.

Especially, we see not how this our Brother can allege the same for such a
purpose, considering what himself has written elsewhere in this learned
Treatise of his wherein he examines that answer of ours. Two passages in his
treatise I propound to consideration, which seem to me to make for that
independent or supreme power in Congregations, which here he is disputing
against, the one is that which we touched before in his Page 413. Where he
says that Synods in case of neglect of Presbyteriall Churches are to command
the particular Churches whom it concerns, to do their duty, as in other
particulars there named, so in excommunication of offenders; and further that
the Synod, Act. 15. Is to remit the censure of Excommunication to the
Presbytery of Antioch and Jerusalem, in case of the obstina^ie of these
obtruders of Circumcision. Which I conceive is very truly spoken, and thereupon
it follows that there was a supremacy of Jurisdiction in that Church of
Antioch, and no necessity of appealing from them to the Jurisdiction of others.
For ^ith the Synods are only to command the Churches to do their duty, and to
remit the censure of offenders to the Churches themselves to whom the offenders
belong, it plainly appears thereby where the supremacy of Jurisdiction does
lie.

The other place is in his Page 307. Where we have these words, viz. The power
of Jurisdiction ordinary intensive and quo ad essentiam Ecclesiae
Ministerialis, according to the entire essence of a Ministerial Church, is as
perfect and complete in one single Congregation as in a Provincial, as in a
National. Yea as in the Catholic visible body whereof Christ is the head. Now
if there be such perfect and complete power of Jurisdiction in a single
Congregation, I know not how there can be such necessity of Appeals from them
to the Jurisdiction of others as he is pleading for, nor how that supreme and
independent power in Congregations can be denied, which here he disputes
against. For let this complete and perfect Power of Jurisdiction be
acknowledged as due to such Churches, and appeals from them to other
Jurisdictions will be of small necessity or use.

I know indeed this Reverend Author says in the Page last mentioned, and
within a few lines of the words which I have here alleged, That a Congregation
is so a part of the Presbytery that it has not a whole entire complete
intensive power over its own members to Excommunicate them --. And therefore
the consociated Churches must have a power over the members of a Congregation.
Which words I confess seem not well to agree with the former, because in the
one entire complete intensive Power is denied to a Congregation, and in the
other the Power of Jurisdiction, ordinary intensive, is said to be as complete
and perfect in the Congregation as in the great Churches. But it is not the
latter words but the former which I do stand upon; and by them (as I conceive)
the supremacy of Congregations is established, and the necessity of appeals
from them to other Jurisdictions is clearly takes away. For if the Power of
Jurisdiction be as entire perfect and complete in the Congregation as in the
greater Churches, as our Brother expressly affirms it to be, I know not the
reason why there must be appeals from the Jurisdiction of the Congregation
unto the Jurisdiction of those other Churches. If the Power spoken of were more
imperfect and incomplete in the Congregation, then it is in the other Churches,
then there might be more reason or ^ayrer pretense for those appeals: but since
our Author confesses it is no more entire complete and perfect in these then
in the Congregation, but as complete and perfect in the Congregation as it is
in the other, I am yet to seek of a sufficient ground for the necessity of
appeals from the Jurisdiction in a Congregation. For is it reasonable to
appeal from one Iudicatory to another, and yet the power of Jurisdiction be as
entire complete and perfect in the former from which the appeal is made, as in
the latter to which the cause is brought by such appeal? It seems by such
appeals we are not like to be much helper, nor much to mend the matter above
what it was before, and therefore the usefulness and necessity thereof is
still uncl^^^^.

I think the Brethren err in this to teach that Antioch had power to
determine the controversy, Act. 15. When the Churches of Syria and Cicilia, to
their knowledge were troubled with the like question as verse 24. may clear,
-- I doubt much if they had power to determine a question that so much
concerned all the Churches.

Answ. It is not clear from verse 24. nor from any part of the Chapter as
far as I can find, that Antioch did know that other Churches were troubled
with this question; and if they had known it, I see nothing therein but they
might notwithstanding lawfully end the matter so far as concerned themselves.
For when this question was started amongst them by such as came from Judea and
taught this corrupt Doctrine at Antioch, the text is very clear verse 2, that
they had much disputation amongst themselves to have ended the matter, before
there was any speech of sending to Jerusalem: which disputation is an argument
that they had right to have ended it, if ability had no^ been wanting.

And as for our Brothers reason for the contrary taken from their knowledge
that the other Churches of Syria and Cicilia were troubled with the like
question, there is not one word in the verse alleged to show that Antioch had
knowledge of any such matter, nor is Syria and Cicilia once mentioned therein:
And though they be mentioned verse 23. Yet neither does this verse declare that
Antioch had any knowledge that this question had ever troubled those other
Churches. Say it be true that indeed they had been troubled therewith, and that
the Epistle from the Synod does intimate no less, this may prove that when the
Epistle came to be read at Antioch, then Antioch by this means might come to
the knowledge thereof; but all this does not prove that Antioch knew so much
before. And therefore they might endeavor to end the matter amongst themselves,
as not knowing for any thing our Author has yet brought to the contrary, that
any other Churches besides themselves were troubled therewith. But suppose they
had known so much, I see nothing in this to hinder but Antioch might lawfully
clear up the truth in the question, and censure such of their Church as should
obstinately hold and teach that false Doctrine, notwithstanding their knowledge
that others had been troubled with the like Doctrine and teachers. Suppose a
Christian family be troubled with lying Children, or servants, or such as are
disobedient and undutifull in one kind or in another; suppose they also knew
that their neighbor families are troubled with the like, shall this knowledge
of theirs hinder the Parents or Masters in such a family from censuring or
correcting these that are under their government, according to their demerits?
If not, why shall Antioch be hindered from censuring offending members of their
Church, only upon this ground because to their knowledge other Churches are
troubled with the like offenders? A City or Corporation is troubled with
Drunkards, with thieves, or other vicious and lewd persons, and knows that
other Cities or Corporations are troubled with the like: A National Church, as
Scotland for example, is troubled with obtruders of Ceremonies, Service book,
Episcopacie or other corruptions, and knows that England or other Churches
are troubled with the like, shall Scotland now be hindered from removing these
corruptions, and the obtruders of them from amongst themselves, only upon this
ground, because England to their knowledge is troubled with the like? Or shall
the Corporation ^ee hindered from punishing thieves and such other malefactors,
only for this reason, because to their knowledge other Corporations are
troubled with the like lewd persons? I suppose it is easy to see the
insufficiency and invalidity of such Consequences? And therefore if Antioch did
know that other Churches were troubled with the like offenders, as themselves
were troubled withal, this needs not to hinder but they may determine
questions that arise amongst themselves, and may censure such of their members
as shall trouble the Church or Brethren therewith, and obstinately persist in
so doing.

This being considered withal, that in thus doing they do not go beyond their
line, nor meddle with matters any farther but as they are within their
Compass. For when diverse Churches are troubled with the like corruptions in
Doctrine or practice, and some one of those Churches by using the Key of
Doctrine or discipline or both, does endeavor the removal of these
corruptions, they do not hereby attempt and endeavor to remove them out of
other Churches (which might be an appearance of stretching their line beyond
their compass) but out of their own Church, and only so far as concerns
themselves, and in so doing no man can justly say they meddle further then
their Power does reach.

But he gives another reason why Antioch had not right to determine the
question, And this is taken from the strong party that was in Antioch against
the truth, which was such as that they opposed Paul and Barnabas: concerning
which he says, that when the greatest part of a Church as Antioch is against
the truth, as is clear, Act. 15. 2. He believes in that they loose their jus,
their right to determine eatenus in so far; for Christ has given no
Ecclesiastical right and power to determine against the truth, but only for
truth; and therefore in this, Appeals must be necessary.

Answ. How is it clear that the greatst part of the Church at Antioch was
against the truth? The text does not say so much, but only this, that certain
men which came from Judea, taught the Brethren and said except ye be
Circumcised ye cannot be saved, and that Paul and Barnabas had no small
dissension and disputation with them about the matter, and that in the issue
they determined that Paul and Barnabas and certain others should go up to
Jerusalem about the question: Thus much the Scripture witnesses, Act. 15. 1,
2. But whether they that held that corrupt Doctrine at Antioch were the major
or the minor part of the Church, the text does not express, except we shall
say that where a false Doctrine is taught by some, and greatly opposed and
disputed against by others, there it must needs be that the greatest part are
tainted with that false Doctrine, which we think is no good Consequence. And
therefore whereas our Author says, the greatest part of this Church was
against the Truth, and that so much is clear from verse 2. I answer, first
that I do not perceive this cleerenesse, neither from verse 2, nor from any
other place of the Chapter.

Nextly, suppose this were clear, this may argue that they wanted ability and
light to end the matter, but must it needs argue that they wanted right though
they had been able? Or shall we say that they who want ability to do things as
they should be done, do therefore want right to ^^al^ in them at all? I
conceive it will not follow, and the reason is because this right in Churches
is Natural, or Connaturall to every Church, and this want of ability is only
accidental, and therefore this latter cannot totally hinder the former.

That light of government is Natural or connaturall to every Church, our
Brother own words do testify Page 341. Where he says this, viz. Supposing
that Christ have a visible Church it is moral that she have power of
government also, in so far as she is a Church; yea, power of government upon
this supposition is Natural or rather connaturall. And in Page 307, he says
as was alleged before, That the power of Jurisdiction ordinary intensive --.
Is as perfect and complete in one single Congregation as in a Provincial, or
in a National; yea, as in the Catholic visible body whereof Christ is the
head. And in Page 383. He says, That to a Congregation Christ has given by an
immediate flux from himself a political Church power intrinsci^ally in it,
derived from none but immediately from Jesus Christ: And the like he says of a
Presbyteriall Church. Now whether Antioch was a Congregationall Church as we
hold, or a Presbyteriall as is holden by this our Brother, yet it is clear by
those words of his here alleged, that being essentially a Church; it had a
political Church power intrinscically within it self, yet a perfect and
complete power of Jurisdiction, yea and such a power as was natural or
connaturall unto her, as she was a Church. But now the light of knowledge
whereby they should be enabled well to use this power, did not add any power
unto them which they had not before, not did the want of it, being but
accidental, deprive them of that Power, which was intrinscicall, essential
and connaturall unto them as they were a Church of Christ. Only this want did
hinder their ability to express their power well, but their right as being a
thing Connaturall did still remain.

Our Brother has a saying or two about the civil Power, which by proportion
may well illustrate this that I am speaking o^^bo it ye Church Power. In one
place he says thus, There is a twofold power in a King, one in a King as a
King, and this is a like in all, and ordinary regal, coactive: whether the
King be an Heathen, a Turk, or a sound believing Christian: there is another
power in a King as such a King, either as a Prophetical King as David and
Solomon or as a Christian believing King. And of this latter he says, that it
is not a new regal power, but potestas execuliba, a power or gracious ability
to execute the Kingly Power, which he had before as a King; Page 387. etc. 388.
^ow why may it not be said in like sort, there is in a Church twofold Power,
one in a Church as it is a Church, and this is a like in all true Churches of
Christ, whether the Church in this or that particular question have light to
discern, and hold the truth, or otherwise: another in a Church, as it is sound
believing Church, holding the truth in such or such question; and this is but
only a gracious ability to exercise the power which they had before, not adding
to them any new Power at all? Again, in his Page 393. he has these words.
Though the King were not a Christian Magistrate, yet has he a Kingly power to
command men as Christians, and it is by accident that he cannot in that state
command Christian duties, and service to Christ; because he will not, and
cannot command those duties remaining ignorant of Christ; even as a King
ignorant of necessary civil duties cannot command them, not because he wants
Kingly power to command these civil things, for undeniably he is a Judge in
civil things, but because he has not knowledge of them. And may we not say in
like sort, though a Church want the knowledge of the truth, in some particular
question, yet they have a Church power to determine such questions, and to
command obedience therein, and it is by accident they cannot in that state
determine rightly, because they will not, being ignorant of the truth therein,
not because they want Church Power to determine such matters, but because they
have not the knowledge of them. Again a little after in the same P. he tells
us, That Christianity adds no new fatherly power to a Father over his
Children, nor gives a new husband right to the husband, once an Heathen over
his wife; for an heathen Father is as essentially a Father over his Children as
a Christian Father, and an heathen husband an heathen master etc. are all as
essentially Husband, Masters, etc. as are the Christian husbands, masters, etc.
And may we not as well say, soundness of knowledge in such or such a
particular question adds no new Church power to a Christian Church over their
own members, nor gives a new Church right over them which they had not before;
for a Church that wants such knowledge is as essentially a Church, invested
with Church power over her members as is another Church? For ought I perceive
the cases are alike; and if soundness of knowledge do not give to a Church
their Church-right in this or that question, how can want of that knowledge
deprive them of that right? Sure one would think the whole substance of
Christianity might do as much for the adding of Kingly right, Fatherly right,
Husband right, etc. As soundness of knowledge in some one particular question,
for the adding of Church right; and that the want of all Christianity should be
as available for taking away the Kingly right, the Fatherly right, etc. As the
want of knowledge in one particular point for ye taking away of Church-right;
and since we have our Brothers own testimony clear and full for the one, it
seems to me the cases are so parallel and proportionable, that the other is
unavoidable: I mean thus, since in the one case the whole substance of
Christianity does not give power, nor the want thereof take away the same by
our Brothers own teaching, I know not how in the other case soundness of
knowledge in one particular question should give power or right, and want of
such knowledge take away the same. And so for Antioch in particular, if it were
as our Brother supposes that the greater part of them did hold against the
truth in that question about Circumcision, I see not how this could deprive
them of their Church right which they had before.

As for our Brothers reason that Christ has given no Ecclesiastical right and
power to determine against the truth, but only for the truth, This saying I
confess is very true, but does not suffice for the purpose for which he
brings it, viz. To prove that Antioch being ignorant of the truth in that
question about Circumcision, or holding against the truth therein did thereby
lose their Church right to determine. For if this reason be good, then a man
may conclude against that power in heathen Kings, Parents, and Husbands, to
govern their Subjects, children and Wives; which our Brother, as we heard
before, has granted and taught: For suppose that Antioch were ignorant of the
truth in that particular is it not clear that the Kings, Parents, and Husbands
mentioned are ignorant of the truth in many more matters? And it Antioch do
hereupon loose their right, because Christ has given no power to determine
against the truth but for the truth, how will it be avoided but by the same
reason, ^he Kings and the others mentioned must likewise lose their right to
govern their own subjects and families? For the Lord gives no right, I hope,
to Pagans against the truth, no more then he does unto Churches. And therefore
if the reason be valid and strong in the one case, and for the purpose, for
which our Brother brings it, it seems to be as strong in the other case also,
which shall be contrary to what our Brother himself does teach.

In a word* Churches and Antioch in particular have right to determine
questions, and they ought to determine only according to the truth: They have
formally a right to determine, and when their determinations are according to
truth, then they will ^ind Vi mat^^i^ which else they will not. They have right
to determine in fore Humano, and if their determinations be for matter
agreeable to truth, they will be ratifyed in foro Div^^o, but not else. Now our
Brothers arguing does seem to confound these two; and because of the latter
which is freely granted, he would conclude against the former, which we think
is not good reasoning; but on the contrary do still think, that though
Churches ought to give out no determinations but such as are agreeable to
truth, and that otherwise their determinations, in respect of the matter of
them will not bind before God, yet for all this they may have right formally
and in Foro humano to judge, and to determine of such things.

Moreover, if this were granted for true, that Antioch when they are against
the truth do lose their right to determine Controversies, yet we are not hereby
much nearer to an issue, unless it be determined withal who must be judge
whether they be against the truth or no, and the reason is because if they be
not against the truth but for it, then I hope, it will be granted that they do
not lose their right at all. The question therefore still remains, who has
this Ministerial Power to Judge whether this or that Church, Antioch or any
other be against the truth or for it; and unless this be cleared we are but
where we were before.

But to draw toward an end of this passage about the Church of Antioch:
whether they had right to determine Controversies when ability failed, or
whether they did when lose that right, I will here transcribe a few words of
our Brother as I find them in his second, 331. Page. Wherein he either clearly
yields the cause, and says the same that we do or I am much mistaken. The
words are these, There is a difference between ability to judge, and right or
power to judge. A presbyteriall Church, (and he disputes in six Pages together
to prove Antioch such a one, Page 470. 471. etc. sequ.) may have right, jus,
and Ecclesiastic^ll law to judge of a point, to the judging whereof they want
ability: therefore de facto, it belongs to an higher Synod where more learned
men are, though de jure the Presbytery may judge it. These words I wish to be
well considered. For whereas in the place we have been speaking of, he says
Antioch, the greater part of them being against the truth, did lose their jus,
their right to determine, for which as we have heard, he gives this reason,
because Christ has given no right and power to determine against the truth but
for it, yet now we see he grants distinction between ability and right, and
says, a Presbyteriall Church may still retain this latter of their right,
even then, when they want the other of ability. Which two sayings whether they
do perfectly agree, and whether in the latter of them he do not plainly come up
to us, against whom he has been disputing in the former, I leave it to the
wise in heart, and especially to himself to consider. For, for my part I must
confess that these two sayings, A Presbyteriall Church as Antioch may have
right, jus to judge a point, to the judging whereof they may want ability; and,
Antioch a Presbyteriall Church wanting ability did thereby lose their right, or
jus to determine the point, these two I say, are such sayings as are not easy
for me to reconcile.

Lastly, if it be said our Brother does not deny unto Antioch, or a Church in
error all power simply to determine, but only to determine tali mode, that is,
to determine against the truth; for his words are, they lose their jus their
right eatenus, in so far. I answer, he has such a word indeed, as eatenus, in
so far: but if any shall say he meant no more in this dispute, but only that
such a Church has no right to determine against the truth, I conceive that he
that shall so say, shall therein impute some fault unto our Brother, even the
fault of wresting Mr. Tompsons Tenent and mine, and suggesting against us unto
his Reader, as if we had held such a thing as we never wrote nor thought. For
it is plain, that our Brother in his Page 424. is disputing against us; For he
says, that we teach the Church of Antioch had jus, power to judge and
determine the controversy, but because of the difficulty had not light to
judge thereof, And sets down Master Tompsons name and mine as the men that so
teach, in Answer, Page 42. And a few lines after he says, I think the
Brethren err in this, to teach, that Antioch had power to determine the
Controversy, Act. 15. And then he gives two reasons for the contrary. So that
it is manifest that he intends this dispute against us. Now what have we said
in this matter? Have we delivered any such thing, that Antioch had right to
determine against the truth? Let the Answer be viewed in the place which he
alleges, viz. Page 42. And I am sure no such gross Tenent will be there
found, no nor any where else in our writing. That which we have said, is this,
that Antioch had right to have determined the matter if ability had served
thereto: but for right to determine against the truth, we never spoke one word
that sounds that way. Our Brother therefore intending this dispute against
us, and plainly expressing so much, and our Tenent being no other then as I
have said, it must therefore needs follow that his intendment is, that Antioch
had no right to determine that matter. But for right to determine against the
truth, he cannot confute such a Tenent as ours, we never having delivered any
such thing, but he must withal be culpable of manifest mistaking and
mis-reporting of us to the World; and we are, and must be slow to believe that
a man of such worth would willingly do us such wrong. It remains therefore,
that right to determine and not right to determine against the truth, is the
thing which he oppos^t^ as ours, and therefore it is that in this sense and
meaning I have here applied my answer.

The (...) thus much; That Antioch had right to determine against the (...)
that may soon be con^uted, but the Tenent is none of ours: That (...) to
determine, is indeed our Tenent, and whether this be con^uted (...), let the
wise and Judicious consider.

CHAP. IX.
Whether the Congregationall way or the Presbyteriall do make the Gospel more
difficultive then the Law. Of Excommunication by a Church that has only three
Elders, and of doing things sudainly.
IN the latter end of his Page 424 meaning Mr T^mpson and me, and alleging
Page 17, 18. of the Answer. He writes that we say our opposites do much Judaize
in that they multiply appeals upon appeals, from a Congregation to a Classis,
then to a Synod, then to a National Assembly, then to an Oec^^^^nicke
Council; and this way while the world endures causes are never determined,
and Synods cannot always be had; even as in Jerusalem the supreme Judicature
was far remote from all Proselites, as from the Eunuch of Ethiopia, Act. 8.
And from the remote^^ parts of the Holy Land: but God has provided better for
us in the new Testament, where every Congregation which is at hand may decide
the Controversy: And then, Page 425. He subjoyneth his Answer.

Answ. Though I deny not but some of the things here alleged are written by us
in the Pa^^^ nam^d, yet that they are written for the purpose which our Brother
expresses, viz. To show that our Brethren of the opposite judgment do much
Iudaize, that I do utterly deny. For the places being viewed will plainly
witness that we bring the things alleged for another end, viz. To show
whether the way that is called Independencie, do make the people (as some have
thought of it) more defective and improvident then their Law. For this being
objected against that way, we in answer thereto do show by sundry particulars,
that it is not that way that is justly culpable in this respect, but the way of
our Brethren of the other Judgment; one way on the one side making the state
of Christians in these days in some things equal to the Jews, and in other
things more excellent; and on the other side the way of our Brethren making our
condition in many things more defective then was the condition of the Jews. So
that (not Iudayzing but) making our condition more defective then the Jews, is
the thing which we here note in the Doctrine of our Brethren. Nor do I see how
our Brother in his Answer does free their Doctrine and way from being justly
culpable in this respect. If we had intended the thing which he reports, we
would never have used such a reason as he truly report^ us to use, viz. That by
appeals upon appeals causes according to our Brethrens way may be so
protracted as never to be determined nor ended. For this reason has neither
strength nor color of strength for such a purpose, as he says we bring it
for, inasmuch as it is well known, that the Jews had a supreme Iudicatory for
the final ending of causes among them. And therefore to say that our Brethren
do Iudaize, and then to give that for a reason which does show that the Jews
and they are very unlike, the Jews having a supreme Iudicatory for the final
ending of Cruses, and they having none, were to show our selves very
irrational or worse: end why our Brother should put such a thing upon us, we
being no ways guilty thereof, we do not know. But we desire that our reason
may be applied to our own conclusion, to which we did and do apply it, and not
to this other expressed by our Brother, which indeed is none of ours, and then
we are content that rational and judicious Readers may judge whether or no
there be any sufficient weight therein. Which that they may more readily do, I
have here recollected the same into this short sum, that they may briefly
behold it with one view, viz If the Jews had a supreme Iudicatory for the
final ending of causes, and the Congregationall way has the like: If the
Jews had a standing Iudicatory always in readiness for the hearing of
causes, and the Congregationall way has the like: and if the supreme
Iudicatory among the Jews was very far remote from many of them, and in the
Congregationall way be more convenient and near at hand, then the
Congregationall way is in some things equal to the Jews and in other things
more excellent.

But the first is true in all the particulars, and therefore the second is true
also. Again, If the Jews had a supreme Iudicatory for the final ending of
causes, and the way of our Brethren has not: If the Jews had a standing
Iudicatory always in readiness for the hearing of causes and the way of our
Brethren has not: and if the supreme Iudicatory among the Jews was very
remote from many of them, and Synods among our Brethren are the same, then the
way of our Brethren is in some things as defective as the Jews, and in other
things more defective then theirs.

But the first is true in all the particulars of it, and therefore the second
is true also.

Both the Assumptions in all the branches thereof, I conceive are clearly
proved in the Answer in the Pages which our Brother does allege, and whether
the Consequence be good let the wise judge.

Having thus reduced our Argumentation to its own proper and genuine shape, let
us now consider of Mr. Rutherfords answer thereto.

First, says he, The speediness of ending controversies in a Congregation is
badly comprised with the suddenness and temerity of delivering men to Satan
upon the decision of three Elders, without so much as asking advise of any
Classes of Elders, and with deciding questions deep and grave which concerns
many Churches, which is a putting of a private sickle in a common and public
harvest.

Answ. If advise from other Churches may be had, we never spoke word for doing
weighty matters without the same, but in such cases it is both our practice and
advise to make use thereof, And therefore this delivering men to Satan in way
of temerity or rashness touches not us whose opinion and practice is other
wise.

As for suddenness, I conceive if the same be sometimes accompanied with
temerity and rashness, and so worthy to be blamed, yet not always: for in the
Reformation of the House of God in the days of Hezekiah, it is said, that the
thing was done suddenly. 2 Chronicles. 29. 36. Where suddenness does not signify
any sinful temerity or r^shnesle. But contrarily does testify Gods great
goodnesle that had so prepared the people to so good a work: for this cause
this suddenness was to Hezekiah, and Gods people an occasion and ground of
great joy and gladness, which temerity could not have been. And therefore
suddenness and temerity must not always be confounded and coupled together,
as if they were the same.

Though hasty delivering of men to Satan without due consideration be not good,
yet overlong delay of due proceeding against Delinquents is bad also, for the
Holy Ghost tells us because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set to do evil,
Eccl. 8. 11. For which cause execute judgment in the morning, that is to say
speedily is sometimes expressly required, Jer. 21. 12. Which being spoken of
justice to be executed by civil Authority does hold by proportion and like
reason in Ecclesiastical censures, for as much as speedinesle is a duty, and
delays are daangerous in the one case as well as in the other.

Whereas our Author thinks much that Excommunication should proceed upon the
decision of three Elders, as we know nothing but a Congregation may have more
Elders then the three, if God provide them fit men and the numerousnesse of the
Congregation so require, in which case our Author says nothing to the
contrary, but they may have power to Excommunicate, so if they have but three,
we know nothing in this, but they may have power to Excommunicate
notwithstanding, since himself teaches, Due Right. Page 61. That the Jews
had their Congregationall Churches as we have, and had their meeting in their
Synagogues, not only for Doctrine, but also for Discipline and Excommunication;
Which if it be so, it seems there might be Excommunication by as small a
number as three, unless it could appear that in every Synagogue the Elders
and Rulers in it were a greater number then is here mentioned, which is more
then I do remember to be expressed in Scripture. Yea and further he tells us,
That the inferior Iudicatures in Israel had power of life and death, Page 315.
Now the Judges in these inferior Iudicatures though they must never be under
that number of three, yet they did not always exceed the same, for ought that
does appear. And if three Judges had power of life and death, why may not a
Congregation with three Elders have power of Excommunication? Moreover, in his
Page 454. He gives us these words for a Proposition, That it flows
connaturally from a Church to which agrees the essence of Church to exercise
Jurisdiction over all its own members; to which those words do also agree, Page
287. viz. The power and right to Discipline is a propriety essential to a
Church and is not removed from it till God remove the Candlestick, and the
Church cease to be a visible Church: And in Page 302. He affords us these
words for an Assumption, that a Congregation is a Church, wanting nothing of
the being and essence of a Church: And hence the conclusion is obvious, that a
Congregation may exercise Jurisdiction over all it own members: and in as much
as a Congregation in which are but three Elders, is a Congregation, it
follows that a Congregation in which are but three Elders may exercise such
Jurisdiction. This conclusion our Author cannot deny in as much as it
necessarily and directly follows from Premises which are both his own. Yea in
his Page 302. H^ says, That this is a principle of Church policy, that every
politic body of Christ has power of Church government within it self.
Either therefore a Congregation with only three Elders is no politic body of
Christ, or else it must have power of Church government within it self.
Besides, if the power of Jurisdiction ordinary intensive be according to the
entire essence of a Ministerial Church be as complete and perfect in one
single Congregation, as in a Provincial, National, or Catholic Church as our
Author says it is P. 307. It is then a marvel why such a Congregation having
only three Elders, may not have power to Excommunicate. Lastly, his words are
express, Page 338. Where there are not many Churches consociated, then
Ordination and Excommunication may be done by one single Congregation. If
therefore a Congregation have not above three Elders, yet being not consociated
with other Churches, it may lawfully Excommunicate, by his own grant.

For deciding questions that concern many Churches, if they decide them no
further but only as they concern themselves, this is no putting a private
sickle in a common and public Harvest, but a meddling with matters only so
far as they do concern themselves.

Secondly, he says, All appeals without warrant from Christ's will we
condemn, as the abuse of Appeals to a Court which is known shall never be,
Page 425.

Answ. If appeals without warrant from Christ will be condemned, why are we
not told what appeals they are, that have the warrant of Christ's will, and
what Appeals have not? For such a general word a^ this, of the warrant of
Christ's will, without some further and more particular explication does leave
the matter as dark as it was before. If the meaning be, that only such
Appeals are unwarrantable as are made to a Court which is known shall never
be, and that all others are warrantable, then it will follow that appeals to
general Councels and all other Courts, except only from a general Council
are warrantable, for who does certainly know that a general Council will
never be? And so by this means the Classes, (...) Synod, and the National
Church are all deprived of supremacy, and independencie of Jurisdiction as
well as the Congregation.

Thirdly, he says, Antiochs appeal to a Synod 200 miles distant as our
Brethren say, was no Judaizing but that which Paul and the Apostles were guilty
of as well as we.

Answ. Whether Antioch and Jerusalem were 200 miles distant or no as we have
never affirmed so much, so I will not stand now to inquire. But this I stand
upon, that no Scripture does witness that Antioch did appeal to Jerusalem in
the point of Jurisdiction, about which our question does lie, if they did
appeal to them for a Doctrinall decision or determination of the question,
that nothing hinders our cause who do not deny such a Doctrinall power in
Synods. But their power of Jurisdiction is the thing that should be proved.
Lastly, if this example of Antioch do prove that there may be and ought to
be appeals from Congregations to Synods, though those Synods be 200 miles
distant, then that which we said in the Answer is here confessed to be true:
viz. That according to our Brethrens Judgment the state of the Church in point
of Discipline is as defective and burdensome in the time of the Gospel, as it
was in the days of the old Testament. For as then the supreme Iudicatory at
Jerusalem was many miles distant from such as dwelt in the furthest parts of
the Holy Land, and specially from the Proselites that dwelt in other Countries,
so here our Author seems to yield that in these days of the new Testament
there must or may be appeals to Synods, though they be 200 miles distant. I
hope then if others blame our way for making the Gospel as defective and
improvident as the Law, or more defective then it, yet this our Brother will
not do so, but on the contrary will acknowledge for us and with us, that the
way which himself pleads for, is more justly culpable in this respect.

Fourthly, he says, Matters concerning many Churches must be handled by many.

Answ. This may be granted in a safe sense without any prejudice at all unto
our cause, for we are well content that so far as they concern many they may
be handled by many, so that each Congregation may have liberty to deal in them
so far as they concern themselves.

And thus you have all which Mr. Rutherford has brought against that passage
of ours wherein we say it is not our way but theirs, that does make the Gospel
more defective then the Law, instead whereof he is pleased to make us say that
they do Iudaize; But for eleering their way from that which we object against
the same, or for convincing out way to be guilty thereof as by some has been
objected, which is the thing in question in the place by him alleged, for
ought I perceive there is nothing in the four particulars of his answer, that
does any thing avail to either of these: for if a rash delivering of men to
Satan have more evil in it then speedy ending of controversies has good* If
appeals without warrant from Christ's will, be unlawful: If Antioch did
appeal to a Synod 200 miles distant, and if matters concerning many Churches
must be ended by many, which four particulars are the whole substance of his
answer, what is there in all this (for I would gladly apply his Answers to the
(...) the thing in question, what is there I say in all this that (...)
convince our way to be more defective then the way under the old Testament? Or
that does clear the way of our Brethren from being truly culpable thereof* Let
all the evil that can be found in rash delivering men to Satan be extended to
the utmost, and let the rest of the four particulars be granted, does all this
sufficiently clear it that the way which we plead for is more defective, or
the way of our Brethren more perfect and excellent, then the way that was used
under the Law? If they do not amount to the clearing of this, they do not come
up to clear the thing in question, which for ought I perceive does still
remain as it was notwithstanding all that our Brother here brings.

CHAP. X.
Whether the necessity of Discipline be greater then of Sacraments: and whether
a Congregation that has neighbors may not exercise entireness of
Jurisdiction as well as one that has none: and whether a man may take on him
the whole Ministry having no outward calling thereto; and may not as well take
on him one act of Baptizing or Ministering the Lords Supper.
THe next place where I find our Reverend Brother dealing with the Answer, is
in Page 453, 454. Where disputing that there was a Presbyteriall Church at
Jerusalem, he says it is Objected by us (alleging the Answer, Page 6.) That
if a Church in an Island by Divine institution and so the first Congregation as
Jerusalem which did meet in Solomon's Porch had once an entire power of
Jurisdiction, though in an extraordinary case, the case is ordinary, as in the
Dominion of Wales there is scarce a Congregation to be found within 20, or 30
miles. 2. Suppose the case were extraordinary and rare, may they violate the
ordinary rules of Christ? For so some may think and say that though according
to ordinary rules, Baptism and the Lords Supper must be dispensed only by men
and by Ministers, yet in the want of these the one may be dispensed by a woman
or midwife, and both of them by such as are no Ministers. And then he
subjoyneth his Answer.

Answ. Our Authors scope and intention being to prove a Presbyteriall Church at
Jerusalem, I cannot apprehend a good reason, why now he should fall upon the
place of the Answer alleged, in as much at the place makes not any mention of
Jerusalem at all, nor of any Presbyteriall Church there, either one way or
other. But it seems he was willing to go something out of his way that so he
might have a saying to the Answer, yet if it must needs be so, I could have
desired that the words of the Answer might have been kept, without making
alteration by leaving some things out, and putting others in of his own accord,
and by mentioning others with another face then was ever intended by us. For
though he is pleased to mention a Church in an Island and the first founded
Congregation at Jerusalem, in his Objection which he^ brings in under Mr.
Tompsons name and mine, yet he that shall peruse the place will find that
neither of these are once mentioned by us at all, and why then they should be
brought in as ours I do not know. And for the former part of our Answer,
wherein we show that for a Christian Congregation to want neighbor
Congregations to whom they may with convenience have recourse, and not so
unusual as some may imagine, we do not only allege for that end the Dominion
of Wales as our Brother does report, but also the remoter parts of the North,
and specially the state of things in times and places of general Persecution
and general profaneness, and new Plantations in Heathen Countries; all which
our Brother does omit, as if we had not mentioned any of them. And whereas we
mention the scarcity of Congregations in the remoter parts of Wales and of the
North, as intimated by our Reverend Brother Mr. Herle in that learned and
loving discourse of his, whereto we do apply our Answer, Mr. Rutherford
concealeth that we do mention this, as the apprehension or intimation of
another, and instead thereof makes bold to set it down under our name, as if
we had delivered it as our own. All which alterations, omissions and additions
are such as we for our parts would not willingly have made the like in any
work of his nor of any other man. For let such liberty as this be taken in
repeating what men do speak or write, and misapprehension of their true ^ntent
and meaning must needs be bred hereby in the minds of all those that shall read
or hear such reports and believe the same. Nevertheless, let us consider what
our Brother does return in his Answer.

We think says he, a Ministry and Discipline more necessary to a
Congregation in a remote Island, or to the Church of Jerusalem before they
increase to such a number as cannot meet for their numerous multitude in one
Congregation, then the Sacraments when there be no Ministers to dispense them.

Answ. Would not one think by th^se words, and the other laid down in the
Objection, that we had spoken something of a Church in an Island, and of the
Church in Jerusalem? Else why should these be objected, and answered as ours?
But th truth is we have not spoken one word either of the one or the other of
these particulars: which will plainly appear to him that shall view the place.
Something we have spoken in the general of a Congregation that wants
neighbors, which we did being thereunto led by our Reverend Brother Mr. Herle,
but of a Church in an Island, and of the Church at Jerusalem in particular, of
which Mr. Rutherford here speaks, of these we have said nothing.

Second, the former part of our answer, that for a Congregation to want
neighbors is not so unusual as some may imagine, this Mr. Rutherford wholly
passes over in silence, only he propounds it in his Objection in such sort as
we have heard, and so leaves it, whereby it seems he yields the thing. And
thereupon it follows, that entireness of Jurisdiction in a Congregation must
be yielded frequently lawful, it being frequently seen, that Congregations
want neighbors in which case their entireness of Jurisdiction is not denied.

Third, for the second part of our answer, we thus express our selves therein.
viz. That we suppose it is good to take heed how far we yield it lawful in
extraordinary cases to transgress and violate ordinary rules, whereof we
render the reason, least some body do thence infer the lawfulness of
ministering Sacraments by non-Ministers, in case Ministers be wanting. This is
that which we have said in this matter. If therefore Mr. Rutherford would take
away what we have said herein, he must say it is not good nor needful to take
such heed, but men may yield it lawful in such cases to transgress and
violate ordinary rules, and never need to take heed how far they yield
therein. This indeed were contradictory to what we have said, and if this be
once cleared for truth, then I must confess our saying is clearly disproved.
But the clearing of this we hope our Brother will never attempt: Sure yet he
has not done it, and so our saying yet remains as it was.

Fourth, Whereas he says he thinks a Ministry and Discipline more necessary
in the cases he speaks of, then Sacraments and there be no Ministers, though
this be not directly opposite to what we have said, yet because I would
consider of every thing wherein he seems to aim at us, therefore I am willing
to consider of this also. Our Reverend Brother thinks Discipline in the cases
mentioned more necessary then Sacraments: and yet in his Page 287, 288.
handling that question, whether Discipline be a mark of the visible Church,
and laying down sundry distinctions about the same, he gives us these several
Propositions in terms: First, care to exercise Discipline may be wanting in a
true Church. Second, right Discipline is not necessary to the essence of a
visible Church as a City may be without Walls, a Garden without a hedge. Third,
the exercise of Discipline may be wanting, and the Church a true visible
Church. Fourth, the Church may retain the essence and being of a visible
Church, and yet have no Discipline in actual use or little, in which place he
cites and approves the judgment of Parker, Cartwright and others; who make
Discipline necessary only to the wel-being of the Church, as being not
indifferent but commanded in the word and necessary in respect of its end. Now
if this be all the necessity that is in Discipline, how is Discipline more
necessary then Sacraments? For may not as much be said of them as here is said
of Discipline? Are not Sacraments necessary to the well-being of the Church, as
being commanded in the word, as well as Discipline is? And serving for
excellent ends, as well as Discipline does? I suppose it will n^^ be denied,
and therefore the necessity of Discipline above Sacraments does not yet
appear. Especially if that be considered withal which our Brother teaches
elsewhere. viz. In his second P. 211. and sequ. Where he tells us, That
Sacraments are not only declarative signs, but also real exhibitive seals of
Grace, having a causality in them to make a thing that was not, and so
excelling all civil Seals which do add no new Lands to the owner of the
Charter sealed therewith. Now if Sacraments be thus excellent and effectual,
how is it that in the place we have in hand, Discipline is made more necessary
then they? For a greater Elogie then here he gives to Sacraments, I suppose
himself would not give unto Discipline. Yea in P. 302 he expressly affirms,
That Preaching of the word and administration of the Sacraments are essential
notes of the visible Church. But of Discipline I conceive he will not say the
same, sure it is in the Page following distinguishing betwixt notes of the
Church which are necessary ad^sse, To the very being of a visible Church, and
such as are necessary only ad been esse, to the well-being thereof, he expressly
makes Discipline a work or note of this second sort, and as we heard
ere-while, he in Page 287 expressly affirms it is not necessary to the essence
of a Church. And therefore it is some marvel why now (...) makes Discipline
more necessary then Sacraments.

But he gives us two reasons of this greater necessity of Discipline then of
Sacraments. First, that entire power of Discipline in a Congregation that wants
neighbors is not extraordinary Second, that there is no such moral necessity
of Sacraments, as there is of Discipline, Page 455.

Concerning the former his words are these, viz. That the Church be in an Island
it self alone may possibly be extraordinary, but that in such a case they have
entire power of discipline whole and entire within themselves to Excommunicate
Scandalous persons is not extraordinary. Wherein first of all I observe a
difference between him and our Reverend Brother Mr. Herle, who having granted
that where there is no consociation or neighborhood of Congregations, there a
single Congregation must not be denied entireness of Jurisdiction, does
presently add that the case is extraordinary, and so falls not within the
compass of the question of the ordinary rule of Church Government:
Independencie of Churches, P. 2. plainly confessing that the case is
extraordinary, whereas Mr. Rutherford here says it is not.

Second, as he expressly differs from Mr. Herle, so it is considerable whether
his words do well agree with themselves. For says he, That the Church be in an
Island it self alone may be extraordinary, but that in such case they have
entire power of Jurisdiction of Discipline within themselves, to Excommunicate
Scandalous persons, is not extraordinary. Which saying needs good explication.
For it seems hard to conceive how the power and actions of any subject or
efficient should be more usual and ordinary then its very being and
subsistence: Which yet must needs be, if this stand good that the being of a
Church in an Island is extraordinary, and yet the power of such a Church to
Excommunicate is usual and ordinary

Third, If their power of Discipline, yea entire Power be in the case expressed
or^^^ary, shall we then say that if the case ^e otherwise so that a Church be
not alone but have neighbors, entirenesse of power in such a case is
extraordinary? It seems a^ must ^ay (...), or else we must say that
entireness of power in both cases is ordinary. If this latter be said, it is
as much as we desire: for then I hope it must not be a small (...) ordinary
matter, that must hinder a Church that has neighbors from exercising (...)
^^^^diction within themselves, no more then a Church that lives alone, (...)
power being ordinary in them both. For if it be so in them both, in the one as
well as in the other, I know not why any small or ordinary matter should hinder
the one Church any more then the other from the use and exercise of such entire
power. If we say that entirenesse of power in a Church that has neighbors is
extraordinary, though in a Church that is alone it be ordinary, besides that
such a saying sounds harshly and seems very improbable, we shall by this
means make cases extraordinary to be very frequent and usual, in as much as
all men know it is very usual for Congregationall Churches to have neighbors:
and so if entirenesse of power in a Church that has neighbors be
extraordinary, it will follow that extraorninary power is very usual and
frequent; so that inconveniences on each side do seem inevitably to follow
against our Brothers cause, upon this which here he affirms, that entirenesse
of power in a Church that is alone is not extraordinary.

But let us here his reason in the subsequent words, why this entirenesse of
power in a Church that is alone is not extraordinary. For it flows says he,
continually from a Church, to which agrees the essence of a Church, to
exercise Jurisdiction over all its own members. And I suppose he must mean
this of Jurisdiction entire and complete, for of this is the question, and a
few lines before, He expressly calls it entire power of Discipline, whole and
entire within themselves. Now if this be true which here is said, as for my
part I conceive no other of it, that it flows connaturally from a Church, to
which agrees the essence of a Church to exercise entire Jurisdiction over all
its own members, then it will follow that a Church that has neighbors as well
as a Church that has none must have this entirenesse of Jurisdiction, since the
essence of a Church does agree to the one as well as to the other, to a Church
that has neighbors as well as to a Church that is alone. Our Author tells us
Page 302. That a Congregation in an Island is a Church properly so called, and
has the essential notes of a visible Church agreeing to it, and wants nothing
of the being and essence of a Church. And if this be true of a Church that is
alone, shall we think it is not true of a Church that has neighbors? Does
the accession of neighbors to a Congregation take away from such a
Congregation the essence of a Church which it had before? I conceive none will
so say. And if every Church to which agrees the essence of a Church may
exercise entire Jurisdiction over all its own members, as our Brother does
acknowledge, it follows unavoidably thereupon that all Congregationall
Churches, such as have neighbors and such as have none may exercise such
entirenesse of Jurisdiction, since the essence of a Church does agree unto them
all. Unless he will deny the essence of a Church to a Congregation which has
neighbors, which he freely yields to a Congregation which is alone, he must
grant entirenesse of Jurisdiction unto them both, because he grants it to the
one upon this reason, that the essence of a Church does agree thereunto, which
reason if it agree to both, how can i^ be avoided but entirenesse of
Jurisdiction must be in both? And how can it be affirmed or imagined that a
Congregation having the essence of a Church before and have neighbors, should
lose this essence of a Church when neighbors are added to it? A family having
the essence of a family now it is alone, does not lose this essence by means
of other families added. Nor does a City that is such, as it is alone lose the
essence of a City by the access of other Cities: and the same might be said of
a Corporation, a Province, a Kingdom, or any other society whatsoever. And
that it should be otherwise with a Congregationall Church, that it should lose
the essence of a Church as other neighbors Churches do arise, does seem very
strange and unreasonable. And let the essence of a Church be still retained by
such a Congregation, as I conceive it must, and then entireness of
Jurisdiction must not be denied to such a Congregation, since it does flow
connaturally from every Church to which the essence of a Church does agree.

If there be no more consociated with that Church that is by accident, and an
extraordinary exigence of Gods Providence. As a Master of a family is to
educate his children in the fear of God, but if God take all his children from
him by death, he does not transgress the ordinary rule of educating his
children in the fear of God, as he has none.

Answ. If this comparison do suit the present purpose and case in hand, then
this Master of a family is a Congregation, and these his children are the
members of other Congregations: And so as a Master of a family needs not to
educate his children in Gods fear, when they are all taken from him by death,
so a Congregation needs not to govern the members of other Congregation as
there are no other Congregation extant, but it self is left alone in an Island.
In which kind of arguing sundry things may be excepted against. As fir^^ of all
that there should be such power in a Congregation as in a Master of a family
over his own children, which needs a good deal of proof before it may be
yielded, in as much as the power of the one is plainly and plentifully taught
in the Scripture, as Ephesians. 4. 6. Col. 3. Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Deuteronomy. 21. And many other
places. But I desire one clear place of Scripture, in all the Book of God
either old Testament or new, to show the like power in a Congregationall
Church, over the members of other Churches. Again, when a Master of a family
has all his children taken from him by death, he has then no children of his
own to govern, but wants a Congregationall Church and is left alone in an
Island, the Presbytery of that Congregation is left alone, but have still the
members of that Congregation whom they may and ought to guide and govern in
the fear of God, which is another particular wherein the comparison fails.

But though the similitude as Mr. Rutherford has laid it down, does not
confirm his purpose, yet I conceive it may be* so framed and applied as that
it may well serve for the weekning thereof, thus; A Master of a family having
(when that family is alone) entire power to govern his family in the fear of
God, when other families do arise that become neighbors near adjoining, he is
not by this means deprived of the power which he had before, but still
retains the same entire and complete as formerly it was: even so the
Presbytery of a Congregationall Church having (when that Congregation is
alone,) entire power of Jurisdiction over its own members, is not when
neighbor Congregation do arise, deprived by this means of the power which it
had before, but still retains the same entire as formerly it was. Again,
though when God takes away a man's children by death, he is no longer bound to
educate and govern those children in the fear of God, yet as long as his
children live with him in his family, it is not the sitting down of other
families near by him that can take away this power from him, or discharge him
of this duty: even so, though when members of a Congregation be taken away by
death or otherwise, the Congregation or its Presbytery does no longer stand
charged or bound with the oversight and government of such members yet as long
as they live in the Congregation, it is not the arising of other Congregations
near to them that can free them from the power wherewith they were invested,
nor from the duty wherewith they were formerly charged toward such members,
Thus the comparison runs even, and we see our Brothers cause is not a little
disadvantaged thereby. But as he has laid it down, it does so apparently fail
that I do not perceive how it can afford him any help at all.

This argument supposes that the Congregation has no power of Excommunication
at all, either complete or incompleate, as the Midwife has no power to
Baptize, either complete or incompleate.

Answ. Suppose a Congregation have an incompleate power when they have
neighbors, how shall it appear that when they are alone their power is now
complete? Or how will it be avoided but by the like reason, one Elder alone may
Excommunicate in case there be no other Elders to join with him? For plain it
is, that one Elder when their is a full Presbytery or Classis has an
incompleate power, though not a complete. And yet I hope this incomplete power
in one Elder when there are other Elders joined with him, will not warrant him
to exercise a power complete when he is alone, because such a power must be
exercised by a Church, with one Elder alone cannot be. And if one Elder having
an incomplete power when he is joined with others, may not exercise a complete
power when he is alone, how will the incomplete power of a Congregation when
they have neighbors (suppose that in such case their power were indeed
incompleate) how will this I say warr^nt that Congregation when they are alone
to exercise a complete power? For ought I see, the complete power of the
Congregation is no more warranted upon this ground, then the like power of one
Elder upon the same ground, the cases being alike in both.

Neither does a Congregation transgress any rule of Christ at all when it
exercises entire power of censures within it self, whereas there be no
consociated ^hurches to share with it in that power.

Answ. This I grant is very true; and I desire it may not be recalled, but may
still stand as here it is expressly given to us; and then I desire to know what
rule of Christ is transgressed, if an other Congregation, I mean a
Congregation that has neighbors, do exercise the like power. For my part I
know no such rule, nor any good reason but if that the one Congregation may so
practice, the other Congregation may do the like, and that the grounds (at
least some of them) which will warrant the one, will also suffice to warrant
the other. Nevertheless when any rule of Christ shall be produced that does
restrain a Congregation that has neighbors of this entire power, which is so
freely and plainly granted to the Congregation that is alone, I shall then
grant that the former must have less liberty to exercise this power, then is
here granted to the latter. In the mean time, that which here is yielded to
the one does amongst other things induce me to think that the same ought to be
granted to the other, and so that entirenesse of power is in them both.

A Congregation (viz. which is alone) is capable of entire Jurisdiction because
it is a Church.

Answ. How will it then be avoided but a Congregation which has neighbors, or
a Congregation which was alone and now has neighbors added to it, how will it
be avoided I say, but such a Congregation as this is also capable of entire
Jurisdiction? For can it be denied but such a Congregation is a Church, as well
as the other? Sure if Mr. Rutherford his Doctrine elsewhere delivered do stand
good, this cannot be denied at all. For in his Page 301 he says, That is a
Church, and has the essence of a Church, to which agree the essential notes
of a visible Church, and Preaching of the word and administration of the
Sacraments says he are essential notes of a visible Church. Which if it be
so, then a Congregation that has neighbors is a visible Church, and has the
essence of a Church, because Preaching of the word and administration of the
Sacraments are clearly found in such a Congregation. And if such a
Congregation be a Church, then by his own Doctrine in this place which we have
in hand, such a Congregation is capable of entire Jurisdiction. For thus I
argue from his own words

Every Congregation which is a Church is capable of entire Jurisdiction.

But a Congregation which has neighbors is a Church.

Therefore a Congregation which has neighbors is capable of entire
Jurisdiction.

The conclusion is that which we stand for, and it makes directly against our
Brother, and yet I see not how he can avoid it, because both the premises are
his own. For the Proposition is plain from the words we have in hand, v^z. A
Congregation is capable of entire Jurisdiction because it is a Church. Now if
this be the reason why it is capable thereof, then look to what Congregation
this reason does agree, every such Congregation must be so capable. For our
Author well knows that a quatenus ad omnia consequentia. And for the
Assumption, the same is confirmed by his words, Page 302, Where he makes that
to be a Church, and to have the essence of a Church, to which the Preaching of
the word, and administration of the Sacraments do agree. And these agreeing to
a Congregation that has neighbors, it follows that a Congregation that has
neighbors is a Church. Unless he will deny to a Congregation that has
neighbors power of Preaching the word and administering the Sacraments (which I
am persuaded he will not deny at all) it will unavoidably follow from his own
ground that such a Congregation is a visible Church. And if such a Congregation
be a visible Church, then by his own ground also, such a Congregation must be
capable of entire Jurisdiction: which conclusion if it be granted we desire no
more, for it is the thing that we hold.

A woman in no case is capable of administering Baptism or the Lords Supper,
except she were extraordinarily and immediately inspired to be a Prophetess,
but for the exercise of entire power of Jurisdiction by a Congregation in a
remote Island, I hope it has no such need of immediate inspiration.

Answ. Nor do we think otherwise; but (that we may keep to the points and
bring up the dispute to the thing in question) if such a Congregation having no
such inspiration may notwithstanding lawfully exercise entire power of
Jurisdiction within themselves, and that upon this reason, because they now are
alone, which if they had neighbors were not lawful for them to do, then let
it be well considered, whether by the like reason in the like extraordinary
case, Baptism and the Lords Supper may not be administered the one of them by a
woman, and both of them by such as are no Ministers. For as in one case the
plea, to make it lawful is this, because such a Congregation has no
neighbors, so in the other the plea is because the Congregation has no
Ministers, nor perhaps there are no men at hand. And if the one which at other
times were unlawful, yet in such an extraordinary exigence of Gods Providence
may be lawfully done, though there be no immediate inspiration to warrant the
same, why does there need such immediate inspiration to warrant the other, the
extraordinary exigence of Gods Providence being alike in both. I desire I may
not be mistaken in this passage, for I do not affirm (nor ever did) that the
dispensation of Discipline and of Sacraments in the cases mentioned are both
alike unlawful, or else both alike lawful. The Answer will not witness that
I have so affirmed, neither yet this present discourse t^ much less do I hold
that Sacraments may be dispensed by women or by men that are not Ministers. All
that I have said in this matter is thus much, that it is good to take heed how
far we yield it lawful in such extraordinary cases, as want of neighbors,
to transgress and violate ordinary rules, least some body do thence infer
that Sacraments may be dispensed by women or men that are no Ministers, in case
that Ministers or men be wanting. This I have said indeed, as being tender and
afraid to open a door too far for liberty of transgressing ordinary rules, and
conceiving that keeping close to those rules is the safest way. If any man be
more bold and dare open the door further then I dare adventure to do, and
think he can easily shut the same again, to stop the inconveniences and ill
consequents which I fear may thence ensue. I shall leave him to his
discretion, and the guidance of God therein, only craving thus much for my
self that no more may be imputed to me, nor reported of me in this or other
matters, then indeed I have affirmed or expressed.

Concerning his second reason of the greater necessity of Discipline then of
Sacraments, his words are these. There is no such moral necessity of
Sacraments as there is of the Ministry of the word and consequently of the use
of the Keys, where a Scandalous person may infect the Lords flock: for where
vision cease the people perish. But it is never said where Baptism cease
the people perish, Page 455.

Answ. How shall we be sure that by vision, Prove. 26. 18. Is meant Discipline?
Yea Discipline not in a large sense as comprehending generally all order and
behavior concerning a Church and outward duties therein, but Discipline
strictly taken for administration of censures (for of this is one question) how
I say shall we be sure that by vision is meant this Discipline? The usual
Expositers Tremeli^^ and Junius, (...), and others do expound the same of the
Preaching and dispensing of the word, making no mention at all of Discipline as
meant thereby. And the (...) branch of the verse, He that keeps the Law is
blessed, does show that by vision in the former branch is mean the Law, or
Doctrine or word of God. And if the Scripture do not s^y, where Baptism
cease the people perish, yet neither does it say, where administrat^on of
Censures cease the people perish; and therefore no necessity of censures
above Sacraments can be concluded hence.

Uncalled Ministers in case of necessity without Ordination or calling from a
Presbytery may Preach and take on them the holy Ministry and exercise power of
Jurisdiction, because of the necessity of the Souls of a Congregation in a
remote Island requires so.

Answ If they may do these things without Ordination (as for my part I deny it
not, so that the election or consent of the Congregation be not wan^ing, for
that I suppose might be a good part of an outward calling) then I demand
whether one Minister alone may not thus do, I mean whether one alone may not
in the case proposed take on him the holy Ministry and Preach the word as a
Minister. If many may do it, then I suppose there is no question but one may do
it much rather. And if so, then I demand further whether such a single Minister
may not also administer the Sacraments to such a Congregation: I suppose it
cannot be denied, for if he lawfully take on him the Ministry and Preach as a
Minister, what should hinder, but he may also Baptize, and minister the Lords
Supper? And if he may thus do, then I demand lastly, whether this single
Minister may also administer Discipline and censures in that Congregation. If
he may, then either the power of those censures must be in himself alone, or
in the Congregation also, in himself alone it cannot be, because censures must
be dispensed by a Church, and one man alone cannot be a Church, If it be in
the Congregation also, then here is a power of Excommunication or other
censures even in the people which is against our Brothers judgment. If it be
said that this single Minister as long as he wan^s other Ministers joined with
him may not administer censures or Discipline, then it will follow that power
of censures is not always annexed to the Ministry as an inseparable adjunct
thereof, nor are Censures to be preferred before Sacraments as more necessary,
as our Brother would have it, for as much as here is a Ministry and the
administering of Sacraments, the necessity of the souls of the Congregation
requiring so, and yet for all this not any power of censures at all. Our
Brother therefore may make his choice, whether he will grant the power of the
Keys of Discipline to be in the people, or whether he will say the necessity
of the souls in a Congregation does require Sacraments more then Discipline;
For though these be both against himself, yet upon the ground which himself
does here lay, the one of the two is unavoidable.

But I hope no necessity in any of the most extraordinary case requires that a
Midwife may Baptize, or that a private man remaining a private man may
celebrate the Lords Supper to the Church, without any calling from the Church.

Answ. Concerning the Midwife I think the same that he does. And concerning
the private man, I also therein ^^curre that without calling from the Church
he may not perform what here is spoken of. But here I would make this Quare
whether (...) man that never was a Minister may not as well in an extraordinary
case perform (...) act of administering of Baptism or the Lords Supper,
without any calling from the (...) bytery or the Church unto whom the office of
Ministry, as take on him without any such calling the whole Ministry, and so
Preach and exercise the power of Jurisdiction as a Minister For as for the one
of these, our Brother expressly grants a man may lawfully take it on him without
any such calling, the necessity of the Souls of a Congregation in an Island
requiring so; and if this necessity will warrant the one which is the whole and
so the greater, why will it not warrant the other which is but one act and so
the lesser? One would think one act of dispensing Baptism or the Supper were
a lesser matter then the whole Ministry, and all the actions thereof. And
marvel it is, that the necessity of the Souls of a Congregation should
warrant this which is the greater, and yet the same necessity should not be
sufficient warrant for the lesser, a man's calling being otherwise alike unto
both, that is, having an outward calling to neither Himself does sometimes
reason thus, If we give to believers that are not in office one pastoral act,
we may with the like weight of reason give them all: Peaceable plea, Page 272.
Now if this reasoning be good from one Act to all, why is no this as good, from
all to any one or to some one? And why may we not in like manner argue thus, If
persons uncalled may without Ordination or calling take on them the whole
Ministry, why may not persons uncalled without Ordination or calling take on
them to Baptize or Minister the Supper? Not that I think such a practice to be
lawful, but only I intend to make quaere about the validity of our Brothers
kind of arguing. Yea, it is elsewhere his arguing, that it persons not in
office of Ministry may execute censures and Discipline, they may then
administer the Sacraments. For says he, What hinders by this reason but they
may also without Ministers Prea^h and administer the Sacraments: Peaceable
Plea, Page 196. Yea says he, I s^e not but with a like warrant private men may
administer the Sacraments: Vbi Supra, Page 196. This we see is his arguing
elsewhere: And yet in the place we have in hand he grants that persons uncalled
may in case of necessity without Ordination or calling take on them the
Ministry in general, and in particular may exerc^se the power of
Jurisdiction, and yet for all this he says, that no necessity will warrant a
man to celebrate the Lords Supper without a calling from the Church. Which two
sayings for ought I perceive do not agree. For in the one it is affirmed that
if they may exercise Discipline and censures, they may by the like reason
administer Sacraments: and the other says they may exercise Discipline and
censures and yet may not administer Sacraments; and yet both the sayings are
expressed by the same Authors Pen.

CHAP. XI.
Whether the power of Jurisdiction flowing immediately from the essence of a
Church do not agree to a Church that has neighbors as well as to a Church
that has none: And whether otherwise neighboring Churches be not a loss.
And whether pretense of maladministration be a sufficient reason for
neighboring Churches to deprive a Congregation of its power.
THe next place where I find Mr. Rutherford dealing with the Answer, is in his
Page 455. Where he brings in these words under Mr. Tompsons name and mine, viz.
If the power of Jurisdiction flow immediately and necessarily from the essence
of a Church, and a Congregation be essentially a Church, then this power
agrees to all Churches whether consociated, or not consociated, and without
respect of what neighbors they have, whether many or few, whether any or none.
Second, a Congregation it self alone cannot have sole power of Jurisdiction
and then be deprived of it, when God sends neighbors, for then neighboring
Churches which are given for help should be given for loss, the contrary
whereof Ames says no. Do Synods says he, Constitute a new form of a Church.

Thus far Mr. Rutherford who in his Margent alleges Mr. Tompson and me, 16.
Page 4, 5.

Answ. In one of these Pages of the Answer, viz. P. 5. there is nothing at all
to be found that looks toward such a purpose as our Brother has in hand, and
therefore this Page should not have been here alleged. The words of Dr. Ames
are more imperfectly cited by our Brother, then they were alleged in the
Answer, For the Answer alleges them thus out of Medull. Theol. Lib. 1.
Chapter 3. Sect 27. That the combination of Churches into Classes, and Synods
does neither constitute a new form of a Church, nor ought by any means to
take away or impayer that liberty and power which Christ has given to his
Churches, since it serves only for the directing and furthering of the same.
Wher^as our Brother expresses only those first words that Synods do not
constitute a new form of a Church, but all the rest wherein the chief
strength of Dr. Ames his testimony does lie, them he does wholly omit and leave
out. He also leaves out the assent which is given by Mr. Paget, to this
testimony of Dr. Ames, which assent as it is expressed in his defense P. 107.
in these words, This we do willingly grant, is also in the ^ame words alleged
by the Answer in P. 4. But this is wholly passed over by Mr. Rutherford in
silence. Now two such men as these being alleged in the Answer, as plainly
affirming that the combination of Churches into Classes and Synods must neither
tollere nor minuere, take away not impair or diminish the liberty or power of
Churches, but only serve for the directing and furthering of the same, And the
one of them being the chief Patron of the power of Classes and Synods, It is
some marvel to me that no word of Answer is vouchsafed to them by Mr.
Rutherford, but that their words are thus passed by with silence, and the name
of one of them not so much as mentioned. How ever this is clear, that he that
gainsayes the Answer in this passage, has not only the Answer, but also the
Reverend Author here mentioned to be against him. But let us come to consider
of Mr. Rutherford his Answer which he subjoyneth in these words, viz.

Power of Jurisdiction flows from the essence of a Congregation in an Island,
ergo a total and complete power of Jurisdiction flows from the essence of a
Church or Congregation consociated, it follows no ways.

Answ I desire the reason may be laid down according to our true meaning
therein, and in its full strength; and then the former part thereof must not
only speak of power of Jurisdiction flowing from the essence of a Church that
want neighbors, but of entire power, for thereof is the question; and in the
latter part the terms must no: be a Church consociated but a Church that has
neighbors; Now if entire power and Jurisdiction do flow from the essence of a
Church, and therefore this essence of a Church being found in a Congregation
that wants neighbors, this entirenesse of power mu^t thereupon be granted to
such a Congregation; I then demand why the like entirenesse of power must not
be granted as well to a Congregation that has neighbors, since the essence of
a Church is found in this Congregation, as well as in the other. For ought I
see either the essence of a Church must be denied to a Congregation that has
neighbors or else it will follow that entirenesse of power must be granted to
such a Congregation, Risibility and power of reason flowing immediately and
necessarily from the essence of a man, and power to defend it self and purge
out excrements flowing in like sort from the essence of a humane body, and
power to govern it self with family government flowing in like sort from the
essence of a family; therefore we must not grant these powers to be entire in
such a man, such a body, or such a family as is alone, and deny the same to one
that has neighbors, but must grant them alike unto all, because this power
flows from their very essence, which is as truly found in such as have
neighbors, as it is in those that are alone. And the like may be said in other
cases. And why it should be otherwise in a Congregationall Church, that the
power of the Jurisdiction flowing from the essence of such a Church should
therefore be entire in such a Congregation as is alone in an Island, and yet not
entire in a Congregation that has neighbors, though this Congregation has
the essence of a Church as well as the other, why these Congregations I say
should thus greatly differ in their power, and yet be alike in their essence
from whence their power does flow, for my part I yet do not understand the
reason.

Nor does that satisfy which Mr. Rutherford here alleges, That one Pastor in
a Congregation has as a Pastor power to rebuke sin and to administer the
Sacraments, and yet when three Pastors are added to help him he has not the
sole power of rebuking sin, and the sole and entire power to administer the
Sacraments, but these three Pastors have power with him: This I conceive does
not help the matter at all: For though it be true that these three Pastors
being added to the first have each of them the like power as the first had, yet
the power of the first for the performance of these things mentioned, is as
comple^t in him notwithstanding this addition, as it was before, and not any
whit abated nor impaired thereby: And the reason is, because matters of order
flowing from the essence of a Pastor may be sufficiently and completely
performed by one Pastor singly, which acts of Jurisdiction cannot. Mr.
Rutherford his own words in this case are these, viz. A single Pastor may
Ministerially give out Commandments in the authority of Christ, but he cannot
himself censure or Excommunicate the contraveners of those Commandments: Due
Right, Page 387. And again, Page 387, 388 It is proper is acts of Iuris^iction
Ecclesiastical that they cannot be exercised by one alone, but must be
exercised by a society: but a Pastor as a Pastor himself alone without any
collaterally joined with him exercises his Pastoral acts of Preaching and
administering the Sacraments. Now if a Pastor as a Pastor himself alone without
any collatterally joined with him, may thus exercise his Pastoral acts, then
indeed the access or addition of other Pastors is not at all destructive of
his Pastoral power, but he still retains the same as complete and perfect as
before, because he does these acts as a Pastor and remains a Pastor still.
But how this example and instance can any thing further Mr. Ruth^rford his
purpose, I do not understand. For his intention is to make good that a
Congregation may have entire power when it is alone, and yet not so when other
Congregations do arise; and for the consuming of this he brings this instance
and example from a Pastor that has a Pastoral power before other Pastors are
added; who by the addition of others has no less power then before; which
example I conceive rather makes against him then for him. For says he, Page
456. Their Pastoral power added to him is Cumulative and auxiliary, but not
privative or destructive of his Pastoral power, and therefore that the first
Pastor suffers loss by the addition of these three to him, who, says he,
will say this?

Answ. I know none that will say it; but if their power be Cumulative and
auxiliary to his Pastoral power, and no ways privative or destructive
thereof, then what power he had before they were added, the same he has still
in as great measure as formerly, and so his Pastoral acts are as perfect and
valid as they were before. Now let the same be granted to a Congregation that
has neighbor Congregations added, and we have what we demand: And if this be
not granted, then though the power of those other Pastors be Cumulative and
auxiliary to the other Pastor, yet the power of those other Congregations
seems not so to the former Congregation, but rather privative or destructive
of its power, and then how can this example confirm our Brothers purpose, or
how can it be avoided but the example which he produces does make against
himself? Sure if the power of these other Pastors be not destructive to the
former Pastors power, but auxiliary thereto, so that what power he had before,
the same he retayneth still, and in the same measure, then it must be so
likew^se in a Congregation when neighbor Congregations are added, or else this
example will not suit: But make the examples to agree and our cause is
advantaged thereby.

Our Brethren do conceive the power of Congregations in its kind and essence
to be Monarchical, so as if any power from consociated Congregations be added
thereunto, the Congregations power Monarchical is diminished and the essence
of it changed.

Answ. The power of Congregations we ^old to be Ministerial, as being
delegated from Christ Jesus, and to be exercised according to his appointment;
and in him alone and in no other do we place this Monarchical power; according
to what the Holy Ghost witnesses, that there are differences of
administrations but the same Lord, 1 Cor. 12. 5. And though our Brother is
pleased to put this upon us, that we conceive the power of Congregations to be
Monarchical, yet in truth the same is far from us: Nor do I think that so
much as one of us can be named, that at any time has so spoken: Nor does such
a thing follow from any thing delivered by us concerning the power of
Congregations. For as for that which here he intimates and elsewhere
expresses more plainly, so that the power of Jurisdiction in Congregations is
closely made void or destroyed by that power which some ascribe unto Classes,
if this be holden by us, does it thence follow that we hold the power of
Congregations to be Monarchical^^ It follows not at all. For then by the like
reason I could prove that himself does hold a power Monarchical in the
universal or Provincial Churches: For he expressly affirms, Page 337. That
the Popes power destroys the power of the Church universal, and the Prelates
power destroys the power of the Church whereof he is pretended Pastor. And
yet I hope he does not hold a Monarchical power in the one Church nor in the
other, nor in any Church or Churches but in Christ alone; nor can the same be
truly concluded upon that which he affirms of destroying the power of
Churches by the power of the Pope and Prelate. And if not, how then can any man
conclude against us that we hold a Monarchical power in Congregations, though
we should hold that the power of Congregations is destroyed or diminished by
that power which some would give unto Classes^ If our pr^mises will warrant him
to fasten such a Tenent upon us, his own will give a warrant for the like
against himself. And if the ground be insufficient to bear such a conclusion
against him, as I confess it is, I know no sufficient ground why the same
should be imputed unto us.

Complete and en^ire power to rule both the Congrega^ion and members of
consociated Churches in so far as they do keep communion with that
Congregation, and may either edify or Scandalize them, flows not immeaiately
and ^ecessarily from the essence of every Congregation even in remote Islands
not consociated with others, that we never said.

Answer. Indeed it were an absurd and gross saying for any man to say, that a
Congregation in a remote Island not consociated with others should have power,
yea complete and entire power to rule the Congregation and members of Churches
consociated and that this should flow immediately and necessarily from the
essence of such a Congregation. But there is no need that our Brother should
clear himself from this saying, for I know none that imputes it to him.
Nevertheless, the saying here ^^joyned cannot be denied, for they are his own
verb^ti^^.

First, the ordinary power of Jurisdiction because of nearest vicinity and
contiguity of members is given by Jesus Christ to one Congregation in an Isle,
because that Church is a Church properly so called: It is a little City, and a
little Kingdom of Jesus Christ, having within it self power of the lord and
Sacraments and that is a Church and has the essence of a Church to which agree
the essential notes of a Church: now Preaching of the word and administration
of the Sacraments are essential notes of a visible Church: Page 302.

Second, a Congregation is a Church wanting nothing of the being and essence of
a Church, Page 302.

Third, where consociation is not, Ordination and Excommunication may be done
by one single Congregation, Page 338.

Fourth, that in such cases (viz. When a Church is in an Island it self alone)
they have the word Preached and entire power of Discipline whole and entire
within themselves to Excommunicate Scandalous persons, is not extraordinary,
Page 454.

Fifth, it flows co^naturally from a Church to which agrees the essence of a
Church, to exercise Jurisdiction over all its own members, ibid.

Sixth, neither does a Congregation transgress any rules of Christ at all, when
it exercises entire Power of censures within it self, whereas there be no
consociated Churches to share with it in that power, ibid.

Seventh, a Congregation is capable of entire Jurisdiction, because it is a
Church, Ibid.

Such sayings as these himself has delivered in the pages and places here
cited, and in the words and terms here expressed; and therefore from these he
cannot clear himself And if from these the entirenesse of Jurisdiction in a
Church that has neighbors may justly be deduced, as I conceive it may, and
have above manifested, it will then but little avail him to wash his hands
from the stayne of that other absurd saying before mentioned, which no man that
I know do charge him withal. For as long as these other sayings do stand
unrecalled, so long we have clear grounds from himself and his own words,
for entirenesse of Jurisdiction in every Congregationall Church, and so for the
weakening of his cause, and for the strengthening of our own.

A power to govern well and according to the rule of the Word added to an
other power to govern well and according to the Word, is an auxiliary power
and no way destructive to that power to which it is added. Indeed a power to
govern well added to a power of maladministration in a Congregation is
destructive of that power, and reason it should be so, because Christ never
gave any such power of maladministration to a Congregation.

Answ. Here our Brother speaks of two cases, first of a Power of governing
well added to a power of governing well. Second, of a power of governing well
added to a power of governing ill; but besides these, there is a third case
which had need to be considered also, viz. A power of governing ill added to a
power of governing well, which may be the case when the power of Classis is
added to a Congregation; for it is not impossible but the Congregation may be
in the right and the Classis in the wrong. Now what shall be said or done in
this ^ase? Shall the Congregation now have the free exercise of its power, or
shall it not? To say yea, would satisfy the minds of many, if the Congregation
themselves may be judge that they are in the right, or if it were determined
who must judge thereof. And to say no, and that the power must still be in this
erring Classis, were to subject righteousness to wickedness, and truth to
falsehood, and I conceive our Brother will not maintain such power in a compound
or Presbytery or Classis. For in Page 335. speaking of this very case, and the
greater Presbytery is wrong in their voicing, and the Elders of a
Congregationall Church are right, and have the best in judging of a case before
them, he plainly affirms, That the power which in this case the Presbytery
exercises is not of Christ, and that de jure the power of the greater
Presbytery in this case ought to be swallowed up of the voices of the Elders of
a Congregation, though they be fewer in number. Now if this be so, then the
thing in question is still as uncertain as before, and still we are to seek
where the power of censures or Jurisdiction does finally reside. For in the one
place our Brother tells us, Christ never gave power of maladministration to a
Congregation, and in the other he tells us the like of a Classis or great
Presbytery, and that Christ has given no power to any Church to err. By which
sayings we are left at great uncertainty: for still the question will be
whether the Congregation does err or no, and so whether the Classis do err or
no, and unless it be determined who must judge of this, we are still but where
we were, and no nearer an issue then before.

This indeed is most true and must be so acknowledged, that though the Lord
Almighty have given a power unto Societies, whether they be families,
Commonwealths, or Churches, and have made sundry of them subordinate to none
other the like Societies in the exercise of their power, but to have supremacy
of power within themselves, yet he has also given them just and holy rules in
his word for the directing of them in the use of this Power, from which rules
it is not lawful for them to swerve or go astray; but if they do, it will be
sin unto them, and he will surely require it of them: But now between these two
the power it self and the abuse or right use of the power, we must carefully
distinguish, for though abuse of their power be not given of God, from whom
comes nothing but good, yet the power it self being good is given of him, and
is so to be acknowledged. And though abuse of their power do justly deserve at
his hands that they should be deprived of the power it self, ye^ God does not
always forthwith deal with men according to their deserts herein, but many
times continues still to them their power, though they have abused the same,
much less does he allow others to deprive them of this power because of every
abuse thero^: witness among others the examples of the Pagan Princes in the
Apostles times, who through their ignorance, infidelity, pride and other sins,
could not but in great measure abuse their authority, and yet the Holy Ghost
commands the Christians to be subject and obedient thereunto, Romans 13. 1, 2.
etc. Tit 3. 1. Not to obey them indeed, in doing evil at their commands, for
in such case they must obey God rather then man, as Act 5. 29. Yet still they
must be subject to the powers either actively or pa^^ively, even then when the
powers were sinfully abused. Even so, if a family shall abuse their power, it
does not follow that other families, may lawfully for this cause take away
their power from them: Or if a Corporation shall so offend, it will not follow
that other Corporations may deprive them of their power. And if it be so in
Commonwealths, and families, why may we not say the same of Churches? Or how
will it follow, if a Church shall abuse their power, that other Churches in
such eases may take away the power from such a Church? For ought I see, this
will not follow at all, no more then the other. For though Christ have not
given to any Church a power of male administration as Mr. Rutherford speaks,
yet has he given to every Church a power of administration, which if they
manage not aright but do abuse the same, the Lord Jesus will be displeased with
them for this abuse, and other Churches may and ought to advise them and
admonish them and testify against them for the same; but for the power it
self, as Christ himself does not forthwith deprive them thereof, so much
less may other Churches take it from them, for who gave them this authority?
Per in parem non habet potestatem: and Churches are all of equal authority,
and not one superior or inferior to another, as therefore when children or
servants in a family are not governed as they ought to be, yet neighbor
families have not warrant because of this male administration to invade the
rights and destroy the power of such a family, even so it is in this case of
Churches* this maladministration in a Church is not forthwith a sufficient
warrant for neighbor Churches to invade the rights of such a Church, and to
take away its power from it. Especially if we do consider that this
maladministration in a Congregation may possibly be but pretended and not
real, and that the administration of the Classes may paradventure be really
such; in which case Mr. Rutherford says the power of the Classis is not of
Christ, but their voices ought de jure to be swallowed up by the Congregation
and the Elders thereof. This argument therefore from maladministration of the
power of a Congregation, which Mr Rutherford says, it is reason should be
destroyed by another power added to it, meaning the power of a Classis is of no
sufficient force to take away the power of a Congregation at all, not to
establish the power of the Classis over the same, being as justly applyable
against the Classis it self: Therefore for ought that does yet appear,
supreme Ministerial Church power which I conceive must needs be somewhere,
may as well be in the Congregation as in the Classis, and can neither by this
argument of maladministration nor by any other that we have yet seen, be
placed in the Classis any more then in the Congregation.

CHAP. XII.
Whether it be against the light of Nature that the adverse party be judge; and
whether Mr. Rutherford can safely say that none of them do so teach, and
whether this saying that parties may not be judges do make against entirenesse
of power in a Congation, any more then in a general or National Council.
THe next place where Mr. Rutherford deals with the Answer, is in his P. 456.
Where alleging Mr. Tompson and me, Page 5. he has these words as ours, viz.
If it be against the light of Nature that the adverse party be the sole Judge,
which must be if the sole power of Jurisdiction be in the Congregation (as we
grant in an extraordinary case and the Congregation is in an Island it self
alone) and so it shall be lawful for a single Congregation to do that which is
against all equity, and the very light of Nature, it must then follow, that it
is not against the light of Nature that a Congregation though consociated with
other Congregations have entire Jurisdiction within it self.

Answ. Our words in the Page alleged are more prospicuous and clear, then
these which are here set down for ours: neither do we make any mention of a
Congregation in an Island, nor yet of a Congregation consociated with other
Churches, least of all do we say (or report others to say) that it is lawful
for a single Congregation to do that which is against all equity and the very
light of Nature; none of these things are ours. And therefore, that our true
meaning may plainly appear as it is, I will transcribe a few of our words,
which are these, viz. Sure we cannot think that there can be such a case
imagined, wherein you would grant it lawful for a single Congregation to do
that which is against all equity and the very light of Nature, and yet you
grant that the case may be such that a single Congregation may have entirenesse
of Jurisdiction within it self; which seems to us plainly to prove that for a
Congregation to be so independent as to be the final Judge of offenses within
it self, is not against all equity nor against the light of Nature, as is
intimated by you. These are our words, much differing from those which Mr.
Rutherford sets down as ours, which I thought meet to relate out of the Answer,
that our meaning might appear as it is, and no otherwise. And now let us hear
what our Brother subjoyneth for answer.

None of us, says he, Do teach that it is against the light of Nature that the
adverse party be the Judge: it might fall out in a general Council lawfully
convened from which their is no Provocation: Yea and in a National Council
(for all Councels may err) the adverse party may Judge; as it was a lawful
Council according to a Church constitution that condemned Christ of Blasphemy
and they were also his enemies.

Answ. And may it not also fall out in a Provinc^all Synod, and in a Classis or
Presbtytery of many Churches? I suppose it cannot be denied, but the Judges in
all these may be the adverse parties; and so if the adverse party may not be
Judge, then neither general nor National Councels, nor Provincial Synods,
nor Classes, nor Presbyteries may be Judges; because there is none of these but
possibly they may be parties. And so this argument, parties may not be Judges,
does make no more against the Congregations power of judging, then against all
Ecclesiastical Assemblies whatsoever. Unless therefore men would overthrow
the power of all Ecclesiastical Iudicatories whatsoever without exception of
any, they can have no help from this Argument to overthrow the power of
Jurisdiction in Congregations. Not to insist upon that which might also be
truly alleged, that the Objection has the like force, (if any at all) against
civil Iudicatories.

But is it so indeed as our Brother affirms, that none of them do teach that
it is against the light of Nature that the adverse party be the judge? I think
he should not thus have spoken, for I am much mistaken if the contrary hereunto
be not certainly true. For first of all, I allege the words of Reverend Mr,
Herle, in his Book of Independency Page 5. alleged in the Answer: Page 6, the
very Page which here Mr Rutherford is dealing against. In which place of Mr.
Herle there are these words, viz. That there ought to be graduall Judicatories,
wherein the agrieved party may appeal from the lesser to the higher, that
against the very light of Nature the adverse party be not the sole Judge and
party too in the cause, there can be no Ceremony or Type in this, Next of all I
allege the words of the same Reverend Author in his Page 10* (Which is also
alleged in the forementioned place of the Answer) Where the words are these,
What if a Brother offend not a particular Brother, but the whole Congregation?
What if ten Brethren offend the whole or part? Shall we think the offense falls
not within our Saviors remed or complaint or Appeal here? That the offended
party be not against all equity the sole and final Judge of the offense. In
which places we see it is plain, yet this Reverend Author counts it against
the very light of Nature; that the adverse party should be Judge and party too
in the cause, and that it is against all equity that the party offended should
be sole and final Judge of the offense. And therefore it is mavelous that
Mr. Rutherford should say that none of them do so teach: Yea, it is the more
mavelous inasmuch as both these places of Mr. Herle are expressly mentioned in
that very page of the Answer which here Mr. Rutherford is disputing against.
And therefore it he had not remembered that himself had read the same in Mr
Herle, as like enough he had, yet finding the same alleged by us in that
Scripture of ou^s, it is marvel he would not turn to the places alleged to
search and see whether the thing were so or no, before he had denied the same.
Whereas on the contrary, whether he searched or searched not, this we see that
he roundly affirms, that none of them do so teach; to which saying I know not
how to assent, our eyes having so plainly seen and read the direct contrary,

Yea and further, it is yet more mavelous that Mr. Rutherford should thus
write, considering not only what has been already said, but also what himself
has written elsewhere: I will mention a few of his own sayings, and then
himself shall be judge, whether the thing we have now in hand was by him
advise^ly and well spoken. In his Pe^ceable Plea, Page 218 he has these words,
When the Grecian Church offends the Hebrew Church, the Hebrew Church cannot
complain to the Grecian Church, for the Law forbids the party to be
Judge. And what Law he means may be perceived by his words in Page 208. of
the same Treatise, where he says, If one man be wronged and see truth suffer
by partiality, the Law of Nature will warrant him to appeal to an Assembly,
where there is more light and greater Authority, as the weaker may fly to the
stronger. Now let himself be judge whether in these testimonies compared, he
do not teach, that it is against the Law of Nature that parties should be
Iudge^, and that therefore men may appeal from them. Again, those words Page
27 of the same Book are so plain as that nothing can be more, These words
says he what soever ye bind on earth, etc. Must be meant only of the
Apostles, and of the Church, verse 18. Yea, and it must exclude Peter and his
offending Brother, suppose they were both believers; because parties by the Law
of Nature and Nations cannot be Judges. Las^ly, those words are express in his
Due Right of Presbytery, in his see and P. 338, 339. Where he writes thus, If
according to the Law of Nature and Nations, no man can be Judge in his own
cause, then are appeals from the Eldership of one Congregation, when they are
a party to the caused person, Natural -- but the former is reason, Nature, Law
of Nations. Ergo so is the latter. In the Assumption of which Sylogisme he
plainly affirms that it is reason, Nature, and the Law of Nations, that no man
may be judge in his own cause, and by all this I suppose t^ is manifest that
the thing which he says none of them do teach is expressly and plainly taught
by some of them, and among others even by himself, who therefore ought not to
have denied the same, nor can be cleared from much forgetfulness in so doing.

And if so great an oversight be found in him, I hope himself may thereby be
entreated to be tender of agravating matters against us or others, at leastwise
not so far to agravate them, as to impute unto us matters which we do not
hold: for a man's own infirmities should make him more equitable and favorable
toward others. And Christian Readers may be warned hereby not hastily to
receive all that Mr. Rutherford has written, before they have duly examined and
tried the same, whether the things be so or not, for we see through
forgetfulness or otherwise he may greatly mistake himself, and miss of the
truth, and give forth such sayings and expressions for truth, as are in no sort
to be maintained but recalled, though nevertheless he is otherwise a man of
great worth, and so ever to be acknowledged.

We teach that it is not Congruous to the wisdom of Christ, nor to the light
of Nature, that Christ should have appointed all the ordinary Church Courts, so
many thousand Congregations, who may rather cry then extraordinary and higher
Synods to be the only ordinary Judges in their own cause.

Answ. These qualifications and limitations of the matter of parties being
Judges are such as to my remembrance I never heard given before now. Now indeed
it is said 1. That all Congregations being so many thousand. 2. May not be the
only ordinary Judges in their own cause, but it would be against the wisdom
of Christ and light of Nature if it should so be; Yet formerly it was delivered
absolutely and simply, that it is against the light of Nature for parties to be
Judges, without any such modifications and qualifications as now Mr. Rutherf.
gives to help the matter withal. Nevertheless by qualifying the thing in this
sort, it seems thereby to be still granted that though so many thousand
Congregations may not ordinarily be Judge in their own cause, but the light of
Nature will be against it, yet for some Congregations and at some times the
thing may be allowed well enough: else why is the thing denied only to so many
Congregations, and ordinarily, if it be not thereby employed that some
Congregations and at some times may thus practice? Now hereupon the question
grows, whether some at some times may be allowed to do contrary to the light
of Nature, though all may not: or whether the light of Nature be changed when
there comes to be many Congregations, and be not the same that it was before,
when there was no more Congregations but one, whether I say some new light of
Nature do arise with the rise of new Congregations, so that when they are many
it would be against this light for them thus to be Judges, though it was not
so when there was but one: or whether we must say the light of Nature remaining
in the same, one Congregation remaining alone may be allowed to do contrary
thereto, but many may not. It seems to be inconvenient and hand to affirm
either of these; and yet the one or the other seems unavoidable by this that
Mr. Rutherford here teaches. For let it be granted that a Congregation that is
alone, yea a general Council, yea a National Council also may be Judges in
their own cause, and that no light of Nature is against the same, and yet many
Congregations may not be so, but then the light of Nature will be against it,
let these things I say be granted, which are all of them granted and taught by
Mr. Rutherford, and then I desire to know how the inconveniences mentioned can
be avoided; I mean how it can be avoided, but either some men or Church
Assemblies may lawfully do that which is against the very light of Nature, or
else that the light of Nature is changed when many Congregations do arise, from
that which it was when there was but one. Yea the difficulty and intrica^y in
this way is yet more, if it be well considered. For first of all when a
Congregation is alone, it is yielded that it is not against Natures light for
them to be Judges in their own cause. Secondly, when many Congregations do
arise, now it is said it is against such light, that they should so be Judges:
Yet thirdly, when these Congregations do gather into a National Council, then
this light of Nature will allow them to be Judges, as in the first case of a
single Congregation that is alone: And the same is also said of the general
Council: so that here is strange varying and changing of the light of Nature,
and of that which is against it, lawful or unlawful thereby. And when good
reason and ground is given for the clearing of these things, we shall then
consider further thereof, and see more then yet we do. In the mean time taking
what is granted, that no light of Nature forbids a Congregation when it is
alone, to have entirenesse of Jurisdiction within it self, nor forbids the
same to the general or National Councels, I think it may thence be inferred,
that the like must be allowed to Congregationall Churches that have neighbors,
and that entirenesse of Jurisdiction in these is no more against the light of
Nature, then in the other. For to say that one Congregation may have this
entirenesse of Jurisdiction and the light of Nature allowe^ it, and others may
not but the light of Nature forbids it; yea to say first the light of Nature
allows it, and then it forbids it, and then it allows it again, these are
such abstruse and intricate things, yea so apparently incongruous and
inconsistent, that it passes my understanding to perceive how they can stand
together.

CHAP. XIII.
Whether the Churches at Thessalonica and Jerusalem, were each of them more
then one Congregation; and of Mr. Baynes his Judgment therein. Of the Assembly
mentioned Luke 12. And whether our Savior did there speak to his Disciples
only, or to all the people also.
IT is a wonder to me says our Author Page 457. That Thessalonica was but one
Congregation -- yet the Apostle ascribes to them that which is a note to
worthy Baynes of the unmerous multitude of the Church of Jerusalem, from whence
went the word of Ged to all the World. 1 These. 1. 8. For from you sounded out
the word of the Lord not only in Macedonia, and Achaia, but in every place
your Faith to Godward is spread abroad.

Answ. All this does not hinder but Thessalonica might be one Congregation,
though perhaps a great one. For that the word did sound out from them to
others, and their Faith to Godward was spread abroad, what is there in all this
to prove they were many Congregations in one Church? And for Mr. Baynes whom
our Author worthily counts a worthy man, there is nothing in him that will
serve Mr. Rutherford his purpose, but much that makes for the contrary. For it
is well known in his Diocesans Trial he maintains at large, that Churches by
the appointment of Christ are Congregationall, and denies that one Congregation
may be one Church: and in the particular instances of the Church, at Jerusalem,
at Co^i^th, at Ephesus, at Antioch and others, he holds the very same that we
do, and the direct contrary to that which Mr. Rutherford stands for. And
therefore whereas he wonders that Thessalonica should be one Congregation,
considering what the Apostle says of them, and what Mr. Baynes has said of
Jerusalem, I may more justly wonder that he should once mention Mr. Baynes in
this cause. For if ever there was man in this world that deny^d many
Congregations to be one Church, and allowed only such Churches to be
instituted of Christ as may meet ordinarily in one Congregation, this Mr.
Baynes was one of them; and therefore a wonder it is to me that Mr. Rutherford
should think to have help from him in this question. But let us consider what
it is that Mr Baynes does say of the Church at Jerusalem: Why, this which the
Apostle affirms of the Thessalonians Mr. Baynes does make a note of the
numerous multitude of the Church at Jerusalem. But does he make it a note of
many Congregations in one Church at Jerusalem? If he do, this were something to
the purpose, I grant. But I hope Mr. Rutherford will not so report of Mr.
Baynes; For it is plain Mr. Bayne^ does not so speak, but expressly says the
direct contrary; and therefore what ever numerous multitude might be in that
Church, and what ever might be a note of such multitude, except Mr. Baynes had
said that the multitude was such as made many Congregations and yet all but one
Church (which he never said but the contrary) there is no help to be had from
Mr. Baynes in this business. For who knows not that there might be a
numerous multitude, and yet but one Congregation? Sure in Mr. Baynes his
judgment it might be so, and therefore though he grant a numerous multitude
in this Church at Jerusalem, yet Mr. Rutherford purpose for many Congregations
in Thessal^nica and yet all but one Church, is not gained, nor at all helped
thereby.

Which will better appear if Mr. Baynes his Argumentation in the place which I
conceive Mr. Rutherford aims at, be considered in Page 3. of his Diocesans
Trial, he propounds an Argument of theirs who would have many Congregations to
be one Church, taken from the example of the ancient Churches of Rome and
Alexandria, laid down in these words: If the multitude of Christians did in
Jerusalem so increase within a little time, that they exceeded the proportion
of one Congregation, how much more likely is it that Christians in Rome and
Alexandria did so increase in 200 years, that they could not keep in one
particular Assembly: But the first is true, Ergo also the latter. Now when he
cames to answer this Argument, Page 18, 19. What does he then say. First of all
he says, The Proposition is not of necessary consequence, for there were says
he very extraordinary reasons of that which was effected in Jerusalem: And so
he proceeds to mention 5, or 6. reasons in particular, of which one is this
which it may be Mr. Rutherford has an eye unto, that the state of this Church
was such as that it was to send out light to all others, a common aursery to
the World. And therefore if the thing were granted that in Jerusalem there was
a numerous multitude, yea such a multitude as could not be contained in one
Congregation, yet says he, It does not follow from this particular to the so
great increasing of these Churches, to wit, of Rome and Alexandria in tract of
time. And even so may I say, it does not follow to the so great increasing of
the Church of the Thessalonians, there being such extraordinary reasons for
that which was effected in Jerusalem, as neither Rome nor Alexandria, nor yet
Thessalonica could allege the same. And this is his Answer to the Proposition.
But for the Assumption, where Mr. Rutherford his help must chiefly lie, to wit,
that the multitude of Christians in Jerusalem did exceed the proportion of one
Congregation, this Mr. Baynes does expressly deny: not to mention, says he,
That we do deny the Assumption. Therefore, the Proposition being by Mr. Baynes
not yielded, and the Assumption expressly denied, I see not how Master
Rutherford can have any help to his cause from either of both.

He denies not, he says, What Mr. Tompson and I do say, that 5000 may meet to
hear the word, many thousands were gathered together, Luke 12 to hear Christ.

Answ. If this be not denied, then suppose there were 5000 or more in the
Church at Jerusalem, it does not follow therefore that that Church was many
Congregations, and so our purpose is gained.

But we, he says, Leave out the inconveniences of thronging so all at once,
for they trod one upon another. Second, Christ Preached not to all those
thousands at once, for it is expressly said verse 1. He began to say to his
Disciples; so, Christ refusing to Preach to such a disorderly confluence of
people, who could not hear, and his Doctrine being all for his Disciples, the
very Sermon being Preached to his Disciples only -- evidenceth to me that
Christ condemns a numerous multitude to hear at once.

Answ. The Question is not about the convenience or inconveniency of such
excessively great Assemblies; but whether there be an impossibility in Nature,
and reason, that so many as are said to be in the Church at Jerusalem should
assemble and come together in one Congregation; for this is sometimes said for
the proving of sundry Congregations in that one Church. Now if this be not
impossible, then the plurality of Congregations in that one Church cannot be
concluded by those great multitudes that were therein. And that it is not
impossible for such great multitudes to come together in one Congregation, the
Scripture alleged Luke 12, does witness. If they trod one upon another, that
might argue the Assembly was very great, and that they were very desirous to
be near unto our Savior for their better hearing, but does not at all prove
that such multitudes are so great as that they cannot possibly be spoke unto
and hear in one Congregation. And therefore, whereas our Brother says, Christ
preached not to all those thousands at once, and that he refused to Preach to
such a disorderly confluence of People, With favor of so worthy a man, I
think the truth is otherwise. For though he began to speak to his Disciples,
verse 1. And exhorted them against worldly carfulness, verse 22. Yet others
who were not Disciples were present, and did also hear his Sermon: Witness
that in verse 13. Where it is said that one of the company (interrupting our
Savior as it seems) demands of him that he would speak to his Brother about
dividing the Inheritance; to whom our Savior makes answer, verse 14. Which
plainly ^hewes that all the p^esent company were not Disciples. Yea whereas it
is said, that hereupon our Savior spoke to them of bewaring and taking heed of
Coveteousnesse, verse 15. And sp^ke a Parable to them of a certain rich man,
verse 16. And after this said to his Disciples, verse 22. Take ^o thought for
your life what you shall eat, etc. It appears hereby that these persons
spoken to afterward verse 15, 16, etc. Were not the Disciples, who were spoken
to afterward, verse 22. But were some other people besides. And what can be
more plain then that in verse 54. where it is expressly said, that Christ spoke
unto the people, rebuking them for their hypocrisy, that could discern the
face of the Sky, and of the Earth, but could not discern that time? And he
said also to the people, says the Text; does it not plainly appear hereby
that as Myriads of people were gathered together, ver. 1 So our Savior spoke
the word unto those people? I suppose the thing is manifest, and that therefore
our Brothers words cannot stand, when he says, That Christ Preached not to
that confluence of people, but refused so to do, his Doctrine being all for his
Disciples, For we see the Holy Ghost witnesses that he spoke not only to his
Disciples, but to the people also: Chemniti^s has these words, Neg^ri non
potest ^n hac satis prolixi concione, etc. It cannot be denied that Christ in
this long Sermon of his, directed his speech first to his Disciples, second to
his friends, Third to one of the company. Fourth to Peter demanding a question.
Fifth to all the multitude, and it seems the Ev^ngelist was willing as it were
to reckon up these several parts or members of the Sermon, Harmon. chap. 110.
And the Refuter of Dr. Downams Sermon says, The mention of many thousands in
Jerusalem does not make the number such as by no means could meet together in
the public worship of God, seeing it is apparent, Luke 12. 1. that the people
which assembled unto Christ and partake his 'Doctrine were also many Myriads:
and albeit he began at the first to speak to his Disciples verse 1. Yet
afterward he spoke to all the people assembled, ver. 13. 15. 54. Reply P. 2. P.
90. Wherefore though our Brother say Christ spoke not to these multitudes of
people but to his Disciples only, yet since we have the ^ext it self, and the
judgment of two Divines of chief note, expressly witnessing the contrary,
therefore we cannot assent to him herein. Whereas Chrysostom says 5000 did
hear his voice at once in one Congregation by means of Scaffolds and
Galleries, and Mr. Mather is willing to yield 8120 were all assembled in one
place to hear the word, and that all the multitude of Converts at Jerusalem
were together in Solomon's Porch Acts 5 12. I grant 3000 could hear at once,
but alas etc Page 458. Answ. If Chrysostomes testimony be of any weight, or Mr.
Baynes his testimony by whom Chrysostom is alleged Diocesans Trial, Page 16.
Then a must be granted that not only 3000, but a greater number, even 50^0 at
least may hear the word at once. And if so, then 5000 members in the Church at
Jerusalem will not prove plurality of Congregations in one Church, forasmuch as
here are 5000 people and yet no more Congregations but one.

But alas this is a great uncertainty for independent Congregations, but this
is to be proved, first that 8000 (Mr. Mather has not added many other
multitudes mentioned, Acts 5. 14. and 6. 17.) did meet daily in the Temple.
Second, daily or ordinarily from house to house. Third, to celebrate the Lords
Supper daily in the Temple and in every private house, and there were need of
many Scaffolds and Galleries, to sit at one Table. Fourth, to make one
Judicature, etc.

Answ. He that shall look upon the Answer Page 34 will plainly see that I have
here spoken to both those places of Acts 5. 14. and 6 1. Showing that neither
of them do prove a plurality of Congregations in this Church at Jerusalem, but
rather the contrary. And therefore this Parenthesis which does intimate that I
have omitted to speak to these places, must not be assented to, but denied.

But why must these four particulars be proved? I suppose he means because of
that which is said Act. 2 46. They continued daily with one accord in the
Temple, etc. But this does not clear it, that these four particulars must
needs be proved, and the reason is; First, because Judicature which is one of
the particulars, is not mentioned at all in that Scripture; nor is it said by
us, that a daily exercise thereof is necessary in every Church or in any.
Second, the Lord Supper, which is another of the particulars, is not mentioned
at all in that Text, at leastwise not in those words or terms which Mr.
Rutherford sets down; much less is it said as he expresses it, that they did
daily celebrate the same both in the Temple and in every private house: nor can
the same for ought I know be proved by this or by any other Scripture, nor was
such a thing ever affirmed by us, so far as I know. I suppose if they had
celebrated it in the Temple alone, or in some private house or houses alone,
that might have been sufficient, without any necessity of celebrating the same
in both places upon one day, both in the Temple and in the houses too. Nay it
is a question whether the Lords Supper be at all intended in this place;
though I doubt not but they observed that Ordinance, and verse 42. may possibly
teach so much. But for the verse we are speaking of, viz, Verse 46* there is no
necessity that the breaking of Bread there spoken of, must needs be meant of
that Ordinance. Sure he was a judicious expositor who understands it otherwise,
Quod hic fractionem panis etc. That is, whereas some expound breaking of Bread
in this place of the Lords Supper, it seems to me to be far from Lukes
intention: Calvin in Act. 2. 46. So then, of Mr Rutherfords four particulars
which he says we must prove, there is not past the half of them that needs to
be proved at all, the two last being already removed. And for a third which is
of breaking of Bread daily and ordinarily from house to house, understand this
breaking of Bread as Calvin does, of their civil repast, and then it hurts not
our cause at all, though it be yielded that they did daily meet for such
purpose in several companies, in their private houses; for this they might do
and be no more but one Congregation. There remains therefore only one that
needs to be proved, namely the first, that they did daily meet in the Temple;
and this may be proved with case, because the plain words of the Text do
affirm it, They continued daily with one accord in the Temple; so that yet we
have found nothing that proves Jerusalem to be many Congregations in one Church.

Nay I conceive, that one of these four particulars, viz. The first, of their
daily meeting in the Temple, does apparently show that how great soever the
number was, yet it was not exceeding the proportion of one Congregation, which
might come together in one place; For the Temple was but one in all the City, I
mean there was but only one individual Temple, and not many Temples, which
if there had been then our Brethren might possibly have said, that they met
distributively in sundry lesser companies, but were to many too meet all in
one Congregation; for so they were wont to expound sundry other phrases used by
the Holy Ghost, to declare their coming together. True say they, they come
together, but how? Not collectively all of them together in one place, they
were too many for that; but they came together distributively, some of them in
one place, and some in another, and so they think they have answered
sufficiently. But now to this of their meeting together in the Temple, they
cannot answer so; for then there should have been sundry Temples, in which they
might have met, distributed into sundry companies; but there being no more
Temples but one, and the Text affirming plainly that they all met with one
accord, in the Temple, it must needs be, that they met collectively, all of
them together in one and the same place; and hence it follows, that they were
not so many but still they might be one Congregation as well as one Church.

So that of the four particulars, which he says we must prove, some we see
need not to be proved at all, and the first of them which we can prove with
case does make much for the weakening of his cause, and for the strengthening of
ours.

Yea Mr. Mather will have the whole containing as one independent Congregation,
Act. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. And the many Myriads or thousands of believing Jews, Acts
21. 21, 22, 23. To meet as one Congregation.

Answ. When in the Answer I speak of these places, the word Independent was
not there used by me at all, but only is here added by himself, for what cause
himself can best tell. But for the matter, I conceive the thing which I there
delivered is clear from the Texts themselves, that the multitude of those
Jews did assemble and come together, in one place; for as for one of the
places Act. 6. It is expressly there said that the Apostles called the multitude
together to propose unto them the choice of Deacons, verse 2* and bad them look
out from amongst themselves seven Men, qualifyed as the Apostles do there
describe, verse 3. whereupon it is said that the saying pleased the whole
multitude and they chose seven who are there named verse 5. and presented them
unto the Apostles that they might lay their hands on them, verse 6. Which
plainly shows that the whose multitude how many soever they were, yet were
not so many, but they might all assemble in one place, to hear matters
proposed to them, to consider thereof, and upon liking to put them in
execution, as in other things so in this particular, of making election of
Officers, as there they are Recorded to have done. And as for the other place
Act. 21. though it be a Question, whether those many thousand Jews, that
believed were all members, of that one Church at Jerusalem, yet it cannot be
any question, whether they might come together in one place, since James and the
Elders do expressly there say unto Paul, the multitude must needs come together,
for they will hear that thou art come. Nor can we say they might come together
only distributively, in sundry companies, but not all in one place, for the
end of their coming together will not bear that exposition, which end was,
that they might see, and hear Paul, and try what satisfaction he would give
them, in the matter whereof they were informed of him, that he taught the
Jews, to forsake Moses, and to omit Circumcision and other Jewish customs.
These things they were informed to have been taught by him amongst the
Gentiles, and hearing that he was come to the City, they must needs come
together to hear what he would say to the matter, and how he would clear
himself. Now if this was the end of their coming together it must needs be
that their coming was altogether unto one place, and not in several
companies; for this could not answer their end, inasmuch as Paul being but one
person, it was not possible they could see him, nor hear him in sundry places
at once; and therefore they might as well have staid at home, and not have come
together at all, as come together in such sort.

Plain it is therefore, that the multitude spoken of in these two Scripures
were not so many but they might meet in one Congregation.

Which point as something has been said in the Answer P. 34, 35. For the
clearing of it, so I am the more confirmed in it by Mr. Rutherford his dealing
concerning these Scriptures. For though he make mention of them in this place,
as we see, and of that apprehension of mine concerning those Scriptures, yet he
does not at all remove the grounds, which were given for that apprehension in
the Answer, but does wholly pass them by in silence. Now taking occasion to
speak of the Scriptures, and relating what my apprehension was concerning the
same, and yet saying nothing at all to the gronnds, whereon that apprehension
was built, it seems hereby to be employed that indeed he had nothing in
readiness to object against the same. So that I may still conceive of those
Scriptures as I did before, for any thing yet brought to induce me to be of
another mind.

As for that which next follows, certainly the Apostles practice must be our
rule, and then 500 or 1000 being so far beneath 10 or 8000, may well seem a
number for fewness not competent, and what shall we then think of 7 only, or
10.

Answ. The answer is, that the Apostles practice does not at all condemn ours,
though our Congregations have not in them the like numbers, but sometimes more
and sometimes less; for was it not so in that Primative Apostolic Church? Is
it not plain, that that Church was for number far lesser at the first, then
afterward, when they grew to 4000 or more; and yet after this they grew to be
fewer again, when Persecution scattered them all abroad except the Apostles,
Act. 8. 1. And therefore if 10 or 8000, being once the number in that Church,
be a rule condemning out Churches, as being for fewness not competent, when
they are beneath that number, how will it be avoided but by the same reason the
practice of that Church at one time, shall be a rule, for the condemning of it
self at another time? For sure it is, their number was not at all times alike,
but sometimes more, and sometimes less; as in the Sea it is not always full
tide, but sometimes low ebb, nor is the Moon always at full, but sometimes
at the Change; Nay if the Apostles practice must be our rule, then inasmuch as
their Churches, had not always the like numbers of members in them, but
sometimes the number was greater, and sometimes lesser, it will follow
therefore that the number of members in our Churches needs not always to be
the same, but though greater numbers be lawful, yet the lawfulness of lesser
numbers may not be denied.

CHAP. XIV.
Whether the Church at Corinth was one Church, meeting distributively in sundry
Congregations, or whether it was only one Congregation. And whether 1 Cor. 14.
23. If the whole Church came together in some place etc. Do make for sundry
Congregations or for one only.
PAge 464. I cannot but think that weak which Mr. Mather and Mr. Tompson say
(Answer Page 37.) the place 1 Cor. 14. 23. That speaks of the whole Church
coming together to one place does unavoidably prove, that Corinth had their
meetings and not by way of distribution into several Congregations, but
altogether in one Congregation: and it is plain, that though they had variety
of teachers and Prophets, yet they all used to come together to one place.

Answ. If that which we say be weak, it is more easy for one of such ability
and strength as Mr. Rutherford to overthrow the same. Yet it is not words that
will suffice, but weight of reason that must avail thereto. Let us hear
therefore his Answer to this passage which he thinks and censures to be so
weak.

The place says he, 1 Cor. 14. 23. If the whole Church come together etc. Death
evince the contrary. For the Apostle does there reason ab absurdo, from a great
incongruity: it were incongruous says he, and ridiculous that the whole Church
of Corinth and all their guifted men speaking with Tongues (so that they could
not be understood by Infidels) should all Convene in one place, and speak with
diverse Tongues: For the unlearned and unbeleevers would say they were mad;
therefore he presupposes that the whole Church should not all come to one
place, but that they should so come to one place, in diverse Assemblies. --

Answ. And is it true indeed, that this place does evince the contrary? viz.
That the Church at Corinth did not all meet in one Congregation: How shall we
be assured that such a thing is evinced by the place? For as for the reason
given, etc. That the Apostle does there reason ab absurdo, or from great
incongruity, this does not prove the thing at all, partly because they might
practice something that were not meet but had incongruity in it, and partly
(and more especially) because the Apostle does not lay the absurdity where Mr.
Rutherford lays it, viz. In the convening of the whole Church in one place,
but in their speaking with strange Tongues when they were convened and come
together.

Touching the former of these, Mr. Rutherford reasons to this effect. If it
were an incongruous or un^it thing that the whole Church at Corinth should come
together in one place, then they did not so come together: but the first is
true, Ergo the second is true also. In which kind of reasoning (such is our
weakness) we think neither part of the argument to be free from just
exception. For as we wholly deny the Assumption, so we also think there is no
sufficient strength of consequence in the maine Proposition, forasmuch as
sundry things were practiced in that Church which were no ways fit not meet to
be practiced, and which the Apostle does therefore reprove, and seeks the
redress of the same: witness their Factions and divisions: Chap. 1. and 3.
Their neglecting Church censures against the incestuous person, and on the
contrary being puffed up, Chap. 5. their going to Law one with another before
the Infidels, Chap. 6. their abuses in Prayer and Prophesying, their women
uncovered and their men covered, Chap. 11. their abuses in the Lords Supper,
when they so came unto it that one was hungry and another drunken, Chap. 11.
Now as it were an unsufficient kind of arguing to say, these things were unfit
and unmeet, and therefore that Church did not so practice, even so Mr.
Rutherford his arguing seems to be no better, who would prove they did come
together in one place, because the Apostle, as he thinks, did count such
coming together unmeet. For if it were granted that such a coming had been
unmeet, yet it does not follow, but such might be their practice
notwithstanding: and therefore as he counts our apprehension in this matter to
be weak, so I leave it to himself and others to consider, whether in this
consequence, It was not meet they should all come together in one place, Ergo
they did it not, be very strong.

I desire here not to be mistaken: for I do not grant that their coming
together in one place was unmeet, nor that the Apostle does reprove them for
the same; I have already said the contrary, in denying the Assumption before
mentioned, which I do still deny. But the thing I intend, is to consider the
strength of Mr. Rutherford his reasoning, and for that cause to apply it to the
thing in question, which I still desire to keep close unto, if it may be. Now
the thing in question, being this, whether the Church at Corinth, were so many
at that they could nor meet together in one Assembly, but had many
Congregations, and all but one Church, and Mr Rutherford maintaining the
affirmative, and bringing this reason for it, taken from the Congruity of
meeting all together, I therefore thought meet, to weigh the strength of this
reason, which I do not perceive to be in any wise convincing: but supposing the
Apostle had counted such meetings, inconvenient and unmeet, yet this reason as
I conceive, is too weak to prove Mr. Rutherford his purpose, that their number
was such as that they could not all possibly meet in one place; for they might
possibly do that which were unmeet to be done, in this particular as well as
they did in many other things.

But in this particular I do not think, they did any thing absurd, or unmeet
at all; and therefore for further answer to this reason I would say: that the
Apostle does not say the absurdity, where Mr. Rutherford lays it, to wit, in
that the whole Church did convene, and come together, but in speaking with
strange Tongues when they were convened, this latter being incongruous: and
absurd indeed; for the Infidels coming into the Church Assembly, and hearing
them so speak, might think them mad, as the Apostle says; but for
assembling all in one place, I know no madness that was in that; nor show
thereof; nor do I yet believe that the Apostle does place the absurdity there.
For though Mr. Rutherford be a worthy man and learned, yet such a thing as
this had need of some further proof then his bare word. If a Church should
meet distributively in diverse Assemblies, and being so met should speak with
strange Tongues, I demand whether this manner of speaking, do prove such a way
of meeting absurd; I suppose he will say no, because it is the way of meeting
which he holds the Apostolic Churches did use; And if so, then suppose they
should so speak with strange Tongues, when they meet collectively all in one
Assembly, how can this manner of speaking conclude the absurdity of such kind
of meeting any more then it did in the other? For my part, though such kind of
speaking have incongruity and inconveniency in it, yet I conceive assembling
collectively and in one Congregation is no more prejudiced thereby, then
assembling distributively in many.

He (that is the Apostle) presupposes that the whole Church should come to
one place, in diverse Assemblies, and all Prophecy in a Tongue known to the
Infidels, as the unbeleever being convinced and judged of all the Prophets
might fall down in his face, etc.

Answ. If the Prophets were met in diverse Assemblies at once, I marvel how the
unbeleever should be convinced and judged of them all; for I hope one singular
and individual unbeleever was not present in diverse Assemblies at once, nor
convinced and judged (as here he is said to be) by those Prophets, from whose
Assembly he was absent. Either therefore the Prophets were all met in one
Assembly and not in diverse, or else it is yet a Quaere how he could be
convinced by them all. For sure the unbeleever could not be present in sundry
Assemblies at once.

Page 465. The whole Church is not the whole much people of Corinth that
believed, that did ordinarily meet in one place, the Text says no such thing,
and that is to be proved and not taken as granted.

Answ. Suppose it were true, that the whole Church was not the whole much
people of Corinth that believed, this does nothing prejudice our cause, for as
much as our Question is not about the whole much people that believed, but
about the whole Church. If therefore it be granted that the whole Church
collectively did come together in one place, we have what we desire, and
require no more. As for the whole much people that believed, whether this be
the same with the former or no, we shall have no need to prove or take for
granted that these did in like manner come together, for as much as our
question in the terms of it is not about these, but about the other.

But why is not the whole Church the whole much people that believed? Shall we
say the whole Church is more then the people that believed? Or shall we say it
is not so much? I conceive it must be one of these, or else it must be the
same. If it be said it is more, then still we have our desire, if not more then
we demand. For if a company that is greater then all the much people that
believed, were nevertheless not so great, but they might and did assemble in
one Congregation, then that much people that believed might so assemble much
more. For if there be no impossibility but a company that is greater may so
assemble, I suppose the same cannot be denied of a company that is lesser.
Again, to say this whole Church was a greater number then the much people that
believed, is directly to gainsay himself, who in Page 460, 461. Makes the much
people a greater number then the Congregation meeting for the Word, Sacraments,
and Church censures; because such a Congregation, he says, could not
conveniently exceed one thousand, whereas the much people must be much in
comparison of thousands of Jews who rejected Christ, for that otherwise it
would not have been much for Paul's comfort, for which end it is mentioned and
brought.

If it be said the whole Church be less then the people that believed, then it
follows that some of those believers were not of the Church, and so what
himself has written, Page 125. 242. 251. will not stand. For in Page 125, he
says, That the Seal of Baptism and the profession of the truth is that which
makes one member of the visible Church -- and by this are all the Citizens and
domestics in-Churched, and received into a visible Church. And Page 242. He
says any who blamelessely profess Christ is Ecclesiastically -- in foro
Ecclesiae, a true and valid member of the Church visible, having
Ecclesiastical power valid for that effect, and Page 251. he says, a visible
profession of the truth and Doctrine of golinesse is that which essentially
constituteth a visible Church and every member of the visible Church. Now if
these things be so, then it follows that this whole people that believed were
all of them members of the Church, inasmuch as they were all partakers of
Baptism and profession, which he says do essentially constitute the visible
Church and every member thereof. And they were all members of the Church, then
the Church was not a lesser company then they.

Nor can he say it was a greater company, for the reasons mentioned before.

And if it was neither a greater company nor a lesser, was it not then the
same. And if it was the same, then how can this stand which he affirms in the
place we have in hand, where he says the whole Church is not the whole much
people that believed? It seems to me, that which way soever he shall take, his
own pen will be witness against himself; for in the place we have in hand,
he says the whole Church is not the whole much people that believed: and in
another place he tells us, that the much people that believed was a greater
number then the whole Church meeting for Word, Sacraments, etc. And yet in a
third place he tells us, that in effect it was not greater, inasmuch as all
Baptized professing believers, he says, are of the Church.

Further, when the Text speaks of the whole Church coming together in some
place, let the wise judge whether it be a good Exposition to say, by the whole
is not meant the whole, but only a part. Which I conceive is Mr. Rutherfords
Exposition, who will not yield that the whole did come together in any one
place, but part in one place, and part in another, the whole being distributed
into several parts, and those parts into several places. So that the whole
Church coming together into some place, must have this meaning, the whole came
not together in any place, but part in one place and part in another, which I
fear is too much violence offered to the Sacred Text, which should be handled
with reverence.

But he brings a reason for this Exposition, and that is this, Because else we
must say that at any one Assembly all the Prophets and teachers did Prophesy at
Corinth; for the Text says, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all,
whereas the consequence should be absurd, it should be a longsome and
wearisome meeting, Page 465.

Answ. And if they Prophesyed not all in one Assem^ly but diverse, how could the
unbeleever be convinced and judged by them all? It will not be easy to
conceive how it could be, they Prophesying in such a way: for the unbeleever
sure could not be present in sundry Assemblyes at once, but in one only. And
therefore, those words, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all, will lay
as much absurdity upon his Exposition of the words as upon ours, or rather a
great deal more. For as for ours, there is no absurdity therein at all, for
as much as by all the Prophets is meant all that Prophesied at the time, when
the unbeleever was present, and not that all must Prophesy upon one day as Mr.
Rutherford would have it. But the Text does not so say, nor any Interpreter
that I have met withal. Sure I am Beza says, the express contrary, for upon
verse 31. Ye may all Prophesy one by one, etc. He has this note, Non eodem
sane die, sed ternis etc. That is indeed not all upon one day (which is Mr.
Rutherfords Exposition) but three at every moeing, having their turn to speak
till all had spoken by course.

Interpreters say they met in diverse Assemblies, Page 465.

Answ. Let those Interpreters be named; and there words set down, and then by
Gods help we shall consider of what they say, and of the grounds and reasons
thereof* in the mean time to say that interpreters say it, and yet neither to
tell us the reasons nor the words of those Interpreters, nor so much as the
names of any of them, how should this prevail with us to turn us away from
our former apprehensions in the point?

True it is in another place, etc. Page 461. Speaking of verse 31. Yea may all
Prophesy one by one, he there tells us that Diodatus understands it that they
might Prophecy, by course and in diverse or sundry Assemblies; And Essius, says
he, says the same, to wit, that these Prophets were to Prophesy in diverse
Assemblies.

Answ. For Diodatus I have him not at hand, and therefore I cannot peruse the
place; But for Estius, this I may say, that he neither says what here is
reported in his Commentary upon the verse alleged, nor upon any verse else in
all the Chapter, as far as I can observe, and I have read and perused him on
purpose to see what were to be found in him: But though I cannot find him
affirming that which Mr. Rutherford brings him for, yet I find sundry places,
wherein he seems to me to affirm the contrary; for instance, Commenting upon
the verse alleged, he has these words as the sense which he most preferres,
viz. Quod si non unus tantum Propheta sed plures etc. That is, If not only one
Prophet but sundry, yea all do speak in the Assembly in order, it will come to
pass that those all may also learn, and receive exhortation, there being
never a one of them, who is not also a hearer. Wherein we see he speaks not one
word of Prophesying in diverse Assemblies at the same time, but that they were
so to Prophesy that all of them were to be hearers, and learners, as well as
speakers. Which does plainly imply, that there must be many Prophets in one
Assembly at once. Again, upon verse ^9, he has these words as the sense of
the place, Quamvis forte multi suit in Ecclesiae -- vestra Prophetae etc. That
is, Although perhaps there be many Prophets in your Church, yet it will be
sufficient if two or three do speak at one meeting, and for others it shall be
their duty to judge, that is to say, to examine and try whether these things be
true and sound which are spoken by them that speak. Wherein he plainly shows
his judgment to be that at one meeting they were to have many Prophets
present, of whom two or three only were to speak, and the rest to try and
examine what was spoken. And to the same purpose he speaks upon verse 32.
Which he counts to be the same with that of judging, verse 29. Further these
words verse 23. Of the whole Church coming together into one place, he
expounds thus, Alicujus loci totus populus fidelis, That is, all the faithful
or believing people of a place; which is contrary to Mr. Rutherford who will
not have the whole Church, to be the whole much people that believed. Finally,
speaking of those words verse 24. if all Prophesy, he has these words, Nec
omnes inteligit absolute, etc. That is, the Apostle understands not all
absolutely but to this sense, to wit, if all that speak in the Assembly of the
Church do Prophesy, that is, if Prophets only do speak, and they that have the
gift of Tongues do hold their peace. Which is contrary to Mr. Rutherford who
understands the Text so, that they were all to Prophecy at one time; and
because at one meeting there were but two or three to Prophecy, which two or
three he thinks could not be all, he will therefore have it that they were
distributed into several Assemblies, and so did Prophecy all at once, though
only two or three at one meeting. For which interpretation, though he
alleges Estius, yet Estius we see affords him no help at all. Whereupon I
have marvelled why Estius should be alleged, sometimes thinking with my self
whether his name might not be mis-Printed by the Printer, instead of some
other man; sometimes thinking whether Mr. Rutherford his memory might not fail
him in this particular, having read the thing in some other Author, and
supposing it had been in Estius. But what ever might be the reason of this
mistake, he that shall examine Estius will not find in him any help at all for
Mr. Rutherfords cause in this particular, but the contrary.

The Text says expressly, verse 29, that at one time they Prophesied but two or
three.

Answer. This is a mistake also: for the words are, let the Prophets speak two
or three, and let the other judge. Now let them do so, does not show their
practice, but their duty: not what they did, but what they should have done.
The Text says, if there be no interpreter let him that has an unknown Tongue
keep silence in the Church, verse 20. And let your Women keep silence in the
Churches, verse 34. Now shall any man say, that these Texts do expressly prove
that it was the manner of their Women and of their men that had unknown Tongues
to keep silence. I suppose no man can say it, the words being not a report of
what their practice was, but a rule of direction to show them how they ought to
practice. And so we say of the case in hand. But let it be supposed that it
was not only their duty, but also their practice to Prophecy at one meeting
but only two or three, what can Master Rutherford gain hereby? His words
following do tell us, where he says, If two only Prophesyed at one Assembly,
as this Text will warrant clearly.

Answ. Not so, the Text allows three, which is more then two only. But go on,
and let us hear the consequence.

Then how does this whole Church consisting of all the believers at Corinth, as
is supposed by our Brethren, convince the Infidel, so as it may bear this
sense, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all* Can two Prophets be all
Prophets?

Answ. Though we suppose the whole Church consisted of all the Believers at
Corinth, yet that the whole Church did convince the the Infidel, this we
never said nor supposed at all: For we supposed and so do still, that he was
to be convinced only by the Prophets, besides whom there were many others
that were of the Church.

But for his demand, Whether two Prophets can be all Prophets, The answer is,
that though two be not all where there are more then two, yet if there be no
more, there it is otherwise; and so where there are but two or three that do
Prophecy at one meeting, there he that is convinced by those two or three,
may be said to be convinced of all, that is of all that do Prophecy. This
sense of the place must needs be received, else how shall the Apostles words
be reconciled and stand together? For as in one verse he requires, that the
Prophets speak two or three at one meeting, and the rest to Judge, verse 29.
And in another verse affirms that the Infidel in the case there proposed, is
judged of all, verse 24. So he does not only suppose in the very same verse,
that they did all Prophecy, if all, Prophecy says he, and there come in one
that believes not, etc. But moreover in verse 31. He expressly and plainly
allows them thus to Prophecy; Ye may all Prophecy, says he, one by one,
that all may learn and all may be comforted. Which places compared do evince
the sense of the words here given, and do plainly show that what he says
verse 24. Of the Infidel being convinced of all and judged of all, may be
truly made good, if he be convinced of all and Judged of all that Prophesyed
at that meeting, though their number that so Prophesyed were no more but two or
three.

And therefore whereas he concludes, Surely for my part I think it must
unavoidably be said, that they Prophesyed distributively and in several
Congregations, The Answer is, that this needs not to be said at all, but may
be avoided with ^ase; and the contrary may be safely held; to wit, that they
Pro^^^cied collectively and in one Congregation.

For first, they did so Prophesy, that one that believed not, and one unlearned
might come in amongst them when they were Prophesying, and by that means might
be convinced of all and judged of all, verse 24. Which might well be done, if
they Prophesyed all in one Congregation, but otherwise it could not, for as
much as one unbeleever could not be present in several Congregations at once.

Secondly, they were so to Prophecy, that the Prophets when they Prophesied
were to have the rest of the Prophets to be (...), to hear and Judge of that
which was delivered, let the Prophets speak two or three, and the rest judge,
verse 29. and the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, verse
32. The former of which sayings Mr. Rutherford himself does understand of a
College Prophets, having a power Dogmaticall of judging, and censuring the
Doctrine of the Prophets delivered. What they speak, says he, Page 467. Is to
be judged and put under censure; for the whole College must judge; for which
he alleges verse 29. And a little after, this is not a Power of judging which
every Christian has, for (...) says Piscator does relate to the Prophets, who
are to judge; but as ^ take it a Prophetical judging, which may warrant the
Iuridicall power of a Presbytery, etc. By all which it plainly appears that
when the Prophets did Prophesy, the other Prophets were to be present, to
hear and judge of the Doctrines delivered; and if so, how can it be that they
Prophesyed in several Congregations at the same time? For had it been so, they
could not have judged of one another Doctrine, which they could not hear,
being themselves at that time employed in speaking in some other place.

And therefore it seems more likely, that they met in one Congregation, where
they might all Prophesy, first one and then another, some at one time and some
at another, and so all of them might also hear and learn, and judge of the
Doctrine delivered by others.

CHAP. XV.
Whether the Church at Ephesus were more in number then Corinth and Jerusalem,
and the judgment of Mr. Baynes; Whether that Church was many Congregations, or
one only?
Page 470. Having suggested sundry things, to prove that Ephesus was many
Congregations, and yet but one Church; he concludes this, viz. upon these
considerations, I leave to our reverend Brethren their judgment; if Mr. Mather
and Mr. Thompson say right, we do not think they were more in number at
Ephesus then in Corinth and Jerusalem, where the Christians met all in one
place.

Answ. The exception then which in this place is taken against Mr. Thompson and
me, is for this, that we do not think the Christians at Ephesus, to be more
in number then at Jerusalem and Corinth. Concerning which, I will not say much,
but only this, that as we have only delivered what we think in this matter,
without determining or asserting any thing peremptorily; so we shall readily
embrace the contrary, when good grounds shall be showed for the same: which
though we do not yet perceive to be performed in all that Mr. Rutherford has
said; yet I will not here spend time in examining the same, because I do not
count this point of so much importance concerning the principal thing in
question. For whether the Church at Ephesus were more in number then Corinth
and Jerusalem, or whether it were otherwise; there is no great matter in this
as touching the maine question. For if all of them were such Churches, as might
usually meet together in one Congregation, as I conceive they were* it matters
not much which of them was most in number.

But does not M. Rutherford prove that the one Church at Ephesus was more then
one Congregation? I confess, he has sundry things in the precedent pages,
which he intends that way. But in as much as they do not concern M. Tompson
and me in particular, nor are by him applied against any passage in the answer;
I will therefore pass them over more briefly, my purpose being chiefly, to
consider of such particulars, wherein he takes exception against the Answer.
Only, thus much I would advertise the Reader, that a good part of that which
Mr. Rutherf. brings to prove many Congregations in one Church at Ephesus, has
been answered long ago by Mr. Baynes in his Diocesans trial, page 5. which I
the rather Commend to Mr. Rutherfords consideration, because, he counts him a
man of worth, calling him worthy Baynes: And for the help of such Readers, as
cannot readily come to the book it self, I will here transcribe a few lines out
of the same worthy Baynes, as they are to be found in his Dioces. trial. p. 5,
6. viz.

The Church of Ephesus was but one flock; First, it is likely that it was of no
other form then the other. (Sir, Jerusalem, Antioch and Corinth, which he had
before showed to be each of them one Congregation.) Secondly, it was but one
flock, that which Presbyters might jointly feed: they had no Diocesan Paster:
If Presbyters only, then none but Parishonall Churches in and about Ephesus:
theremay be many flocks, but God ordained none but such as may wholely meet
with those who have the care of feeding and governing of them: Peter indeed 1
Pet. 5. 2. calls all those he writteth unto one flock, but that is in regard
either of the mystical estate of the faithful, or in respect of the common
nature, which is in all Churches one and the same: but properly and in
external adunation, one flock is but one Congregation. Thirdly, Parishes
according to the adverse opinion were not then divided: Neither does the long
and fruitful labors of the Apostle argue that there should be Parish
Churches in Diocesan wise added, but a great number of Sister Churches. But
when it is said, that all Asia did hear, the meaning is that from hand to
hand, it did run through Asia; so as Churches were planted every where, even
where Paul came not, as at Collosse: there might be many Churches in Asia, and
many converted by Peter, and others fruitful labors, without subordination of
Churches.

CHAP. XVI.
Whether the Church at Antioch was only one Congregation, and whether Acts 14.
27. and 15. 30. do not prove the Affirmative.
THE Answer, having in page 5. alleged Acts. 14. 27. and 15. 30, 31. to prove
that the Church at Antioch was no more then might be gathered together into one
place, Mr. Rutherford in Answer hereto says, p. 472, 473. That the place Acts
14. 27. is the representative Church, and that he believes the Assembling of
the multitude, Acts 15. verse. 30. must be taken distributively.

Answ. This answer of Mr. Rutherfords, to the former place, was removed long
ago by worthy Mr. Baynes, who also understands the latter place as we do, and
not as Mr. Rutherford: For in his Dioces. trial, maintaining this position,
that the Churches instituted by the Apostles, were only such as might meet in
one Congregation ordinarily, and giving this very place and instance of the
Church of Antioch, for one of his grounds, for confirming the said position, p.
5. He comes imediately thereupon to answer an objection, which is the very
same that here Mr. Rutherford brings to the former place, viz. that the Church
mentioned in that place, was the Ministers or representative Church: for the
removing whereof Mr. Baynes returns 4. things, 1. that the word Church, is
never so used: 2. He argues by analogy from that Acts 11. where Peter gives
account before the whole Church, even the Church of the faithful, and
therefore in like sort, Paul and Barnabas might report before the whole Church
of the faithful, what things God had done by them. 3. Says he, they made
relation to that Church which had sent them forth, with Prayer and Imposition
of Hands; and this Church stood of all those who assembled to the public
service and worship of God, (which is clear, Acts 13. 2.) 4. His fourth
particular is this other place of Acts 15. verse. 30. where, says he, the
people of the Church of Antioch were gathered together, to consider of Decrees
sent them by the Apostles from Jerusalem, (...). In all which, we clearly
perceive the judgment of this worthy man to be the same with us, and as
clearly against Mr. Rutherford, as can be expressed, which being so, and his
judgment being delivered upon such reasons, as seem to me weighty, and which
Mr. Rutherford does not remove; I therefore see no sufficient reason to think
otherwise of the Church of Antioch then formerly.

For as for M. Rutherford his reason to prove the place, Acts 14. 27. to be
meant of a representative Church, viz. That they met for a matter of
Discipline, at least for a matter that concerned all the Churches, to wit, to
know how God had opened the door of says unto the Gentiles: The answer is,
that this does not evince the thing: 1. Because rehearsing, how God had opened
the door of Faith unto the Gentiles, being neither admission of Members, nor
of Officers, nor any matter of censure, nor any thing else; but only a mere
declaration of the gracious workings of the Lord, cannot be any matter of
Discipline, as I conceive.

2. Suppose it were a meeting for matter of Discipline, must it needs be a
meeting for Elders alone, without the presence of the faithful? Will Mr.
Rutherford deny it to be l^wfull for any to be present at matters of
Discipline, but only the Elders? I suppose he will not deny it at all, sure I
am he has heretofore written otherwise; Peaceable Plea p. 49. Where he
grants that all matters of Discipline must be done with the peoples consent,
and alleges about 19. or 20. Divines old and new for the same Tenet. Now if
matters of Discipline must be done with the peoples consent, then the people
must be present thereat; For else they give their consent blindefold. And if
they must be present at such matters; then suppose the matter mentioned in the
Scripture we have in hand, had been of that nature, yet the Church that was
gathered together about the same, needed not to be a representative Church of
Elders alone, as Mr. Rutherford would have it, but might consist of the people
also, who by his own grant may be lawfully present at such matters.

3. Be it a matter of Discipline, or a matter that concerned all the Churches,
or what else Mr. Rutherford will have it? It is plain that Paul and Barnabas
when they were at Jerusalem, did declare such matters as here they do declare
at Antioch, not only to the Apostles and Elders, whom he perhaps would make a
representative Church, but also to a Church besides them, I mean besides the
Apostles and Elders; for so it is said, Acts 15. 4. That at Ierus^lem they were
received of the Church, and of the Apostles and Elders, and declared all things
that God had done with them: and verse. 12. they declared to the multitude what
miracles and wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by them. Now if they
declared these things at Jerusalem not only to the Apostles and Elders, as to
a representative Church, but to the Church of the Faithful also, as the Text
says, they did, what reason can be rendered that the Church, which was gathered
together at Antioch, should be only a representative Church? And that the
people there were not present? For my part, I see no reason for it, but that
they might declare these things to the Brethren a^ Antioch, as well as to the
Brethren at Jerusalem; and as well to a representative Church at Jerusalem, as
to a representative Church at Antioch. And therefore since it is apparent that
at Jerusalem they declared these things to a Church, which consisted of others
besides Apostles and Elders; the Church at Antioch to whom they declared the
same things, might be also a Church of the like kind, and not a representative
Church, as our Brother conceives it to be.

4. The nature of the thing, which they do declare to this Church was such, as
that it was fit enough for the people to be acquainted therewith; which the
text mentions in two clauses; first, more generally, all that God had done with
them: Secondly, more specially, how he had opened the door of Faith to the
Gentiles. Now suppose the people had nothing to do in matters of Judicature by
way of power therein, yet to be informed of other peoples conversion, and how
God blessed the labors of the Apostles to that end, which are the things they
declared to this Church, these are no such matters, but the people may be
acquainted therewith for their comfort, and that God might have praises from
them all; and therefore the Church to whom Paul and Barnabas declared these
things, needs not to be understood of the Elders alone, but may well enough be
a Church consisting also of ordinary Christians.

5. Paul thought it not unmeet to make known to all the Corinthians the grace
of God bestowed on the Churches of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 9. 1, 2. and declares to
them of Macedonia, the forwardness of the Corinthians in the grace of
liberality, 2 Cor. 9. 2. showing the good that came hereby, in that the example
of Gods grace, in some provoked many others to the like, 2 Cor. 9. 2. your
zeal, says he, has provoked very many; and likewise in that, by this means,
there redounded many thanksgivings unto God, verse. 12, 13. And if upon these
and other good causes he did thus practice toward the Christians of Macedonia
and Achaia, I know no good reason why he and Barnabas should deal otherwise
with the Christians at Antioch, and conceal from them the gracious workings of
God by their Ministry amongst the Gentiles; and make known the same only to a
representative Church of Elders.

As for our Brothers answer to the other Scripture, Act. 15. 30. That the
assembling of the multitude, there spoken of, must be taken distributively, I
conceive the text will not bear that exposition: for the words are that they
gathered the multitude together, then delivered the Epistle. Now if this
multitude was gathered together not in one assembly but diverse, how could the
Epistle being but one, be delivered to them all? Can one Epistle be delivered
to sundry or several assemblies at one time? I suppose it is not possible,
except we shall imagine there be sundry Coppies, one to be read in one
assembly, and another in another; whereof in the present case, there is not so
much as the least hint. And if we would imagine such a matter, for which there
is small reason; yet since it is, Judas and Silas, by whom this Epistle was
sent, and who were to tell the same things by mouth, and who also upon the
delivering of the Epistle exhorted the breathren of Antioch, with many words,
as is clear, verse. 22, 23, 27, 32. Judas and Sila^, I say, being but two men
could not be present, and speak, and act these things in many assemblies at
once, but must of necessity be both in one assembly, or at the most in two: but
the text makes no mention of their being in two, but plainly enough intimates
the contrary, that they were both together: and yet where they were present,
there was the multitude gathered together, to receive the Epistle by their
hands, and to hear the report and word of exhortation at their mouth. Unless
therefore we will imagine that Judas and Silas could be present, and act in
many assemblies at once, there is no reason to think this multitude among whom
they were present and acted, to be many Congregations or assemblies.

And therefore for his conclusion, page 475, 476. That the mentioning of one
multitude in the singular number, Acts 15. 30. can never prove that there was
but one single Congregation at Antioch. The answer is, that we do not lay the
force of our reason in the mentioning of the multitude in the singular number,
and therefore it can not thus be satisfied, or put off: for our words are
these: The whole multitude of them were gathered together at the return of Paul
and Barnabas from the Synod at Jerusalem, to hear the Epistle read, which was
sent from that Synod: Answer p. 50. wherein it is easy to perceive, that we
lay the force of our reason not in this, that the Church is called a multitude
in the singular number; but in this, that the whole multitude were gathered
together, for such an end, as there is expressed: and this we still conceive
may prove the point: For a Church, which is such a multitude, as is gathered
together, for the receiving of one Epistle, which was sent unto them all, and
which is gathered together to hear the Epistle read, and also to hear the
same things by mouth, the men from whose mouth they must so hear, and from
whose hands they must so receive, being no more but two; such a Church as this
can be no more, but one Congregation, or Assembly. Now Antioch was such a
Church: and therefore was no more but one Congregation. If this conclusion be
not granted, some way must be devised how many several assemblies might all be
receivers and hearers of one and the same Epistle at the same time, there being
but one copy of the Epistle, as also how they might at one time hear the same
things declared to them by mouth, when there was but two men to declare the
same. And when such a way is found out, we may then further consider thereof.
But in the mean time, the grounds and reasons alleged does induce me to think,
that Antioch, where those things were thus done, was indeed, but one
Congregation.

CHAP. XVII.
Whether no liberties are given by Christ to the People, but women must
exercise the same, as well as men: and of the peoples liberty about Ordination,
or the Calling of Ministers.
IN the answer, p. 8. we have these words, viz. Governing properly so called we
acknowledge not in any, but in the Elders alone, 1 Cor. 12. verse. 28. Romans 12.
8. Heb. 13. 17. If that word be ascribed to the people, it must be understood
in a more improper sense; for that which impropriety of speech were more fitly
called liberty or privilege: and yet this liberty when it is exercised about
Ordination, Deposition, Excommunication, etc. is of the whole body communiter,
or in general, but not of all and every member in particular, as you conceive
us to hold; for women and children are members, and yet are not to act in such
matters, the one being debarred by their sex, and the other for want of
understanding and discretion. This passage Mr. Rutherford having related
(though with some variation) in his page 476: in answer thereto, he says thus,
p. 477. If there be no governing power in women, nor any act at all in
Excommunication, you loose many arguments, that you bring 1 Cor. 5. to prove
that all have hand in Excommunication, 1. Because Paul writes to all. 2. All
were to mourn. 3. All were to forbear the company of the Excommunicated: then
belike Paul writes not to all Saints at Corinth, not to women, and women were
not to mourn for the scandal, nor to forbear his company.

Answ. If Mr. Tompson and I do being such arguments from 1 Cor. 5. why is not
the place quoted, where we do bring them? I suppose there is no such place at
all that can be produced; and therefore I desire so much favor, that what we
never said, may not be imputed to us, nor divulged abroad, as ours. If others
do bring such arguments from 1 Cor. 5. they that bring them are able to speak
for themselves, and to give account of their own arguments; but I know no
reason that does require, that we should be drawn to defend such arguments as
we never used; nor that does allow our Reverend Brother to report such
arguments as ours; which having never been used by us, I counted it therefore
an impertinent digression, to spend time in the defense of them.

The privilege, says he, being a part of liberty purchased by Christ's body,
it must be due to (...) for the liberty wherewith Christ has made women free,
cannot be taken away (...) of God from their sex, except in Christ Jesus there
be a difference between Jew and Gentile, male and female.

Answ. That which is in the people, we say, in propriety of speech, is more
^itly called liberty or privilege: but of liberty purchased by Christ's body or
blood, we make no mention at all: and therefore our Brother might have spared
speech thereof. But it is true indeed, that the people can have no liberty, but
women also may exercise the (...) else their liberty purchased for them by
Christ is taken away? It seems, he so conceives: but then I desire to know how
his own doctrine elsewhere, and the Apostl^s w^^ds can stand together: for in
one place, he says, that Acts 14. 23. Proves that Elders ordain Elder, with
lifting up of the hands of the people, and this, says he, is (...) doctrine,
Due Right p. 190. and in another place, he says, The people have Gods right to
choose Ministers, for so the word prescribes; for which in his margent he
alleges (...) several texts of Scripture, Acts 15. 22. 1 Cor. 16. 3. 2. Cor.
8. 19. Acts 6. 4. Acts 14. 23. and in his text alleges Tertullian, Cyprian,
Ambrose, Origin, Chrysostom, the Council of Nice, the first general Council
of Constantinople, with other Councels and Authors witnessing the same: page
201, 202. And in a third place, he grants that all matters in the Church must
be done with the peoples consent, consentiente plebe, alleging a matter of 18.
or 19. Authors for the same tenet. Peaceable Plea, p. 49. and in another place
he alleges and approves the judgment of Mr. Calderwood, and Mr. Cartwright
affirming that this liberty is purchased by the blood of Christ: Due Right,
Secondly, page 464. All which, do plainly show that in his judgment, the
people have some (...), or privilege, or right in Church matters; yea, as
himself says in this, they have divinum jus, Gods right: And yet for all this,
the Apostles words do plainly forbid women to speak in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.
34. 1 Timothy 2. 12. which very prohibition to women does also secretly imply,
that men may have liberty to practice, though women may not. Now then, if the
people have liberty, privilege, right to consent, and act in Church matters;
yea, to speak in the Church, and yet women may not speak therein, how can this
stand, which here M. Rutherford writes, That if the people have any liberty,
this liberty must also be due to women? If the Apostles words and our Brothers
own doctrine in the places cited do stand, his saying in the place, we have now
in hand, cannot stand, they being so contrary one to another. Thirdly, says
he, What privilege the people have in Ordination to confer a ministry,
which they neither have formally, nor virtually, I know not.

Answ. Neither formally, nor virtually? then hear your own words, page 7. I
deny not but there is a power virtuall, not formal in the Church of believers,
to supply the want of ordination of Pastors, hic and nunc; this power is
virtuall, not formal, etc. Whereas in the place we have in hand, the virtuall
power as well as the formal is denied; which things are not free from
Interferring, or strong appearance thereof.

Our words are not just the same which M. Rutherford sets down, a privilege
in ordination to confer a Ministry; but these are our words, a liberty
exercised about ordination, etc. And who knows not but there may be a liberty
exercised about ordination, or any other Ordinance by way of consent thereto,
or desire thereof, etc. without any authoritative acting therein? And if this
liberty about ordination be such a fault, then how shall he be justified, who
does give to the people a greater matter then this liberty does amount unto,
even a power to do that which shall stand for ordination it self? which to do
I conceive is more then to exercise some liberty about ordination. And when the
reader shall have considered these ensuing words of M Rutherford: then let him
be judge, whether M. Rutherford do not give this power unto the people in some
cases. As a rose, says he, caused to grow in winter by art, is of that same
nature with a rose produced in summer by nature, though the manner of
production be different; so are they both true Pastors, those who have no call,
but the peoples election, and those who have ordination by Pastors, p. 186. And
in the page following, he gives two reasons to prove that in some cases
election by the people only may stand for ordination: 1. Because God is not
necessarily tied to succession of Pastors: 2. Because where men are gifted for
the work of the Ministry, and there be no Pastors to be had, the giving of the
Holy Ghost is a sign of a calling of God, who is not wanting to his own
gracious intention, though ordinary means fail. Now if the people without
Pastors may do that which shall stand for ordination, and if their election do
make a Minister in some cases; this seems to be more then only to exercise
some liberty about ordination, for as much as they may do this latter, and
possibly no Minister be made thereby; whereas in the other case a man is made a
true Pastor and Minister, as well as by ordination it self. Marvel it is
therefore that the greater is allowed as lawful, and not the lesser: that some
liberty about ordination may not be allowed, and yet that can be allowed which
may stand for ordination it self, and which makes a Minister^ as truly as
ordination does.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Mr. Rutherfords report of Synodicall propositions in New England.
NExt after this, our reverend Author falls to scanning, as he says, page 476.
some Synodicall propositions of the Churches of New England, as he calls them,
together with a Table of Church power, which he calls the Table of New England.
But with favor of soworthy a man, he does greatly mistake the matter: for
neither was there any such Synod, nor Synodicall propositions as he speaks of,
nor any such Table of New England, as he mentions. There was indeed at
Cambridge in the year 1643. a printed conference of some of the Elders of that
Country; where sundry points of Church judgment were privately discoursed of,
and this was all. But as the meeting was not any Synod, as Synods are usually
understood, so neither were there any Synodicall propositions there agreed
upon, nor any table of propositions agreed upon to be given forth as the
Doctrine of New England. This I am able to testify, having been present at
that meeting from the beginning thereof unto the end: and sundry others of the
Elders of these Churches can testify the same, upon the same ground: And
knowing full well the truth of what I hear relate, I will not spend time in
replying to what he has written upon so manifest misinformation, and mistake.
What information he goes upon, I know not: per adventure some notes may have
come to his view, which one or other might gather at that conference for his
own private use: Peradventure some in their simplicity meaning no hurt, many
have called that private conference by the name and term of a Syno^, and M.
Rutherford might thereupon adventure to publish in print as here we see. But
however they mistake a Rose, sure I am, Synodicall propositions there were
none; (...) any Synod at all, not New England Table. And therefore I think
himself and others may do well and wisely hereafter, to be informed by good
and sufficient intelligence of such things as they publish to the world
concer^ing the Churches in New England, or else not to believe the same, much
less to divulge the same in print. For what comfort can it be to any Christian
to receive, and publish to the world against a man's neighb^u^, specially
against whole Churches of Christ, such reports as for the matter contained in
them do not agree with truth?

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Appeals of Luther and Cranmer: and of the power and jurisdiction in
general Counsels denied by Mr. Rutherford; whether therein he do not
contradict himself, and also overthrow the jurisdiction of Classical,
Provincial, and National Assemblies.
IN his page 482. alleging Mr. Tompson and me, page 16, 17. He reports us to
say, that though some have appealed, as Luther and Cranmer from the Pope to a
general Council, yet not from a Congregation to a general Council.

Answ. As he one of these pages has nothing at all concerning this matter, and
therefore might well have been spared, so neither of them both does make any
mention of Luther, either of one purpose or other: and therefore it is some
marvel, why he should be mentioned as thus spoken of by us, who do not speak
of him at all so much as one word, for any purpose whatsoever. Nor do the rest
of the words of appealing from a Congregation to a general Council agree with
ours, as we have set them down in the 16. page alleged; and therefore that
our mind and meaning may appear, let me relate our own words which are these,
How this example (sc. of Cramners appealing to Council, related by Mr. Fox)
does suit the present question, we do not understand; for his appeal was not
from a particular Congregation, but from the Pope: nor was it from a Synod, but
to the next general Council, which from that day to this has not yet been
assembled nor called. If we must hold a necessity of appeals to such a
Iudicatory as Cranmer appealed unto, then the supremacy of Synods provincial,
and national is utterly taken away. These are our words in the place alleged
by Mr. Rutherford: now what does he answer thereto?

In matters doctrinall, says he, some as Luther, and others have justly
appealed from Congregation to a general Council, though Luther and Cranmer
did it not.

Answ. Say it be true, that Cranmer did it not, yet for Luther how can it be
that he should be an instance, both of such as did it not, and of such as did
it? for Luther and others have justly done it, and yet Luther and Cranmer are
two of them that did it not, these are sayings which seem not to agree. Again,
if Luther did so appeal, why is no proof alleged for Confirmation of what
here is affirmed? which if there had been, we might have considered thereof.
But since there is not, we may be allowed to forbear assent, till that which is
here nakedly affirmed, be further strengthened by some proof or other, to make
it good. Lastly, if Luther or others have justly appealed from a Congregation
to a general Council, then why will it not be lawful for others upon like
occasion to do the like? And if so, then (as we argued in the answer) the
supremacy of Classical, Provincial, and National Presbyteries is utterly
taken away: and so, by this means causes and controversies may still be
depending, and never come to be determined so long as this world shall endure;
which whether it be agreeable to the wisdom of Christ, and good of his people
let the wise judge.

Though verily, I profess, I cannot see what power of Jurisdiction to censure
scandalls, can be in a general Council; there may be some merely doctrinall
power, if such a Council could be had, and that is all.

Answ. For my part, I am altogether of the same mind. But here I have a quere
or two to propose to our reverend Brothers serious consideration; first of all,
how this passage does agree with that which himself has written, page 387.
where he says, It may be made good that a power Dogmaticall is not different
in nature from a power of Jurisdiction, and that we read not of any society,
which has power to meet to make laws and decrees, which have not power also
to back their decrees with punishment. Yea, he says further that if the Jewish
Synodry might meet to declare judicially what was Gods law in point of
conscience, and what not, far more may they punish contraveners of the law:
For Anomothetick power in a society, which is the greater power, and is in the
fountain, must presuppose in the society (...) lesser power, which is to
punish. Anomothetick power ministerial cannot want a power of censuring. So
that whereto in the place we have in hand, he says, there may be in a general
Council, some (...) doctrinall power without any power of jurisdiction to
censure, in this other place, he says, these powers do not differ in nature,
nor can the former be without the latter; but does always presuppose the same,
as that which is lesser, and which it cannot want. Now how these things do
agree I am not able to understand: next of all how does this passage we have in
hand agree, with that which is written p. 308, 309. Where he says, it is by
accident, and not through want of inate and intrinsecall power, that the court
of a Catholic Council can not in an ordinary and constant way exercise the
power which Christ has given to her; and what that power is he expresses in
two or three lines proceeding, viz. A power of jurisdiction to Excommunicate
and relax from Excommunication even national Churches. If the Lord should be
pleased to give the Christian Churches a general Council this day, might
lawfully in a jurisdictiall way declare the faction of the Romish pretended
Catholics to be mystical Babylon -- which in Excommunication in the essence
and substance of the act. And again, This of our Savior, Tell the Church, is
necessarily to be applied to all Churches and Courts of Christ, even to a
general Council. And in page 304. He tells in that a power of jurisdiction
(though he call it extraordinary and remote, and which is but rarely to be put
forth in acts) is given to the Catholic visible Presbytery, of the whole
Catholic visible Church. In all which places he plainly affirms there is a
power of jurisdiction to censure scandalls in a general Council, which in the
place we have in hand he does as plainly deny.

Thirdly, if there be no power of jurisdiction to censure scandals in a
general Council, then how shall it appear that there is such power of
Jurisdiction in the Classical, Provincial and National Presbyteries, which
are far less? Yea, and that there is in these Presbyteries a power
Independent and Supreme, without appeal to any other. For such power there
must be in some of them, if there be any power of jurisdiction in them at all,
since we are told there is no power of jurisdiction in the general Council to
appeal unto. Now how shall it appear that any such Independent supreme power
of jurisdiction is given to any of those Presbyteries? where are the texts of
Scripture that speak of such power? For our parts we know of none, but do still
think that this power is placed by Christ in a single Congregation and its
Presbytery, and are the rather strengthened in this apprehension, for that the
reason which is wont to be given against the Congregations power, and wherein
our Brethren are wont to place their greatest strength, sc. that appeals are
juris naturalis, and that defects, in the parts are to be supplied and holden
by the whole, this reason we see is now removed and utterly taken away,
forasmuch as all power of jurisdiction is denied to the general Council which
is the inevitable. Now if there be no power of jurisdiction within the general
Council, then there can be no appeals to such a Council for such an end: and
if no appeals to that Council, then the rule does not always hold, that
there must be appeals from the lesser assemblies to the greater: and if this do
not always hold, then there may be independent power of jurisdiction in a
Congregation without appeals from the same, though it be a lesser assembly then
the Classical, Provincial and National Presbyteries, and thus our purpose is
gained. For how can it be avoided, except this power of jurisdiction (yea
supreme or independent power) which is denied to the general Council, could
be proved to be in the Classes, Synods, or national Presbyteries, which we
think cannot be done. Indeed to say on the one side, that (...) is no
independent power in the Congregation, and to say on the other side, that there
is no power at all of jurisdiction in general Counsels, this does inevitably
lay a necessity of such Independent power in these intermediat assemblies of
the Classical, Provincial and national Presbyteries; except we shall say
there is no such power at all appointed by Christ in any Church assemblies on
earth. Now if such independent power be given to the Presbyteries mentioned,
(as it needs must if it be neither in the general Council, nor in the single
Congregations) then I desire to know upon what scripture or scritures, such
power in the said Presbyteries is grounded and built; and whether the said
power belong unto them all, or only unto some of them, and which they be, and
why not to the rest as well: yea, why not to the single Congregation, nor yet
to the general Council, as well as to any of them. When this quaere is
answered, and the answer sufficiently proved by scripture, then we shall see
more reason for the jurisdiction of such assemblies over the particular
Congregations then yet we have seen. In the mean, time this quaere with the
rest I leave to our Brethrens consideration.

CHAP. XX.
If it were granted that the light of nature teaches all societies to end in
Monarchies, whether it would not thence follow, that the government of Churches
must so end, as well as that Congregations must depend on the government of
Synods, because the light of nature teaches a Communion in government to other
societies. And whether the multitude of Grecians and Hebrews, who chose the
seven Deacons, Act. 6. were two Congregations or one only.
PAGE 482. If Churches must be dependent on Synods, because the light of nature
teaches a communion and assistance in government, by the same reason Churches
must end in a Monarchy on earth; for which he alleges the answ. page 20. and
then subjoyneth his answer, thus: I see this said without any approbation:
Churches depend on many above them for unity; but what consquence in this, Erg^
they depend upon one visible Monarch? It is an unjust consequence.

Answ. With favor of so worthy a man, he greatly wrongs our words (and thereby
wrongs the reader) by leaving out those words wherein the plainness and
strength of our argumentation lies. Therefore I am forced here to relate the
order and progress of the dispute in that script of ours, and to set down our
words there used, because as Mr. Rutherford has set them down, the strength of
consequence is suppressed from the Readers knowledge, and so indeed his answer
is made easy: but the naked truth lies thus. Our reverend Brother to whose
Treatise we return answer in that small piece of ours, having said, that
communion and assistance in government is taught by the very light of nature to
all societies whatsoever, whether Commonwealths, or Armies, Universities, or
Navies; he presently adds by way of prevention. Not that therefore this
government of Churches should (as those) end in a Monarchy upon earth. In
answer whereto, besides other things, we have these words, page 21. If Churches
must be dependent on the government of Synods, because the light of nature
teaches a communion and assistance in government to all societies whatsoever,
then we see not how it will be avoided, but by the same reason, Churches must
end in a Monarchy on earth, if it were once cleared, that the light of nature
does teach all societies whatever so to end; so there is as good reason for
this as for the other. Which last words, if it were once proved etc. Mr.
Rutherford wholly leaves out and suppresseth, and so makes his own answer more
easy. But I desire so much favor, which I think is but reasonable, that he
that will undertake to answer our writing, would represent our words and
arguing as it is, and no otherwise, and then I am content that the same may
come under trial. Now our arguing is this; If Churches must be dependent upon
the government of Synods upon this reason; because the light of nature teaches
a communion and assistance in government to all societies whatsoever; then by
the like reason let it be once proved (which is by Mr. Herle affirmed) that the
light of nature teaches all societies to end in a Monarchy, and it will
thereupon follow that Churches must likewise end in the same manner. If we
yield thus much that what the light of nature teaches other societies, the
same must be observed in the government of Churches: I think it will then
follow, that if the light of nature teach other societies to end in a Monarchy
on earth, the government of Churches must do so also. This is our manner of
arguing, in which the consequence is the same with that which our Brethren
think so strong, viz. that because the light of nature teaches a communion and
assistance in government, therefore there must be in the Churches a government
of Synods.

If any say the consequence is not alike necessary in both cases, because the
ground does not hold alike in both, for the light of nature does not teach all
societies on earth to end in a Monarchy, as it does teach a communion and
assistance in government The answer in that we have plainly said the same, in
the place of the Answerer alleges, viz. p. 20, 21. But the main question lies
not there, whether other societies do end in Monarchies, (for though the
reverend author whom we there do answer, do seem so to judge; yet we have
there plainly declared, that we conceive of that matter otherwise:) but here
does lie the main question, viz. Suppose it were granted, that light of nature
does teach all societies to end in a Monarchy on earth, whether would it not
then follow that Churches must also so end: And that this is the thing in
question will plainly appear to any that shall peruse the place. And to this
question, our answer is that the consequence for the affirmative is as good as
in that other case, in which our Brethren do think it so strong: viz. for the
government of Synods over congregations, from the communion and assistance --
government taught by the light of nature to other societies: and our reverend
brother granting that the light of nature does teach the one as well as the
other unto other societies, that is, that they should end in Monarchies, as
well as have communion in government, our answer is that thereupon the
consequence will be as strong for the one as for the other in Churches. In
which arguing it is easy to perceive that we go upon the ground which was laid
and given us by our author: and therefore for M. Rutherford to suppress this
ground which we have there so plainly expressed, and to represent and set down
our arguing as if there had been no such matter; this indeed may make way for
himself to give answer to us with ease, but whether it be candid and fair thus
to deal, I leave it to himself, and the godly wise to consider.

In the same page 482. he alleges the answer page 26. and sets down these
words as ours, viz. The Graecians and Hebrews made not two Churches, but one
Congregation; they called the multitude of the Disciples together, verse. 2.

Answ. Here again our words are set down unperfectly: for the question being,
whether those Graecians and Hebrews, Act. 6. were two several Congregation in
one Church, or both but one Congregation, we for this latter do not only
allege that one particular which Mr. Rutherford mentions, that the Apostles
called the multitude of the disciples together, verse. 2. but moreover that this
multitude must look out seven men duly qualified, whom they might appoint over
that business, v. 3. and that the saying pleased this whole multitude, and
that they thereupon chose seven who are there named v. 5. and set them before
the Apostles, v. 6. who laid their hands on them: ibid. In all which, say we,
there is no hint of two Congregations, one of Graecians and another of Hebrews,
but all the business of choosing and ordeyning these Deacons, seems to be
transacted and done in one Congregation. For when the text says that the
Apostles called the multitude of the disciples unto them, and made a speech to
this multitude being assembled, and the whole multitude did hear what the
Apostles spoke, and well liked the same, and thereupon jointly concurred in one
act of choosing seven, and presenting them being chosen before the Apostles, it
seems to me more rational to look at these things as done in one Congregation,
then to imagine there were two, one of Graecians another of Hebrews: for of two
Congregations wherein this choice of Deacons should be made, the text for ought
I perceive does not afford the least hint.

But let us hear Mr. Rutherford his answer. That the chief, says he, of both
Graecians and Hebrews were contained in one, to give their consent to the
admission of the Deacons, I conceive.

Answ. The chief are not so much as once mentioned in the story: but contrarily
the text expressly mentions the multitude, verse. 2. and the whole multitude,
verse. 5. Now to exclude the multitude, whom the text does expressly mention, and
to attribute the assembling and acting only to the chief, of whom the holy
Ghost speaks not one word, this (to say no more) seems a violent forcing of the
text.

And if something had not forced him to it, I think he would not have used it;
for elsewhere (viz. p. 495, 496.) he alleges this very scripture, and that
three several times, within the space of a doozen or sixteen lines, to prove
that the people, yea the multitude are to have the choice of Officers; and
says he, If it please not the whole multitude, Act. 6. verse. 5. it is not a
choice. And in page 190. He tells us, that the multitude Act. 6. are directed
to choose out seven men, as being best acquainted with them; and that
accordingly they did look out seven men and chose them. In which places we see
he can attribute this choice to the whole multitude, without any mention of the
chief, or so much as the least intimation of the action to be performed by
them, the multitude being excluded or absent; yea, he gives a reason of this
choice, which will reach the multitude, and not the chief only, except we shall
say, that the chief only were acquainted with these seven: whereas in the place
we have in hand, he would exclude the multitude, and ascribe the action to the
chief only.

But that all the thousands of the Church of Jerusalem were here as in one
ordinary Congregation, I judge unpossible.

Answ. For as much as the text tells us that the whole multitude of the
disciples were gathered together to act as here is recorded about the election
of Deacons, therefore we judge that it was not unpossible for them so to do;
for how should we judge the thing unpossible, except we would judge the words
of God to be unpossible to be true? Besides, how many soever they were the text
tells us Act. 2. 46. that they continued daily with one accord in the Temple:
Now Temples we know there were none but one; and therefore that they should all
assemble in one Congregation, we dare not judge a matter unpossible, least in
so judging we should seem to question the truth of Gods Testimony.

CHAP. XXI.
Whether Congregations may be excommunicated by Classes and Synods, by virtue
of those words, Matt. 18. tell the Church, as containing a rule and remedy for
all offenses, or at the least a Church remedy, for the officers of Churches,
and Churchmembers? And if yea, whether it would not follow, that a national
Church must have the benefit of this remedy as well as others, and so have no
independency of jurisdiction within it self, but be subject to the jurisdiction
of general Councels, which yet Mr. Rutherford does deny?
IN the same p. 482. He excepteth against another passage in the answer p. 27,
28. where he sets down these as our words, viz. If our argument be good, If thy
Brother offend and refuse to submit, tell the Church, because Christ's remedy
must be as large as the disease; then if a national Church offend, you are to
complain to an higher Church above a national Church; and because offenses may
arise between Christians and Indians, you may complain of an Indian to the
Church: and then he subjoyneth his answer.

Answ. Yet again our words are so imperfectly related, as that our scope and
intent does not sufficiently appear to his reader. I must therefore for the
readers understanding, relate the passage according to the true and plain
meaning thereof. The question between reverend Mr. Herle and us being this,
whether Congregations must depend on the government of Synods, and this reason
being brought for the affirmative, that Christ's remedy, Matthew. 18. Tell the
Church, must be as large as the malady, offense; if therefore there arise
offenses between Congregations, there must be a Church of Synods above
Congregations, and those Synods must judge and redress those offenses: to this
we there answer that all offenses do not fall within the compass of this rule
and remedy, tell the Church; and so no dependency of Congregation upon the
jurisdiction of Synods can be sufficiently proved by this text. First of all,
we instance in the offenses of national Churches, of which we suppose our
Brother will not say that they fall within the compass of our Saviors rule,
Tell the Church, for then the independency of national Churches and national
Synods is overthrown, as well as the Congregations; which we suppose he will
not grant; and yet it cannot be avoided if his reason for the dependency of
Congregations upon Synods do stand firm. And next of all we instance in the
offenses of Turks and Indians and other heathens, who may offend Christians and
yet are not to be complained of to the Church, the Apostle expressly teaching
the contrary, 1 Col. 5. This being the scope of that passage in the answer,
which here Mr. Rutherford, excepteth against, let us now hear what it is, which
he says thereto.

Because, says he, ordinary communion fails when you go higher then a
national Church, and Christ's way supposes art ordinary communion, as is
clear, If thy brother offend, etc therefore I deny that this remedy is
needful in any Church above a national Church.

Answ. 1. If this remedy be not needful in any Church above a national, then
the rule does not universally hold true, that the remedy, complaint to the
Church, must be as large as the malady, offense: and so our purpose is gained;
For our purpose in that place is to prove this very thing, by this same
instance of the offense of a national Church; wherein Mr. Rutherford we see
does come over to us, and affirms the same that we do. To what end therefore
was it to make show of removing or weakening what he had said, since when it
comes to the issue, he plainly concurs with us? For by this means our tenent is
not confuted, but confirmed with his attest thereto.

2. Though here he says, this remedy is not needful in any Church above a
national, yet I am mistaken, if elsewhere he speak not otherwise. For in page
311. prepounding this objection, viz. Christ here spe^keth of a present and
constant removal of scandalls -- A Catholic council of the whole visible
Church is far of, and cannot be had, he returns this for answer thereto:
That Christ, says he, speaks of a present and constant remedy only, and of
no remedy against the scandal of whole Churches, is denied. He speaks of all
remedies to gain any offenders, persons or Churches. And in page 322. he says,
Christ gives an instance only in an offending brother; but the doctrine is for
the curing of an offending Church also, and for all persons to be gained, Thou
have gained thy Brother: and says he, we are to gain Churches, as we are not
to offend Churches: 1 Cor. 10. 32. Again in his second page 332. speaking of
five s^rts of Synods, of which he calls the fifth the general and Oecuminick
Council, he says, that all these differ not in essence but in degrees, and
what word of God, as Matthew 18. 16, 17. proves the lawfulnes of one, is for the
lawfulness of all the five sorts of Synods. Lastly, nothing can be more plain
then those words page 39. This of our Savior, Tell the Church, is necessarily
to be applied to all Churches and Courts of Christ, even to a Catholic
Council: (The same is also to be seen in the Peaceable Plea p. 86.) In all
which sayings, he plainly understands the text we have in hand, to speak of a
remedy, for all that are to be gained, yea a remedy for the offenses of all
persons and Churches that may give offense; which Churches he says may do, and
expressly affirms that it is to be applied to general Councels, and that
necessarily: and how these things do agree, with the place in hind, where he
says, he denies the remedy is needful in any Church above a national, let
the wise and himself judge. For, for my part, except there be some difference
between necessary and needful, the sayings to me do seem inconsistent, one
affirming the place is necessarily to be applied to all Churches and Courts of
Christ, even to general Counsels; and the other denying that the remedy there
mentioned is needful in any Church above a national

2. Christ's remedy, says he, is a Church remedy for offenses among the
brethren, and members of the visible Church. And Indians are nomembers of the
visible Church, and so being without they cannot be judged, 1 Cor. 5. 12.

Answ. That Indians cannot be judged by the Church is very true, but nothing
against us: for the very same that here is said by Mr. Rutherford, was said by
us before, in the place which himself does allege, where we also brought the
very same text of Scripture which himself does bring. Now why should these
things be brought as a confutation of us, which are nothing but a reception of
that which we had delivered before as our own judgment? May not his reader be
induced hereby to think that we had spoken otherwise? But to let this pass. If
Indians cannot be judged by the Church, then still our purpose is gained; for
by this it appears that an offense may be committed, where Christ's remedy,
Tell the Church, may not be applied for the redress thereof; and so that
universal proposition, Christ's remedy is as large as the malady, and where an
offense may be committed, there to tell the Church, is the remedy for the
redress of the same, which our brethren do lay as the foundation on which to
build the jurisdiction of Classes and Synods, the universality, I say, of this
proposition is utterly overthrown by this instance of Indians; and so that
scripture, Matthew. 18. appears to be too weak a bottom, to bear the building
which our brethren would erect upon it.

Nor is the matter much amended by that which our brother here brings for the
helping and clearing of it, That Christ's remedy is a Church remedy for offenses
among brethren members of the visible Church. For let this be granted, as I
know none that denies it, yet still the question remains, what is that Church
to which our Savior here gives power to remove and redress scandals by
excommunicating the offenders? we conceive this Church is only the particular
Congregation, and its Presbytery; and our brethren think it is also the Classes
and Synods: but this apprehension of theirs is not confirmed by saying our
Saviors remedy is a Church remedy for offenses amongst members of the Church,
inasmuch as the members of a national Church, as such are members of the
visible Church in our brethrens judgment, and yet our brother holds here is
nor remedy prescribed for a delinquent national Church.

And if he can so understand this Church remedy, as that for all this, the
national Church must not partake thereof, so as to be censured and
excommunicated by any Church above it, why may not others understand it so, as
that Synods and Classes, yea and Congregations too be exempted from the
jurisdiction of Churches? For my part, I know no reason, but if the
Congregation be liable to the censure of Classes and Synods by this Scripture;
because our Saviors remedy is a Church remedy, by the same reason the Classes
and Synods must be liable to censure also; yea, and the national Church
likewise, because this reason is applyable to all these as well as to the
Congregation. So that this notion of a Church remedy does not help his cause at
all, nor hurt ours, any more then it hurts himself. If this reasoning be good,
it is a Church remedy, therefore the Congregationall Church must be liable to
censure for their offenses, then this reasoning is as good, it is a Church
remedy, therefore the Classes, Synods, yea and the national Church must be
liable to censure for their offenses: but this latter at least, for the
national Church, our brother speaks against, and therefore he may not press
nor urge the former.

If he or other shall say, that this Scripture contains a remedy even for a
national Church, then it will follow that the jurisdiction of a national
Church is not independent, but depends upon the Oecumenicall: but this our
brother cannot say, unless he will gainsay himself, because he has already
said the contrary, and seriously protested it w^^h a verily, that verily be
cannot see what power of jurisdiction to censure scandalls can be in a general
Council: only a mere doctrinall power in all the power that he can see in
such a Council, page 482. So that let him hold to what he has thus seriously
protested, and this rule of Christ affords no remedy by way of censure for the
scandalls of a national Church. Besides, if the jurisdiction of a general
Council be established by our Savior in this or other Scriptures, then it
will not only follow that the independent jurisdiction of national Churches;
yea, and much more of Classes and Synods is overth^^wn, which I suppose our
brethren will not grant, but moreover it will follow that Christ has not
sufficiently provided Church remedies for redressing scandal^s of Church
members: the reason of the consequence is, because all other jurisdictions
being subordinate one to another, and all of them under the jurisdiction of the
general Council, which alone is supreme, there may therefore in all of them
be appeals from the inferior to the higher judicatories, till at the last
^atters and causes be transmitted from them all to the general Council; and
so by this means matters shall or may never be ended, nor scandalls remedied,
till a general Council shall effect the same; which general Councels all
know are rare, and difficult to be attain^ (...) and therefore there were small
sufficiency in our Saviors remedy, if matters may or must depend till general
Councels shall be assembled for the hearing and determining thereof, and may
not be ended sconer.

Therefore we cannot see that this rule, nor any other, establishes the
jurisdiction of general Councils; and then national Churches can have no
benefit of our Saviors remedy of, Telling the Church; no more then the
Churches, which are congregationall; and so whether is the saying universally
true, that where there may be offense committed, there our Saviors remedy of
Telling the Church, may be applied for the redress thereof, nor does this
saying hold, being narrowed according to Mr. Rutherfords mind, who would have
it understood only of a Church remedy, for the offenses of Church members. For
we see there may be offenses in Churches, according to our brethrens judgment,
which cannot be redressed by the help and remedy of this rule.

CHAP. XXII.
When the supreme magistrate is a professed curing to Religion, whether then it
be likely and usual that the greater part of the people are sincerely
religious: and whether when the greater part are enemies with their
magistrates, it be then the duty of a few that are sincere, to assemble in a
national Synod, and there to enter into a national Covenant, and also to
enjoin the same unto that greater part.
PAGE 483. We say, that if the magistrate be an enemy to Religion, may not the
Church without him conveen and renew a Covenant with God? Mr. Mather and Mr.
Tompsons answer p. 29. that if the supreme magistrate be an enemy to Religion,
it is not like, but most or many of the people will be of the same mind: Regis
ad exemplum totus -- and then the (...) in the land with not be able to bear
the name of the land or nation, but of a small part thereof, not can it be well
contained how they should assemble in a national Synod, for that or any other
purpose, when the magistrate is a professed enemy, nor does God require it at
their hands.

Answ. The question between Mr. Hefle and us, as it is spoken to, by us, in
this passage, is still about the meaning of our Saviors words, Tell the
Church: which will plainly appear to him that shall look upon Mr. Herles
Treatise and our Answer, and compare them together. And though we speak
something of the Churches renewing a a Covenant with God, when the magistrate is
an enemy to Religion, yet the question lies not merely so and no further; but
first, this Church is called the Land or the whole Church therein, or the whole
number of Believers. Secondly, The thing inquired into concerning this Church,
is whether they have not power to enjoin a solemn renewall of the Covenant. In
answer whereto we first of all say, that in case the magistrate be an enemy to
Religion, the believers in the land are not like to be so many, as that they
should bear the name of the land or nation, but of a small part therein.
Second, that in such case, it is not like they can have such liberty as safely
to meet in such great assemblies as national Synods: and hereupon we conclude
that renewing of Covenant and enjoining the same in national Synods, being not
in the power of some few believers in a land, is not then required at their
hands. This being said for clearing the scope and sum of that passage in the
answer, let us now hear what Mr. Rutherford says thereto.

This says he, is a weak answer.

Answ. Sat magistrabiter: would it not do well first to disprove and confute,
and then to censure, rather then to censure first? But if it be so weak, it
will be more easy to overthrow it: let us hear therefore why it is so weak.

The Christians under Nero were not like their Prince: and its not like, but
sincere Christians will be sincere Christians and profess truth, even when the
magistrate is an enemy.

Answ. And what of this? does this strongly overthrow that saying, which was
censured for so weak? If sincere Christians be sincere Christians, when the
magistrate is an enemy, suppose as bad as Nero, does it follow thereupon, that
in such times the sincere Christians will be so many in number as to bear the
names of the land or nation, where they are, (for there lies the question) and
that it is not like to be otherwise? I suppose no man can justly affirm it. For
were they so many in England in the days of Queen Mary? were they so many in
Scotland in the days of popish Princes, before the reformation? Are they so
many in Spain, in Italy, in Turkey at this day? does not the Scripture say,
that when Rehoboam, forsook the Lord, all Israel did the same with him? 2 Chronicles. 12. 1. And that Jeroboam did not only sin, but made Israel to sin?
and that when a ruler hearkneth to lies, all his servants are wicked, Prove. 29.
verse. 12. which sayings and many more that might be alleged, besides common
experience do abundantly witness, that when the supreme magistrate is an enemy
to religion, often times (if not always*) sincere believers in those days are
the smaller part of that land. If M. Rutherford can prove this apprehension
weak, he must then prove the contradictory to be true, viz. that when the
supreme magistrate is an enemy to religion, it is not like that many of the
people will be of the magistrates mind, but contrarily the greatest part of the
land will be sincere believers, though the magistrate be an enemy. And when he
has confirmed this position which strong and convincing proofs; he may then
more freely take his liberty to condemn the other for weak: In the mean time,
I think it were weakness in us to depart from this apprehension without some
better grounds then yet are given to discover the weakness of it.

2. Says he, If your meaning be, it cannot be conceived how they should
assemble in a national assembly, when the magistrate is an enemy, because it
is not safe for fear of persecution, then you say nothing to the argument,
because the argument is drawn from a duty.

Answ. Are those things duties, which are in nature impossible? If not, how is
it a duty of a few believers in a land (for when the magistrate is a professed
enemy, I do still conceive the believers in that land to be but few, a small
part of the land) how is it a duty, I say, for these few believers, in a land
to assemble in a national Synod, and there to enjoin a national Covenant, to
be entered into, not only by themselves, which are but a few in comparison,
but also by the rest of the land which are far the greater number? If this be
a duty, it is more then I yet understand? Suppose it be their duty to enter
into covenant with God for their own part; Suppose also it were the duty of
others to do the like, yet when the greater part will not so do, but are
enemies to the truth of God like their magistrates, is it nevertheless a duty
of this smaller number to assemble in a national Synod, and there to enjoyne a
solemn Covenant to be taken by the land? I mean not only by themselves; but
also by others, who are far more in number then they? do they fall short of
their duty, if they do not thus assemble, and impose the Covenant? In the days
of Jeroboam, when the generality of the land walked after his wicked
commandment, Hos. 5. 11. who made Israel to sin, yet then there were some in
Israel who retained their integrity, and set their hearts to seek the Lord, who
also for that end came to Jerusalem, to sacrifice to the Lord God of their
Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 11. v. 16. But I do not remember that these few that were
sincere in worship, did ever come together in a national assembly in Israel,
to renew the Covenant with God, and to enjoin the same to that great multitude
of the backslyding Israelites, nor that such a duty was required of them, nor
that they are blamed by (...) Lord, nor any of his Prophets for the neglect
thereof. And the case we have in stand is the same.

If you mean that because the Princes power is against the Synodicall meeting,
this is nothing against the power of the Synods that Christ has given to his
Church.

Answ. We mean as we have said, that those few believers in a land, being
overpowered with the Prince and People that are enemies, therefore this
assembling of those few in a national Synod, and there enjoining a national
Covenant is now not in their power, and so not required at their hands.

If your meaning be that, it is not lawful to them to conveen in a national
Synod to renew a Covenant with God, against the supreme magistrates will; I
hope you mind no such thing.

Answ. If it be our meaning, how can it be hoped that we do not mind it? Can
our ^^^^ing be one thing, and our mind another? But for his satisfaction and
resolution, (...) plain answer is this, that we neither had mind nor meaning to
meddle at all with that question; whether Churches may assemble in national
Synods against the supreme magistrates will. For we did not think that Mr.
Herles treatise did lead us thereunto: (...) such a matter. Nor am I willing at
this time to turn aside to the same, but to keep close to my scope and aim,
which is to consider of Mr. Rutherford his exceptions against the answer. And
therefore for his discourse, which here he falls upon, maintaining at large
against malignants, and namely against Tho: Fuller, that the reformation begun
in Scotland and prosecuted in England, against the Kings will is lawful^ and
warrantable by the word^ this discourse, I say, being altogether concerning
others, and not us; I will therefore pass it over, and come to that wherein
our selves are concerned.

CHAP. XXIII.
Whether the word Church be not given to a single Congregation, and whether a
Congregation be a Company or Church, meeting only for Word and Sacraments, and
not for any other spiritual duties: and whether the diverse duties, 1. of Word
and Sacraments. 2. Of Discipline, etc. must needs argue diverse Churches.
PAGE 489. The name Church, 1 Cor. 14. 4, 5, 35. 27, 28. is plainly given to
that company that did assemble and come together for performance of spiritual
duties, and for the exercise of spiritual gifts, as Act. 14. 27. and 11. 26.
and 15. 4. 22. 30. and 1 Cor. 11. 18, 20, 22, 23, 3 John 6. which places do
abundantly show, that a company gathered together in one place, is called by
the name of a Church, as Centhera, Romans 16. 1. which could not contain many
Congregations, being but the part of Corinth. And for this passage he alleges
the answer. page 32.

Answ. Mr. Herle having said, that the Scripture never uses the word Church
for a single Congregation, unless happily, 1 Cor. 14. and that many
Congregations in one Province or City are frequently called by the name of a
Church, we in answer to the former of these do give many instances, p. 31, 32.
where a single C^^^regation Is called by the name of a Church, not only in 1
Cor. 14. which Mr. Herle acknowledges (though with a perhaps) but also in
sundry other scriptures, which here Mr. Rutherford quoteth. Now let us hear
his answer to this passage.

We seek no more, says he.

Answ. Are we then agreed, that in scripture language the word Church is sundry
times given to a single Congregation? If so, then for this point the answer is
not confuted but confirmed.

If it be called a Church which conveeneth for performance of spiritual
duties, as some of your places do well prove, ergo, no assembly should have
the name of Church, but such as assemble for Word and Sacraments, this now you
cann^t affirm and it follows not.

Answ. If this follow not, what needs it? we never affirmed it, and our purpose
that the word Church is given in scripture to a single Congregation, is
sufficiently gained without it.

The Church spoken of Matthew. 18. is not assembled to Word and Sacraments, but
to bind and loose: the meeting 1 Cor. 5. is not for Word and Sacraments, but
to deliver to Satan; the word Church Act. 14. 27. is not an assembly for Word
and Sacraments, but to hear how God has opened the door of Faith unto the
Gentiles. -- If to be received of the Church, Act. 15. 4. be matter of Word and
Sacraments, let all judge: If to send a decree of a Synod, Act. 15. 22. be the
act of a Church assembled for Word and Sacraments, let the world judge.

Answ. Reverend Sir, keep to the point, we never said that discipline, and all
other acts, whether performed by a Church, are Word and Sacraments: and
therefore there was no need to prove they are not, and then to triumph as in a
great victory: The thing in question is this, whether the name or word Church,
be given in scripture to a single Congregation: and if this be proved (as the
instances given, I hope, do prove it sufficienly) then it matters not what that
particular spiritual Church action is, for which they do meet: For whether it
be that they meet for Word and Sacraments alone; or whether it be for the Word
and Prayer alone, and not at that time for Sacraments at all, or whether it be
for discipline, or for any other Church duty, yet still if they come together
into one place, be it for all or for any of these ends, they are then a
Congregation, (for what is a Congregation but a company so assembled in one
place) and so our tenet stands good, and our purpose is gained: For if they
that come together into one place for Church actions and ends, be called in
scripture by the name of a Church, then the word Church is given to a company
that so came together; and such a company being a Congregation, it follows that
the word Church is used for a Congregation. What this Congregation does when
they are come together, is not the question: but if a Congregation coming
together for Church duties be in Scripture called a Church, we have our intent.

If the word Church, be a meeting of persons assembled to one place for
Spiritual duties, sometimes for Word and Sacraments only, sometimes for acts
of jurisdiction only, then is the word Church by our brethrens argument taken
both for the Congregation, and for the Elders of one, or of diverse Churches,
and so we have our intent.

Answ. Let the antecedent be granted, yet the consequence is denied: For the
word Church may be a meeting assembled, sometimes for Word and Sacraments
only, and sometimes for acts of jurisdiction only, and I add, sometimes for
the Word and Prayer only, without exercise of jurisdiction or Sacrament, and
sometimes for some other act or acts, then any of these that are named, and yet
for all this, it may not be taken for the Elders alone of one Church, and much
less for the Elders of diverse Churches; the reason is, because all these acts
may be performed by the Congregation assembling sometimes for one of them, and
sometimes for another. And therefore your intent is not yet attained; who would
have the word Church to be taken sometimes for the Congregation, and sometimes
for the Presbyters or Elders alone?

We desire our brethren to prove (which they must if they oppose our
principles) that the word Church is never taken for the Eldership alore, in all
the word of God.

Answ. Must we prove a negative: and is that saying, Affirmanti incumbit ^^us
probandi, now become unreasonable, unnecessary, or of no force? For my part I
am still of the mind, that he that affirms, must in equity and reason prove
what he affirms. Besides for our selves we have this to say further, that If we
prove what we undertook, we have done as much as can in reason be required of
us, though we do not prove this that Mr. Rutherford would impose upon us: And
what was that which we undertook to prove? nothing in this place, but only
this, that the word Church is taken for a Congregation, in other Scriptures
besides, 1 Cor. 14. and this we have performed and proved already. Mr.
Rutherford himself allowing some of our proofs for good: And therefore having
performed this point, it is more then needs to be required of us, to prove
another also, which we never undertook to prove, as being quite besides our
question, which we were and still are desirous to keep close unto, and not to
wonder or be diverted from it by any means.

Whereas our brethren say, a company gathered into one place (which is nothing
else but a Congregation) are called by the name of a Church, I answer such a
company is only (I suppose this is misprinted, for is not only) called by the
name of a Church, for a company meeting for discipline only, is a Church also.

Answ. If a company gathered into one place, which is a Congregation, be called
by the name of a Church, this is as much as we desire: for our tenent is herein
expressly granted to be true: If a company meeting for discipline only be a
Church also, yet as long as the former is not denied, the adding of this other
does no hurt to us at all.

It is false that a company gathered into one place, are nothing else but a
Congregation.

Answ. Bona verba quaso: we had thought that as a company assembled, is an
assembly, a company met, is a meeting, a company convocated, a convocation; so
a company gathered together or congregated, had been a Congregation: But this
is peremptorily now condemned as false: yet let us hear why.

As you take the word Congregation: for so your Congregation is an assembly of
men and women meeting for Word and Sacraments, with the Elders of the Church.

Answ. And what if they meet for prayer also, what if for the Word and Prayer
without Sacraments, for this or that time? what if they meet for the admission
of members also, or for censuring delinquents? Can Mr. Rutherford prove that
either of us, I mean either Mr. Tompson or my self, or indeed any man else of
that judgment, which he opposes, have denied an assembly meeting for such
ends, as these to be a Congregation? I suppose he cannot: And therefore it was
not well done to impute unto us such a sense of the word Congregation, as we
never spoke nor thought of, and then to say, It is false that a company
gathered into one place is a Congregation, as that word is taken by us.

I appeal to the judgment of our reverend brethren, if the Church, Matthew. 18.
assembled to to bind and loose, if the Church assembled, 1 Corin. 5. to deliver
to Satan, (and sundry others are there named to the like purpose) be a
Congregationall Church assembled for Word and Sacraments.

Answ. If the Word and Sacraments be not mentioned in the places alleged, but
other actions and duties, must it needs follow that the Churches spoken of in
these places did assemble for Word and Sacraments? may not one and the same
Church assemble for diverse ends and actions? yea, possibly for diverse upon
one day? At the least wise it cannot be denied, but at several times of
assembling a Church may attend to diverse duties and actions, and yet still be
one and the same Congregation or Church, at one time which they were at
another. Or otherwise we must say (which were a very unwise saying) that a
Church meeting for diverse actions to be performed upon one day, as the Word,
Prayer, Psalms, Sacraments, etc. is not the same Church is one of these
actions, that it was in another, but is one Church when they are at Prayer,
another when they are singing Psalms, another when they are in exercise of the
Word or Sacraments, etc. Or if they meet one day, for Word and Sacraments, and
another day for Word and Prayer without Sacraments, that n^w they are diverse
Churches, and not the same upon one of these days, that they were upon
another, the nature and kind of their Church being altered according to the
several duties wherein they are exercised. This arguing I suppose Mr.
Rutherford, would not own for good, and yet for ought I see, it is no worse,
but the very same with that which himself does here use, who because the Church
mentioned Matthew. 18. 1 Corinthians. 5. and other places by him named, is said to
meet for discipline or other duties, would thereupon have it thought, that the
Church mentioned in those places was not a Church that did ever meet for Word
and Sacraments, but was some other Church of another kind: which arguing may
be good, if these which I have here above expressed be good, but otherwise I
conceive it cannot stand.

CHAP. XXIV.
Whether those children of Israel, Numb. 8. 10. who laid hands on the Levites,
were Elders by Office, and as so considered, did lay on their hands. And
whether this Scripture do not prove that where there are no Elders to be had,
there some principal members, though not Elders by Office, may impose hands on
Church Officers.
THe children of Israel which were not the Church officers laid hands on the
Levites, Numb. 8. 10. therefore when a Church has no Elders, the people may
confer Ordination, and it is not to be tied to the Presbyters only: And for
this be alleges the answer. page 46. And then he adds, that other of our
brethren say, Ordination is but accidental to a Ministers calling, and may be
wanting if the people shall choose, in defect of Elders, page 491.

Answ. This latter clause should not have been added, as deserving a
confutation, except our brother would confute himself: for as we heard before,
himself does plainly affirm page 186, 187. That both are true Pastors, those
who have no call, but the peoples election, and those who have Ordination by
Pastors; and that election by the people only may stand for Ordination, where
there be no Pastors at all: which if it be so; why should the same thing in
effect when it is holden by others, be here inserted in an objection as worthy
to be spoken against, when himself does cast the very same?

It is marvel that our reverend brother should thus go on in representing our
words and mind amiss: for as here he sets down the objection under our name,
some of our words are changed and altered, others being substituted in their
place, some are wholly suppressed as if there had been none such, and others
are added as (...) which never came from us: Of the first sort, are those of
the peoples conferring Ordination; whereas our words are not so, but that the
people may impose or lay on hands. Now between these two himself page 492. does
make a great difference, even as much as between the authoritative calling of a
Minister, and a rite annexed to that calling: and further says, that though he
think imposition of hand^ not so essential perhaps, at that a Minister can be
no Minister without it, yet of Ordination he thinks otherwise, And if he make
so great a difference between Imposition of hand^ and Ordination, why should
our words be forsaken which import the lesser matter in his judgment, and
those other which he accounts do import much more, be substituted in the room?
was this to burden our opinion or apprehension with a greater odium then our
words in his own judgment will bear? or was it to make his confutation of us
more easy, then it would have been, if our own words had been retained and
kept? what ever was the cause hereof, we cannot but think it had been better if
it had been otherwise.

For omitting and suppressing some words of ours (which was the second
particular) I allege those of the time and places where Elders cannot
co^veniently be borrowed from any other Church: the whole passage is this: viz.
by which, scripture, (to wit Number. 8. 10.) thus much is manifest, that when a
Church has no Elders, But the first Elders themselves are to be ordained, and
this at such times and in such places, where Elders cannot conveniently be
borrowed from any other Churches, in such case Imposition of hands may lawfully
be performed by some principal men of the Congregation, although they be not
Elders by Office: In which place, these words, at such times and in such
places, etc. though they contain a great part of the case, wherein we think
Imposition of hands may be performed by non-Elders, yet they are wholly
concealed by Mr. Rutherford, as if there had been none such; for what purpose,
himself best knows. But this is apparent, that by his concealment or omission,
the way is made more easy and the ground more rati^n^ll for that passage of
his in the following page, where he says, What if there be no Elders in a
single Congregation? it will not follow therefore the people are to lay on
hands, except says he, there were no Elders in the land, or national Church
to lay on hands. Now had our words been delivered and set down by him as they
came from us, this speech and passage of his would have been useless, and
apparently brought in without cause: For to what purpose should he bring in
this exception, saying, Except there be no Elders in the land etc. when our
selves had prevented him in this, by putting such an exception expressly into
the prohibition, which we deduce and gather from that scripture of Numb. 8. 10.
Sure this had not needed, but might have been spared, if our words had been
fully related: But by this omission and concealment, his own speech has more
appearance of ground and reason in it, then otherwise it would have had, and
our apprehension does not appear to his reader as indeed it is, nor as himself
received it from us in that our answer. Which we have reason to take somewhat
unkindly from him, and the rather because it is not only once, but twice at the
least, that we have thus expressed our selves in that answer: once in the words
which I have here above repeated and transcribed, and again in page 49. where
speaking again of this same scripture, Numb. 8. v. 10. We say thus, that we
have showed from that scripture, that if there be no Elders as at the first,
nor any that can conveniently be gotten from other Churches, then imposition of
hands may lawfully be performed by others: Nevertheless though we have thus
expressed our selves, once and a second time, yet M. Rutherford does not once
give notice hereof unto his reader, for ought that I can find; but still
passing by these words of borrowing Elders from other Churches, does take
advantage of the want thereof, which indeed are not wanting in our Churches,
which he deals against, but twice at the least are plainly expressed therein,
and would not have been wanting in this passage, which here he sets down as
ours, if himself had not concealed and suppressed the same. Now to leave out
those words of ours, which we have plainly expressed two several times at the
least, and then to make advantage for himself against us for want thereof,
whether this be not such measure as we have cause to take unkindly, let himself
and others consider. The third particular of adding words which never came from
us, I will briefly pass over, because it is of less moment, as not so much
misrepresenting our meaning; yet I conceive those words, it (by Ordination) is
not to be tied to the Presbytery alone, which here are presented to the Reader
as ours, are not at all to be found in our writing: but I will not insist on
this, but come to consider of his answer.

There is not, says he, a place in all the word of God, where people conser^e
Ordination to the Pastors of the New Testament, therefore our brethren flee to
the Old Testament to prove it from the Levites, who received Imposition of
bands from the Children of Israel.

Answ. We have given a reason, why no such scripture can be expected in the New
Testament, viz. because in those times Elders were not wanting; for there were
the Apostles and Apostolic men, who were Elders in all Churches: and say we,
we do willingly grant, that where Elders are not wanting, Imposition of hands
is to be performed by the Elders: Ans. p. 49. Now for our brethren to require
of us an example of Imposition of hands performed without Elders in the
Apostles times, in which times there were Elders to be had, this we think to be
unreasonable, first it is our opinion, that when Elders are to be had,
Imposition of hands is not to be performed without those Elders, but by them.

Moreover, if it be such a disparagement to our cause, that the scripture of
the New Testament affords no example of Imposition of hands by the people, how
will Mr. Rutherford free his own way from another objection, which we think as
sore and weighty against the same, as this which they think of so much weight
against us? The objection I mean is this, that there is not any place in all
the scripture of the New Testament, where ordinary Pastors or Elders Imposed
hands on ordinary Pastors or Elders; but all the examples in scripture
concerning this matter are such, where either the persons Imposing, or the
persons on whom hands were Imposed, or both, were officers of extraordinary
note and degree, such as now are not extant in the Church, but are ceased long
again: Not that I deny, but an argument may be taken from those examples for
Imposition of hands in these days: but the thing I stand upon is this, that no
example can be given from scripture directly parallel, to the way which our
brethren in these days do practice and allow, but some dissonancy will be
found therein: from their way as well (and perhaps as much) as from the way of
Imposition of hands performed by the people in some cases: let them tell us of
Act. 6. v. 6. and 14. 23. and 1. Tim. 5. 22. and we answer the persons imposing
hands in those places were Apostles and Evangelists, such as our brethren are
not, nor do so account themselves. Let them name Act. 13. 3. and 1 Timothy 4. 14.
and we answer, the persons on whom hands were there laid were the like, even
Apostles and Evangelists, whatever the imposers were, and therefore neither
will these places perfectly suit the case* So that if we could give no example
in the New Testament of Imposition of hands performed in some cases by the
people, we think Mr. Rutherford and out brethren of his way might be favorable
to us for their own sake.

Yet for the justification of our way, and for further answer to this passage
of Mr. Rutherford, we have this to say further, that an example in the Old
Testament of a practice not abolished in the New as ceremonial, typical, or
of some peculiar reason specially concerning those times and peoples, but of
moral equity and reason; such an example we think a sufficient warrant unto
us, for the like practice upon the like occasion in these days: This I think
Mr Rutherford must acknowledge, for else he shall loose many arguments which he
frequently uses in this Treatise, from the example of Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah,
and others in the Old Testament, for the proving of things to be practiced in
the New: And else himself and we all shall loose the argument for Pedobaptisme
which is taken from Circumcision. Yea, and which is more, if it were not thus,
the Apostles arguing would not be strong, who do frequently argue from the
examples of the Old Testament to confirm and prove truth and virtue, and to
reprove and to condemn the contra^y in the New: to instance in no more but 1
Cor. 9. 10. 2. Heb. 3. 24. which examples, together with that saying, Romans 15.
4. Whatsoever was written in former time, was written for our learning; and
many more that might be alleged, do abundantly and plainly prove the point in
hand: And therefore Mr. Rutherford should bear with us, if we sometimes argue
from examples of the Old Testament.

As for that which follows, where he says, But our brethren hold that the
calling of the Levites and of the Pastors of the New Testament are different,
as the officers and Churches of the Jewish and Christian Churches are
different; the answer is, that I do not remember that we have spoken one word
of this matter, either one way or other; nor does he mention any place where we
have spoken ought of these things. And for the thing it self, though many
differences may be assigned between the Levites and Pastors of the New
Testament, and between the Jewish and Christian Churches, yet I know no such
difference between them, but that in things which are of general and common
nature concerning them both, in those we may lawfully argue from them and their
times, unto our selves and our times. If Mr. Rutherford know we have given any
such difference as will not suffer us thus to argue, when he shall express the
same, we may consider further thereof.

Our brethren grant page 49. that it wants all example in the New Testament
that the people lay on hands.

Answ. And we have also in the same page 49. rendered the reason hereof, viz.
because Elders then were not wanting: Why then did not our brothers ingenuity
so far prevail with him as to mention this, when he mentioned the other?
however yet this he may be pleased to observe, that as we grant the thing he
speaks of, so themselves, I think must grant also, that it wants all example
in the New Testament, where ordinary Elders do Impose hands on ordinary Elders:
for my part I remember none, nor do I remember that themselves have yet
produced any.

These who laid on hands on the Levites Numb. 8. were Elders, and our brethren
say it is like they were; but 1. They did not as Elders: 2. But as representing
the people; not as Elders Civil, for that belonged to Aaron and his Sons,
Levit. 8. else it will follow that where a Church has no magistrates to lay on
hands, there the Church may do it: Nor did they lay on hands as
Ecclesiastical Elders, because what these which laid on hands did, they did as
from the Congregation: For 1. these Levites were taken in stead of the first
born of Israel, and not instead of the first born of the Elders only, Numb. 3.
40, 41. 2 They were presented to the Lord as an offering of the Children of
Israel, not of the Elders only. 3. When the multitude brought an oblation, the
Elders put their hands on the heads of the sacrifice, Levit. 4. 15. instead of
all the multitude.

Answ. In relating this passage, our meaning is exceedingly mistaken, and both
our meaning and our words represented far amiss unto the reader: the
particulars which in this respect may be excepted against, are such as these.

1. That reporting us to say, it is like they who laid on hands were Elders, he
there breaks off the speech; and so suppresseth that which follows; wherein we
first of all do give an explication in what respect they might be said to be
Elders, viz. as being the chief and principal members of the Congregation;
and next of all we do add, that nevertheless therein example does prove the
point, if two things be considered which there we do express. But both these
particulars, I mean, both the explication and the addition or exception, are
wholly suppressed by Mr. Rutherford, and so the concession; It is like they
were Elders, is left standing alone by it self.

2. He reports us to say, they did it not as Elders civil: for that belonged
to Aaron and his Sons; wherein he fathers on us a palpable error, of
accounting Aaron, and his sons to be Elders civil, or magistrates, which
never came into our thoughts: nay it was so far from us that we plainly said
the contrary, in that very place, to wit, that they were Elders
Ecclesiastical. Our words are these, If they, (that is, the children of
Israel) did it as Elders, then either as Elders and governors ecclesiastical,
or as civil governors: but not the first, for that charge belonged to Aaron
and his sons: Levit. 8. and these Levites now ordained. In which words we
plainly ascribe to Aaron and his sons the charge of Elders and Governors
Ecclesiastical, but not of civil governors, as Mr. Rutherford, is pleased to
report.

3. In these words, Else it will follow, that where a Church has no
magistrates to lay on hands, there the Church may do it; our words are so
miserably mangled, that no tolerable sense can appear: for here is expressed
an inference or consequence, that must follow, and yet no ground or antecedent
at all from which it should follow, which is to represent us to the world as
men that were loesi cerebro. For men that were in their right wits, I conceive,
would scarcely ever argue in this fashion, as here we are reported to do: But
our words are these, If the second be said, viz. that the children of Israel
did lay on hands as civil governors, then it will follow that civil
magistrates, though no Church Officers may Impose hands in Ordination of
Church Officers, and so the point is gained: (viz. that Church Officers may be
ordained by those that are no Church Officers) which we do further manifest in
the following words in this manner: If the magistrate may do it, then it will
follow that a Church that has no magistrate may perform this action by other
the fittest instrument^ she has; For which we there give this ground, for that
this is not a work properly tied to the magistrates office, because then the
Church in the Apostles times wanting magistrates, could not have had officers;
the contrary whereof we say is manifest in the Scriptures, Act. 14. 13. Tit. 1.
5. This is our manner of arguing in the place alleged, which is far
different from that which Mr. Rutherford reports as ours.

4. Whereas he reports us to say, Nor did they lay on hands as Ecclesiastical
Elders, because what these which lay on hands did, they did as from the
Congregation; in this he also reports us to speak quite besides our plain
meaning and express words. For whereas, he so sets down this sentence, as that
the latter clause or branch therein is made the reason of the former; the truth
is this, that these clauses in the answer, have no dependence the one upon the
other at all; but the former has another reason given for it, which here is
not mentioned, and the latter which is here mentioned as the reason of the
former is not so mentioned by us, but for another end and purpose.

Touching the former of these two, when we said that the children of Israel,
did not impose hands on the Levites as ecclesiastical Elders, the reason we
give for this saying is this, because that charge was only belonging to Aaron
and his sons, and those Levites now ordained: which reason Mr. Rutherford
never mentions, but mentions another speech, as our reason, which was delivered
by us for another purpose. The like measure does he afford to us in the second
branch of the sentence by him expressed: For whereas we give two reasons of the
main thing in question, that this example of the children of Israel, imposing
hands on the Levites does prove that in some cases, non-officers may impose
hands upon Church officers, the one because what these children of Israel did,
they did it not as Elders; the other that what they did, they did it not for
themselves alone, but for all the Congregation, Mr. Rutherford applies not
these two reasons to the thing in question as they were applied by us, but
instead thereof makes one of them to be a reason of the other, which was no
part of our meaning, nor could justly be gathered from our words.

This being said for clearing this passage of ours from his manifold mistakes,
let us now hear his answer.

Page 49^. These who laid on hands did it as a work peculiar to the Elders,
because the Elders were a part of the first borne, who by office were Elders,
and in whose stead the Levites were assumed, Numb. 3. 40, 41.

Answ. If the Elders were but a part of the first born, then how could all the
first born be Elders by office? or if all the first born were by office Elders,
then how could the Elders be but a part of the first born? These things seem
not to be here. But be it so, that the Elders were a part of the first born as
here is affirmed, how does this prove that they who laid on hands did it as a
work peculiar to the Elders? Is there any necessary or clear consequence in
such a proposition? For my part, I see it not: but on the contrary, I suppose
it is certain, that the Elders might be part or all of the first born, and yet
they who did the work of imposing hands might neither impose as Elders, nor of
necessity be Elders. Though in the sense expressed in the answer, I will not
deny but there might be Elders, that is chief and principal members of the
Congregation. But if this were granted in the sense expressed, must it needs
follow that they imposed hands as Elders, and as Elders by office too? Can a
man sustain no relation, but all his actions must be actions of that relation?
Cannot a man be an husband, or a parent, etc. but his actions of plowing
sowing, etc. must needs be performed by him, as he is a husband, or parent?
Cannot a minister pray in his family, instruct his children, or receive the
bread and wine in the Lords supper in the Congregation, but all these things
must be performed by him as a Minister? I suppose that none will say that this
does follow: and if not, then suppose that these who imposed hands were Elders,
how does it follow, that when they imposed hands, they did impose as Elders?

Else the Church of Israel being a constituted Church before this time wanted
officers, which is against all truth.

Answ. Else, else what? let the antecedent or ground of this inference be taken
from the words preceding, or from any of them (and whence else to take it I
cannot tell) and no necessity of consequence I think will appear. The words
preceding are no more but these, These who laid on hands, did it as a work
peculiar to the Elders, because the Elders were a part of the first born, who
by office were Elders, and in whose steed the Levites were assumed, and then
comes in this inference, else the Church of Israel wanted officers. Now how
this must needs follow upon any or all of those preceding, I see not. Not that
I deny the truth of all those preceding words, for of some of them I think
otherwise, but supposing that were all true, which is more then does yet
appear, yet here is that which I am doubtful in, whether this inference must
needs follow upon the same? For ought I see, the Church of Israel might have
officers, and yet the particulars here mentioned not be all true, but some of
them false notwithstanding. At least wise if they were true, yet the reason
here used would not infer so much. For, to consider a little of the
particulars: The Church of Israel had officers, ergo, the Elders were a part of
the first born (which is one of the particulars) The Church of Israel had
officers; ergo the first born were Elders by office; (which is another) The
Church of Israel had officers: Ergo, the Levites were assumed instead of the
first born (which is another of them) is there any necessity of consequence in
any of these? For my part I see it not: but suppose they were in themselves
true, yet, the medium here used does not prove them so to be. And for that
which is the first, and as I conceive the chief, to wit, that these who imposed
hands did it as a work peculiar to Elders, must this needs be granted, if it be
granted, that the Church of Israel was not without officers? I see no necessity
of granting this neither, but the contrary to me seems possible enough, that
thee might be officers before this time in that Church; and yet what was now
done by them who imposed hands, not be done by them, as Elders by office, but
as prime and principal members of the Congregation.

For the clearing whereof a little further, we may observe that they who
imposed hands on the Levites are not here called Elders, nor rulers, nor
officers, nor first born, nor any such like, but the term whereby they are
expressed is this, the children of Israel; The children of Israel, says the
Lord, shall put their hands upon the Levites, Numb. 8. 10. Now this term being
used in the 9. verse imediately preceding, and in the 11. verse. imediately
following, yet in neither of both can it be meant of Elders and officers alone,
but in both verses is undoubtedly meant of all the body of the Congregation:
and therefore if the context and circumstances of the place be regarded, these
children of Israel, who imposed hands on the Levites, v. 10. cannot in that act
be considered under the not^on of officers. Sure it is when the verse before
tells us that the whole assembly of the children of Israel must be gathered
together, and the verse following tells us that Aaron must offer the Levites
for an offering of the children of Israel; in neither of these can the children
of Israel be understand of the officers alone, but the whole Congregation is
meant hereby in both verses: reason therefore requires that this tenth verse
standing in the midst between the other two, the word children of Israel, being
used therein should be taken in the same sense in this verse, in which it is
taken in the verse before, and in the verse that comes after.

Nay and further, he that shall peruse this chapter Numb. 8. may easily find
that this word, the children of Israel is used therein no less then fifteen or
sixteen several times; and sometimes four or five times in one verse; and yet
of all these, I think here is not so much as one, where it can be understood of
the Elders and Officers as such, but is used to signify all the Congregation.
And therefore to give such a singular interpretation of this word, in v. 10. so
far different from the sense of the same word, in all the rest of the verses
both before and after, and those being not only one or two, but so very many;
this kind of practice and interpretation had need to be builded upon very plain
and pregnant, very clear and cogent reason and demonstration, or else our
brethren may excuse us if we be not over hasty and forward to receive it.

Again, the ninth and eleventh verses tell us plainly, that these Levites were
to be offered to the Lord for an offering, not of the Elders alone, but of the
children of Israel, even of all the assembly of the children of Israel, and
other scriptures tell us as plainly that all offerings were to be presented
with the imposition of his hands, whose the offering was, Levit. 1. 3, 4, and
4. 24, 29, 33. whereby it seems evident, that these children of Israel, who
imposed hands on these Levites, at this time when they were offered for an
offering, were the whole Congregation or some in your name and stead, since
these Levites were an offering of the whole Congregation.

We grant the magistrates laid not on hands, but they who laid on hands, did
it as Ecclesiastical Elders.

Reconcile this with that page 188 l. 1. where it is said, the Princes and heads
of tribes laid hands on them: now what were these Princes and heads of tribes,
but magistrates? and if they were Princes and Magistrates how could they be
considered in this act as Ecclesiastical Elders?

The reasons against this conclude not. The first reason concludes not.

Ans. Here again our meaning is presented amiss to the reader; for those three
reasons of ours were given by us to prove another point, and not this to which
Mr. Rutherford, applies therein, as is plainly to be seen in answer, page 46,
47. where the reader may perceive that those reasons were brought to show, that
when the children of Israel imposed hands, if these children of Israel were not
all the Congregation, yet what they performed herein was for the Congregation,
and not for themselves only: And if those reasons prove this, as I hope they
do; it is no great disparagement to them not us, if they prove not another
point for which they were never intended. But let us hear the answer.

The first reason concludes not, because those who laid on hands were the
first born, who by office were Churchmen.

Answ. How shall we be sure that those who laid on hands were the first born?
though I deny it not, yet a bare affirmation proves not.

Again, suppose what here is affirmed were also sufficiently confirmed, how is
the point in question proved hereby? for, say they were the first born, they
might notwithstanding do what they did for all the people, and not for
themselves above.

The other two reasons proves nothing.

Answ. Let them be applied to the thing, whereto they were intended and applied
by us, and then let the reader judge. The position was, that those who imposed
hands on the Levites, did it for the Congregation or in their stead. The first
of the two reasons is, that the Levites were the Congregations offerings, and
all offerings were to be presented with the imposition of his hands, whose the
offering was: The other is this, that it was an usual thing when the
Congregation were to present an offering, that the Elders should impose hands
on the Congregations offering, in the Congregations stead, Levit. 4. verse. 14,
15. Now let the Prophets judge, whether these reasons prove what they were
brought to prove, to wit, that they who imposed hands on the Levites did it
for, or in stead of the Congregation: or whether it be as our reverend brother
affirms, that these two reasons proves nothing: yet let us hear why they prove
nothing.

Because these who laid on hands, did lay on hands as representing the whole
Congregation. Alas it does no ways conclude that they laid not on hands, as it
is a work peculiar to them (...) Elders.

Ans. If it do not, yet if our reasons do conclude that they did it instead of
the Congregation, we have our intent: But to follow Mr. Rutherford a little in
digressing from the point; why, do not our reasons conclude this other?

The High Priest offered sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the
peoples; Heb. 7. v. 27. and so did represent the people; but I hope it
follows not that therefore the Priest did not sacrifice as a Priest, and by
virtue of a peculiar office, but only as a principal member of the
Congregation.

Answ. Mr. Rutherford himself gives us a distinction which may be sufficient
for answer to this passage. A representer, says he, stands for another
either objectively or subjectively. The former of these is he that does a
business for another, or in rem ejus, for his behalf and good, as the eye sees
and the ear hears for the whole body; and thus objectively the Presbytery
does represent the people, that is, for your good and salvation of the people.
The other representing another subjectively is when the representer has its
power from that which it represents, as he who carries the room and person
of a King as an Ambassador: but thus, says he, the Presbytery or Eldership
does not represent the People. Due right of Presbyt. p. 316, 317. Now as the
Presbytery represents the people, so may it be said of the Priest, viz. that he
represented the people only objectively, for their good, but not subjectively
in their room and stead, and therefore the cases are not alike; for we think
that what was done by those who imposed hands, Numb. 8. was not only done for
the good of the children of Israel, but also in their room and stead, which he
will not say of the Priest sacrificing for the people, having already said the
contrary of the Presbytery.

Page 493. You will say, in a Church, in an Island, one may be a Pastor without
any ordination if the people elect him, and there be no Elders to ordain; I
answer it is true.

Answ. If this be true, then what becomnes of that which was said in the
precedent page, That though imposition of hands be not so essential, as that a
Minister can be no Minister without it, yet for Ordination it is otherwise,
this being the authoritative calling of a Minister, and the other but a rite
annexed to the calling. In which place he counts ordination so essential, as
that a Minister can be no Minister without it, and yet in the very next page
confesses, as we see, that in some case one may be a Pastor without
ordination: whereupon it must needs follow either that one may be a Pastor
without any authoritative calling or else that ordination is in effect, but the
same with imposition of hands, and so there is no such difference between them
as is pretended.

But so many Pastors send a Pastor to a Congregation, though that Congregation
never choose him.

Answ. Take your own words for answer page 496. We never read that in the
Apostles Church a man was obtruded upon the people against their will and
therefore Election by the people in the Apostolic Church as Act. 1. 26. Act.
6. 2, 3, 4. Rev. 2. 1, 2. Act. 20. v. 28. must be our rule. Any election
without the peoples consent must be no Election, for if it please not the whole
multitude as Act. 6. 5. it is not a choice. And in page 465. he tells us that
all incorporations have power by the law of nature to choose their own rulers
and officers, and that Christ has provided the same in an eminant manner for
his Church. And therefore for this passage that many Pastor may send a Pastor
to be Pastor to a Congregation, though that Congregation never choose him, we
desire that he would take his own money for payment.

CHAP. XXV.
Whether a Ministers calling consist in Election or in Imposition of hands, and
whether of those is greater, and whether is prior or posterior. Whether, 1 Timothy
4. 14. Act. 6. 2, 3, 4. Act. 13. 1, 2, 3. do prove that the Ministers calling
consists in imposition of hands by the Presbytery, and that such imposition of
hands is not a consumatory rite, or benedictory sign. Also whether Romans 10.
15. do prove that a man cannot be a Minister except some Presbytery ordain him
before the People choose him, and whether otherwise the people do send a Minster
to themselves: and whether the people of God may not as well discern a man's
fitnes to be ordained as his fitnes to be elected.
Page 493. If the people may elect Officers, then in some cases they may
ordain them also, because Ordination is less then election, and depends
upon it as a necessary antecedent, and it is nothing but a consummation of
election, or the admission of a person into the possession of that office,
whereto he had right before by election. If then a single Congregation may
elect, which is the greater, they may ordain, which is the less. And for this
he alleges the Answer page 46, 47. And then gives answer thereto in these
words, Ordination is the more and Election the lesser; for Ordination is an act
authoritative of the Presbytery, 1. Tim. 4. 14.

Answ. Take Ordination as we take it for Imposition of hands on a Church
officer, and then we think it is less then Election, as being but a Rite or
Ceremony used at a Ministers entrance into his Office, but not at all of the
essence thereof. Nor are we alone, or the first that have so thought: For to
omit others, he that wrote the book, called the unbishoping of Timothy and
Tytus affirms page 114. That it is no essential, but a ceremonial part of
Ordination, which may be sufficiently made without it, and says that Angelus
de Clavasio, Peter Martyr and others both Papists and Protestants affirm the
same. And in page 116. he says it is an act of service or Ministry, not of
Authority, and no more then an external complement or Ceremony, alleging Dr.
Ames and others for the same tenent. But now election is more then a ceremony
that may be omitted, Mr. Rutherford himself being judge: for in his page 496.
He tells us, that in the Apostolic Churches, a Minister was never obtruded
upon the people against their will, but that they still had the election of
their Ministers, and this he says must be our rule, so that any election
without the peoples consent must be no election, for if it please not the whole
multitude it is not a choice. And in p. 202. he tells us out of Chrysostom
that all Election of Pastors is null without the consent of the people. Whereby
it seems that Election is something essential; and so consequently more then
imposition of hands, which is but a Rite or Ceremony, which may be absent, and
yet a man have all the essentialls of a Minister notwithstanding. As for 1 Timothy
4. 14. the imposition of hands of the Presbytery there spoken of, I conceive,
could not be any act of superior authority but only an approbatory sign or
rite which might be used by inferiors toward your superiors. For Timothy
being an Evangelist, how could any ordinary Presbytery have authority over him,
or give office or authority to him? Besides it is not said that Timothy
received his gift by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, but by the
Prophecy, and by the laying on of Paul's hands, and with the laying on the
hands of the Presbytery. Now between those two phrases, by the laying on of
hands, and with the same, there is great difference, the one importing some
cause or authority or power, the other importing no more but an approbatory
rite, or a sign used in a solemn commending of one to God by Prayers: Altar
Damascen. page 161. of which more is to be seen in the plea for the Churches in
New England part of the second chap. 12. quest. 2, 4.

For ought I see the Authors might argue thus, The people may ordain: Ergo,
they may preach and baptize, for all the three are Presbyteriall acts given to
men in Office.

Answ. We read in Mornay de Ecclesia chap. ^. that of old time it was an
argument rise in the Church, he may baptize, he may administer the Lords
supper; Ergo, he may lay on hands; but such arguing as Mr Rutherford uses,
they may lay on hands, ergo, they may baptize; this we remember not that we
have read in any authors, except in him: Nor do we think the consequence the
same, inasmuch as in the one the argument proceeds from the greater to the
less, and in the other from the less to the greater, and yet affirmatively in
both. Thus the argument is understood by the forenamed author of the
unbishoping of Timothy and Tytus, who in page 100. speaking of these words of
Mornay lays down the argument thus, He can baptize, he can consecrate and
administer the Lords supper which are the greater and more honorable actions,
Ergo, he may lay on hands which is the less: and this kind of arguing for my
part, I think to be good* but for that of Mr. Rutherfords, I see no more
consequence therein, then if one should say, he that may do the lesser, may
do the greater also* in which I see, no strength of consequence at all.

Page 493, 494. Whereas some say Act. 6. 3, 4, 5. Election of seven men to be
Deacons goes before Ordination or Imposition of hands, v. 6. Answ. Election of
the people goes before Ordination in the relation of Luke, true; Ergo,
Election is prior by order of nature, it follows not.

Answ. The place cannot be so satisfied; for the text is very plain, that these
seven were elected by the multitude before the Apostles laid their hands on
them; yea, and not only before in respect of priority of nature, but also in
respect of time; for otherwise, how could the Apostles say as they do unto the
multitude; brethren look out seven men among you whom we may appoint over this
business? Can any man imagine they would thus have spoken, if themselves had
already found out the men, and likewise had imposed hands upon them? for my
part, I see no reason for such an apprehension; but think it is undenyably
plain in the text, that the election of these seven by the people was prior to
their Ordination, by Imposition of the Apostles hands, not only in the
relation of Luke as Mr. Rutherford would have it, but also in nature and time,
and that the contrary cannot be said without violence to the text, and injury
and wrong unto the Apostles, who by Mr. Rutherfords exposition are made to have
bidden the multitude to look out for the men amongst them of honest report,
etc. with a profession that when the multitude had so done they would then
appoint the men to the business, when as by this exposition they had already
appointed them thereunto, and had imposed their hands on them, which kind of
dealing had been such, that I think that Apostles were far from it.

It cannot be that Election of the people is the whole calling of a man to the
Ministry, and Ordination only a supplement and a consummatory rite, or a
benedictory sign, which may be spared.

Answ. Take Ordination as we do, and why cannot this be? himself told us p.
492. That he thinks not Imposition of hands so essential, but that a Minister
may be a Minister without it, and that to him it is but a rite annexed to the
calling: which is just the same that we hold, and yet when it comes from us it
cannot be accepted. Again, he told us page 186, 187. That there are true and
lawful pastors, who have no call but peoples election: Which if it be so, does
it not then follow, that the election of the people with the man's acceptance
thereof is his whole calling? For if ^^ey be true and lawful pastors, who have
no more but this election, it seems it must needs be that this is the whole,
and yet here this is denied. But let us hear the reasons of this denial.

1. Because by the Imposition of the hands of the Presbytery Timothy was made a
Minister, 1 Timothy 4. 14.

Answ. The text is not by the Imposition of their hands, but with it, not (...)
but, (...), as was noted before out of Didoclavius Altar Damascen. p. 161. who
also shows in the same place at large, that this Imposition of hands upon
Timothy was only for a testimonall of the approbation of his calling, and for
a ceremony used in commending him to God in their Prayers. And in as much as the
office of Timothy was the office of an Evangelist, how could an ordinary
Presbytery giving him either the gifts or the power belonging thereto? When Mr.
Rutherford has satisfied Mr. Calderwood in these things (a man of his own
nation) for I suppose Mr. Calderwood to be the author of that treatise of
Altar Damascen. then if we require more may be said of this place. In the mean
time I proceed to the next.

By this Imposition of hands Paul and Sylas were separated to preach to the
Gentiles, Acts 13. 1, 2, 3.

Answ. Paul and Sylas are not once mentioned in that place, but Paul and
Barnabas; But not to insist upon this mistake, let M. Calderwood answer for us
concerning this scripture: Litigent, says he, inter se pontifieii utrum
impositio ista manuum fuerit ordinativa, etc. that is, let the Papists contend
amongst themselves whether this imposition of hands was for Ordination, or
only for Prayer: we hold that it was for Prayer and Comendatory (for they
commended them to the grace of God, as its said, Act. 14. 26.) yet as they
could not ord^^n them and call them to this Ministry they being Apostles, who
were called extraordinarily, so neither could they appoint them to any certain
employment or place, for the holy Ghost did direct the Apostles in their
troubles, and here it is expressly said, that they were sent forth by the holy
Ghost Altar Damascen. page 160. and then speaking of certain words of Spalato,
who says, this Imposition of hands was a pious ceremony, and used at that time
as a certain part of an efficatious Prayer; he adds, Rectius diceret fuisse,
etc. he might more rightly say, it was a rite and gesture of one that prayed,
showing the person for whom he did implore grace, rather then to call it an
efficacious part of prayer. Where we plainly see that he counts this Imposition
of hands on Paul and Barnabas no ordaining of them to the office, as some
Papists and it seems Mr. Rutherford would have it; but only a rite or gesture
used when the Presbytery commended Paul and Barnabas to God by Prayer. This
author of Altar Damascenam also adds, Cum assumendi erant Levitae, etc.
That is, when the Levites were to be taken from amongst the Children of Israel,
the Lord commands that they should be brought before Jehova^, and that the
Children of Israel should lay their hands upon the Levites, Numb. 8. 9, 10.
Although the Lord had commanded to consecrate these Levites unto the Ministry;
yet he commands the Israelites to lay their hands upon the Levites, as if they
had of their own accord in their name given them up to the Ministry, as Junius
in his Analysis does fitly interpret it: Thus far Mr. Calderwood whose
judgment of this scripture Numb. 8. whether it be not the same with ours,
which was formerly expressed, let Mr. Rutherford himself be judge.

Mr. Rutherford adds that by Imposition of hands the Deacons were ordained,
Act. 6. and that this is enjoined with the right manner of acting it to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 22. and 2. 2. 2. as a ministerial act.

Answ. Whereas, he says, it cannot be that laying on of hands should be only
a consummatory rite or benedictory sign, and brings the example of these
Deacons, Acts. 6. for proof, I desire no more, but that he would accept his own
words for answer. Now in page 169. his words are these; It is not said that the
Deacons were ordained with Fasting and Prayer, as hands are laid upon Paul and
Barnabas, Act. 13. 3, 4. but simply that the Apostles prayed and laid their
hands on them; which seems to me to be nothing but a sign of praying over
these Deacons, and no Ceremony or Sacrament conferring on them the holy Ghost.
Now if it was nothing but a sign of Praying over these Deacons, then 1 the
substance of their calling consisted not in this laying on of hands, but in
some thing else; and what should that be but their election by the people? 2.
If it was nothing but a sign of praying over then, then why is a consummatory
rite and a benedictory sign gainsaid and opposed? For what great difference is
there between a sign of prayer and a benedictory sign? And how shall he be
reconciled with himself, that says it was nothing but such a sign of praying,
and yet will not yield that it was only a benedictory sign?

And for the other particular where he says, this laying on of hands was
enjoyed to Timothy as a ministerial act, if by ministerial act he mean an act
that could be lawfully performed by none, but only by a Minister; then I
desire some proof that this was so enjoined to Timothy. That it was enjoined to
him I grant, but that it was so enjoined needs some better proof then a bare
and naked aff^rmation; specially since many things were enjoined to Timothy in
those examples, which were and are justly applyable to all Christians.

Furthermore suppose it were true that Imposition of hands were enjoined to
Timothy as a ministerial act, how does this reach to make good the thing in
question? what should hinder but the peoples election might contain the
substance of a Ministers calling notwithstanding? or how does it therefore
follow that Imposition of hands was not a consummatory rite or benedictory
sign, but something more? Is there any such necessary consequence here, that
the one of these must needs follow upon the other? For my part I see it not,
nor see any thing to the contrary, but if Imposition of hands were such a
ministerial act, as he says it is, yet it might still be merely a
consummatory rite or benedictory sign, and the substance of the calling
consist still in the peoples Election. Himself does say, as we hear even now,
that Imposition of hands Act. 6. though here he call it a ministerial act, was
nothing but a sign of praying over the Deacons. And therefore these two, to be
a ministerial act* and yet to be nothing but a sign of prayer or benedictory
sign (which to me are the same) are not so inconsistent by his own doctrine,
but that they may well stand together; And himself does also hold that the
laying on of hands mentioned Numb. 8. 10. was a ministerial act, and that they
who did it, performed the same as Ecclesiastical Elders; and yet I hope, he
will not deny that the substance of the Levites calling was in the immediate
designement and appointment of the Lord, and not in the performance of this
laying on of hands. And therefore it follows, that if laying on of hands were
granted to be a ministerial act, yet still it may be merely a benedictory
sign, and the substance or essence of the Ministers calling not consist in it,
but in some thing else.

A mini^^eriall calling stands in an authoritative sending, Romans 10. 15. and
I see not well how the people do send a Minister to themselves.

Answ. But it is not easy to see how they choose a man for a Minister to
themselves, being sent unto them by God? And if God do furnish a man with
gifts, and an holy propensity of mind to the work in general, and to such or
such a people in particular, and make way by his providence thereto, then who
can deny, but such a man is sent of God unto that people? And then if that
people observing Gods sending of him in this s^^t, do hereupon elect and choose
him, and promise to be obedient to him in the Lord, what is there now wanting
to the substance and offense of such a man's calling to such a people? and yet
the man is not sent by them to themselves, but sent by God, and received and
chose by them: Parcus understands this sending, Romans 10. of Gods sending* and
so does Piscator, and who not? And to understand it otherwise would be to
condemn the Prophets and Apostles, who were not sent by men at all, and yet
did truly answer this scripture, in that they were sent of God: True it is,
ordinary Ministers are not sent of God in such an extraordinary way as the
Prophets and Apostles were, but in an ordinary way, and by ordinary means;
which way and means if they do observe, they also may be truly said to be sent
of God unto the people.

But peradventure our brother means that the people may not lawfully choose a
man for minister unto themselves, except he be first sent unto them, in an
authoritative way by some other men, and that otherwise he is not sent unto
them of God; which if it were true, then it would follow, that the Apostles and
Prophets, as I said, were not sent of God: for plain it is, that men sent them
not. It would also hereupon be requisite to be cleared, that some men besides
the Church have authority to send Ministers to the Church, and who these men
are that have such authority had need to be cleared also; which I for my part
think will not be done in have. And till this be done, I know no reason, but I
may still retain this apprehension, that men who are qualified according to the
rule of the word and duly elected and chosen to some office of the Ministry by
Gods people, are truly sent of God unto that people.

The people have not either formally or by grant of Christ virtually, the keys
committed to them, how then can they give the keys to Pastors?

Answ. Yet in p. 7. He tells us that he denies not but there is a power
virtuall, not formal in the Church of believers, to supply the want of
ordination of Pastors, or some other acts of the keys simply necessary, hic
and nunc: and this power, says he, is virtuall not formal. Now to say they
have this power neither formally nor virtually, and yet to say they have this
power virtually though not formally, what is it but an apparent contradiction?

But suppose it were true that the people had not this power either formally or
virtually, yet Mr. Ball and Mr. Bai^s before him do tell us, that ministerially
they may give what they never had, viz. As ministering to him who has power and
virtue of deriving its as a man not (...) a penny of his own may give an 100 l.
if the King make him his Almoner. Thus the Church deriveth a^ taking the person
whom Christ describes, and out of power will ^ave placed in this or that
office in his Church. The power of the imperial dignity is not in the electo^
of the Emperors, nor the power of that office and authority, whereunto a
Minister is elected, in the Church, who chooses him to that office. Ball Trial
of Separat. page 239, 240.

Page 494, 495. People may as the sheep of Christ discern his voice, Joh. 10.
and so have a power of election of their own Pastors: nor does this make good
what our brethren say, that therefore they may judge of a ministers fitnes?

Answ. That which we say in this Answ. page 51. There must be some ability to
discern whether men be qualified according to the rule, before they ought to be
elected and chosen into office; and the people of God have so much ability as
is of necessity required before there be preceding unto ordination? Wherein it
is plain that our arguing is from the peoples ability to discern of men's fitnes
before they be elected, to their like ability to discern of their fitness before
they be ordained. They who have so much as to discern who are fit to be
ordained: but the people of God may have the former. Ergo, they may have the
latter. Now what says Mr. Rutherford hereunto? The assumption he denies not,
but in plain words grants it, saying, they may as Christ's sheep, Joh. 10.
discern Christ's voice, and so have a power of election of their own Pastors. It
must then be the consequence that must be denied, or the conclusion must be
yielded: what then brings he to overthrow the consequence? Nothing but this,
that there is a two fold knowledge, one of Christians not denied to women and
believing children, who cannot lay on hands, nor ordain Mi^isters, as the
Presbytery does. But what the other knowledge is he does not plainly tell,
except any thing may be gathered from the words following, where he says, But
for trying of Ministers if they be the sons of the Prophets apt to teach,
able to convince the subtle heretics, and gainsayers, and to put them to
silence, there must be in a constituted Church a College of Pastors and
Prophets to try the Prophets with a Presbyteriall cognizance.

Answ. But if Mr. Rutherford would have spoken to the point, he should have
given some reason why the people may discern a man's fitnes for election, and
yet not discern his fitnes for ordination, for this is the consequence of our
argument which he denies. But in all that is here said about a two fold
knowledge, one of Christians, and the other of some body else, what is there in
all this, that has so much as the least show of overthrowing or weakening the
conseqence? su^e nothing at all that I can find: For as for that which is
intimated, that Christians have not so much knowledge as to try Ministers
whether they be apt to teach, etc. this makes nothing to the point in hand,
that they can discern whether a man be fit to be elected, but not discern
whether he be fit to be ordained; but if it have any strength in it at all, it
is as much against the ability of the people, which he expressly grants, as
against that which he would deny; as much against their ability of discerning
his fitnes for ordination. And therefore how this should overthrow the one and
not the other, I do not know: for to any man's understanding it makes no more
against the one then against the other; but either against both, which he will
not grant, or else against neither which I conceive is the very truth? To argue
in this sort, they have not ability to convince (...) Heretics; Ergo, they may
not choose their Ministers, this Mr. Rutherford will not own; for he plainly
grants they may choose: and therefore how can this arguing be good, they want
ab^lity to convince Heretics; Ergo, they may not impose hands in ordination?
How the one kinds of reasoning can be better then the other, I do not know,
except we would say some may be lawfully elected and chosen to the ministry,
who cannot lawfully be ordained, but this I suppose cannot be said with truth.

CHAP. XXVI.
Whether the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, wherein there are contained rules
of direction in laying on of hands, do prove that the action may not in any
case be performed by non-officers, but must be performed only by Presbyters;
and whether the argument do not make as strongly for the appropriating of
laying on of hands to the Prelates, as to the Presbyters, and do not as well
exclude the Presbyters from meddling therein, as exclude the People.
THere is only one place more where I find Mr. Rutherford excepting against
the answer; and that is in his page 497. where alleging the answer page 59.
which I conceive is misprinted for page 49. He sets down these words as ours,
viz. If people may not meddle with ordination, because it is proper to Timothy
and Titus, this may prove that they were Bishops who did ordain Elders there
alone, which Ministers may not do there, for these Epistles are not written to
them as Bishops alone, nor as Elders alone, but as to a mixed state including
the People.

Answ. The order of the dispute is this: Reverend Mr. Herle arguing for
ordination of officers by a consociated Eldership, and not by a single
Congregation with or without a Pastor, brings this reason for his judgment,
viz. Rules of direction how to proceed in ordination, and the Epistles where
those rules are laid down, are not written to the Churches or Congregations,
but to Timothy and Titus. In answer whereunto we spoke to this purpose, that if
this be a sufficient reason to prove that the people may not in any case meddle
with Ordination, then by as good reason it will follow, that Ordination belongs
not to the Presbytery or Synod, but only to one man, as the Prelates would
have it; the reason we give is, because Timothy and Titus were each of them but
only one man. And we there further say, that we do approve the answer given
to this kind of reasoning by the refuter of Dr. Down^^s sermon, at L^^beth,
who shows that what was written in those Epistles, was not only written for
Timothy and Titus, but for other Ministers also, and also in some sort for all
the Saints, and that therefore there is no more reason to appropriate those
rules, only to the use of Presbyteries and Synods, then only to the use of
Prelates.

Now what says Mr. Rutherford to this?

Some parcel of these (...) are written, says he, to Timothy and Titus as
Evangeli^ts. Somethings are written to them as Christians; and finaditer and
objective all is written for the Churches good, but the bulk of the Epistles is
written to them as Elders, and especially. 1 Timothy 5. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 2. for these
and the like they were to do with the Presbytery as is clear, 1 Timothy 4. 14.

Answ. This Scripture 1 Timothy 4. does show that Timothy had a gift given him by
Prophecy with the laying on the hands of the Presbytery; but how does it hence
appear, that not only Timothy but Titus also was to dothings with the
Presbytery? Titus is not at all mentioned in that Scripture. And as for
Timothy, Scripture tells what the Presbytery did to him, but what he must do
with the Presbytery it tells us nothing at all. Again, if the bulk of the
Epistles be written to them as Elders, and the Churches be no otherwise
concerned therein, but only finaliter and objectively, the Epistles being
written for their good, then what shall be the meaning and reason of these
words in the conclusion of the Epistle to Titus, and of the latter to Timothy,
where it is said, grace be with you, and grace be with you all? does it not
plainly appear hereby, that more then Elders, even all the Saints in those
places are written unto in those Epistles? Thirdly if there be rules in the
Epistles that do belong to Elders alone, yet since it is confessed, and may not
be denied, that other things therein do concern all Christians, how shall we
be assured that such passages, as concern ^aying on of hands are of the former
sort, and not of the latter? For to say it is so, and it is clear, we think
does not clear it at all, unless some further proof be added. Lastly, if all
this were granted, which here is said by Mr. Rutherford, yet for ought I see,
our answer is not removed thereby, but still stands fair and good: For in that
place of the answer alleged, we say two things, 1. That these rules about
ordination in Timothy and Titus may with as fair a color be appropriated to
one man, as to Presbyteries and Synods. 2. That the Epistles and the rules
therein are not to be appropriated to Bishops alone or Ministers alone, but are
indeed of general concernment for all the Christians. Now neither of these two
is discovered by Mr. Rutherford. For as for the former of them, he says
nothing thereto at all; and the latter he does in a manner grant, not only by
saying that all here is written for the Churches good, but also by saying that
somethings are written to Timothy and Titus as Christians which is in effect
the same that we had said before. And how our answer can be disproved or
satisfied, either by saying nothing at all thereto, or by saying the same that
we had said before, I leave it to the Judicious reader to consider.

FINIS.

