Riddles Mervels and Rarities: OR, A New way of Health, FROM AN Old Man's
Experience, etc. BEING ^is ^ind Legacy, to his Fellow Creatures: OR, The
PHYSICIAN, and no PHYSICIAN, Prescribing PHYSIC, and no PHYSIC; SHOWING

Plain, Easy, and Cheap Ways, how every Man may become His own PHYSICIAN, his
own APOTHECARY, and his own CHYRURGEON, with little or no trouble, but far less
Cost.

Whereby Sickness, may certainly be Pr^^ented to the Well; Health, ^s certainly
Procured to the Sick; and Man's Life comfortably preserved to a good Old ^ge.

All (...) by the Author's last Thirty Years Experience, upon himself (...)) he
being now (School.) in the Eighty Six Year of his Age, (...), Lively, Active and
Brisk. Gloria Deo.

(...) into (...) by two Universal Medicines; the one Physical, the other
Natural; the first the Worst, the second the Best.

ALSO (...) concerning the PHYLOSOPHER'S STONE, (...) been long said, to turn
all things, (or Metals) into Gold; showing what (...) be the meaning of That
Strange Saying, for we can see No ^uch Thing.

But that there is a Stone (of late Years) discovered, that has as Eminent
(...) is said to have, is most certain; if happily, it prove not to be (...),
as here shall be made Plain.

With several (...) Choice Observations of Profitable Use, as may be seen in
the Table here ^nnext.

London, Printed for the Author, (...) Mace, of Trin. Coll. in Cambridge,
Clark, at his House (...) Parish in Cambridge, Anno Dom. School.

Where this Rare (...) at the Present to be had and may easily be conveyed to
any Part of England,, 5 or 6 times a Week by ^^^iers from thence to ^ondon, and
so to (...) of the Nation. Price 6 d.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Seeming Riddle of the Title Explained. A Pertinent Question Put in That
Explanation, well worth a Wise Man's Regard, Page 1 The Second Riddle Unfolded.
Page 2 The Third Riddle. Page ibid. Explained in 5 Particulars. Page ib. The
Physician and Apothecary made. Page ib. The Chyrurgion made. Page 3 The Quacks
and Mountebancks Undone. Page ib. The little Trouble. Page ib. The less Cost.
Page 4 The Reason why it is the Cheapest Thing in the World. Page ib. How it
comes to be Perpetual. Page ib. The Author's Intent by this Work Page 5 When
Physic should be Taken and when Not. Page ib. This Physic has No Body. Page
ib. To whom Only it is to be Given. Page ib. Concerning the Philosop. Stone.
Page 6. The Reason of this Powder's Name. Page 7. The Universal Physical
Medicine. Page ib. Its Chyrurgical Virtues. Page 8 Here follow 8 Strange
Stories. First, Of the Plague. Page ib. Second, Of the Leprosy. Page 11.
Third, Of the Yellow Jaundice, Obstructions and Monthly Visits. Page ib. Forth,
A Girl brought to Life after that she was laid out to be Stripped. Page 12
Fifth, A Deep Consumption cured by twice Taking. Page 13 Sixth, A Soar Breast.
Page ib. Seventh, Madness Cured, very Remarkable. Page 14 Eight, The High
French Pox Cured. Page ib. A singular Quality in This Medicine. Page 15 The
Second Universal Medicine, is no Physical Medicine: Page 16 It may well be
Judged One of God's Predestinate Purposes. Page ib. What may be Understood by
the Word Nature. Page ib. What is Nature. Page 17 The very Place where the Best
Universal Medicine is to be had. Page ib. Its Name and Excellency. Page ib. Its
Description and Use. Page 18 Three particular Things belonging to it. Page ib.
Who are most subject to Infections Diseases and short Life. Page 19 The many
Benefits that will arise by the English Protestant-Pries^ Powder to the whole
Nation. Page 20 Concerning Astrology and its Excellent Use. Page ib. An Eminent
Astrolog. Story. Page 21 Some Easy Astrological Rules needful to be Observed
in taking Physic. Page 22 The Description of the Planets. Page ib. How to find
a Planetary Heur and its length Day or Night. Page 23 A more Easy short way,
etc. Page 24 The Great Affinity, betwtxt Music and Physic made Plain. Page 26
How in several Particulars, Music and Physic agree. Page 27 A Canon of four
Parts in One. Page 28
ADVERTISEMENT.
TO Prevent all Frauds, know, That This Rare Power, known by the Name of the
English PRIEST'S-POWDER, is to be had No where but at These few Places
Following, viz. By the Author ( Thomas Mace) at his House in St. Peter's Parish
in Cambridge, near the Castle; And at Mr. Daniel Peachcy's in St. Buttolphs
Parish there: And in London, by Mr. Adam Mason at his House in Old Bedlam near
Bishopsgate; And by Mr. William Pearson, Printer, at the third Door in Hare
Court in Aldersgate Street near the Meeting House; And by Mr. John Vaughan,
Milliner, at his House in Grivil-street near Hatton Garden; and by Mr. Will.
Benson in the Old Baily;

Note, The Powder is Sealed up in Quarter Ounce Papers with Directions to go
along with It when it is sold, with the Author's Own Coat of Arms, viz. An Armed
Hand holding a Scepter, and 2 Spur-Rowls at the Top. The Price of the Powder is
10 s. the Ounce, and is Sealed up, etc. as before.

THE EXPLANATION OF The Title Page.
BEcause the Title (...) begins more like a Riddle, than in the common way of a
(...); it may be expected it should be Explained: therefore thus. As to the
First Clause of it, Viz, The first Clause of the Title page Explained.
The Physician, and no Physician; I do freely acknowledge I am no physician,
either by Education, Gradation, License, Intent or Practice. Yet I thank God, I
was not The Fool at 40 according to that old English Proverb, which runs thus,
Viz. Every Man is either a Fool or a Physician for himself, at 40 Year^ of ^ge.
That is as much as to say, He that has lived to 40 Years and has not taken so
much Notice of His own Constitution etc. as to know what is Good or Bad for His
Healthful Well being etc. may justly be called the Fool; But otherwise The
Physician. I say I was not Then the Fool, for I had by That Time Observed what
was Beneficial for my own Health, etc. So that if the Proverb be true you must
acknowledge, that I was then a Physician Though but for my self, and what was
found Good for my self must needs be Good for Thousands besides. Well then
Grant me but That, and that is Enough to make Good, the first Clause of my Title
Page, Viz, the Physician and No Physician.

And now, since I am upon this Theme, I will take the Liberty, to ask This one
Question, Viz: Whether it be not posible, A Pertinent Question.
for a Man that has lived to 40, 50. 60, 70, or 80 years Old (as I have now
done) may not He (I say) be as Good a Physician (having Studied Himself and
Nature (It may be) 30, 40, or 50 of Those 80 years) as a young Stripling, who
has been but five years at the University, and has got a Batchellor of
Physick's Degree upon his Back; by Reading a few Books (perchance but a year or
two neither of those Five, before he got his D^gree.) Now I say This young Man
must not be denied to be a Physician, how little Experience soever He Is
Furnished withal Either of His own, or of other Men's Constitutions, or
Complexions; neither can he be Questioned (by the Law) if he chance to give
such Physic as Kills any Man he takes in hand to Cure.

Without doubt, Experience is a most necess^ry Thing for a Physician. But this
only by the Bye, and by way of Preparation, (as a Brush or Whisk, to Clear off
some dust and that (no doubt) will be Blown or cast upon this my Attempt, by
some Envious Breaths or other; who usually are displeased, at any stonest or
Laudable undertaking, that may seem to Reflect upon Them; Though I do it not for
any such end (God knows.)

And now to the 2 Riddle which is Prescribing Physic and no Physic. The 2d.
Riddle ^^^o^ded.


This must needs seem as Strange as the First. However it shall be as Easily
made Plain as the First, Viz, Thus; You must know, that this Rare Thing that I
Thus Commend unto the World; for an Vniversall-Physical-Medicine, for all sorts
of Constitutions, and all sorts of Maladies, Sicknesses, and Diseases, is a
Chemical Prepared Powder which for some late years past I have Published in the
Name of the English PRIE^T'S POWDER, and which it self is never to be Taken,
either Inwardly (as Physic) nor Applied Outwardly to any Wound, Sore Scab,
Bruise, Swelling, Pains, Aches, Headache Rheumetick-Sore-Eyes, etc. All which,
and many more, it is most Admirably good for.) I say, it is never (it self) to be
used or Applied (as Medicine) But (only) a ly^cture, which It sends forth, into
some Certain Liquors; The 2d. Clause of the little page Explained.
into which it is to be Infused, for some certain Hours: And Those Liquors,
(Retaining its Virtue) are only to be used; And ( as Physic) are to be taken,
into the Body, in the way of Potion; ^^ther for Vomit, Purge, Glister, or
Sweat; But in the way of Surgery, are only Outwardly Applied, by Washings or
Bathings etc.

So,
that the Powder (which is Really and Virtually) the Physic) must never be
taken, or used, but still carefully kept, in Some Glass-Bottle, to infuse a New
supply of liquor, in the room of what may be taken off it for some present use
at any time.

So that (here you may Easily perceive, the Riddle un^^^ded, in that you never
take the Body of any Physic or Potion, as is generally done from the
Apothecaries-Shops by Physicians Directions.

I need say no more (I suppose to Explain these two first Riddles. Therefore I
proceed to the next. Viz,

Every man his Own Physician, Apothecary; Chyrurgion with Little Cost, and far
less Trouble.

Here are no less than Five Things Particularly to be considered, The 3d.
Riddle Explained in 5 particulars.
All which seem (at the first view a Confounded Piece of Impossibility; but,
(as the two former) you shall find them very easy to be understood. As Thus,
First as to the Physician, you are only to get the Book of Directions (which is
but very Short and Plain, First, the Phyfician is Made.
and to be understood (almost) by any one, except (only) an Idiot or Fool. So
that upon whatsoever Occasion you are to use your Physic, (or rather Tyncture)
it is but Turning to That Place (in the Book which concerns your particular
Business; and There you shall have Exact Directions what you are to do and how;
as well as if you had Studied five years in the University, and obtained a
Batchellor of Physics Degree, etc.

There Is one of the five difficulties easily made Easy.

The Second is the Apothecary. Secondly, the Apothecary is Made.
Now as to That; most People know that the Skill, the Work and Labor of an
Apothecary is to Procure Simples and of several sorts and Kinds; and to
Prepare, Order, Mix, Belabour, Compound, and Work them all up into Diverse Forms
and Ways, with a Vast Deal of continual Care and Trouble (besides the Cost.)

But now, whereas This High Virtue carrying in it such a Powerful Predominarcy
over All the Enemies of Mans-Nature, whereby it does Clearly Expel and Drive
forth the very Root of any Diseuse (curable) if it be Taken in Time) there
needs no more to be done, than to Furnish your self with a Competent Store of
This Wonderful Thing. And put it into Preparation, according to the Exact
Directiors of the aforesaid book; which (having already (as we will suppose)
made you a Physician) you have Nothing more to Provide for, or to do, than what
you will find Therein Exactly set down, and now you are an Apothecary also.

So that now, you may conclude your self, both Physician and Apothecary, and
sufficiently become Skillful in both, for Most Diseases.

It now only remains that you have sufficient Skill in the common Art of
Chyrurgeny (for I pretend no further) which already, Third, the Chyrurgeon Made.
is (upon the matter done;) Supposing you are Physician and Apothecary; for you
have Nothing more to do, than still to apply your self, to Those Plain
Directions in your Book. Making use of the very same Virtue which does All
things as well in common Chyrurgery as in Physic; (excepting only Fractions,
Dislocations, Cuttings off of Arms, Legs, and such like; yet it shall Heal any
of Those Grievances, as well as most things that are usually applied upon Those
occasions. So that now, you (being thus Accomplished) may say, Tria sunt Omnia,
you having All the Three Properties of a complete Physician.

And no doubt (if you would take up the Humor to be a Mountebark) you would
(by way of Figure) be said to put them all into your Pocket; The Quacks and
Mountebanks undone.
That is, You Would spoil their Trade. Qus. Why? Ans. Because, admi^ting their
Medicines to be never so Good, yet when they are Once taken, they cease to be;
They are gone, and you must be at a New-Charge for more continually, as you
have occasion; whereas This, (after it is Purchased) shall do you Ten thousand
Services, (never Losing its Virtues) to the End of your Days; as shall be made
good by what follows in the next two Particulars to be Explained. And thus I
have made Plain these three first Difficulties; there needs not much to be said
to Explain the other two. Viz, with Little Trouble but far less Cost. These two
last, being Included, in the three former.

First to the Trouble, Fourth, the little Trouble.
you having but once Purchased your intended Quantum, Stock or Store, of the
Forementioned Chymical-Powder, you need but put it into a Srong-Bottle-Glass;
And put to it such a Quantity of such Liquor, as you are Directed unto in your
Book of Directions; and in 24 Hours That Liquor, will be fit for any Physical
or Chyrurgicall use, without any further Trouble. And this is all the Trouble
you need be at, as Long as you Live, putting still a New supply of the same
Liquor, when at any time you draw off any from the Powder, the Powder still
remaining in the Bottle.

And here it is well worth your Notice, Viz,

That though the Liquor will be sufficiently Tynctur'd, fit for use in 24 Hours,
Yet if ou let it lie upon the Powder 24 Days, Months, or Years, (or I believe
never so long) it will be, (but) always fit for use. For no Liquor can Receive
more Tyrcture, than its Body or Capacity is able to contain; And (which more
is) the Powder it self, will Never wast in its Substance nor its Virtues,
although it lie never so Long in Liquors to Feed them with Virtues.

These are Great and High Things, and not Easy to be Believed; however you will
find all True for Experience has Confirmed them; And when You find them thus as
I my self (with Many worthy Persons in this Nation) have done; let them not
only be the cause of your Wonder and Admiration, but also to Magnify and Adore
The Infinite Inconceivable God, (The Good,) the Unsearchable cause of Causes
whose works are all Mystery, and full of Wonder. But This one Thing which I
here discourse of, (and thus kindly Publish for a General Good) is One of the
most admired Wonders (in its kind) that can be produced. The Lodestone is a
Great Mystery, in its Magnetic Property, but This may be said to be more
Great, in that it has so General a Physical Excelling Property, as well as
Magneticall. (For its Virtues are Perpetual by being Magneticall. And if you
do, or can believe, the strange Virtues or Property of the Lodestone; It will
be a means to help you (the more Easily) to the Belief of what I Here declare;
concerning these seeming strange and incredible things

The last of which I shall now dispatch in few words; That is, if it be
remembered, what I have already said concerning the four former Particulars,
Fifth, with less C^st.
it is already made out.

For if it have Virtue to do all those Things which I have affirmed it can and
will do, ( and These Perpetually as it will most certainly do,) what Thing is
there that can be named, of Greater Value, or ought to be more Highly Esteemed
of than This Thing?

So that let it cost what it will, it is the Cheapest thing upon Earth. For,
when you have but Once Purchased it, The reason why it is the Cheapest thing
upon Earth.
you need never be at a Pennyworth of Physical cost more, so long as you live;
yea, you may when you Dye, leave it as a Precious Legacy to your best Friend;
And He again may do the like and so from Generation, to Generation etc.

And now I think the whole Title Page is made Plain, even to the weakest
Capacity.

However (yet further) to Highten your Admiration and wonder, you are to know;
That it is found by continual Experience, that this Powder is Magneticall,
continually drawing Inn, the Influentiall Virtues of the Heavens, so fast as it
gives forth ( Lodestone like as I said) by which Faculty it becomes a
Perpetual Medicine, How it comes to be a Perpetual Medicice.
by never wanting Virtue; And if this you find to be True, (as sure enough you
will, if you ever be so Happy, as to make Trial of it) you then will surely say
with me, It Is the only Thing in its Kind, not only of the Greatest Value, but
of the least cost of any Thing known in the whole World.

The Author's Intention by this WORK.
IS This, Viz, to Accommodate the Meaner sort of Men; The Authors Intention by
this Work.
but more especially the Poorest of all, who stand most in Need of Help and
Comfort in their Sicknesses, seeing no Great and Skillfull-Physicians, will so
much as look after Them, or scarce think of their Miseries; so that many
Thousands live in Misery; Languish and Dye, for want of That which every
ordinary House keeper might Easily Purchase, and not only have the Benefit of
it for himself and his whole Family, during his Life, in all common Sicknesses,
and Diseases, but might also be assisting to all his Poor Sick Neighbors round
Him; And not give away the Value of a Quarter of a Farthing at any One Time, to
any Poor body toward the Removing of an Ague Fever, Smallpox, etc. Yea the
High High French Pox, Leprosy, or even the Plague it self, all which I my self
can manifest that This Rare Cheap Thing has Cured, as shall be made out in the
following Discourse.

And this is the first of my two Universal Medicines mentioned in the Title
Page, where I say the first the Worst. The meaning of which saying is, that
it is worse to procure Health, by Physicall-Means, than by Natural Means, if
possibly it may be so gained: Note when Physic should be taken, and when not.
For Physic is a mere Sickness in it self, and should never be taken but upon
Absolute Necessity; and very Cautiously then too, for there is no Physic
(Vomitive, Purgative or Applicative,) but has Poison in it, which is the only
cause of its Opperative Qualities; therefore due regard ought to be had what
sort of Physic People put into their Bodies. But This Physic which I Here
Publish has no Body, but a pure Tincture, This Physic has no Body.
which although it has the Opperative Power to stir and bring away the
Poisonous Humors in Men's Bodies, yet it having no Body, can leave no Malignity,
or Danger behind it; as too often is known from the common ordinary Potions
which are given to Sick People, and which oftentimes provs more Dangerous than
their Diseases.

Now I would have you take Good Notice that what I have said thus far, is
chiefly in Reference to those who are Passively Sick, To whom only it is to be
given
and labor under Pains and Grief, etc. And unto such I intend only the
Benefit, and commend the Excellency of This High Excelling Virtue.

But for all such as be actually Well, and in good Health, I do commend my
Second Universal Medicine to be The Best, mentioned in the Title Page. ( Viz,
The Best, because it is Natural.) Yet they Both may well be called the Best,
according as they may, and must be used, by all who Truly regard their Health,
which is Their Richest Earthly Treasure.

I will now give you a little short Discourse concerning the
Phylosophers-Stone, and then tell you a few Remarkable Stories, concerning the
Excellency of This First Universal Medicine, in certain Eminent Cures which it
has done, even to Wonder and Admiration.

Concerning The Phylosophers-Stone, Which has been long said to Turn all Things
into Gold, and what may probably be the Real Meaning Thereof, for we can see No
such Thing.
MVch Talk has been of The Philosophers-Stone,
From Ages past; That by its livge alone,
'Twould turn Inferior Metals into Gold.
A Glorious Worder sure, if True; but Hold!
Where is it? Who has't? we no such Thing can see;
It Is surely Folded up in Mystery,
And most believe, it is cortainly a Lie.
Yet truly, (for mine own part) so don't l.
I do believe, that Really there is
In Nature's Store, even such a Thing as This;
Though not according to its Literal Sense,
As turning Br^ss, into Gold's Quint-Essence,
That saying's surely Metaphorical,
And cannot well be understood by All,
But needs Explaining; and therefore shall be,
Made easy, to each low Capacity.
The Explanation Thus.
Most Men judge Gold to be, The chiefest Thing,
Delighting Man, which Nature's Store, does bring;
For where there is Gold Enough, Naughts wanting there,
All Things beside are Gained by little Care.
What do not Men attempt God-Gold to Gain?
Oh! how they Cuddle! how they Run Amain!
Adventring life and Limbs, to find it out,
Yea, often) Their most Precious Souls to boot,
Yet notwithstanding This; One Thing I Will name,
Of much more Value; Far Exceeds the same;
It Is Health! Health! Health; That High Praiz'd Jewel Health,
And in compare of Which, Gold's merely Pelf.
For were all Woods, Rocks, Hills, yea Mountains Gold;
And free for any one to take that would.
Yet wanting That most Rich, Chi^f Treasure, Health,
Those Golden Mounts would naught resemble Wealth.
For thus it may be Truly said.
The Rich Man Sick, and full of Pain is Very Foor,
The Poor M^^ in his Health, and Strong, is Rich; yea more;
For He Is contented with his little Store,
And That Is a Treasure, Ever running over.
Now Here take Notice,
That Health's That Precious Thing the Wise men (sure) of old,
Did comprehend under That Specious Name of Gold.

And had a Stone which would procure The Same,
Which Stone I Fancy much that I could Name.
But show one like't I will, that every one may see,
How Wond'rously it works in Mystery.
So, that in time, Experience plain shall show,
And make Men say, We now That Stone do Know;
And for Substantial Reasons, Thus conclude,
To This same Stone, the Wise men did allude.
Now here Friend Reader take Notice,
I Declare (in the Presence of the All knowing God) that I have been made
Happy, in the Knowledge and possession of this Rare Thing, more than 30. Years
last past, as will appear in the First of those Eight Mavelous Unquestionable
Stories (here shortly following) and for the which I most humbly give Thanks
and Praise to That most Bountiful Donor; This being That Great Universal
Medicine of all Vniversals; and the which of late years I have Published, under
the Name of The English Priest's Powder. And here I think it convenient to give
my Reason, why I gave it That Name, having been sometimes asked why I called it
so. My Reason was This. Viz,

Because, there have been Two very Eminent Powders, The Reason of the Name of
the English Priests Powder, and its Augmentation.
of late years Published, under the Names of Two Roman Catholics, the one was
Sir Kenelm Digby's Sympatheticall Powder, which would Cure Wounds at many Miles
distance, by only Anointing the Weapon or Blood taken upon a Cloth etc. (the
which is very Admirable). The other was the Roman Jesuit's Famous Physical
Powder, (very Highly Magnified by most Great Persons) etc.

And now, My Powder being the 3d. (Et Tria sunt Omnia) and finding it no whit
Inferior to those two Former; But in Many Respects, Far outstriping them; and,
that the world should see, that The great Bountiful Donor of all Excellent
Gifts, has not Bound Himself up in His High Favors only to Those of the Roman
Church, But has likewise been Pleased to Distribute Some, to an Unworthy Son of
the Protestant-Church of England also; therefore I call it so. But now, (for
the more Clear Distinction sake) I would have it called, The English PROTESTANT
PRIEST'S POWDER.

And now I shall Proceed (as before) and let you know the Admired Use of This
Powder (or Stone) First, as it is Physical, Viz,
FEar You the Plague, and fain would be Secure, The Universal Physical
Medicine.

Let This be used, it is Prevention sure.
Yea, were the Plegue even Settled in your Blood,
There Is nothing Likelier (sure) to do you Good,
Or have you That Foul, Nasty, Pockey, French Diseas^?
Take This, 'twill surely Cure, and Thoroughly give you Ease.
The Quartan Ague (most Physician's Shame),
It fails not Perfectly to Cure, the same.
Then down from the Plague and Pox, through all Inferior Ills,
If Curable it Cures, and All Their Causes Kills.
For by Its Searching, Clearsing-Faculty and Might,
It Cleers the Body of All; and sets weak Nature Right.
For unto Nature it is so Sure a Friend,
It keeps it Healthy, to its Destined End.
And for Mine Own Part, when This fails to give,
Assistance to my Life, I Will Cease to Live.
No other Means I Will use; none can be Given,
For when This fails, Prepare your self for Heaven.
Thus far concerning Its Physical Opperations.
Now concerning Its Virtues Chyrurgicall.
IF Outwardly Applied, 'twill Cure a Wound,
A Bruize, a Sore, a Scab, 'twill make all Sound.
For Headache, Pains and Rheumatick, Sore Eyes,
There Is Nothing Better (ture) Man can De^^se.
But to be short,
Most things with Physics, Ointments, Plasters, Salves can do,
This Thing shall do the Like, if not Outdo them (too.)
And thus much (sure's) enough to show Its Excellence,
And give it (Justly) due Pre-eminence.
'Bove any One Thing known in Nature's Store,
Yet of This Virtue (still) I can say More.
"And One Thing more I Will say, I have not said,
"The which shall set its Crown upon Its Head.
"And This it is,
"This Wond'rous-Virtue is Magneticall,
"By which,
" Its Opperations are Perpetual.
"That is, so long as Nature does endure,
"(Even Load-Stone-like) It keeps Its Virtues sure.
"Which is a Wonder, Never yet was Told,
"Of any Physic, either New or Old.
"But Truth it is; Experience does Confirm it,
"And from Experience I do Thus affirm it.
Yea, Witnesses good Store, if need there were,
I could produce, to make This Truth Appear.
But That is needless; Why? Ans. Because,
That any one, may by an Easy Trial,
Prove, or Disprove the Thing, against All Denial,
But still.
If This a Wonder seem, consider Well,
The Virtues of the Load Stone, which to Tell,
Is also Needless; Why? Ans. Because, that most Men know
It has a Secret Power Thus to do,
That is,
To draw in Virtue as fast as it gives Forth,
And so Perpetuates in its Excellent Worth.
And, why not This (I pray?)
It Is worth each Wise Man's Easy Trial,
And That Is the Surest Way,
To prove the Truth against all Denial.
And when you find This True, as certain Truth it is,
Esteem It one of Natures choicest Mysteries.
Gloria Deo in Eternitate.
BEloved Reader, mind me Well,
I no Fictious Stories Tell,
But real Truths (as I can Show)
Which from Experience you shall know.
If Patience you will but have and Try,
You Will say, it is Truth, as well as I.
Therefore,
I Will say no more to praise It, but here End,
Let it in its Great Work, it self Commend.
And now ( Friend Reader) if thou can find but so great Faith, as to Believe
This Mighty Troath, which I do Publish Here, Thou may be Happy in the
Procurement of This Rare Thing.

But if not,

Thou must be content to Live as well as thou can, in thine own Ignorant Hard
Happ and Unbelief, and let others Enjoy the Benefit thereof, who are more
Charitably Credulous, and dare Believe an Honest Man upon his own Bare Word.

But now I think on it Better, and consider the Nature of his my seeming Bold,
and strange Undertaking, and that it must needs appear very Doubtful, or
Incredible to most (or indeed to all) who have taken little or no Notice of
Nature's Wonderful Opperations, and the Admirable Secrets which lie Hid, and
close locked up, in Her Rich Cabinet, (not to be Revealed, or known to any, that
do not intently give their Minds delightfully after such Things.) I will
therefore here relate something that may give thee a competent Satisfaction in
some few particular instances,

But still, Thou must Believe. For,

It was never my Business, nor is, nor ever shall be, to play the Quack,
Emperick, or Mountebanck, etc.

I am no Mountebank, No! no such Thing,
No boasting Covetous Physician;
But I am One, who thus Good Tidings bring
Both to the Rich, and to the Poorest Man:
And am unto my Kind, so much a Lover,
That therefore I, this rare Thing thus Discover.
Which (doubtless) has been known to some few Wise of Old,
Though not thought Fit, to the Public to be Told.
'Twould sure have been too Great a Loss to the Trade,
If public Knowledge of it had been Made.
However Here it is, and thus I Will make it Common,
And chiefly for the sake of each poor Man and Woman;
And at so Easy a Rate, that all the World shall see,
Nothing can be more Cheap, assured
That bears a Price, if it you will Compare,
To any thing that is Common, or that is Rare.
For,
One Dose of it,
if you will keep with Care,
Will last your Life, and so from Heir to Heir.
If this a Wonder seem, do but Conceive,
It has Magnetic Virtue to Receive;
So fast as it gives Forth, and so thereby
Perpetuates in Circularity.
The Lodestone has the like, which when Man Knows and Sees,
Let him Admire, and Praise, the God of Mysteries.
Some Instances follow as it has Wrought in Eight Eminent Stories.
THE first shall be a true Story of what happened at Cambridge, The First Story
of the Plague.
in Alderman Muriel's Family. In the Year 1665, or 1666, in both which Years,
the Plague was in that Town (my self being an Inhabitant therein;) This Person,
his Wife and Family, were all shut up upon that Account in St. Clement's
Parish; when as a near Neighbor of His, (and a Friend of Mine) knowing that I
had this Excellent Virtue, came to me, and desired me, to send them some of it
in their Distress: And truly, (at the first) I did Refuse to do it, in regard
it was a Desperate Case, (my Self, not being a Professed Physician.) And
besides, there were in the Town, diverse Able Physicians, so that I told this
Friend, that if I should meddle, and any of them should Die upon it, I might
run my Self into I knew not what Danger, and thereupon desired to be Excused;
advising them to have Recourse to the Physicians, etc. Mr. Murial being an
Alderman, there must needs follow a greater Notice of any Mishap Happening, than
if he had been an Inferior Man: But this Friend of mine, would not be
satisfied, but still urged me to comply with her desire; telling me, That I
should not be known in the Business, but that She her Self, would take it
wholly upon Her.

Whereupon, I did Consent, and sent Her three quart Bottles of this prepared
Virtue in Sack; so she went with it as near the House as she thought
Convenient, and called to the Watchman, or Keeper, of their Door, and bid him
call to Mr. Muriel, to look out of his Chamber Window, which both He and his
Wife presently did, (being themselves both very well at that present,) so she
told them, What a Hopeful good thing she had there for them, which she doubted
not, but would preserve them all, etc.

But Mr. Muriel himself Refused it, and said, He would take none of it: But
Mrs. Muriel desired her to set down, saying these very Words, By the Grace of
God she would take it; whereupon it was set down, and such Directions, as I had
given, for its Use, was likewise left; so my Friend retired, and the Watchman
came and took it, and set it into the House for them.

Now the Sequel is to be Observed, which, in short, was this: Mrs. Muriel her
self took it, and gave it to every person in the Family, (both to the Sick, and
to the Well.)

The Sick Recovered, the Well never fell Sick, only Mr. Muriel himself, (who
refused to take it) Sickned and Died.

This is a Story still in Memory by the Ancient Livers in the Parish, and may
be proved if need were, but it shall be none of my Business; I told you, You
must Believe, but choose Whether you will or not.

Of the Leprosy.
AT the Lady Rhoade's House in Derby Shire, The Second Story.
at a place called Barl-brough-Hall (a Mile of Clown) I met with one Thomas,
an Old Man, I knew him by no other Name) he being the Ladies Over-seer of Her
Cole-pits, with whom (the Year before) I had left some of This High Virtue, as
also, with the Ludy her self, a pretty full Store, for she would needs be a
Factriss for me, to diverse of her Friends, etc.

Now, as soon as I was come thither, and Old Thomas had Saluted me; he
presently told me, That his Wife had cured one of the Leprosy with my Powder,
which to me was a great piece of Strange News* in that, I never had the
opportunity to try it upon any such. Here you have the Person and the place, so
that the Verity cannot be suspected; and I am confident the Lady her self, will
aver what I have writ from Old Thomas; I shall say no more to this.

The Story shall be of an other Female Person, at the same Lady Rhoad's in
Derby-shire, whose Name was Madam Green.
HER visible Disease was the Yallaw Jaundice, The Third Story of the Yallow
Jaundice, Obstrustions, and Monthly Vis^^^
(very much discovering it self in her Color) proceeding from inward
Obstructions; and those, from the want of her monthly Wisits, and those, from
the Original of All, (or most Diseases) viz. the Stomach, (a foul Corrupt
Stomach,) which, as it were, Poisoned all her Food; the which corrupted her
Blood, and distempered her whole Body, so that she could have no perfect
Norishment, by any thing, she either Eat or Drank: And so it certainly is with
all People, that take not especial care to keep their Stomachs Clean. Now she
had used all the helps as she thought convenient at London, but nothing did her
Good, until she had made trial of this prevailing Medicine, which I here speak
of. She took it but five times, and she began first with three spoonfuls, and
every other day increased a spoonful, till she had taken seven spoonfuls, and
Then she was perfectly Cured of all, being clearly freed from the Yellow
Jaundice, and from all her other Grievances; as also restored to her Monthly
Visits. The want of which (proceeding from her foul Stomach) was the cause of
all her Ills.

This Story is easy enough to be proved or disproved, Run or Ride that will.

Of a Girl brought to Life after she was laid out to be Stripped.
THIS Gentleman having been one of my Old Acquaintance in Cambridge, This Forth
Story was sent me in a Letter from Mr. Samuel Tailor, Chaplain to Sir Roger
Langley of Cherry-Hutton, 7 or 8 Miles beyond York, and Minister of the same
Town also; who likewise was a Physician to his Neighborhood, etc.
meeting me at York, and hearing that I had This Great Rarity, prevailed with
me for some of it.

But he (having entered into a former formal way of Practice) laid this of mine
aside for some Years, not at all making use of it, till once, upon a very
Dangerous Case, when he had given a Girl (about Ten Years of Age) some certain
Physics which did not work at all, but lay in the Body of the Girl, to her
great Oppression, and his great Fear; so that he knew not what to do further,
till at last he bethought himself of My Powder. And according to such
Direction^ as I had given him, he venter'd to give the Girl a Dose of it;
which, after some little time, the Child began to be extreme Sick, and Died
away, and continued so long, till the Women thought convenient to stripped it,
and (to That purpose) laid it forth upon a Table, and began to turn it over and
over, in the way of Stripping: But in That Action, the Girl began to make some
Motion, and soon after to Boaken, upon which, they taking Her up, and assisting
what they could, the Child began to Vomit, and so continued, till she had
brought up all her former Load of Physich, and her Disease along with it; and
from That time she Amended and Recovered her perfect Health, and grew found
again. This Story, I have still under the Ministers own Hand Writing, which was
in the Year, 1670.

Now what is chiefly worth Noteing in this Story, is, That Nature (...) so
extremely over laden by the Disease and the former Physic, that the (...) was
not able to bear up against it, and fell into Languishment. But then, (...)
this Powerful Virtue was added to the Former, it must needs either (...) dainly
Destroy Life, or set it at Liberty; the First of which, as you have heard,
Happened. And, if this be not an Eminent, and a most Remarkable Story, I would
fain hear one by any that are thus Imploid; I have told it with Particulars
enough, and Circumstances more than sufficient, insomuch, That it may easily be
Proved or Disproved, if any be so minded. I am no Mountebank, nor will I
otherwise Trouble my self, to make People Believe; their Unbelief will be their
own Loss, and not Mine.

Of a deep Consumption, by twice taking this Virtue, was Cured.
THere was a Person in the City of Norwich, The Fifth Story.
(a mere stranger to me) nor do I remember that ever I heard his Name; he was a
Master Workman of Stuffs, and kept many Men at work in that Trade; he was a
Friend of a near Kinsmans of mine there, who desired me to walk down and see
him, so we went to his House: The Man was Bedridden, and wasted to Skin and Bone,
with a deep Consumption, and so very weak grown, that all about him thought he
could not live.

I asked his Wife, if he could sit up? She answered, No, my reply was, That
then he must Die; yet I told her, That Life was sweet. And if they could raise
him up by strength of Arms, and set him in a Great Chair, (which I saw there
standing by) and Boulster him up with Pillows, and hold him so for an Hour or
two, it might be worth your Labor, and I would send him two or three spoonfuls
of something to take (which was this Liquor.

All this was done, and he took the Liquor, and it wrought so effectually upon
Him, and his Disease, that he grew finely Cheerful; after it had done working
That Day, and sat up two or three Hours after it.

The next day but one, he took it again, in a greater Quantity, which wrought
so Effectually, bringing off from his Stomach such a boundance of Foul Humors
(which were the only Cause, that no Meats or Drinks could nourish him;) that
from That second Taking, he was so Revived and Refreshed, that he ran about the
House among his Work-folks, as if he had not been Sick at all; only he looked
like a Starveling, as Lean as a Rake, as the Proverb goes. So that he perfectly
recovered out of his Consumption from That very time.

I would fain have persuaded him to have taken it once or twice more, to have
confirmed him in his Health, but could not: He telling me he was Very well,
Very well, etc.

This is as true a Story, as was the former, and very Notable sure.

Of a soar Breast.
IN the same City of Norwich, The Sixth Story.
there was a Servant Maid unto Mr. -- Cook, one of the Sheriffs of the City,
living in Cunsford street. There were two Brothers at That time of the same
Name, both Sheriffs of That City; this Mr. Cook was the younger Brother, but
the Senior Sheriff, and as I am informed, was Mayor there the last Year, or the
Year before: This Maid had been long afflicted with a Soar Breast, and often
healed by Chyrurgeons, but still broak out again, which continued thus many
Years.

It was my Chance to be there, and seeing it, I did advise Her to make use of
This Thing; the which, I left with her, with Directions how to use it; and not
long after, I received a Letter that this Malds Breast was perfectly Cured, and
stood Sound. Her Mistress (Mrs. Cook) sent me a very civil piece of
Thankfulness for it afterward.

This is a true Story, and may easily be Proved, etc.

Of Madness Cured, very Remarkable.
THis Story shall be of a Mad-Woman, The Seventh Story.
at a place called, Wath in Yorkshire, four or five Miles from Rotherham, who
threw her self into a Deep Well of Water, and very heardly was got out Alive, I
being by chance at that Town, hearing of it, went down the Town to see this sad
Sight, and found the Woman fastened to her Bed-Post, with a great Horse-Chaine,
and her Husband with others, sorrowfully standing by; The Woman looking
Frightfully and Sullenly upon us all. So after a little Discourse upon the
occasion, I asked her Husband, if he had sought out for any means or help of
Physicians for his Wives Recovery? etc. His Answer was, That he was a Poor Man,
and had not where-with-all to do it, etc. Then I asked him, If he were willing
to use Means if it were given him? etc. He answered, He should be very
thankful, etc. Whereupon, I ordered it so, That when she called for Drink next
time, there should be a good Dose of this Tincture put into it, (for I
perceived, she was a lusty strong Woman.) The which was done, and soon after
she called for Drink, and took it all off, and in a little time, it began to
work (Rarely Well;) she all the while standing stoutly upon her Legs staring
Mad, and spouting all the Vomits out of her Mouth, to a huge distance from her
(looking furiously about her all the while) till at last she ceast Vomiting,
and it turned to Purging, and then she took her Chamber Pot and used it; the
which, I caused the Man to fetch away, (after she had set it down) that we
might see it, but I never saw such a Stool before; for it was as Black as a
Chimney Stock, a perfect sign of Melancholy, or Madness. And in short, Thus he
continued giving her this same Liquor, and in a very short time, she perfectly
recovered her Right Senses, and that very Harvest, she went a Gleaning among
her Neighbors, as Sensibly and Quietly, as any of them, and so continued.

This Story is as well worth Noteing, as any of the former, and as well worth
the Enquiring into, if any be doubtful of the real truth thereof, there are
particulars enough to find it out.

Of the French POX.
IN this Story of the High French Pox, The Eighth-Story.
I must be excused, in that I nominate no Person, save only a lustly Young Man,
of a Vigorous, Strong, Lively, Brisk and Active Temper, etc. It being too great
a Reflection upon his Reputation, to give any hints toward his being thus
known; I shall therefore only tell you, how that he was Miserably Tormented
with this Foul Disease, and how soon he was Cured.

He was infected with it from Head to Foot, broaken out in Head, Arms,
Privities and Legs, etc.

It had brought him so deplorably Weak, that he could scarcely go up a pair of
Stairs without Fainting or Swounding away.

The Truth is, It was dangerous for any one to come near him, nor did any body
Officiate in his Cure but himself. I gave him this thing freely with exact
Directions, how to use it, which he very carefully followed, and in a short
time, (First, by taking it inwardly, in the Nature of Physic, and then by
outward Washings and Bathings of his Soars and other swelled Parts, etc. till
he was so perfectly Cured, that a while after meeting him in the Street, and
asking him how he did, he Rejoycingly told me, (in these following Words,
clapping his Hand on his Breast) That he thought he was as strong as a Horse,
and so continued.

This is as true a Story as any of the former, and as true as ever any was told
by any Man.

Here are but few Stories (of a great many which I could set down) to show and
prove the admired Virtues of This Rare thing; and if these few will not suffice
to satisfy, concerning the Reality of what I have thus far Declared, more would
be needless; therefore I shall forbear to Nominate any other.

These Eigth Stories are well worth Observation in This Particular, especially,
viz. in that they are each of Them of a different and various kind.

The first, the Plague; the second, the Leprosy; the third, Yallow Jaundice,
Obstrustion and Monthly Visits; the forth, a Dead Child Restored; the fifth, a
Deep Consumption; the sixth, a Sore Breast; the seventh, Madness; the eighth,
the High French Pox; by all which you may plainly see, the Powerful and
Effective Force, and the Universality of this Active Medicine.

And by which it may very easily be conceived, That no other Disease can stand
in its Way, or fail to be Cured, where This Tincture is rightly used or
applied; for all, or most other Diseases may well be said to be comprehended
under These eight great Grievances, (for Omne majus contenet in se minus) so
that cure These; doubt not of cureing any of a lower Rank or Quality, therefore
conclude it, (not only an, but) The Universal Medicine of Vniversals, in a
Physical way. It never fails suddenly to cure any sort of Ague whatever.

^^e singular Quality (by all that take it) it is observed to have, viz. A
singular Quality, constant to this Medicine.
^^ways leaves them with a Hungry Appetite to Meat (which seldom is ^ound in
most other Physics) and is That, which shows the true Effects of its
Operations, viz. That the Stomach is Rectified, the which is no small
Commendations of the Physic; for as the Stomach is well or ill affected, so
(constantly) is the whole Body; for in It, all our Nourishment is determined
either for our Health or Sickness, wherefore This very One, only Commendation
(if it had no more) is enough to Magnify it above all others commonly used.

I will therefore now Conclude this first Part, treating of the first Universal
Medicine, specified in the Title Page, viz. Thus, The First the Worst.

FINIS.
PART. II.
CHAP I. Treating of the second Universal Medicine, which is no Physical
Medicine, but Natural; and is the Best of the Two, as shall appear by what
follows.
ALthough I have in the first part spoken so many Great Truths concerning the
just and deserved Praise of That Most Excellent Medicine, of all Physical
Medicines, and do really believe, that no one Physical Medicine, The reason of
a just Preferrance.
can be compared unto it in That respect; yet I do far prefer the Natural
Universal Medicine before It, because, that That which is Natural, is ever to
be Preferred before That, which is Artificial.

For Nature, being God's Principal Workman (as may be so said) She never Errs,
nor can she do any thing amiss; Her ways are Plain, Perfect and Easy; Gentle,
Sweet and Quiet; Cortain, Absolute and Complete, if she be not interrupted, etc.

So that whosoever follows the Rules and Dictates of Nature, cannot do amiss,
but must needs live Happily in their Health, (for That Is the Theme we are now
upon) and it will hold good in all other things (in Nature) whatever. What may
well be judged one of God's Predestinate Purposes.


Nature being God's Faithful Servant, does all His appointments Faithfully and
most Exactly, even according to His Secret Determination; and sure That may be
looked upon as One, if not the Main Predestinate purpose of God.

We often have the word Nature in our Mouths, What may be understood by the
word Nature.
but few of us do consider, or understand what it is, or how, etc.

If I should say, that Nature is God's own Opperating, it cannot any way
Derogate from the Adorable Honor which is Due to God.

He that shall Studiously, Seriously and Considerately ponder the var^^^^
Manners and Ways of Nature's subtle and stupendous Opperations, in the
production of Millions of Millious, etc. (ad infinitum) of various Varieties of
things, he must needs be Confounded, if he thinks they be otherwise produced,
than by God Himself, (the most wise Infinite.)

Although God gives (or suffers us to give) Names to His Attribute or
Opperations, etc. and to give us leave to call His chief Opperator (Nature) in
regard He knows, how we are Depraved from our First Original Understanding, and
Right Capacity, and that in our Present State, we are now involved, we see like
blind Moles, and are incapable of discerning God aright, in, or by any of his
opperative Works, as we might or should have done, had we continued steadfast
in our Primitive and pure Capacity. Therefore (out of His Compassionate
Condescension, and great Patience to us) He suffers us to call Things by their
wrong Names, and to understand them with a half understanding (if with so much.)

Nature, is God Himself, opperating Mistically and Magically; What is Nature.
for if God were not Present in Nature, or Nature Present in God, Nature could
not produce a Fly, etc. It being the very Instrument (as we may say) in God's
Hand, by which He produces His Admired Wonderful Works.

Therefore (surely) when, and wheresoever we Offend and cross Nature in her
opperative Course, Then and There we Offend and cross God; (although yet God
cannot be said, to be either Offended or Crossed) yet He suffers us to use such
Words, when we Offend or Cross, either Nature or our selves, and thereby
(Consequently) receive just Punishment for such our Great Defaults, by
Sicknesses, Diseases, and all manner of Vexatious Turmoiles and Afflictions,
which are Primarily The Effects of Our Sin, etc. and so Consequently of all
other Our Woes.

Now Here, in This very Place, are we to Search and Look for, The very place
where the Best Universal Medicine is to be had.

Its Name.


and to find The Universal Medicine of All Vniversals; we need not go far off
to seek It, or find It, or pay Deer for It, it being close by, and ready at
Hand, yea, in every Man's Power, and at his Command; and that you may the
better know it, by its Right Name,

It Is Called Temperance.
And it is to be had every where, at any place you come at; and it is Good for
All Sorts of Men, Women and Children, Its Excellencies.
and for most Diseases you can Name; and likewise, a most certain Preventor of
All the chief Diseases, and Sicknesses incident to Mankind; so that now,
although I have Commended the former Universal Medicine for the cheapest of All
Physical Medicine, etc.

Yet This, has far the Preheminency of That for Cheapness; for though That was
Cheap, yet it would cost something, but This will cost you Nothing; yea, This
will save you much Cost: We must therefore Prefer This to be The Very, Very,
Best of Bests (if you can admit of such a Companion.)

But I am Doubtful, because it is so Very Very Cheap, and so very easy to be
obtained, there are more than a great many will undervallue It, and give it no
Entertainment.

For, the Old Proverb is most truly Practiced, viz. Far Fetched, and Dear
Bought is fit for Ladies and other Ignorant People of all sorts; who, although
the Thing be never so Slight or Silly, yet if it come from France, or out of
any other Remote Region, and also Dear, etc. it must then needs be Vallued and
Purchased by all means at any Rate.

Whereas, (one the contrary) Things near Hand, and low Prized, though never so
Good, and Worthy of due Praise, etc. are most what Vndervallued by such
Vn-understanding Ignorants; yet, some there are, Wiser than other some, and to
such as those, This Downright plain Discourse may be of Good Use, if they will
give a little heed unto it, and sollidly consider the Reasons therein
Contained, no doubt, but they may find Great Benefit thereby. And now to the
Medicine it self.

CHAP. II. The Description of the Medicine it self is Short and Easy, and no
difficulty at All in its Use.
I Told you it was Temperance, Three Rules belonging to Temperance.
which must be considered in three Particular Things only. The First, is Food;
the Second, is Labor; the Third, is Rest; all three must be performed with
Moderation and Temperance.

Some Few and Easy Rules are here following.

The first Rule (as to Food) is but this: The first Rule as to Food.
Eat and Drink Sparingly, that is, never to Satiety or Fullness, but ever
leave off with an Appetite, and in so doing, you give no Occasion for Sickness,
in that particular. For by That Means, Nature can never be Oppressed with more
Work then She is able to Perform; and when Nature is thus Reasonably employed,
She joyeth in her Work, and performs it Perfectly and with Ease; Whereas, on
the contrary, Immoderate Eating and Drinking overloads Nature, even as an
inconsiderate Man, who laying more Load upon his strong Horse then the Horse is
able to Bear, wears out the Strength of his Horse, etc. And just so it is with
Gormendizing Men and Women, who Cram down more into their Stomachs, then Nature
can Bear, or Deal with; and then, they must needs be Sick; for Sickness cannot
properly be said to be any thing else, but Nature Oppressed; therefore keep
your self within This Easy Moderate Rule of Food, and you may be sure to Live
Healthfully and Pleasantly; If, in the second Place, you observe Temperance in
your Exercise or Labor also; and as to That, there need not be many Words, or
Rules, One General Rule may ferve for all, which is,

Never to oppress Nature, The second Rule as to Labor.
by over Violent, or over long Labor, or Exercise, at any Employment whatever,
viz. at Sport, Work, or Play; but let it always End with Moderation, and so,
That when you have left off, you can perceive an Aptitude, and a Sensible
Ability of still performing More with the same Vigor and Courage, as you began
with: And in so doing, you cannot be said to injure or impedite Nature, in Her
chief Work, of your own Chiefest Concern, viz. Your Health: But much rather may
be said to do Her a Kindness, in assisting Her, and inabling Her, the more
Easily to perform Her own Work the more Vigorously; for Labor or Exercise, is
as Necessary to a Tranquil Life, as Food it self, yea, and much more too. For
although Food be necessary to maintain Life, yet without Labor or Exercise, it
makes a Dull, Heavy, Blockish, Sottish or Swinish Body, seldom long without
Sickness or Disease, and sure enough, a Short Life ends All: Therefore moderate
Labor is a most Necessary Appurtenance to a Happy Life.

Rest and Sleep, The third Rule as to Sleep.
is the Third Particular Thing needful to be Regarded with Moderation, as
conducing much to a Healthful and Pleasant Life; but if it be taken in Excess,
(Especially by Young People) it makes them Lasie, Dull-Doults, as to any
Activity of Mettle-some or smart Agitation, and commonly Lecherous into the
Bargin, etc. And if they be Great Eaters and Drinkers also, it Puffs Them up to
Corpulency and foul Humors, so that scarce One in Ten Thousand such, live half
their Days, which otherwise they might (by the Strength of Nature) do, Who are
most subject to Infestious Diseases, and a short Life.
their Bodies being apt to receive the Malignity of any Infectious Air, or
other catching Diseases, as are at any time a Foot; and if none such be
generally Abroad, they fall not to Breed them in themselves. Diseases always
are taken or Hatched in foul Bodies; no Man (I believe) ever saw a Puffed Swagging
Fat, Lasie person, live long, that were Intemperate and Regardless in these
Three Particulars last mentioned; therefore it concerns such Men and Women,
Especially to take Good Notice of what I have thus far Writ, toward the
Well-being of all sorts of Constitutions, etc.

The many Benefits which will Arise from This Rare Thing, viz. The English
PROTESTANT-PRIEST'S POWDER: ( Or, The first of these two Universal Medicines)
For whomsoever can be so Happily Fortunate, as to be Possessor But of One
Ounce, yea, or but Half an Ounce thereof, He has a Treasure beyond the Golden
Mounts of That talked of PHILOSOPHERS STONE.
FOR First, He may Preserve himself in Health, The many Benefits attending This
Rare Thing.
or procure Health out of the worst of Sicknesses (Cureable) and Live to a GOOD
OLD AGE.

Secondly, If any Person have taken Poison, one Dose of This Infused Liquor
being taken in Time, will most certainly Expel That Poison.

Thirdly, For its Opperations work, in all manner of needful ways, for the
Expelling of Foul Humors out of the Body, viz. By Vomit, Purge, Glister, or
Sweet, the four Chief Ways of Cleansing the whole Body, etc.

Forthly, One Quarter of an Ounce of This Powder, is a sufficient Stock (for
Ordinary Uses, viz. Vomits, Purges, etc.) for any One Person, During his whole
Life, and his Friend's Life after Him, etc. But if there be Need of Outward
Bathings, for Curing of Pains, Aches, etc. Then there must be more Powder to
the making of such Baths, etc.

Fifthly, Whoever has This Powder, need Never to be at a Penny Charge at any
Time, for the Giving a Vomit, Purge or Glister, etc. so long as he Lives.

Sixthly, He may be Charitable to any Poor Sick Body at this easy Charge at
any Time; and who would not be Willing, yea, Glad to do such Christian
Good-Turns to the Needy and Poor?

Seventhly, It is always Ready at Hand upon any needful Occasion, or sudden
Accident, etc.

Eighthly, Whoever has a Mind to be a Physician, He need but stock Himself with
a convenient Quantity of This Powder, with the which, (and the Directions that
go along with it) He may Safely venture at the Cure of most Common Diseases
attending Mankind.

Ninthly, Although He lives Remote, far from Physicians, He need not send Man
and Horse, Five, Ten, or Twenty Miles for a Doctor, or for Physic.

Tenthly, If in every Town, or Parish throughout the Nation, there were
Provided a Convenient Stock of This Powder, which should always be in the
Custody of the Minister, for the General Relief of the Poor Sick of the Parish,
An Unaccountable Benefit to the whole Nation
they might keep Their Poor Generally in Health; The which doing, would be a
Considerable, and an Unaccountable Benefit to the Whole Nation. For if Poor
People were free from Sickness, etc. the Parishioners would be the more Free
from Charge of Maintaining them, etc. This one Thing is worth serious
Consideration.

Here are but Ten Conveniences Expressed, but they will find many more not
easily Thought upon at present.

Concerning ASTROLOGY, and its Excellent Use in Physic, etc. With a Notable
Story thereupon Depending, etc.
THere is no Noble Art under the Sun, so much Boggl'd at by many, as is The Art
of Astrology; and every Horseman knows what the Cause of a Horse Boggling is,
viz. Fearfulness, caused by the Ignorance of the Horse, his not knowing What
the Object is, which causes him to Stare and Winch thereat; even so it is by
most, who have such Frightful and Auke Apprehensions of That Excellent and very
useful Science. The which, if it were Rightly, Honestly and Religiously made
use of, would be of exceeding Beneficial Use in many of our Affairs, but more
Especially, in Physical and Chyrurgical Occasions or Opperations; and not only
so, But also Highly Advantageous to Man, in his Inward and Spiritual
Contemplations and Considerations, concerning the Wonderful and Mysterious
Works of God, and of His Infinite Wisdom and Power.

I do acknowledge, I am not a fit Advocate, to Plead its Cause as it should be,
or a fit Champion to Defend it, as it ought to be; But Thus much I can say in
its behalf; viz. That whereas formerly, in Ignorance, I was (as most are) a
Jeerer or Fleerer of it, etc. and those that used it. But by Accident, I met
with one of Their Books, which Treated of the Rudiments of That Art.

The Book was a little Quarto Book, of One Darriot, and (to please my
Curiosity) I Read it over, and took Notes of the Chief Particulars in it, which
were concerning the very Rudiments of The Art (very Plain and Easy) and
finding Them to be so Rational and Harmless, etc. I was resolved to Enable my
self (from Those Rules) to Learn to set a Figure of the Heavens; and from
thence to make some Trial of the Verity of That Art, which indeed at That time
was the utmost of my desires or intent therein, and in a short Time after, I
became Able to Set a Figure, etc. And not long after That, I met with a fit
Oppertunity, both to try my Skill, and also to satisfy my self, concerning The
Verity of the Art, which was thus:

It happened, An Eminent Story.
that I was at an intimate Friend's House (a Minister) who both Himself, and
his Wife, were utter Enemies to This Art; and whilst I stayed There (which was
some Weeks) there was a Child Born in the Neibourhood, and this my She Friend
was at the Birth of That Child; so when She came Home, I asked her the Time of
the Child's Birth, the which, She told me Exactly; I then asked her, How all
was with the Birth, viz. Both with the Mother and Child? She Answered, All was
very well and Hopeful, etc. So then (I being glad of so fit and proper an
Oppertunity for Proving the Verity of the Art, I went into my Study, and set a
Figure of That Child's Nativity, and it was the First that ever I set to make a
Trial of The Art; and therefore I endeavored to be as Exact as Possibly I
could, by The Rules of the Art which they give.

And when I had done, I began to Examine the Figure by Those Rules, in each
particular: The first Thing I did, was to see whether the Child was likely to
Live or no.

But, to be short, all the Rules for Life were absolutely against the Child,
yea, very Dismally Sad; insomuch, That (if their Rules were True) the Child
could not Live long.

Whereupon, I was very much Amused, because of the Relation my She Friend gave
me of the Hopefulness of the Contrary, etc. So that I began to Suspect my own
Vnskillfulness in the setting of the Figure, being it was my First attempt in
That Kind.

So I went into my Study and Examined my Figure Over and Over again, to try
where the Fault lay; for I thought it lay in my Figure I set; but when I had
wearied my self sufficiently in so doing, and could find no Fault in setting
the Figure, I was Confirmed, that That Child could not live long. And so I came
forth, and showed my two Loving Friends what I had done, etc. and gave my
Judgment accordingly; but They Smiled at it, in an ordinary Slighting way, etc.
and so it rested a while.

Then after Dinner, I went and set the Figure of the Mother of That Child,
because I had a great mind (upon such certain Radical Terms as then I had,
concerning the Punctuallity of the Time, etc.) to see what was likely to become
of the Mother as well as of the Child; and, in short; I found the Mother as
Desperately in Danger of Death as the Child, according to the Rules the Learned
in That Science have left upon Record. Whereupon I came forth again to my two
Antagonists, and told them what I had found concerning the Mother (as
aforesaid,) but they Laughed on (as before, etc.) so then we were to wait to see
the Issue, what would follow hereupon, which (in short) was Thus, viz.

That within a Week or ten Days, Both Child and Mother were Dead, The Issue of
the whole story.
whereupon my two Friends were forced to put on another kind of Countenance; I
told them, I was no Witch, but a mere Young Novice in That Art, and what I had
Predicted, was not my Own, but what I found Recorded from known Experience; and
from the Rules of Art which are, That if: Such and Such Positions of The Stars
and Planets were So and So in any Nativity at the Hour or Moment of Birth, Such
and Such Consequences would undoubtedly Follow, either for Good or for Bad,
etc. the which most exactly came to pass with This Mother and Her Child.

This is as true a Story as ever was Told, and was so convincing to me at that
Time, as also by diverse Trials since Then, as that I have been Confirmed of the
Verity of That Wonderful Admired Art; and if all the Pretended Artists, were as
Knowing, and as Innocently Honest and True, as the Art it self is Real and
Infallible; it would have more Fidelians by Multitudes, than at present it has.
But enough of this.

Some Plain and Easy Rules to instruct all such who would either Give or take
Physic, so as that they may know from the Rules of That Art, how to choose a
Fit and Proper Season, so that the Physic may Work more Effectually and Kindly
with the Patient, than otherwise it would do, If given at an Unseasonable Time.
THE first thing to be known, is, The Seven Planets, and their Order, which is
Thus, viz.

The First Planet (and the Highest) is Saturn, Marked thus, The Second, Is
Jupiter.. The Third, Is Mars.. The Forth, Is Sol (or the Sun). The Fifth, Is
Venus.. The Sixth, Is Mercury.. The Seventh, and Lowest is Luna..
The Second Thing to be known is,
THat these seven Planets Refer to the seven Days of the Week, viz. Thus:
Saturn Refers to Saturday; Jupiter to Thursday; Mars to Tuesday; Sol to Sunday;
Venus to Friday; Mercury to Wednesday; and Luna to Monday. These two Rules,
must be got readily by Heart.

The Third Thing to be known is,
THat every Planet Rules the first Hour of his own Day, viz. The first Hour
after Sun Rise.

The next Planet in Order after him, Rules the next Hour after that, viz. The
second Hour after Sun Rises.

And so every Planet takes his Hour Orderly, the One after the Other, till the
first seven Hours are run out; and then the first Planet again takes the Eight
Hour, the second Planet the Ninth Hour, the third Planet the Tenth Hour, the
forth Planet the Eleventh Hour, and the fifth Planet the Twelfth Hour, viz. to
Sunset: And thus are the Twelve Hours of the Day provided with different and
Proper Planets to Rule Them.

And now for the Hours of the Night.
THey keep the same Order, only you are to Remember, where you last left off,
and let the next Planet to That, rule the first Hour from Sunset, and so carry
them in the same Order (through the 12 Hours of the Night) till Sunrise again;
and by That Rule, you will find the Proper Planet for the next day, will come in,
to take his proper Hour at Sunrise.

One thorough Example will make all very Plain, A plain Example for Saturday.
therefore i will set down one for the 24 Hours of Saturday, till Sunrise on
Sunday, as follows.

Saturn Rules the first Hour from Sunrise on Saturday, viz. Note Well.
from 6 till 7 a-Clock, (that is, if the Sun do not Rise before, or after 6)
which is about the 10th. of March or September.

Then from 7 to 8 a Clock, Jupiter Rules, from 8 to 9 Mars, from 9 to 10 Sol
^^^es, from 10 to 11 Venus Rules, from 11 to 12 Mercury Rules, and from 12 to
One a Clock Luna Rules.

Now, Note, From One to Two Saturn comes in again and Rules, which is the 8th.
Hour from Sunrise.

Then from 2 to 3 a-Clock Jupiter Rules, from 2 to 4 Mars Rules, from 4 to 5
Sol Rules, and then from 5 to Sunset Venus Rules, (thus the 12 Hours of the
Day are run out.

Now for the Night, from 6 a-Clock to 7 Mercury Rules, from 7 to 8 Luna Rules,
from 8 to 9 Saturn, from 9 to 10 Jupiter, from 10 to 11 Mars, from 11 to 12
Sol, from 12 to 1 Venus; from 1 to 2 Mercury, from 2 to 3 Luna, from 3 to 4
Saturn, from 4 to 5 Jupiter, from 5 to 6 Mars, now from 6 to 7 Sol; and here
you see Sol Rules the first Hour on Sunday, as Saturn did on Saturday.

Practice thus your self with all the other Days, and you will find it very Easy.

A Rule to know the length of a Planetary Hour, every 10 Days, for every Month
in the Year.
THe first 10 Days in January 40 Minutes, the second 10 Days 43 Minutes, the
last 10 Days 46 Minutes.

The first 10 Days in February 48 Minutes, the second 10 Days 51 Minutes, the
last 54 Minutes.

The first 10 Days in March 58 Minutes, the second 10 Days 60 Minutes (or an
Hour,) the last 1 Hour 5 Minutes.

The first 10 Days in April 1 Hour 10 Minutes, the second 10 Days 1 Hour 13
Minutes, the last 1 Hour 16 Minutes.

The first 10 Days in May 1 Hour 19 Minutes, the second 10 Days, 1 Hour 22
Minutes, the last 1 Hour 23 Minutes.

The first 10 Days in June 1 Hour 24 Minutes, the second 10 Days, 1 Hour 24
Minutes, the last 1 Hour 23 Minutes.

And now as the Days begin to shorten, Now begin to shorten them Backwards to
January.
so you must shorten the Hours proportionably Backwards by Minutes, as you
lengthned them by Minutes; and by this Rule, you may assure your self of the
just length of a Planetary Hour for any day in the Year. I need say no more as
to This.

This following (Easy and Short Way) I drew out at the Request of a Friend,
who was not willing to take the Pains of Observing all the Exactnesses of Those
former Rules, and it may serve Tollerably well, with much more Ease than the
Former.
THere are six Hours every day in the Year, which may be good to take Physic
in, viz. Three in the Morning, and Three in the Afterhoon. And when the Days
and Nights are at an Equal Length. Then Thus:

First, On Sunday, The first 3 Hours begin, from an Hour after Sun Rise; the
second 3, from about 2 a Clock Afternoon.

Secondly, On Monday, The first 3 Hours begin from 2 Hours before Sun Rise; the
second 3, from about 11 till 2 Afternoon.

Thirdly, On Tuesday, The first 3 begin from 2 Hours after Sun Rise, till about
11 a-Clock; the second 3, from about 3 till 6.

Forthly, On Wednesday, The first 3 from the Hour before Sun Rise, till 2 Hours
after; the third 3, from about 12 till 3.

Fifthly, On Thursday, The first 3 from about 9 in the Morning, till about 12,
and from about 4 Afternoon, till about 7.

Sixthly, On Friday, The first 3 from Sun Rise, till about 9 a-Clock, and from
1 Afternoon, till about 4.

Seventhly, On Saturday, The first 3 from about 10 in the Morning till 1, and
from about 5 Afternoon till about 8.

This Rule will hold Exactly True, when the Days and Nights are of an Equal
Length; as in March and September.

But as the Days Lengthen or Shorten, so must your Planitary Hours Lengthen or
Shorten. Therefore, to be very Exact, you must always Divide the Time betwixt
Sunrise, and Sunsetting into 12 Equal Parts, and every Part is a Planitary
Hour, be it more or less: But if That be too Troublesome for you, let it
suffice, that you Observe only the abovesaid Rule; and because you have three
Hours Good, ever coming together, you cannot miss of a Tolerable Good Time;
but to be sure you will Miss the Evil Time, and That is a Great Benefit.

I could have been more at Large, but because you do not desire to Trouble your
Self, in such Curiousness, This may be of Good Use unto You,

From Your Loving Friend, T. M.

The Use of a Planetary Hour in Physic, etc.
THe Right use is, To choose such an Hour to take a Vomit, or a Purge in, so, as
that the Physic may Work kindly with the Patient, and Effectually, etc. And it
has been Observed by the Learned, That if Physic be given in the Hour of
Saturn or Mars, it will work very Roughly and Painfully with the Patient; those
two Planets being counted In-Fortunes, and in Physic their Hours always to be
Refused.

Now there are 2 Planets of a different Nature to Saturn and Mars, which
generally are esteemed Good, viz. Venus and Luna, whose Hours are to be chosen;
they being Active, Cool, Gentle and Moist Planets, and do cause the Humors in
the Body to be more Flued and Active, so that they come away more Freely, and
with less Violence.

Therefore, when you take Physic, always observe to take it in one of the
Hours of Venus or Luna, ( Mercury may do well sometimes) either of which will
afford you its Hour once in seven, either in Morning, or in Afternoon, as you
may perceive by Those former Rules.

Therefore be careful to Understand them well, and then you will find both a
Great Benefit and Content in so doing; and as well in other matters as in
Physic (as occasion may fall out.)

The Wise Man tells us, Ecclesiastes 3. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. etc. There is a Time
for All Things under the Sun.

An Advertisement for the Satisfaction of those who may think this is Odd or
Strange, that Music is here joined with Physic in this Work.
READER,
I Am not Ignorant How, That (through Ignorance, or Worse, viz. Envy, etc. This
Work of Mine (Especially This Latter Part (or Conclusion by Music) lies liable
to the Rash Censures of several sorts of Short-sighted People, which may Meet
it.

And methinks I See, and Hear, some of them Frumpingly Laugh, and say, What!
Conclude a Serious Physical Book with a Song? This is a Piece of Strange
Impertinency, etc. Or, Nothing to the Purpose as to Matter in Hand, etc.
Therefore to Rectify the mistake of all such, I will here inform them of such
their Gross Ignorance in That Particular, and let them Plainly See, the Great
Affinity and Likeness, that is betwixt Physic and Music, they both being
Properly and Suitably alike, as to the Health and Well-being of the Man, both
in Body and Mind, (both which make the Complete Man;) for as the Body without
the Mind is No Man, but a Dead Lump only, so the Mind without the Body is No
Man, but a living Spirit only. So that as Physic is Properly Adapted for the
Groser and Lower part of Man, (the Body,) so likewise is Music, as properly
designed for (the Purer and more sublime Part of Man, (the Mind;) therefore it
may be Properly said, that Physic is Music, and Music is Physic. The which
may run in a Handsome Proverb, Thus, viz.

As Physic is Music to the Body me find,
So Music is Physic to a Sick Tempered Mind.
The Proof of This, will be clearly Manifest, both from Scripture and from
History; I Will here Instance in Two Uncontroublable Great Examples, The One from
Scripture, viz. David's Curing Readiness Distempered Sick-Mind by Music Only.

The Other from Unquestionable History, viz. Concerning The Strange Disease of
The Terrantula, which all Learned Physicians know, is a Poison of a certain
little Creature coming from its Teeth or Sting (like That of a Wasp, etc.) so
that whosoever receives That Poison, soon after, falls into a Violent Fit of
Distracted Madness; no Cure could ever be found out for it, But Music only,
and That Perfectly Cures them.

Now, these being such Realities, and Uncontrollable Truths, What will my
Inconsiderate Frumper say, or do for himself, for Laughing, etc. at he knows
not What? I Will tell Him what he shall do, and by Doing it, It may possibly
chance to Do him Good. My Advice therefore is This, viz. Let Him go Learn to
Construe That Old True Latin Sentence, or Proverb, which is, This, Per Risum
Multum, Possis Cognoscere Stultum, and when he has well Learned to Construe It,
let him Learn to Understand the True Meaning and Intent of It, etc. (But enough
of This.)

I Will now return Back to Music and Physic, and let you still further See, how
very suitably They both Agree, in several Other Particulars. Also,

First, As to their very Names, Observe, How They Poetize (as twere) in Meetre,
viz. Music, Physic.

Seconly, As to their Number of Sillables, viz. They are two a Piece.

Thirdly, As to their Number of Letters, viz. They are six a Piece, (count them
else,) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.

Oh! Oh! says the Critic, there are 7 in One, and but 6 in the Other; There
you are Out Mr. Author; No, No, Mr. Crittick, it is You that are Out: Are you so
Unlearned, as not to know, that H. is no Letter? And if so, Then their Number
is Equal, as I have Affirmed.

Oh! Mr. Author, I crave your Pardon, I had forgot That; It Is true, Their
Number is Equal, viz. Six and Six, Well! What then? Why then, I say, This with
the Rest shows how Nearly they are Allied One to the Other, even as Kindred or
Breathren, yea, much rather Twins; so that All this Considered. Tell me again,
or give me some Reason, if you can, for your so Rash casting your F -- s Bolt
upon, or toward me, for joining them Thus Together, in This my Work, etc. But
I hope by This Time, you are so Modest, as to Acknowledge your Mistake, and
think it an Error in you. But, if for all this you cannot be brought to so much
Ingenunity, I have yet two further more Reasonable Reasons to Answer, for what
I have done, if there had been no Affinity or Likeness at all in their Natures
and Properties.

The First is, that my Book Hitherto is a Continuation of Rarities, Riddles and
Mervels, and this Song here Set (without any of the former Considerations) is
most properly suitable to the whole in That respect; for you shall find both
Riddle, Mervile and Rarity: And therefore nothing at All impertinent to the
whole Matter in Hand, but (E Contra) very Congruous and Suitable.

My Second Ultimate and most Principle Reason is. I Publish it as my
Thanksgiving to The Almighty Goodness in that it has pleased Him to make me so
Happy, as I have been, by Receiving so Great a Blessing in the finding out of
This Rich and long Hidden Secret, Equivolent to the Philosopher Stone. As also,
in That I my self have Received several Inestimable Benefits as to my Health
and Well-being Thereby; I therefore Account it a Just Debt and Duty, to His
Infinite Goodness, to return Him the Highest Praises and Thanskgiving, I am
Capable to do; and therefore, This very Cannon also being an other signal Token
of His Peculiar Favor unto me, I think it most Properly Fit, to Return it
again as my Duty, and most Sincere Thankfulness, etc. by It, It being The Best
I have, and far beyond all (in its kind) that ever I was Possessor of. And Now,
Mr. Critt. I hope you will be Satisfied, and Scoff no more at me, for this my
Seeming Impertinence; But rather Endeavor (if you want Skill in That Divine
Art) to enable your Self to Bear a Part in so Needful a Work.

The Author's Advice.
BE Wise, and Trust not thy Precious Life in the Hands of Thou know not Who,
and must be used Thou know no^ How, and may be Cured Thou know not
When, but Thou must Pay Thou know not What; and at the Long-run, make Thy
sad Exit, and leave Thy Executors to Pay the Long Long Bill of Charge, as it is
too sadly seen by Most, when They are Giving up the Ghost, who thought
Themselves so very Wise, but find it now far otherwise when it is too Late.

A Musical Canon, of 4 Parts in One, in the Unison,
Not made by Man nor ever Thought upon,
Yet Real Truth it is; Come Riddle me Riddle me this.
To Thee, O on-ly One-ness, be Glory, Honor and Praise
in E -- ter -- ni -- ty. To Thee,
HA -- le -- lu-jah,
TI -- by O Unus Solus U-nitas, Sit Glory -- a et Honor et Laus
in E -- ter-ni-ta-te. Ti -- by O Unus,
HA -- le -- lu-jah, As Before,
Thus as with Ridd'l and Rarity my Book Begun,
So here with Ridd'l and Rarity it is now Done.
Vale, Valetudine Esto.
FINIS.
The WORLD by LIES has been so much Deceived, That TRVTH when told can
scarcely be Believed.
However, Here it is, Declaring The ENGLISH PRIESTS POWDER, One of the Great
Wonders in NATVRE, And the highest Excellency found out in the whole World; as
will plainly appear by these 4 Properties, Certainly known to be in it.

FIrst, It is Physical; 2ly. Chirurgical; 3ly. Universal; 4ly. Magnetical or
Perpetual. 1st. As it is Physical, it will (Internally) give Vomit, or Purge,
Clyster, Sweat, Work by Urine against the Stone or Gravel; and otherwise
secretly Operate, to the great benefit of Nature.

2ly. As It is Chirurgical; it will (Externally) heal any Wounds, Cuts,
Bruises, Scabs, Cankers, Putrifi'd Sores, Swellings: Ease Pains in the Head,
Body, Joints, or any other part; And an Admirable Remedy for Rheumatick Sore
Eyes.

3ly. As it is Universal, it is a great Cleanser, and a Purifier of the whole
Body and Blood; expelling all Poisonous, Venomous and Corrupt Humors, so
thoroughly, that no Disease can say hold, or remain long, where This Virtue is
rightly used, Provided it be taken in Time; For it prevents, and Cures the
Plague it self, the Pox, French Pox, Running of the Reins, Kings Evil,
Consumptions, Convultions, Frensy, Madness, Appoplexy, Pleuresie, Lethargy,
Spleen, Dropsy, Sciatica, Bloody Flux, Whites, Green Sickness, Fevers, and
Agues of all sorts, etc. and so down to any Ordinary or Common Disease or
Distemper; For by its Purifying or Cleansing Faculty, it does all These Things,
and very many more.

4ly. As it is Magnetical, It always keeps its VIRTVES; For so fast as it gives
forth, so fast it Attracts, Renews, or draws in again, the Influential Virtues
of the Almighty; (the Lodestone does the like, which is wonderful.) So that
when you have once purchased This Rare Thing, you have a Perpetual Store for
your Self, your Family, your Friends, your Poor Neighbors, and your
Generations after you, without any further Cost or Trouble; And you may be
Charitable to any Poor Sick Body, and not give away the value of a Farthing at
any Time: It is therefore the Most Cheap, (yet the most Valuable Medicine in
the World;) Yea, and the Most Convenient; For it is ever ready at hand, in time
of the greatest Extremity or Need; So that it is Necessary for every Householder
(be he Rich or Poor,) to have it always by Him.

A Quarter of an Ounce will serve the ordinary Use of any One Person, the whole
Time of his Life; Half an Ounce for a Family of 2, 3, or 4. And an Ounce for 4,
5, or 6. and so in proportion for Greater.

The Common Price is but double the weight of Silver; and the Cheapest thing on
earth

Communicated for a Public Good; But especially directed to Those who live far
from Good and Worthy Physicians, or cannot go to the Cost of their Physics; by
reason of which, many Thousands live in Misery, Languish, and Die, for Want of.
That, which Here, they may obtain even for a Trifle.

To prevent all Frauds; Know, It is to be sold (at present) in London, only by
Mr. R. White, at the Black Reven in Coleman-street, and Mr. T. Cole in
Holbourn, over against Fotter lane, Instrument maker; where will be Papers of
Ounce, Half-Ounce and Quarter Ounce, Sealed up with the Authors own Coat of
Arms, (viz.) An Armed ^


