The Copy of A LETTER ADDRESSED To the Father Rector at Brussels, found amongst
some Jesuits taken at London, about the third year of His Majesty's Reign.

Wherein is manifested, that the Jesuits from time to time have been the only
Incendiaries and contrivers of the miseries and distractions of this Kingdom.

And how their designs are, by a perpetual motion, carried on by the same
Counsels at this time, as formerly they have been.

June 5th LONDON, Printed for Ralph Rounthwait, 1643.

A Copy of a Letter which was found amongst some Jesuits that were taken lately
at London, and addressed to the Father Rector at Brussels.
Showing there is a perpetual mischievous motion of the Jesuits for Englands
ruin.
FAther Rector,
let not the dump of astonishment seize upon your most ardent and zealous soul
in apprehending this sudden and unexpected calling of a Parliament, we have not
opposed but rather furthered it, so that we hope as much in this Parliament, as
ever we feared any in Qu. Elizabeth's days; You must know the Council is
engaged to assist the King by way of Prerogative, in case the Parliamentary way
should fail; you shall see this Parliament will resemble the Pelican which
takes pleasure to dig out with her own beak, her own bowels. The election
of the Knights and Burgesses have been in such confusion and such apparent
fractions (that which we were wont to procure heretofore with much art and
industry when the Spanish match was in Treaty) that it now works out naturally,
as a botch or boil, and spits and spewes out its own rancour and venom; you
may remember how that famous and immortal Stat^sman the Count Gondamore led
King James's fancy, and rocked him asleep with the soft and sweet sound of
peace, to keep up the Spanish Treaty; likewise we were much bound to some
imminent Statesmen of our own Country to regaine time in procuring those
advantaging cessations of Arms in the Parliament, and in admiring the worth
and honor of the Spanish Nation, vilifying the Hollanders, remonstrating to
King James the State was most ungrateful both to his Predecessor Qu.
Elizabeth, and his sacred Majesty; That the States were more obnoxious then
the Turk, and perpetually injured his Majesty's loving Subjects in the
East Indies; And likewise they had usurped from His Majesty the regality of the
narrow Seas, in fishing upon the English coast. Had the Spanish match taken
effect, (that which was broken by the heat and violence of our furious enemy
the Duke of Buckingham,) certainly King James had deserted the Hollanders.
These great Statesmen had but one means to further their great and good
designs which was to seize on King James, that none but the Puritan faction
which plotted nothing but Anarchy and his confusion, were averse to this most
happy union. We steered on the same course, and have made great use of this
Anarchicall election and have prejudicated and anticipated the great one, that
none but the Kings enemies and his are chosen of the Parliament, and that the
Parliament vows to begin where they left, and will never give over until they
have extirpated him and his posterity. On the other side the same parties are
to be admired for their indefatigable industry, incessantly some out revenge,
and jealousy in most of the Parliament Men, and especially they work upon the
pride and vainglory of such who have been imprisoned, acknowledging that they
are the only Martyrs and Worthies of their Country. London is as much
distempered as ever Florence was, for the Companies are at odds, and the
Common Council have opposed the Magistrates, against their old customs in the
electi^n of Knights, which has bred a great heart-burning in the City, that
twice we can divulge what we list in Paul's, and upon the Exchange, and we
have already rendered our irrecoverable enemy the Duke of Buckingham as odious
as a Toade, so that the people are apt to believe any thing against him; we
hope to be revenged of that ball of Wildfire the Duke, and shortly to quench
his fury; you shall see the same Sword that has vvounded us, drawn upon the
vvound with an Oil that we anointed, it shall make us whole, and this shall
be done, The Parliament as a great ship has dashed twice against the same
Rock, and we have so wrought upon the several complexions of Parliament men
in charging the most temperate and vviser sort; that the best way to overthrow
the Duke is by humble Petition to his Majesty, with the violent sort we have
taken a contrary course by vvorking upon their passions, and inebriating their
fancies with probabilities and precedents that were never heard of, that
Favorites have not been Parliament proof; they may wrestle for a time, but
at last the Parliament has overthrown them upon their backs. We do encourage
them with all the wit we have to fall upon the Duke, and persuade them, now
is the time or never, the King being in such apparent necessity, insomuch as
we assure our selves God has forsaken and infatuated them, that they shall
not only strike and dash upon the rock again, but split and vvracke in the
bottomless Sea of distraction: we have now many strings to our bow, and have
strongly fortified our faction and have added two bulwarks more: for when K.
James lived, you know he was very vehement against Arminianism, and interrupted
with his pestilent wit, and deep learning, our strong designs in Holland, and
was a great friend to that old rebel and heretic the P. of Orange. Now we have
planted that sovereign drug Arminianisme, which we hope will purge the
Protestants from their Heresy, and that flourishes and bears fruits in due
season; The materials which builds upon other Bulwarks are the Projectors and
Beggerers of all ranks and qualities whatsoever; both these factions cooperate
to destroy the Parliament, and introduce a new species and form of government
which is elegant. These factions serve as direct Medicines and Instruments to
our end, which is the universal Catholic Monarchy; our foundation is
mutation, this mutation will cause a relaxation, and many violent diseases in
the body, as the Stone, Gout, etc. And to the speedy distraction or perpetual
and insufferable anguish of the body, which is worse then death it self, we
proceed with Counsel and mature deliberation when and how to work upon the
Dukes jealousy and revenge, and in this we give the honor to those which
merit it, which are the Church Catholics.

There is another matter of consequence, which we take much in our
consideration and tender care, which is, The Puritans, that they hang not upon
the Dukes ears; they are impudent subtle people, and that is to be feared,
lest they should negotiate a reconciliation between the Duke and the
Parliament; that is certain, the Duke would gladly have reconciled himself at
the Parliament at Oxford and Westminster: But now we assure our selves we have
handled the matter, that both Duke and Parliament are irreconcilable. For the
better preventing of the Protestants, the Arminians have already blocked up the
Dukes ears, and we have those of our Religion which stand continually Sentinels
at the Dukes Chamber to see who goes in and out: we cannot be too careful and
circumspect in this regard. I cannot choose but laugh to see how some of our
coat have accoutered themselves; you would scarce know them if you saw them,
and that is admirable, how in speech and gesture they act the Puritans. The
Cambridge Scholars, to their woeful experience, shall see we can act the
Puritans a little better then they can act the Jesuits: They abused our
Patron, Saint Ignatius, in jest, but we will make them smart for it in earnest.
I hope you will excuse my digression, for I confess unto you, I am at this
instant transported with joy to see how happily all instruments and means, as
well great as less, cooperate to our purpose.

But to return to the main fabric, our foundation is Arminianisme: The
Arminians and Projectors, as it appears in the Premises affect mutation;
this we second and enforce by all probable Arguments we can: In the first
place we take into our consideration the Kings honor and present necessity,
and we show how the King may free himself of his wardship, as Lewis the
eleventh did, and for his greater splendour and luster, he may raise a vast
revenue, and not be beholding to his Subjects, which is by way of imposition
and excise; we instance in the Low Countries, and show what a mass of Money
they raised to pay the Armies by Sea and Land, merely out of excise. Then our
Church Catholics proceed to show the means how to settle this excise, which
must be by a mercenary Army of Horse and Foot; for the Horse we have made it
sure they shall be Forraigners and Germans, who will eat up the Kings revenues
and spoil the Country wheresoever they come, though they should be well paid;
what havocke will they then make when they get no pay, for when they are not
duly paid, surely they will do much more in mischief then we of the Catholic
Army will do. We are provident and careful that this mercenary Army of
2000. Horse and 20000. Foot shall be taken out and in pay before the Excise be
settled, enforcing the Excise. The Country is most ready to rise; if the
mercenary Army subjugate the Country, then the Soldiers and Projectors shall
be paid out of the Confiscations: If the Country be too hard for the
Soldiers, then they must consequently mutiny, which is equally advantageous
to us.

Our superlative design is, to work the Protestants as well as the Catholics
to welcome in the Conqueror; that is, by this means we hope instantly to
dissolve Trade, and hinder the building of the Shipping, in propounding
probable designs, and put the State upon Expeditions, as that of Coals, in
taking away the Merchants Ships, and feeding them with hopes to take the
West India Fleet, which is to seek a needle in a bottle of Hay. His Catholic
Majesty shall not want our best intelligence; besides he has Pistacheos and
Caravils, which are still abroad to discover, so you cannot be surprised in any
Harbor. When Trade is ruined, and Shipping decayed, what will become of
Excise? What will become of Nobles and Gentlemen's Revenues? the Yeomen and
Farmers, in which consists the glory of the Infanterie of this Kingdom, they
will turn Rogues, and resemble the Peasants in France, who are little better
then slaves. Trade and Shipping is also much decayed abroad, that London is at
it were besieged for want of fuel, for Sea-coale are at three pound a
Chaldron. When things are brought to this perfection, which we hope will be by
that time his sacred Majesty has settled his affairs in Germany, all the people
in general will long for a conquest, missing their means and revenues which
should maintain and support them according to their several ranks and
qualities. Then we assure our selves that the Lands which were rent and torn
from the Church by that ruinous monster Henry the eighth, shall be reassumed
by our mighty Protector, his Catholic Majesty, to the recalling of those
which are exiled, and delivering thousands of souls which suffer persecution at
home for the testimony of a good conscience. Join your prayers with ours,
imploring the blessed Virgin, and all the host of Angels and holy Martyrs, to
intercede for us. Thus hoping to see Count Tilly, and Marquess Spinola here
about July come twelve months, I rest: In the mean time we pray for all the
happy success in Germany and the Low Countries.

From the County of (...) Your friend J. M.

FINIS.

