THE DECLARATION OF General MASSEY, AND Colonel General POYNTZ.

Showing the true Grounds and Reasons that induced them to depart from the
City, and for a while from the Kingdom.

With their Resolutions what they intend for their own safety, and the
preservation of Religion and Covenant, and the King and Kingdom.

blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed for J. L. in the year, 1647.

The Declaration of General MASSEY, and Colonel General POYNTZ, Showing the
true grounds and Reasons that induced them to depart from the City, and for a
while from the Kingdom.
Being one of us elected lately by the Common Council of the famous City of
London, to be their Commander in chief, for the defense of the King and
Parliament, the Kingdom and the City; And being resolved both of us, to the
uttermost of our power to defend the same, with and above all, the Covenant
which we had so often and so solemnly undertaken for the preservation of
Religion, and finding that by the combination of another party, (which closely
lay as well by policy as by force to undermine us) that we were both left
destitute of all promised helps, and being not able thereby to perform the
work conducing so much to the Covenant we had taken, that Religion in the
first place, might be preserved inviolable and entire, but that amongst many
other, we were exposed our selves to the greatest infamy and danger, that could
almost fall on any men, but especially those, who by the mercy of God have so
faithfully and successefully deported themselves for the preservation of the
Kingdom, both thought it requisite; as well for the general satisfaction of
the Kingdom, as the particular obligation of our own honors, to give the world
notice of the integrity and Candor of our intentions in this our following
Declaration.

We tak no pleasure in the first place (as many do who are against us) to
insinuate into the affections of the people, by repeating what great things God
has done by us in the North and West parts of the Kingdom, especially the
latter.

When all the power and Arms of the united West, having no less then the King
himself and two Princes for their Commanders did sit down before the City of
Gloucester, which not long before, a small party out of Wales, under the command
of the Lord of Raglan^ (since made Earl of Glamorgan) did make full account to
master.

There is no delight taken to repeat with what faithfulness and courage that
City was then and afterward preserved by the one of us, and the whole Kingdom
(as affairs then stood) in relation unto it (...) to declare that the most
able and the most (...) ^ouldiers of the King being there sorely hurt, or
slain outright. I made a way not only to facilitate the Victories to come,
but to put the chief staff of command into those hands also, who since have
born it. For though that not long after the Earl of Essex did break both the
head and the heart of the Kings Army at Newbury, he could not have the honor
to see the great work accomplished in himself. It was the virtue indeed and
the vigilance of Lucullus to overcome the puissant Mithridates of Asia, a
Monarch of more then three Kingdoms, and to break at first that mighty and
almost invincible body of his Horse, but it was the fortune afterward Pompey
to ride in triumph for it at Rome. Whilst we declare the Virtues of one great
Commander, we take not from the merits of another, and we are confident there
is no breast of honor can accuse us of detraction in giving the dead their due.
We shall for our own parts forbear to mention the services achieved for the
State both in Gloucestershire, and the County of Wilts, at Newarke, and in
Cheshire, etc. And what especially was performed in Summersetshire, when first
the great body of General G^rings horse was beaten. Doubtless there will be
hereafter a review of all, and pens that now lie dormant, will be rouzed up
to tell the mistaken their errors: But let others voice our praise, it shall
be enough for us to declare our integrity.

The first beginning of the Distaste was, when one of us did use his best
endeavors to appease the mutiny and mutiners at York. There are no good works
but are attended with envy, and Ambition is so heady that it will know nothing
more eminent then it self. Services beg^n by command of the State grew first
into suspicion, and afterward into offense. It was a crime to do any thing but
what must be cried up by those who would have all things to dance according to
the motions of their own sphere. All things were made subject unto change, and
under tenderness of Conscience even (that which is most to be lamented)
became most spiritual, our Religion also. And the other of us when by order of
Parliament, being a Member of it, I was employed into the Army to make
experience what forces could be drawn from thence for the service in Ireland,
in which (I thank them) I had an eminent place of dignity conferred on me,
where I left nothing unattempted for the dispatching of that service, well
knowing how much it concerned the honor of England, and the necessity of
Ireland. Being there daily in the heads of the Regiments, I observed in many of
them some threescore, and in others more or less of the Soldiers, who
heretofore had served under my Command, who were willing all to adventure their
lives with me in that service, and to that purpose they were drawn up, but so
dow-bak't were the examples of some others in the Army, and their proceedings
so left handed, that what was resolved on overnight, found no effect on the
morning following. But these things are so evidently known, and so apparent to
the whole Kingdom, that we shall not need to insist upon any further
discourse thereof.

It shall suffice that since our departure, we will not presume to deliver any
thing of our own sense upon that which has been altered, acted, or consented
unto or shall be by the instant interposition or the importunity of the Army,
but only to give a true account unto the Kingdom upon what grounds and
reasons we have been induced to forsake the City. For finding all things so
uncertain, and nothing answering to what was promised or expected, we held it
safer wisdom to withdraw to our own friends, whom we have always found fast
and entire to their first principles, then to continue with those who like
ways are beaten with every wind, and do take or receive Counsels as their
fears do prompt them, but not without this confession, that we acknowledge the
General himself to be an excellent personage, and free from those violent
distempers and hears of passion in which other men do delight and perish.

And we do protest that as far as in us lies, (wheresoever God shall call us)
we will improve our utmost abilities for the true settling of Peace in this
Kingdom, for the restoring of the Covenant to Religion, and for the restoring
of his Majesty to his just Rights and Authority, and for the meintaining of the
privileges of the Parliament, and preserving of the people in their lawful
Liberties, and proprieties, and for the relieving our distressed brethren the
Protestants in Ireland. And we profess in the conclusion, that we have
been-necessitated to this Declaration, to give satisfaction to the World, that
the honor, safety, and happiness of this Kingdom shall be evermore the
delight and earnest of our devotion and endeavors, for we shall always labor
to keep our selves in that posture both with Heaven and Earth, as to be ready
to wade through a Sea of blood, and to increase it with our own, that the
Gospel of truth may flourish, and that the Peace of the King, the Parliament,
and the Kingdom, may grow high and happy.

Edw. Massey, Syd. Pointz.



