(...), ESSAYS AND OBSERVATIONS Theological and Moral.

Wherein Many of the humors and diseases of the Age are discovered, and
uncharacterized: diverse cautions and directions praescribed for the avoidance of
their infection, and the promotion of their cure.

Together with some Meditations and Prayers adjoined, serving to the same
purpose.

By a Student in Theology.

JOB. 32. v. 7, 8, 10. I said; Days should speak, and multitude of years
should teach wisdom.

But there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives
understanding.

-- I also will show mine opinion.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for R. Davis in Oxon. 1654.

To the lively Patterns of real Christianity his honored Parents.
I Have great cause to fear the liquor I have expressed from these unripe
grapes may disrelish in your experienced, and judicious Palates: and that what
I now design as an humble testimony of my duty and observance, I may my self
ere long condemn to the flames as a libell and indignity to the relation I am
honored with from you. Yet having thus adventured the usage of the World
(which certainly is grown in all respects more peevish, and ill-natured of late
then formerly) I knew not how to scruple my approach to your gates, whither (if
to any place) proscribed Candor and Humanity has retired. Were I to limne out
the exact pourtraicture of that charity, Christian prudence, and moderation (to
which I chiefly purposed to do homage in these sheets) I should place no
other Archetype before my eyes but your selves. But I shall pray for an Apelles
for that piece: in the mea^e time may it please you to illustrate these obscure
shadows with your gracious radiation, and acceptance.

Your*

To the indifferent Reader.
I Hold it very unnecessary to make an apology for coming forth in print: if
the book do not that for the Author, it is past the power of his Epistle.
Neither have I altogether so much charity beyond discretion as to believe the
utmost of all excuses writers make for them selves, and think I have some
cause to suspect, that what some say [Their widdow's mite is not to be
contemned, That a desire to do good according to that little a man has ought
favorably to be accepted, That they durst not hide their single talent, though
they acknowledge how small that is, and the like] may have more of form in them
then of truth diverse times; and that if these modest mejosies were converted
into the plain sense of their secret thoughts, they would salute the Readers
ear in another style, I shall not therefore provoke my Reader to pass the
same sentence on me, which I have on others, but shall freely acknowledge that
a Cacoethes scribendi had some mixture with my more justifiable inducements to
this work; which if thou desire furthar to be satisfied in, take this
account. Having often in the diversion of my studies (For I must tell thee they
are much of another nature) occasionally glanced upon some such considerations,
and a long time as lightly passed from them, I began at length to question
whether I were not injurious to my Genius, or rather a superior benevolence to
bury such thoughts in their conception? Musing a while hereon, I found at
length that what was so easily represented was not as easily recalled, and that
I had cause to suspect that possibly whilst I labored with more intention to
gather grapes of thorns, I might loose figs ready to drop into my mouth.
Hereupon I used more providence for the future, and as I had such a thought
suggested, I presently committed it to paper. At length upon a review I
conceited them such (for I will not conceal this weakness from thee) as might
perhaps not without some profit be sent to the Press, and so I gave them my
Inprimantur. Thus Reader thou had my designs, and my motives thereunto in
their true colors. I confess I had rather be accounted a fool, than an
hypocrite, and yet rather be accounted a hypocrite, than be one. That I
subjoined a caution now and then, was because I feared diverse in this age to
resemble the Thorns David mentioned at his last, that cannot be taken with
[bare] hands but the man that touches them must be fenced with iron etc: and
if the courteous Reader think the like wanting in other places, I desire his
charity to believe them understood. And now if I can perceive that these few
notions procure any Christian the least advantage, as I pray God they may, I
shall not be quite disanimated either by the harsh censure from others, which I
expect, or the condemnatory sentence of rashness and precocity, which I am
more sure of from my self; but shall think it a business not wholly to be
repented of, that another has been benefitted though by my indiscretion.
Lastly, if this hope fail me (yet I hope not) I have one more in reserve, and
that is to be edifyed my self by hearing and seeing my Book laughed at; which
that thou may the more freely do (if thou think it deserves it) I shall
not tell thee my name, but am

Thy Servant.

Apremunition for the Reader.
It Is reported that the harvest Pythagoras reaped of his long study was Nil
admirari, a freedom from wonder. I dare not boast of the progress of mine;
yet according to what I have made, I find the contrary wonders increase. The
more I look into my self, the more I look abroad, I discover the more things
that provoke my admiration, and the same things when not strange to me, yet
upon further in sight cease not to be wonderful. and therefore Reader I desire
thee not to wonder; if, when thou think not the discoveries new, the
exordium of some of my Observations be, It seems strange to me, or I wonder.

ERRATA.
THe mistakes of the Presses (for more than one was made use of for expedition
sake) which seem most likely to endanger the sense are here corrected. As for
smaller ones, it was thought fit rather to leave them to the Readers candor,
than discourage him with a whole page of Errata's.

In the Essays.
Page 17. lin. 5. for all r. at. p. 18. l. 1. for their r. the Galatians
account. p. 25. l. 3. for lightest r highest. p 30. l. 1* r. effected. p. 65.
l. 1^. r. God grant* p. 58. l. 12. after that r (as I have heard) p. 67. l. 21.
r. haven* p. 69. l. 24. r. A Kempis. p. 106. l: 18. for strange r. stale.

In the Meditations.
Advert: for the eyes r* their eyes page 3. l. 13. for not them r. n^ man.

ESAYES AND OBSERVATIONS.
Some few of the Vanities and Absurdityes in VVriters and Readers.
Observation 1.
I Have often wondered what in the world should persuade so many to write
Books: if you say their eyes are not open to discern their own weaknesses
and the ill success of others, I wonder the more how they can see to write in
the dark. Some present us with daintyes at another cost: and think they
shall Take much by converting the original sense into their own worse words.
Some think borrowed collections of the Terra filius's and Prevaricators wit
worth printing: and yet, after percolation through their brains, the Fresh-Man
himself scarce thinks them worthy his former Humme and stamp. Some have wit
of their own at will, but can they think they have therefore the readers
patience and his penny so too, or that the trifles they adore must exact worship
from all men else? Some write to please fools, and let wiser heads pass what
sentence they will on their works; they applaud themselves at home and are
acquitted by their Peers: and I would that some who think better of what they
do could attest it unto our experience. Some think to make amends for what
they have erred before by a second edition, or The other Part of the same: but
can they hope when they have frayed the Bird far away by the first stone, they
shall hit it with the third or the fourth? Some out of modesty conceal their
names, and yet they leave marks enough in their Books to be descryed: or if
they do not, they hope the difficult discovery may advance their reputation.
Some fancy they shall have much credit for a Greek word here and there
interposed, but who knows how often they consult the Book to accent right?
Some pity the Readers ignorance, and I would they did not more betray their
own? How sollicitous are many of the readers profit, and when they come to a
special sentence they Digit it straight, and that must make amends for the
tedium of the former page* whereas, in a book that deserves printing, there is
scarce a Categorematicall word, but as well deserves a mark. Some are at their
journeyes end soon, and when they lie at the lowest staire of invention, they
think it impossible to ascend higher. Some write out of serious designs, and
yet I wish they did not administer occasion to others of an other temper. Some
tell us a sad story; how much the Age is injured by the loss of some of their
works: and yet how little do they help us to believe it by what they have
saved?* Some fancy they enrich the Age with choice secrets: and yet see as
far into a Millstone, as into their own hearts. Some think they can never,
benefit us enough: but, meethinks, since St John wrote so short a history of
what he might have filled the world with books, they might contract themselves
to a lesser bulk. Some labor after moderation between parties: and yet I
wonder they then put so much viniger in their ink? Or can others think to
reform the vices of the Age by laughing as them only, and so committing a
greater themselves? However there are some that endeavor to do that little
good they can, and when that is joined with humility and discretion, I hugely
accept it: and a few there are able to do much, and Oh that the world would
suffer them!

The Reader also has his vanities, too many to be noted in this have. Some
sterile brains envy others men discoveries, and if they meet with a thought
published which they Locked up as the jewel of their own invention, they
presently in a lamentable tone cry out, They are robbed, they are robbed! and yet
they wear so hard a pavement on their brains, that, it is not easy to think how
any thing could be picked thence. Some like Alexander in his youth, are ill at
ease that so much is acted before they come on the stage, and fear there will
be no part left for them, and yet, it would puzzle a Diviner too choose out any
one for which they are fit. Some fall into Julius Caesar's passion, that anothey
Man rises to high fame at their years: but do they think the Ballcourts, the
Tavernes, or worse places the ready way to do wonders in print? Some let
writing books alone, and read to benefit themselves: but do they hope to be
nourished with the bare sight or taste of their meat? Some are so taken with an
Author that they loose themselves, and are ready at every close to exclaim
(...); He must be more then man that thus speaks, and yet the person it may
be has Worms (good store) in his brains, and my thinks it should discourage
their idolatry, that those who see so overmuch in others are reputed to have
very little in themselves. Some plain hearts light on a profitable treatise,
like it well, and could be edified by it, but that it is not named a Sermon: Or
it may be they say; it is pity there were not more Scripture in it, when it is but
too often there to be quoted. Some have their eyes turned yellow at the sight of
things, so much above their heavy heads: and yet their tongues are nimble
enough, to say; such pregnant parts are often void of grace. Lastly some few
read books without uncharitable reflections on the Author, and are glad to be
profited though they know not by whom: God increase their number.

Caution.
THe ingenius Reader is desired to distinguish between Authors, and believe, I
mean no disparagement to such as are above my reach. Impossible be it for any
to think, I would seem to be without vanities my self: I se a world within me,
and should be glad any would discover more; and I assure him amongst other
writers, and readers, I have not spared my self. Nay I shall confess to thee
that I have been so far gone in one, that I have been forced to my prayers;
that I might count all things dung and dross in comparison of Christ and his
Scriptures. And I petition my more Serious Reader he will not think I induldge
a light satyricall vein, in that this subject has carried me so far in these
unstudied thoughts. I shall endeavor to make him amends in what follows.

Concerning forcible Impressions.
Obser. 2.
AS there is a supernatural illumination whereby a child of God perceives the
things which others see, but perceive not: and a spiritual opening of the
heart cordially to embrace the things, which float only in the surface of
other men's brains, or but undulate their affections at best: so also are there
different impressions of an inferior nature, which the same truth makes on
diverse subjects, yea and many times on the same subject, at diverse seasons.
There may be such a conspiracy of circumstances (some times discernible
sometimes not) so disposing a man, that at one time such an observation, or
such a discourse may be as grateful to him as the cool waters of the well of
Bethlehem were to David: which at another time the same man can relish no more,
then Job did the white of an egg. The words of the wise (I know Solomon says)
are like goads and nails fastened by the masters of the Assemblies: and yet
these pierce deeper when they meet with an object so softened for impression:
and it is not the least part of their wisdom to make a good guess thereat. I
am confident the Masters of our Assemblies might find it profitable enough
more to study this Art: and yet I am not ignorant that Solomon's character
concerning a word spoken in season is often in their mouths, though sometimes
they therewith usher in a discourse, which has little imaginable in it to make
it seem in season, but that good things are never out. I have often thought I
have heard a Sermon, in but one Text opportunely applied: and have had my head
not once more instructed, and my affections more moved by one short sentence,
or a close reproof; than I can many times perceive by a whole Doctrine,
Reasons and Use. I doubt not but men mean well, and I know God chooses the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise: yet this hinders me not,
but that I should wish them the best instructed that may be, who think
themselves fit to teach, and I tremble (as much as any I hope) to have the
weakest of Gods messingers lightly regarded.

Of Natural weaknesses.
Obs. 3.
It is a strange thing to observe what force and pertinacity there is in some
natural weaknesses and a stranger yet that so many men so little heed it, but
presume so largly on themselves. To speak my own experience, I have often
taken notice of a particular infirmity in my self (which is not necessary for
the reader to be named) have condemned it as a folly worth laughing at in
others, and unworthy the esteem my friends charity have conferred on my self,
which I have often suffered by, which I have reproved in the very acting, and
hated afterward: and yet again and again fall into it (notwithstanding all
my discourses, reasonings, resolvings, and experimental smart for it) as if
there were witchcraft in that proverb.

Naturam expellas furca, licet usqut recurret. My soul! this case is beside
religion: yet I doubt if thou look narrowly into thy self, thou might find
it many parallels of that concernment. Let this admonish thee that it is not in
man that walks to direct his way, but in him, from whom are the very
preparations of the heart.

Concerning the sympathy of Souls.
Obs. 4.
THere is a strange hermony between some souls: and though all true Christians
are tied together by a mystical union, yet some of these do more sympathize
between themselves then do others. I have more then once met with an author,
that has so happily expressed his own thoughts (and in some part mine too) in
points of charity, or humility, or holy jealousy over a man's own spirit, that,
me thought, he uttered his soul to me, and unbowelled the very heart of an
experienced awefull christian. I have seemed exactly to know the man, though I
never saw his face: and have been ready to leave my body behind to search him
out, to have purer communication with his spirit, and to mingle together our
souls.

My own heart is so deceitful, that I dare not be overbold in making too
confident conclusions upon my self: much less dare I hold it (any whit)
impossible I might frame a wrong Jdea of another. Yet I have met with some men
that have so fully and experimentally expressed to me the power of Godliness
in them; that I have been ready to say as inspired Paul did of his fruits of
the Lord: that I knew their election; and conclude without any reserve of
hesitation, that this is the true grace of God wherein they stand.

Verily I persuade my self I lie open to no danger (of that nature) more then
of being led into an error, or inconvenience by the authotity of a person that
has so gained such an interest in me. And therefore because God only is wise,
and deceives not, nor can be deceived, but every man a liar; I shall ever make
the Italian Proverb my prayer; A chi mi fide mi guarda Dio Far more open to
danger do they lie, who believe such cannot err whose persons (it may be for
some advantage) they have in admiration: and therefore credit the Gospel,
because in their mouths. But questionless, if the wise virgins had no oil to
spare for others lamps, in the next world, they must sit in utter darkness,
who in this borrow all their light from fools.

Concerning ill will undeserved.
5 Observa:
It Was not Jerimies hard condition only, no nor that modern German Divines, to
make that bitter expostulation; Woe is we my mother that thou have borne me a
man of strife, and a man of contention to the whole earth! I have neither lent
on usury, neither have men lent on usury to me, and yet every one of them does
curse me. There are those in every age that might claim a share in that
complaint, but how many in this? Diverse with that Prophet are far from
desiring or rejoicing all the evil day (God he knows it) and yet every man
thinks they bode and mean them ill. Many compare them to Ishmael, whose hand
was against every man, and they receive Ishmaels portion from others; Every
man's hand and tongue is against them: And though they are for peace (none more)
yet when they speak thereof to others (who agree well enough among themselves)
they make themselves ready for contention: so that to the outward eye the fault
seems next those from whom it is farthest. That courageous Apostle was
somewhat disheartened, (or greived at least) that the more be loved his
Corinthians the less he was beloved: and that (in their account) he was become
their enemy for telling them the truth. An ingenuous soul hates no
imputation more, than that of being a Timon (and good reason too, there is none
but a Devil further from a Christian:) what an affliction and wound must it
needs be to the very heart of meek Christians, to lie undeservedly under this
censure; to have their good meanings ill interpreted, and their very endeavors
to explain themselves, misconstrued or not believed? How many are counted busy
pragmaitcks in the world, that meddle with no man's affairs, but when they
think conscience and charity obliegeth them, and then but fearfully too?
Howbeit if a small indiscretion or mistake be committed, (from the which the
highest Saints are not wholly privileged) oh into what foul names are they
aggravated! and one such error committed must stop their mouths for the
future, although from speaking truth, and now such attempts lie under double
prejudice.

However, the case is not yet at the saddest* if this measure be measured to
them from such as are friends to none who are enemies to their sins: but if
those that seem better Christians express somewhat of this nature toward
them, if to them their breath be offensive, and such as should be their
Familiars draw away, or stand aloof off them, allthough they entreat them
with the words of a guilelesse mouth; oh into what bitter complaints like those
we read of Job and Heman, must they necessarily break out? and yet I am
confident* God out of gracious design suffers many of his dear children to be
exercised by this temptation; under which certainly they would sink, did not
God support them by a strong hand.

Obser. 6.
Uncharitable Mistakes.
THere is one mistake rife amongst Christians, the Mother of many
inconveniences and much uncharitableness, and that is, Men's passing a judgment
upon others according to what they have experimented in themselves, or at least
believe so. How many busy brains, as if they we^^ (...), take upon them to
read the secrets of others hearts, and frame unto themselves such and such
Idea's of other men's tempers, Spirits, designs, and commonly take the copy
from themselves (though they perceive it not,) and then every thin color
serves them for a demonstration? What rashness is it in some men to require
of others an exact account of the time and other circumstances of their
conversion, a legible history of the conflicts and agonies of their souls, and
(what is hardest of all) a positive determination how the case stands with the^
now in particulars, and all this to be done, according to the standard of what
they have felt or fancied in themselves? Whereas many a true Israelite may
wander out his whole life in the wilderness; and a Moses himself not have a
full sight of Canaan till his last minute. Bu alas; how grosely do such men
forget what they so often read, that the heart only knows its own heaviness,
and a stranger cannot [fully] partake of his joy, that the spirit, like the
wind, blows when, and where, and how it lists, that grace is compared by
Truth it self to seeds and plants which spring and grow a man sees not,
knowth not how? There are some Christians that have run through such a maze in
their lives, that they cannot track their own steps: Some have their evidences
so blurred, and interlined, that their own eyes will not serve many times to
read them. Too many, like Hagar, see not the wels of consolation before them,
and some meet with such riddles in their souls, or such misteryes in the
method of Gods dealing with them; that the next world only can resolve and
interpret them* And 'twould be a hard sentence to conclude all such
unsanctified persons, that cannot assure themselves (much less others) that
they are not such.

This error is then most dangerous when it swayeth the pulpit, and is oftener
there I fear then taken notice of. It Is the duty of such as speak from that
place (I doubt not) to exhort us to examine and try our selves whether we be
in the faith, to give all diligence to make our calling and election sure. It
is their duty too, to take care they grieve not a weak brother for whom Christ
Dyed, or drive a stray sheep further from the fold. There are criterions (I
question not) which discriminate between the sheep, and the Goats, yet it is
not impossible for any but the chief shepherd to fail sometimes in the
application.

The Vain Man's self-miracle
Obser. 7.
THere are some men whose brains are filled with a very little, and yet think
all men's else with much less. How difficultly are they persuaded to believe,
that those who know more know so much as themselves, and if they are overcome
by some conviction irresistible, yet will they create some choice fantastical
circumstances or other, whereby their knowledge of the same things must
out-value other men's. If by chance they light upon a good thought or
observation (which though new to them, is yet common and familiar to wiser
heads) strait ways with Pythagoras they cry (...), and can hardly forbear
Sacrificing Hacatombs to their good stars. T hey think they are borne to
oblige the whole world by their great parts: and they account it the lightest
sin to be parsimonious of them. The deep commiseration they have of the
mistakes, and follyes, and ignorances of the age makes them always eager to
fly up to the Theater; and if some small occasion be presented more justifiable
then usual, they are like El^hu in Job; Behold they are full of matter, and
their spirit within them constraines them: Their Belly is as wine which has no
vent, and if they should now hold their peace, they should burst like new
bottels; and yet by the leave of their rare gifts, many of those, they so take
upon them to instruct, may reply as Job did to his other friends; Sure [as ye
take your selves] ye are the men, and wisdom must dye with you. But we have
understanding as well as you, we are not inferior to you: yea who know not
such things as these? How forcible are are right words: but what dorh your
arguing reprove? But should an Angel tell them this story, they would scarce be
drawn to credit him; but think still their meanest thoughts deserve Golden
Characters, though their fancy at the highest scarce exceeds the tract of
obvious discourse. God forbid this humor should carry any man up into the
Pulpit. Toward that Sacred function (which above all other I honor and
reverence, and for which I wish my self once competently sufficient) I cannot
think I can use candor enough. Far be from me an uncharitable suspicion
toward Persons engaged in that employment, which is so deeply interessed in
humility and self denial, which has already so little encouragement in the
world, and is like to have less. I dare not, like Miriam, speak, nay nor think
against a Servant of the Lord, be he but a Door Keeper, as well as a Mose, sor
an Aaron. Experience tells me the strongest brains have not always done God and
his Church the best service: and this I shall think a warrant for some of
less abilities. Yea, if the case need, I shall strive to suppose many other
pious incitements in those, in whom I cannot discover, nor scarce imagine them.
Yet I cannot deny, but some (and the more is the pity, if many) mingle such
rash confidence with their unexperienced ignorance in that dreadful place,
that it would puzzle a charity, which is not blind and deaf too, to excuse
them from this vanity, or frame a better apology for them.

Caution.
LEast a Reader may think the former part of the proceeding Essay my own
Charecter (which if he does, God forgive him. I do) Let him know, that I
publish not these Observations for such as have taken notice of them already,
and far better then myself, (which I believe are multitudes) but for those
that as yet have not, withal I should be glad that those whom I cannot suppose
ignorant of them, would in their practice more demonstrate it. For my own
part, I have been in the two extremes (of which Quintilian knew not whether
most to blame) one while not any thing I did, but liked me highly (yet owning
what ever I had for Gods free Gui^s) and afterward not any thing I did but was
quite as far from it, yet then too, not calling God illiberall. And if at the
present I am not in the mean, yet I hope I am coming near it. I shall tell
thee further (if thou will believe I do it without any indirect design) that
there is nothing for which I have wrastled with God more (and that with prayers
and tears) then for lowly and charitable spirit: and I have a good hope that
for the intercession of his Son, He has not shut out my prayer.

Obser. 8.
Difference of Parts.
I Have often observed (but seldom without wonder) the diversity of men's
parts: though lam not thereby induced with a French Author to conclude the
difference greater between some men and others* then between some men and
Bruits. It has been often observed how that some men in the diversion of their
studies have affected with ease, what would have been too great a task for an
Age of some plodding students serious thoughts. But this puzzleth me most. That
among young men I perceive those allotted best parts, who either least value
them, or least mind their real improvement. That a merry boon Blade (that
passionately affects the Tavern, or companions, or his dog, or horse, or
something Worse, and that so much beyond the cloisters and Books which he
accounts*himselfe so unluckily allied to) shall yet pass with general
esteem, and come off (in any business) with applause; whilst the close student
sits neglected in his cell, or comes abroad, and is smiled at; men wondering
what infection he has got from his cobwebs, and dust, and he himself too often
bewailing his dear pennyworthes, and sometimes in the Poets phrase
interrogating himself, whether it deserve so much pains, and watching only.

Pallere and toto vinum nescire Decembri? It Is said (for a miracle) of the
gatherers of Manna, That he that had gathered much had nothing over, and he
that had gathered little had no lack: but it seems an absurdity here that the
industrious gatherer should want, and the Truant have to spare. I am not so
nigh Atheist as to allow. Fortune a hand in this uneven distribution, but
therein discern a finger of providence which rules all. It may be God will
have the edge of ambition taken off first, and that requires years. It may be
He will have a man at a loss to himself in his parts, that so he may the more
readily acknowledge all he has Gods gift, and consequently with less
temptation to pride, or self seeking employ all in Gods service, Many other
gracious intentions God may have toward these backward persons, whereas on the
contrary the former person parts perish commonly in the using, yea and many
times too before that. 'Its no common thing to see the same party in reputation
both in his youth, and in his full age: and because they come to same to soon,
they keep not in it long. The lavish praises men bestow upon their Juvenile
seize makes them think they are come to their Nil Ultra then, and
therefore (laboring only for themselves, and thinking vain breath reward
enough) for want of going forward, they go back. Thus what at the Horizon
promised a glorious noonday Sun suddenly vanishes into a snuff. I should
prophecy that industrious soul, who with Aquinas a long time bears the
Nickname of Bos Mutus the dumb Ox, most likely atlength (as great Albertus
said of him) to fill the whole world with his lowings.

The Commonwealth mere Wits.
Obs: 9.
There is a commonwealth of men, in their own eyes, the most of all other
refined from the vulgar, and their interest of greater concernment then all
else* and yet of all others, if wanting would be least missed. They are not
only like Aesops Flies, in that buzzing about the wheels of all affairs they
fancy to themselves what a dust they raise: but like his B^etle too, which made
Jupiter let fall the Eagles eggs out of his lap. They boast between
themselves great security, and cry with Nero; (...), yea while they live; they
fear naught: and yet their Basis rests on things more uncertain and fleeting
than the air and that is but Chimara's and fancies. To be serious with them a
little, I fear none are more hardly persuaded to be Christians: For pride,
vain glory; and contempt of others (those stiff Opposites to humbling grace)
though I dare not affirm them strict Proprieties to that society, yet I wish
they did not appear Accidents almost inseparable. Besides, how far is he
from cure that has not one eye open to see his disease, and will as soon
almost deny his Creed as believe those that can discern better? Give them a
serious exhortation or reproof, they return you back again, in a scoff,
the salutation of Grave and Wise. And if you labor to answer them according to
their foolishness, you must expect but worse language It Is the first rudiment
of that profession, Never to acknowledge a fault: and they would have it their
Privilege, that none should dare tell them of any. Howbeit if any man be se
bold, it would be a sin impardonable by the Company, to let him escape
unpunished; nay, I warrant you, if words could wound, the man should bleed to
death. Being such untractable subjects I leave them to God who is best able to
deal with them*

Of Vanity in Society and Discourse.
Obs: 10.
I Have wondered much at some men's choice of their company (and the same
Christians, and as they think, good ones too.) How many of them are unequally
yoaked together (in respect of elected society) with (I say not Infidells, yet)
unbelievers in a true sense? To omit the assembly of scoffers, to who^ with
David I would not have my soul joined; I cannot choose my companions and
friends, as do some (who yet think not themselves of that Tribe:) nor can I
think any man unworthy my acquaintance, because he wants wit; nay rather I
fear some that have it, and that not out of any incapacity of being pleased
with their society, but out of an Experience of not being profited. I value
much acuteness in discourse, but I would not have my meat seasoned with
poisoned salt: and when things are admirable for the substance, I cannot deride
them for their dress. Neither can I discern any thing I dare laugh at in such
a saying as this; One grain of grace is more worth then a pound of wit.

I know, some men fear it would be a Disparagement to their parts, to
converse with one of weaker than themselves: but (come what will of it) I hold
it my duty, when opportunity presents me with one such, and I do it with
delight. I can thank God, who has made me differ from another, without any
arrogant insultation over him: and do not tell him, I pity his ignorance, but
earnestly endeavor to redress it. I can receive his discourse without
exploding the weakness of i^* and am not provoked to upbraid him, if he
apapprehend not mine; yea rather, correct the error my self, and fit my future
speech to his capacity

But, alas! How much beside their purpose (and, I would That were all) are most
Christians whole society and discourse? I shall not here mention correptions,
advices, private exhortations and encouragements (those maine businesses of
society) to all which Christians are as much obliged, as they do neglect
them: How many seem to think all rationality to consist in risibility, and
the employment of their time to apprehend or make matter whereon to exercise
that faculty? How many hope for high esteem by setting at naught a weak
brother; or, it may be, by making him appear so, who is stronger than
themselves? I tremble to think how some can talk to the grief of those, whom
God has wounded: and many who do not so themselves, yet without scruple give
their assent, and sometimes their applause too, to those that do. I reduce my
thoughts from this sad subject: only I am confident, if Solomon himself (who
so much commended cheerfulness) were now on earth, and St Paul (who bade us
always rejoice) what men now adays delight in as facetious discourse, they
would with joint votes condemn for mad, if not devilish mirth.

Caution.
LEast my reader should think some things in this too arrogant for me to spoke
of my self: I shall not oblige him to believe that I am every whit as I there
described, but that I passionately desire it. I beg of his charity also to
apply this Caution to what other expression else where in my Book, he may
think needs it.

Of Frugality.
Obser. 11.
I Have often wondered at the difference of our days from the discriptions of
the former; and in nothing more than in the points of Frugality. To pass over
those white ages, when the Wealthy Patriarchs disdained not the offices of
husbandmen, and of Sheepherds when great men employed their children, yea their
daughters, that soft sex, in such services in the modern age (that about
Christ's time I mean) Frugality was never accounted a crime. Cicero in his
defense of Dejotarus, King, maintaind it a virtue proper for a Prince. The
Sumptuary laws, the apothegms, the patterns and presidents thereof famously
known, and too many to be repeated, speak sufficiently in it is behalf.
Christianity certainly has not cashiered it it is esteem: nay rather on many
good grounds and arguments has advanced it (far above a semy-vertue) into the
roll of virtues and duties obliging the conscience it self; and questionless
the best of the primitive Christians were not so neglectful of the repute of
the Gospel, so un-mindefull of the necessities of the Saints, as in their
opinions, or practice to undervalue it. Yet by what experience I have had it,
it seems to me now to be as far banished from most places as is justice: nay
it has not that thin garment of words allowed it, with honesty, to keep it from
being sterved. I have often wondered that such, as profess themselves disciples
of Jesus, should with less straining bestow pounds upon the rich, upon
superfluities, upon impertinent company, (when commonly the loss of time is
equally considerable) than far smaller sums on the poor members of Christ,
or whom at least charity obliges them to hope to be such. But I know not what
limits to put to my admiration, that a Christian should be worse thought of for
such acts of Charity, and such living as may maintain them, than for direct
breaches of scripture commands in apparel, in diet, in revelling banquetings
and comessations; as if every Prodigal were sure to return home to his father
with him in the Gospel, or there were no favor to be expected for such sons
as have not ru^ that riotous course. I know a man that by general vote was
cast for a parsimonious, and a covetous fellow; yea not a few among the more
serious sort thought him much too close handed, and yet the same man as ready
as any to spend liberally according to his ability, where the least shadow of
reason could make it seem fitting* and by his own conscience so free from that
crime that he ranked the contrary in his usual confessions. Certainly, as the
world goes now, a man had need have a great measure of selfdenyall to be a
good husband as well as a good Christian.

Concerning Parsimony of Gifts.
Obs: 12.
ONe would think the obligations christianity lays on us to edify one another
(yea, and that in such express terms, as not a word allowed, but what may some
way serve for that use, Ephesians: 4.) should have exempted Christians from that
accusation among the Ancients, clausis thesauris incubandi, of niggardly
tenacity and concealment of their inquisitions and gifts* and yet we find
some, that may without injustice be taxed for such parsimony: some that sit a
brood on their parts, and that till they are addle too. Diverse men gather honey
only for themselves. They grudge to give away the sweat of their brain: and
they had rather have their wealth be buried with them, than make others rich
without pains. Others think whatever is lent to another is alien'd from
themselves: and their barren hopes are so far from promising them an
increase, that the count the principal lost. How vain and absurd are these
humors, how much more sordid this penuriousnes than that of the purse? It is
there true, a man cannot retain what he gives, but must rely on the hopes
religion affords him of a remuneration: but here in the very act of liberality
the stock increases. I know it the humor of vain men to catch at hints of
discourse, and before their opinion be asked, to give you their judgment and
dicision of any matter in debate: though perhaps they borrow from another what
ever they speak. But yet he is very short sighted that cannot discover a mean
between this, and the former weakness: Nor is his judgment better who cannot
distinguish between an obligation, to profit others, and an affectation of
undue praises unto our self. And were the matter put to my choice, I wonld
rather undergo this censure undeserved, than neglect the former duty when an
opportunity engaged* You will say, such men as these reserve their parts for a
fit opportunity to express them: but do they suppose none such but the
public Theaters, and whence they may be rewarded with a grande and insanum
(...)? Or are their endowments so scanty, that they have nothing to spare for a
private charity or civility? Or rather is their mind so vain, that they must
sell every thing for general applause? If I should yield them what they
foolishly pretend, that public places and imploiments are the proper stage
where on to act their parts: yet *it is certain that these private offices are
so far from hindering them therein, that they further them. That Glory of
Christ-Coll edge in Cambridge, (than in whom I am persuaded that in no man
since primitive times rare gifts were tempered with more moderation and
humility) was wont to profess himself beholding to those, who would minister
a handsome occasion to him to utter any of his choice notions; and when others
thought themselves great gainers thereby, he accounted himself a greater. A
well fraught soul is far from the fear of spending it is stock: nay rather he
is troubled his wares should lie on his hands: and because public
opportunities are not presented often enough, he gladly makes use of the
private to keep his notions from gathering rust; and the more liberally he
spends this way, the more his store increases. Whereas those illiberall men,
who keep their parts for themselves, and to show them to the public, do but
loose their labor, and must be contended with the Title of Vmbratiles
Doctores; and like Isocrates, declaime in the shade.

Concerning the vain boasting Saint-ship.
Obs: 13.
It Is to be feared, that many men (and some such as persuade themselves they
have an Apostolical spirit beyond all others) do yet in their purposes and
endeavors quite contradict St Paul's temper. That blessed Saint was fearful
that his Corinthians might think over highly of him, and therefore (as he
tells them) forbore the discovery of many excellencies and privileges* which
he had received of God; and that, least any man should think of him, above
what they heard of him, or saw in him. I omit those whose whole aim is like
Simon Magus, to be thought some great ones; such as take upon them to have
clear knowledge of those mysteries the Gospel has drawn a veil over, and
not only vent the cabbinet secrets of Gods unrevealed will and unsearchable
ways before men, but to God himself (all which are so far from a true Gospel
spirit (which necessarily must be an humble, a sober, and a charitable one) as
that they seem to be the very (...) prophesied of by St Peeter, Saint Jude and
others.) I fear too much of this leaven remains undiscerned among those who
have the reputation of a more sober fect, should we otherwise hear so many,
if not direct ostentations, yet by circumlocution and necessary consequence?
It Is to be feared, some men make a vain glorying of that which is the greatest
obligation to humility; namely, the free grace of God. Let no man therefore
say, the persons I mean assume nothing unto themselves, but ascribe all to
Gods mercy, and so no danger in it, their boasting being in the Lord. For I
here suspect a great depth of Satan* God enable his to fathom it. Suppose we
should hear a Courtier thus speaking; It is my Masters pleasure thus highly to
honor and confide in me; True it is, there is nothing in me that may lay
claim to the least of these privileges bestowed upon me; If so had been his
pleasure he might have made choice of such or such a one of his servants for
these employments, and dignities he has entrusted me in: and yet all the while
the man has no sufficient warrant for such his presumptuous conceit, nay
contrarily the persons he so much exalts himself above, are indeed much more
in the Princes favor, he has already made more experience of their humility
diligence and faithfulness, and intends them further honor. Would not every
man conclude this Courtier diseased in his brains? The Pharisee in the Gospel
acknowledged God the Author of what he gloried in, and gave him praise for many
favors: His fault was that he could not allow the Contemned Publican a share
in this privilege. There are many men take upon themselves to be Daniels,
Persons greatly beloved of God and yet have no better authority for their
assurance, than that of a presumptuous fancy. Many think the Lord does nothing
almost (great or small) but he reveals the secret to them: Many persuade
themselves that they have heard the words of God and seen the visions of the
Almighty; and yet some of those they look upon as strangers to God may
without Miriams guilt reply to them in her words; Has the Lord spoken only to
you, has he not also spoken to us? A vast difference there is between a Man's
being a reprobate and a man's vaunting of his being a Saint. It Is true I grant
we are bound to glory in the Lord: Yet not beyond the line, of things which God
has not wrought in us, or by us.

Of Pride of Parts.
Obs: 14*
I Cannot persuade my self there is any sin more connaturall, and general
than Pride, and of all sorts of pride that of a man's parts There is scarce a
fool in the world but conceiteth many particulars in himself, wherein he
excells other men; and scarce a wise man in the world but has some alloy of
this folly. The inbred flattery of our selves within us makes us (according to
the proverb) think all our own geese swans and our most deformed issue
amiable. Hence those rash, and unsuccessefull attempts in writing, and
speaking, when men cannot distinguish between the affection of a Mother, and a
Stepdame. Quintilian spoke solid experience that it was seldom seen that a man
should suspect himself enough. Life and soul cannot keep together in a man
out of conceit with himself; unless he has a higher principle then morality
to sustain him. And yet as unwillingly as men are to appear weak to
themselves, they are far more unwilling to appear so to others. They know
other men judge according to outward appearances, and so they dare not trust
them for such favorable indulgences, as they allow themselves. Hence those
Sollicitous arts and studied designs of enhaunsing a man's reputation in
public. Those cautelous concealments of defects, which would be less seen, if
freely laid open: For alas! How short do those attempts fall of the scope
they aim at? What an error in policy do these opiniative wise men commit?
There is nothing more conducing to a good fame and esteem than a prudent
security, and neglect of it. Men brook not to sell their valuations at
prescribed rates: nor to have their commendations extorted from them as a debt
or tribute; nay rather they suspect designs when such sedulous artifice is
used, and think the river not deep because it makes a noise.

There is yet a more deadly poison in Pride, and that is when it infects
Christianity it self, and the strongest obligations to humility. I have spoken
somewhat hereof already, and therefore I shall only now take notice how
difficultly this enemy is ejected even out of a good Christians heart. Alas!
How many lurking holes, and strong holds to retire to does it find in an humble
Soul, that labors it is extermination. Many times it mingleth it self with
the very prayers, and tears that are plentifully powered out for it is
mortification. A devout Christian may, with Hezekiah, be humbled for the pride
of his heart and yet again be proud of that humility. It lies perdue many
times, and when we think our selves most safe surpriseth us, and through
strange subtilties gathers strength on us a long time ere discovered; and when
discovered, so varieth it is shapes, that it is longer ere subdued. I say not
that this pride is reigning, (yea contrary, It Is most likely there to reign,
where least perceived) Yet since of all relicts of the old man there is none
more displeasing in the eyes of God, and none more prejudicall to a Saint, I
should think this Devil the mee^est of all others to be encountered with
fasting and prayer. If any Readers case requires, and he so please, he may make
use of the prayer and meditation I have added amongst others for this purpose.

Of Arguments for Sermons.
Obs: 15.
A Man would think in this abundance of preaching, and preachers (God be
praised for both) that there should not one point of divinity (of what nature
soever) escape frequent discussion; and yet an observant Auditour may perceive
it much otherwise. To omit the polemicall part of Divinity, which is not held
so proper for the Pulpit, (and yet some Auditories and occasions may seem more
than to tolerate them, and it would do vulgar ears no hurt to be wisely and
discreetly instructed in those points, they are called upon to be so zealous
for, unless we will defend in our selves the implicit faith we condemn in our
Advensaries) To omit, I say, controverfiall divinity; we may observe that very
many useful practical points are rarely handled in the Pulpit; yea and some
the most seasonable of all others. I aim not at the person that thought
strange to hear another preach of faith and Repentance in this age, which
seemed to him as if the man had been in a dream all these times of Glorious
dispensations (and I wonder what he would have thought of one that should have
discoursed concerning unruly and selfewilled Spirits, concerning false
prophets, and deluders, and the Trial of Spirits, etc.) I speak of sober men,
and such as have not derived their Gospel from the late dark and mysterious
providence of God in this nation. How few of these I say, instruct us in many
points of conscience very necessary for this age; as concerning the obligation
and dispensation of oaths: of the necessity, for me, and circumstances of
Christian communion, of schism, of obedience in vicissitudes of civil
government. Many give us good store of cautions, and directions not to loose
our way in a known beaten path: but leave us to guide our selves in those that
are perilous, and untrod.

But you will say, some of these touch too much the affairs of State. Yet
certainly some of them do not: and many others that might be named, which yet
are almost buried in silence. If men speak often enough of the danger of the
Last times, and those vices of some men which make them such (2 Timothy 3. cap. 1,
2, 3* 4 verse.) it is not likely such persons should be counted Saints or simple
souls deluded with the noise of glorious times when the weakest experience may
confute such a pretension. Besides, is the (...) of Gospel officers so much
inferior to that of those of the Law, that they must not be allowed to rebuke
wickedness in ^igh places or persons? The Priests in Jerusalem, when words
would not do it, made bold to thrust Vzziah out of the Temple, when he made but
a Sacrilegious intrusion: what hinders, but those who take upon them the care
of Souls (and great men's are not exempted from their charge) should imitate at
least the milder part of this animositie?

Alas! I have observed, that some men, who about a twelve years since
challenged as great a share as any in this free ome of Spirit and speech (and
then exercised it, as 'twas thought, beyond discretion) are since become
crestfalne, and like men amazed, have scarce aword to speak out at passages
which call for a Stentors voice. Away with unchristian pusillamimous pretenses!
Let not this satisfy men that they inveigh (and sometimes ^s^ (...) ravim)
against a petty Heretic, or poor deluder, who has not wit enough in all
lik^ly hood, to do much mischeife, whilst they let Gol^a sinners escape, who
give the other their power to do mischeife. Let them not think it enough to
reprove the abominations of the times in a parenthesis, or oblique reflections,
or at the furthest in a timorous soft voice; now sinners have armed their
foreheads with steel, and seem to dare th^nder. Nor will a booke-reproofe serve
the turn, which (vel duo, vel nem^) perhaps but one or two it concerns read,
and neither of those lay to heart. No; men must have the deformity of their
sins laid before their eyes, and the proud men (such as Iehonan and AZariah)
must be told of their dissimulation to their faces I am loath to prophecy what
men's cowardice portends: Yet sure I am some of those that are enjoined by
office to reprove sin with boldness, will not find every excuse they now make
for their omission warrantable at the dreadful day of General account.

Caution.
I Would by no means be guilty of the fault reprooved in the Prophets; namely
of contending with the Priests, or taking upon me to instruct my teachers,
(whom I as much as any man desire to reverence.) Far from my intentions be a
design of imposing Laws upon my superiors, or of binding burdens upon other
men's shoulders, which I would not touch with my least finger. I thought it
neither of these offenses to reprove some corrupt flattering Zedekiahs possessed
with a lying Spirit, and some honest yet faint hearted Eli's who want courage
to frown upon enormous sins; and I intend my reproof no further. If my style
seem too tart, I must use the excuse of that famed Divine Dr Twisse That what
is natural to me I cannot easily alter.

Of impatient desires of full assurance.
Obs: 16.
THere are some Christians over impatiently desirous of full assurance of their
salvation. A good hope, or a good persuasion of heart* will not serve their
turns. Nothing contents them, unless they be made as sure of Heaven, as if
they were in it already. This is, as if a son had a good fathers word, his
oath, his fidelity, his deed and seal made over to him for such an
inheritance: but he takes on, and will not be satisfied, unless his father put
the deed into his own keeping, and in his own characters too. No, say they,
the case is not like: God forbid they should doubt of the least promise of God.
They have no assurance that they are God's children, and so dare not call him
father. I answer; I intend not the comparison for exact, but thus make use of
it. (I speak to persons that in some measure hunger and thirst after
righteousness, that desire to cast themselves on Gods mercy, and cordially
endeavor to live answerably. To others, I only say; Repent and believe the
Gospel, and grant they may) You say, you are not assured you are Gods sons. I
say, are you assured you are not? If you say you are, you must be conscious to
your selves of some indulged rotte^nesse of heart, of an appare^t want of true
repentance and faith; and so till this leaven be purged out of you (as I said
before) you are not the persons to whom I speak. If you say (as I presume you
will) that you are not so assured, I proceed thus; you cannot deny one part of
the contradiction, Either you are in the state of grace, or you are not. You
stick between these contraries; you are neither assured of this or that. I say
then, there must be some grounds and arguments considerable on both hands that
thus hinders either scale from making a perceptible descent. Examine then with
reverence between God and thy soul which side has the better grounds: if the
uncomfortable (unless a temptation prevail over thee, the frequencie whereof
causes the greatest difficulty in this business) I say then, necessarily thou
must be privy to some, if not reigning sin or sins, yet very like them. Humble
thy Soul therefore; break off thy sins by repentance, strengthen the things
that remain which are ready to dye, and that with speed, least thy very
spark go out. To be short; do as thou would do if thou were sure thou were
not in the state of grace but desire to be.

But on the contrary; If after hearty prayer for a discerning spirit, and
impartial consideration of particulars, thou find the arguments in the
other scale weightier, when thou art free from temptations (and thou may
make some guess at that, if thou find thy heart moov'd with humble desires
after God, to fear him, to trust in him, to rejoice in his name) I say, if
then thou seem to hear the Lord answer thee with good words and
comfortabl^, thou have in a serene day a pleasant sight afforded thee, of the
heaven where thy tossed soul would be; though anon thou loosest this sight,
the heavens lowre, and the waves, billow after billow threaten to swallow thee
up: yet stay thy self upon thy God; say to thy soul, why art thou cast down
Oh my soul, why art thou disquieted within me? Hope still in God, for I shall
yet praise him who is the health of my countenance and my God, And O thou of
little faith, wherefore do thou fear?

But this satisfies not thee: after this course taken thou can not perceive
either scale weigh down. That Is strange! do thou pray heartily, do thou
walk humbly and circumspectly, or (if thou art jealous of thy self in these)
do thou earnestly desire to do thus, and pantest after communion with God?
I tell thee (if at all thou can value an others opinion of thee) I tell thee
I am persuaded God keeps thee under discipline out of some gracious design*
and will thou prescribe him his method how to deal with thee? It may be thy
heart needs furthar humbling, or longer at least: it may be thy pantings after
God are to be hereby inflamed, or God purposes that thou should wrestle
with him with mighty wrastlings, and intends thee the honor of a Prince or
prevailer with himself. Whatever the causes be (and they may be infinite)
though thou discern them not, endeavor with Abraham against Hope to believe
in hope, that God would bring thee out of this Maze. Say unto God, Lord why
castest thou off my Soul, why go I thus heavily all the day long by reason of
the oppression of the enemy? show me some token for good, that my enemy may see
it, and be ashamed, and my soul comforted. To be short; for thy practice (as
the voice from heaven in Kempisious advised one in thy case) do what thou
would, and what thou think thou should do if thou had obtained that
certainty thou desire.

If still thou objectest, as thou may everlastingly, if thou say, thou
longest for higher enjoyments of God, so do I too, I labor to forget what is
behind, and press forward; but yet so, as that I am not discontent, nor
unthankful unto God for what by his grace I have attained. And if it is thus
with thee, I blame thee not* labor to grow in strength and assurance, I aid
thee with my prayers, and desire to be aided with thine. But if thou meanest by
assurance what I supposed at first, and have no measure of cheerfulness or
patience till thou have attained that, I cannot commend thee; for how can
thou grow, when at full growth? Besides, thou would be privileged from
doubts and fears wherein consists the chief exercise of faith. Now this humor
is what I styled impatient demanding of thy evidence into thy own keeping and
characters.

The unadvised Boanerges catechized.
Obs: 17.
I am very confident that many preachers much offend and contristate some of
the true children of God, when they not so discretly and temperately as the
matter requires, inveigh against the fair moral man. I hate as much as any
the sowing pillowes under every elbow, and the dawbing with untempered mortar
(with those in Ezechiel; and am as much satisfied (I believe) as others in the
extreme dcceitfullnesse of the heart: yet I like not that the heart of the
righteous should be made sad, whom God would not have sad; and that whose joy
might abound, the everblessed son of God was contented to be sorry unto death.
Now I wish, a sort of men (who seem not a a little to resemble the old
Pharisees: though they much inveigh against them) would consider, That there
are some weak Christians not to be offended, and therefore great caution to be
used: some children of light that sit in darkness, and see little or no light,
some tender lambs in Christ's flock, some ewes great with young, who with a
little hard usage might be in danger of miscarrying: some faint and sickly,
some lame and feeble handed, whom the Holy Ghost would by all means have healed
and stre^gthen'd, not turned out of the way. Again, those Christians that are
stronger are not fully privileged from doubts and fears, and discomforts
frequent. A David may say in his have, and think in his heart too, That he is
cast out of Gods presence, that his hopes have deceived him, and that he shall
one day fall by the hand of the enemy. Further yet, none are more jealous of
themselves and of their estate than the true children of God: none so apt to
apply severe doctrines to their own hearts. A weak Saint is not easily
persuaded to believe a true work of grace in his heart, but scruples almost
perpetually: and amongst the stronger there is scarce one to be found but
meets with so much of all corruption in his heart, and amongst the rest some
hypocrisy too, that at a low ebb of faith he will be apt to charge the
dissembler, the formallist, the halfe-Christian on him self, though of all
others he be furthest from such. Now suppose at such a sad hour he should
hear a Minister aggravate his own thoughts, tell him how many come to heaven
gates, and yet never enter in, how narrow the way to life is and how few find
it, and all this without needful qualifications and cautions, how much would
much this set forward his affliction, break his bones and wound his soul
within him, go near to put out his smoking flax, and overwhelme him with the
waves of despair? Verily I persuade my self, had it been possible, many of
the elect themselves had here suffered shipwreck. Mean while, because the
security we have from God by no means frustrates or makes useless humane
providence and solicitude for the avoiding of dangers, and therefore of this
great one, I could not but thus deliver my mind, and exhort these Boanerges
carefully to examine the ground on which they plant their terrible artillery.
If we will believe Truth it self, the young man in the Gospel was not the
furthar off but nigher the kingdom of heaven by his good morality. The
Scripture, I am sure, tell's us that in many things we offend all, and makes a
challenge to any Saint of what form soever to say; I have made my heart clean;
I am pure from my sin. It becomes us much better to be severe and rigid toward
our selves, than toward others* I deny not but that the Scribes and Pharisees
were furthar from the kingdom of heaven, then the Publicans and Harlots: Yet
we shall find that the devout men and women are often noted in the Acts of the
Apostles to be the usual converts, and thus that judicious Divine Mr Mede
takes off from the stupendiousnesse of the wonder, that so many thousands
should be converted at one Sermon, saying, that they were mostly of the devout
proselytes, in whom God had wrought praedispositions toward conversion.

Concerning unhappy Differences between good men.
Obs: 18.
IT is sad to behold how far the differences of the times have prevailed with
even the better sort of men* and that of all parties: how much they have
blinded the eyes and imbittered the hearts of those that call God Father, and
so should each the other, Brother: yet alas how much easyer are opprobious
titles bestowed on each other, than that loving appellation. It Is strange, that
when Christianity obliges it is professors to bear with one another, to speak
no evil, to think no evil, to forgive injuryes, yea to requite and overcome
them with good, that they should practice the contrary to these precepts; and
yet not perceive it although they have them often in their mouths. The one
side belieues the other has too little charity to be religious: the other
think they as much want zeal: and neither betray a greater defect of both,
than by thus censuring each other. What strange Idea's of one another does the
passions and interest of men create? thus good men mutually become judgers of
evil thoughts. Notwithstanding, these distempers excepted, (which their
affections, and engagements make undiscernable, yea many times adopt them into
religion) in all things else almost, the persons on both sides approove
themselves eminent patterns of wisdom and piety; and it is not easy to say
which deserve most commendations. If the one excel in deep knowledge, the
other in profitable, practical applications and condescentions; If the one in
fervor of spirit the other in moderation with discretion. If the ones axe be
keener, the other puts to it the more force; and whilst the one fetchets
the homer stroke, the other strik's oftener. Both excellently exhort to the
contempt of of the world, to the denial of our selves, to a holy life; the
one by faith effectual from St Paul, the other by good works evidencing and
justifying faith from Saint James, and both second their doctrine by their
lives: what course now shall an indifferent Person take, whilst each of these
call him from the other to themselves, each denounce the others coast
infectious, if not deadly?

For my own part, I so adheare to neither, as to swallow down the errors of
the one (as far as I can deserne them) or to reject things laudible in the
other: neither would I have objects, that are comely in themselves, appear
deformed to me, through the fault only of a distempered organ, or medium. I
know the God of wisdom and of peace can make a sweet harmony out of these
discordant sounds, and I humbly pray him to do it. In the mean time I cannot
away with a monopoly of Gods free grace, and dare not conclude He favors not a
person, who^ he has not privileged with the understanding of fo^e points,
which it may be I count of greater concernment than indeed they are. I cannot
think it a piece of religion to anathematize from Christ such as will not
subscribe to every one of my Articles: but am conscious to so many errors
speculative and practical in my self, that I know not how to be severe
toward others. For differences between Christians I much bewail them, and
hope my want of years and accommodations may be some excuse for me if I judge
not accuratly between them. Yet I doubt not, but he that believes the
Scriptures to be the word of God, and firmly endeavors to live accordingly,
beleiving and obaying God, and hoping for pardon of his sins through Christ's
merits, is a true member of Christ: and with every such I hold an internal
communion (viz by assent, by love, by prayer* and I hope there are many such,
or some at least in every division of Christianity, even as there still remains
some flower in the coursest bran. The foundadition of God remains sure, the
Lord knows who are his: howbeit it is my duty to walk charitably, and reject
none whom, for ought I am sure of, God may receive; yet my hopes are fullest
there where I see moderation and Christian lenity most approved and practiced.

Of ambitious discontent.
Obs: 19.
THere is one piece of content the least of any taken notice for a virtue and
yet much commended in Scripture, and that is contentation with a man's gifts. I
do not wonder hereat; first, because some men place their highest happiness
in them, yea mistake them (and not a few do so) for sanctification it self.
Again, the want of them is commonly imputed to a defect of industry: and
ingenuous men much hate that opprobrious charge.

Yet I wonder greatly that many Christians ears should be so close stopped at
what St Paul discourses of in the 12 chapter of the first Epist: to the
Corinth. (viz) that it is requisite there should be feet and other inferior in
the body as well as eyes and lips: and that every member has it is proper use
and service wherewith it ought to be content. But alas, what a mutiny in the
body (beyond that in Agrippa's Fable) may we now discover. How many must needs
be tongues who are fitter to be ears, how many take upon them to be eyes who
had need be led by the hand? Hence, so many Novices (contrary to Apostolical
Canon) take upon them to be public Teachers, and (as the learned of our
English Kings once spoke) every Good-mans son writes Catechismes. I know the
Harvest is great, and I therefore pray the Lord of the Harvest to send
multitudes into his vineyard; yet those such as are able to labor: and the
Apostles (...) (who is sufficient for these things) will not suffer me to think
every one such. The wisdom of primitive times appointed under offices in the
Church, as of Readers, Deacons etc, beneath a Bishop or Presbyter: and in
these, men of lesser abilityes were retained or fitted for higher. 'Twere to be
wished, that since men now adays plead so much for parity in Church Officers,
they could effect something toward it at least, viz. a sufficiency inall those
men's gifts, whose imployme^ts, and dignities they thus equal. I shall speak
but one word more to any such over forward Ahima^z* that he would first go
and learn thoroughly what that Scripture means (James the third and first (My
Brethren be not many teachers.

The destrustive Prosperity of Fools.
Obs. 20.
It Is easy to observe what a luster success affords to men's persons, and
actions. 'To omit the known verse in Du Bartas, (almost grown a Proverb) the
comparisons made between Iul. Caesar and Cataline, and many of their paralells
(who all owe their different reputations to their different success.) Is it
not a strange thing that four or five opposite parties should succeed each
other on the stage, and each of them be accounted Saints whilst up, and neither
longer? Iuvenall observed in his time* That though Riches had not the honor of
a Temple in Rome, as Victory had, yet it had the devotion of men's hearts* It Is
to be feared, neither of these Idolatries is yet quite banished Christendom.
How many opinions are there in the world confuted only by this argument?
Alexanders way of untying Gordian knots is too well known in this age, and too
much practiced. Experience tells us what deep roots an error may take by
prevalence, and continuance: and how little the strongest assaults of an
unsuccesfull truth can shake it; there needing no other confutation of
improsperous arguments, but either scorn or silence. I conceive, amongst
diverse others, that worthy defense of our Saviors Prayer by Mr D' Espagne is
thus answered.

I shall not conjecture of what ill consequence this error is when public:
but certainly there is nothing more dangerous to any particular Soul that
lies under it. When a man shall with much scrupling venture upon a course, or
action, and in judgment condemn himself for what he allows in practice; and
yet a little after finding no harm for the present to follow, yea contrariwise
fancying much good, shall conclude his former scrupulosity needless* and vote
his conscience to be reformed by his success; what a ready way is this to
prepare a man's throat to swallow Camels at length, who at first strained at the
smallest imaginary Gnat? This is it that turns grace into presumption and
wantonness, and makes the very blessings and mercies of God become the bane of
souls. God bring them out of this path leading down to the chambers of death,
who walk securely in it.

The All-most Christian.
Obs. 21.
THere are some Christians that may (with Tiberius in Suetonius) well bear the
title of the horses called Callipedes, qui multum cursitant parum
progrediuntur. They are like sticks and straws in a whirlepoole nigh a strait
passage, they are ever and anon making toward it, but never shoot the gulf.
It Is a sad thing when a man shall be every day purposing and promising to leave
such and such gross sins, and every day commit them: when he shall be always
sinning, and always confessing, and so on in a round, making even his
confession a chief sin. A thing more to be pittyed it is, that some shall
attain unto good perfection in external behavior, and moral honesty, induce
others, yea and themselves too, to believe they are Saints of good proficience,
and as I may say, knock at the very gate of heaven, and yet not enter in. What
can be the cause of this, but that men will have some little Zoar's spared:
they can be content to let religion seize on the outworks and suburbs of their
souls, but they must reserve to themselves a Cittadell in their hearts. Many
men seem to bear the strongest burdens of Christianity, yea with the young
Pharisee to have kept all the Commandments from their youth, and yet they have
some secret sins lodging in their bosoms, which if they be told they must
necessarily part with, they would be much grieved: skin for skin, and all that
they have, yea life it self will they part with rather than those. This
disease is then most deadly when it turns the free grace of God, and the
sanctifying power of the spirit into it is nutriment: which is done when a man
shall be convinced of a gross sin (and the least allowed is such) and shall
pray God by his omnipotent power to deliver him from it, and here set up his
rest, not cooperating with Gods grace, nor in his heart hating the sin, or
desiring it is mortification, but confuting his frequent prayers by continual
practice. This, I persuade my self, is one of the depthes of Satan! but
because it requires an experienced Divine to fathom it, and also border's upon
the nicest of the Arminian controversies (which I here purposely shun) I shall
speak no further on this Argument.

Concerning a tender Conscience.
Obs: 22.
THere are some men which pretend great tenderness of Conscience, and cry out
extremely not to be pricked: and yet seem to express very little of that
temper* It is a hard matter to believe he has a tender conscience, that will
hazard and attempt the overthrow of a Church or State, proceed to tumults and
sedition, involve himself in the guilt of the foulest crimes, yea and swallow
any Camells rather than some few Gnats, which perhaps too his own fancy or
phrensy has created. I supposed tenderness of conscience had consisted in a
fearful avoidance of every sin, even to a circumstance or an appearance; and
so consequently in some proportionable detestation of sins according as their
foulness and odiousness increases. I thought a propriety thereof had been
patiently to suffer any evil rather than commit any: and to be content to be
rather infringed of some part of due liberty, than use indirect means to
obtain or enhaunse it. The world has been excellently informed long since,
that it is no part of a strict conscience to lift a burden from it is own
shoulder, and lay it with more weight upon another: I would there were none
that practiced it. But alas? What riddles, and paradoxes do we meet of this
nature? We have been told what an impartial informer witness, and judge
conscience is: and yet there are practices but too many in the world that make
the truth seem contrary. How easy does it appear in some men to charm this
clamorous faculty, and confine it is jurisdiction to what circuit they please,
even with an Hitherto shall thou go and no furthar? But what a wonder is it
that men should cry, Peace, Peace to themselves in this ensnaring estate: that
they should think themselves religious all the while, and believe their Corban
of zeal for some points, which their interesse makes dear to them, should
dispense with their obedience to many of the great commandments of God. It has
puzzled me often to see how cautious men are in some smaller particulars, how
they charge themselves with profanesse, and superstition, and irreligion if
they fail in such; and yet the same men securely commit greater sins without
asking themselves what they have done; nay they will not regard another that
shall tell them never so plainly that they have done ill. This is all one as if
a man should run from a barking curre, and leap into a lions jaws before him,
or cautelously avoid the sting of a Be, and yet voluntarily expose his bosom
to an Aspe or a Scorpion.

St Paul charged it as a great absurdity upon the Jew, that he should prohibit
others from what, and condemn others for what he practiced himself; Thou that
say a man should not steal do thou steal? would not the absurdity have
been greater if he should have anathematized others, or himself for a small
sin, or a shadow of a sin, and the mean while have allowed in himself, or
promoted in others the greatest? Or if the Apostle had thus interrogated him;
Thou that abhorrest a Ceremony, do thou commit sacrilege? I would by no
means aggravate other men's failings: yet I cannot but wonder that some men
should seem to be more fearful of a superstition or formality (which with
them is all one) in using that form of Prayer prescribed by Wisdom it self,
than of taking God's Holy Name in vain, and that in actions of greatest
solemnity.

Caution.
I cannot fear that any who indeed has a tender conscience should take offense
at what I have here said. I confess I am fearful somewhat may be applied to
Persons whom I much reverence, and believe Christians of high rank: yet I
wonder that some of these should so little scruple at some practices, the guilt
whereof would wound me to the heart. But I persuade my self they may discover
particulars in me, which they may as much be puzzled at: and therefore I
endeavor to exercise toward them the same charity I desire from them. God be
merciful to us all.

Of Christian Reputation.
Obs. 23.
It Is a great offense to some weak Christians, that those they look upon as
eminent Saints, do express a great deal of jealousy, if not
uncharitableness toward them. Many too much forget the pangs of their new
birth, and so consequently stop their bowels of compassion toward others in
that case. And it is to be feared, that some, whilst they read too severe
lectures concerning the conflicts of natural conscience, and the diverse
subtle workings of counterfeit grace, endanger an abortion in others. Some too
tartly interrogate how long others stick in the place of coming forth of
children, and it may be too little remember their own delays there. Some
require an Elijah's fervor in all men else, because they feel something like
it in themselves. Diverse accuse a defect of light in others, or at least that
their candle burns under a Bushel: whereas indeed it is not so, but the fault
lies in their want of discerning. Others bid us, if we have the heat of
godliness in us, rake our coals out of the embers: whereas many true
Christians have the rays of grace more united in their souls, as in a
burning-glasse, where though the circumference be not so great, yet the heat is
more intense. Many devout hearts burn inward, so that those without cannot be
competent judges what are their flames. I speak not this to patronize any
fault, much less that great one of lukewarmnesse: I would by no means
discourage private exhortations and reproves, nay nor a godly jealousy in any
man over another. It is far from my intent to furnish any halfe-Christian with
expedients how to elude any such courses intended for his good. (To which alas
how many are apt?) My purpose is only this, that since the Apostle exhorts us
to be patient and meek toward all men, and that upon this consideration how
foolish, and disobedient, and vicious in all kinds we our selves once were,
we should not be peevish and uncharitably ill-natured toward such as perhaps
are weaker Christians, yet may have more humility in them, and more love.
Besides, how many are thought strangers to God, and the discipline of Grace,
who yet from their youth up have been under that discipline? The Lord has given
them counsel, and their reins instructed them in the night seasons; They have
been lead into the galleryes, and have had the banner of Gods love displayed
over them; and had they either the Art, or the confidence to communicate to
others a history of their experiences, they might discover many subtle wiles
of the natural man's heart, and of Satan, of whose devices they are not
ignorant.

I say these uncharitable jealousies, and suspicions are an offense to weak, or
Novice-Christians; which somewhat need the crutch of other men's opinions to
support their souls. As for an experienced Christian, though he avoid what in
him lies the giving offense to any, and setts a due value on a good report
(especially from good men) yet is he in some measure affected like magnanimous
St Paul: It is a very small thing with him to be judged of men, Yea he judges
not himself (peremptorily and absolutely without appeal to the higher court)
but referres all things within himself to the righteous judgment of God
through the intercession of Jesus Christ.

Of Prejudices against godliness.
Its a great stumbling-blocke to ingenious men that religion (I mean the full
power thereof) seems to them to destroy modesty, and other principles of
nature, and of education a second nature; and I am persuaded it is this that
makes some men but partial Christians. That Christianity and the power of
godliness suffers undeservedly herein I make not the least question. Were I to
deliver the most exact rules of humble modest behavior, I should pick them out
of the sacred preceps: or were I to prescribe an absolute pattern of such
carriage and expressions, I should take them from no other place than the
sacred histories. Let a man but read the speeches of Abigail, of Hanna, of
Mephibosheth and diverse other holy persons; and if he be not sticken into
admiration, I shall pronounce him incapable of any noble impressions of
humanity, as well as of devotion. Saint Paul delivers it for a rule, that we
should not give offense to them without, and practiced it himself in becoming
all things to all men, that he might gain some. Certainly then he had no
morose humor within him which he would compel other men to submit to, no
intemperance of Spirit which he would have accounted zeal: yea, we read with
what a noble appellation he answered ^ectus, (who accused him but of madness)
that he spoke the words of sobriety, as well as truth. Notwithstanding all
this, the ground of the former charge against religion seems specious and
obvious. Some men misinterpret the Apostles (...) or boldness of speech, and
take that for a sufficient warrant for indecencies, and ill manners. Others
think it a crime to be modest in matters of religious concernment; whereas, if
they would consider St Paul's behavior toward his Corinthians Ep. 2. 10, 11,
12) they might find it much advantageous, and besides confidence, in mattes
that require it, takes most when it holds a combat, and seems some*times to
give the upper hand to bashfulnesse. Another thing that sets forward this
prejudice is, that (by I know not what hard hap) the vulgar sort take them for
the most genuine Christians, who seem most to have banished such ingenuous
principles: and think those men not zealous enough for the truth, or too much
regarding their own reputations, who use cessions, apologies, and excuses, all
which well managed Christianity will allow of without a taint of vain
ostentation.

We need not dwell long on this subject, now the generality of men of the
higher rank set a greater value on this ornament, than on the substance of
Christianity it self. Let us remember therefore that we improove not matters
of convenience into matters of highest necessity; and so consequently more
accuse a failure or defect in them than in direct honesty and integrity of
life, as is the fashion of too many now adays, who much glory in their good
breeding. But certainly, since Christian love covers a multitude of sins, if
such men had but a reasonable measure of that temper, they would not be so far
provoked by a small incivility, or indiscretion which the party who commits
perhaps wants, but accommodations to discover in himself, and so to reform
them.

Of Set Forms and extemporary Prayer.
I Am not yet fully satisfied whether the danger be greater of making prayer a
mere lip-labor by the use of set forms, or a mere braine-labour the
extemporary way. It Is undoubtedly true, that the whole heart, yea the whole man
ought to be laid out in that Angelical service, and almost as strongly
attested by experience, that which way soever we manage our devotions, there
will multitudes of vanities and imperfections attend them. I am sure that
eminency of grace consists not in any art of invention; and doubt not but a
plain Rustic (whose thoughts one would think are confined to a narrow
compass) may as sweetly converse with God in a few common words, as a sublimer
Christian in elaborate meditations. What ever high dispensations men pretend,
they seem to me to have but friged souls, who need the heat of invention to
warm them, and in the same form cannot attain unto variety of thoughts. I
have often diserned deeper matter in the same words; and I thank God, can pray
them unto him morning, and evening, and nighttime, without flatnesse many
times, and sometimes with tears: and after a thousand repetitions enjoy new
affections in my strange expressions, and am assured I have not yet attained
the utmost they may signify. I dare not tempt God so far as wholly to trust to
sudden injections: nor can I scruple the making use of such helps as my
experience tells me God has sanctified to my weakness. Yet diverse times my
soul breaks out unexpectedly into new matter and words too, and if I should
deny them vent my heart would burst. Also, I cannot think that I am rash with
my lips in so doing. Nay rather, I will praise the Lord, as he enables me, both
with my old and with my new songs, who is worthy every way to be magnified.

The Conclusion.
I Shall here stop my pen, for I doubt my reader may think what is past more
than enough of such dough-baked considerations. Those that remain I shall
keep by me till I perceive how these are digested.

The contents or argument of every Observation*
1 Absurdityesin Writers and Readers page 1 Caution 1. page 8
2 Concerning forcible impressions (page 9 3 Of Natural weaknesses page 12 4
The Sympathy of Souls page 13 5 Concerning ill will undeserved 16 6
Uncharitable mistakes 20 7 The Selfe-Miracle 24 Caut 2. 28
8 Difference of parts 29 9 The Common wealth of mere Wits 33 10 Vanity in
Society and discourse 36 Caut 3. 39
11 Of Frugality 40 12 Concerning Parsimony of Parts 44 13 The vain boast of
Saint-ship 48 14 Of Pride of parts 53 15 Of Arguments for Sermons 57 Caut. 4. 63
16 Of impatiency after full assurance 64 17 The unadvised Boanerges catechized
71 18 Unhappy differences between good men 76 19 Of Ambitious discontent 82 20
The destructive prosperity of fools (85 21 The All*most Christian 88 22 Of
Tender consciences 91 Caut 5. 95
23 Of Christian Reputation 96 24 Of praejudices against godliness 101 25 Of
Extemporary prayer etc. 105
The Publisher to the Reader.
The Author acknowledges he might have ranked these observations in a better
order, had his own occasions and my importunity to have them Printed against
this time allowed him the full liberty of his second thoughts: had it not been
for this also, he persuades himself he should have licked these Bear's whelps
(so he styles them) into a somewhat better shape.


