A SHADOVV OF THE VICTORY OF CHRIST, Represented to the Honorable House of
COMMONS, IN A SERMON Preached at Margarets Westminster on the Day of the
public Fast, October. 28. 1646.

By JOHN MAYNARD, Minister of the Gospel at Mayfield in SUSSEX.

Rev. 17. 12. And the ten horns which thou saw are ten Kings, which have
received no kingdom as yet: but receive power as Kings one hour with the
Beast. 13These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the
Beast. 14These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome
them: For He is Lord of lords, and King of kings, and they that are with Him
are called, and chosen, and faithful. LONDON: Printed by F: Neile for Samuel
Gellibrand, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard. 1646.

TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS Assembled In PARLIAMENT.
WHen Joshua was by Jericho, there stood a man over Josh. 5. 13, 14*
against him with his sword drawn in his hand; and Joshua seems in a military
way to examine him, Art thou for us, or for our adversaries? Nay (says he) but
as Captain of the host of the Lord am I now come. This answer makes him fall
on his face to the earth and worship; acknowledging Him for Commander in chief,
and humbly subjecting himself to Him as His Lieftenant General, ready to
receive His Commands: What says my Lord unto his servant? It is one of the
greatest* honors the sons of men are capable of here on earth, to follow the
Ensigns of this victorious Captain of the Lords host* and to wait upon his
triumphant chariot. If herein the Lord has honored You above many thousands
of your brethren, it concerns You much to imitate Joshua* First, as he
questioned the Son of God whom he knew not in that apparition at the first
sight; so ye knowing Christ to be that Captain of the Lords host, who will
subdue all things to Himself, ought in an holy jealousy to search your own
hearts, and to examine all your counsels and proceedings: Are we in these
things for Christ, or for His adversaries, for Him or against Him? Secondly, I
beseech You be willing to lie low before him and to say, What says our Lord
unto His servants? Ye expect not His immediate voice, and therefore in all
humility hear Him by His Ambassadors, when they speak according to their
Commission, as if His mandates were delivered unto You by His own mouth.
Admirable is that of Valentinian recorded Theod. ^. 4. cap. 6.
by Theodoret, when Ambrose had freely reproved some things amiss in his
government, said the Emperor, I knew well thy zeal and courage, and therefore
was so far from opposing, that I was forward to promote thine election to this
pastoral charge: Go on therefore to cure the diseases of our Souls according
to the prescript of Gods Word* And it is reported of Albert Duke of
Mickleburgh* that when a flattering Courtier sought to incense him against a
Preacher for dealing roundly with him; He told him, he loved the man so much
the better, and willed him in his name to give him thanks for his pious Sermon*
If Ye follow Christ as your Captain, not turning to the right hand or to the
left, who knows whether after six years compassing the w^ls of Jericho, they
may not on the seventh fall to the ground before You. The Lord Jesus direct You
by His Spirit, and gird You with His strength, to endure unto the end, that no
man take Your Crown.

So prays Your unworthy Servant in the Lord, JOHN MAYNARD.

Die Mercurii: 28 October. 1646.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That Colonel Stapeley do from
this House give thanks to Mr. Maynard for the great pains he took in the Sermon
he Preached this day, at the entreaty of this House, at St. Margarets
Westminster (it being the Day of public Humiliation) and desire him to Print
his Sermon. And he is to have the like Privilege in Printing of it, as others
in the like kind usually have had.

H: Elsyng Cler. Parl: Dom: Com.

I Appoint Samuel Gellibrand to Print my Sermon.

John Maynard.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS.
Phil. ^. 21. -- According to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all
things unto himself.
THe Apostle gives a large testimony to the Saints of Philippi concerning the
sincerity and eminency of their graces; yet not being satisfied with the
measure to which they had attained, he presses them to a farther growth and
progress: And for this end having laid before them his own example, he
exhorts them, Brethren, be followers of us, Ver. 17.
and mark them which walk so, as ye have us for an example. Which exhortation
he enforces by two main arguments:

1 From the baseness of their way, who took a contrary course, and the woeful
issue of that way: they were enemies to Ver. 18, 19.
the cross of Christ, their God was their belly, their glory was in their
shame, they minded earthly things: the issue is answerable, their end is
destruction.

2 From the excellency of the way wherein he walked, and V. 20. 21.
the blessed and glorious issue of that way. His way is described in these
words, Our conversation is in heaven: the issue in the words following: where
he shows, that as the conversation of the Saints is in heaven, so their
expectation is from heaven. Where may be observed, 1. The Person whose
appearing they expect, The Lord Jesus Christ, their Savior, in whom all their
hopes are treasured up. 2. The fruit of His appearing, and that is a glorious
change to be wrought in their whole man, though that of the body only, be here
expressed.

In this change may be noted four things.

1. The terminus a quo, the condition wherein their bodies shall be found
before they are transformed, a state of vileness.

Secondly, The terminus ad quem, the condition into which they shall be
changed, a state of glory.

Thirdly, The pattern according to which they shall be changed, the glorious
body of Christ.

Fourthly, The power by which this glorious change shall be wrought, and that
is the efficacy or working of Christ, whereby he is able even to subdue all
things unto himself: which is the thing I intend to insist upon.

This change is wonderful, that such vile bodies should be transformed into a
condition so exceedingly glorious, yet no way incredible, if we consider that
it shall be done by the working of him, of whom it was prophesied of old, His
Name shall be called Wonderful, The mighty God, who wrought such wonders Isa.
9. 6.
in the days of his humiliation, and discovered so much of God in the form of
a servant, and (which was the height of wonders) when he was dead, by his own
power, by the Almighty working of his eternal Spirit, and Divine nature,
raised himself from death to life. So that here we see the Apostle ascends
very high in asserting this truth, which seems so far above reason: he has
recourse to Christ his omnipotency, who has all power in heaven and earth, and
is able to subdue all things to himself, and not only the power, but the
efficacy, the working, (...).
acting, exerting of his Almighty arm. As if he had said, let the materials be
never so untoward and seemingly incapable of that form which is to be put upon
them, if they fall into the hands of Christ, he is able to work them into any
shape: he can of stones raise up children unto Abraham, and of carcasses
mouldred into dust, raise up bodies like to his own glorious body. And in
as much as the Apostle does not confine his speech to this particular of
changing the bodies of the Saints, but enlarges himself in an universal
expression of the efficacy or working of Christ's Almighty power, whereby he is
able to subdue all things to himself; I purpose to follow him herein,
presenting you with this observation from the text, that,

Jesus Christ can and will effectually subdue all things to himself. Doct.


The Spirit of God has expressed the Majesty and Almighty power of Christ in a
lofty style, Jesus Christ who is the faithful witness and the first begotten of
the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of Rev. 1. 5. 7. 8.
the earth. Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they
also which pierced him: and all the Kinreds of the Earth shall w^y'e because of
him: even so Amen. I am Alpha and Omega, The Beginning and the Ending, says
the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, (...). The Almighty;
The Alpha and beginning who gave being and beginning to all things, the Omega,
and the ending, who gives ending unto all, or puts them into their last
condition, brings all things to their uttermost period and final issue. He
shall put down all rule 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25*
and all authority and power. For he must reign till he has put all enemies
under his feet. By him were all things created that are in heaven, and that
Col. 1. 16, 17.
are in earth, etc. all things were created by him and for him: The most mighty
and excellent among all the creatures were created by him, and therefore must
be subordinate to him, they were created for him, and therefore must be
subservient to him, either by a voluntary submission, or a compulsive
subjection, (...), and by him all things consist. Their beings have no
consistency, but would dissolve, the frame of their nature would be disjoynted
and fall asunder, did not he hold them together, and therefore how easy is it
for him to subdue them to himself. He that by the word of his power upholdeth
all things from sinking into nothing, can without the least difficulty Heb. 1.
3.
subdue all things to himself. A man that holds a lump of dust in his hand
(which has no consistency but only by the hand that holds it together, but
would fall asunder, and scatter as soon as he leteth it go) can easily cast it
at his feet, and trample on it at his pleasure. Much more may Christ, who gave
being to all the creatures, and now supporteth their beings, bring them under
as he pleases.

For the farther clearing and strengthening of this truth, let us consider the
various workings and different ways of exercising this power of his, for the
subduing of all things to himself. First, In regard of different objects.
Secondly, In respect of different ends and uses. Thirdly, In regard of
difference of times. Fourthly, when there seems no difference in respect of
objects, ends or times, he may according to the counsel of his own will work
diversely, for the more glorious manifestatio^ of his wisdom and power: as a
curious artizan may vary his workmanship upon the same kind of materials,
intended for the same use, to give farther proof of his skill and abilities.
But because these are so complicated and interwoven, that the three last will
fall in with the first, and it would require much time to pursue every one of
them distinctly; I purpose to insist only upon the first, taking the rest in
collaterally.

These objects which Christ has to work upon, are either rational creatures,
or such as are void of the principles of reason. The former are Angels or men.

The Angels which are holy He preserves in that state of subjection 1
to Himself wherein they continued when the rest left their habitation,
upholding them not only in their beings, but in the integrity and perfection
of their beings, whose perfection is their voluntary subordination to the Son
of God, Christ Jesus, who is the Head of all principality and power: Col. 2. 10*
and so they are ministering Spirits unto Him, employed as a Convoy to his
people in the wilderness of the world, until they arrive at that eternal
rest which he has purchased for them.

As for the apostate angels, by an act of justice and power, 2
He cast them down into everlasting chains under darkness, where he holds
them prisoners until the great Assize, the ^ Pet 2. 4. Jude 6.
judgment of the last day. And though for the present He is not pleased to
keep them close prisoners, but seems to give them the liberty of the prison,
and sometime to lengthen their chains, suffering them to range abroad for the
executing of his judgments in diverse kinds upon the wicked, and for the
exercise and trial of the godly (out of all which He gets glory to His great
Name) yet still He keeps them chained; that is, under the restraint of His
Almighty Arm, not permitting them to stir an inch beyond the bounds which He
has set them: as themselves intimated when they begged leave of Him to enter
into the herd of swine, and when Satan petitioned the Lord for a Commission to
plunder holy Job, and then to have it enlarged for afflicting of his person;
when the Lord gave him greatest liberty, it was with limitation: But save his
life. So that the devils now are Job 2. 6*
Christ His prisoners, and should not be suffered to walk up and down the
world, had He not use of them for such ends as those, formerly hinted. However
they stir not one foot without their keeper, viz. the overruling power of
Christ. But at the last day they shall be fully and for ever subdued by the
almighty power of Christ, never to stir more against any of His. Yea these
apostate angels shall be so absolutely brought under by Christ, that His very
servants shall sit in judgment upon them. I am persuaded 1 Cor. 6. 5*
it will be a wonderful torment to these proud spirits (who have affected a
principality, yea a godhead in the world) to be convented before men as their
judges, who were their inferiors by Creation, and are of the seed of that
woman, who was long since vanquished by the devil.

But as these Angels good and evil are invisible spirits, so the workings of
Christ in subduing them seem more invisible and secret, than those which He
exercises upon those rational creatures which are visible, viz. men and
women, which are to be considered in the next place.

These we may look upon either, 1. as single persons; or, 2. as 3
associated and combined in Societies, Kingdoms, Commonwealths, etc. As single
persons they are either vessels of mercy and honor, or vessels of wrath and
dishonor. The former He subdueth by the Scepter of His Gospel, and power of
His grace, secretly, but effectually and infallibly, bowing and subjecting
their souls and whole man to the government of His Spirit, constraining them by
His love shed abroad in their hearts, and bringing them under a regiment of
love, sweetning His commands with discoveries of His love, and (as it were)
oyling His yoke with love, so making it easy to them, and teaching them to
obey in love, and to walk in love as He has loved them, and given Himself for
them: giving His own Spirit possession of their hearts, and making them one
with Himself, and so subjecting them to Himself as members to their Head. And
this He does by degrees, leaving something in them unsubdued, while they are
absent from Him in the body (which as it is displeasing to Him, so it is
grievous to them) but in the end He will not leave any thing in them either of
soul or body unsuitable to Himself, but will bring them into a full subjection
and conformity, transforming their bodies into the likeness of His own
glorious body, and their souls into the likeness of His own perfect holiness,
fullness of joy, and blessedness. But although He uses this sweet way of
working with them for this blessed end, as that which is most direct and
proper, yet sometimes He prepares them by terrors, putting on the countenance
of an enemy, and handling them roughly, as Joseph did his Brethren, dealing
with 1 King. ^9* 11. 12.
them in his approaches toward them as with the Prophet El^j^h, sending before
him a great and strong wind, renting the mountains, and breaking in pieces the
rocks; and after the wind an earthquake, and after the earthquake, a fire;
dreadful representations of His wrath, and convictions of their guilt: but
after comes the still, soft voice, the Word of promise and reconciliation, a
word of peace and pardon. Yea when they are in some degree subdued to Him, He
does sometime suffer them to be exercised with renewed terrors on their
spirits, and outward afflictions, to be troubled on every side, with fightings
without, and fears within, to prepare them for farther subjection and 2 Cor. 7.
5.
conformity to Himself. The workings of Christ in this kind have been more
glorious and conspicuous in some ages than in others: as in the times of the
Apostles and the ages next after, when thousands were subdued at once, Cities
and Nations were brought in subjection to Christ: the devil raged, and stirred
up his instruments to oppose the growth of Christ His kingdom with fire and
sword: Nec eo minus ad Apostolorum vocem gentes commoventur: principum aulae
legionesque adeo ipsae in Christi parts propendent and nutant, as one says,
the world is stirred notwithstanding at the summons of Christ His Ambassadors,
and the Courts of Princes, and the legions of military men are ready to yield
and bow their ensigns to the Majesty of the Lord Jesus. What a cordial was
that which the Apostle sent to these believers at Philippi, All the Saints
salute you, chiefly those of Cesars household. A Phil. 4. 22.
glorious spectacle to see the banner of Christ advanced upon the turrets of
Nero his palace. So when Luther was raised up to restore the light, there was
another age wherein Christ was pleased in a more than ordinary manner to show
himself victorious. The States of the Empire meeting at Noremberg, thought to
moderate things according to principles of policy: But what says Luther to
this? Long aliter conclusum est in coelo quam Norembergae: The conclusion made
in Heaven differed much from that at Noremberg: as the event demonstrated.
Certatim enim Principes and Civitates Imperii doctrinam repurgatam
introduxerunt: For the Princes and Imperial Cities did (as it were) out-vye
each other in a speedy entertainment of the reformed Religion. Christ would
not wait the leisure of the State.

But as for the vessels of wrath, although he deals diversely 4
with them in regard of his intermediate dispensations, raising some of them to
great dignity, arming them with power, that so He may make his power known upon
them: leaving others in a low condition, and thereby disarming their malice:
giving some of them Esan his portion, the dew of heaven, and the fatness of
the earth, suffering them to fat themselves to the day of slaughter, and to
aggravate their condemnation by unthankfulness: denying others this worldly
abundance, and laying upon them many temporal judgments as the beginnings of
sorrows, whereby their stubbornness becomes more unexcusable: suffering some
of them to break forth into more outrageous wickedness; circumscribing others
within the circle of morality, and civility: enduring some of them with much
longsuffering and patience; surprising others in their sins, not suffering them
to live out half their days: bringing some of them under powerful means of
salvation, giving them precious opportunities, which they despise or neglect,
shutting others out of the confines of his Church, etc. yet in the issue he
subdueth them all by strong hand, breaking them by his power, because they
stoup not to his authority: and as he does execute exemplary vengeance upon
many of them in this life, so at the last day He will bring them all under his
feet, and cast them into utter darkness, where they shall never be able to
lift up their heads or hands against Him or his.

But there is yet another consideration of men and women, as 5
they are united or combined in Societies, Commonwealths, etc. Some of these
He so far subdueth, as to cause them to promote His Cause, propagate His
Gospel, protect His Church, as the Kingdom of Israel in the days of David and
Solomon, the Kingdom of Judah in the reign of Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, etc. the
Roman Empire under Constantine, Valentinian, Theodosius, etc. Others He so
orders, as to make them suffer his Church to sojourn among them, as Egypt in
the days of that Pharaoh who knew Joseph, the Empire of Rome in the times of
Vespasian, Titus, Nerva, Antoninus Pius, Pro^us. Some of them He has reduced
to more moderation, after they began to stretch out their hands to vex certain
of the Church, as it is said of Trajane, Adrian, Antoninus Verus; and others.
But as for those whose rage was implacable, has not the Lord Christ set His
face against them for evil, rebuking Kings and Rulers for His peoples sake,
saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, destroying Noble
and Royal Families, subverting Commonwealths and Empires, that he might
avenge the blood of his Saints, cutting off Nero, Domitian, and others,
degrading Dioclesian and his Colleague. In such cases sometimes he destroieth
some of his enemies by others, expelling one poison by an other, sometime
putting a two-edged sword into the hands of his Saints, and giving them this
honor to become victorious instruments of his wrath upon His and their
enemies. But at the length, He will break in pieces the iron and the Dan. 2. 35.
clay, the brass, the silver and the gold, and make them like the chafe of
the summer threshing fl^ores, and the wind shall carry them away, and no place
shall be found for them. He will put down all rule, and all authority and power.

Lastly, As for creatures void of reason, I will not now dispute 6.
that question, whether after the worlds dissolution the species or several
kind of creatures shall be restored; But thus, Christ has already in part
subdued, and shall in the end bring under all those creatures not endowed with
the principles of reason, and amongst these the very towns, cities, buildings
wherein he has been dishonored. Some experience of this the world has
already had, in the Eastern Babylon, in the City of Jerusalem, after that
Himself was crucified there, his Gospel rejected, his people persecuted, to
what a fearful desolation did he bring it by the hands of the Romans! and the
Temple it self when it was kept up as a Monument of defiance against him, for
the continuance o those sacrifices which were abolished by his death, by a
people blaspheming his Name, he destroyed it: and when that wretched people
attempted to rebuild it, through the encouragement of Julian the Apostate, he
fully (as is conceived) accomplished his prophecy upon it, not leaving one
stone upon another. And at this day how are the expectations of the Saints
raised to see the power of Christ put forth in subduing, and consuming with
fire the Western Babylon, the City of Rome, in which was found the blood of
Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that Rev. 18. 24.
were slain upon the earth. In a word, as the creatures have been abused or
desired by the sins of men to the dishonor of Christ, being made either
instruments of rebellion against him, or corrivals with him, the hearts of men
being stolen away from him, and going a whoring after the creatures, so shall
all be subdued by his mighty working. The old world was subdued by a flood of
waters. But the heavens and the earth which are now, by the same ^ Pet. 3. 6, 7.
word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of Judgment, and
perdition of ungodly men. If any ask why the world stands so long, being
planted and peopled with rebels, and silled with rebelion against Christ? The
Apostle tells us, it is kept in store by his word: the world would dissolve
like water when it is powered on the ground, were it not kept in store as in a
vessel, by the word and will of Christ until the appointed time, and then the
heavens V. 10, 11.
shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent
heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up: both the
works of God (which some call the works of nature) and the works of man, the
works of art, and all these things shall be dissolved. V. 13.
Nevertheless (says the Apostle) we, according to his promise look for new
heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. If the frame of heaven
and earth shall be renewed, and so kept pure from all spot of sin to eternity,
this may be a farther evidence to the truth in hand, that Christ by His mighty
working shall subdue all things to himself.

But what is the last enemy that shall be brought under? The 1 Cor. 15. 26. 54.
Apostle tells us, The last enemy that shall be destroyed, is Death. Then
shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in
victory. And the Apostle seems, as one ravished, with assurance of this
victory over death, to sing an (...), a song of triumph, insulting over this
old and last enemy: O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory?
The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law. But thanks
be unto God, which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

This is therefore for the comfort of the Church of Christ against Use 1.
all her enemies. Their workings, plots, contrivings, attempts, have been many
and desperate from age to age and particularly in this age, in this land and
elsewhere: and I believe the people of God do generally expect they should go
on Cant. ^. 4.
whilst they have power, even until Antichrist be destroyed. The Church is
said to be terrible as an Army with banners. A learned expositour taking this
song for a prophecy of the state of the Church from Solomon's time unto the Jews
conversion, and carrying on his interpretation according to the succession of
time, took this place to note the condition of the Church from about the
beginning of Queen Eliza^eths reign, and so downward until the destruction of
the Pope, and Turk; that in these days the Church which had bin trodden under
foot in former ages, should become formidable to her enemies as an army with
banners, and thence infers that these times should be plenabellicis
tumultibus full of the troubles and tumults of war between the Church and her
enemies: we have had much experience of this, and are likely to have more,
wheresoever the seat of the war shall be: Rev. 16. 16.
The great battle of Armageddon (I am persuaded) is yet to come. And therefore
I expect that the adversaries should exercise the height of their policy, and
put forth the uttermost of their power, finding themselves stoutly assaulted by
this Army with banners. But here is the comfort of the Church, the mighty
virtue and working of Christ shall subdue them all. It is said, that the Lord
Christ shall consume that man of sin with the spirit 2 These. 2. 8.
or breath of His mouth, and destroy him with the brightness of His coming.
Certainly Christ His approaches have been very glorious of late, and the
Antichristian faction has been much weakened by Him: very much of the power of
Christ has been put forth against those who have sided with the Beast. But I
am persuaded the time is at hand, when Christ shall come in a more glorious
manner, and give forth more admirable demonstrations of His power in subduing
those enemies, who have for so long a time opposed and exalted themselves
against Him. For I conceive we are under the seventh trumpet, to which all the
seven vials full of the wrath of God, to be emptied upon the enemies of the
Church, do belong; and under the fourth vial powered on the Sun. Now mark what
is said upon the sounding of the seventh trumpet. And the seventh Angel
sounded, and there Revel. 11. 15, 16, 17.
were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the
kingdoms of our Lord, and of His Christ, and He shall reign for ever and ever.
Now is the time when Christ shall conquer kingdoms, and subdue Nations to
Himself, to reign over them for ever. And the four and twenty Elders which
sat before God on their seats, fell upon their faces, and worshipped God,
saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art
to come; because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and have reigned.
Where they seem to speak of Christ as of some mighty Prince, who seeing his
kingdom to be invaded by foreign enemies, suffers them to go on in acts of
hostility for a time, as if he had laid by his great power: but when he sees
his time, takes up his power again, raises his Armies to suppress them. So
Christ may seem for diverse ages to have laid by His great power, suffering the
Dragon and his Angels, and then the Beast and his ten horns to reign and
domineer: But at the sounding of the seventh trumpet, He should take to Himself
His great power and reign. And therefore now let the people of God expect
wonders to be wrought by the great power of Christ daily. It follows, And the
Nations were angry: the devil being cast out of the throne by Christ, stirs
up his vassals to anger: and we have had great experience of their fury. Some
of them have seemed even mad with anger, so as to run on desperately upon their
own ruin, when the hand of God has been apparently against them, when the
Lord has blasted their counsels, crossed and confounded their plots, broken
their strength, leaving them no such grounds of hope as might encourage
rational men, yet on they would, and why? they were angry, and their anger and
rage carried them headlong. But I believe Christ will anger them yet more,
whilst He goes on conquering, and to conquer.

Again the Elders proceed in their doxology, And thy wrath is come, and the
time of the dead, that they should be judged; the time when Christ should
judge, and avenge the cause of His servants that have been slain, by executing
vengeance on their bloody enemies: And that thou should give reward to thy
servants the Prophets, and to thy Saints, and to them that fear thy Name, small
and great, and should destroy them that destroy the earth: Christ shall raise
the spirits, and encourage the hearts of his despised Ministers and people, and
destroy their destroyers. This has been done in part, and shall be more fully
accomplished. And the Temple of God was opened in heaven: the glory of Christ's
Church shall become more visible, and it shall have a free and open passage,
many which were without, entering into it: And there was seen (...) his Temple
the Ark of his Testament: the secrets of his kingdom shall be manifested, the
Ark it self that was hidden from the multitude within the veil, shall be
discovered. And there were lightnings, and voices, and thundrings, and great
hail: dreadful judgments upon those who will not see and submit to the mighty
power of Christ: And an earthquake, dreadful concussions, great changes and
alterations in the kingdoms of the world. The hearts of God his people should
now be filled with expectation of the glorious acts of Christ, in as much as the
time is come that He has taken to Himself His great power.

Secondly, If Christ most certainly will subdue all things to Himself; Use 2.
it is our wisdom willingly to stoop unto Him. Let us assure our selves,
Christ will not part with his royalties in the least degree. He will maintain
to the uttermost his supremacy, and sovereign authority. We must bow or break:
one way or other we shall undoubtedly be brought under, either we must
willingly yield to the golden Scepter of his love, or we shall be crushed with
the iron rod of his wrath. Joseph (I conceive) was a type of Christ both in his
abasement and exaltation: when he was made ruler over the land of Egypt, it is
said, they cried or proclaimed before him; Bow the knee: let all people
throughout the Knigdom submit G^n. 41. 43.
to his authority. So when Christ for his Fathers glory and man's salvation, had
greatly humbled Himself, even to the death of the Cross, God highly exalted
Him, and gave him a Name above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every knee
should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
earth. He proclaimed before Him throughout heaven, earth and hell, Bow the
knee: All, men, angels, devils and other creatures shall be subjected to Him. A
necessity lies upon us, and woe unto us if we do not willingly submit. For
this end take these three considerations.

1. The glorious and magnificent titles attributed to Christ in 1. 1 Timothy 6. 15.
Scripture. The Blessed and Only Potentate, earthly Potentates have but a
shadow of power in comparison of Him, though all due honor and subjection
must be given them by those under their Government. But in respect of Christ
their power and authority is no more than the light of the Stars in the
presence of the Sun. He is Lord of Lords: other Lords are but his vassels, King
of Kings, other Kings are but his Subjects: so they are de jure, so they ought
to be: and they shall de facto, actually at one time or other, one way or
other, be brought under. Yea He has this Name written upon his thigh, and upon
his vesture, King of Rev. 19. 16.
Kings, and Lord of Lords. The Name which He wears on His lower parts, upon
the skirt of his robe, proclaims Him King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. If we
poor worms are so apt to tremble at the name of an earthly King or Ruler, Oh
let all the powers of our souls prostrate themselves, and lie low before the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Secondly, consider what a blessed condition they are in, who 2
in sincerity have subjected themselves unto him. 1. In regard 1
of His singular love toward them. He is infinitely above all others the most
gracious Master toward those whose spirits are subdued to His government. Says
the Spouse, His banner over Cant. 2. 4.
me was love. What an encouragement is it to Soldiers to have the love of
their General! Thrice happy souls that have Christ for their Commander, and
are led, governed and conducted by Him as their King and Captain of their
salvation: His very banner over them is love: all His Commands are commands of
love: all the service He requires of them, is imposed in love: He never
enjoyneth them any thing but what is for their good: they are never losers by
obeying his pleasure: all their losses come by their disobedience. He never
puts them upon any suffering, but it is done in love. He chasteneth us for
our good, Heb 12. 10.
that we might be partakers of His holiness. If He leads them into the
field, and lets them meet with any sharp encounters, Romans 8.
He makes them more than conquerours. The Apostle having (as it were) searched
Satan's muster-rolls, and taken a view of his several brigades, tribulation,
distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, sword (enemies of a
terrible aspect to the eye of flesh, as the grim visages of Ariovistus his
Germans were to Cesars Soldiers) he slighteth them all, in all these (...), we
do more than conquer, through him that loved us: it may seem more proper to
have said, through the Almighty power of Christ our Captain: But he chooses the
sweet attribute of love, showing that it is a special act of his love that he
leads on his followers to such conflicts, intending to make them happy
gainers, more than conquerours. I believe so many would turn Soldiers that we
should want hands for other employments, if they could be assured of two
things. First, to be entirely beloved of their Commander, as his own right arm.
Secondly, that they should return with safety and victory. This is the
happiness of all the servants and soldiers of Christ: He loves them tenderly
as the members of his own body, as the apple of his own eye. He will bring them
off more than conquerours.

Secondly, He delivers all his faithful servants from all those cruel
taskmasters to which they were enslaved. Sin shall not have dominion over you:
for ye are under grace. Oh what an Rom 6. 14.
happiness is it to be freed from so many tyrannical monsters, to have the
strength of pride, covetousness, lust, sensuality broken! This should
wonderfully provoke us fully to yield up our spirits in subjection to Christ.
Blessed is the Soul that makes such a change, that is freed from the slavery
of sin and Satan, carrying it on to destruction, and is now governed and led by
Christ in the way of salvation.

3. He pitieth them in regard of the infirmities accompanying 3.
them in his services, for which themselves mourn, against which they strive:
and graciously spares them as a Father spares his son that serves him.

4. Yea, He helps their infirmities, comes in upon them by 4.
his Spirit; when the work is too heavy for them, is a co-worker with them,
eases their yoke, and delights to manifest his power in their weakness.

5. The happiness of his subjects and servants appears in 5. Psalm. 58. 11.
Prove. 11. 18.
their reward, that is, 1. Sure. 2. Incomparable. 1. Sure. Verily there is a
reward for the righteous. The wicked works a deceitful work: that is, a
self-deceiving work, as the opposite member shows: he that has to do with
sin, deals with a cheater, which promises gain, pleasure, satisfaction; but
merely deceives him, pays him with shame, sorrow, misery: but to him that
loves righteousness shall be a sure reward: righteousness and true holiness
is such a kind of seed as never miscarrieth; he that sows it is sure of a
good harvest: it is a seed taken out of the granary of heaven: it will grow and
prosper in any ground. Christ says, Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is
with me: His reward is ready. Those that serve Princes or States most
faithfully, must wait long for their reward many times, though they whom they
serve be very desirous to satisfy them, because their reward is not always
with them, not always ready. I have 2 Timothy 4.
fought a good fight (says the Apostle) henceforth is laid up for me a crown
of righteousness, etc. his Crown was ready for him before he was ready to wear
it; it was laid up and kept in store for him.

Secondly, the reward is incomparable, 1. In the service. 2. After it.

1. In the service: In scelere sceleris supplicium: sceleri paena coaetanea.
Sin carries vengeance in it own bowels: sin and punishment are contemporary:
fin it self is a misery; holiness it self is a reward. Now being made free
from sin, and become the servants of God, ye have Romans 6. 22.
your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. This is a certain
truth (and the people of God find it by experience) that the present reward
that goes along with the work of Christ, the sweet refreshings which
Christians meet with in the way of holiness, are far above all the pleasures
of sin, and the best things which the world can bestow upon it lovers. That
sweet peace of conscience, those tastes of heaven, those glimpses of glory,
those beginnings of eternal life are far above all earthly comforts.

But secondly, the reward that is prepared for them after their work is done,
is more than they are able to desire or conceive. Exodus 33. 19, 20.
Says Moses, I beseech thee, show me thy glory. The Lord tells him, Thou
can not see my face: for there shall no man see me and live: As if he had
said, Moses, thou ask thou know not what: the weight of glory which would
result from my face is more than thou art able to stand under in this mortal
condition. That exceeding weight of glory which Christ has provided for his
people is so great, so incomparable, that they are not capable of it, until
they be transformed into the likeness of Christ: it is more happiness than
their hearts can hold in that estate wherein now they are. Oh that the Lord
would give us hearts to believe these things really, as they are most sure and
real truths! Does not many a man think, if I could get into such a man's
service, I were a man made. This is only true of the service of Christ: thou
art more happy if thou have him for thy Master, than if thou had all the men
on earth for thy servants. His service is a greater preferment than the richest
Crown under heaven. If our hearts were not wretchedly muddy, earthly,
unbeleeving, how could we sleep quietly until we were entertained by Christ in
his service!

Thirdly, consider the misery of those that do not yield subjection 3.
to Him. No enemy so dreadful as Christ to them that stand out against Him.
Who knows the power of thine anger? Little Psalm. 90. 11. Luke 19. 27.
do poor souls know the weight of his Almighty arm. Those mine enemies, which
would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me,
let me see them executed. Kings, Rulers, people conspire in rebellion against
the Lord, and against His Christ: Let us break their hands asunder, and cast
away their cords from us. Psalm. 2. 3, 4, etc.
Alas poor worms: He that sits in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall
have them in derision. Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them
in his sore displeasure. That wrath which springs out of the earth, which men
of the world can show, seems terrible: but who is able to endure that wrath
which is powered V. 9. 10.
down from Him that sits in heaven? Thou shall break them with a rod of
iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a potters vessel. Then follows the
Use that now we are upon: Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye
Judges of the earth. It is the wisdom of Kings and Rulers, yea, and of all
degrees of people, to stoop to Him who can, and most certainly will, subdue all
to Himself. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son
rest he be angry, and ye perish in the way, when his wrath is kind^ed but a
little. A little of His wrath is more dreadful than all the rage of man. Let
us beg this wisdom from above, that we may be taught of God, in all humility to
yield and submit to Christ. If a people rising up in rebellion against the
Authority of the State could be fully assured of two things: first, that if
upon summons they lay down their Arms and submit, they shall not only be
pardoned, but much advantaged in their estates: and secondly, that if they
remain obstinate, it will be the ruin of themselves, their families, and
posterities, were it not mere madness to show themselves wilful? We are all
from our birth enemies and rebels against Christ. The silver trumpet of the
Gospel proclaims pardon, mercy, adoption, salvation, the promises of this
life and that which is to come, to those that have been deepest in this
rebellion, if they come in. On the contrary it is most certain, all that stand
out against Christ in their natural estate and impenitency, shall be subdued
to their everlasting ruin and destruction: For He must reign till he has put
all enemies under his feet.

Thirdly, how careful should we be thoroughly to examine Use 3.
our selves whether we be truly subjected to Christ, or not? whether His grace
have bowed us that so we may be sure his power shall not break us; whether we
are over-powred by his love, that so we may not be overwhelmed with his wrath?
Beloved, this is one of the principal enquiries which we are to make
throughout our whole lives. We are fallen upon times which are full of
questions and controversies. I believe there have not been many ages since
Christ's ascension, wherein more queries have been stirring, more doubts and
disputes agitated, than in these days. Now I suppose a man of ordinary
observation, may take notice of two sorts of people among us: Galli^es, mere
spectators, that look on and care for none of these things, who mind the things
of the world: the main question that seems to stick with them, is how they
may compass their worldly ends, or how they may satisfy their lusts, and make
provision for the flesh: these as they trouble not themselves to find out the
truth of things in controversy, so they are securely negligent about this
great enquiry, whether they are subjected unto Christ or not? Others are very
busy in various disputs about things pertaining to religion, some of whom (I
fear) take little or no care to be resolved in this great business, whether
their spirits are effectually subdued to the Government of Christ. I beseech
you let us, in the fear of God, set our selves to study this point. If once we
can by good evidence of Scripture rightly infer this conclusion, that our souls
are brought into a willing subjection to the Lord Jesus Christ, that we are
loyal Subjects to the King of Israel, we may assure our selves that The Spirit
of Christ will lead us by the light of His word into all necessary truth. And
though we be not able to answer every cavil, and frivolous objection made
against some particular truth, yet if we can confute those arguments bent
against the saving work of Christ upon our souls, in reducing us under the
Scepter of His Gospel, we shall find more solid comfort and sweet satisfaction,
then those that toss the word of God in restless and doubtful disputes; and
shall be sure to have so much knowledge as may serve to light us the way to
heaven. 1 Then are our minds, understandings and judgments, 1.
subdued to the wisdom of Christ, revealed in His word? In reference to this
head, let us put our selves to these three interrogatories. 1. Do we verily
account all that wisdom to be mere foolishnes, which lifts up it self against
any truth of Christ? Do we sincerely desire and endeavor, to have every
thought within us captivated under the power of His truth? Do we abhor it as
no less than a degree of rebellion against Christ, when we find any
imaginations, any carnal reasonings in our minds crossing the Gospel of Christ
in any part? For instance: it is one of the great truths of Christ which the
Apostle has taught us by the Spirit of Christ: Godliness is profitable unto all
things, having 1 Timothy 4. 8, 9.
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. And first he
confirms it as a most certain truth, This is a faithful saying. Secondly,
he valueth it as a most precious truth, and worthy of all acceptance. Thirdly,
he justifies it as an approved, experimented truth. For therefore we both
labor and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the
Savior of all men, especially of those that believe. Beloved, if every one
here present were examined upon this interrogatory, and conscience were to make
the answer, how few would be able to approve themselves in the sight of God, as
true and loyal subjects unto Christ? Do not many of you entertain such
thoughts as these in your hearts? If I should observe the Lord His day
according to the strict rule of godliness, if in the course of my life I shall
make godliness my rule in performing duties in secret, in my family, in
public, in buying, selling, in all the business of my calling, in conversing
with others, if I should regulate all my votes in Parliament according to the
principles of godliness, I might lose my friends, my repute, many advantages
for my estate, much prejudice if not ruin my self and my posterity? What answer
the tongue would give I know not; but I am persuaded many an ones conscience
within would plead guilty. This argues non-subjection to the Scepter of
Christ, and rebellion against His Sovereignty. Says Christ, Whosoever drinks
of the water that I shall give him, shall never Ioh. 4. 14.
thirst; but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of living
water, springing up into everlasting life. Here is a point of divine wisdom
uttered by the mouth of Christ Himself: Are not many that read and hear this so
far from subjecting their reason to it, that they are ready to scorn or slight
it? Let them have wine and strong drink, their pleasures, let their cisterns be
filled with worldly abundance, and they do not much trouble themselves about
this living water: they can live without it. Their minds are not subdued to the
wisdom of Christ. But he that looks upon Christ as a fountain of living
water, believing verily that if once he has him dwelling in him, he shall
never be exhausted and drawn dry, but that this spring of grace and spiritual
consolation shall stream forth into the ocean and full sea of everlasting
glory. He whose thirsty soul cannot be satisfied without the saving graces and
comforts of Christ's Spirit, fully submitting himself to this wisdom of Christ,
and renouncing sense and reason which seems to contradict it: he may say, I
am a subject of Christ's Scepter, the Lord Jesus is my Christ and King. Again
says Christ, Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate, Matthew 7.
13, 14
and bread is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go
in thereat. Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads
unto life, and few there be that find it. Strive to enter in at the Luke 13, 24.
strait gate: for many I say unto you will seek to enter in, and shall not be
able. Are your minds subjected to the wisdom of Christ discovered in these
truths? Are ye verily persuaded that the gate is strait, and the way narrow,
that it requires much striving and contending to enter, that a cold, sluggish,
common, formal way of seeking will never give you entrance? If not, if you
please your selves in your own conceits and vain imaginations, contrary to the
wisdom of Christ, that it is an easy thing to go to heaven, ye hope to be
saved as well as the best, though ye hold on in an easy broad way, sliding
down the hill, carried with the stream of the world, the tide of your lusts,
the wind of Satan's suggestions, and applause of the multitude, assure your
selves ye are rebels against Christ: ye oppose your carnal conceits, and exalt
your blind reason against His heavenly wisdom.

Secondly, if your understandings be subdued to the wisdom of Christ, then ye
will yield to particular truths of Christ, notwithstanding former engagements
to the contrary. A man cannot approve his loyalty to that Prince or State to
whom he owes Allegiance, unless he renounce contrary engagements to a
foreign Prince, If by education, mistake, weakness of judgment, seducements
of others, thou have been engaged in defense of any error, and because of such
prejudice will stiffely maintain it against the contrary truth of Christ, what
is this but rebellion against the wisdom of Christ. But that is a sweet,
gracious, loyal spirit, that is freely ready to quit all engagements for
receiving of any truth of Christ, and is content that all his own notions
should fall to the ground, that the wisdom and truth of Christ might be exalted
and maintained in it just and full authority.

Thirdly, when thy mind and judgment stoopeth to the truth of Christ held
forth by such Instruments as the proud world despises, so soon as ever thou
see the Kings stamp upon it, that is so soon as thou findst Christ His
authority for it: not regarding by whom it is presented to thee, but looking up
to Him who sits at the right hand of God, humbly subjectest thy self to his
wisdom.

Secondly, if a man be brought into subjection unto Christ, 2.
then is his will subdued to and by the Spirit of Christ. Barnabas being sent
from the Church of Jerusalem to confirm the new converts of Antioch, When he
came and had seen the grace of God, was Act 11* 22, ^3
glad, and exhorted them all that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto
the Lord. As if he had said, Brethren, I rejoice to see these happy beginnings,
to see the kingdom of Christ thus enlarged, and withal let me exhort you, that
ye yield up your wills fully and steadfastly unto Him; cleaving to Him with
purpose of heart. This shall be a sweet evidence to your souls, that ye are
indeed subjected to Him. That is a real subjection of a loyallhearted people
to Christ, when they are resolvedly His; not when they have some slight
inclinations toward him, but when the purpose of their heart is fixed upon Him,
and they are steadfastly resolved that Christ shall give law to them. It is
grievous to a loyal subject of Christ to have any thing remaining in his will
that savoureth of rebellion against Christ, any renitency, any unwillingnesse
and indisposednesse to the work of Christ.

Thirdly, when a man is subjected unto Christ, his affections 3.
are subdued to Him. He obeys Christ, and he obeys Him in love; he shunneth
sin, and he loves to avoid it. He does the will of Christ with a desire
exceeding his performance and ability. A carnal person not subjected to
Christ, his performances exceed his affections, he does many outward services
to which he has no heart. Again, the loyal subject delights in his
subjection. He would not for a world be free from this yoke. Whereas those
rebels said, Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away Psalm. 2.
their cords from us: he says from the bottom of his heart, Blessed be God
that ever He brought me under the government of his Son, that instead of a
slave of Satan, He has made me a subject to the King of glory. As it is said
of one of our English Martyrs, that he kissed the stake, saying, Welcome the
cross of Christ, welcome everlasting life. So says he whose heart is
subjected to the Lord Jesus, welcome the sweet yoke of Christ, the very
entrance into everlasting life. I rejoice in the Law of God, says Paul, I
delight Romans 7.
to do thy will O my God: yea thy law is within my heart, or Psalm. 40. 8.
in the midst of my bowels, says David. He professes it was his delight to do
the will of God, and gives two reasons: the former employed in those words [ O
my God] thou have given me thy self for my gracious God and portion, and
therefore it is my delight to give up my self to thee in obedience. The second
expressed in these, Thy Law is within my heart. When the Law of God is once
lodged within a man, written in his heart, fixed in his bowels, then is he a
loyal subject of Christ, and goes on in the way of holiness with rejoicing.
he delights in godly sorrow for his disloyalties: and whereas others strive to
forget and shake off the fear of God, he rejoices to find his heart overawed
by Christ: It is delightful to him to curb his lusts, to control his own
will: It is the joy of his heart to see these enemies of Christ within his own
soul, lie slain before Him.

Fourthly, He that is a true subject of Christ, rejoices to see 4.
the kingdom of Christ enlarged, his cause prosper, his implacable enemies
brought under; but especially to see rebels so subdued, as to become loyal and
obedient subjects. What spectacle so glorious in his eye as to see Christ
victorious, to behold the Captain of his salvation on a day of triumph? Those
that are otherwise affected, show of what spirit they are, whatever they
pretend: I heard a voice from heaven, come out of her my people, that ye Rev.
18. 4, 5.
be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. For her
sins have reached unto heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities. Reward
her even as she has rewarded you* and double unto her double according to her
works. If this be a voice from heaven, what shall we think of the clamor of
those that contradict it? is not that a voice from hell? It follows in that
place, how the enemies of Christ mourned at the funeral of the whore of
Babylon, as many of late seemed to be vexed at the fall and weakening of them
that fought for the whore. But what says the holy Ghost? Rejoice Ver* 20.
over her, thou heaven, [thou Church of Christ] and ye holy Apostles and
Prophets: for God has avenged you on her. And after these Cap. 19. 1. etc.
things, I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia:
salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God. For true and
righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the great whore which did
corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of His
servants at her hand. They that belong to the kingdom of Christ rejoice and
give thanks in this case: who are they that lament but those that belong to the
prince of darkness?

Fourthly, This should stir up all who are loyall-hearted subjects Use 4.
of Christ, to labor more fully to subject themselves unto him. And first
endeavor to take deeper rooting in Christ by 1
faith, that ye may partake more of the power and Spirit of Christ* for He
according to his working is able to subdue all things to Himself. The more ye
have of Christ, the more shall your spirits be subjected unto Christ. Dilate
your hearts by faith in sweet and free meditations on the promises, that ye may
let in more of Christ into your souls. His entrance into the soul is the ruin
of Satan's strong holds: when He is exalted in the heart, lust will sink,
corruption will be weakened. Meditations on the Law, and on the wrath of God may
be of great use to prepare the way of Christ: but it is the presence and power
of Christ possessing the heart, which does the work. For this purpose the Son ^
Ioh. 3* 8.
of God was manifested, that He might destroy the works of the devil: that is
spoken of his manifestation to the world in general. It holds true in this
case, the more Christ is manifested to any believer in particular, the more are
the works of the devil destroyed in him, and the more is that soul subjected
unto Christ. The cause why Satan's bulwarks are not more fully demolished, and
our spirits so little subdued unto Christ, is, because we have but obscure
discoveries of Christ.

Secondly, Labor to be more and more humble, and sencible 2
of your own vileness. Self-abasing is the lifting up of Christ. The spirit
that stoopeth lowest is best prepared to become a throne for Christ. For thus
says the High and lofty one that inhabiteth Isa. 57. 15*
eternity, whose Name is holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him
also that is of a contrite and humble spirit. This may seem strange that the
highest place in heaven, and the lowest hearts on earth should be the fittest
thrones for Christ. And why? the heart that is lowest in humility, is highest
in excellency in his esteem: the spirit that is lifted up to the greatest
height of pride, is lowest for vileness and baseness in his account* God
resi^teth the proud, because they lift up themselves against His royal
Majesty, and gives grace to the humble, because they yield him subjection.
Humility makes way for more grace, and so for more full subjection unto
Christ. They that delight to lie at the footstool of Christ in humility, shall
see Christ sitting in the throne of their hearts, and shall be exalted to sit
with Christ in his throne of glory.

Thirdly, Keep a continual watch. A Commander who knows 3
many of his Soldiers to be ill affected to the cause wherein he is engaged,
and ready to raise a mutiny, or that has many sturdy prisoners in his Camp
that wait an opportunity to act mischief, had need set a strong guard upon
them, and keep a watchful eye over them. So a Christian finding many
treacherous lusts in his heart, ready upon occasion to break into actual
rebellion against Christ, had need be very watchful: if he be slumbering, they
will soon be acting mischief. Watch therefore, and if they begin to stir,
execute martial Law upon them presently. Let them dye without mercy, that thy
soul may live, and Christ may reign.

Fourthly, Keep peace with God: and let the peace of God rule 4
in thine heart, that so thy soul may rest in a sweet subjection under the
government of Christ the Prince of peace; whilst the hearts of others are
hurried up and down with diverse and contrary lusts, being like the raging sea,
casting up mire and dirt.

As the point is of universal concernment to all degrees of persons, so I have
carried it on in the Application. I yet desire liberty for one word to this
Honorable Audience, whom it especially concerns.

Much honored in the Lord, I beseech You take home to your selves what has
been spoken to you and others in the Name of Christ, and labor to make it your
own. This is that which would make your memories precious to posterity, and
cause future generations to call you blessed; yea this will enable you to give
up your last account with joy, if first your own spirits shall be truly subdued
to the Lord Jesus Christ; and then if your Parliamentary counsels and
proceedings shall be such as savor of the loyalty of your hearts toward this
King of Saints. The Apostle seems 2 Cor. 9. 12, 13.
to have been wonderfully affected with a work of mercy performed by private
Christians, in relieving the necessities of their poor Brethren. For (says
he) the administration of this service not only supplyeth the want of the
Saints, but is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God: whilst by the
experiment of this ministration, they glorify God for your professed
subjection to the Gospel of Christ. How much more shall the right
administration of this public Service wherein ye are engaged, and the faithful
discharge of this great trust committed to You, not only supply the wants, and
make up the breaches of Church and State; but also be abundant by many
thanksgivings unto God, enlarging the hearts, and opening the mouths of
thousands of the godly, whilst by the experiment of this public ministration
they glorify God for your professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ. And if
the Apostle in that case did break out so affectionately, how much more shall
the faithful have cause to lift up the praises of their God, and Ver. 15.
to say: Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift: Blessed be God for a
Parliament that subjected themselves, and all their power and authority to Him
whom God has set at His own right hand, far above principalities and powers,
and every name that is named not only in this world, but also in the world to
come; for a Parliament, who in all their legislative Acts hold respect to their
subordination to that supreme Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy,
who were tender of the glory of the Lord Jesus, of the purity of his truth and
worship, and would not for a world infringe any of His royal prerogatives. Ye
have mighty engagements hereunto: And therefore for conclusion let me set
before Psalm. 18. 47, 48
you David's case, and his example. It is God that avengeth me, and subdueth the
people under me. Has not God avenged you, and wonderfully subdued the people
under you, far beyond the hopes of those that were most confident among you? He
delivers me from mine enemies: yea thou have lifted me up above those that
rise up against me; thou have delivered me from the violent man. Cannot ye say
after him verbatim, and apply all to your selves, word for word? What cause
have you to conclude with him, Therefore will Ver. 49.
I give thanks unto the Lord among the heathen; and will sing praises unto thy
Name. Labor in thankfulness to make the Name of the Lord glorious among the
heathen; heathenish Christians that are strangers to him in diverse parts of the
Land, by propagating the Gospel, and giving necessary encouragement to those
that publish it. And remember that Christ's highest end in all his works (and
therefore certainly in such admirable works) is Himself: not the greatn^sse of
the creature who enjoys the comfort of them, but the honor of His own great
Name. Oh learn therefore to seek not your own things, but the things of Jesus
Christ: 1 Samuel 12. 24.
For consider how great things He has done for you.

FINIS.

