De Morbis Foemineis, THE Woman's Counselor: OR, The Feminine Physician.

MODESTLY Treating of such occult accidents, and secret Diseases, as are
incident to that Sex, which their too much modesty, too often to their sorrow,
causes them to conceal from others; for a Remedy whereof, they are here taught
to be their own helpers; especially in these particulars: Of barrenness and
Abortion: of natural, and unnatural Births: of the suppression of the Terms,
the immoderate Flux thereof and other infirmities.

Dicere quae puduit, Scribere jussit. With a brief Appendix, touching the
Kinds, Causes, and Cures of Dropsies, and Tympanies of all sorts.

Translated out of Massarius de morbis Mulier.

By R. T. philomathe.(...)

London, Printed for John Streater, and are to be sold by the Booksellers in
London, 1657.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Am now to write to two Sexes, both Masculine, and Feminine: This Treatise is
composed useful for both Men and Women; for men who are English Students, in
the excellent works of nature, the knowledge of Physic, who want some English
subject of this nature, there being nothing of it yet extant. And this Author
coming to my hands, almost worn out with the Canker of Time, I have bestowed
the pains to new dress, and revive with many additions; there being no subject
more useful.

To the Feminine Gender, Women of all sorts, be they Maids, Wives, or Widows,
what private and occult infirmities they are subject to, are here described,
with their causes and Cures, Those that are, or intend to take on them the
honorable practice of Midwives, may be instructed in some difficulties that
will happen in their Offices, whereby they may be helpful to those they
undertake; I mean not the Theorical part of a Midwives Office and Duty: what
appertains to that they are sufficiently, and excellently directed, by that
late deceased, and yet living English Apollo, Mr. Culpepper, in his Midwives
Directory; and here follows the practical part directing what means is to be
used in any accident there, or that follows, or precedes Childbirth.

I have bestowed the pains plainly to English the Receipt of every Medicine, in
words at length, and not in figures, that every one may understand them; and
thereby over modest Maids and Women may help themselves in many private
infirmities, which oftentimes they languist under, and will not discover. Then
make use hereby, as you have occasion; and as you find the Benefit, give God
the praise, who has given power to his weak Creatures, the Herbs of the Field
to be your helpers, and preservers, which is the desire of

R. T. (...).

A TABLE OF THE Contents of the Chapters.
OF Women's Diseases in general: The Introduction. Chap. 1. Of the Menstrue or
Terms. C. 2. Of the suppression, or stopping of the Terms. Chap. 3. Of the
immoderate Flux of the Terms. Chap. 4. Of the Flux of the Womb, or the Whites.
Chap. 5. Of the Fits of the Mother, or suffocation, and drawing up of the
Matrix. Chap. 6. Of the falling down of the Womb. Chap. 7. Of natural
Conceptions. Chap. 8. Of Barrenness. Chap. 9. Of monstrous and unnatural
births. C. 10. Of the unnatural fleshy Conception in the Womb, called Mola.
Chap. 11. Of weakness of Children in the Womb. Chap. 12. Of Mischances, and to
prevent the same. Chap. 13. To expel and drive forth a dead Child out of the
womb. Chap. 14. Of hard Labor find means to procure easy Delivery. Chap. 15.
Of superfluity of milk, and other accidents happening after the Birth, as sore
breasts. Chap. 16. Means and Remedies for Nurses that want milk. Chap. 17. Of
Dropsies and Tympanies, an Appendix.
THE WOMAN'S COUNSELOR.
The Introduction.
Chap. I. Of Women's diseases in general.
THis being a Subject, which too much modesty, or indeed as it is, simple folly
of many of the female Sex, has hindered them from attaining to; and others, to
fill their purses, have, and do still endeavor to conceal; But the want
thereof being much, and the benefit great to save the health, and sometimes the
lives of many poor women, whom God made as like himself, as he did the greatest
Queen in the world; is the cause of bringing this so much necessary work to
every ones capacity. And to treat peculiarly of the Diseases, and Infirmities
incident to women, which as they want a particular Treatise, so they require a
peculiar and proper Cure, Hipp. I. de morbis mul. 331.
as Hippocrates at large teaches: For the women do much differ from the men,
from their beginning, and therefore do labor under, and suffer many Diseases
peculiar and proper only to that Sex; which men can never surfer, neither are
they incident to them. Wherefore, Is it not requisite to call such infirmities
women's diseases, and for them to instittute not only a proper Treatise, but a
special Cure? Nevertheless, it has been, (and perhaps still is) contended
against by some learned and famous men, who would account this Treatise
needless, and seem to aver, that there is no such vast distinction to be
used between the Male and Female; but their Diseases having only respect to the
Sex, may be cured by one and the same general method. And this indeed may be
true in some common and general Diseases usual to both sexes; but in such
infirmities as appertain only to the women, and are not at all contingent to
the men, their falsity plainly appears. And therefore Galen, Hippocrates, and
Dioscorides, and many others, have taken the pains to write whole Commentaries
merely upon the Diseases of women; but yet their works are much incused by the
corruption of time, though full of much variety of speech, gravity, and
excellency of Learning.

This Treatise of the Diseases of women, is so occult, intricate and difficult
to perform, that there is nothing to be found in all the Cabinets of nature, or
secrets of the medicinal Art, more abstruse and difficult. The causes of this
are many, as Hippocrates numbers them in his Book, Hipp. de morbis mul. page
331.
De morbis mul. page 131. The first cause is, that women carry Diseases a long
time about them, and root it in them, and yet are either voluntarily, or
foolishly ignorant thereof; either they do not know, or else are so
superfluously modest as they will not discover the same, until time and
necessity, too late to their pain, teaches them to know them by experience. And
from hence it follows, that their Cure is not only difficult, but oftentimes
their Diseases are incurable.

The second cause Hippocrates numbreth to be this; That a great many women that
are troubled with some secret Disease, and do well know the same, yet are so
shamefac't and modest as rather to suffer under the same, than to communicate
their minds to the Physician. Whereas he that wears the shoo best knows where
it wrings; and amongst other Causes, the information of the Patient, discovers
to the Physician the knowledge, and so consequently, the Cure of the Disease
may be the easier effected. Now the Physician being destitute of that help, by
reason of the silence of the women, the knowledge of the Disease is the more
hard to find out, and consequently the Cure more difficult.

This also may be added for a third cause, the too much verecundity or timidity
of the Physicians, dealing too carelessly with the women, being too shamefaced,
or bashful to deal plainly with them, and to inquire of them diligently and
perfectly, the causes of their infirmities, and also absconditos locos suos
attingere and tractare, which is necessary and needfully required. Of which
negligence, Hippocrates does much reprove and reprehend many Physicians, who do
not accurately and carefully study to search out, and understand the true
Causes of women's Diseases, without the knowledge whereof, their going about to
Cure them, is rash and indiscreet.

But to pass by these Causes, which, are of no small moment, it will not be
amiss to add another, that the ignorance of Midwives, not knowing the internal
secret parts of nature, nor how to exhibit in word or outward remedies, may
cause to the women difficult and hard labors.

From all which, is consequently gathered, that the Causes finding out, the
matter and knowledge of women's Diseases, contains in it many secrets and
great difficulties.

But these difficulties carry with them, and comprehend in themselves a
recompense of jucundity and profit; For what is more delightful to man than to
understand so great secrets and mysteries of Nature? And what can be more
profitable to a Physician than to find out and know the way and manner of
curing, and helping the infirmities and diseases of women? For since that the
infirmities which do most frequently afflict miserable women, are very many
most acute and grievous, in so much that their complaints may be heard almost
continually from the very Womb; certainly Physicians in the study of their Cure
shall not only gain great esteem and honor, but much profit. This therefore
induces me to render this Treatise plainly in the English tongue, that the
women themselves may be their own Physicians.

The first thing therefore here intended to be handled is of the Conception of
man; and therein the first thing to be noted, is the distinction and difference
of the Sexes of man and woman, without which no Conception can be had, nor the
Course of nature maintained; of which that it may be fully and perfectly
understood by you, we shall speak plainly; I say therefore as the Philosophers
teach, that all things whatsoever that are, have a twofold ens or being, some
ingenerative incorruptible, eternal as Intelligences and Heaven: others
generative corruptible and momentary, as these inferior Elements, and those
things which consist of the Elements.

Although the Elements, as to the whole, are ingenerative and incorruptible,
nevertheless, according to the parts they are generated, and corrupted, and
are subject to continual transmutation. But the Cause thereof is the materia
prima, or first matter, which always desires new forms as the Philosophers in
their Physics every where teach. But to let pass all other circumstances,
Gal. 14. cap. 11.
Galen tells you, there was a man so studious in the secrets of Nature, as to
seek if it were possible to be immortal, and bring immortality upon the Body.
But the materia prima, or which, if you will, call it God himself, knew this to
be unlawful, and this Galen sufficiently declares; Gal. 1: cap. 1.
For that which consists of Arteries, Veins, Nerves, Bones and Flesh, is the
compound of Nature, and therefore is subject to corruption, for the Frabricatum
or building of Nature, is a plain way, yet impossible to bring a man to
immortality, his structures are subject to fall. The greatest of Cities, and
the wisest of men be their Counsels never so great, or their people never so
many, and their wisdom and their providence never so much, time will bring them
all to nothing. Therefore the works of Nature are wonderful, as, that as one
dies, another lives, and instead of one another succeeds; and by that Rule you
may call nature to be immortal, but this is no other but the continual
Generation of mankind: Gal. 6.7.14. 3 De usu part.
so teaches Philosophy, and so the learned write. There is no part of the
Body, but is necessary to be used, and competent to the protection of life, as
the Brain, the Heart, the Liver, the Eyes, the Nose, the Ears, but if we should
particularly instance the primum mobile of Nature, we must then speak of the
four principal parts which carry a distinction between the Male and the Female,
and are the preservers and continuers of mankind.

I Will presume so much modesty as to give you these terms in the old tongue,
Turner.
my meaning cannot be unknown, 'twas lawful for Ovid to write what he would
not speak, and you may know my meaning; the parts following which we must treat
of, are the maintainers and continues of the World before the confusion of
Babel, called pudenda, testes, utert.

You know my mind, if you do not his, in English, such things as have the best
sense of feeling.

Of this which we said before, we intend only to discriminate the Sexes,
without which no Generation can be had in any Creature whatsoever, without the
perfect mixture of Male and Female.

And therefore Aristotle in all his works, Arist. de genesis c. 2
counted the Earth to be the Mother of all Creatures, the Sun the Father and
begetter of them: so says likewise Plato, and all others, that the Man and the
Woman consist of two Elements of the Sun and Moon; the Father and begetter to
be the Fire or Sun, the woman or conceiver to be the Earth or Moon, of which
the whole World is built and consists.

As the Macrocosmus or great world consists, Turner.
and is properly supported by the Sun and Moon, which are the male and female
of the same great World. so the Microcosmus Man, by the woman which is the Moon
of the man, and the Earth of the Microcosmus, and the field of his generation,
products the continual generation of mankind. To speak of the differences of
Sects and parts between man and woman, would take up a Volume in Philosophy,
beyond our present intention, which intends only the infirmities incident to
the Moon of the man, or that Creature which we call a woman; Something may be
said how the Sun and Moon of the Microcosme, or the man and the woman differ in
parts and nature, Philosophy largely teaches it, but we say no more but only
they differ in Faculty. For the Man or the Sun of the Microcosme, has a power
or faculty to engender in another, that is, in the Moon, but the woman has
also a faculty in power of generating, or bringing forth in her self, by the
help of the Sun her husband, without which mutual conjunction no Generation can
be had.

I hope you have wit enough to know what I mean by the Sun and the Moon, that I
may not be forced to English one thing twice: and if you be Men or Women, then
know that by the Sun I mean the Man, and by the Moon the Woman; which if she be
a whore, I cannot help it. That Is an Eclipse to the microcosmical Sun; And as
these two differ in Sex, so they differ in Nature, and in the several Faculties
of Nature, and Members belonging to procreation, and Generation of Creatures
accomodated the one to the other; but if you will take the distinction,
Aristotle he calls them in Women Pudenda and uterus, and in Men Testes and
Membrum virile. Testes signifies properly, witnesses; and a man without such
witnesses will have bad success in his cause, Turner.
if women be of the Jury. And therefore the first Mover and Maker of all things
knew it necessary, to have a procreation of Mankind, for the continual supply
of the World, which should be as well Male as Female; and therefore he made the
Woman, and fitted her answerably to be accomodated to receive the Instrument of
the Microcosmical Sun the Man, necessarily fitting one to the other for the Act
of generation, and this was the cause why 'twas thought not fit, the Man should
be alone, for if he had been so, the World had ceased in him: and 'twas not
only sufficient to make a Man and a Woman so, and furnish them with Instruments
proper to conjunction and copulation; but also, that as well in the Man as in
the Woman, there should be a desire, and magnetical attraction to the Act of
copulation, by a sympathy between themselves; or else, the very Act it self
would be abhorred, and the species of humane Generation frustrate, and come to
nothing, by an abhorrency of the Act it self naturally as it is, whereby the
intention of Nature would have fallen to the ground, and one Man, and one Woman
only, been made in vain. Therefore the sagacity of Nature, to cause propensity
in both Sexes, to the Act of Generation for procreation sake, endued both with
a reciprocal pleasure, and delight in the Act of Coition it self.

And this propensity and pleasure, is not ordained in men and women only, but
in all other Animals, to maintain a continual succession of generations amongst
them: as appears by the great fierceness, and earnest desire of all Creatures
to this Act, of which the Philosophers largely write; but we pass, it as not
pertinent to our present intent, and come to speak of the menstrual or monthly
Courses, by the natural constitution whereof, all women are more or less weak
or strong, diseased or sound, more or less able and meet for Conception
according to the species or degrees thereof.

Chap. II. Of the Menstrua or Terms.
ARistotle delivers, Arist. 1. de genesis Anim. cap. 19.
that the Menstrua is an Excrement, and in proportion as the Seed of man; and
that they happen to Women at the same age as the men begin to have Seed; And
that the humors of the Terms are purged forth by Nature, as superfluous and
unprofitable: therefore they may be comprehended under the general notion of an
Excrement the principal use thereof is, for generation sake, which is the first
Institution thereof, the Birth desiring a copious matter for nutriment.

The Terms generally begin in all Women, The time
about the fourteenth year of their age, about which time also Men begin to
have Seed, and both men and women change their voice, and are subject to many
other mutations in their Bodies. And they cease, as the same Philosopher
writes, about the 50th. year, seldom longer continuing.

The time of their flowing, is not in all alike, for some have these purgations
but one day, others two, three, and four days, according to the age and
temperament of the Woman. For sometimes they flow more, and sometimes less:
sometimes longer, sometimes shorter. In women that are sound of body; they
moderately flow two or three days, if any longer or shorter time, that Woman
is sickly, or barren.

And so much for the Terms in general, we will proceed now to speak of the
suppression or stopping thereof.

Chap. III. Of the stopping, or suppression of the Terms.
WHereas by the institution of Nature, it is necessarily provided, that all
Women should have their monthly natural purgations, by reason of the
temperature of this Sex, and many other causes: but if they be suppressed or
stopped, there follows to that Woman much peril and many sicknesses, but on the
other side, if they have their purgations according to the law of Nature, it
keeps them in health, and preserves them from many Diseases.

The Causes.
The Causes of the suppression of the Terms, or diminishing of them are
principally four, The first is, the vitiousness of the Womb, and of the Vessels
pertaining thereunto. The second is, the vice, or corruption of the blood. The
third, the viciousness of the whole Body. The fourth and the last are, the
viciousness and the Faculties of the Body, to which all other causes may be
referred.


First therefore, the Terms are suppressed, or diminisht by reason of the Womb,
and the Vessels belonging thereunto, by which the Terms ought to be purged; if
therefore the Womb labor under any Disease, which may be many, as that if the
substance of the womb be too hard or too thick, otherwise then is agreeable to
Nature, that causes a stopping of the Terms, that must be brought to a better
habit, with fit medicaments, and used in time for a convenient remedy.

Secondly, there does happen Diseases of intemperateness, which are various,
simple and compound, some with matter, and some without matter, under all which
the Womb may labor, partly by Nature, and from the Birth, and partly growing
in time against Nature, as hardness and thickness, of which we have spoken.

Of these Causes, the Simple are cold and dry, the Compound hot and dry; both
which, may stop the Terms, cause the Womb to grow thick and hard, destroy the
blood and impedite the natural purgation.

Then there are Diseases of intemperatenesse with matter, as Inflammations,
Swellings, Tumors, and Cancers against Nature.

Then there are other Diseases, as Ulcers, Fistulaes, Imposthums, and the like,
which the Womb is subject to, which also impedite the Terms.

The second cause of the suppression of the Terms, is corruption of blood,
which may be either too thick, or too glutinous, by reason of the vicious
thickness of the humors, the Diet and many other causes frequently happening.

The third Cause, which causes Women many times, not to have their Purgations
at all, is the viciousness of the whole Body, that it sends not blood
sufficient to the Womb for this matter to be digested of; the humor inclining
to other parts of the Body, either caused by ill Diet, or too much exercise, as
often happens in some rustic Women; whereby their temperament becomes too hot
and dry, almost inclining to the nature of men.

Another Cause of the suppression of the Terms, is the weakness of the Women in
general, whereby the blood wanting power for Concoction runs to some other
parts of the Body; and so long as the Woman labors under that weakness, the
purgations are hindered, if not altogether stopped. But thus much may suffice
for the Causes, we shall now proceed to the Symptoms, Prognostics, and
Remedies to be used in the helping this infirmity.

Though outwardly no visible sign may appear, but only the mere relation of the
party afflicted; yet the differrences thereof, may be judged by the Causes, and
Accidents attending it, and the part of the Body thereby afflicted. Whether the
whole Body be vitiated and diseased, or the defect be in the Womb, or Vessels,
as that the Mouth of the Womb be distorted and turned aside out of its due
place, or some other impediment there about; or if there be a perpetual
suppression of the Terms, then it plainly shows such a Woman to be absolutely
barren.

If the Obstruction come by weakness of the Vessels, and expulsive power then
that is perceived by immoderate heat, great thirst, a swift and strong pulse,
headache, and many other signs of heat.

But if the cause thereof happen to be from cold, then the Woman is dull,
drowsy, and much given to sleepiness, but without any thirst: the pulse beats
very slow, and the Urine is of a loathsome color.

If the Disease proceed from some inward cause, it is discovered by the fatness
or leanness of the party.

This Obstruction usually brings to the party afflicted, not only barrenness,
but oftentimes the Falling Sickness, Suffocation, Swellings and Impostumes of
the Womb, and the other parts appertaining thereunto, much dullness and
drowsiness over all the Body, Coughing, difficulty of breathing, the Dropsy,
detention of the Urine, costiveness, heaviness of mind, pain in the Head, and
many other infirmities.

Now therefore, to proceed to the Remedies to be administered for Cure of this
infirmity, it will be very fit and necessary in the first place, to loosen the
Belly; which may be done by Glisters, which dissolve wind, and gently loose as
thus:

A Glister for the stopping the Terms.
Take flowers of Camomile and Mugwort of each one handful; Anni-seeds and
Fennel-seeds, each an ounce, and make a Decoction thereof.

Then, take of this Decoction a pound, or a pint, which you please: three drams
of oil of Camomile and brown Sugar to make it a Glister; so give it.

Hiera Piera, is much commended in these cases, to purge the Excrements of the
Vesicles, and remove those gross humors.

A proper Receipt thereof may be thus, to provoke the Terms.
Take the Species of Hiera, or (if it be lawful for me to speak English; and
that it is a hard matter to do of such ugly unsignificant words, as purblind
Physicians have devised)

Take four ounces of the powder of Hiera pi^ra, and mix it with honey of Roses,
or syrup of Roses, a sufficient quantity to make it into a Bolus.

Also, take of the same simple Species, or plain powder of Hyera, two drams,
that is, a quarter of an ounce; and mix it with a sufficient quantity of syrup
of Betony, that it may be made a Bolus.

Another.
Take three drams of solutive syrup of Roses; and a sufficient quantity of the
Decoction of Citron-seeds; make it into a Potion or drink, which you please,
and take it immediately after the Hiera Bolus before directed.

Another excellent, is this.
Take of the powder of Hiera picra three drams; of the Electuary called
Lenitivum, and Cassia newly drawn, three drams; mix it into a Bolus with fine
Sugar.

Be pleased to give me leave to tell you what a Bolus is; Turner.
for It is a term Physicians have caught by the end, without sense or reason,
to fright you with. Bolus, is a Latin word, and signifies as much in English as
to say, a mouthful or morsel, or as much as one can swallow at once, so that
you may make it a Pill or Electuary, which you please: for you know both are to
be swallowed.

Some do refuse the use of Cassia to be administered in such cases, and condemn
it; but being well administered with Hiera piera, it is very commodious for this
disease.

The opening of a Vein, or letting of blood, is very proper for this Disease,
if it appears that there be a plenitude, or corruption thereof; it is properly
to be drawn from the lower parts of the Body, Give me leave to be so modest as
conceal that.
as the Foot; sometimes from the Thighs and Venis Cubiti, et ab utero; you may
imagine my meaning though I speak Latin: but I say, the superfluous blood must
be drawn out, and that downwards, or else it will endanger to spoil the Body.
Sub matrice.


Ligature and binding of the Thighs, is also requisite in this case, and to
keep the same bound to draw down the blood.

Also, if the Veins in the Matrix be obstructed and stopped, and the humor of
blood abounds, it is requisite that there be a Vein opened, to take away the
blood, and that there be other means used to diminish the same, as laxative and
opening Medicines, using abstinence and exercise, as need requires; but where
no order nor abstinence is used, never expect a good remedy.

But take it for a general Rule, that at first you begin to provoke the Terms,
with gentle and lenitive moving Medicines, afterward, if that do not the work,
proceed to stronger by degrees, always having due respect to the age and
strength of the person.

For young and tender persons generally, this is a gentle mover of the Terms;
syrup of Betony, of Mugwort, of honey of Roses, the decoction of Betony, and
Hysop, Ceterach.

Simples gently provoking and moving the Terms: which are warm by nature, are
accounted these;

Smallage roots, Fennel roots, roots of Butchers broom, of Parsley, Madder,
Asarabacca, Valerian and Elecampane;

The seeds of Lupines, Sperage, Parsley, Smallage, Annis, Fennel, Comin.

Of herbs these, Cinquefoile, Mugwort, wild Mints, Harts-tongne, Marjerom,
Fetherfew, Wormwood, Juniper, wild Time, Lovage, Maidenhair, Southernwood, and
washed Turpentine.

Stronger Simples to provoke the Terms, are; Hemlock, Rue, Centory, Savin,
Euphorbium, Sagapenum, Ammoniacum, Mirrh, Assa foetida, Mustard Seed, Celandine
roots, Coloquint, Pepper, black Hellebore, Boras.

These with the former, are to be used in powder, Syrrup, Juice or Decoction,
but beware you be not too busy in meddling with some of the last mentioned,
lest you repent it.

A Syrup to Concoct, and prepare the humors, to provoke the Terms.
Take Syrup of of Betony, of Mugwort, and Elecampane, of each half an ounce; of
the Decoction of Hysop, and Betony, of each four ounces; mix them together, and
so take it when you please.

Odoriferous things which provoke the Terms are, Cynamon, Cassia Lignea, Costus
roots, Muscus, Spica Indiae, Spica Romana, Gallia muscata, and such like.

Fumes to be burnt to move the Terms are,
Oppoponacum, Soponoria, Frankincense, Lignum Aloes, and red Storax.

Things by nature cool, which move the Terms, are,
The seeds of small Endive, of Melons, of Gourds, of Pompeons, Cucumbers and
Lettice; of which Pessaries may be made, to use in the Womb; but have a care
you put a string to them, to get them out again when you please.

A Syrup to take away the Obstructions in the Body, which hinder the Terms.
Take Madder, two ounces; of the roots of Lovage, Sperage, Cypers, and grass,
each an ounce and a half; Penny Mountain and Balm, of each two ounces, Spica
Indiae, half a dram; Licorice, Currants, Rosemary flowers, and Stecados, of each
an ounce; six ounces of Honey, and nine ounces of Sugar; boil it into a syrup,
and take thereof two ounces at a time.

Another for the same.
Take two ounces of Madder, Sperage roots, Cypers roots, and the roots of
Butchers broom, of each an ounce, Valerian Sabine, white water Mints, and
Pennyroyal, of each a handful; Baulm two handfuls; of Melon seed, one ounce;
Licorice and Currants, each half an ounce; Honey and Sugar, of each six ounces;
so make it into a syrup, and take thereof about an ounce and a half at a time.

To provoke the Terms strongly.
Take the water of Smallage, of Lupins, Sperage, and Fennel, of each six
ounces; a dram of Cinnamon, a quarter of an ounce of Spica Indiae; Ammoniacum
and Oppopanacum, of each a dram and a half; Parsley seed, Fennel seed, wild
yellow Rape seed, and Carraway, of each a quarter of an ounce; Gromell seed and
Agrimony, of each a handful; Galingale and Saffron, of each half a dram, the
kernels of Quinces and Mallow seeds, of each half an ounce; Syrup of Violers,
two ounces; boil them all, except the syrup in two quarts of Gourds water, till
the third part be wasted; then strain it, and mix it with the syrup of Violets,
and boil it with so much Honey as you see convenient; then strew a little
powder of Cinnamon into it, and Vinegar of Squils, enough to make it sowrish;
then take of it in quantity as the former.

Common Sirups whith remove obstructions of the Terms, are,
Syrup of Mugwort, of Maidenhair, of Chicory with Rubarb, and the syrup of the
five roots; these you may have ready made at the Apothecaries.

A Laxative to open the Body, and purge superfluous humors.
Take Seen leaves, Pennyroyal and Madder, of each a like quantity; boil them
in white Wine, take thereof about three ounces at a time fasting.

Another for the same.
Take Pennyroyal, Nep, Southernwood, Rue, Centory and Hysop, of each one
handful; Savin and Fetherfew, of each one handful and an half; Galingale, a
dram: Cinnamon and Madder, of each one handful; Mirrh, a quarter of an ounce;
boil them together in a quart of fair water till the third part be wasted, take
thereof two or three ounces fasting at a time.

Another.
Take Sperage, Smallage, Fennel and Parsley roots, Carduus benedictus and
Butchers broom, of each an ounce and a half; Annis, Fennel and Carraway seeds,
of each a dram and a half; Mugwort, Pennyroyal, Mints, Horehound, Assarabacca,
and Fetherfew, of each half a handful; sees them altogether in two quarts of
water till half be wasted; then strain it, and mix therewith the syrup of the
five roots of Calamint and Mugwort, of each a like quantity, and drink thereof
in the morning and afternoon, about two ounces.

Another to move the Terms.
Take Mints, Balm, Pennyroyal, Marjerom and Southernwood, of each an handful;
Anni-seeds, Fennel and Carraway seeds, of each an ounce; Polipody, an ounce and
an half; Cicory roots, an ounce; cut the roots and herbs very small, and boil
them all together in a quart of water till a third part be consumed; then
strain it, and sweeten it with Sugar to your own likeing, and take thereof as
you please.

A Syrup to provoke the Terms.
Take four handfuls of Cicory roots, take out the pith, and cut them small, and
boil them a good space in two quarts of White wine; strain it, and then boil
the decoction unto a syrup with Sugar, and take thereof about two spoonfuls,
evening and morning.

A Trochis to move the Terms.
Take a dram and a half of Mirrh, two drams and an half of Lupines, Rue, water
Mints, Comin, Madder, Elecampane roots, Sagapenum, Oppopanacum, of each a dram;
make it into Trochis, with the juice of Mugwort and give half an ounce thereof
in the decoction of Juniper berries, made with water.

Wines good to provoke the Terms.
Wine of Elecampane roots, of Marjerom gentle, of the herb Rennet, of Betony,
of Gellow-flowers, and of Rosemary; these are very good if the Patients Body be
fitting to drink Wine, otherwise discretion may direct you not to use it.

Confections good for this Disease are,
The Confection of Elecampane roots, the Confection of Eringo roots, Conserves
of Pioney, and Mirrh roasted in an Apple.

Pills to move the Terms.
Take the Pill Alephargine, half a dram; Aloes, two scruples; Savin in powder,
one scruple make in into Pills with the water of Mugwort, and take half thereof
at once; these provoke the Terms, and are safe without any danger.

Others for the same.
Take-Pill Alephargine, half a dram; pill Cochiae, one scrupse, mix them into
five Pills, and take them at once.

By the way, heed is to be taken that these Medicines are not to be exhibited
at such time as the Flowers do use to come, or nature uses to send forth the
menstrual purgations; for at that time they may draw and turn the humors from
the womb, where nature would yent and purge it, to some other parts of the
Body, to the impediting of nature, and damage of the Body: but the whole Body
being purged and cleansed, then it is a fit time to apply these Medicaments,
which may take away the intemperatness, and remove the vices and obstructions
of the Womb and Vessels; purify the crassious and corrupted blood, and
extenuate the same out of the Vessels; and briefly provoke the Terms: To do
which, you see the ways and means are manifold, partly simple, partly compound,
partly internal, and partly external, to be administered and exhibited sundry
ways, and for sundry reasons, as the cause and necessity shall require, to
which we further proceed.

Pills to procure the Terms.
Take Musk and Mirrh, of each four scruples, Sterhas, Madder, Pennyroyal,
Citron pills, long Pepper, Cassia wood, Cassia pills, Pioney seeds and Calmus,
of each three quarters of an ounce; Spica Indiae, half a dram: make Pills
thereof with the juice of Mugwort; whereof take a dram at once.

Thus far of inward Medicines, to procure the Terms; there are also many
outward Medicines to be used if need require, the first part whereof are Baths
and Lotions, which are partly natural, as of the natural water of hot Baths;
and partly artificial, which are prepared of congruent and fitting Medicaments.

A Bath or Lotion for the Terms.
Take of Camomile flowers, of Mugwort, Calamint, Dictamnus of Crete, Briony,
Savin, of each one handful; of Anniseeds, Fennel seeds, yellow Carrot seeds,
and Ameos, of each an ounce; mix them altogether and therewith make a Decoction
in water.

The use of these Lotions and Baths, is twofold; First, to wash and Bathe the
Thighs and lower parts of the Woman, with the water decocted; and secondly, for
the woman to sit in a Bath up to her middle.

The second sort of external medecines are injections, or medecines to be
injected into the Womb; and Pessaries, or Suppositories to be put into the
Womb, and remain there a space. Suppositories are made of medecines wrapped up in
wool or bombast, or some such like thing; and so put up into the Womb, and
there a great while to be detained.

But always remember that you tie a string thereunto, put about the Thigh,
that it may again be taken out when you please.

A Pessary for the Terms.
Take the leaves, roots, and juice of Mercury, and make thereof a Pessary, and
apply it alone; it may also be mixed with other Medicaments.

Pessaries of odoriferous things, and Aromaticks are very good.

An Aromatic Pessary to draw down the Flowers.
Take of Gum Ladanum the best, two parts; of Belzoine and Mirrh, of each one
part; of Musk, one part: mix the Aromaticks with oil of white Lillies, a
sufficient quantity, to make it into a fit form, and so put it up.

Pessaries more strong in operation, are such as are made of Coloquintida,
Briony, Scammony, and the like, an example whereof take following.

A Pessary to move the Terms.
Take of Ox gall, the juice of Briony, of each one ounce; Pulp of Goloquintida,
two drams; of Mirrh one dram; make this into a Pessary as before is directed,
and so apply it.

In the third place outward means to be used, are, fumes and suffumigations,
and they are best to be made of odoriferous Aromatic things, whereof take this
example.

A Fumigation to procure the Terms.
Take Belzoinum, Storax, Calamint, Mirrh, Bdellium, of each a dram; These you
may have at the Apothecaries.
Gallia Muscata Mes: half a dram; Libethum, half a scruple; Storax liquid, or
oil of Spike perfumed, a sufficient quantity, to make it into Pills or Trochis.

This is to be put on a moderate fire, that the fume may ascend, and the Woman
is to be so comodiously placed, that she may receive the fume up into the
Matrix, through a vessel or funnel fit for that purpose, which is to be made
broad at that end next the fire, that it may receive all the smoke, and with a
narrow neck like a funnel, to inject the fume into the Matrix.

But these Fumigations as Hippocrates teaches, Hipp. 5. Apho. 28.
use to cause the Headache. Therefore, the Woman ought to be well covered and
fortified with clothes, that the vapors may be kept from ascending to the Head.

In the fourth place, amongst the external Medicines, unguents and plasters
are to be used, and applied to the Abdomina or secret places.

Letting of blood is also to be used in the Foot, or else where, as need
requires us.

An Oil good to bring down the Flowers.
Take oil of sweet Almonds; two ounces; of white Lillies, one ounce; Oil of
Anniseed, two drams; Mix them, and therewith anoint etc. it is very effectual
for infirmities in those parts.

A Plaster to apply, to move the Terms.
Take of Pennyroyal, Calamint, Ditanny, Mugwort, of each one handful; Cinnamon,
Cloves, Mirth, Balsom, of each a dam; meal of Pease, a pound; mix them with
White Wind upon the fire, and make thereof a plaster, and apply it to the
pundenda.

An Ointment for the same.
Take Mussilage of Fleawort, and Linseed, of each an ounce; Butter Unsalted,
two ounces; Hens grease, Ducks grease, Goose grease, Marrow of Calves bones, of
each half an ounce; Ammoniacum, a quarter of an ounce; oil of Sesanum, oil of
sweet Almonds, of each five drams; Wax sufficient to make it into a salve. With
this Ointment, anoint the Body behind and before, from the Navel downwards; but
not before you have used all other inward means, and outward of Bathing,
letting blood, Fumes, Pessaries, etc.

A Plaster for the same.
Take Confectio benedicta, half an ounce; Turbith, a quarter of an ounce;
Nigella seed, three drams; clarified Honey, enough to make it into a Plaster.

This Plaster, is to be applied over the Privities, as before is directed.

If you perceive the Courses begin to appear, then take this drink following.

Take Mugwort, Seen leaves and Pennyroyal, of each half a handful; Cinnamon,
half an ounce; Mace, three drams; boil these altogether in three pints of good
Wine, until the fourth part be wasted: boil it in a pot stopped close in boiling
water, otherwise called Balneo Mariae.

In the last place, is to be used frictions, or often rubbing of the Thighs;
and inferior parts, to draw the humor downwards, Ligatures or binding the
Thigh hard with a string, Cupping glasses to be applied to the Hips and Thighs,
and the inferior parts, both with scarification and without.

Let the sick party beware of all slimy meat, and hard meat, and from all salt,
cold binding things, as are hard of digestion: omit hatred, sorrow, and
melancholinesse; and always in these cases, begin with the mildest Medicines
first: of which you have sufficient before directed. And thus far, for the
suppression or stopping of the Terms, we proceed to the extraordinary Flux (an
evil also incident to Women) and the remedies thereof.

Chap. IIII. Of the immoderate Flux of the Terms.
HAving hitherto fully declared the Symptoms Causes and Cure of that great
Feminine infirmity the stopping or obstruction of the termes' we provide now in
order to treat of the immoderate Flux, or overflowing of Women's courses, which
oftentimes brings to the party afflicted there with many other infirmities, and
great weakness, and sickness, pains in the back and stomach, loss of appetite,
ill digestion, and many other diseases, as Dropsy, Consumption, and others.

This infirmity may, and often times is caused by some fall, blow, thrust,
over-straining, too much exercise, over-heating the body, and thereby making
the blood thin and fluxible.

It is also caused by some unnatural, and untimely birth, breaking of a vein,
or some bruisings in the womb, some vein there being broken, or through some
weakness in the retentive faculty, and too much strength of the expulsive; too
much moisture and slipperiness in the Matrix.

Many suppose the immoderate Flux of the terms, and the continual Issue of
women to be one and the same disease; but they are besides the Cussion; for
they are 2 several and distinct diseases, as Galen plainly teaches, for in the
superfluous Flux of the terms, blood only issues, as it uses to appear in
the natural monthly purgations; but only it flows immoderately; but in the
issue or Flux of Women, not only blood, but various excrements, sometimes
watery, and of another substance, are evacuated.

The Terms or courses are said to flow immoderately, after a twofold manner.

First, when they flow excessively, and beyond measure in a small time.
Secondly, When this evacuation continues many days beyond its natural course
and time.
And to this purpose, writes Galen, when he says, Men are wont to call that
much rain, or a great rain, which continues a long time, though it fall but
slowly, and leasurely; or else if it suddenly fall upon the earth in great
showers.

If any one shall be so curious, as to ask what is the proper quantity and
measure of the menstrual blood, which nature ought duly to evacuate,
Hippocrates answers them, That in a sound Woman, Hip. 1. Lib. de morb. mulier.
Page 313.
and one perfect in health, the moderate monthly Purgations ought to be about
20. ounces, a very little more or less, if they exceed very much that
proportion, or are much less, then are the Courses diseased, and disaffected.

But the certain quantity of the monthly natural purgations, cannot so
strictly be defined in all bodies, because of the difference of the
temperature, the diet, habit, constitution, age and strength of Women's bodies:
it must necessarily be, that some must have them more copiously then others;
but this definition might be taken to be of a Woman in perfect health; but if
the Flux of natural purgation be immoderate, the party must needs be much
afflicted therewith, and thereby incur many other Diseases; of some whereof
mention is already made, and partly of the causes thereof.

But we desire to be a little more copious, Causes.
in discovering the causes of this distemper, before we proceed to the method
of the cure thereof.

The causes of this immoderate Flux, Gal. 3. de Sym. Causis Cap. 2.5. Aph. Com.
58.
are distinctly and accurately handled by Galen, That

The Terms (as other Fluxes of blood) do flow immoderatly for three causes.

First, By reason of the faculty that recludeth the Vessel containing the
blood; as in the Flux of blood at the nose. The second, Because of the evil
affection, and ill disposition of the blood. And the third, By reason of some
vitiousness, or detriment in the Vessels themselves.
The first cause is, by reason of the natural faculties which are four. The
faculty attractive, retentive, alterative, and the faculty expulsive.

All which faculties perform their operations, Gal. 1. de fac. Not.
according to their proper temperatures, as Galen largely teaches.

Therefore they are the cause of the menstrual Fluxes immoderation, when these
fuculties do not properly, and duly exercise their functions and Offices.

As chiefly, If the retentive faculty be too weak, that it cannot retain the
blood so much, and so long as it should, until its due time: this is a special
cause of the superfluous Flux, which many times happens, by reason of some ill
distemper in the womb or Vessels, either too much cold, or moisture, or both.

In like manner, it comes to pass, when the expulsive faculty too powerfully
sends forth the blood, in such quantity, and at such times, when by the Laws
of nature it should not; and this also chiefly happens, by reason of some ill
distempers, either in the Womb or Vessels, proceeding of too much heat, and
dryness, or both.

Another cause of the immoderate Flux of the Terms, is the ill disposition, or
corruption of the blood, and that after a twofold manner.

The first, when the blood is so vicious that it corrodeth and corrupts the
Vessels wherein it is contained, which is done, when the blood is too thin,
hot, or sharp, and that by reason the temperature, or ill dyer, is mixed with
superfluity of Phlegm, Choler, or Melancholy, which are offensive to nature,
and do provoke her to expel them.

A second cause is superfluity of blood distempered, 4 Method. 2.
so that the Vessels cannot contain it, but it breaks out, and forces a
purgation, by reason of the abounding acrimonious humor thereof, as Galen also
makes mention. Having now spoken of two causes of the immoderate Flux of the
Terms, we proceed to the third, which is, because of the viriousness of the
Vessels, and that consists in the too much hardness, softness, or smallness
thereof: And happens to come, in youth, in their first beginning; and to others
afterward, in progress of time. And this happens to come thus to pass. Too
much softness of superfluity of moisture, hardness of too much dryness, and
smallness of too much hunger, or want of sustenance.

If this superfluous Flux proceed of too much blood, Color.
then the color of the Terms will be pale and whitish, if they come of
Choler, then the Flowers will incline to a yellow Color.

If Melancholy be the abounding humor, then are the Flowers of a bluish,
black, or dark color.

By which Colors you may judge of the abounding humor, and provide a remedy
accordingly, to stop the excessive Flux thereof; for which purpose we now come
to prescribe many, both internal and external means.

First, Observe these Rules.
Beware of hot things. If the Body be gross, and full of blood and humors,
that nature seems to expulse it this way, stop it not suddenly, unless there be
danger of much weakness by it; but gently purge and prepare the body first.

If the Body be very full of blood, you may open the Basilica vein; and seek to
reverse it that way, if it appear to come of Choler; or, if any other peccant
humor abounds, purge that humor with proper moderate Medicines, mixing
astringent and comfortable things amongst it.

Let the Woman abstain from all hard labor, and all kind of slimey, thin, and
waterish meat.

Vomits are good to stay the humor, and turn their course, that they flow not
downwards.

Inwardly may be given Sirrups, Electuaries, decoctions, Confections, and the
like.

A Sirrup to stay the immoderate Flux of the Terms.
Take Sirrup of Endive, one ounce; Sirrup of Purslain, half an ounce; the
decoction of Egrimony, and of Plantain 4 Ounces: mix them together, and make
them into a Sirrup, and so take it as you please.

An Electuary for the same.
Take conserve of Roses 2 Ounces, of water Lillies, one ounce of Pearl
prepared, and burnt Hartshorn, each half an ounce: Bole Armonick, Terra Lemnia
each half a scruple: mix them together with syrrup of Plantain, a quantity
sufficient to make it into an Electuary.

A Bolus for the same.
Take Conserce of Roses, half an ounce; Philonium, or Requies Nicholai, two
Scruples: Mix them together, and make a Bolus thereof. This is not to be given,
but when extremity urges.

Avicenna amongst many other Medicaments of this nature, commends the use of
Vinegar, which to some may seem strange, it being the vulgar opinion, that
Vinegar is of a great opening quality.

Nevertheless, Galen agrees with Avicen, Gal. 1. de sim. med. cap. 18.19.
who writes of Vinegar, that it is of an astringent quality, and does
suppress and stop fluxes of the blood.

Others contradict the same, not approving of it in this case, as hurtful to
the Womb. And there being many other Medicines here readily prescribed, it may
very well be let alone.

A Powder to stay the immoderate Flux of the Terms.
Take Species tria santali, Diarrhodon Abbatis, each a dram: Coriander, two
scruples and a half: (Boodstone washed, one dram: Shepherds purse, two
scruples: fine Bolus, half a dram: Roses, Corral, of each half a dram: Cinnamon,
a quarter of an ounce: make them all into a fine powder, and mix them with
Sugar, as much as you please, and take it in broth, or strewed on meat,

Another Powder for the same.
Take fine Bolus, one dram: Terra sigillata, two scruples; Tormentil, half a
dram; Shepherds purse; a scruple: Pearl prepared one dram; Species de gemmis
frigidis one dram and a half: Pomgranates, half a scruple: Roses, Saunders, red
Coral, of each a scruple: Sugar, three ounces. Mix them all together, and make
them a fine powder, and give it as the other in broth or stewed meat.

An Electuary for the same.
Take Conserve of Roses, six ounces; Conserve of Burrage, Buglas, Balm, of each
an ounce; Bolus prepared, a dram: Pearl prepared, a quarter of an ounce: of
Rubies, Jacinths, Saphir, each a Scruple; Cinnamon, a dram; mix these together,
and make an Electuary thereof.

Another Electuary to stay the Flowers.
Take Conserve of Roses, three ounces: Marmalade, two ounces and half: red
Corral, a dram: Bolus prepared, half a dram: Boodstone prepared, two drams;
mix them all together with the syrup of Myrtles, and make an Electuary thereof,
and take it as you please.

A Confection for the same.
Take Conserve of Roses three ounces; Marmalade, two ounces and a half;
Conserves of Burrage, Buglas, each one ounce; Bolus prepared, a dram and a
half: Pearl, two drams and a half: Tormentil, two scruples; red Saunders, one
dram; mix them all together, and make a Confection thereof, with the Syrup of
Myrtles.

The Confection of black Cherries, and preserved Barberries, are also very good
for this use.

A tossed of bread steeped in red Wine, and Nutmegs in powder, strewed thereon,
is very good.

Another for the same.
Take Tormentil and Nutmegs, of each a like quantity, Plaintain seeds, half as
much; beat them all to powder, and give it evening and morning, with stale beer.

Red Corral, taken every day before meals in Plantain water, is also very good
to stay the Flux.

For the same.
Take burnt Hartshorn, and Nettleseeds, of each a like quantity: and beat them
to powder, and take thereof a dram at a time in Plantain water, and about a
spoonful of the juice of Yarrow.

Galingal chewed in the Mouth, is also good.

A Clyster to stay the immoderate Flux of the Terms.
Take Fetherfew, Balm, Rue, Scabious, Rosemary flowers, Southernwood, Comin,
Bay Berries, Cassia wood, Cassia sistula, of each a dram and an half: Dill
seed, Anniseed, each a handful and a half: shaven Ivory, two handfuls; boil
them altogether by a mild fire in two quarts of water, till half be consumed,
and then strain it out, and take of this Decoction, 12. ounces: oil of Sesanum;
Rue and Pepper, of each half an ounce; Indian Salt, one dram: Diacastore;
Confection of Bay Berries and Benedicta^ of each three drams; temper them all
very well together, and administer it very warm.

Thus far of such Medecines as are to be given inwardly; we now proceed to
external or outward applications, of which there are diverse, but all ought to
be of an astringent stopping quality: such are Pessaries, Unguents, and
Plasters, etc.

A Pessary, to stop the excessive Course of the Terms.
Take Baulustes, bark of Pomgranates, Mirtles, each half a dram; mix them with
a sufficient quantity of Honey, and make thereof a Pessary, and put it up into
the Matrix.

There are also more liquid Medecines, which may very commodiously be injected
with a fit Instrument like Clysters.

An Injection to stay the Flux of the Terms.
Take Baulustes, Pomgranate Pill, Tragant, of each a dram: Comfrey, four drams;
make a decoction thereof, and mix it with four drams of the Juice of Plantane,
and make an Injection thereof.

A Pessary for the same.
Take juice of Plantane, juice of Sloes, and juice of Pimpernel, and make a
Pessary thereof with Cotton.

A Cataplasme for the same, or a Pultis, which you please to call it.
Take Wormwood, Knot-grasse, Nights-shade, of each a like quantity: pound them
together, and strain out the juice; then temper with it Ryemeal, a sufficient
quantity, to make it into the thickness of a Pultis, and lay it all over the
Belly from the Navel to the Matrix.

A precious salve to stay the immoderate Flux of Women's Courses.
Take Comin, Carraway, Rueseed, Ameos, Seseli and Gallia Moscata, of each a
dram and a half: Rosin, three drams: oil of Dill, two ounces: oil Olive, one
ounce: Lignum Aloes, Cloves, of each half a dram; melt the Rosin in the oil,
and temper the other things with it, being beaten small into fine powder, and
incorporate them together, by stirring until it become a thick salve.

Herewith anoint the Hips and Reins, it is excellent to stop the superfluous
flux of the Terms: It is also good against vomiting and perbreaking, and to
expel wind, being applied to the Navel and Stomach.

Be sure to observe, whether the woman abound with heat or cold, and frame your
Medicines accordingly; if cold be predominant, use such things as cause heat,
and are good to stop blood; such are,

Frankincense, Mastick, Cipress nuts, Sandaraca, Laudanum, Mirrh, Storax,
Annis, and the like.

If heat abound, such things are to be prepared as are cold and astringent, as
cool and bind, and such is the nature of these following.

Camphire, the juice of Sloes, burnt Ivory, Coriander, Dragons blood, Saunders,
Boodstone, fine Bolus, Hypocistis, the seeds of Kneeholm, or Butchers broom,
call it which you will; these seeds and also the decoction of the root, are
very effectual; if you would know where to find the seeds, look into the inside
of the red berries thereof, and there you shall be sure to find them; but not
before you have found the herb, for they grow together, and the Kneeholme
herb is a common companion almost with every holly bush.

These are also cooling and astringent; Myrtle seeds, Galls, Pomgranates,
flowers called Balaustes, the seeds of Plantane of Melons, Cucumber gourds, and
of Pompeons and the roots of Pimpernel.

Some are glad to eat what they can get, yet ye must as near as ye can avoid
what is hurtful.
Let the manner of dier, be such as is nourishing and breeds good juice, and
is easily digested, especially such as thicken the blood, and hinder the
fluxibility thereof, as Birds, those especially of the Mountains, are highly
commended, if you can catch them.

Let their drink be astringent Wine, or, use to quench Steel in their drink, or
boil therein the seeds, leaves, and roots of Plantane. And thus much of the
Flux of the Terms.

Chap. V. Of the Flux of the Womb, or the Whites in Women.
We have already declared, that the immoderate Flux of the monthly Courses,
and the Flux of the Womb, or the white Menstrue, Gal. 6. loc. affe. ad finem.
are two several Diseases, as Galen plainly teaches.

We proceed now to speak of the Whites, or white Flux in women, called by the
Physicians, Gal. lib. 3 de sym. cause. cap. 4.
Menstrua alba and profluvium uteri, as Galen.

This Disease has great affinity with the Gonorrhea, or the involuntary issue
of natural seed, called the running of the Reins.

And this Flux also proceeds from two Causes, either too much cold, or unatural
heat; and the differences of this Issue are very many, as may appear by the
color of the Excrements which flow or issue, which are sometimes red,
sometimes pale, sometimes yellow, sometimes black, sometimes white, and
sometimes green, sometimes thick, and sometimes watery; from Species may be
gathered the quality of the peccant humor, as for example; If the Flux be of a
red color, it declares, that the issue flows from the blood, and is thereby
caused; If it be pale or yellow, it denotes, black Choler is the cause thereof;
if white, it proceeds from phlegm; if it be thin and watery, superfluous humors
do abound in the Body.

But above all things, be sure to know whether this Flux, be a Gonorrhea, that
is an involuntary issue of the natural Sperm, which is the running of the
Reins, the self same Disease being also incident to men, as well as women, and
proceeds in both Sexes, from one and the same cause, and that women as well
as men do labor under the same Symptom; But is general among women to call
this disease the Whites; though it be a Gonorrhea, or the running of the Reins,
under which infirmity many do a long time labor to the great wasting and
Consumption of their Bodies; the principal cause thereof proceeding either from
immoderate, excessive, or unlawful Venery.

It is generally agreed, that the lawful and proper cause of the Whites, is too
much superfluity of Excrements; but as touching the place and manner, where and
how these Excrements are ingendered, Authors disagree.

Some say, the cause is a daily begetting of corrupt humors in the principal
parts.

Others, that it proceeds only from the Womb, and Spermatick Vessels.

Others, that it flows only from the Reins, the Womb being not at all afflicted
thereby.

But Galen plainly demonstrates, 6. de locis affect. loc. 5.
that the whole Body is affected with this Issue, although it purge through the
Womb, and evacuate it self from the Reins; and that this Disease is most
incident to phlegmatic and weak women.

It remains before we come to speak of the method of the cure of this
infirmity, that diligence be used (as we said before) to find out whether it
proceed from a Gonorrhea, that is, a Running of the Reins, or Flux of humane
seed, or not: the knowledge whereof must be rather conjectural, then to be
demonstrated from any certain sign, other then the Patients own relation.

But the flowing of the Seed, is more thick, and flows in less quantity, and
is not so corrupt, and of a whiter color.

On the contrary, the other Excrements are more thin, do flow more abundantly,
are more filthy and putrified, and are not always of the same color.

But to proceed to the manner of the Cure of this Disease: Respect in the first
place is to be had to the purging and cleansing of the whole Body; and if the
Disease be a Gonorthea, and proceed of heat unlawfully, or however gotten; the
Body must first be purged with Medicines appropriate to the Reins, before you
attempt in any wise to stop the same; for which, this following is very good.

An Electuary to purge the Reins.
Take Cassia newly extracted, one ounce; Rheubarb in powder, one dram: mix them
together with syrup of white water Lillies, a sufficient quantity to make it
into an Electuary; put this into a penny pot of White Wind, or a little posset
drink, which comes first to hand; stir it well together, till it be all
dissolved in the drink, and so take it in the morning fasting, and go about
your business (if you have any thing to do) about two hours after, take some
broth or posset drink.

This Medecin you may take twice or thrice, as you see occasion, resting
always a day between.

Afterward, you may take every other day, a dram of Trochis de Carabe in
Plantane water.

You may also give the Patient, every second or third day, a dram of the
filings of Ivory in Plantane water; it is very good.

Sweating is also much commended in this case, which may be thus done.

Take Barley water, three ounces; strong Wine, two ounces: give it the Patient
very warm, and so let her sweat.

Afterward, prepare a Clyster in this manner.

A Clyster for the Whites, through heat, or running of the Reyns.
Take Beets, Violet-leaves, and Nightshade, of each one handful, sees them
well together, and take 12 Ounces of the decoction, or boiled liquor; which you
please to call it, and to it add, Sugar 1 Ounce and a half, Yolks of Eggs, Oil
of Water Lillies, Oil of Roses, of each 2 Ounces, Salt a dram and a half: give
this Clyster in the afternoon, a little before meat.

A Confection for the same.
Take Comfrey-roots 3 Ounces, Pompeon-seed, Water Lillies, of each a dram,
Juice of Liquorice 2 scruples, Coral prepared, Bolus, Mirtle-seed, Roses of
each 10 grains, Gun Traganth half a dram, Syrup, the Comphrey Roots; cleave and
slice them small, and sees them in Red Wine, until they be so tender, that you
may beat them to grout or pap, then pill the Pompeon-seeds, and beat them
together with the other things to fine Powder; then incorporate them with the
pap or grout, made of Camphrey-Roots; and then put to them Sirrup of Citron
Pills, and of Orenges, as much as you please, and then boil them together to a
Confection. And take every morning a spoonful thereof, before breakfast.

Conserves of Roses, and Marmalade, are exceeding good for this purpose, either
to be taken alone, or mixed together, with prepared Bolus, and take thereof a
dram at a time.

An excellent Sirrup for the same.
Take the Seeds of Purslain, Lettice, and Water Lillies, of each an Ounce,
prepared Coriander, Water Lilly-Roots, Dandelion, Nightshade, of each half an
Ounce, Camphire half a dram, Dates chopped small 2 Ounces, Rue-Seeds, Mountain
Mints, parched Gomin, of each 1 dram. Steep the Dates 8 days in Vinegar, then
sees them together in 2 quarts of water, till half be wasted, strain it, and
put to it 12 Ounces of the juice of Quinces, Sugar 36 Ounces, and boil them all
together to a Sirrup, and so clarify them.

Of this Sirrup, take 2 Ounces, with 3 Ounces of Plantain water, or
Purslain-water: This is an excellent proved Sirrup for this purpose.

Drinks and Waters good for this Disease.
Take Comphrey Roots, and boil them in water, and drink thereof 3. of 4. Ounces
at a time with Sugar.

Also water wherein the filings of Steel have been steeped, and then
Myrtle-seeds boiled therein, is very good to drink for the same:

Simple waters good for this infirmity, are the waters of Plantain, Sorrel,
Purslain, and Cithorie.

The decoction of Mallows, and the Roots of Hollyhockles, is also very good to
drink for this Disease.

An Ointment for the same, called, Unguentum sandalinum.
Take red Sanders 2 drams and a half, yellow Sanders 1 dram and a half, Roses 3
drams, Fine Bolus a quarter of an Ounce, burnt Ivory a dram, Camphire half a
dram, white Wax an Ounce, Oil of Roses 3 Ounces. Melt the Wax first amongst the
Oil, then temper the other things amongst them, and make them into an Ointment.

This Ointment is not only good to anoint the secret parts for this Disease,
but also to cool the inflammations of the Kidneys, Liver, and Stomach, and all
other parts, being anointed with it.

A Salve for the same Disease.
Take Oil of Roses, Oil of Mirtles, Mastick, of each half a dram, shaven Ivory
a scruple, Camphire 2 grains, pound that which is to be powned, and with a
little Wax, make them into a Salve; with this anoint the Reins and Kidneys, it
is excellent good for the whites.

Another Confection, very good for the same.
Take ripe Black berries, or bramble berries, which you will call them, and
boil them unto a Confection, either with Honey or Sugar; and take there of
every day as much as you please: this you may make, when the Black-berries be
ripe, and keep it in a readiness by you all the year; it is also good for any
soreness, or swelling in the throat, and for inflammations in the mouth.

A Powder also excellent for the same.
Take the young buds of the Blackberry Bush, and the Berries thereof dried;
pound them, and drink a dram thereof twice a day in red wine.

You may gather the green buds, when the branches first spring; and keep them
dry by you, and gather the Berries too when they be ripe (if you be not afraid
to prick your fingers) and keep them dry by you; and when you have occasion,
beat them to powder, and take them in red Wine, as before is directed.

You that will not regard this Medicine, because it is too cheap, may let it
alone for them that will; there be Medicines enough to be had, to fit your
turns, if you think the virtue consists in their dearness; and I do not desire
to hinder those that can furnish you with them; but those that will make use of
this, will find it worthy their acceptance.

But if in case this Disease issue from some cold cause, it will not be then
amiss to use this Medicine following.

For the Whites.
Take the Seeds of Arch Angel, or dead Nettles in powder, about a dram at a
time in red Wine.

Confected Aniseeds is also very good for this Disease, and not improperly may
be given in either case, this following.

Another for the same, or Reds.
Take 4 spoonfuls of red Rose Water, a new-laid Egg, a penny worth of white
Sugar Candy in powder, and a Nutmeg grated, incorporate all these, and beat
them well together, and drink it last at night going to bed.

You may also if the Issue be sharp, so as to cause pain and soreness, use an
Injection or Pessary.

A Pessary for the whites in Women.
Take some Whites of Eggs, and beat them well in red Rose Water, and make it
into a Pessary, with some Cotton or linen Clothes wet in it, and so put it up
into the Matrix, always remembering to tie a string to it, to pull it out
again, when you please.

If the Whites flow from the abundance of superfluous humors, it will not be
unnecessary to endeavor to evacuate the same through the skin, by using often
frictions or rubbing of the whole body; first gently, and then more hard, by
which means the humors may be purged through the skin.

And to use unctions is also very good, if necessity urge, of Oil of Camomile,
of sweet Almonds, or the like; so that of all sorts of remedies you have here
your choice, and therefore we shall proceed to another Chapter.

Chap. VI. Of the fits of the Mother, or suffocation, or drawing up of the
Matrix.
MAny Women sorely labor under this Disease, it has great affinity with the
Syncope passion, and the Disease called Epilepsia, or the Falling Sickness; and
that because of the Sympathy, that is, between the heart and the brain, and the
Matrix.

This happens to Women, through several causes.

Oftentimes when there is an obstruction, or stoppage of the Terms, which do
burden the Brain and Matrix with bad humors.

Sometimes by reason of the retention of their natural Seed, as in Widows, and
old Maids; for this retention causes wind to ascend, and ill vapors from the
Matrix, to the Diaphragma or Midrif, and there stops the passage of the
breath: it often therefore troubles such as have been used to have carnal
Copulation, and afterward are constrained to want it; and therefore, says
Galen, it does most frequently trouble Widows.

Likewise the overmuch retention of the Seed, causes it to putrify, and send
up ill vapors to the head, causing many troublesome accidents, as drousiness,
dullness, giddiness, and pains in the head; sometimes madness it self, shortness
of breath, and panting of the heart.

The Complexion alters into a sandy color, swarthy or yellow, pale, and
sometimes redness of the face or eyes.

When they are thus taken with this evil distemper; they begin to gnash their
teeth, and immediately lose their speech, by reason their breath is stopped; and
sometimes it is so violent, that neither breath, nor pulse, nor life, can be
discerned; but lie as if they were dead, which is the worst condition of all;
for the breath cannot be retained, but death will ensue; for breath is the life
of the body, without which no Creature can live.

This accident also happens through some sudden fright, and some sorrowful
news or sad accident suddenly happening; or some sorrow or grief, whereby
melancholy prevails, and overcomes the body.

It may likewise be caused, by reason of some strong and violent Cold, which
may so draw the breath and pulse inwardly, that no feeling, or sense thereof
outwardly appears; but this case is not so dangerous as the other.

But to proceed to Remedies, when this Disease comes suddenly, speedily cast
cold water on her face, and give her cold water to drink.

Let another Woman dip her finger in some sweet smelling odoriferous Oil, as
Oil of Lillies, of Cloves, or of sweet Almonds mixed together, and gently rub
the neck of the womb and Matrix, and that will draw the Matrix downwards;

If it be a married Woman, her Husband may give her a present remedy, which
lest it offend the Maids pudoris gratia, I leave it in my Authors own Language.

Si maritus ungat penem suum cum oleo gariophillorum admixto parum olei.
Amygdal: dulc: ad Caliditatem prioris temperandum, and Cum uxore coeat; Matrix
subito descendet, it is a speedy Remedy.

You must have a care to keep away all sweet and pleasant things from the
Patients nose, and apply stinking things thereunto; and on the contrary,
anoyne, foment, and fume the Matrix with sweet Aromatic things.

For the Matrix is drawn and attracted to sweet things, and naturally flies
from stinking smells: therefore as in the ascension, or rising of the Mother,
you are to use stinking things to the nose, and sweet to the Womb; so
contrariwise, in the falling down, or discention of the Mother, you are to
apply sweet perfumes to the Nose, and stinking to the Matrix: to the end, the
same may thereby be drawn up again into its due place.

For this Disease, it is good to hold to the Nose, Assa foetida, galbanum, old
Woollen Clouts, or Shoes burnt, Hair, or Feathers, or such stinking things
that may be gotten speedily.

And apply sweet odoriferous things to the Matrix beneath; for which purpose
this Powder following is very good.

A Powder to be used in the nature of a Pessary, against the suffocation of the
Matrix, or fits of the Mother.
Take red Storax, Lignum Aloes, Cloves, of each a dram, Musk, Amber of each
half a dram: Make them altogether into a Powder, and then bind it up in a
Cloth, in the form of a Pessary, and put it up into the Matrix.

Another for the same.
Take an Ounce of Oil of Lillies, Musk, Saffron, of each 3 grains; bruise all
well together, and make a Pessary thereof with Wool, or Cotton, and put it up
into the place.

A Fumigation for this Disease.
Take Gallia Moscata, Cassia wood, Cynamon, Time, of each a like quantity; mix
these together, and make a perfume thereof, and let the smoke be received up
into the Matrix, through a tumel for that purpose.

If the Patient be a Maid, a Husband is the best Medicine, if she can get one;
but in case that cannot be, then let her abstain from strong Wines, and flesh
meat, and all such things as increase natural sperme.

And use letting blood, such meats and drinks as are cooling; and amongst the
rest, this Confection following is very good.

A Confection against the fits of the Mother.
Take Polipody Roots 6 Ounces, Seen, Violets, Prunes, Sebastins, Dates,
Currants, of each an Ounce and a half, sees these altogether in two quarts of
water, till half be consumed away, then strain it out hard, and infuse in the
decoction, while it is hot, 6. Ounces of the Seeds of Fleawort, till the
Muscilage be drawn out of them, then put to this decoction 24 Ounces of fine
Sugar, and take thereof, once in 2 or 3 days, and fast after it 6 hours.

Take silver Mountain, Madder Penyroyal, the innermost rinds of Cassia Pipes,
Pomegranat Kernels, Piony Roots, Calamy, of each 3 drams, Mulcus and Spica
Indie, of each, half a dram: make all these together into Pills, with the juice
of Mugwort; of these she may take a dram every day before Supper, if she take
not the Confection the same day.

It is also good for this Disease, to open the Saphea vein in the foot, and
afterward give the Patient a dtam of the Powder of Betony, in
Featherfew-water. It is also good to anoint the Belly with the Oil of Mastick:
and so much for this affliction of the suffocation, or ascension of the Matrix;
we come next to speak of the discention, or falling down of the same.

Chap. VII. Of the falling down of the Womb.
This is another great evil, wherewith many poor Women labor, and is of no
small consequence and danger; for as in some cases, and for some causes, the
Matrix in some Women is drawn up and ascends out of its due place; so on the
contrary, it sometimes descends downwards, out of the Body.

This accident is caused sometimes by hard labor, and heavy births falls,
bruises, too much astringency in the body, taking great cold, violent sneesing,
overmuch stirring, and the like.

It may likewise be caused by reason of ill humors, predominant in the Body,
which fall down to the Womb, forcing it out of its natural place; and many
times brings with it the Palsy and Falling Sickness: as also Ulcers and
Imposthumes in the Womb.

If this Disease happen by means of any outward accident, the Patient her self
can best discover the cause thereof.

If it come from some inward cause, then respect is to be had to the
Constitution of the party, whether she be lean or fat, moystor dry, and to the
Symptoms the disease, which causes pain in the lower part of the Backbone,
and also about the secret parts; sometimes an Ague with it, the Urine stays,
and the Body is astringent.

If the passage of the neck of the Womb be smooth and open, then it is not
moved downwards; but if it be stopped, then be sure it is descended, although
it appear not out of the Body; and if it do continue displaced any long time,
it will be very difficult, if not impossible to reduce the same to its natural
place again.

Now to seek Remedies for this Disease, you must, instead of applying sweet
things to the Matrix, as you were directted in the ascension of the Matrix, or
the fits of the Mother, to draw it down, you must now apply stinking things to
the Matrix, and sweet smells to the Nose, to draw it up again.

A Fume for the falling down of the womb.
Take Tormentil, Bistort, juice of Sloes, of each 3 drams: Pomgranate pills,
the blossoms thereof, of each a quarter of an ounce; Assa foetida, an ounce;
Mastick, Frankincense, Galbanum, of each 2 drams and a half: Cypress Nuts,
Galls, Myrtle seed, of each five drams: stamp and mix all these together, and
strew thereof upon a red hot brick, and let the patient receive the fume
thereof beneath.

Let it not come at her Nose, but in the mean time, let her smell to Musk,
Amber, Violets, and such sweet smells which draw up the Mother, and cause it to
ascend again.

Another for the same.
Take a stinking rotten addle Egg, that a Hen has sat on, and dip Cotton in
it, and lay it upon the neck of the Matrix, it causes it to ascend again.

A Fume for the same by a Decoction.
Take Camomile, Marjoram, Carraway, of each one handful; Linseed, one handful
and a half: boil these altogether in water, and receive the Fume thereof into
the Matrix.

The vapor of Housleek bruised and laid on a hot brick, is good for the same,
if there be heat, or inflammation in the Matrix.

A Fomentation for the same.
Take Roses, three ounces: Myrtle seed, Violet leaves, Marigolds, Fetherfew, of
each one handful: Assa feetida, five drachms: bruise them together, and tie
them up in a bag, and sees them in red Wine, and lay it upon the place after
the vapor is received.

An Ointment for the falling down of the Womb.
Take the Ointment of Hollyhocks, which is called at the Apothecaries unguent
de Althea: mix therewith some marrow of an Ox, or other beast, the grease of a
Hen or Capon, and some oil, and herewith anoint the neck of the Matrix, and
all the parts about it, when you go to bed; you may also make a plaster
hereof, and apply it all night as before.

Another Ointment for the same.
Take oil of Myrtles, of Lillies, of Mastick, of each two ounces and an half;
Assa foetida, Bistorta, Tormentil, of each three drams; melt the Gums, and then
pound them altogether, and make an ointment thereof; and with this anoint the
Kidneys, and lower parts of the Body.

A Pessary for the same.
Take Assa foetida, one ounce: Mastick, Frankinsense, Myrtle seed, Galingale,
Cypress nuts, of each a dram; beat them together very small, and mix it with
the oil of Mirtles, and make a Pessary thereof, and put it up into the Matrix.

A Plaster for the descension of the Matrix, to keep it from going any further
out of the Body.
Take Rozen, two ounces: Frankincense, Mastick, Cypres gum, of each half an
ounce: mix and melt them all together, and put to it some oil of Mastick, so
make it into a Plaster, and apply it to the privities, and wear it thereon.

Another Plaster for the same.
Take Mastick, one ounce; Frankincense, half a dram; Cypress nuts, Galls,
Myrtle seeds, of each one dram; Pomgranate pills, the blossoms thereof,
Turpentine, of each one quarter of an ounce: pound all that is to be pounded,
and mix them all together, with turpentine and oil of Mastick, enough to make
it into a plaster, and spread it on a cloth, to cover from the Navel to the
privities, and there wear it always.

For the descention of the Matrix, it is also good to take Date stones, and
beat them to powder, and strew thereof on the place.

A Bath for the falling down of the Matrix.
Take Oken buds, Medlar leaves, Service leaves, Cypress leaves, topps of Ladies
thistles, each one handful: Sprigs of Myrtle, Valerian, wild Mints, of each
two handfuls; bruise or chop them all small; then put them in a bag, and boil
it well in water and fit thereon, in a Bath up to the Navel about an hour.

For pain in the Matrix, through wind.
Take Turbith, four scruples: Ginger, one scruple: give it in Mugwort water, or
in the Decoction of Mugwort.

For the same, and to prevent Miscarriages.
Take Carraway seed, one dram: Ameos, Ginger, Beaver cod, of each one scruple:
steep the Carraway seed in Vinegar, and dry it again, and beat it to powder;
then mix it with the rest, and give a dram thereof in Wine, every morning for
certain days together.

For the same.
Anoint the Belly with oil of Lillies, and oil of Wall flowers.

For an Impostume in the Maetrix, a Pessary.
Take Wax, oil of Violets, of each half an ounce: melt them together, and then
put to it juice of Plantane, Nightshade, of each an ounce: Camphire, half a
dram: mix them all well together, and dip a tent of Cotton in it, and put it up
into the Matrix.

An Injection to cleanse the Matrix.
Take Galls, Lentils, Pomgranate flowers, Kneeholm seeds, Roses, Saunders, of
each a like quantity: boil them all together in water, and strain it, and
inject the decoction into the Matrix with a Syringe.

For the same.
Take Hysop, Wormwood, and Honey of Roses, and sees the same in white Wine and
milk, and inject the decoction thereof.

A Bath to incarnate the flesh in the Matrix, after it is clean sed from all
uncleanness.
Take Centory, six ounces; Ireos, Comphrey, Cassia roots, Egrimony, of each
three handfuls: Sarcocolla, Gum dragon, Dragons blood, Mummy Hypocistis,
Frankincense, of each one dram: boil them all together in a sufficient quantity
of water, till half be consumed,; and then, put to it refuse of Iron prepared,
an ounce and a quartet: then boil it a little longer, and use this for a Bath.

Another for the same use.
Take Mallows, Violet leaves, Melilot, Plantaine, Lentils, Fenegreeke, Colewort
buds, of each three handfulls: boil them all in water unto the half, and make a
Bath of it, as of the former.

A Pessary, to mollify the hardness and pain between the Navel and the Matrix.
Take Ducks grease, marrow of Hearts bones, or Oxes, marrow if you cannot get
the other, Neats feet oil, Bdelium, yolks of roasted Eggs, of each a like
quantity; Saffron, two drams: dissolve them together in Wine, and temper
therewith oil of Lillies; then dip a tent of linen or Cotton therein, and put
it up into the place; use it often, this will assuage the pain, and take it
away.

For Cankers, and Ulcers of the Womb, a purging Potion.
Take Benedicta laxativa, half an ounce; Agarins one scruple: Ginger, Grains,
one scruple; juice of Fetherfew, two ounces and a half: mix them well together,
and give it the Patient two mornings together, and then let let her govern her
self, as after purging.

Another Potion for the same, to be used many days together to cleanse the
Matrix.
Take Oxymel of Squils, half an ounce: Syrupus de Bysantijs, Syrup of Vinegar,
of each three quarters of an ounce; Lovage water, Egremony warer, of each an
ounce: Cicory water, 2 ounces; Let the Patient drink this in the morning early,
and sleep upon it, and fast four hours after it; use it many days together,
till the Urine become of a good color, and appear clean.

A Pessary for Ulcers in the Womb.
Take oil of Fetherfew flowers, Saffron, of each half an ounce: oil of
Wall-flowers, two ounces: Sarcolla, Mittha, Opopanacum, of each a dram;
Turpentine, three quarters of an ounce; Musk, one grain; White wax, one ounce:
boil them all together in four ounces of the juice of Smallage, till all the
juice be consumed; then anoint a Pessary of Cotton therewith, and put it up
into the grieved place, and refresh it oftentimes.

Cleanse the Body inwardly with Honey water, and make afterward this Pessary
following, renewing it four or five times a day.

Take Smallage, Fetherfew, Mugwort: stamp them together, and make a Pessary
thereof, and anoint it with Hierapicra.

Take also the juice of the aforesaid herbs, and wet a cloth therewith, and lay
it on the Back and Hips, and lower parts of the Back bones.

An Injection for Ulcers in the Womb.
Take Egrimony, and sees it in Barley water: and mix with it clarified Honey,
or Honey of Roses, and so use it.

Another more strong for the same.
Take Wine, six ounces: burnt Alum, Verdigrease, of each half a dram; temper
them together, and let them stand infused in the Wine five hours, and then
inject it.

Another to dry the Ulcers.
Take Galls, Pomgranate pills, Pomgranate flowers, Allom, Egrimony, of each a
like quantity: sees them all together, and strain out the decoction, and
inject it.

For a Vein broken in the Ulcer.
If there be any Vein broken in the Ulcer, then mix some of these things with
the former decoction, as Dragon blood, Mirrh, Frankincense, fine Bolus,
Saffron, Hartwort, Rose water or Plantane water.

A Bath for the Reins, very good for Ulcers or Cankers therein.
Take Yarrow roots, Valerian roots, Smallage roots, of each four handfuls;
Mirrh, Oppopannacum, of each one quarter of an ounce: boil them altogether in a
sufficient quantity of fair water until a good part thereof be consumed, then
let the Patient sit therein up to the Navel.

Let the Patient in this Disease, use such meats and drinks as cleanse the
Body, and make good blood, beware of fish, and such moist meats, and abstain
from much motion of the Body.

Chap. VIII. Of natural Conceptions.
HAving thus far treated of the diseases, accidents and infirmities incident to
the Menstrue, and generative parts of Women; we proceed to discourse of those
things which pertain to the Conception and Birth of man; in which thing the
conservation and continuance of all mankind consists.

That to the generation of every man there is a necessity of a distinction of
both sexes Male and Female; and also of Conjunction of them both, we have
already declared.

But in what manner this admirable operation of nature is effected, and brought
to perfection, Galen declares; who says, Gal. 1. sem. 4.
That in time of Copulation of the Male and Female, the Seed of the Male, is
attracted into the Womb of the Female, and is extended, and dilated through all
the parts thereof; and is there, by the natural heat, and moisture of the Womb,
Coagulated into a massy substance, before any of the Members be formed, and
afterward nature, as with an instrument forms and fashions the Veins,
Arteries, Bones and other Members branching them all over the body, and then
safely wrappeth them all up together in a Coat, preserving them to the time of
the perfect Birth, if no mischance, or accident intervene to the hinderance
thereof; which must be diligently endeavored to prevent. And to further the
Conception for the procreation sake of mankind, take these directions.

A Confection, to cause fruitfulness in Man or Woman.
Take Rapes, Ivory shaven, Ashkeys, Sesely, Behen red and white, of each one
dram; Cinnamon, Doronicum, Mace Cloves; Galingale, long Pepper, Rosemary
flowers, Balsom wood, Blatiis Byzantiae Marjoram gentle, Pennyroyal, of each
two scruples; Balm, Buglas, Citron pieces, of each one scruple, Spica Indiae,
Amber, Pearls, of each half scruple; Sugar a pound: decoct the Sugar in
Malmsey, and the other things; and make them into a Confection, use of it a
little at a time.

A Powder for the same, to be strewed on meat.
Take Nurmegs, Cubebbes, Ginger, of each half a dram; long Pepper, Mastick,
Cinnamon, red Behen; white Behen, of each a Scruple: mix them all together, and
make them into fine powder, and strew of it a little upon the parties meat.

Another Confection for the same.
Take Honey; three ounces: Linseed, Grains, Ivory shaven, of each one ounce:
Borrage three ounces; Sugar, 24 ounces: Musk, Amber, of each half a scruple:
Cinnamon, two grains: Cloves, Mace, of each one grain; clarify the Honey, then
incorporate the other things with it, to make a Confection thereof, and take of
it as you please.

A Porionto further Conception in a Woman.
Take Wormwood, Mugwort, of each a handful. Boil them together in a quart of
Goats milk, till almost half be wasted, and let the Woman drink thereof first
and last, every morning and evening a good draught.

A Bath for the same.
Take Penyroyal, Mugwort, Rue, of each a handful: Put them into a Bag, and boil
them in Rainwater, a sufficient quantity to make a Bath, boil it well, and
bathe therein twice a day, and renew the Bath every third day, use this for a
good space.

You must understand, as I said before that without the mutual conjuction of
male and female, the natural reception and coagulation of both their Seeds in
the Field of generation the Womb, there can be no natural conception, and so
consequently no birth; so that if the impediment lie in either of the Vessels
receiving, or instruments giving, then these Medicines prescribed, do not work
their effect till the obstructive causes be removed, and of them you shall be
sufficiently directed, in the subsequent Chapter of barrenness, and the causes
thereof; but if the Womb be clean, and the Masculine Instrument proportioned
thereunto, so that the defect lie in some debility of nature, let both parties
make use of this Confection following; and take of it in the mornings fasting,
and they shall seldom fail of their desires.

But take notice by the way, I do not prescribe this to Maids, nor Batchelors,
they have no use for it.

A Confection to further fruitfulness in Men, and Conception in Women.
Take a Bores Stones, Stags Pissel shaven small, I ounce, (Bulls Pissel, if you
cannot get the other, will do as well) Sparrows Brains, 50. or 60. yellow Rape,
Eringo Root, and Satyrion confected, Ivory shaven, of each 3 Ounces and a half;
Cynamon, Dates, Indy, Nut Kernels, of each 2 Ounces; Long Pepper, Ginger,
Rosemary Flowers, of each half an Ounce; Seseli 1 dram, Nettle-seed, Cloves,
Safron, Mace, Galingale, Cypress Roots, Nutmegs, Cassia wood, Cucubes,
Doronicum, Field Mints, Penny Royal, Spica Indiae, Musk, Amber of each one dram.
Make all these into a Confection, with 4 pounds and an half of white Sugar,
refined in Mint-water, and take of it as before is directed; and if you cannot
easily get all the things, yet refuse not the Medicine, but make it with as
many as you can come by.

Chap. IX. Of Barrenness.
IT is granted amongst all men, that the Generation of mankind, and also of
all other Creatures, is the most perfect work, and the most excellent and most
exquisite natural operation of all the works of nature; Aristotle 2 Genesis
A^^mal. Galen de ^s^ part. 14.2.
which Aristotle most elegantly sets forth, and demonstrates, That whereas it
is impossible by the decree of nature, that any animal or Creature should live
always, or have an eternal Essence and being: therefore for the continuance of
the kinds of all Creatures, as well bruit as rational, that a continual
Generation might be had, and maintained, the Sexes of male and female, fitted
to the act of procreation, were ordained.

And from hence, says Galen, it comes to pass, that all Creatures are
furnished with Instruments of generation, fitting the quality of their Sex,
and are endued with natural instincts, prompting them to the use thereof.

Therefore we here take liberty, to speak of this wonderful Operation of
nature. And to seek out the causes that hinder, and prescribe means to further
the Operation of the same; partly for Dame Natures sake, whose intent in
hindered, where this work is obstructed, and partly for those Ladies sakes, who
are sometimes disconsolate, being amongst the number of those that are
accounted barren.

We intend not here to enter into the Philosophers Inquisitions, nor the
Physicians Lectures; what is the forming matter which causes the birth in the
Womb; in what order, how, and in what time, or how many days the several parts
and members of the body are framed; at what time God the Author of all things,
and nature it self infuseth the living soul into the Conception, or conceived
body; but our intention only is to speak of what belongs to Physic, and not
only to Philosophy; and to treat of those things which do impedite, or hinder
the perfection of conception.

For as the conception has some contingency with every part of the body, so
the same may be taken quite away, hindered or impedited, or depraved, as it
happens in all other actions and motions of the body.

If Conception be quite taken away in a Woman, so that she can never conceive,
this affection is called barrenness; or this may be called a barren Woman,
which you please.

But if a Woman do conceive sometimes, though rarely and seldom, this is a weak
and diminutive conception, or the conceiving faculty is feeble, and diminutive.

And to this kind of debility and weakness, may be referred abortive, and
untimely Births; when the Woman does conceive, but through weakness cannot
bring the conception to the due time of the birth.

There is also a depraved conception, when in the Woman's Womb is contained some
unnatural conception, as Monsters, Mola, or superfluous unshapen flesh, water,
wind, or the like, filling up the Womb, and receiving the form of a conceived
substance: the causes and Remedies of these, we shall proceed to declare.

The holy Scripture makes mention what reproach, and how odious and detestable
a thing barrenness was accounted in the ancient times: there was hardly any
greater defamation to a woman, so that Rachel could cry out to her Husband for
Children, or else her life lay on it, rather then bear the reproach of
barrenness; and some Women have preferred their Maids to their Husbands, so
that the Child might be reputed theirs, to take away their blemish of
barrenness; but you will find few Women of that mind now a days.

Therefore we come to speak of the causes of this grief, which the Physicians
do account many and diverse.

Hippocrates accounts the principal causes of barrenness to be these, Hippoc.
lib. de sterilitate.
if the mouth of the Womb be disterred, and turned aside out of its place,
contrary from the pudenda if the mouth of the Womb appear too big, or more wide
then is convenient; or if the mouth of the Womb be fallen down, or hang out
below the pudenda; then is such a Woman unfit for conception; these are
therefore great causes of barrenness.

Many other are the causes of barrenness, sometimes more, sometimes less, as
Galen excellently teaches.

The head and principal beginning of the invention, Gal. 3. de Symp. Cause.
and finding out of all causes, which bring hurt, or are obnoxious to the
faculties of the body, is no other but the knowledge of the means; whereby
these faculties perform their actions in the time of health and soundness of
body.

And whereas it has been already declared, that to produce any natural
conception, there is a necessity of conjunction, and carnal copulation, both of
the man and woman: therefore it ought, first, to be made manifest, that the
cause of barrenness, may be through some defect in the man, or in the woman,
and sometimes in both.

Although at this time our intent is only to treat of such Diseases, as are
incident to Women: yet nevertheless, since the Women have in this case a great
interest, and a damage too if the fault be in the man; because they may help
their Husbands defect, and in so doing, pleasure themselves, if they find the
imperfection to lie in him, we shall not praetermit it.

And again, since there is a necessity of the Copulation of man and woman, or
else there can be no generation: and that they be both furnished with fit
Instruments for that purpose, as the man with the yard, stones, and seed; the
woman with Pudenda, testes, You may easily know what I mean.
the womb, seed, and menstruous blood.

Then all reason tells you, that if there be any disaffection, or defect in
nature, in any of these members or parts, belonging to this work, the
fruitfulness and conception must necessarily be, either impedited, diminished,
or quite taken away.

Barrenness in men. Few Women do complain of this fault.
One cause of barrenness on the man's part, which is of all Authors condemned,
is, penis longus, or the overmuch length of the yard; by reason whereof, the
seed is refrigerated, and takes cold in the passage of the yard, before it can
be injected from the stones, into the womb.

But although this be a general received reason, Avicen. lib. 3. tract. 1.8.
amongst almost all Philosophers, yet it may seem vain, and suffer
contradiction; for the seed passing through the Conduit, or channel of the
yard, is cherished, and kept hot, by the pudenda of the woman, so that it seems
impossible, that it should take cold in the passage; but rather the contrary,
that the long penis is most fit and commodious, to further and perfect the
Conception, by injecting the seed into the inner parts of the womb, which is
done without any interval, or space of time.

And also contradictive to this Opinion, is the relation of Averroes, which is
credited by Aristotle, and other good Philosophers, That a certain Maid
conceived with Child, by standing in a Bath, where some seed of man had been
cast, the Womb drawing the same into it, by its natural magnetic attractive
faculty, which draws and attracteth to it self the seed of man, as the
Loadstone draws Iron.

But whereas many will have it, that the too long yard is unfit for conception;
This is the worst fault in women's account.
so there are others on the contrary, that affirm the short penis to render men
unfruitful, and that to be as bad, if not a greater fault then the other.

And this is the more probable reason, that the short penis may be more
defective then the long one, because it cannot so well inject the seed into the
inner parts of the womb.

But to speak freely, neither of these causes, either of the length or
shortness of the yard, can be firm reasons of the barrenness, or fruitfulness
of man, or to cause barrenness in the man, since it is confirmed by experience
of both parts, that have had plenty of Children.

But a greater reason of barrenness in the man, may be some vitiousness, or
defect in the yard, as if the same be oblique or crooked, if any of the
ligaments thereof be distorred, or broken, whereby the ways and passages,
through which the seed should flow, be corrupt, stopped, or vitiated; or some
Disease or imperfection, be either in the proper, or in the vicious parts
thereof.

Another cause of barrenness, by the defect of the yard, is too much weakness
and tenderness thereof, so that it is not strongly enough erected, to inject
the seed into the womb; for the strength and stifness of the yard, very much
conduces to conception, by reason of the forcible injection of the humane seed
into the womb.

A second cause of barrenness of men, may be some natural vice, or laesion in
the stones; Gal. 14. usu part. 1. de sem. 11, 16.
if they are so made by nature, that they cannot exercise their gift properly,
in producing seed.

The stones may be the cause of barrenness, by reason of their evil
composition, or accidents and distempers, or continual solution.

The stones may labor under distempers, either simple or compound, either
with, or without matter.

As if the stones be oppressed with any inflammation or tumor, wound or Ulcer,
or drawn up within the belly, not appearing outwardly, all such causes of the
stones, may be the reason of barrenness in the man.

Also the man may be barren, by reason of the defect of the seed, and that may
come from a twofold cause.

The first, If he engender and cast forth no seed at all, or in less substance
then is needful. And secondly, If the seed generated, and cast forth, be
vicious, and unfit for generation.
The seed is hindered from generation in those bodies, which are gross and fat,
the matter of it being defective.

And on the other side too much leaness, or a continual wasting or consumption
of the body, destroys the seed; nature turning all the matter and substance
thereof, into nutriment for the body.

The seed may also be corrupt, and vicious, by reason of many internal, and
external causes.

If the Instruments and Vessels of seed be intemperate, or disaffected, or in
any ways corrupted, that they cannot attract the matter of the fruitful seed,
and so that they cannot concoct the attracted matter, and retain the same so
long, until it can receive its whole and perfect absolution; as for examples
sake, it frequently happens to those, who have a long time labored with the
Gonorrhea, or running of the Reins; or if the principal parts of the body be so
ill affected, that they conceit ill nutriment, that causes vicious seed to be
generated, unfit for conception.

Likewise many outward causes may so alter, and disaffect our bodies, as that
they may cause the seed to be vicious, and unfruitful.

Too frequent carnal Copulation, Gal. 1. de sem. Cap. 16.
is one great cause of barrenness of men, which attracteth the seminal moisture
from the stones, before it is sufficiently prepared, and concocted, as all
other members of the body, by the institution of nature, do use to draw their
accustomed juice to themselves.

So if any one by daily Copulation, do exhaust and draw out all the moisture of
his seed, then do the stones draw the moist humors from the superior veins,
unto themselves; and so having but a little blood in them, they are forced of
necessity, to cast it out raw, and unconcocted; and thus the stones be
violently deprived of the moisture of their veins, attract the same from the
other superior veins, and the superior veins, from all the other parts of the
body, for their proper nutriment, to the great violating of the body, depriving
the same of the vital spirits.

It is therefore no wonder, if those that use immoderate Copulation, are very
weak in their bodies, seeing the whole body is thereby deprived of its best and
purest blood, and of the vital spirits: insomuch, that many who have bin too
much addicted to the pleasure, have killed themselves in the act.

But chiefly, It is no wonder, if such seed not well concocted and digested, be
unfit for generation.

Gluttony and drunkenness, do also much hinder men from fruitfulness, and
makes them unfit for generation.

But amongst other causes of barrenness in men, this also is one that makes
them barren, and of the nature of Eunuchs, the incision, or cutting of their
veins behind their ears, which for a Disease many times is done.

This says Hippocrates, causes barrenness in them, Gal. Lib. de genitur.
whose veins behind their ears are cut, to which Galen agrees; for he says,
that especially more then from any other parts of the body, the seed flows
from the brain by those veins behind the ears, which also Aristotle confirms.

From whence it probably appears, that the transmission of the seed is
impedited by the Section of the Veins behind the ears, so that it cannot at
all descend to the lower parts of the body, or else very crude and raw.

And thus have we shown the causes of barrenness in men. Now we come to speak
of barrenness in women.

Although there are many causes of the barrenness of women; yet the chief and
principal are internal, and they may be all referred to the privy parts of the
Body, the Seed, or the menstruous blood.

Therefore Hippocrates speaking of the easy and difficult Conception of Women,
says thus; The first consideration is to be had of their Species; for little
Women are more apt to conceive then great; slender, then gross; white and
fair, then ruddy and high colored; black, then pale and wan.

Those which have their Veins conspicuous, are more apt then others; but to be
very fleshy is evil, to have great swelling Breasts good.

The next thing to be considered is, their Courses or monthly purgations,
whether they have them duty every Month, if they flow plentifully and are of a
good color; whether they have them equal every month, at their certain days
and times; for so their purgations ought to be.

Then the Womb, or place of Conception is to be considered, it ought to be
clean and sound, dry and soft, the Womb not retracted nor drawn up, nor prone
or descended downwards, and the mouth thereof ought not to be turned awry, nor
everst, nor too close shut.

But to come to consider of these Causes more distinctly, and particularly.

The first parts therefore to be spoken of, are the pudenda, that is, the
privy member, and the Womb, which parts are shut and enclosed, either by
nature, or against nature; and from hence such women are called inperforate;
For in some Women the mouth of their Womb continues compressed and closed up,
from the time of their Birth, until the time of the ripeness of their Courses;
and then on a sudden when their Terms provoke forwards to purgation, they are
molested with great pain and sickness: some break, of their own accord, others
are dissected and opened by Physicians, to some it brings death, or else they
are forced to break, or never break at all.

And this Aetius distinctly handles, who writes, that the Wombs of women are
shut three manner of ways, which hinders Conception.

The first is, When the lips of the Pudenda do grow or cleave together.

Secondly, Although the lips seem open, yet there are certain Membrances
growing in the middle part of the Matrix within.

The third, Though the lips and bosom of the Pudenda may appear fair and open,
yet the Mouth of the Womb may be quite shut up; all which three kinds of
Closures are impediments to the Conceptions of women.

They do hinder in the first place, the performance of three offices; the use
of man, their purgations, and their Conception.

In the second place, they are two impediments, the communication with men, and
Conception thereby.

And thirdly, two other impediments to themselves, Purgation and Conception,
there might also fall in by the way, a discourse of the Hymen, or that Membrane
which is so called; but that only serves for the testimony of true virginity to
them that know it, which lock the loss of a Maidenhead opens: but that seems a
digression from this intention.

But amongst all causes of barrenness in a Woman, in the instruments of
generation, it is certain, that the greatest is in the Womb, for the Womb is
the field of generation; and if this field be corrupt, and not well disposed,
it is in vain to expect any fruit, let it be never so well tilled and sown, for
the Womb is subject to many diseases, and thence it follows, that it may be
often unfit for generation, distempers many are subject to it, as over much
heat, and over much cold. Women whose Wombs are too thick and cold, cannot in
any wise conceive, because coldness extinguisheth the natural heat of the
humane Seed.

Another cause of barrenness may be, immoderate moisture of the Womb, which
destroys the Seed of the man, as Corn sown in ponds and marshes.

A third cause of barrenness of the Woman, is, over much dryness of the Womb:
so that the humane Seed perishes for want of nutriment, and becomes as Corn
sown upon stones, or sandy ground.

A fourth cause of women's barrenness is, the immoderate heat of the Womb, which
scorcheth up the Seed of man, as Corn sown in the drought of Summer; for
immoderate heat hurts all the parts of the Body, and no Conception can live, or
be nourished in that woman.

Many other may be the distempers which the Womb is subject to, that may render
it unfit for Conception, and be the cause of barrenness, as when unnatural
humors, are engendered in the Womb, too much phlegm, Tympanies, worms, wind,
water or any such peccant humor, abounding contrary to nature.

But amongst all other causes, which produce fertility, or barrenness to a
woman, the monthly Terms are greatly to be respected, as hinderers or
furtherers thereof; if they come not in due order, it must necessarily cause
barrenness of that woman to follow; but of them we have already spoken, and
given directions how to promote and further the same.

But having sufficiently spoken of the causes of barrenness in man and woman,
we shall methodically proceed for procreation sake, to lay down such remedies,
as may naturally serve to prefer generation, and hinder accidental barrenness
in either.

But if in men the cause be, and that in the shortness of the penis, I cannot
help that: the women must in that case help themselves as well as they can: of
any too long there is seldom any complaint.

A woman may also have some other accidental causes, which may hinder her
conception; as sudden frights, and anger, fear, grief, and perturbations of the
mind, too violent exercise or stirring after Carnal copupulation, leaping,
dancing, running, or the like.

If the cause of barrenness be in the man, through over much hear in his Seed,
the woman may easily see! that in receiving it.

If the nature of the woman be too hot, and by that cause she is unfit for
Copulation, it may appear by these Signs.

Such a woman, whose cause of barrenness is by reason of too much heat, she
has her Terms or Flowers very little, and they are mixed with some yellowness;
such a woman is very hasty and Chollerick, quick witted and crafty, thirsty and
desirous after Carnal Copulation, her pulse very swift.

Some say that by these signs you may know where the fault lies, whether in
the man or the woman: Sprinkle both Urines of the man and of the woman upon a
Lettice leave, and that which dries away first is unfruitful.

Also take five Wheat corns, seven Barley corns, and seven Beans; put them all
into an earthen pot, and piss thereon, and let it stand seven days; if they
begin to sprout, the party is fruitful; if they rot, then barren, be it man or
woman.

Another way to know whether a woman be fruitful
Take Mirth, red Storax, and some such like odoriferous things, and make a
perfume thereof, which let the woman receive into the neck of the Womb through
a tunnel; if the woman feel the smoke ascend through her Body to her Nose, then
she is fruitful.

Another experiment for the same.
Take Garlic and beat it, and let the woman lie on her Back upon it, and if
she feel the sent thereof to her Nose; its a sign of fruitfulness.

But I could tell you a more infallible rule, for either the man or woman, to
find out where the fault lies, but they are too apt to learn it without
teaching, therefore I pass it by.

If the barrenness be proceeding from a hot cause, then take these directions.
Let such beware of hot air and hot dwellings if they can; and that they use
not too hot cloths about the sinews, and parts of the Womb.

Let them avoid hot meats (I speak now to women) hot Spices, strong Wine, fat
meats, warm herbs use not over much watching, lie not much on the Reins and
Kidneys, and as much as possibly may be, eschew great labor, anger, heaviness,
and all such motions as disturb the mind, and use moderately cooling things, as
thus,

To further Conception, and take away barrenness proceeding of hot causes.
Take oftentimes Conserve of Roses, cold Lozinges made of Dragagant, the
Confections of Triasantali; and use to smell to Camphire, Rose water and
Saunders.

It is also good to breathe the Basilica, or Liver Vein, and take out four or
five ounces of blood, and then take this purge.

A Purge against Barrenness through heat.
Take Electuarium de Epithymo de succo rosarum, of each two drams and a half:
whey of milk four ounces: mix them well together, and take it in the morning
fasting, sleep after it about an hour and an half, and fast four hours after
it, and then drink a good draught of Whey about an hour before you eat any
thing.

Another for the same.
Take water Lilly water four ounces; Mandrogara water, one ounce: Sassron, half
a scruple: beat the Safron to powder, and mix it with the waters, and drink
them warm in the morning, use this eight days together.

Pills against Barrenness.
Take Broom flowers, Smallage, Parsley seed, Comin, Mugwort, Fetherfew, of each
half a scruple: Aloes, half an ounce; Indy Salt, Saffron, of each half a dram:
beat and mix them all well together, and put to it five ounces of Fetherfew
water warm, stop it up close, and let it stand and dry in a warm place; and
thus do two or three times one after another. Then make each dram into 6 Pills,
and take one of them every other day before supper, all the while the said
Potion is used, and afterward when the drink is done, take one of these Pills
every third or fourth day. And after that Potion proceed with this purging
Medecin following.

Take Conserve Benedicta lax. one quarter of an ounce: de Psillio; three drams;
Elect. de Succo rosarum, one dram: mix them together with Fetherfew water, and
drink it in the morning betimes.

About three days after the Patient has taken this purge: let her be let
blood four or five ounces in the Median vein in the right foot. And then take
five days one after another filed Ivory, a dram and a half in Fetherfew water;
and during that time, let her sit in this Bath following, an hour together
morning and night.

Take wild yellow rapes, Daucus, Balsam wood and fruit, Ash-keys, of each two
handfuls; red Behen, white Behen, Broom flowers, of each a handful; Musk, three
grains; Amber, Saffron, of each one scruple; Boil all in water sufficiently,
but the Musk, Saffron Amber and Broom flowers, put them into the decoction
after it is boiled and strained.

A Confection profitable against barrennes.
Take Pistacia, Pingles, Eringos, of each half an ounce; Saffron, one dram:
Lignum Aloes, Galingale, Mace, Gariophilata, Balm flowers, red Behen, white
Behen, of each four scruples; shaven Ivory, Cassia bark, of each two scruples;
syrup of confected Ginger, twelve ounces; white Sugar, six ounces: decoct all
these well together, in twelve ounces of Balm water, and stir it well together;
then put to it of Musk and Amber, of each half a scruple. Take hereof the
quantity of a Nutmeg three times a day, in the morning an hour before noon, and
an hour after supper,

But if the cause of Barrenness in man or woman, be through scarcity or
diminution of the natural Seed, then such things are to be taken, as do
increase Seed, and incite and stir up Venery.

For this is good, yellow Rape seed baked in bread, young fat flesh not too
much salted, Saffron, the tails of Stincus, and long Pepper, are good prepared
in Wine.

Let such parties eschew all sour, sharp, doughy, and slimy meats, long sleep
after meat, surfeiting and drunkenness, and as near as possibly you can, keep
your selves from sorrow, grief, vexation, and care.

To increase natural seed.
Generally these things following increase natural seed, and stir up venery,
and recover the Seed again, when it is lost, viz. Eggs, Milk, Rice boiled in
milk; Sparrows brains, flesh and bones and all; The Stones and Pissels of
Bulls, Cocks, Bucks, Rams, and Bores.

Portages good to increase natural Seed, are such as are made of Beans, Pease,
and Lupines: cast away the first bitter broth of the Lupines, and mix the rest
with Sugar. French Beans, Wheat sodden in broth. Anniseeds, Fennel-seed,
Mustard seed, Colewort seed, and Nettle seed.

Roots good to increase the natural Seed.
Oynions stewed, Garlic, Leeks, yellow Rapes, fresh Ragwort roots, confected
Sugar, confected Eringo roots, confected Ginger, Costus roots, Sperage, Thistle
roots, Radish roots, Zedoary, confected Assarabacca.

Of fruits, Hazel nuts, Cypress nuts, Pistacia, Almonds, and Marchpane made
thereof.

Spices commodious to stir up Venery are,
In general Cinnamon, Cardamome, Galingale, long Pepper, Cloves, Ginger, and
Saffron.

Assa foetida taken a dram and a half at a time in good Wine, is very good for
this purpose, and so likewise is Dragagant, Borax is also fit to be taken in
like manner.

Of Compositions, these Confections following are good to increase the natural
Seed.
The Confection Dia Moscha, Aromaticum rosarum, Diambra, Dianthos, Diagalanga,
Tryon pipetion, Dia margariton calidum, and Mithridate, and especially the
Confection of Diasatyrion, but these are dear.

Lozinges, or a Confection to increase the natural Seed.
Take Ginger, one dram and a half; Almonds, Pingles, Pistacia, of each one
ounce; Kernels of Indian Nuts, Sysarum, of each half an ounce; Hearts Pisle,
five drams: Cinque-foi^e, Palma Chri^^i, one dram and a half: Galingale,
Cloves, Cinnamon, Mustardseed, long Pepper, yellow Rape seed, white Behen, of
each one dram; Onion seed, Radish seed, Rape seed, Ashen keys, of each two
scruples: sides of Stymus, tails of Stymus, three drams; Borrage, one quarter
of an ounce; Sugar, two pound; boil them altogether in Wine sufficient to make
a Confection or Lozinges thereof; and take about the quantity of a Nutmeg at a
time.

Another for the same.
Take yellow Rapes, Onions, Sperage roots, Mustard seed, Radish seed, Pingles,
Ash-keyes, Eringo roots, Satyrion Roots, Costus Roots, Ginger, long Pepper,
Cresses seeds, of each a like: make all these into fine Powder, and mix them
well together, and add to every Ounce of the Powder 3. Ounces of clarified
Honey, and therewith make it into a Confection: take of this Confection, about
3 drams at a time, with a little Sugar, and new milk.

For the weakness, and debility of the yard of a man, use this Ointment.
Take Wax, Oil of Bever-cod, Marjerom gentle, and Oil of Costus, of each a like
quantity; make it into an Ointment, and put to it a little Musk, and therewith
anoint the yard, and other members adjacent.

Another Ointment for the same.
Take of Horse Emmers 3 drams, oil of white Sesamum, oil of Lillies, of each
one Ounce: pound and bruise the Ants, and put them to the Oil, and let them
stand in the Sun 6 days, then strain out the Oil, and add to it Euphorbium 1
scruple, Pepper, Rue, of each one dram; Mustard Seed half a dram: ^et this
again altogether in the Sun, 2 or 3 days, then anoint all the Instruments of
Generation therewith.

Another for the same.
Take Oil of Lillies 2 Ounces, Oil of Bever Cod 1 Ounce, Euphorbium, Pepper,
Mustard Seed, of each 1 dram, Muscus half a scruple, mix them together unto an
Ointment, and use it as the other.

Remedies against barrenness in Women, through Cold.
Care must be taken in this case, to cleanse the womb from all excessive
moisture, and not to overcharge the stomach with meat, and refrain from much
sleep, and not addict her self to anger, nor sorrow neither, if she can avoid
it, to use moderate exercise and stirring, unless it be immediately after she
has bin helping her Husband to get a Child, or endeavoring to do it, then let
her rest from exercise, and motion of the body, at least 2 hours after it.

Let her abstain from eating of much fish, milk, or fresh cheese and from fat
flesh, and Vinegar, these are obnoxious to the womb.

To cleanse the womb from moisture.
Take a potion prepared of Oximel, of Squils, or of Oximel compositum, and
Sirrup of Wormwood, with a decoction of Annis, Fennel, Comin, and Hearts Tongue.
And afterward, take 1 dram of Pill benedicta, once in 14. days, and fast 5
hours after it.

A Bath for the same.
Take Storax, Calamita, Field Mints, Asphalatus, Annis, Seseli, Rue, Balsame
wood and fruits, Behen red and white, of each half 1 Ounce; boil all together
in water, and make a Bath thereof, and let the party sit in it up to the navel.

Also use often to annoint the parts about the womb, with warm and drying Oil,
such as Oil of Spike, Oil of Elder, and the like.

Another Bath for the same, wherein the Woman may either bathe her whole body,
or sit in it up to the middle.
Take Mugwort, Sage, of each two handfuls, Calamint, Dittany, of each half a
handful, Fennel Roots, Sparagus, Parsley, of each one handful, Bayberries,
Juniper, Annis, Comin, of each two drams, mix them, and boil them all in
water, and make a Bath thereof, and use it, as before is directed.

A Confection good against barrenness, caused through too much coldness, and
moisture in the womb.
Take Cinnamon, Cardamon, Saffron, Cloves, Mace, long Pepper, Cypers Roots,
Nutmegs, Cummin, Lignum Aloes, Cassia wood, of each 1 scruple; Cucubes,
Doronicum, of each four scruples; Musk, Amber, Balsom, one dram, fine Sugar 18
Ounces, boil the Sugar with the rest, with Malmsey, and Buglosse-water, enough
to make it into a Confection; and take thereof about a spoonful, going to bed,
and half a spoonful a little before Supper.

To dry a moist and slippery womb.
Take Silver Mountain, red Behen, white Behen, Ash Keys, shaven Ivory, yellow
Rape-seed, of each one dram, Cynamon, Mace, Cloves, Galingale, long Pepper,
Rosemary flowers, Balsom wood, Marjerom gentle, Penny royal, of each 4 scruples,
Balm, Bugloss, Citron peels, of each 2 scruples; Pearls 1 scruple, Musk 2
grains, white Sugar 24 Oun: sees these with Malmsey, and make thereof a
Confection, and use it as the other.

If there be any infirmity in the retentive faculty of the womb, so that it
cannot retain and keep the seed injected into it, so as to come in thereby, if
the same be caused through overmuch coldness of that part, as oftentimes it
does, which the Woman her self may be sensible of, whether heat or cold do most
abound; I say, if cold abound, and weaken the retent ivevirtue of the womb,
then you are to use such things as strengthen, comfort, and warm the same, such
are Amber, Frankincense, Mastick, Cloves, Lignum Aloes, Nutmegs, Sage, and the
like.

And in this case, it is good to boil Cypers Roots in the water, and often
bathe, and wash the neck of the Matrix therewith.

And for this, it is good to make a fume of Mastick strewed upon Coals, and to
receive the same into the Matrix below.

An Ointment for the same.
Take the juice of Roses, of Pomegranates, Cloves, of each an Ounce,
Frankincense, Hypocistis, prepared Coriander, Mastick, Juice of Sloes, Iron,
Dross, of each one dram, sealed Earth, Starch, of each one Ounce, beat all
these together to an Ointment, and anoint the privy members, and womb often
therewith.

But if the operation of the retentive faculty of the womb be impedited from
performing its natural office through some distemper of heat, then are such
Medicines to be applied, as are cooling, astringent, and corroborating; yet let
them be tempered with some warm things.

The cold things to be used for this purpose are these, burnt Hartshorn,
Amber, Juice of sloes.

Hypocistis, burnt Muscle shells, Bolus, Dragons blood, terra sigillata,
Pomegranate flowers, and Pills, Acorns, and their Cups, Medlars both fruit and
bark of the Tree, Services, and Mirtle-seed: of any of these simples, you may
make unguents, Plasters, Confections and Electuaries, or other Medicines, as
occasion shall require.

If any yet desire other Medicines, they may use Plasters and Pessaries, and
trochis for a fumigation; of which here follows; examples.

A Plaster to comfort the womb against barrenness.
Take Landanum 1 Ounce, Storax Calamite, half an Ounce, Cynamon, Cloves, Lignum
Aloes, of each 1 dram; Species Diambre, Gallia Moscata, of each half a dram;
Oil of Spikenard, Oil of Lillies, and Wax a sufficient quantity to make it into
a Plaster, or Cerot. This Plaster may be applied to the womb, and quite down
to the lower Region of the Abdomen, and worn thereupon a long time.

For a Fame, these Troches following may be taken.
Take of Mugwort a dram, Mirrhe, Benzoi-Storax, Calamint, of each half a dram,
Lignum Aloes 1 scruple, Musk, Amber, of each 10 grains: beat all these together
to a Powder, and with Oil of Spikenard, make Troches of it; put some of it upon
Coals, and let the Woman receive the fume thereof through a convenient
Instrument.

A Pessary for the same.
Take Mugwort, Ditany, Marioram, of each 1 dram, Aniseeds, Rue, Citron, of each
half a dram, Species Galliae Moschatae one scruple, Musk, Amber, Saffron, of
each 15 grains, beat them all together into a Mass, and make a Pessary
thereof, wrapped up in Linen, and put it up into the Matrix.

And now we have largely declared to you, the external and internal causes, of
natural and accidental barrenness, and sterility, both in man and woman, and
the Physical, both external and internal means, to be used to remedy the same,
what else is to be done, your own natural kindness must excite you to; which if
it be but dull, we have given you sufficient Rules, whereby you may quicken the
same. Some other things there are, which the Physicians say, do prefer
fruitfulness, by hidden quality, as the stones of a Fox, and the like; but they
are already declared, and described in compound Medicines.

Physicians do likewise tell long stories about the time of the year, what time
is best for Copulation: all agree, the Spring is the most convenient time, and
fit for procreation; for then the blood is in its vigor: and in the heat of
Summer, it ought to be forborne altogether, if possible (but then Venus takes
most pleasure to be jolly, and to her girls then most opportunities offer
themselves.)

But the most convenient and fit time for a Woman to conceive, is immediately
after her purgations cease; for then the womb is cleansed from superfluous
excrements; and the most fit hour for conception, is after meat, and before
sleep, that she may sleep, and rest after it.

Chap. X. Of monstrous and unnatural Conceptions.
IT follows now in order in the next place, to speak something of Conceptions,
contrary to nature, and unnatural Births, which is called a depraved Conception.

For since it is the certain institution and intent of nature, that Women
should bring forth perfect mankind, and nothing else, then it follows, that
whatsoever else is conceived in the womb, besides mankind, the same is a
vicious, and depraved conception, against the Rules and Laws of nature.

Which though these vicious and unnatural Conceptions, may be many ways; yet
they may all generally be reduced unto one of these heads, to wit, Monsters,
Mola, wind and water, all which we often find to be conceived, and grow in
the womb.

Of Monsters, there is much written, either historically, fabulously, or
philosophically; but that appertains not to our present intent or purpose.

And therefore the Philosopher in his Book of Generation, 2 Phys. 82.4. Genesis
Animal.
and the causes thereof teaches, that a Monster is nothing else but a peccant
vice of deficient nature, whereby nature is impedited, and hindered from
effecting her end, as it is in any Art, when the Artist fails, by reason of
some defect in him, that he cannot attain to accomplish his desired end.

And although these unnatural Births may happen many ways, yet all these
errors of nature may be referred to the Diseases proceeding of evil
composition: as for example, to the Disease in number, as when a man is born
with one eye, one foot, or two heads.

Of Diseases of magnitude, the same the figure of the body demonstrates to the
rest; Gal de causis morb. 7.
which Doctrine, Galen manifestly teaches.

But the causes why Monsters are generated, contrary to the intent of nature,
Gal. lib. de hist. Phil. lib. 5. plai. Ph. 8.
are not fully agreed upon by all. Galen, or rather Plutarch, says thus.

Empedocles teaches, That Monsters are created, if the seed be too much, or
too little; too much spread abroad, or separated, if it be void, or injected by
inordinate motion; or because something is added, detracted, transposited, or
inflamed: or if the womb be distorted, the Vessels corrupted, or the formative
virtue be deficient, or do abound: these things hinder the natural conception,
and due operation of nature.

Chap. XI. Of the unnatural fleshy Conception in the womb, called Mola.
THis unnatural Matter sometimes happens to grow in the wombs of Women, that
have no Copulation with men, and causes the Belly to arise, and all signs to
appear, as though they were with Child; their Terms staying, the Breasts grow
hard, they lose their appetite, or stomach to meat: their complexion grows
pale, and sometimes they may feel a stirring about the Matrix, as if they were
with Child; yet nevertheless, they bear no Child, which have this mola
engendered in them: Of this writes Aetius, Aetius lib. ult.
and Avicen, who says, that it is a certain hard substance, sometime found to
spread it self throughout the whole Matrix.

Aristotle teaches, that this Mola is nothing else, Lib. 4. Genesis Hin. Cap. 7.
but a certain piece of flesh, conceived and engendered in the womb of a Woman,
and he recites a story of a certain Woman, that brought forth a lump of flesh
which they called Mola.

And hereunto Galen also plainly consents, Gal. 14. usu part. 17.14. Meth. 13
who affirms, that this Mola is a piece of unprofitable deformed flesh, which
is engendered in the Womb of a Woman, without the Copulation with a man, as a
Hen has Eggs without a Cock.

But now a Question may arise, whether the cause of this unnatural Mola,
proceed from too much heat, or too much cold, or too much blood?

For Avicen teaches, Avic. fen. 21.3. trait. 2. cap. 18.
that besides the multitude, or superfluity of blood, there is a vehemence of
heat, wherein the blood is concocted, and thereby the flesh acquires a form.

But this, Aristotle seems to contradict, who manifestly writes, that the Mola
is no otherwise bred, then of impure, and imperfect concoction; and that it
has its Original from the defect and imbecility of natural heat, And Averroes
confirms, that the cause is nothing else but debility and weakness of nature,
corruption of digestion, and loss of the last concoction; and certainly, that
rude and deformed flesh, called Mola is engendered of crudities.

This, grows in the womb in two kinds, like a piece of flesh, putrified
without form or figure, resembling rather a piece of spongeous blood, wind and
water, then right flesh which hinders the expelling of the terms, and being
mixed with the natural seed, it grows sometimes to a hard substance.

It is also engendered of superfluous blood, and the concourse of tough and
unconcocted humors, which make the belly swell up, as if the Woman were with
Child.

This is an ill accident, and putrifieth and spoileth the Matrix, breeding
there oftentimes Ulcers and Imposthumes, Dropsies, unnatural Fluxes, or some
such like infirmities, bringing death, if it be not well regarded to be
prevented.

The sighs whereby they that labor with this unnatural Mass, may be known
from Women with Child, are generally these.

The first is motion; for this burden moves not as Children do, because there
is neither life nor sense in it.

But it may move by accident, according to the motion of the woman, and the
ponderousness thereof, but that is no true motion.

The Belly of Women which labor with this unnatural Mass, is harder then the
Belly of women with Child, and will not so easily move from one place to
another, as theirs that be with Child.

The Woman that has this Mola is also more melancholy, then those that are
with Child, and their hands and feet more feeble: this Mass also sometimes
falls from one side to another.

A Woman with Child at nine months end, is delivered thereof; but they go two,
3, or 4 years, sometimes all their lifetime with this burden. For the cure of
this Mola, Hippocrates before all others, prescribes the most perfect method.

The first means to be used, is cleansing and purging of the whole body.

The second is to mollify, loosen, and open the Vessels, and ligaments of the
Womb, wherewith the Mola is bound and fastened there.

The third is to stir up, and strengthen the expulsive faculty, whereby this
burden may the more easily be expelled from the Womb.

All Physicians do agree, that this disease cannot be cured without great
difficulty, and sometimes not at all; yet nevertheless, means must be used,
and first of all purgation, whereby the Belly may be lenified; and amongst all
other Medicines; Hiera obtains the chief place; for its molifying and purging
quality, the better if it be mixed with Cassia, as in this manner.

Take Species of Hiera simplex, Cassia new drawn, of each 1 dram; mix them into
a Bolus with Sugar.

A Sirrup for the same.
Take of Oximel simplex one Ounce, decoction of Betony, of Motherwort, Mints,
Penny Royal, of each 4 drams, mix them together, and make a Sirrup thereof; but
before you take it, take this Bolus and Confection following.

A Bolus.
Take Conserve of Maidenhair, two drams Species of Dia calamint, 1 scruple, mix
them and make a Bolus thereof to be taken before the Sirrup.

A Confection for the same.
Take Species Diambre, Diacalam* of each half a dram, Sugar 2 Ounces; make a
Confection thereof, with White Wind, and take it before the Sirrup.

An excellent potion for this Disease.
Take Elect Diaphen, Hiera, Diacol, of each half a dram, Mel. Ros. Sol. 4.
drams, decoction of Betony, of Mugwort, of each a sufficient quantity, to make
a potion: let the Patient in this Disease, abstain from cold, and moist meats,
and use this potion following, which mollifies the Mass, or Mola, and expels
the humors that cause, or increase it. Take St. John's Wort, Savin, Rosemary,
Field Mints, Lovag, Mugwort, Penny Royal, Madder, of each one handful; Fennel,
Squinant, Parsley seed, Calmus, Galingale, of each 1 dram, Hors-radish Roots, 4
Ounces; boil them all together in a good quantity of water, to make a potion,
and take thereof every day 3. or 4. Ounces, mixing therewith about a quarter of
an Ounce of this Trochis following.

A Trochis.
Take Cynamon, Mirrhe, of each 2. drams and a half, Rue, Savin, Field Mints,
Penny Royal, Madder, Sagapenum, Opopanacum, of each, 1 dram; Cardamum,
Juniper-wood, Rosemary, of each, 1 dram and a half: dry them all to powder, and
make Troches thereof, and use it, as above is directed.

Also for this Disease, this following is a cheap and ready Medicine.

Take 3 Ounces of warm Fetherfewwater, every morning fasting, for two months
together, and fast 4 hours after it. And every fourth day during the time she
drinks the water, let her take one of these Pills following.

Pills for the Mola.
Take Galbanum, 1 quarter of an Ounce, Flowers of Mugwort, St. John's wort,
Assarabacca, of each 1 scruple, dissolve the Galbanum in good wine, and make
thereof 6 Pills, of a dram, and take one at a time, in 4 days, as before is
directed.

A Bath for the same.
Take Mugwort, Camomile, Dill, Holly-hock Roots, Mallows, of each one handful;
Linseed, Fenegreek, Anniseed, Fennel-seed, of each one dram; make a decoction
thereof in common water for a Bath, and let the Woman sit hot in it, up to her
breasts; and after use this Ointment for the same purpose.

Take juice of Holli-hocks, 2 Ounces, Goosgrease, Hens grease, of each, one
Ounce; Oil of sweet Almonds, of white Lillies, of each half an ounce, mix them
to an Ointment, and therewith anoint all the external parts against the fire.

Inwardly, let her also take Dia calamint, Trochis of Mirrhe, and in a word,
whatsoever is good to provoke the terms, and to drive forth the secundide, and
expel a dead Child, the same is effectual for this Disease; of which shall be
spoken in the ensuing discourse, of hard Labors.

We have now at large, written of all special accidents and infirmities,
incident to the womb, and parts of generation, and given perfect directions for
remedies for the same: yet nevertheless, though the humane seed may be received
and contained, yet a mischance may follow, or otherwise a weak and feeble
fruit, that it cannot come to perfection; and at last, a difficult and hard
labor, are many if not most of the Daughters of Eve subject to, whereby
oft-times, their lives are in danger thereby, if not quite lost, with the fruit
and all: therefore concerning these infirmities, and what belongs to
fruit-bearing Women, and their delivery, is the intended subject of the
subsequent part of this Book, and first, of the debility, or weakness of the
child in its Mothers womb.

Chap. XII. Of the weakness of Children in the Womb.
SUch is the frailty of humane nature, that the Child is subject to sickness,
even in his Mothers womb; no great marvel then, if men are all their lives
encumbred with casualties, when they begin with them, even before they have a
visible being; the sickness of Children in the womb, not being obvious to the
eye, is the more difficult to find out; but the signs to know it are these,

If the Woman have her terms much, being with Child, it must argue debility of
the Child, because his nourishment and sustenance is taken away from him.

If Milk flow from Women with Child, its evident the Child is weak, and not
strong enough to draw his nourishment to him.

If a Woman with Child be afflicted with a strong and violent looseness, there
is great danger of a mischance.

But the strength or weakness of the Child, depends on heat and cold, under
which are comprehended all accidents whatsoever.

If the Child be weak through immoderate heat, and dries, then the remedy is
to purge the Mother of Choler; for which this following is a convenient
Medicine.

Take Conserve of Prunes, half an Ounce, three Ounces of whay, of milk, give it
her in the morning, and let her fast 5 hours after it.

Another for the same.
Take Cassia extracted out of the Cane one Ounce, and put to it 4 Ounces of
Sorrel-water, or Barley-water, and give it in like manner as the other.

Another safe, but stronger Medicine, both for the Mother and the Child, is
this following.

Take 2 Ounces of Manna, and 3. or 4. Ounces of Whay, mixed with it, and use it
as the other.

For the same, you may also steep in the same quantity of Whay, a dram of
Rubarb one night, and strain it out well; or, if you will, take half a dram of
Rubarb in powder in some whay.

Let the Woman use such diet, as is cooling, and moystning, as Barley-water,
Lettice, and use Verjuice, and juice of Lemons with her meat: Endive water, and
Syrrup of Roses, and Endive, and succoury water, are good in this case. Forbear
all things, which provoke vomiting, or which force Urine or blood.

Let the Woman 3 or 4 times every day, cool and quench her thirst with
Barley-water, having half an Ounce of Syrrup of leaves mixed with it.

An external Medicine for this Disease, if you feel great heat to abound, may
be this.

Take Citron water, Violet water, of each 6. Ounces, Sorrel-water, 12. Ounces,
Red Sanders, burnt Ivory, Sorrel seed, of each one scruple, Saffron, half a
scruple, Vinegar 3 spoonfuls, mix them all together, and wet a Linen Cloth in
it, and lay it on the privities, and on the small of the back.

Take also one Ounce of Pompeon Peels, Oil of Roses, Oil of Water Lillies, of
each one Ounce and a half, Housleek one Ounce, temper them all together, and
anoint the back and privities therewith 3. or 4. times a day.

But if the cause of weakness, or debility of the Child in its Mothers Womb,
proceed from cold and moystness, then are contrary medicines to be used; of
which these following are approved.

Take Buglosse water, Saffron seeds, Agarins, Hermodactils, of each 1 scruple,
Cynamon, Ginger, Roses, Coriander prepared, of each 4 grains, steep them one
night in the Buglosse water, then strain it, and drink it in the morning
fasting.

Another for the same.
Take Fethersew-water, Balm water, of each one Ounce and a half, Benedicta
laxativa one Ounce, Sugar half an Ounce, mix them, and infuse them together one
night, then strain it out, and use it as the other.

Have a care to use a good order of Diet, and such things as warm and dry; boil
Sage, Mints, and Rosemary in her Portage, and use to drink red Wine with
steeled water.

To mundifie and cleanse the bad humors, this Medicine following is very good.

Take juice of Mints 4 Ounces, Agarick one dram, Ginger, Roses, of each 4
grains; Manna half an Ounce, steep the Agarick in the juice of Mints a days,
and nights; then put the Manna, Roses, and Ginger to it, let it stand a while,
and dry against the fire, and make it into Pills, and take them.

Use this oftentimes; for they gently purge and dry up the warty humors without
pain or anguish.

A Plaster to remedy the corrupt humors.
Take Roses, Cipers Nuts, burnt Ivory, Sandaraca, of each 1 dram, Rosen 3
Ounces; boil the Rosen in red Vinegar, till the Vinegar be consumed, then mix
the other things with it, and make 2 Plasters of it, and apply one to the
back, and the other to the womb.

Another excellent good Plaster to strengthen Women with Child, that do not
use to go out half their times.
Take Oil of Quinces, Oil of Roses, Oil of Mints, of each 1 ounce and a half,
Comphrey, Boodstone, red Coral, Sandaraca, Date-stones burnt, of each 1 dram,
mix it with a sufficient quantity of Wax, to make a Salve thereof; and with
this anoint the Kidneys and Mother.

Chap. XIII. Of Mischances, and to prevent the same.
IT oftentimes comes to pass with women with child, as with the fruit upon a
Tree; which being young and tender, hangs on brittle stalks, and is easily
blown off with every wind; nay, when it is come to its full growth, and is
stronger, sometimes forcible winds bruises, or blows, cause them to fall off;
but when they come to their perfect time of ripeness, they fall of themselves.

So it is in this occult operation of nature, many accidents sometimes happen
to the Tree, which bring the fruit to an untimely birth; and oftentimes, not
without peril of the Woman's life, nature being dead in the Child, that it
cannot help it self; whereas in those that are alive, and of their full time,
nature helps forward the birth, the Infant it self striving to find a way into
the World.

This may be perceived by the breasts; for if they be small, weak, and slack in
Women with Child, then is a mischance to be expected; for then the Child wants
nourishment, and pines, and dies; also impatiency, or violent motion, many
times breaks the secundine, and then the fruit falls away.

Signs of a mischance approaching, are also pains of the Backbone, Belly, and
privities: to prevent which, let the Woman with Child, beware sharp and bitter
meats, and drinks; avoid much anger and violent motion, and exercise; use
oftentimes to drink red Wine, and keep the body soluble: To do which, if need
require, she may use the decoction of Mallows, Mercury, and stewed Prumes;
forbear Clysters, and strong Medicines; but if there be any great obstruction
in the body, then let her eat Cassia out of the Pipes, or Cassia new extracted;
especially, if the neck of the matrix have any issue, or overmuch moisture,
then use a little Rubarb in powder, mixed with the Cassia, which without
trouble, or danger, does cleanse Phlegm, and Choler.

For to stay the slipperiness of the Matrix, take Pomegranate Pills, and pound
them to powder grossly, and boil them in Oil of Lillies, and inject the same
into the Matrix.

A Pessary excellent good for the same.
Take Mastick, Mirrhe, Gallia Muscata, of each half a dram; mix them with one
ounce of Goos-grease, and role it up in Sheeps Wool, and put it up into the
place.

An Ointment to strengthen Women with Child.
Take Cypress Nuts, Galls, Myrtle-seed Juice of Sloes, Hypocistis, of each half
a dram, Blood stone, Amber, Dragons blood, Bolus, of each one dram and a half,
reffuse of Iron, half an ounce, innermost Peels of Chestnuts, one ounce: decoct
the reffuse of Iron a good while in Vinegar, then beat them all together in a
Mortar, to an Ointment, with 3 or 4 whites of Eggs, and anoint the belly
therewith, 4 times a day.

Another Ointment for the same.
Take Oil of Nuts 4 Ounces, Barrowes grease 1 ounce and a half, Cypres Nuts,
Mastick, of each 1 dram and an half, boil them together gently, the space of
five hours, and therewith anoint the Matrix, Womb, and Reins of the Back.

A Plaster for the same.
Take Dragagant, Gum, Bdellium, of each 1 quarter of an oun. Juice of Sloes
Frankincense, Hypocistis, Sandaraca, of each one dram, Bolus, Dragons blood, of
each 1 quarter of an ounce, wax, half an Ounce, Paper glue 2 ounces: dissolve
the glue in red Wine-Vinegar, then temper them all together into a Plaster,
and apply it to the womb and privities.

For an Ague in Women with Child.
Take Barley meal, Juice of Sloes, and Housleek, what quantity you see
convenient, temper it with Vinegar, and lay it upon the belly, use it often:
this defends the Child from all accidents of an Ague.

To prevent miscarriage through wind.
Boil Cominseed in water, and take three or four spoonfuls of that water, with
a dram of Mithridate, twice a week.

Chap. XIIII. To expel and drive out the dead Child.
FOr the expulsion or delivery of a child that is dead, the same Medecines that
are prescribed to drive forth the unnatural excrement, called, Mola, and to
provoke the Terms, are good to be used.

But first be sure that the child is dead, and do not go about to expel a live
Child instead of a dead one, which may be known by these signs. If the Child
be dead in the Womb, then does the woman feel great pain in the optic Nerves
of her Eyes, and behind the Neck, and on the Backbone, with great pain and
anguish in her lower parts. And the Burden always falls to that side she lies
on, because the Ligaments of the Secundine, have no power to hold it in one
place; the thickness of the upper part of the Belly sinks down, and the woman
feels much pain, and cold about the neck of the Matrix.

Also, if one hold a warm hand long upon the Belly, and feel no stirring, the
Child is dead; these are signs the Child is dead, before it come to
putrefaction.

But when it begins to stink and putrify, which will be in three days
space after it is dead; the woman will have a stinking breath, stinking
corruption issues from the Matrix, and pieces of stinking flesh, will at last
be expelled from the Womb: then means is to be used to cleanse the Womb of the
dead Child, and to preserve and strengthen the heart from the corruption of
filthy sents ascending to it, which may be done, by this powder following.

Take white Diplamus, one dram and a half; Citron peels and seeds, each half a
dram; Pearls prepared, four scruples; Coriander prepared, a scruple; Roses, two
scruples; Sugar, two ounces and a half; make them all to fine powder, and take
thereof about a quarter of an ounce at once in drink.

Juice of Vervaine and Hysop drunk in Wine, is good to expel the dead Child.

The innermost skins of the Maws of Hens, and Capons washed in Wine, and then
dried to powder; and give thereof a dram in Wine, broth, or Rose water, is good
to expel a dead Child, and the Secundine.

For the same, take Betony and Rue, of each a handful; juice of Salomons seal,
an ounce; boil it well in a pint of white Wine, and strain it, and give her to
drink.

Linseed is very good for the same, either to drink the decoction, or Bathe
therein.

Also, take Mirth the quantity of a Hazle-nut stamped, and taken in Wine; or
Mugwort water, is good for the same.

For women that are strong; take about a spoonful of the juice of Garlic, with
wine or Honey.

If a woman chance to miscarry through a fright, or some such accident: then
take a Crab and stamp it, and wring out the juice, and drink it with water of
Mugwort.

Pills to expel a dead Child.
Take Trochis of Mirth, one scruple; Galbanum, half a scruple: make five Pills
thereof, with Pennyroyal water.

Another for the same.
Take of the fruit of the Savine tree, one quarter of an ounce; Assa foetida,
Ammoniacum, Madder, of each half a dram; make 11. Pills hereof, and take one at
a time three times a day, morning, night and at four of the clock in the
afternoon.

A Fume to expel the dead Child.
Take some shavings of an Asses hoof, or of a Horses, if you cannot get the
other, and make a fume thereof, and let the woman sit over it.

Basilium is good for the same to be used in like manner, and so is likewise
the fume of Laudanum, and Galbanum.

A Bath to expel a dead Child.
Take ten handfuls of Mints, and boil them well in a sufficient quantity of
water, and let the woman sit therein up to the middle.

Chap. XV. Of hard Labor, and means to procure easy Delivery.
THat all women should bear children with pain and sorrow, was a punishment
inflicted on them by God, for the disobedience of the first Mother; for which
cause they undergo more anguish, and peril in bringing forth, then any other
Creatures.

Yet nevertheless, there may be many causes, and accidents which render the
delivery more dangerous and difficult in some then in others; for which our
purpose is here, to prescribe some remedies.

A most excellent Plaster to strengthen women with child, to wear all the time
they be with child,
Take oil Olive, two pound and four ounces; red Lead, one pound; Spanish Soap,
twelve ounces; Incorporate them altogether in an earthen pot, and when the Soap
comes upwards, put it upon a small fire of coals: and continue it an hour and
a half, stirring it with an Iron or stick; then drop a drop of it upon a
trencher, if it cleave not, it is enough: spread it on cloths, or lay it on a
board till it cools, then make it up into Rolls; it will last twenty years, the
older, the better; and when you have occasion to use it, for this purpose,
spread a Plaster of it, and apply it to the Back^ and when you have tried it,
you will give me thanks for it; It is likewise good for the bloody Flux,
Running of the Reins, or any weakness in the Back, for any bruise, to draw out
a Thorn out of the flesh, and eases Corns, and is good for a strain, and for
the Headache, being applied to the Temples.

But to proceed, when the woman with child, begins to draw near her time; then
let her use such meats and drinks as nourish well, but use no excess of
either; but especially let her take care to keep her Body soluble, for which,
and also to prepare the Body for an easy delivery, this Bath is very good to be
used.

A Bath good for women with Child when they draw near their time, to procure
easy delivery.
Take Holly-hock roots and leaves, two handfuls, Mallows, Betony, of each one
handful; Mugwort, Marjoram, Mints, Camomile, of each half a handful; Linseed
two handfuls; bruise the Linseed grossly, and put that together with the herbs
into two bags, and boil them well in water, enough to make a Bath for the woman
to sit in up to the Navel when it is warm; and let her sit upon one bag, and
hold the other upon her Navel; And afterward, use to anoint the Belly, Back,
and privities with this Salve following, being warmed.

A preparative Salve to cause easy delivery in Child bearing women.
Take oil of sweet Almonds, of Lillies, Violets, of each-half an ounce;
Linseed, Holly-hock roots, Fenugreek, Butter, Hens grease of each one quarter
of an ounce; Quince kernels, Dragagant, of each an ounce: stamp the seeds
small, and slice the roots, and boil them all together in rain water; then take
out the Muscilage, and temper the same with the oil; then let the powned
Dragagant and Hens grease boil so long, till the Muscilage, be consumed: then
make thereof a Salve, and anoint therewith as before is directed.

Another Ointment for the same.
Take oil of sweet Almonds, of Lillies, of Violets, each half an ounce: Hens
grease, Ducks grease three drams: mix them together with Wax, as much as is
needful to make a Salve, and use it as the other.

With any of these Salves, a woman is to be anointed about the parts before
mentioned, every day the space of five or six weeks before her time.

Now when the time of Labor is come, then use any of these things which
follow, as the cause requires; but above all things, this powder following is
most effectual.

An excellent Powder for women in travel with Childbearing.
Take Dittany of Crete, Penny-royall, Aristolochia round, each half a scruple:
Cinnamon, Saffron, of each twelve grains: Let them be all beaten into a fine
powder, and given in Wine or some convenient decoction, as the decoction of red
Pease, of Pennyroyal, or of Parsley.

For outward Medecines, there be many things used to be held to the privities,
as, Egrimony with the roots to be held to the Matrix, and immediately after the
birth to be thrown away, lest it draw down the Matrix: also Henbane roots,
Polypody roots, and Bistorta, are very good for the same.

Also, take Polypody roots and Mallows of each a handful, and a handful of
Mugwort: bruise them small, and boil them well, and apply it moderately warm
upon the Matrix, and after the Delivery, immediately take it away.

Some use to tie a Snakes skin about the Thigh; but what virtue there is in
that, they know that have tried it.

Bay Berries beat, and applied to the Navel, are good to further the Birth; but
inwardly this Powder is commended.

Take Cinnamon, Mirrh, of each half a dram; make them into powder, and give it
with a little White Wind,

Another for the same.
Take Cinnamon, one dram: Saffron, half a dram: Cassia wood, Cassia pipes, of
each two scruples: scrape off the uttermost black bark from the Cassia Pipes,
and make it all into fine powder, and give it four or five times in the
decoction of red Pease.

Pills for the same.
Take Mirrh, Bever-cod, red Storax, of each half a scruple: Cinnamon, Savin, of
each half a scruple; make it into Pills, with the decoction of red Pease, and
so give it.

Another for the same.
Take Mirth, Costus, red Storax, of each half a dram: Ammoniacum, Savin, of
each half a dram; beat them very small, and give it in the decoction of red
Pease: use it three or four times.

If the throws be too weak, or do not continue, let all sweet savours as Musk,
or the like, be kept from the woman in labor; for that hinders throws, and
holds back the Birth. But to forward the Birth, make this decoction.

Take Betony, three handfulls: Mugwort, one handful; Camomile Pennyroyal,
Hysop; of each one handful: Linseeds two handfuls: bruise the Linseed grossly,
and cut the herbs small, and put them all in a bag, and boil it well in Wine
and water: with this decoction foment the Matrix, five or six times with a
sponge, and then anoint the place with the oil of Wall-flowers; even to the
Neck of the Mother, if it can be done with convenience.

But if this help not, then give her a good draught of this Potion following
every two hours.

Take Mugwort, Pennyroyal, Hysop, of each half a handful; Betony one handful:
boil all these in a pint and a half of Renish Wine till the fourth part be
consumed, strain it our and put to it half a dram of Saffron, and amongst each
draught put half a dram of one of the powders before mentioned.

Also, this following is very good to quickn the throws,

Take half a dram of beaten Amber, and give it in water of Lillies, or in the
decoction of red Pease.

An excellent Medicine to procure easy delivery in women.
Take Pippins, cut them in thin slices, and fry them with oil of sweet Almonds,
and eat thereof in the morning and at four a clock in the afternoon, use it
constantly a matter of five or six weeks before your time, till you are brought
to bed: and mix some oil of sweet Almonds and Sperma coeti together, and
anoint the Belly, and Matrix once every day therewith warm, or oftener if you
can conveniently.

Another for the same.
Take Hysop, Vervaine, Betony, of each one handful: stamp them small, and
strain them in good stale Ale, and let the Patient drink a good draught
thereof, it gives present help.

To expel the Secundine or Afterbirth.
The Secundine or Afterbirth, is that skin or caul wherein the child is
formed and wrapped up till the time it break forth to the Birth, and does, or
at least ought to come away, immediately after the Birth of the child.

But sometimes it remains behind, and causes great peril to the woman, and
many ill accidents, as Agues, stinking breath, pain of the Head, Swooning, and
the like, if it be not expelled.

It commonly remains behind when the woman has had very hard labor, and is
thereby grown so weak and feeble, that nature has not strength enough to drive
it forth: she must therefore have some comfortable things given her to
strengthen and comfort her heart, as, Dia marga^iton, and Manus Christi; 'then
let her rest a little, and if the Secondine do not follow, anoint the Belly
and parts adjacent, with oil of Lillies, and oil of Elder flowers, and use such
things as are directed for the delivery of a dead child; as, Corn flowers given
in Lilly water: also Garlic, half an eggshell full of the juice thereof, given
in honeyed water, does expel the dead child, and afterbirth as before has
been prescribed.

To ease the After-throws.
Take Spikenard and Squinant, of each one quarter of an ounce: boil them
together in a good quantity of Mugwort water, till half be consumed, and drink
thereof two or three times.

Also to assuage the pain, make a Cawdle with Malmsey, or some other good Wine,
and put therein yolks of Eggs and Cinnamon, and so give it. For the fame, take
Triphes a magna, half an ounce: Saffron half a dram: Mace a scruple; and give
this at twice, in warm Wine.

To stay the excessive flood after the Birth.
The Remedies before prescribed for the asswaging of the excessive Flux of the
Terms in women, be also very good for this Disease, and for all Women in
Childbed; yet nevethelesse take this Confection following.

A Confection for an excessive flood in Women lying in Childbed.
Take Conserve of Piony one Ounce, Conserve of Roses one ounce, Conserve of
Burrage, Bugios, Balm of each half an ounce, prepared Bolus half a dram,
prepared Pearls 1 dram, Cynamon 1 dram and a half, mix them all together, and
make a Confection thereof.

For the same, use this Powder following.
Take Bolus prepared, Pearls, of each one dram; sealed Earth 2 scruples,
Tormentil half a dram, Shepherds Purse 1 scruple, Species de gemmis frigidis 1
dram and a half, Roses, Corral, Sanders, of each one scruple, Cynamon 2.
scruples and a half, Sugar 3 Ounces, mix them all well together, and take it
with Hen-broth.

Lozinges very effectual for the same.
Take Boodstone 1 dram and a half, red Coral one dram, Tormentil, Trochis de
Sodio, of each half a dram; scraped Ivory, burnt Hartshorn of each 1 scruple,
Pearls prepared 4 scruples, fine Bolus 2. scruples, Shepherds purse, red
Sanders, of each a scruple, Cynamon 1 dram, Sugar six ounces; wash the
Boodstone in Plantain-water, and make a Powder, or Lozinges thereof.

Chap. XVI. Of the superfluity of Milk; and other accidents happening after the
Birth.
EXcessive abounding of the milk, after a Woman is delivered, if it flow more
than the Child can grow, there oftentimes ensues Imposthumes, and other
Inflammations and distempers in the breasts; for Remedies whereof, use these
prescriptions following.

The Patient must eat and drink but moderately, and avoid all such things as
engender much blood, and use means to dry and take away the superfluous blood,
as Rue and wild Rue, with the seeds Basil, and stamped together, if one take
every day a quarter of an ounce, the same is very good to dry up the milk.

To dry up the milk.
Take Rosen a good quantity, and temper it with Cream, and lay it lukewarm
over the breasts.

For the same.
Take 8 ounces of Honey, and two pints of water, boil them well together, and
scum it, and dip therein a threefold Cloth, and lay it on the breasts, and when
it is cold, renew it again.

Also for the same, take one dram of Saffron, and 8 ounces of Malmsey, wet a
Cloth therein, and lay it on the breasts as aforesaid.

Also take Garden Mints, stamp them, and mix them with Oil of Roses, and use it
as the other.

For a Plaster to dry up the milk, take bean meal, oil of Roses, and red
Vinegar, a sufficient quantity to make a Plaster, and apply it to the breasts.

For clotted, or congealed milk in the Breasts.
Let Women keep sobriety in eating and drinking, and use moist meats, that may
engender subtle milk; Mints, Saffron, and Cynamon, is good to be used in their
meats.

Take grated bread, new milk, and Oil of Roses, of each a like quantity, sees
them together to a pap, and lay it warm upon the breasts:

For congealed milk, and pain in the Breasts.
Take Cork and burn it to ashes, and temper it with oil of Roses, and a little
Vinegar, and therewith anoint the breast.

A Salve to dissolve congealed milk in the Breasts.
Take Deares Suet 3 quarters of an oun: liquid Styrax 1 oun: Wormwood, Cummin,
Dill-seeds, of each 1 ounce; oil of Wormwood, Ducks grease, of each 1 ounce and
an half, Saffron one scruple, make an ointment or Plaster hereof, and apply it
to the breasts.

For milk congealed with Inflammation in the breasts.
Take a quantity of the muscilage of Fleawort, Fenegreek, and Purslain seeds,
of each a like; and make an ointment thereof wieh wax, and anoint the breasts
therewith.

Also for the same, take Chickweed, and lay it warm upon the breasts.

Also beat oil of Roses, and Vinegar of Roses together, and lay it on the
breasts.

If the Woman has taken some extreme cold, then take this following,
especially, if there be an Ague with it, take Camomile, Melilot, Fennel seeds,
Anniseeds, Dill seeds, Fenegreek Linseeds, Southernwood, Ginger, Bazil, beat
them together, and with oil of Camomile, make a Plaster of it, and apply it to
the breasts.

A good Plaster to dissolve hard knots in the breast.
Take Crumbs of white bread, Barley meal; Mustard-seeds, Fennel, and Holly hocks
roasted under the ashes, of each a like quantity, pound them all well together,
and make a Plaster thereof, with oil of Camomile, and apply it warm to the
breasts.

For hardness, and inflammation in the breasts through congealed milk, A Pultis.
Take flowers of Mallows, Violets, Celendine, Daisies, Cinquefoil, of each 1
handful, boil them together in two quarts of water, till it come to a pint;
then strain it, and mingle it with Wheaten meal, to the thickness of pap, then
put to it Hens grease or Hogs Lard, and boil it again to a Pultis, spread it on
a Cloth, about the thickness of a finger, and lay it morning and evening, upon
an inflamed sore breast.

Another for the same.
Take Bean meal, Mints in Powder, each 3 quarters of an ounce, prepared
Coriander, Pease meal, of each 1 dram; Roses half a dram, fresh butter 2
ounces, Muscilage of Linseed one ounce, Muscilage of Fenegreek 3 quarters of an
ounce, Sheeps Suet, Ducks grease, of each 1 ounce, oil of Turpentine half an
ounce, Saffron three grains, temper them all together to a salve or ointment,
and lay it upon the breasts.

For Tumors, or swelling of the breast.
Take Purslain Plantain, of each one handful, Camomile, Melilot, of each one
ounce, Barley meal 4 ounces, stamp the Herbs in a mortar, to a pap, and then
incorporate therewith, oil of Violets and Roses, enough to make it a salve, and
lay it on the sore breasts.

Another Medicine for swelling in the breasts, much profitable and easy to be
had.
Take a good quantity of Peach leaves, and Rue, and stamp them small, and boil
them in water to a Pultis, and lay it on the grieved place, this will ripen the
Imposthume, and ease the pain.

A Plaster for the same.
Take Plantain, Mallows, of each one handful, Housleek 6 handfuls, boil them
together, till they come to be like grout, then strain it, and add thereunto,
Oil of Roses 3 ounces, Camomile, Melilot, both beaten, of each an ounce, Barley
meal 4 ounces, Bdellium 1 quarter of an ounce, dissolve the Bdellium in
Vinegar, and then boil them all together, to the thickness of a Plaster, and
spread it on a Cloth, and apply it to the grieved place.

For Impostumations in the breast.
Impostumations do breed oftentimes likewise in the breasts, through the
congealing of the milk, and ill humors, settling and putrefying there, bringing
with them the Canker, Gangrene, and such like griefs, to the great anguish and
misery of the Patient, if not to death, by reason of the tenderness of the
place. And many times it happens, by reason of an obstruction of their terms,
which turns our cause of the superfluous blood thither: And therefore, if when
there happens any swelling, or anguish in the breasts in this case, if the
terms be stopped, use all means possible to provoke them speedily, if you mean
to abate the swelling and pain; and if the swelling increase, then the Liver
vein must be opened, or the median. And afterward take oil of Roses, and
Vinegar, and sees a little Camomile therein; and then dip a Cloth in it, and
lay it on the breasts, four times a day, refreshing it.

If the Impostumation in the breasts be caused of superfluity of blood, the
sign to know it is, it causes great pain in the breast, redness and much
beating.

If it proceed from Choler, then is the pain more raging, and the breast redder,
and yellowish, with greater Agues, and the Inflammation is hotter then that
which proceeds of blood.

If Phlegm be the ingendring cause thereof, then the Tumor is but small, the
breast white, the pain moderate, and no Ague with it.

An excellent Plaster to consume and cleanse all swellings of the breasts; and
also of other members.
Take clarified Honey 6 ounces, Barley meal, 3 ounces and a half, two yolks of
Eggs, Mirrhe, Sarcocolla, of each half a dram, Honey of Roses 4. ounces, oil of
Roses 3. ounces: powder that which is to be powdered, and boil the Honey and
the meal together, till it be thick, and then stir the yolks of Eggs amongst
it, and the other things; and so make a Plaster of it, and apply it to the
grieved place.

When the Tumor or swelling comes to maturity, and breaks, then cleanse it with
this Salve.

Take Honey, the juice of Smallage, yolks of Eggs, and Turpentine, of each a
sufficient quantity, and make a Salve thereof, and so apply it.

Or else use this Salve following, with a tent of Lint.

Take Wheat-meal, 3 quarters of an ounce, clarified Honey, and juice of
Smallage, of each an ounce, mix them all into a Salve, and use them as has
been directed: this is good to be used with a tent, to cleanse any sore
Fistula, or Carbuncle.

But if in case the Tumor, as many times it unhappily does, grow to a Canker,
or Fistula, then must orher means be used, to prevent the eating, or spreading
thereof: the Patient must be purged of melancholy humors, and avoid such
things as engender Choler and melancholy, and to seek to prevent the increase
of the same; for which this drink following, is very effectual.

Take Time, 1 quarter of an ounce, Polipody, Seen, each 1 dram, Violets, Seeds
of Gourds, Cucumbers, Pompeons, each 1 dram and a half, Cynamon, Rapeseed, of
each 1 scruple, Hops 1 ounce, boil them all together in 8. ounces of water till
half be consumed, then strain it, and take one ounce of this decoction, in 3
ounces of whay, of Goats milk, and fast 6 hours after it.

Then use outwardly this Plaster following.

Take Fenegreek, Barley meal, of each two Ounces, Mallows 3. handfuls, Housleek
8 handfuls, Oil of Roses 6 ounces: bray the Oil of Roses in a Leaden Mortar,
with a Leaden Pestle, and sees the Herbs in wh^y, till they be so tender, you
may beat them to a pap, and mix the other things amongst them; and boil it
again in 6 ounces of Nightshade-water, till it be consumed, and so make a
Plaster of it; and first anoint the sore with Oil of Roses, and then lay the
Plaster thereupon.

If the Canker corrode, and spread abroad, then take Barley meal 4 ounces, Oil
of Violets, oil of Roses, each three ounces, Tutty prepared 2. ounces,
Boodstone 1 ounce. Bray the oil of Roses with 4 whites of Eggs; a good while
in a Leaden Mortar, and likewise beat the Boodstone in water of Lillies, then
temper them all together, and dip small tents in it, and lay them all on the
sore.

Then take one ounce and a half of oil of Roses prepared in a Leaden Mortar, as
before, and two ounces of the juice of Nightshade, 1. ounce of starch, and an
ounce and an half of Bolus: mix and temper them all together; in a Leaden
Mortar, and therewith often anoint the breasts round about the Canker or
Fistula.

A Plaster for the Fistula.
Take Mummey, Bolus, juice of steel, Frankincense, Hipocistis, Mastick, of each
3 drams, Acorn Cups, Cipers Nuts, Galls, Isinglasse, Dragagant, Gum, of each 1
ounce: dissolve the Isinglasse in red Wine Vinegar, and mix the other
ingredients amongst it to a Plaster.

For Clefts, or Chops of the Nipples.
Take Mutton, or Lambs Suet, as much as you please, and after it is molten, and
clarified, then wash it in Rose Water, and therewith anoint the Nipples. And
thus much for the Diseases in the Breasts.

Chap. XVII. Showing means and Remedies for those Nurses that went milk.
Having already at large discoursed to you the infirmities, happening by reason
of superfluous; or congealed milk; and the evil accidents that attend the same,
with the means of their prevention and Remedy: it is also convenient for their
sakes, who would be Nurses, and cannot for want of milk; to show them some
means to increase it where it is wanting.

Women given much to fretting, or who are by nature lean and sickly, having a
bad digesture in stomach and Liver, cannot breed store of milk, nor good milk:
also bad meats and drinks, hinder the ingendring of milk, therefore they ought
to be forborne.

And women that would increase their milk, let them eat good meats if they can
get it, and drink milk wherein Fennel seed has been steeped.

If the woman be of a hot nature, and full of Choler, let her drink Barley
water and Almond milk, eat Lectice with her meat, Burrage, Spinnage, Goats
milk, Cowes milk, and Lamb sodden with Verjuice; And avoid sorrow and anger as
much as may be: and comfort the stomach with the Confections of Anniseeds,
Carraway and Cominseeds: and likewise use these seeds sodden in water.

Also, take Anniseeds, two drams and a half beaten, and temper them with the
broth of Cole^orts, and drink it when you go to bed.

Also, take Barley water and boil therein green Fennel, and Dill, and sweeten
it with Sugar, and drink it at your pleasure.

If you would have an outward means, use this Plaster following.

Take half an ounce of Deers suet, and as much Parsley roots, with the herbs,
an ounce and a half of Barley meal, three drams of red Storax, and three ounces
of oil of sweet Almonds: sees the roots and herbs well, and beat them to pap;
and then mingle the other amongst them, and lay it warm on the Nipples, it
increases milk.

Thus have I Counseled women of all sorts, how to free themselves from all
casualties, the frailty of their nature subjects them to; which when you find
the benefit of, give God the glory, and sin no more, lest a worse thing sall
unto thee.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TOUCHING The DROPSY.
THis being an infirmity under which many labor, and few are cured thereof
partly, nay most, by reason of their inability; I thought it very necessary,
having this opportunity put into my hands, to add this small Treatise of the
Kinds, Cause, and Cure of Dropsies.

This Disease the Greeks call (...) and (...), the Latins a water between the
flesh and the skin, and vulg^rly Hydrops or Hydropicus morbus, the Dropsy or an
Hydropical disease; which name seems to have been taken from water which in
Greek is called,(...)

Avicenna defines the Dropsy thus: That it is a material sickness, engendered
from a material, outward, and co^d cause, and thereby either the whole Body, or
many parts and Members thereof do swell. All Authors do not agree about it,
some call it a Disease, and some place it among the Symptoms; but they that
are afflicted with it, need not care by what name it is called, so they were
freed from it; therefore I shall not stay upon the definition of it, but
proceed to directions for the Cure; but be sure it is a laesion and depravation
of the digestive faculty, and unconcoction of the blood; whereby the nutritive
faculty is hindered, and corrupted throughout the whole Body, and the natural
operation of the Liver impedited; and this proceeds from a cold and moist
humor, that penetrates through the Body, and swells the Members, puffs up the
Face, swells the Feet and Legs, and the Cods of men: destroys the natural
complexion, altering it into a whitely color, causes great appetite to drink,
and little or none to eat; stops the Terms in women causes retention both
of Stool and Excrement: and sometimes hard Tumors about the Bowels and other
parts.

This for the description or definition: yet this Disease has several degrees,
Kinds or Species.

One kind of Dropsy is called Anasarca, and Hyposarca; another Ascites; and a
third Tympania or Tympanites, or in English Tympanies.

Conserve of Fumitory, is not a miss to be used for cleansing of the blood in
all kind of Dropsies, at the beginning of them; but to proceed first to this
kind of Dropsy called Anasarca.

It is a waterish humor that lies between the flesh and the skin, through all
the Body causing a swelling, and is known by pressing the flesh with ones
finger, the dint or impression thereof will remain a great while after; the
Pulse is slow, the privy members swell, and the party is subject to be
afflicted with a looseness, or scowring, and bad digestion of meat, which is
the cause of it, that it turns into phlegm instead of blood.

If it be a woman, it may be caused through retention or stopping of her Terms;
therefore all means possible is to be used, to provoke and drive them down.

Let the Patient be purged with Pills of Rhabarb; and to expel the water, use
this Confection following.

A Confection for the watery Dropsy.
Take Turbith, half an ounce: Hermodactyls, one ounce: wild Saffron seeds
peesed, three quarters of an ounce: Ginger, Cinnamon Annis^eds, of each one
scruple: Violets, Sorrel seed, of each one dram: Sugar two ounces: Honey of
Roses, four ounces, boil the Honey and Sugar together with Fumitory water until
you may scum it clear: then mix the rest with it, and boil it to a Confection,
take hereof half an ounce in a morning.

Another for the same.
Take Annis, yellow Rape seed, Spica Indiae, of each one scruple: Licoris,
Rhabarb, of each one dragme: Asarabacca, half a dram; Conserve of Marjorom, one
ounce; Conserve of Roses, three ounces: Syrup of Quinces and Oximel, a
sufficient quantity to make it into a Confection. Take hereof a dram in a
morning.

Pills for the same.
Take Pills Aggregative, two scruples; Ammoniaci, one scruple: make it into six
Pills with Oximel; take two in a morning.

The mass of Pills before mentioned, are prepared by the Apothecaries,
therefore do not startle that they bear no English name; for they are more
commonly known by those Titles.

In this Disease, use abstinence from meat and drink, as much as may be;
forbear drowsiness and laziness, and addict your self to reasonable sweating
and exercise.

Of another kind of Dropsy called Ascites.
This Species of this Disease swells only the Belly and Legs, and the upper
parts dry: and the Belly swells like a Bladder, and sounds like a drum
head, or as the Belly of a rotten Sheep will do, if you cl^p your hand thereon;
that is not unknown to every Clown, then wonder not at this; And if the sick
person stir from side to side, the water may be heard forcibly to stir about:
the skin is stretched out, so that it receives no dint or impression of ones
finger as in the other kind of Dropsy; the Pulse is small, wanting vigor of
heat to cause motion, and the original of all is the weakness and debility of
the Liver, that it cannot exercise its natural faculty of concocting the meat
and drink into blood, but unnaturally alters the moisture thereof into water.

This kind of Dropsy may come sometimes from overmuch heat of the Liver, as
well as cold.

If it proceed from hot causes, the Urine the Patient avoids is little, and
that of a very high red color, some spots like little stones appearing in it;
the party suffers intolerable thirst; and the more he drinks, the more he
desires drink; but it quenches not his flames, no more then Brimstone and Oil
will quench fire.

This Disease is dangerous, and oftentimes breaks up the root, or at best
strikes near at it.

But for means which God has given to be used while time is, take these
following,

A Syrup for the Dropsy through heat of the Liver, and to quench the thirsty
desires of the Patient in that disease.
Take Endive, four handfuls; Maiden hair, Hearts tongue, of each one handful:
Fennel seed, Parsley seed, of each half an ounce: Spica Nardi, Spica Romani, of
each a quarter of an ounce; make a decoction hereof, and then boil it up to a
syrrup, with a sufficient quantity of Sugar.

The Body of the Patient in this Disease, is much subject to costiveness, or
binding of the Belly; purging therefore with Clysters, Pills, and Potions, are
requisite to be used in this case, and to endeavor to open the obstructions of
the Liver, and strengthen the same.

To purge with Rhabarb or the syrup thereof once a week, is very good for this
purpose; drink Wormwood Beer or Wine, and use also this gentle purging Potion.

A purging Potion for the dry Dropsy.
Take the flowers of Burrage, Violets, Fumitory, each half an ounce; Licoris,
Jujubes, Currants, Wormwood, each one quarter of an ounce; Prunes, eight or ten:
Spikenard, one dram; boil them altogether in Whey, strain it, and then infuse
therein one night, half an ounce of the shells of yellow Mirobalans, so strain
it for a Potion.

Clysters are also very necessary and profitable for this Disease; and amongst
others, these following are very commendable.

A Clyster for the Dropsy.
Take Bloodwort, Camomil, St. John's wort, or each one handful; boil them in
well fair water, then take twelve or sixteen ounces of the decoction and add to
it Salt, one dram; three ounces of Sallet oil, and half a dram of Hiera picra,
or Caffia extracted; mix them together for a Clister, and give it warm.

For the same another Clister more loosening.
Take Mallows, Holly-hocks, Peers, Camomile, Herb Mercury, of each one handful;
boil these herbs well in water, or in broth of Tripes, or other pottage made of
fresh flesh; take 16 ounces of the decoction, and thereunto add Sallet oil,
Salt, Hiera picra, or Cassia, and Benedicta laxativa, of each half an ounce,
wherewith mix the decoction, and give it for a Clister very warm.

If there be any pain or griping in the Belly, which windeness too often
causes, then use with the Herbs before mentioned, an ounce of Anniseeds,
Fennel seeds and Carraway-seeds, altogether grossly beaten, or the quantity of
an ounce of either of them severa^, which you can get.

Thus for Costiveness, and Obstructions in this Disease; on the contrary
sometimes the Patient is subject to scowring, and a red flux with it, for which
use these means following.

Give to the Patient the Conserve, and concocted roots of Cicory, Juice and
Marmalade of Quinces, Trochisk and Conserve of Barberries with Vinegar, and
such other things as are binding and cooling in operation.

For this Dropsy, and all other kinds, and also for the Green sickness too,
these Pills following, are excellent.
Take of the Mass of the Pill of Hiera with Agarick, one dram and a half: of
the Pill of Opopanax, three drams: of the extract of Rhabarb, of Gentian root,
of Centory the less, each one dram; Steel prepared, four drams; the root of
Aaron prepared, Tartar vitriolated, each two scruples; Chemical oil of
Wormwood, one scruple: oil of Cinnamon, of Cloves, each six drops: Syrup of the
Five roots, a sufficient quantity to make it into Pills; make of every dram
hereof six Pills; let the Patient take two hereof every morning, and as many at
four a clock in the afternoon, and drink after it a draught of Wormwood-Wine or
Ale, stirring or excercising after it the space of an hour.

To provoke and expel the Urine, is very requisite in this Disease; for which
these things following are very good.

Take Rue, St. John's wort, Pennyroyal, Sage, Marjoram, Wormwood, Licoris,
Anniseeds, Fennel roots, Elecampane roots, of each one quarter of an ounce;
boil them a little in a quart of White Wind, and take thereof three ounces
morning and night.

For the same.
Take a head or two of Garlic, and a handful of St John's wort; boil them
together in a pint of White Wind, till a third part be wasted: strain it, and
drink three or four spoofuls thereof at a time morning and evening.

The roots of great Fern boiled in White Wind, and drunk, (the Wine I mean, not
the roots) is verygood for this purpose.

This Decoction following, is also good for the same.

Take the roots of Nettles, Parsley, Fennel, Elecampane, Licoris, Asarabacca,
of each one dram; boil them a little in a quart of White Wind, and drink
thereof as of the former.

Outwardly for this Disease may be used Pultisses, Unguents, and Plasters;
such as dry and expel wind and do strengthen and mollify the Belly and lower
parts, for which purpose, this Plaster following may effectually be used.

Take Coloquint, Holly-hock seeds, Diagridion, Aloes, Mirth, Mallows roots,
Beellion, of each one dram and a half; Ireos, three drams: Mallows seeds, wild
Cucumbers, Cardamome, Euphorbium, of each three drams: Boreas, Salgem, of each
one quarter of one ounce; mix all these and incorporate them well together,
with Goose grease, Ducks grease, Calves suet and Hoggs suet, as much as is
sufficient to make them into a Plaster or salve, and apply it all over the
Belly.

For the same, is good to temper the Salve of Bay Berries with Cowes or Goats
dung, and use it as the former.

For the swelling of the privy members in this Disease, this Salve following is
to be used.
Take Annis, Fennel, and Comin seeds, beaten small together, of each one ounce
and a half; Bean meal Ebalus, the juice of Elder leaves, and Wine a sufficient
quantity to make it a Salve or Pultis, and lay it on the Belly and privities.

For the same.
Take Barley meal, Cypress roots, Sheeps dung, Borax and Bolus, of each a like
quantity: beat them together, and make a Plaster thereof with Hoggs grease or
Goose grease, and apply it to the Belly and privities.

The oil of Camomile and Rue, mixed together, is a very good Ointment for the
dropsy,

Take notice also by the way, that Sweating, and Bathing in hot dry Baths, is
very effectual for all kind of Dropsies.

Of the kind of Dropsy, called Tympanies.
There are three sorts of Tympanies, the one called Aqupsa, or the watery
Tympany or Dropsy, of which we have already treated.

A second called Ventosa, or a Dropsy or Tympany of wind, of which we now
proceed to speak, which is caused more of wind then water, and thence deriveth
its name; and in this Disease the Belly swells up very high, and the Navel
starteth out; the Belly is very hard and sounds, if one thereon clap his hand.

There is another Species called Carnosa, by which may be understood fatness
of the Belly, or as some say, gorre Bellies; but it is, in plain English, a
fleshy Tympany, or fleshy swelling, no way dangerous at all, but Maids Bellies
are much subject to this Tympany; and for their Cure the best is mother
Midwife, and therefore, I say no more of it, but leave it to her discretion.

But for the Cure of the Ventosa, or windy Tympany or Dropsy, use these Rules
following.

Avoid all windy meats, eschew cold, and keep warm: use also Sweating, and use
the Confection de Baccis Lauri, be moderate in Diet and use exercise.

Use also these Conserves, or any of them, as Conserve of Elder leaves, Betony,
Gilly-flowers, Rosemary, Fennel, Annis, Comin or the like.

A Suppository for the same.
Take Salgem, Rue, Bever-cod, Euphorbium, Nettle seed, of each one dram; mix it
with about three ounces of decocted Honey, and thereof make Suppositories.

Use to anoint the Belly with hot Oils, such as are oil of Dill, oil of Rue,
Costus, and Bay Berries.

A Plaster for the same effectual.
Take Goats dung or Sheeps dung dried twelve ounces, roots of wild Cucumbers,
roots of Ebulus, of each two ounces; Barley meal, 12 ounces: steeled Vinegar,
four ounces; boil it all well in sharp Lee, and make thereof a Plaster, which
apply warm to the Belly, or any part of the Body swelled with wind, to open the
Pores, and draw out the same.

A Clister effectual for the same,
Take Ireos, Hysop, Smallage, Rue, Barefoot, of each one handful; Annis,
Fennel, Ameos, Bay Berries, of each half an ounce: boil all these very well in
clean water, then take of this Decoction twelve or sixteen ounces, according to
the strength of the Patient, and add to it clarified Honey, and oil of Rue, of
each one ounce and a half; and stone Salt, one dram: so make it into a Clister,
and administer it.

A Syrup for the Dropsy.
Take green roots of Ireos, or in English, Flowerdeluce (and yet that name is
not quite English neither) twenty four ounces; cut them in pieces, and infuse
them three days in Well water, as much as will only cover them, stirring them
twice a day: then strain that water from them, and reserve it in a clean pot,
and add the like quantity of fresh water to them, doing as you did before; then
strain the second water, and mix both together, and boil it with Sugar a
little; and then add thereunto Scabious and Mayden-hair, of each one handful;
Sperage roots, Fennel roots, and Ireos roots, of each half a handful; peeled
Melon seed, Gourd seeds, Cucumber seeds peeled, Pompeon seeds, Purslane seeds
Cicory, Endive and Lettice seed, of each one quarter of an ounce; Fennel,
Annis, Sperage, and Smallage seed, of each half a dram; Millet and Winter
Cherries, of each three drams; fat dates and figs, of each six; Licoris and
Madder, of each five drams; boil all together to the wasting of half, and then
strain it, and boil up the decoction to a syrup with Sugar: of this syrup, give
about an ounce at a time, and sometimes more, and to strengthen the Liver,
steep therein a quarter of an ounce of Rhabarb.

Also for the Dropsy, these syrups are good to be used; as, syrup of Wormwood,
of the Five roots, of Maidenhair, and Betony, and Wines compounded with
Wormwood, Egremony, Calamint, Cinnamon, odoriferous seeds, and things of the
like nature: Abstain from all excess, and use such meats and drinks as are of
a drying, heating, attenuating nature, and easy of digestion; forbear new sweet
Wine, or drink; and in all things use measure, for therein consists the
greatest virtue.

FINIS.

