THE CHARACTER OF A RIGHT MALIGNANT.
HE is one that professes love to the Protestant Religion; but hatred to all
that Party through Europe, which maintain it. He confesses that the Irish
Rebels were too blame for massacring 200000. Protestants: yet he cannot choose
but wish them good success against all that oppose them, especially against
the Scots. Indeed that is the Nation, which, of all other, he most hates, ever
since they entered into Covenant with England for maintaining and settting right
the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of both Kingdoms. The Spaniard he loves
better then Englishmen heretofore used to do, by reason of some hopes that he
has of their doing good in Ireland, and is much reconciled to the French,
because he thinks they will invade England. The Netherlanders out old friends
and confederates, he would extremely hate, but only that he thinks there is a
faction among them, which are not very right to England. He protests openly
that he much condemns those Lords and Commons who betrayed their trust, and
left the Parliament, because else he thinks this sad War had not been: but yet
he hates all those Lords and Commons, who continue here at Westminster, only
for doing that which he condemns the other for not doing: and now he honors
those, whom he confesses to be the causes of the War; and railes daily
against the other side, because there is no Peace. Those, that say he hates a
Parliament, do him great wrong; for he says he loves a right Parliament,
which is such an one as claims no power at all; but is a thing of bare advice,
and l^sse jurisdiction then any inferior Court of judicature in England. He
loves his freedom, and would be loath to be a slave; but he verily believes
that the King may lawfully take away whatsoever he has, and dispose of all
men's fortunes and persons at his pleasure. He does not think that the King of
England is as absolute a Monarch as any in the world: but he thinks that the
King may do what he will; and that neither a Parliament, nor any humane power
may resist him in it. These are his hourly disputes, and yet sometimes he will
not understand them to be his own tenets: but for all this his Majesty is not
much beholding to him, for he swears that if he thought the King would do any
thing against our Religion, Laws and Liberties, he would himself (though a
Parliament may not do it) bear Arms against him, and verily believes that
those Lords and Gentlemen, that now fight against the Parliament, would do the
same; as if he thought it more derogatory, or less safe for his Majesty to be
fairly kept in the right way by a lawful convention of the Estates in
Parliament, whose advice he ought to follow, then to be afterward enforced to
it by such arms, as no man will doubt to call rebellious; or as if it were not
more lawful for the Parlia. to stand now in the gap against the proceedings of
the Kings evil counselors whilst there is such a gap legally and fairly open,
then for private persons to force open such a gap herafter by rebellious Arms.
He acknowledges that Queen Elizabeth was a glorious Prince; but of all her
actions, he remembers none so well as that, when she seized Wentworth in the
Parliament House, and committed him to prison. He loves those Members of the
House which are now gone away from it; and among others, those who at first
stood fiercely for the Commonwealth, and were since taken off by honors, and
preferments from the King. But those which have still continued constant to
their first positions he disparages and says it was, because the King would
not take them off by such honors and preferments; and that which they did, was
done upon such hopes: so that he honors those which have apparently been
corrupted to forsake the Parliament, and condemns those which have not done it,
because he thinks they would have done it; and has no reason to think so but
by seeing the quite contrary: It appears therefore that he accounts deserting
the Parliament upon such ends to be a fault: for else he would not charge it
by his conjecture upon those men here, whom by that conjecture he labors to
disparage; and yet loves that fault in the others: when he wants actions to
condemn the Parliament side for, he does it upon his own suppositions. He
calls those Hypocrites, who lead a godly life: and though he thinks it a great
uncharitableness in those godly men to censure him for living loosely; he
thinks it no uncharity in himself to censure them for professing godliness:
he pryes narrowly to find faults on the side, and publishes them with great
eagerness: but when he finds virtuous actions instead of faults, he says
they were done for sinister ends. When General Lesley was likely to take
Newcastle, he was every where prophesying what cruelty the Scots would use in
pillaging the Town: but when it was apparent what extraordinary humanity the
Scots showed there, though it had cost them a sharp assault to win, he said
they did it for subtle ends, though he could name none, being equally unjust in
his first false supposition, as in his last false aspersion upon a good action;
it being as impossible that any good deed on this side should gain his
applause, as that any bad one at the other side should incur his censure.
There are some sins, which he acknowledges to be very usual at the other
side, and thinks nothing of it: and yet the same sins, when he finds them
committed at this side, he mightily condemns and jeers; which is a tacit
acknowledgement that the profession of this side is more virtuous, and vice
more repugnant to it then to the other: there is no vice can make him out of
love with that side, which he now adheres to, though in other things he shows
little constancy, for there are no positions held by the Parliaside, which he
now so much contradicts, as those which himself held four years ago: nor no
great persons in State, whom he then hated, as supposing them evil
instruments in the government, whom he does not now applaud, though they
continue the same men. But would you see more of his constancy? The barbarous
cruelty of the Irish Rebels he detested much about November was three years,
but within a year after he became much reconciled to them, and did not only
spare to condemn them himself, but accounted it a great cruelty and
uncharitableness in the Protestants here to be so bitter against them: but
about a year after that, they became friends, and those Rebels and he both of
a side: neither in reason, for favoring of those Irish, can he be thought
loyal to His Majesty. For seeing it must needs be granted the King had the
greatest loss of al men, when so many of his own subjects and of his own
Religion were cruelly butchered: those that took, and still take the Kings
loss most to heart, are the truest and most loyal subjects to him, and
therefore the Parliament, who are still enemies to those Rebels, and desirous
to revenge their brethrens blood (which undoubtedly cries aloud to God) must be
better Protestants and truer Subjects then those that join with them, and fight
or wish at the same side. The Paradoxes which he holds are very strange; as
namely, that those Armies which fight against the Parliament, fight for the
Protestant Religion; and yet that no Papists domesticke or foreign but have
reason to adhere to that side, rather then to the other. That a Parliament
would destroy the liberties and privileges of it self, with other paradoxes
of the same kind, of which nothing can so well inform you as his own
discourses: for unless you take them from himself, they are too strange for
another man to believe, much more to invent.

FINIS.

