A SERMON PREACHED TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS, At their late Solemn
FAST, Wednesday, FEB. 26. 1644.

BY JOHN MAYNARD, Minister of the Word of God at MAYFIELD in SUSSEX, and a
Member of the ASSEMBLY of DIVINES.

LONDON, Printed by George Bishop, for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Brazen Serpent
in Paul's Churchyard. 1645.

A SERMON Preached to the Honorable House of Commons, at their late Solemn
FAST, Febr. 26. 1644.
PROVE. 23. 23. Buy the Truth and sell it not.


TRUTH is the great business of these stirring Times; enquiries after Truth,
discoveries of Truth, contending for Truth. This (I suppose) all parties
pretend to, though never so contrary each to other. And among those who do
really aim at Truth, and meet in the maine; no wonder though there be
differences in judgment, and conflicts about some particulars, the parts of
Truth being so exceeding numerous, the conceptions of men so various, the eye
of the inner man so dimme-sighted, 1 Cor. 13 12.
and apt to mistake, whilst it looks but through a glass. And indeed that
the cause of Truth is of a transcendent nature, and exceeding high
concernement, the Wiseman here shows, so advancing the worth of it, as to be
bought at any rate, so heightening the price of it, as not to be sold upon any
terms. Buy the Truth, etc.

This being one of those entire portions of Scripture (as I conceive) which
have no necessary connection with that which goes before or follows, some
time may be spared, which otherwise should have been spent, in showing the
Coherence.

Neither do I discern any such difficulty in the words as needs much to
retard our progress.

[ Buy] The Original word may signify either to buy or to possess, (...)
to get or keep possession: and so the exhortation may suit all sorts, Thou
that want the Truth, buy it: thou that have it, keep it: but the latter is
manifestly included in the negative, sell it not.

[ The Truth] The Hebrew note used for emphasis, (...)
demonstration, specification, is not in the Text, and therefore I think our
English particle [ The] (which answers it) may be omitted, (...)
and we may read it, Buy Truth, as afterward Wisdom, etc. Not the Wisdom: and
so leave the word Truth in its just latitude.

Here then is a point of Heavenly negotiation or Spiritual traffic which the
Holy Ghost commends to all who desire to make a wise improvement of that
short span of time allotted them in this world, and to give up their account
with joy.

That sense which one Expositour gives* Pelican.
makes this place parallel to that, Gal. 6. Let him that is taught in the
word communicate, etc. though it be a truth clearly held forth in Scripture,
and may be either included in this Text as a part of the sense, or inferred
from it as a consequent, yet I conceive it is far short of the full and
direct meaning of the place.

I concur with those who understand it thus, Mercerus. Junius. Jansenius.
Get possession of the Truth whatsoever pains it cost thee, whatever hazard it
may lead thee into, whatsoever loss or suffering it may bring upon thee. Sell
it not: Do not part with it to gain a world, leave it not, lose it not, for
the greatest advantage under Heaven.

In the words ye may easily see two Propositions, 1. An affirmative, or
precept, Buy Truth. Secondly, A negative, or prohibition, Sell it not. In these
observe 1. The Acts. 2. The Object: the Act enjoined in the precept or
affirmative is, To buy, the Act forbidden in the negative or prohibition, is,
To sell. The object is the same in both, Truth.

The precept and prohibition of these two Acts in reference to the same object,
are both of them absolute and peremptory, we are absolutely commanded to buy
Truth, peremptorily forbidden to sell it: and so the parts of the Text mutually
give light each to other, showing that Truth must be so bought as never to be
sold: that he who buyeth it, cannot overbuy it, that he who sells it, shall
be sure to underfell it. It can never be bought too dear, it can never be
sold at the true value. He that buyeth it at the highest rate shall be an happy
gainer, he that sells it to the best advantage, puts it off with loss, he
makes a miserable bargain.

(...). Rev. 3. 18. Mat. 25. 9.
And therefore Christ says to the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, I counsel
thee to buy of Me, gold tried in the fire, etc.

But the wise Virgins though they had oil for their own lamps, yet they had
none to fell or give.

From the precept or affirmative part, to which at present I intend to confine
my self, give me leave to offer unto you this one point of Doctrine, That

Truth is of absolute necessity to all who will be wise for their Souls.

In trading for things of the world there is a latitude, Merchants have their
liberty: they are not limited to one Port, nor restrained to one Mart, or to
deal in one commodity: so they make a good return, it mattereth not much what
kind of wares they bring home. But they who approve themselves free of that
(...) that glorious Corporation in heaven, Phil. 3. 20.
and trade to purpose for the things above, and not prove bankrupts in the
great day of account, a necessity lies upon them, and woe unto them if they
buy not Truth. Let their Ships seem never so well fraighted, their Shops and
Warehouse never so richly furnished, yet if they want this pearl of great
price, they are broken and undone for ever. The foolish virgins had their
lamps, and it may be for a time made as fair a blaze in show as those of the
wise: but they wanted Truth: their oil was spent, their lamps were
extinguished, they went to buy when market was done, they called and knocked
when it was too late, the door was shut.

For the clearing and proof of the point, and our more orderly proceeding, I
desire you to consider with me these four things.

1. What this Truth is, which we are required to Buy? 2. What it is to buy
Truth? 3. Of whom it must be bought? 4. The necessity of making this purchase.
For the 1. Of these, what this Truth is which we must buy, 1. There is veritas
rei, 1. Veritas rei.
or veritas in essendo, The truth of things, the truth of their essence or
being: and so all things that are, are truly the same which they are, so gold
is true gold, opposed to that which is false and counterfeit, but pretended to
be gold. And this truth of things, is the conformity of things to the Divine
intellect or knowledge of God. And therefore (by the way) I conceive that those
lies are untruths which are called mendacia iocosa or officiosa, officiouslies,
or lies in jest, if they be such as in no regard tend to our neighbors
prejudice, are not so fitly ranked under the 9. Command. as reduced to the
first: because they contradict that Truth which is in the mind of God: for the
Lord in His infinite knowledge comprehends, and (as it were) asserteth all
truth: and every untruth uttered by men is either a denial of some Truth which
God affirms, or an affirming of some falsehood which God denies: and so no
man can utter any falsehood (though concerning matters of small moment) but in
so doing he gives God the lie. God His knowledge is the (...) or original
Truth: and the truth of things is their correspondency thereunto, as the truth
of a copy is its correspondency with the original. For Truth carries a
respect to knowledge, omne verum est intelligibile, every Truth is in a
capacity to be understood, and the Truth of things is their conformity to a
right understanding.

Now the truth of things may come under a twofold Consideration, 1.
Metaphysicall, 2. Moral: and in both of these it still holds good, their
truth is their Conformity to the knowledge of God. For 1. God knows what
every person, action or thing is, and such it truly is, as God knows it to
be, and no other: and this I call a Metaphysicall Consideration. Secondly, God
knows what every person, Action or thing ought to be, and so far as any of
these cross this knowledge of God, they are false in a moral Consideration.
They are true in a Metaphysicall apprehension, because they are such as God
knows them to be, but they are false in a Moral notion, Psalm. 1. 6.
because they are not such as God knows they ought to be. The Lord knows
the way of the Righteous, how? with approbation. This is true: but I think
there is more in it: The Lord knows what is that good way wherein men are to
walk: and the way of the Righteous is suitable to this knowledge of God, and so
the Lord knows it, that is, looks upon it as an object conformable to this
knowledge of His; on the other side, He says to the wicked, Mat. 25. 12
I know you not. I know what manner of persons ye ought to be, but ye are men
of another shape, ye are not objects conformed to this knowledge of Mine.

Secondly, 2. Veritas. Scientiae.
There is Veritas scientiae, or veritas in cognoscendo, Truth of knowledge, and
that in the creature is twofold, 1. Speculative, which is a conformity of the
understanding to the nature of things, when the understanding of man so judges
of things as they are, and the notions or conceptions of his mind are the very
images of those things, this Conformity of his understanding to the nature of
things apprehended by him, is truth. Things are true, as they agree with the
knowledge of God: because his knowledge is the Fountain of all truth, as his
essence is the Fountain of all being: But the knowledge of man is true because
it agrees with the nature of things. Secondly, The practical truth of man's
knowledge is when together with a right apprehension of the true nature of
things in the understanding, there is a frame of heart and affections toward
those things, suitable to that apprehension, when the understanding rightly
judges of things good or evil, and the will and affections are regularly
guided by such a right apprehension, loving, embracing, desiring, delighting in
that which the understanding rightly judges to be lovely, desirable, etc.
Hating, abhorring, shunning, etc. According to that true intelligence which the
understanding gives in of the nature of things or actions; then there is a
practical truth in that man's knowledge. But when the understanding rightly
apprehends, and yet gives way to the perverseness of the will and
distempers of the affections, this knowledge though speculatively true, is
practically false.

Thirdly, 3. Veritas Signi.
There is veritas signi, Truth of expression, Speeches, writings, gestures,
Actions, when truth possesses the mind and heart within and shines out at
the windows (as it were) when a man's words and conversation are the very image
and Characters of that truth which dwells in him, when he knows and loves
the truth, and speaks and walks according to that truth which he knows
and loves.

Now then what is that truth which we must buy? 1. The true knowledge of those
things which serve for the perfecting of the inner, and for the ordering of the
outward man: the true knowledge of God, of Christ, of the mysteries of grace,
of the ways of God, of the power of godliness, of the will of God in things
concerning the matter and manner of his worship, and in those things that
belong to our Places, Callings, Relations, in ordinary and extraordinary
occasions. Secondly, The Practical truth of these things, such a frame of
heart as suiteth with the nature of these things rightly apprehended: which
cannot be without the possession of the things themselves. Thou must have God
dwelling in thee, thou must possess Christ and be made one with him, thy body
and soul must become a temple of the Holy Ghost, otherwise thou have not this
Practical, through, and effectual knowledge of God and Christ: thou have a
shadow of the truth rather then the truth it self. Thou must have the truth of
all saving Graces in thee, otherwise thou can not have an heart suited to a
right apprehension of Divine truth. Lastly, thou must be so possessed of the
truth as to speak the truth from the heart, and to walk in the truth.

The second thing to be enquired, 2. What it is to Buy Truth.
is, what it is to buy truth.

To buy in general, is, For a considerable value with consent of the owner, to
get the propriety and possession of something which formerly was not our own.
He then that will buy truth, Pro. 14. 18.
The simple inherit folly. Such silly ones we are all by nature: and our
inheritance is folly and falsehood. This inheritance we have by descent: our
first Parents changed the truth of God into a lie, forfeited their possession
of truth, and left us lies to inherit after them: and now if we will enjoy any
of these forfeited and confiscated goods, which the Lord has justly seized
into his own hands, we must, buy them as things which are no longer our own. He
that is not convinced of this, is never likely to buy. He that will buy truth
indeed must be of such a poor and humble spirit as Agur was, pro. 30. 2, 3
surely I am more brutish then any man: so the translation: but (as ye see) the
word [any] is in a smaller Character, not being in the original: neither do I
think it ought to be supplied, but we are to read it thus, I am more brutish
then man, (...) Psa. 49. 12
according to that of the Psalmist, man being in honor abides not: he is like
the beasts that perish. Man being honored with the image of God in wisdom and
Holiness, his spirit shining with the Beauty and glory of Divine truth, did
not abide in this condition, but lost the truth, yielding himself to be
seduced by the father of lies, and so no longer had the wisdom of man in him,
but degraded himself from his created Dignity, debased himself to the rank
of brute creatures, enthralled his immortal Soul, and intellectual nature to
his brutish senses and affections: and the next words of Agur confirm this
sense, And have not the understanding of Adam in me: that understanding and
knowledge of Holy truth which was in Adam, (...)
and was properly belonging to the nature of man. He that knows not thus much
of himself, knows nothing yet as he ought to know, and is no fit Merchant to
Trade for truth. Revel. 3. 17, 18.
Christ first informs the Laodicean of his wants, Thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: and then counsels him to buy,
verse. 18. Secondly, He that buyeth gives a considerable value. But alas, what
have we to give that is considerable? If we offer gold, or silver, what can we
expect but such an answer as Simon Magus had? Acts 8. 10
Thy money perish with thee, because thou have thought that the gift of God may
be purchased with money. And Solomon tells us, Pro. 8. 11.
This wisdom of Divine truth is better then rubies: and all the things that may
be desired, are not to be compared to it; which makes good what I said before,
we cannot buy truth too dear: all outward things that can be desired, are not
to be compared to it. And therefore, we may conclude, This buying is not of the
nature of common contracts, in which there is a just proportion between the
price and the purchase, but rather such as has some remote Analogy or
resemblance to it: such as that, where the Lord by solemn Proclamation offers
a free and open market, Isai. 55. 1.
H^, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no
money: Come ye, buy and eat; yea come, buy Wine and milk without money and
without price. And indeed whosoever gets possession of saving Truth, he has
it by a free gift of mere grace: yet so that we must give up whatsoever is
necessary for the obtaining of Truth, and cast away whatever may hinder us in
the receiving or retaining of Truth, or is inconsistent with it. give up our
selves, our hearts, spirits, souls, bodies to the God of Truth. We must be
content to part with any outward things for the procuring and promoting of
Truth, for the supporting and maintaining of Truth: we must account our selves
gainers by every loss which we can possibly suffer for Truth. renounce and
cast away our lusts, our own corrupt reason, blind, carnal notions and
prejudices: in a word, we must out our selves of our selves, and yield up our
selves into the entire possession of the Truth: and in all this we give nothing
unto God: for whatsoever we give up to him for Truth, is his own already, and
cannot be withheld from him, without wrong and robbery, what we cast away is
worse then nothing, and if we leave it not, we keep it to our loss and utter
undoing. It remains then, that though we are said in some sort to buy, yet
Truth is a most free gift of God, and conveyed to man by a mere Act of grace.

we must get the propriety of it, we must make it our own, get it into our
possession, have a sure interest in it and title to it. 2 John 2.
For the Truths sake which dwells in us, and shall be with us for ever. Then
has a man bought the Truth, when he has so owned it, and given it such
possession of his heart, that it is in him, as in an everlasting Mansion, so as
to dwell in him and be in him for ever: when he is so possessed of the Truth,
and the Truth has such possession of him, as to denominate and Characterize
him: 1 Ioh. 3. 19
according to that, Hereby we know that we are of the Truth, and shall assure
our hearts before him. As great Persons are denominated from their Seats,
Mannor-houses, etc. Such a Lord of such a place: So he that will buy Truth must
get such possession of it and propriety in it, as that he may by good right
take a title of honor from the truth, his own conscience bearing him witness
in the Holy Ghost, that he is of the Truth.



This has been intimated before, Deus est sum and maxima Veritas. Snarez.
even of him who is the God of Truth, who is the first, the Highest Truth, the
Fountain of all Truth, who calls himself [ I Am] because he is in and of
himself, the only infinite perfection of being, and so the infinite
perfection of Truth. He sees and knows his own essence infinitely perfect
and glorious, with a most exact knowledge of infinite perfection: and some have
conceived that this contemplation of God the Father reflecting upon His own
Majesty and glory is the eternal and unspeakable generation of the Son. But we
are to speak soberly of these mysteries so far above us: (...). Hebr. 1. 3.
Howsoever when we use Scripture Language, we are warranted by the highest
Authority, which calls Christ the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the
express image of his Person: and the Son of God says of himself, I am the
Truth. Ioh. 14. 6. 17.
And the Spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son, is called the Spirit of
Truth. To this fountain we must bring our empty pitchers if we would be filled
with these living waters, and take in these pure streams of Truth. Rev. 4. 6.
John being in the Spirit saw before the throne of God in heaven, a Sea of
glass like unto Crystal. The Saints may have their Vials filled with Truth:
but here is veritatis plenitudo, An Ocean and full Sea of Truth, and that
without mud or mixture, clear as crystal, wherein the faithful Soul may see
the glory of God shining in the Face of Christ. Here is the Springhead of
Truth: and they which come not to God, and are not inwardly acquainted with him
in Christ, are strangers to the Truth, they never looked into this Sea of
crystal, which is before the throne of God.

And so I come to the fourth and last particular, to show the necessity of
making this purchase, Solomon strongly twisteth together a threefold charge in
a quick and pressing style. Pro. 4. 13.
1. Take fast hold of instruction, 2. Let her not go. 3. Keep her: and
fasteneth all with this knot, for she is thy life. If thou lose her, it is more
than thy life is worth: it were better to part with thy dearest heart-blood: if
thou get and keep the Truth, it will keep thee alive in the very jaws of
death: if thou lose it, thou art dead whilst thou live, and in the road-way
to everlasting death. What need we any farther witness? yet if ye please to
hear an argument or two, take these briefly.

Truth is that Pillar of fire which should guide us in the way wherein we must
walk, and direct us to the promised rest. And though this Truth be never so
clearly held forth unto us in the ministry of the gospel, yet unless we buy it
and get possession of it, so as to make it our own, and to have it dwelling in
us, we are not able to follow it. It is not enough to have the light of the
Sun, except withal there be a light in the eye to meet with that light
without, and take it in: so that lumen externum, that external light of Truth
which shines forth in the word, will never lead us to that rest which
remains for the people of God, except there be also lumen internum, an inward
light of Truth, and principle of saving knowledge set up in the heart.

The Apostle having notably magnified his office, 2 Cor. 3. and 4. 2, 3.
as in other respects, so in regard of that luster and brightness of Divine
Truth which shined in his Ministry, 2 Cor. 3. proceeds in the next chapter,
and says that he had not handled the word of God deceitfully, but by
manifestation of the truth etc. It must be objected, What is the cause then
that your Gospel is hidden to many thousands? his answer is ready: If our
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the god of this world
has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God should shine unto them. They
want inward light, Satan the prince of darkness has filled them with darkness
within, they will not buy the Truth, and so the Gospel of Christ, though it
shines out never so gloriously in it self, yet it shines not at all to them:
as the Sun when it gives the greatest light, shines not to the blind.



A necessity lies upon us, either we must make the Truth our own, or else we
shall be sure to have it our Enemy. Consider that weighty speech of Christ,
Ioh. 12. 48.
He that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him,
the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day: Who is
he that rejects Christ? he that does not receive his words, he that does not
buy Truth, but shuts his eyes or heart against that light of Truth which
shines from the face of this Sun of Righteousness. These men perhaps may
think in their hearts, We will have nothing to do with this, which they call
Truth, for which there is so much contention, nor with the way wherein it
leads those that receive it, we will neither embrace nor oppose it. Nay, but
says Christ, this will not serve thy turn, either thou must receive it, or be
judged by it; if thou do not buy this Truth and embrace it with thine whole
heart, it will condemn thee at the last day. If men could apprehend with what
Majesty and authority that Truth of God which now they cast behind their backs
will appear against them in the day of Christ, how would their Souls tremble to
despise it? How would they yield themselves convinced that the purchase of
Truth is of absolute necessity, whatsoever it may cost them? The proudest
spirits which now may think to outface the Truth of God, shall then not be
able to hold up their faces before it.

So much for the proof and opening of this point: Let us see the Use of it:
and that may be, 1. For Reproof, 2. For Exhortation.

Reproof.
1. For Reproof. 1. of those who are so far from buying truth, that they
labor to stop the trade: Such were those Expounders of Luke 11. 52.
to whom the Lord Christ says, ye have taken away the key of knowledge, ye
entered not in your selves, and them that were entering in ye hindered: they kept
the storehouse of truth locked up, and carried away the key. How many have we
had of late in this land led by such a spirit, who when the truth had many
buyers beheld it with an evil eye, like the Pharisees complaining of the
multitudes that followed Christ? Ioh. 12. 19.
the world is gone after him, It was a vexation to their false hearts to see the
stream of trade bend toward the Coasts of truth: and especially when any upon
whose habitations was a famine of the word, travailed abroad to buy themselves
a little food. Genesis 41. 56.
But how are we bound to bless God who has stirred up your spirits, like so
many Joseph's, already to open many, and to endeavor to open all the
storehouses of truth in the Land, that none may complain of want, who have
hearts to buy? No wonder if the enemies of truth oppose you in this work. It
crosses their maine design. He that does evil hates the light, and comes
not to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. Can the Blackmore change
his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Do we expect a reconcilement between
light and darkness? Let all tremble to give them the right hand of fellowship
in stopping the course of the word of truth, and hindering the work of
reformation.

Of those that are ashamed of the truth: what hope is there that such will buy
it? He that will buy it must look upon it as his crown. Rev. 12. ^.
The Church was presented to John in a vision, clothed with the Sun, and the
Moon under her foot, and upon her head a Crown of twelve Stars. The Churches
clothing and her Crown is Light and Truth: Can any true-borne Child of the
Church account that his shame which is his Mothers glory? Let such weigh those
words of him who is not ashamed to call himself the Truth, Whosoever shall be
ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, Mar.
8. 38.
of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of
his Father with the holy Angels. who will not take so much pains as to resort
to the market though it be near their own doors: who grossly neglect
precious opportunities of hearing the word upon slight pretenses. Did they know
the worth of truth, and look upon it as their life, they would not think every
petty inconvenience a just excuse. A little change of weather or distemper of
body will not keep those within doors, who are necessitated to seek out for
that without which they cannot live. Those that followed Christ sometimes three
days together, Mat. 15. 32
having nothing to eat, might have had a fair plea in appearance to shift off
their attendance. Such as will suffer nothing in this case, but make the
hearing of the word a mere recreation, when they can do it with ease and at
pleasure, are not likely to go to the price of truth. that come only as mere
spectatours rather than buyers, who view many glorious Gospel-truthes openly
proposed and freely tendered to all, but are content to look on whilst others
buy. Such are our common sort of ignorant hearers, compared to the way side,
who hear the word and understand it not. The seed lies above ground: Mat. 13.
19.
then comes the wicked one and catches away that which was sown in his
heart. The father of lies easily robs such a one of the word of truth. such
as seem to cheapen, but do not buy: those who are somewhat affected with the
truth, and think it worth the carrying home if they might have it at their own
price: they hear it, perhaps talk of it, repeat it, etc. And of these there are
two sorts: the one compared to the stony, the other to the thorny ground: the
former would own the truth, were it not accompanied with the cross: but when
persecution arises because of the word, by and by they are offended. They
never gave the truth rooting in their hearts, and so when the Sun arises it is
scorched and withered. The latter suffer it to be overgrown and choked with
thorns: there may be some stirrings in their spirits, some springings of their
affections upon the receiving of the seed of truth, Mat. 13. 22. Luke 8. 14.
but then their unmortified lusts, the care of this world, and the
deceitfulness of riches and pleasures of this life draw away the strength of
their hearts from the truth, and it becomes unfruitful: they will not
renounce their earthly-mindednesse or their voluptuous, ambitious, corrupt
affections to make a full purchase of truth. Herod did many things and heard
John gladly, but would not yield so far to the commands of truth, as to forsake
his Herodias: there was a thorny lust which choked all. Mat. 19. 16.
The young man also seemed willing to buy, What good thing shall I do that I
may have eternal life? what shall I give to buy truth? again, All these have I
kept from my youth; what lack I yet? Thus much I have offered if this be not
enough, I am willing to give more. I believe he thought he offered like a
chapman: But when he heard Christ raise his demands so high, Go and sell all
that thou have and give to the poor, he brake off, went away sorrowful, as if
the price had been unreasonable. I fear, many who countenance the cause of
truth, some who are great actours in it, yea some who may venture their lives
in the prosecution of it may deceive themselves. There may be some thorns not
rooted up, some root of bitterness not killed, some corrupt principle which
may carry men far this way, some by-end which may poison all. If I give my body
to be burned and have not love, 1 Cor. 13. 3
it profits me nothing. A man may seem to die for the truth, and yet never
buy it.

Exhortation.
2. This is for for exhortation: 1. In general to us all: 2. In special to
those whom the Lord has honored above others for the patronage and promoting
of the great cause of his truth. 1. General
And 1. let me stir up you and my self by all means to make this purchase. 1.
to make this purchase.
2. Not to think any cost too much for that purpose: concerning the former,
truths. Learn to be thoroughly acquainted with the Fundamentalls of Faith. 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Great is the mystery of godliness: And the knowledge of it is of great
concernment: it is a great mystery, and requires a deep search. An overly,
slight, and superficial view of those great secrets which the Angels desired
to look into, must not satisfy them who will indeed buy truth. Labor for a
right understanding of the Alsufficiency and infinite excellency of God in all
his attributes, as he has revealed himself in his word: of the person,
natures, offices of Christ, of the covenant of grace, of the fountain of all
spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ, the eternal love and good
purpose of God toward his, and those glorious ways and means whereby the Lord
is pleased to bring poor lost souls to glory, reconciling them to himself by
the death of his Son, calling them by his Word and Spirit, uniting them to
Christ, adopting them for his children and heirs, justifying them freely by
his grace, sanctifying, quickening, and keeping them by his mighty power through
Faith unto salvation. These and the like are especially to be studied, and we
are to take heed lest Satan intangling us in doubtful disputes about things of
an inferior nature, should cunningly divert our thoughts from searching into
these hid treasures. I confess the rents and divisions which follow upon
contrariety of opinions are sad, and such as we have cause to lament: but I am
persuaded this is not the only, nor the greatest mischief. I fear Satan
gains much advantage by engaging young beginners and wanton wits in the
agitation of controversies ere they have laid the foundation, much more before
themselves have taken root in Christ, or so much as proved themselves to be in
Christ, and Christ to be in them. (...) Heb. 4. 2.
The word preached did not profit the unbeleeving Israelites, not being mixed
with faith in them that heard it: they did but view, not buy the truth; we
cannot make the truth our own, nor truly say, we have bought it, unless we so
mix and temper it with faith as that it becomes one with our souls, or
rather our souls become one with it, faith strongly closing with the word,
digesting it, and so leavening all the powers of the soul with the truth, and
causing them to relish of it. 2. By receiving the truth in sincere love. No man
buyeth truth, who does not truly love it. So much truth as thou love is thine
own. Some may hastily conclude from hence, Then all the promises of pardon are
mine: for these I love from my heart, though not those precepts of obedience,
and qualifications of repentance, morification and holiness. But know this, It
is easy to mistake lies of our own coining, for God his holy truth: for those
promises carry a respect to their qualifications, and are true in relation to
them: if thou seperatest what God has joined together, thou huggest an Idol
of thine own brain and do not embrace the truth of God, as the Devil in his
temptations mangleth the truth of God, Math. 4.
promissionem objicit, conditionem abjicit: he objecteth the promise, Jun. in
Parallel: Res transit cum onere.
rejects the condition. But this is rather to profane the truth then to buy
it. He that will buy, must take the commodity with all the appurtenances. This
not receiving the truth in love was the root of that great Apostasy of the
world. 2 These. 2. 10.
This beggered and undid them, they played with the light, and dallied with the
Truth of God: and did not buy it and enrich themselves with it, by receiving
the love of the Truth, that they might be saved. truth. A Merchant who has
made a good voyage, finding such a commodity advantageous, is encouraged to new
adventures: that man never bought any saving truth, who sits down and
thinks he has enough. If once thou were possessed of the truth indeed, thy
desires would be more and more enlarged toward it; many seem to think they
have got truth enough already, more then they know what to do with, so much
that they are troubled with it, it disturbeth their slumbring spirits,
disquieteth their consciences: These men are far from buying the truth; rather
some truths have surprised them against their wills, 1 Kings 21. 20.
and are as welcome to them as Elijah to Ahab, Have thou found me, O mine
enemy? But all that will buy truth let them hearken to the Apostles Counsel,
Col. 3. 16.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom. truth must subject
themselves to the power and command of it. A man must not buy truth as he
purchases outward things, to dispose of it at his pleasure: thou must not buy
it as men were wont to buy slaves, to keep it in bondage, to make it serve thy
lusts and ends, or to fetter it and imprison it by withholding the Truth in
unrighteousnes: but as a man would buy an office at Court, a place of service
and attendance upon a Prince: in buying truth thou must sell thy self a servant
to the truth, give up thy self to be ruled and guided by the truth. Some (I
believe) are troubled that they have more of the truth than they can well rule:
it meets and faceth them in many of their crooked bypathes, it is as a
lighted torch to them when they are most of all retired in acting their works
of darkness: it is apt to interpose, yea and to control, it will not suffer
them to be private when they would: these would have truth enslaved, and lust
predominant. But to pretend to truth and not to allow it that Sovereignty which
belongs to its place and dignity, is indeed to reject it. Let truth rule thy
judgment, will, and affections in all things. truth, but endeavor to have the
truth of God realized to thy soul. Labor to have thy heart possessed with the
substance and reality of Divine truth, to furnish thy self with those very
things which thou find clothed with the truth of God in Scripture. Ephesians. 5. 8
Says the Apostle, Ye were sometime in darkness: but now are ye light in the
Lord. He does not say, ye have light, but ye are light, the light is realized
in you, ye are transformed into the light, ye are become such indeed and in
truth as the light discovers those to be who are children of light. The word
and truth of God has many beams of light in it, and we must seek to take them
in so, as to find the real effects of them in our selves. Believe, and thou
shall be saved: there is a beam of truth: and then do we buy this truth
indeed, when we get that precious Faith of God his elect, that Faith unfeigned
which really uniteth the soul to Christ, takes root in him, draws life and
spirit from him, conformeth and subjecteth the soul unto him. Take heed of
Satan's juggling, lest he sell thee a counterfeit stone instead of this precious
Pearl: a false Faith, a vain fancy, an empty shadow of Faith: how many content
themselves with this, because it is of a low price, or rather may be had for
nothing? But if ever that caution be needful, it is in this case, Caveat
Emptor.
Caveat Emptor, Let him that would buy truth, beware. It is not in this case,
as when a man would buy a thing to please a child, a slight toy of small value
will serve as well as a better: but it is as if a man were to buy a ship to
transport himself, his whole family and all his goods into a far-country: were
it not the extremity of folly to venture all in a rotten vessel for saving of
charges, rather then with greater cost to provide a substantial bottom? Oh
let us tremble to embark our souls (more precious then the world) together with
all our eternal hopes in a leaking ship of a rotten faith, being to make so
great a voyage, among so many dangerous Rocks and sands, through so many
storms and waves, which were too much for the soundest Faith to break through
were it not kept by the power of God unto Salvation. Luke 13.
Again, Except ye repent ye shall all perish. Do not think thou have bought
this truth, so soon as thy judgment is informed that this grace of repentance
is necessary to salvation, thou have but viewed it yet, thou have not purchased
it. If thou will buy it indeed, thou must have a through change wrought in thy
heart and soul, repentance from dead works, repentance unto life: thou must
look upon thy sweetest sins as thy bitterest enemies, and feel them as they
heaviest burdens, fleeing from them as from a Serpent, inwardly loathing,
outwardly leaving them. Thou must labor for the truth of mortification, the
real destruction of thy lusts: as it is said of Cassius Chaerea, a Pretorian
Colonel or Tribune, when he and others conspired the death of that cruel
tyrant Caligula, Suet: in Calig.
the signal word agreed upon was Repete, strike again: So thou must not
content thy self to make some faint attempts against thy sins, or a light
skirmish as soldiers, at a muster, but thou must do it with all thy might:
have thou wounded them, and do they yet resist? Repete, strike again and again,
hate them, pursue them to the death, give them no quarter, spare them not so
long as thou find them stir or breath. Again, the Apostle says, Romans 14.
17.
The Kingdom of God is righteousness, peace, joy in the Holy Ghost. This is a
most sweet and precious truth: would thou buy it? If thou do, thou buyest
a Kingdom, yea a Kingdom more worth then all the Kingdoms of the world. But
if thou will buy it, indeed, thou must have this Kingdom set up in thy heart.
Righteousness must reign there, or Christ must reign there in righteousness,
and thou must have a soul subdued to his Scepter. The Peace of God must rule in
thy heart: Col. 3. 15.
and that is peace in truth: when sin reigns, the soul has no peace with
God, it may be in a dead sleep. Then have thou this truth of peace with God,
when the Peace of God rules within thee, suppresseth mutinous affections,
subdueth rebellious lusts, when the winds and sea obey it, and it has power to
calm all the turbulencies and disorders of thy spirit. So concerning joy in
the Holy Ghost, Thou must have thy heart possessed with this joy, if thou will
purchase this truth. How many read and hear of joy in the Holy Ghost
unspeakable and full of glory, but yet content themselves with such joys and
delights as are full of shame, at least full of vanity, and end in mourning and
misery? these are false joys, (...).
as one says, Voluptates animi febres, earthly joys are soul-feavers,
carnal, sensual, sinful delights are even the agues of the inner man. For
what is the condition of a soul given up to pleasures of this nature but to be
in a continual agitation between hot paroxysmes or burning fits of lust, and
cold shaking fits of shame and horror. Now as there is a great difference
between that unnatural inflammation of a feverish body, drinking up the
radical moisture, and wasting the spirits, and that kindly weltempered heat of
an healthy body: so there is a vast distance between those vain and earthly or
impure and sinful delights, which waste the conscience, and those
soul-ravishing, sweet, serene and heavenly joys which flow from the bosom of
Christ into the breasts of believers. I might add many other instances, but I
forbear.

truth, ye must improve it. It is none of those commodities which a man may
buy, and then suffer it to lie dead by him: 2 John. 4.
no man buyeth the truth, but he that buyeth it for use. I rejoiced greatly
that I found of thy children walking in truth: as we have received a
commandment from the Father. It is no arbitrary thing or matter of
indifferency, but one of the great commandments of God, that we should walk in
truth: and Paul having told the Ephesians, Ye are light in the Lord, he
infers, walk as children of light. Then a man has bought the truth, when he
walks in the light, and power of Divine truth, when he prays, humbles his
soul, hears the word, and performs every act of Divine worship in spirit
and truth, out of such true principles, in such a manner, with such a frame of
heart and such aims as the truth of God his word requires, when in his place
and calling he improveth the truth of God to all purposes. Those things which
men buy at high rates, they desire to make the most of. The truth of God being
so exceeding precious and costly, those that buy it should labor to improve it
to the uttermost. It is none of those things* which are the worse for wearing.

2. 2. Part of the general Exhortation
Let us be persuaded not to think any cost too much that we may buy truth. And
first, consider (I beseech you) what we must cast away, which otherwise might
hinder us either in getting or keeping truth. 2. What we must be content to
resign and yield up into the Lord his hands, that we may buy truth. The
former are such things as are better cast away then kept, the very loss of
them will be our gain.

1. Mat. 5. 8.
In general our lusts and sins. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they
shall see God: an heart cleansed from the filthiness of flesh and spirit, is
like a clear glass fittest to give a reflection of those beams of truth, which
shine from the face of God in Christ. The secret of the Lord is with them that
fear him, and he will show them his Covenant. They that will see clearly, must
do away these scales from the eyes of the inner man. 2. In special, let us
renounce our carnal and natural wisdom. 1. Cor. 3. 18 etc. Intus ^xiflens
prohibet (...).
1. If any man among you seems to be wise, let him become a fool, that he may
be wise: for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. A spirit
emptied of all self-sufficiency, and selfeconceitednesse is best fitted to
receive the wisdom of God, and to purchase His truth. 2. Lay aside all
prejudices against the truth: and first quit all prejudices against the
dignity of Truth. Take heed of thinking any Truth of God to be below thee,
too mean for thee to stoop to* Do not think thy self, thy place or parts
too high for the least of God his holy Truths. 2 Timothy 4. 2
Preach the word, be instant in season, out of season, is a Truth of God which
once was given in Charge to Timothy: but (some I believe) who pretended to be
of Timothy his Rank, looked upon this truth as a thing below their places. On
the other side when a cause of Religion was brought before Galli^, he cared for
none of these things, he had no leisure to spend time about words and names,
his place engaged him in Realities, State-matters, such as were worthy of a
Proconsuls Cognizance. 2. Take heed of prejudices against the necessity of
truth, look not upon it as a matter of indifferency. Regard it as that one
thing necessary. 3. Renounce all prejudicate opinions of dangers or
inconveniences, which seem to attend or follow truth, such as divisions and
commotions: these (though accidental to truth) do ordinarily throng in after
it. Luke 12. 51.
Suppose ye that I am come to send peace on Earth? I tell you, Nay, but rather
division: and that between those of near relations, as it follows there.
Hereupon some seem to be as much afraid of the truth, as of a ball of
wilde-fire, they dare not buy it: they would rather banish it out of their
Coasts: whereas truth is no way the cause, though the corruptions of some men
and their malignity against it, and the weakness and mistakes of others, often
make it an occasion of those ruptures. That there are oppositions between the
friends and enemies of truth, is not strange: but that there are dissentions
among some of those, who unfainedly love and seek truth, and agree in the most
and principal parts of it, is sad: yet let not this prejudice hinder us from
buying and embracing truth. Amongst those who in the Apostles days received
the Gospel, and with joint consent acknowledged the Lord Jesus to be the
Christ, there were differences about the observation of Mosaicall Rites, and
Ceremonies: this prejudice did not keep the faithful from embracing and
holding fast the truth of the Gospel. In Luthers time there were controversies
between those who were newly come out of Babylon: this prejudice did not so
far prevail with the Godly, as to make them prefer their slaverie under
Antichrist above the sweet yoke of Christ. Let the unanimous and full
consent of the Godly in many, and those the most substantial parts of truth,
encourage thee to buy the truth: let not their differences about few and less
material things discourage thee. 4. Cast off that prejudice which Satan may
suggest unto thee, in regard of the meandness of those persons who hold forth
the truth, either as the Lord his Agents, whom he makes use of to invite
buyers, the Ministers of the Gospel, or as purchasers, who having bought the
truth, desire to commend their penny-worths to others, as Philip did to
Nathanael, Joh. 1. 45.
We have found him, of whom Moses and the Prephets did write, Jesus of
Nazareth: Come and see. If any such be contemptible in the eye of the world, as
those were who followed Christ, whom the proud Pharisees overlooked with so
much scorn, Joh. 7. 49.
This people who knows not the Law are cursed: Let not this seem any
disparagement to the Truth of God which needs not borrow any thing from man:
its own sovereign Authority is enough to command all, its native beauty and
proper worth is sufficient to commend it to all. When King Amaziah had set up
and worshipped the Idols of the same people, whom himself had lately overcome
in battle: the Lord sent him this Message by a Prophet, Why have thou sought
after the gods of the people, 2 Chro. 25. 16.
which could not deliver their own people out of thine hand? This was a Truth
which carried so much strength and evidence of Reason in it, that it seems to
preclude all contradiction: yet see how pride and prejudice against the person
that held it forth, prevailed! says the King, Art thou made of the Kings
Council? forbear, why should thou be smitten? Art thou a fit person to
reprove a King? thou art none of the Privy Council: mark how the Prophet
replyeth, and twice descanteth upon the Kings words; (...)
I know that God has Counseled to destroy thee, because thou have done this,
and have not hearkened to my Counsel Do thou despise my Message because I
am not made of thy Council? Know this, that in this particular, the King of
Kings has made me of his Council, and the word which I brought is the very
Truth and Counsel of the great God, as thou shall find to thy ruin, inasmuch
as thou have despised it. The Truth of God needs not receive any reputation
from rotchets or scarlets, if thou despisest it for the meannesse of those that
bring it, thou despisest Him that sends it.

it cost, it must be had, we must buy it, or else we perish: Now we Romans 8. 32
He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all: how shall he
not with him also freely give us all things? so on our part, he that sincerely
gives up himself to the Lord, to be wholly his, how can he think any thing
too dear when the Lord requires it? why did not the young man give up his
possessions upon Christ's demand? because he had not given up himself. When the
Lord told Peter what he should suffer for the truth, and by what death he
should glorify God, he questioneth about his Fellow-Disciple, (whether out of
curiosity, Joh. 21. 21, 22.
or some spice of envy, I know not) And what shall this man do? Jesus says
unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? If I will
that he live till I come, and call him in an ordinary way of visitation, and
that the Truth of the Gospel shall prove more costly to thee than to him, what
does that concern thee? If both of ye give up your hearts to me and my
truth, it is no great matter, whether it cost you more or less in other
regards. Mat. 16. 26.
What is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his soul?
and if he leave the truth, he loses his soul. It may seem the times are come
upon us, wherein the Lord will make discoveries, who they are that prize this
earthly dross above those rich treasures of his Kingdom. Let us not say in
our hearts, we could willingly purchase truth, if it might be had at such easy
rates as our Fathers bought it. No, if we will not buy it now at such a price
as it may be had, whatsoever it be, neither would we have bought it then,
though at a lower rate. And those who lived and died in those times, and
purchased truth indeed, would have bought it at a far higher rate, had it
been exacted of them. He that gives up his heart to God for truth, will never
break off for the price: he that does not yield up his heart, does never truly
buy, though he lives in the cheapest times. miles than others? such a reason
does not keep people from Faires and Markets: although the English Merchant
has a longer voyage to the East Indies than the Portugals by many leagues,
this does not make them give over trading. Though it cost thee more pains in
reading, studying, meditation, by reason of the slownes of thy apprehension,
weakness of judgment or memory; more striving in prayers, more fears, more
laboring with thine own heart to bring it in subjection unto truth, than it
does some other, let nothing beat thee off, buy it whatsoever it may cost thee.
truth: Buy it with the hazard, and (if need be) the loss of thy reputation.
Mat. 12. 42 43.
Among the chief rulers many believed ^n Christ, but because of the Pharisees
they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue; for
they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God. They valued their
credit with men above the truth of God: miserable folly! though the way of
truth should be called heresy (as in Paul's time) though the truth be scorned,
reproached, evil spoken of, though the wise men of the world think no better
of those that buy truth than of such as pay dear for a trifle, and say of them
in their hearts, Act. 26. 24
A fool and his money are soon parted, though thou must be counted a fool and
a mad man, as Festus termed Paul, yet buy it howsoever. Truth with expense of
time, though that be very precious, esteem that time well bestowed, which is
laid out for Truth. Do not say, Wherefore is this waste? Aelian: (...)
Though time cannot be bought with gold, yet it is well spent for the purchase
of Truth. Apelles beholding a curious picture Drawn by Protogenes, admired the
wormanship: but understanding that it had been seven years in hand, he said the
grace of the work was not answerable to the time and pains bestowed upon it.
But if those whom the Lord in his providence has called together, shall be
able by the good hand of their God upon them, to draw to the life that glorious
body of Truth in all its lineaments for matter of doctrine, worship,
government, discipline, I doubt not but in conclusion it would be found time
well employed, though it should cost more months then some expected. And as in
this more public enquiry after truth, so in particular searchings after it,
be careful to redeem time from other occasions, that thou may spare it for
buying of truth. It is part of the blessed man's description, His delight is in
the Law of the Lord, and in that Law, he does meditate day and night. truth. If
peace may be hadwith truth, it is exceedingly to be desired, as in toher
respects, so for truths sake, to which (if well improved) it may be very
serviceable and useful toward the opening of a free trade for truth, which is
many ways obstructed and interrupted by war. But when truth cannot be secured
but by the sword, and all ways are tried which are consistent with the purity,
safety, and honor of truth, and recourse is had to war as the last remedy,
in such a case peace it self must be broken, that truth may be preserved and
purchased. Israel may be considered: The two Tribes and an half beyond Jordan
built an Altar by the River: Josh. 22. 10. etc.
tidings came to the rest of Israel, who apprehended this as an Act tending to
the falsifying and corrupting of the Truth of God, and the Ordinances of his
Worship. This was conceived a just ground for a War: For the whole
Congregation of the Children of Israel gathered themselves together at Shilo to
go up to war against them. But yet desiring a peaceable accommodation, if it
might be had without prejudice to truth, they resolve to treat with them, and
send Phineas a man of great eminency, and ten Princes with him. These deal
thoroughly in the business, and press it home upon them: the Defendants make a
free and candid declaration of their intentions, showing that this Altar was
not erected for Burnt offering nor for Sacrifice, but only for a Monument of
their interest in the God of Israel: whereupon both the Ambassadors and (at
their return) the people were fully satisfied. Now suppose this Altar had
been built for sacrifice, as was suspected, and compare with this the many
hundred Altars (I believe) lately erected in this Land, to the darkning at
least of those great Truths of the Gospel, that Christ is the only Altar which
sanctifyeth all the offerings of the faithful, that His Sacrifice of himself
once offered by Himself is the only Propitiation: add hereunto the Idolatrous
bowings and cringings, the Crucifixes and Images set up in many places, the
endeavors to corrupt the Truth and Doctrine of Christ in diverse points of
great importance, the plots laid to stop the course of the Gospel and
propagating of the truth, the obstinate resistance against such a Reformation
as the Truth of God clearly revealed in His Word, requires. etc. And see
whether there were not many causes for a War against the Enemies of the truth
in England, for one which Israel had, though that had been such as was
surmised. Oh, that the Lord would deliver our King from those that are
Adversaries of his Truth, and make him an Instrument to execute His wrath upon
the great whore, that so the Truth of God might have a free passage through the
several Regions of the World. I have read of some Mariners who being tossed on
the sea in a Tempest, were so superstitiously slavish, as to vow or promise at
least upon their safe arrival on the shore, to build a Temple, the mortar
whereof should be tempered with Malmsey: I desire it may be considered whether
those be not more lavishly profane, who being terrifyed with the storms of
war, could be content to make the sacred Truth of God (more precious then all
the golden veins in the bowels of the Earth) to serve in stead of mortar for
the cementing or rather daubing up an unsound peace with men. precious in the
sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Psalm. 119. 15.
The Lord will make inquisition for their blood. And yet in the last place,
even this precious blood of God his people is not too precious to be adventured
or spent in the necessary defense of Gods Truth. Did not Christ himself shed
his most precious blood (worth more than all the best blood under Heaven) to
seal the Truth of the Gospel, the truth of all the promises of the new
Covenant? none of all which had been true, if Christ had not shed his blood to
verify them. 2 Cor. 1. 20.
For all the Promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen. The Law is true,
in it self: but the Truth of the Gospel and Word of Promise depends wholly
upon Christ. The Law has an intrinsecall and native truth: Cursed is he that
continues not in all things written in the Book of the Law to do them. But
the Truth of the Promise is borrowed: the promise of the pardon of sin, of
justifying the ungodly, of being merciful to unrighteousness, passing by
iniquity, blotting out transgressions, etc. seems to cross the Truth of God,
His Justice and Holiness, if ye consider it without reference to Christ: It is
true then only in Christ: the Truth of this Testament depends wholly upon
the death of the Testatour. Ioh. 18. 37
To this end (says he) was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world,
that I should bear witness to the Truth. How many thousands of God his Saints
have drunk of the same Cup in several Ages? It is appointed to all men once to
dye: and that is a blessed improvement of death, when a man dies not only in
the Lord, but for the Lord and His Truth: He that loses his life shall find
it: He shall find mortality swallowed up of life: His life is hid with Christ
in God, far above the reach of any weapons of war, and when Christ who is his
life shall appear, then shall he also appear with him in Glory.

And now give me leave, 2. A more special exhortation.
Much honored Worthyes, to bespeake your selves in the Name of the God of
Truth: whom I look upon as precious Instruments* of the Lord, for the
advancing and promoting of His Truth, Truth of doctrine, of worship, of
discipline, truth and power of Godliness. Ye are far engaged in this Cause
of truth already, and it concerns you to go on, both in Conscience and in
point of Honor, but chiefly for the Honor of your God, who has so highly
dignifyed and so many ways encouraged you by notable testimonies of His
Presence. Let it appear that ye are so possessed with the truth, so
overpowered by the truth, that ye may justly apply that of the Apostle to your
selves, 2 Cor. 13. 8. Rev. 3. 14.
We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth: and then Christ will
not fail to make good that title, which he has assumed to himself: The Amen,
the faithful and true witness. The People of God have reposed a great trust
in you* and they expect truth from you. And (blessed be God) they have had
their desires in great measure already answered: and the Work is yet in your
hands, these first fruits seem to be pledges of a full Harvest, if our sins
do not blast our hopes. One of the cleerest evidences (I conceive) which ye
can give of the truth of your hearts to the Public Cause, is Selfe-denyall and
quitting of Private Interests. Of this ye have given real demonstration in
your readiness to divest your selves of military and civil dignities, that ye
might reserve your selves for your proper work. Hereupon ye may with greater
Authority exact truth from those whom ye shall employ, a true account of the
public service, and for the future (at least) a true account of the public
treasure, though perhaps for the time past it may be difficult, if not
impossible, in regard of those many sudden exigents, confusions, unexpected
occurrences which have happened: yea, inasmuch as ye have made your selves such
eminent precedents of self-denial, how can others in modesty refuse, if you
require them not to seek great things for themselves, in making over much
advantage of the public miseries: especially such whose service is attended
with no hazard, and very little labor? some redress in these things might
encourage the well affected to more cheerfulness in assisting the common
Cause, and stop the mouths of others.

More particularly, let me beseech you in the first place to examine every man
the truth and sincerity of his own heart in managing the great business which
ye have in hand. To profess a man's self engaged in the Cause of truth, and
yet to be salfe-hearted toward it, and to harbor treacherous aims against it,
is not only contrary to the duty of a Christian, but a thing far below the
spirit and ingenuity of a Gentleman: it suiteth better with the baseness of
common cheaters, then with men of place and worth. A man who by his corrupt
principles is led out of the way, and put into a posture of defiance and open
hostility against the truth, is less odious by many degrees then a false
brother. I am persuaded there was more of the Devil in one Judas, then in all
the High Priests Cavaliers, and that Christ resented more hellish malignity in
that one Traitors kiss, than in all their swords and staves. Wherefore, Gal.
6. 4, 5.
Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself, and not in another. For every man shall bear his own burden. It is
not enough to join with those who are sincere in the Work of the Lord, but
every man must prove his own work, with what heart, out of what inward
principles, to what end. upon what grounds and motives, in what manner he does
it, that he may have rejoicing in himself, and not in those with whom he
joyneth in a good cause, nor by comparing himself with those who either
directly oppose, or basely desert it. For in the great day of account every man
shall bear his own burden: men shall not be ranked on the right hand by whole
Companies, Corporations, Regiments, Brigades, Armies, Houses of Parliament, but
as in that search which was made in Achan his case, they shall be singled out
man by man, and every man's work shall be tried in particular.

Truth: according to that of the Apostle, Phil. 1. 27.
Stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving together for the Faith of
the Gospel. The expressions are strong: he speaks to them as to Champions of
the Truth, (...). i^de Athleta. (...).
as the original word imports: and to whom may it be applied if not to such
^oble Champions as your selves? stand fast, keep your ground, Servate gradum
(as Beza.) maintain your station, and that in one spirit, in the power and
strength of that Holy Spirit of Truth, with one mind or one soul, wrestling or
striving together, as if ye were a combination of many bodies associated and
concentred together by one soul, as one man with joint forces contending for
the Truth of the Gospel, and for the cause of Truth: so should ye be able to
strengthen your spirits with that encouragement following, Verse 28.
In nothing terrified by your adversaries, which is to them an evident token of
perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God. Your uniting would be a
terror to the adversaries, a strengthening to your selves, an encouragement to
those who are friends to the truth, and your friends and servants for the
Truths sake. If a noble Heathen out of a moral bravery of spirit, could
privatas inimicitias reipublicae condonare, pass by private quarrels for the
Commonwealths sake: far be it from any Member of a Christian Parliament not
to lay down all private grudges and cross designs at the feet of this
afflicted Church and State, far be it from them not to quit them for the
truths sake, lest the cause of truth should miscarry through their default. If
the greatest persons who will approve their hearts to God, must throw down
their Crowns at the footstool of Christ, how much more their corruptions? But
especially let every one take heed of raising or fomenting divisions out of a
secret desire to hinder the carrying on of the great work. Differences in
judgment about things directly relating to conscience are to be pitied in
contemplation of the common imbecility of man's understanding. But when men for
sinister ends delight to make rents or cherish factions, this is fearful: let
none such deceive themselves, God is not mocked. In extraordinary times, such
as these upon which the providence of God has cast us, men have extraordinary
opportunities of doing God more then ordinary service: and on the other side
they have extraordinary occasion of bringing more then ordinary guilt upon
themselves, and wrath upon their posterity. This is a time when those who have
hearts to improve it, may wonderfully further their account: and a time when
men may exceedingly aggravate their condemnation. truth of God, that all may
have liberty and be encouraged to buy and furnish themselves. And for this end
to remove of obstructions, in restraining the spreading of gross and dangerous
errors and heresies. I am confident in your wisdom and piety, that ye are
far from entertaining those motions for an unlimited and prodigious
licentiousness, which some have seemed to plead for. Ve^itatem sub hasta
vendere: vel potius praedae et direptioni exponere.
What were this but to make port-sale of the truth, if not rather to give over
the protection of truth, and to expose it to be spoiled, sacked, and plundered
in a promiscuous way by all sorts of enemies? Let it be free for all sorts to
buy any truth of God, but let not Satan's factours and pedlars have liberty to
vent his falsehoods.

Object.But some may say, either ye must give liberty to all, or else show no
indulgence to any, who do not in every point comply with that which is
established by authority. Agelius, Sisinnius. (...) Soz. lib. 7. cap. 12. Socr.
lib. 3. cap 10. Soz. lib. 2. cap. 30.
That famous Emperor Theodosius did not only bear with the Novatians, but
countenance and familiarly consult with some of them about Church Affairs
(though differing in matter of discipline) being sound in the Faith and having
pastors of eminent gifts and godliness. And it is recorded of Constantine,
that though he made a law in terrorem which was so comprehensive that these
were obnoxious to it, yet in point of execution he spared them. And the Apostle
makes a clear difference: of one sort he says, A man that is an heretic,
Tit. 3. 10.
after the first and second admonition reject, knowing that he that is such, is
subverted, and sins being condemned of himself. Of the other he writes in
a far different strain, Him that is weak in the Faith receive ye, Romans 14. 1,
2.
but not to doubtful disputations. For one believes that he may eat all
things; another who is weak eats herbs. Let not him that eats, despise him
that eats not: and let not him which eats not, judge him that eats: and
the reason is very observable: For God has received him. Surely much respect
is to be had to those who give forth strong convincing evidences that God has
received them, and that they have received his Truth in love. If those are to
be tenderly dealt with in whom there is aliquid Christi, something of Christ,
how much more they in whom there is plurimum Christi, very much of Christ, much
of that unction wherewith he was anointed above his fellows, much of those
graces which serve for the edifying of his mystical body, and much of those
which accompany salvation. Comment. de statu reipub. et relig. sub Carol. 9.
An: 1561: Osiand Cent. 16
There is a passage recorded, which happened between Anthony of Bourbon King of
Navari^ and the Ambassador of Denmark: The King being a Peer of France and
first Prince of the blood, challenged the Regency of that kingdom during the
French Kings minority, and told the Danish Ambassador that he hoped in short
time to procure a free passage for the Gospel throughout the Kingdom of
France: the Ambassador showed himself pleased with this, but withal
admonished him to take care that Luthers doctrine, not Calvin's might pass for
current: the King replied, Luther and Calvin agree in forty points against the
Pope, and differ from each other but in one: let those then who follow the
several tenants of these two, join their strength against the common enemy,
and at better leisure, in a more convenient season compound their own
differences. I am persuaded, it is far from your Christian Wisdom and
moderation to esteem alike of those who obstinately shut their eyes against the
bright beams of truth where it shines out with full rays, and those who vary
from you in lesser things, wherein Scripture Light is not so clear, but that
good eyes may judge diversely, and hearts cordially affected to the truth, may
for a time dissent. I grant much prudence and many cautions are needful: as 1.
That the persons be known to be modest, pious and peaceable, lest some of
another spirit for evil ends should make claim to, and so abuse such a
liberty. 2. That all bitterness, insolency, turbulency of spirit, all
reproachful language and tumultuous carriages be forborne: for these (I am
sure) are no parts of liberty of conscience 3. That no Church-meetings for
worship be allowed but in places known, that there may be free access for any:
in which respect I have often commended both the wisdom and ingenuity of the
French Protestants, who in one of their Treaties of peace (I take it) made this
motion, that some officer of the King might be deputed to be present at their
assemblies, for preventing of State-jealousies and vulgar calumnies. For he
that does truth comes to the light, Joh. 3. 21.
that his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God. Many other
means the Lord may suggest unto you, for the ordering of things in such a way,
that some men's privilege may not be other men's prejudice, but that brethren
may walk together in love, so far as they have attained, until the Lord may
please to give farther light.

Truth: for these are persons entrusted by the Lord, as his agents, to call in
men to buy his truth. And for the same cause be pleased also to vindicate them
from the foul reproaches of those, Romans 3. 13. 1 Cor. 4 3. (...).
who have The poison of aspes under their lips. A faithful Minister may say
with the Apostle, With me it is a very small (or the least) thing that I should
be judged of you, or of man's judgment. But let it be considered whether the
truth be not concerned in it, if any through their own weakness shall be
discouraged from buying, when they hear those whom the Lord imployeth as his
trustees and factours to be cried down and stigmatized for Baals priests,
limbs of the beast, Ministers of Antichrist. The way to bring a shop out of
custom, is first to bring it out of credit.

truth, or whose fingers are so foul that they fully the truth by handling it,
causing the word and way of truth to be evil spoken of, and discouraging men
from buying. The very heathens may shame those who censure you in this: who
seem to have been very tender of the honor of their idol-gods in this kind.
Livy.
Livy (as I remember) has a story to this purpose: As they worshipped
goddesses or female gods, so they had female Priests. Soz l. 5. 15 (...). Senec.
A Vestall virgin was suspected of incontinency because of her neatness in
apparel, courtly deportment or some such thing, but being called in question
no such crime appeared upon examination, yet was she sent away with a check or
admonition, and willed to remember, Sancte magis quam site colendas esse
religiones. That the services of their gods required rather sanctity in those
that were actours in them, than any such curious dress as might carry an
appearance of evil. And Sozomen inserteth the Copy of a letter written by
Julian the Apostate to Arsacius Archpriest of Galatia, requiring him to charge
those heathenish priests under his superintendency, neither to haunt Theaters,
or (according to our times) stage plays, nor to frequent Tavernes, and that
upon pain of deprivation. Seneca in his Controversies has such a case as
this. A Virgin being taken captive by Pirates, was sold to a Pandour,
prostituted in a Stews, yet preserved her virginity, and at last slew a man in
defense of her chastity: whereupon she was arraigned, and upon hearing of her
cause, acquitted: after this she sueth to be admitted as a Priest to attend on
one of their goddesses: this bar was put in against her plea by way of
supposition: Tres petunt Sacerdotium: capta, prestituta, rea: Suppose three
several Virgins should come in competition for the Priesthood, whereof one had
been captivated, the second prostituted, the third arraigned, Omnibus nego: I
reject them all: much more when all these meet in one: and yet in all these
three was nothing criminal, but rather something of disparagement. How much
more when the question is concerning the admission of men to the Ministry of
the Gospel, or retayning those that were formerly admitted? suppose one of
them a drunkard, another a swearer, a third superstitious, a fourth an ignorant
person, a fifth idle, etc. Omnibus nego: none of them shall have my voice, and
what shall we say of them in whom many of these meet? It was further pressed
in behalf of that virgin, that her suite should be regarded out of compassion
to her sufferings, it was answered, Non facimus miserandos Sacerdote^: In
choosing Priests we must respect the honor of our gods, not the miseries of
those who desire the office: the wants and necessities of persons and families
in this case are not to be looked at, but the glory of Christ and the wants and
miseries of poor souls: yet I desire from my heart that mercy may be showed
them in other kinds, that they may have means of subsistence, and those who
are known to be learned and studious may not be deprived of their Libraries.
Lastly, I beseech you, show your selves tender of the honor of Truth it self,
in bridling those who cast foul aspersions upon it: rich wares trodden under
feel, and spoiled, may lie by neglected: buyers are nice, and will hardly come
off, unless that which is tendered to them be sightly. This the Devil
knows, and therefore stirs up his Instruments to throw dirt upon the
beautiful face of truth, not only in blind corners, but also in pulpits and
printed pamphlets. And, if it belong to a Court Martial to do right to a man
of quality in point of honor, surely it well becomes the supreme Court of
Parliament to vindicate the Honor of God his everlasting Truth.

Many motives might be used to set on the Exhortation both general and
special, Motives.
exciting us to this great purchase of Truth, and to the promoting of the cause
of Truth. Much might be said of the glory, riches, majesty, beauty and divine
excellency of truth and heavenly wisdom, for which I refer you as to other
Scriptures, so in particularly to the eighth chapter of this book of Proverbs.
Give me leave for the present in few words to touch upon these three things,
and so conclude, 1. The power of truth, 2. The special engagements obligeing
us of this Age and Nation to purchase and promote it, 3. A serious
consideration of what value the truth will be at the last. Admirable is the
power and strength of truth, for all that buy and possess it, against all that
either oppose or neglect it. All the most unlikely Prophesies of Scripture,
have been or shall be accomplished by the power of divine Truth: all the
exceeding great and precious promises of the Gospel have been or shall be
performed by it: all the dreadful threats verifyed. The Power of truth raised
a Seed of the vanquished woman, to bruise the head of the Serpent and god of
the world. It brought the Son of God to descend from His Throne of Supreme
Majesty, to cloth himself with flesh, subject himself to the guilt of sin
and curse of the Law, to the death and shame of the Cross, to drink the
bitter Cup of his Fathers Wrath, and for that end to suspend the excrcise of
His Authority in calling down Legions of Angels from Heaven to rescue him out
of the hands of his enemies. The Power of Truth, Dan. 2.
which is the Power of Christ Himself, raised Him from the dead, and advanced
Him to the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty on High, etc.

Yea this Power of truth what wonderful alterations has it wrought in the
world? how has it dissolved the several Mineralls whereof that Image was
composed, the gold, silver, brass, and iron? broken in pieces famous
Monarchies and Empires of the world, blasted, and in great part already
consumed the power of that man of sin, enfeebled the strength of that Beast
whom the world worshipped and wondered at? It is admirable to consider, how the
strength of divine Truth breaks thorough all opposition, Rev. 3.
bears down all resistance, Pulls down the mighty from their Seats,
Exalts the humble and meek: witness a late and notable example in this Land,
The Ruin of the Prelacy: Truth had long since spoken it, I will spew thee out
of my mouth: yea, such is the power of truth that it makes its very enemies
serve its ends, and in the midst of the most perplexed concurrence of second
causes, cross interferings and overthwart interposings of inferior Agents,
holds a steady course toward its full accomplishment, and moves on in a
straight line to its final period: where it arriveth most exactly in its own
proper point of time. The Power of God his truth brought Israel out of Egypt,
Exo. 12. 41
at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame day it came
to pass. All Pharaohs oppositions, all his tergiversations could not prorogue
the term of Isreal's bondage one day beyond that term which truth had
prefixed: nay, these served rather to spinne out that interim, to fill up that
void space of time, that the truth might take place in its own time. Woe to
them, who stand up against the Power of truth at such a time when any of its
great works are to be accomplished for the Israel of God. Those persons or
what degree soever, Mean men, Nobles, Peers, Princes, who happen to stand up
as Adversaries against the truth at such a time, seem to have been borne in
an evil hour. Pharaoh (I am persuaded) might have gone to his grave with a
great deal less guilt upon his conscience, had he lived and reigned in
another Age, and not at that time when the Power of truth was to be put forth
in. Isreal's deliverance: some of his Ancestors (perhaps) had hearts as bad,
but had no such occasion in so high a degree to treasure up wrath against their
own souls: the like may be said of his Courtiers and People, that joined with
him in that design. When the Lord by visible and glorious signs of the times
and extraordinary dispensations of providence, owneth the cause of his People
in bondage, and says again and again, Let my People go, let my People go,
that they may serve me according to mine own mind and direction, then let
men tremble to hearden their hearts and oppose God, lest in the issue it
appear that for this cause they were set up, that the Lord might make his
Power known upon them. On the other side the Power of truth is strong for all
that embrace it, and labor to promote it. It will carry them through all
dangers and difficulties, and in the end crown them with Glory. In a word,
this Power of truth is sufficient to deliver poor slaves and captives out of
the power of Satan, John 8. 31. 32.
and to make them free. Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him,
If ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed: and ye shall know
the Truth, and the Truth shall make ye free. In a Sea Fight between the
Spaniards and Hollanders, Triumphs of Nassau.
it is said that a poor captive in one of the Spanish Galleyes, had his chain
wherewith he was fastened, broken asunder by a Cannon shot, himself not hurt,
and perceiving that he was loose, leapt into the Sea with a Piece of his chain
and escaped to the other ship, by this strange providence regaining his
liberty: many seem afraid of the truth, especially when it comes thundering
like a Cannon shot from the mouth of some Boanerges, but if thou receive it,
yield and subject thy self to it, it will never hurt thee: no, it will break
thy chain, those chains of death and darkness whereby Satan holds thee
captive, and make thee free, and though thou may carry a piece of thy chain
with thee to thy dying day, yet it will wholly free thee in the end. Buy Truth,
and walk in the power of the spirit of Truth, and ye shall be mighty in the
strength of Christ to overcome, and shall sit down with Him in his Throne,
even as he overcame and is set down with His Father in his Throne.

Motive.
to make us buy truth and stand for Truth to the uttermost. Wonderfully has
the Lord wrought for the bringing in, the restoring, preserving and propagating
of the Truth among us. To say nothing of the first introduction of the light,
in or near the Apostles times, How graciously did the Lord visit this Nation
about 200. years before Luthers days, by the ministry of Wickliffe and
others, raising up a succession of faithful witnesses to seal the Truth with
their blood in the several Reigns of our Kings, who according to the
blindness of those times gave their power to the Beast. Then followed that
strange act of Henry the eighth, in abolishing the Popes Supremacy: next, the
wonderful workings of our God upon the heart and by the hands of our English
Josias King Ew^r^ 6. In whose Reign it is very observable, that by an
admirable conjuncture of providence, the Churches of Germany should be under
persecution, and the Churches in this Land should enjoy a short breathing time
of Peace, that so England which had need to borrow light from foreign parts,
might be supplied; from Germany Divines were called, both such as were
Orthodox, and such (it seems) who were tainted with the Lutheran error, one
at least, viz: Brentius a man noted to be much infected as well with that great
error of ubiquity, as that of the Corporal presence in the Sacrament, a
person of eminent authority for his Learning and manifold accomplishments, and
one who had he accepted of the call, Vocatus a rege Angliae Edvardo amplissimis
promissionibus. Mel: Ad: in vita, Brontii.
might have sowed such seed in one or other of our Universities as might have
overspread the Land, and perhaps those weeds which might have sprang from it,
would not have been rooted out unto this day, especially if that be considered
that our leading men Cramner, Ridley, etc. were supposed not to be well informed
in that point at that time. I conceive there was a gracious overruling
providence of God in it, diverting him, and moving him to decline so fair an
offer, though (it seems) he was troubled to find a place wherein to hide
his head with safety. On the other side the Lord was pleased to incline the
hearts of Martyr, Bucer and Phagius, three pious and Orthodox Divines to accept
the call. What were all our multiplied deliverances in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, among the rest that of 88. And since her time from the
Powder Treason, and now of late a wonderful series or large Catalogue of
extraordinary events brought about by the mighty hand of God; what are all
these (I say) but the glorious workings of our God for the procuring and
continuing unto us these precious opportunities of buying truth? and therefore
they ought to be mighty provocations to our spirits not to neglect such a price
put into our hands, unless we will show our selves of all people upon the
earth most unthankful, Josh. 10. 12
and so most unexcusable. Let me name one of the last sort: that as in the
days of Josh. The Lord hearkened to the voice of a man, saying, Sun stand thou
still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Aialon, and the Sun stood
still in the midst of Heaven, and hasted not to go down about an whole day: so
whereas our Parliaments have formerly been made like fleeting meteors or
falling stars, giving some glimpse of light and suddenly vanishing, the Lord
should now hearken to the cries of His people, and give us a fixed Parliament,
like the Sun standing still in the midst of Heaven, that so there might be
time for the discovery and establishment of Truth and for the scattering of the
enemies of Truth.

Motive.
And lastly consider what will be the value and price of truth at the last on
the deathbed, in the day of judgment. How many thousands of gold and silver,
yea of worlds (if they had them) would the greatest enemies or contemners of
truth give at that day, if then it might be had, if then they could purchase
the saving knowledge of God, of Christ, of the Gospel, the Truth of Faith,
repentance, sanctification? then a whole world for a lamp full of this precious
oil. Certainly Truth is always of the same value, every whit as much worth now
as it will be then: But now men look upon Truth as they do upon rich wares in
a dark-shop, and so undervalue it, whereas they take a full view of the things
of the world, and look upon them in the open Sun. But then the Truth shall be
fully discovered, men shall see such a light as they never saw, a glorious
irradiation, and Divine brightness from the face of Christ, and Truth shall be
exhibited sub dio, in the broad daylight in the clear light of that Great Day,
to which the light which now we see by, is but as a twilight or evening light.
Then the worth of Truth shall be fully known: they that would not go to the
price of it shall know their loss. 2. Pet. 3. 10 (...).
Oh ye that prize your wealth above the Truth, ye will be of another mind when
the pillars of the earth are trembling, the heavens gathering together as a
scroll, and passing away with a great or hideous noise, the elements dropping
or melting, the earth and the works in it burnt up, if ye will seek for that
wealth which now ye value above the Truth, ye must seek it in that heap of
ashes: and ye that prefer your pleasures above it, as they are but shadows
now when they are at best, so then they will be torments, and ye that esteem
your honors, credit, reputation and the praise of men above the Truth, ye will
then see that this was but a blast, an empty breath when ye enjoyed it, and
then it will be nothing, yea, it will turn into shame and confusion of face for
ever. On the contrary, the beauty and glory of truth will then shine forth in
perfection, and they that bought it at the highest rate shall clearly
understand what a blessed advantage they have made. Oh that now we could be
wise for our souls! Let us be content to beggar our selves (if need be) that we
may be rich. Give any thing to buy Truth. The time is short (as the Apostle
says) it remains then that those which buy the things of this world be as if
they possessed not, as men ready to part with them at any time, looking upon
them as things that little concern them, carrying their hearts above them,
keeping their spirits weaned from them: 1 Cor. 7. 30
but that those who buy Truth, be as those that possess and improve it to the
best advantage: For the fashion of this world passes away: but the Word and
Truth of God, and the fruit, comfort and benefit of it endures for ever.

FINIS.

