A LETTER TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord General MONK CONTAINING The instrumental
Causes of the ruin of Governments and Commonwealths, with an Advertisement of
our present danger by a foreign Invasion.
May it please your Exccellency,
THE true affection and high Honor I have for you amongst other your Country
men, that desire your chiefest good, and rejoice with you in the late happy
success God has magnified you with before his people, gives me this confidence
for a humble address in those papers, which were printed last year, January
1658. they being a few sudden Notes drawn up at that time upon conference with
some London Divines, to give timely warning of the great Displeasure of God
that hang over our heads; and had our friends then in place and power
considered of them, and advised with godly faithful Ministers, what to do in a
case of this importance, ruin had not come upon them so inevitably and
suddenly. For your Excellency knows well, what great alternations of
Government, and turning of things upside down, have been within the space of
this last year in the land, very terrible in our eyes. These papers will
acquaint your Excellency what great danger the Church of God and this State is
in at this time, which every days experience more and more confirms the truth
of: and since the impression of these papers Dr. Reynolds has lately put sorth
a Sermon of his upon the same Subject of Church-Desertion, whose Judgment in
the case is much to be reverenced.

I do humbly beg your Christian perusal of them, and if God shall make your
Excellency instrumental to so high and noble a work, as the advancement of the
Gospel, true Religion, and the pure Worship of God is (which is so basely
oppressed in our days) you will be very happy; for God will surely honout those
that honor him: and you, and this people shall find, that nothing does promote
the Peace, Plenty, Security, and flourishing estate of the Land, then Zeal and
Forwardness to hasten the work of Gods house, which he calls for. So says God
by his Prophet Haggai, when he called the people to the building of the Temple,
In this place will I give Peace, Hag. 2.9.
says the Lord of Hosts, that is, upon this work of building my house, and
setting up my pure worship: you shall find, I will give you peac and
establishment, and not otherwise. I will add a little to what I have said upon
the case, with your Honors good leave, to evince the great hazard we are in,
if it be not instantly prevented. Commonwealths and Nations are brought to
ruin by two sorts of causes, some intrinsecal, some extrinsecal. As all the
works of nature are ruined in like sort, either by causes that are within them,
or that are without them. So we see a house falls either by the rottenness of
the plates and timber-work that decay within, or by high winds, or fire that
assault it from without: In like manner it is with States and Governments in
this world, they come to ruin by means of distempers in their own bowels, or
by the force of foreign Invaders. We have woeful experience of the one, God
grant we find not at length the mischief of the other.

Internal active causes of the ruin of Governments, are,

1. Sedition amongst the great ones striving for mastery, or conspiring against
those that have the Rule.

A second is Tumults of the discontented multitude, grieved with the burden of
heavy Taxes, loss of Trade, and cruel Oppressions.

A third is a phanatick spirit, or ignorant impetuous zeal in factions of
Religion, which has in many ages proved pernicious to Church and Commonwealth.

A fourth is Civil Wars, as says the Lord by the Prophet Haggai, I will shake
the heavens and the earth, Hag. 2.22.
and I will overthrow the Throne of Kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength
of the Kingdoms of the heathen, and I will overthrow the Chariots, and those
that ride in them and the horses, and their Riders shall come down, every one
by the sword of his brother. And again, the Prophet Isaiah, Through the wrath
of the Lord of Hosts is the land darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel
of the fire, no man shall spare his brother. Isa. 9.19, 20, 21
And he shall snatch on the right hand and be hungry, and he shall eat on the
left hand, and they shall not be satisfied: they shall eat every man the flesh
of his own arm; Manasseh Ephraim, and Ephraim Mansseh: and they together shall
be againsh Judah: for all this, his anger is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still.

By these cruel Tallons God in Judgment pulls down Governors and people, when
both are wicked, corrupt and rebellious against God, provoking him to do
Justice upon them to their confusion.

My Lord, you have seen with your eyes in these few late years of ours, how
busy these Instuments have been in this Nation to bring it to a general ruin:
God has called you forth now at a time when the last scene is abroad, the last
blows of divine vengeance are ready to batter all in pieces, though the
generality dream not of their danger: for it is Gods usual course, upon the
impenitency of a Nation, to go from one heavy Judgment to another till he has
utterly destroyed all, by giving up his people into captivity, and bringing
upon them Foreign Nations to devour them: and this is the other extrinsecal
cause of the ruin of Nations.

When foreign Nations are through Gods just Judgment called in upon them, then
comes utter ruin.

Now whether our danger after all our former Calamities be such, let your
Excellency draw up the conjecture from these Prognostics.

First, When God greatens our adversaries, and makes them more potent then
before: For when our enemies have malice enough and power enough to do us
mischief, then have we cause to fear them, for God has strengthened them
against us, as he strengthened the Assyrian against Israel, Isa. 10.56.

And now has not Rome made her self strong enough to the work, by the
association of those two Crowns of France and Spain, and combination of all
popish Princes? What think we, is the secret drift of that Conclave and
bloody-slaughter-house (as we have found it) but to use the Armies of those
Princes to overturn the reformed Churches, especially this of England? there
was a time when they had will to hurt us but no power, in the Armado and
Powder Plot, but now alas they have too much both Will and Power, as the
letters of Foreign Agents forewarn us.

A second ground of conjecture is from our implacable domestic Contests, which
have continued now these 20. years, and it has been the usual conclusion of
the wisest Statesmen, That when a people are wearied with homebred long
Contests, then a Forreiner may break in with good success and carry all; as
Malvezzi observes well of Greece, that when it was wearied with civil
dissentions, then Forreiners usually made it a prey.

May not our danger be concluded from hence also? especially if we consider a
third ground for the conjecture.

And that is, when Forreiners carry before them a pretense or title for their
just invasion.

Such was the policy of Amurath going to destroy the King of the Tartars, he
took with him Islan brother of that King in the head of his Army, and by his
presence the people of the Country more easily submitted to the Conqueror. The
like policy used Achish King of Gath, when he purposed to carry up David in his
Army against his Contrymen. I need not say the case is much a like now, its
easy to draw up the resemblance, if God overruled not matters, and secure us
and our Religion; as he did for Israel, preventing David from coming up with
the Armies of the Philistines, least he should have assisted the uncircumcised
against the Church and people of God, and in pursuance of his own private
interest miserably have wasted his own Country: which no doubt so good a Prince
abhorred in his heart, choosing rather to wait patiently upon God for a clear
peaceable Call, then to wade to the throne in the blood of Gods precious people.

A fourth conjecture is from the multitudes of discontented spirits in the Land
ready to embrace a Forreiner, as the Tarentines embraced Pyrrus, and the ten
Tribes Jeroboam with his Calves from Egypt, in hope of ease of their Taxes. The
good Lord preserve his Gospel and true Religion amongst us, and choose such
Governors for us as may be men after his own heart as faithful David was.

A fith ground of conjecture is from neighbor Presidents; When God has let out
the wolves upon the neighbor flocks of France, and Poland, and Germany, yea
and Ireland, do we think all secure with us?

A sixth is from the Impenitency of this Nation, their rejection of God, and
meet applications to him in great fasting and prayer, and true humiliation and
Reformation, that we might obtain his Counsel and Protection. For when a people
stand it out with God to the utmost, what is more likely then that God will
destroy them to the utmost? I will not persume to enlarge further but to beg
our Excellency speedily to consider what is to be done for your self and for
your Country, confident of your faithfulness and tender care, things being so
far gone as that it is almost impossible to prevent the common ruin: and the
Lord God direct your heart thereunto, with Courage, Zeal, and resolution
against all difficulties, which use to accompany men of high place. Build upon
the rock not upon the sand, for a house built upon the sand, cannot outstand
the Tempest. How vain were Isreal's shifts in this kind as the prophet Isayah
notes, chap. 22? where we may see a fit president for our case: When a foreign
invasion was at hand, they opened their Armories and magazins, and prepared
like wise men for the sieg; and when they saw the breaches of the City of
David, that they were many, they repaired their bulwarks, scoured the
trenches, built their Pallizadoes; gathered about the City the waters of the
lower poole both for defense, and use of water in the sieg; they numbered the
houses of Jerusalem, to see which might be fortified, and those houses that
were upon the walls they brake down to make the city more impregnable. What
fault was there in all this? none at all, but they left out that one thing that
was more necessary then all these, as God tells them, But ye have not looked
unto the Maker thereof, says the Lord, neither had respect to him that
fashioned it long ago, and in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to
weeping and to mourning, and to baldness and to girding with Sackcloth, (this
was of more consequence then fortifying and preparing for the war, and they had
a Call from heaven to it by the danger that was approaching) yet behold joy and
gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine; Let
us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die.

Oh desperate impenitency! What does God conclude hereupon? Surely this iniquity
shall not be purged from you till ye die, says the Lord of Hosts. Here Is now
the like case; this people are banning one against another, they trust to their
wodden walls, and filling up of the house, and listing of Regiments (for its
lawful to use the means) but in this day of so great danger the Lord called
for our christian Armoury, mighty prayers and tears powerful humiliation and
fasting, and especially true and unfeigned Repentance, and turning from those
crying sins, that call in trouble upon us, and will irresistibly and speedily
ruin all: but where is this to be found? dull sottish stupid men! Surely, my
Lord, I can tell you for a certain what will become of such a people: Death,
and ruin, and confusion is at their gates: for its an infallible Note of
wicked Rulers, and a wicked people, whom God will destroy, that they cast off
fear and restrain prayer before God. Job 15.4, 20, add 34.


Go to therefore quickly, and gather your selves together, yea gather together,
O Nation, not desired, Ps. 53.1. add 5.
before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff, bafore the
fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lords anger come
upon you. Seek ye the Lord all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his
Judgment, seek Righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the
day of the Lords anger.

I rest, My Lord, Your Excellencies In all humble Christian Observance and
faithfulness. JOHN MAVDIT.


