portrait of Robert May Aetatis Suae. 71. 1660.

What? would thou uiew but in one face
all hospitality, the race
of those that for the Gusto stand,
whose tables a whole Ark command
of Natures plenty, would thou see
this sight, peruse Maijs book, it is he.
For Nathaniell Brook, at the Angel in Corn hill;

Ia Parry.


THE Accomplished Cook, OR THE ART and MYSTERY OF COOKERY.

Wherein the whole Art is revealed in a more easy and perfect Method, then
has been published in any Language.

Expert and ready ways for the Dressing of all sorts of FLESH, FOWL, and FISH;
the Raising of Pastes; the best Directions for all manner of Kickshaws, and the
most Poinant Sauces; with the Terms of CARVING and SEWING.

An exact Account of all Dishes for the Season; with other A la mode
Curiosities.

Together with the lively Illustrations of such necessary Figures as are
referred to Practice.

Approved by the Fifty Years Experience and Industry of ROBERT MAY, in his
Attendance on several Persons of Honor.

London, Printed by R. W. for Nath. Brook, at the Sign of the Angel in
Cornhill, 1660.

To the Right Honorable my Lord Lumley, and my Lord Lovelace; and to the Right
Worshipful Sir. William Paston, Sir Kenelme Digby, and Sir Frederick
Cornwallis; so well known to the Nation for their admired Hospitalities.
Right Honorable, and Right worshipful,
HE is an Alien, a mere Stanger in England that has not been acquainted with
your generous House-keepings; for my own part, my more particular Ties of
service to you my Honored Lords, have built me up to the height of this
experience, for which this Book now at last dares appear to the world: those
times which I attended upon your Honors were those golden days of Peace and
Hospitality, when you enjoyed your own, so as to entertain and relieve others.

Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful, I have not only been an eye witness,
but interested by my attendance; so as that I may justly acknowledge those
Triumphs and magnificent Trophies of Cookery that have adorned your Tables; nor
can I but confess to the world, except I should be guilty of the highest
ingratitude, that the only structure of this my Art and Knowledge, I owed to
your costs, generous and inimitable expenses; thus not only I have derived my
experience, but your Country has reap't the plenty of your Humanity and
charitable Bounties.

Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful, Hospitality which was once a Relic
of Gentry, and a known Cognizance to all ancient Houses, has lost her Title
through the unhappy and cruel Disturbances of these Times, she is now reposing
of her lately so alarmed Head on your Beds of Honor: In the mean space that
our English World may know the Maecenas's and Patrons of this Generous Art, I
have exposed this Volume to the Public, under the Tuition of your Names; at
whose Feet I prostrate these Endeavors, and shall for ever remain

Your most humbly devoted Servant, ROBERT MAY.
From Sholeby in Leicestershire, Jan. 24. 1659.
To the Master Cooks, and to such young Practitioners of the Art of Cookery, to
whom this Book may be useful.
TO you first, most worthy Artists, I acknowledge one of the chief Motives that
made me to adventure this Volume to your Censures, has been to testify my
gratitude to your experienced Society; nor could I omit to direct it to you, as
it has been my ambition, that you should be sensible of my Proficiency of
Endeavors in this Art. To all honest well intending Men of our Profession, or
others, this Book cannot but be acceptable, as it plainly and profitably
discovers the Mystery of the whole Art; for which though I may be envied by
some that only value their private Interests above Posterity and the public
good, yet God and my own Conscience would not permit me to bury these my
Experiences with my Silver Hairs in the Grave: and that more especially, as the
advantages of my Education has raised me above the Ambitions of others, in the
converse I have had with other Nations, who in this Art fall short of what I
have known experimented by you my worthy Countrymen. Howsoever, the French by
their Insinuations, not without enough of Ignorance, have bewitched some of the
Gallants of our Nation with Epigram Dishes, smoak't rather then dressed, so
strangely to captivate the Gusto, their Mushroom'd Experiences for Sauce rather
then Diet, for the generality howsoever called A la mode, not being worthy of
taken notice on. As I lived in France and had the Language, and have been an
eyewitness of their Cookeries, as well as a peruser of their Manuscripts and
printed Authors, whatsoever I found good in them I have inserted in this
Volume. I do acknowledge my self not to be a little beholding to the Italian
and Spanish Treatises, though without my fosterage and bringing up under the
Generofities and Bounties of my noble Patrons and Masters, I could never have
arrived to this Experience. To be confined and limited to the narrowness of a
Purse, is to want the Materials from which the Artist must gain his knowledge.
Those Honorable Persons my Lord Lumley, and my Lord Lovelace, and others with
whom I have spent a part of my time, were such whose generous costs never
weighed the Expense, so that they might arrive to that right and high esteem
they had of their Gusto's. Whosoever peruses this Volume, shall find it amply
exemplified in Dishes of such high prices, which only these Noblesses
Hospitalities did reach to: I should have sinned against their to be
perpetuated Bounties, if I had not set down their several varieties, that the
Reader might be as well acquainted with what is extraordinary as what is
ordinary in this Art; as I am truly sensible that some of those things that I
have set down will amaze a not thorow-paced Reader in the Art of Cookery, as
they are Delicates, never till this time made known to the World.

Fellow Cooks, that I might give a testimony to my Country of the laudableness
of our Profession, that I might encourage young Undertakers to make a progress
in the Practice of this Art, I have laid open these Experiences, as I was most
unwilling to hide my Talent, but have ever endeavored to do good to others; I
acknowledge that there has already been several Books published, and amongst
the rest some out of the French, for ought I could perceive to very little
purpose, empty and unprofitable Treatises, of as little use as some Niggards
Kitchens, which the Reader in respect of the confusion of the Method, or
barrenness of those Authors Experience, has rather been puzzled then profited
by; as those already extant Authors have trace't but one common beaten road,
repeating for the main what others have in the same homely manner done before
them: it has been my task to denote some new Faculty or Science, that others
have not yet discovered; this the Reader will quickly discern by those new
Terms of Art which he shall meet withal throughout this whole Volume. Some
things I have inserted of Carving and Sewing, that I might demonstrate the
whole Art. In the contrivance of these my Labors, I have so managed them for
the general good, that those whose Purses cannot reach to the cost of rich
Dishes, I have descended to their meaner Expenses, that they may give, though
upon a sudden Treatment, to their Kindred, Friends, Allies, and Acquaintance, a
handsome and relishing entertainment in all Seasons of the year, though at some
distance from Towns or Villages. Nor have my serious considerations been
wanting amongst directions for Diet how to order what belongs to the Sick, as
well as to those that are in Health; and withal my care has been such, that in
this Book, as in a Closet, is contained all such Secrets as relate to
Preserving, Conserving, Candying, Distilling, and such rare varieties as they
are most concerned in the best husbandring and housewifering of them. Nor is
there any Book, except that of the Queens Closet, which was so enricht with
Receipts presented to her Majesty, as yet that I ever saw in any Language, that
ever contained so many profitable Experiences as in this Volume; in all which
the Reader shall find most of the Compositions, and mixtures easy to be
prepared, most pleasing to the pallat, and not too chargeable to the Purse:
since you are at liberty to employ as much or as little therein as you please.
It is impossible for any Author to please all people, no more then the best
Cook can fancy their pallats whose mouths are always out of taste. As for
those who make it their business to hide their Candle under a Bushel, to do
only good to themselves and not to others, such as will curse me for revealing
the Secrets of this Art, I value the discharge of mine own Conscience, in doing
good, above all their malice; protesting to the whole world, that I have not
concealed any material Secret of above my fifty years Experience; my Father
being a Cook, under whom in my Childhood I was bred up in this Art. To
conclude, the diligent peruser of this Volume gains that in a small time as to
the Theory, which an Apprenticeship with some Masters could never have taught
them. I have no more to do, but to desire of God a blessing upon these my
Endeavors, and remain

Yours in the most ingenuous ways of Friendship, ROBERT MAY.
Sholeby in Leicestershire, Jan. 24. 1659.
A short Narrative of some passages of the Authors Life.
FOr the better knowledge of the worth of this Book, though it be not usual,
the Author being living, it will not be amiss to acquaint the Reader with a
brief account of some passages of his Life, as also what eminent Persons
(renowned for their good Housekeeping) whom he has served throughout the
whole series of his Life; for as the growth of the children argues the
strength of the Parents, so does the judgment and abilities of the Artist
conduce to the making and goodness of the Work: now that such great knowledge
in this so commendable Art was not gained but by long experience, practice, and
converse with the most ablest men in their times, the Reader in this brief
Narrative may be informed by what steps and degrees he astended to the same.

He was born in the year of our Lord 1588. His Father being one of the ablest
Cooks in his time, and his first Tutor in the knowledge or practice of Cookery;
under whom having attained to some perfection in that Art, the old Lady Dormer
sent him over into France, where he continued five years, being in the Family
of a noble Peer, and first President of Paris; where he gained not only the
French Tongue, but also bettered his knowledge in Cookery: and returning again
into England was bound Apprentice in London to Mr. Arthur Hollinsworth in
Newgate Market, one of the ablest workmen in London, Cook to the Grocers Hall
and Star Chamber. His Prenticeship being out, the Lady Dormer sent for him to
be her Cook under his Father, (who then served that Honorable Lady) where were
four Cooks more, such noble Houses were then keept, the glory of that, and
shame of this present age; then were those golden days wherein were practiced
the Triumphs and Trophies of Cookery, then was Hospitality esteemed,
Neighborhood preserved, the Poor cherished, and God honored; then was
Religion less talked on and more practiced, then was Atheism and Schism less
in fashion; and then did men strive to be good rather then to seem so. Here he
continued till the Lady Dormer died, and then went again to London and served
the Lord Castle-haven, after that the Lord Lumley, that great lover and knower
of Art, who wanted no knowledge in the decerning this mystery; next the Lord
Mountague in Sussex; and at the beginning of these Wars the Countess of Kent,
then Mr. Nevel of Chrissen-Temple in Essex, whose Ancestors the Smiths, of
whom he is descended, were the greatest maintainers of Hospitality in all those
parts; nor does the present Mr. Nevil degenerate from their laudable examples.
Diverse other persons of like esteem and quality has he served, as the Lord
Rivers, Mr. John Ashburnham, of the Bed Chamber, Doctor Steed in Kent, Sir
Thomas Styles of Drury Lane in London, Sir Marmaduke Constable in Yorkshire,
Sir Charles Lucas; and lastly the Right Honorable the Lady Eng! efield where
he now lives.

Thus have I given you a brief account of his Life, I shall next tell you in
what high esteem this noble Art was with the ancient Romans, Plutarch reports
that Lucullus his ordinary diet was fine dainty dishes, with works of pastery,
Banqueting dishes, and fruit curiously wrought and prepared; and that his
Table might be furnished with choice of varieties, (as the noble Lord Lumley
did) that he kept and nourished all manner of Fowl all the year long. To this
purpose he tells us a story how Pompey being sick, the Physicians willed him
to eat a Thrush, and it being said there was none to be had, because it was
then Summer; it was answered, they might have them at Lucullus's house, who
kept both Thrushes and all manner of Fowl all the year long. This Lucullus was
for his Hospitality so esteemed in Rome, that there was no talk but of his
noble Housekeeping. The said Plutarch reports, how Cicero and Pompey inviting
themselves to sup with him, they would not let him speak with his men to
provide any thing more then ordinary; but he telling them he would sup in
Apollo (a Chamber so named, and every Chamber proportioned their expenses) he
by this wile beguiled them, and a supper was made ready estimated at fifty
thousand pence, every Roman penny being seven pence half penny English money; a
vast sum for that Age, before the Indies had overflowed Europe. But I have
too far digressed from the Author, of whom I might speak much more as in
relation to his person and abilities, but who will cry out the Sun shines: this
already said is enough to satisfy any but the malicious, who are the greatest
enemies to all honest endeavors. Homer had his Zoilus, and Virgil his Bavius;
the best Wits have had their detracters, and the greatest Artists have been
maligned; the best on it is, such Works as these outlive their Authors with an
honorable respect of posterity, whilst envious Critticks never survive their
own happiness, their Lives going out like the snuff of a Candle.

Triumphs and Trophies in Cookery, to be used at Festival Times, as Twelfth
Day, etc.
MAke the likeness of a Ship in pasteboard, with flags and streamers, the guns
belonging to it of Kickses, bind them about with pack thread, and cover them
with course paste proportionable to the fashion of a Cannon with Carriages, lay
them in places convenient, as you see them in Ships of War, with such holes and
trains of powder that they may all take fire; place your Ship firm in a great
Charger; then make a salt round about it, and stick therein egg-shells full of
sweet water; you may by a great pin take out all the meat out of the egg by
blowing, and then fill it with the rose water. Then in another Charger have the
proportion of a Stag made of course paste, with a broad arrow in the side of
him, and his body filled up with claret wine. In another Charger at the end of
the Stag have the proportion of a Castle with Battlements, Percullices, Gates,
and Draw-Bridges made of pasteboard, the Guns of Kickses, and covered with
course paste as the former; place it at a distance from the Ship to fire at
each other. The Stag being placed betwixt them with Egg-shells full of sweet
water (as before) placed in salt. At each side of the Charger wherein is the
Stag, place a Pie made of course paste, in one of which let there be some live
Frogs, in the other live Birds; make these pies of course paste filled with
bran, and yellowed over with saffron or yolks of eggs, gild them over in spots,
as also the Stag, the Ship, and Castle; bake them, and ^^ace them with gilt Bay
leaves on the Turrets and Tunnels of the Castle and Pies; being baked, make a
hole in the bottom of your pies, take out the bran, put in your Frogs and
Birds, and close up the holes with the same course paste; then cut the lids
neatly up, to be taken off by the Tunnels: being all placed in order upon the
Table, before you fire the trains of powder, order it so that some of the
Ladies may be persuaded to pluck the Arrow out of the Stag, then will the
Claret wine follow as blood running out of a wound. This being done with
admiration to the beholders, after some short pawse, fire the train of the
Castle, that the pieces all of one side may go off; then fire the trains of one
side of the Ship as in a Battle; next turn the Chargers, and by degrees fire
the trains of each other side as before. This done to sweeten the stinck of the
powder, the Ladies take the egg shells full of sweet waters and throw them at
each other. All dangers being seemed over, by this time you may suppose they
will desire to see what is in the pies; where lifting first the lid off one
pie, out skips some Frogs, which makes the Ladies to skip and shreek; next
after the other pie, whence comes out the Birds; who by a natural instinct
flying at the light, will put out the candles: so that what with the flying
Birds and skipping Frogs, the one above, the other beneath, will cause much
delight and pleasure to the whole company: at length the candles are lighted,
and a Banquet brought in, the music sounds, and every one with much delight
and content rehearses their actions in the former passages. These were formerly
the delights of the Nobility, before good Housekeeping had left England, and
the Sword really acted that which was only counterfeited in such honest and
laudable Exercises as these.

On the unparalled Piece of Mr. MAY his Cookery.
SEe here a Work set forth of such Perfection,
Will praise it self, and does not beg Protection
From flattered greatness. Industry and pains,
For general good, his aim, his Countries gains;
Which ought respect him. A good English Cook,
Excelling Modish Mounsieurs, and that Book
Called Perfect Cook, Merete's Pastery
Translated, looks like old hanged tapestry;
The wrong side outward; so Mounsieur adieu,
I Am for our Native May's Works rare and new:
And with Antique could have prepared and dressed
The Nations Quondam grand Imperial Feast,
Which that thrice Crowned Third Edward did ordain
For his high Order and their Noble Train;
Whereon St. George his famous day was seen,
A Court on earth that did all Courts outshine.
And how all Rareties and Cates might be
Ordered for a renowned solemnity.
Learn of this Cook, who with judgment, reason,
Teaches for every Time, each thing's true season;
Making his Compounds with such harmony,
Taste shall not charge with superiority,
Of pepper, salt, or spice, by the best pallat
Or any one Herb in his Broths, or Sallat.
Where temperance and discretion guides his deeds,
Satis his Motto, where no thing exceeds;
Or ought to waste, for there is good Husbandry
To be observed, as Art in Cookery.
Which of the Mathematics does partake
Geometrick Proportions when they bake?
Who can in Paste erect, of finest flour,
A complete Fort, a Castle, or a Tower.
A City Custard does so subtly wind,
That should Truth seek, she would scarce all corners find:
Plat-forme of Sconces that might Soldiers teach,
To fortify by Works as well as Preach.
I Will say no more, for as I am a sinner,
I Have wrought my self a stomach to a dinner,
Inviting Poets not to tantalize,
But feast (not surfeit) here their Fantasies.
James Parry.

To the Reader of (my very loving Friend) Mr. ROBERT MAY his incomparable Book
of Cookery.
SEe here is a Book set forth with such things in it,
As former Ages never saw in print;
Something I Would write in praise on it, but the pen
Of famous Cleave land, or renowned Ben,
If unintoom'd, might give this Book its due,
By their high strains, and keep i^ always new.
But I whose ruder Style could never clime,
Or step beyond a homebred Country Rhyme,
Must not attempt it; only this I Will say,
Cato's Res Rustica's far short of May.
Here Is taught to keep all sorts of Flesh in date,
All sorts of Fish, if you will marinate;
To candy, to preserve, to souce, to pickle,
To make rare Sauces both to please, and tickle
To the pretty Ladies pallats with delight;
Both how to glut, and gain an appetite.
The fritter, pancake, musroom; with all these,
The curious candle made of Ambergreece.
He is so universal, he will not miss
The Pudding, nor Bononian Sawsages.
Italian, Spaniard, French, he all out-goes,
Refines their Kickshaws, and their Olio's;
The rarest use of Sweetmeats, Spicery,
And all things else belong to Cookery:
Not only this, but to give all content,
Here Is all the forms of every implement
To work or Carve with; so he makes thee able
To deck the Dresser, and adorn the Table.
What Dish goes first of every kind of Meat,
And so you are welcome, pray fall too, and eat.
Reader, read on, for I have done: farewell.
The Book's so good it cannot choose but sell.
Thy well wishing Friend, John Town.

The most Exact, or A la Mode ways of Carving and Sewing.
Terms of Carving.
BReak that dear, leach that brawn, rear that goose, lift that swan, sauce that
capon, spoil that hen, frust that chicken, unbrace that mallard, unlace that
coney, dismember that hern, display that crane, disfigure that peacock, unjoynt
that bitturn, untach that curlew, allay that pheasant, wing that partridge,
wing that quail, mince that plover, thigh that pidgeon, border that pasty,
thigh that woodcock; thigh all manner of small birds.

Timber the fire, tire that egg, chine that salmon, string that lamprey, splat
that pike, sauce that plaice, sauce that tench, splay that bream, side that
haddock, tusk that barbel, culpon that trout, fin that chevin, transon that
eel, tranch that sturgeon, undertranch that porpus, tame that crab, barb that
lobster.

Service.
FIrst set forth mustard and brawn, pottage, beef, mutton, stewed pheasant,
swan, capon, pig, venison, bake, custard, leach, lombard, blanchmanger, and
jelly; for standard venison roste kid, fawn and coney, bustard, stork, crane,
peacock with his tail, hearn-shaw, bittern, woodcock, partridge, plover,
rabbets, great birds, larks, dowcets, pampuff, white leach, amber-jelly, cream
of almonds, curlew, brew, snite, quail, sparrow, martinet, perch in jelly,
petty-pervis, quince baked, leach, dewgard, fruter-sage, blandrells, or pippins
with carawayes in comfits, wafers, and ipocras.

Sauce for all manner of Fowls.
MUstard is good with brawn, beef, chine of bacon, and mutton; verjuyce good to
boil chickens and capons; swan with chaldrons; ribs of beef with garlic,
mustard, pepper, verjuyce, ginger; sauce of lamb, pig and fawn, mustard, and
sugar; to pheasant, partridge, and coney, sauce gamelin; to hearn-shaw, egript,
plover, and crane, brew and curlew, salt, and sugar, and water of Camot;
bustard, shovilland, and bittern, sauce gamelin; woodcock, lapwing, lark,
quail, martinet, venison and snite with white salt; sparrows and thrushes with
salt and cinaon. Thus with all meats sauce shall have the opperation.

Directions for the order of Carving Fowl.
Lift that Swan.
THe manner of cutting up a swan must be to slit her right down in the middle
of the breast, and so clean through the back from the neck to the rump, so part
her in two halves cleanly and handsomely that you break not nor tear the meat,
lay the two halves in a fair charger with the slit sides downwards, throw salt
about it, and set it again on the table. Let your sauce be chaldron for a swan,
and serve it in saucers.

Rear the Goose.
You must break a goose contrary to the former way, take a goose being roasted,
and take off both the legs fair like a shoulder of lamb, take them quite from
the body, then cut off the belly-piece round close to the lower end of the
breast; lace her down with your knife clean through the breast on each side
your thumbs breadth from the bone in the middle of the breast; then take off
the pinion of each side, and the flesh which you first laced with your knife,
raise it up clean from the bone, and take it from the carcass with the pinion;
then cut up the bone which lies before in the breast (which is commonly called
the merry-thought,) the skin and flesh being upon it; then cut from the
breast bone another slice of flesh clean through, and take it clean from the
bone, turn your carcass and cut it asunder the backbone above the loin bones:
then take the rump end of the backbone, and lay it in a fair dish with the
skinny side upwards, lay at the fore-end of that the merry-thought with the
skin side upward, and before that the apron of the goose; then lay your pinions
on each side contrary, set your legs on each side contrary behind them, that
the bone end of the legs may stand up cross in the middle of the dish, and the
wing pinions on the outside of them; put under the wing pinions on each side
the long slices of flesh which you cut from the breast bone, and let the ends
meet under the leg bones, let the other ends lie cut in the dish betwixt the
leg and the pinion; then pour your sauce into the dish under your meat, throw
on salt, and set it on the table.

To cut up a Turkey, or Bustard.
Raise up the leg very fair, and open the joint with the point of your knife,
but take not off the leg; then lace down the breast with your knife on both
sides, and open the breast pinion with the knife, but take not the pinion off;
then raise up the merry-thought betwixt the breast bone and the top of the
merry-thought, lace down the flesh on both sides of the breast bone, and raise
up the flesh called the brawn, turn it outward upon both sides, but break it
not, nor cut it not off; then cut off the wing pinion at the joint next to the
body, and stick on each side the pinion in the place where ye turned out the
brawn, but cut off the sharp end of the pinion, take the middle piece, and that
will fit just the place.

You may cut up a capon or pheasant the same way, but of your capon cut not off
the pinion, but in the place where you put the pinion of the turkey, you must
put the gizard of your capon on each side half.

Dismember that Hern.
Take off both the legs and lace it down to the breast with your knife on both
sides, raise up the flesh and take it clean off with the pinion; then stick the
head in the breast, set the pinion on the contrary side of the carcass, and the
leg on the other side, so that the bone ends may meet cross over the carcass,
and the other wing cross over upon the top of the carcass.

Vnbrane the Mallard.
Raise up the pinion and the leg, but take them not off, raise the merry
thought from the breast, and lace it down on each side of the breast with your
knife, bending too and fro like waves.

Unlace that Coney.
Turn the back downwards, and cut the belly flaps clean off from the kidney,
but take keed you cut not the kidney nor the flesh; then put in the point of
your knife between the kidneys and loosen the flesh from each side the bone;
then turn up the back of the rabber, and cut it cross between the wings, and
lace it down close by the bone with your knife on both sides, then open the
flesh of the rabbet from the bone with the point of your knife against the
kidney, and pull the leg open softly with your hand, but pluck it not off, then
thrust in your knife betwixt the ribs and the kidney, slit it out, and lay the
legs close together.

Sauce that Capon.
Lift up the right leg and wing, and so array forth, and lay him in the platter
as he should fly, and so serve him. Know that capons or chickens be arrayed
after one sauce; the chickens shall be sauced with green sauce or verjuyce.

Allay that Pheasant.
Take a pheasant, raise his legs and wings as it were a hen, and no sauce but
only salt.

Wing that Partridge.
Raise his legs, and his wings as a hen, if you mince him sauce him with wine,
powder of ginger, and salt, and set him upon a chafing dish of coals to warm
and serve.

Wing that Quail.
Take a quail and raise his legs and his wings as a hen, and no sauce but salt.

Display that Crane.
Unfold his legs, and cut off his wings by the joints, then take up his wings
and his legs, and sauce them with powder of ginger, mustard, vinegar and salt.

Dismember that Hern.
Raise his legs and his wings as a crane, and sauce him with vinegar, mustard,
powder of ginger and salt.

Vnjoynt that Bittern.
Raise his legs and his wings as a heron, and no sauce but salt.

Break that Egript.
Take an egript, and raise his legs and his wings as a heron, and no sauce but
salt.

Vntach that Curlew.
Raise his legs and his wings as a hen, and no sauce but salt.

Vntach that brew
Raise his legs and his wings in the same manner, and no sauce but only salt.

Unlace that Coney.
Lay him on the back and cut away the vents, then raise the wings and the
sides, and lay bulk, chine, and sides together, sauce them with vinegar and
powder of ginger.

Break that Sarcel.
Take a sarcel or teal, and raise his wings and his legs, and no sauce but
only salt.

Mince that Plover.
Raise his legs and wings as a hen, and no sauce but only salt.

A Snite.
Raise his legs, wings, and his shoulders as a plover, and no sauce but salt.

Thigh that Woodcock.
Raise his legs as a hen, and dight his brain.

The Sewing of Fish.
The first Course.
TO go to the sewing of fish, muscalade, minews in sew, of porpos, or of
salmon, bake't herring with sugar, green-fish, pike, lamprey, salens, porpos
roasted, bake't gurnard and baked lamprey.

The second Course.
Jelly white and red, dates in confect, conger, salmon, dorey, brit, turbut,
holibut for standard, bace, trout, mullet, chevin, soles, lamprey roste, and
tench in jelly.

The third Course.
Fresh sturgeon, bream, perch in jelly, a jole of salmon, sturgeon, welks,
apples, and pears roasted with sugar candy, figs of molisk, raisins, dates capt
with minced ginger, wafers, and ipocras.

The Carving of Fish.
THe carver of fish must see to peason and furmety, the tail and the liver; ye
must look if there be a salt porpos or sole, turrentine, and do after the form
of venison; baked Herrings, lay it whole on the trencher, then white herring in
a dish, open it by the back, pick out the bones and the row, and see there be
mustard. Of salt fish, greenfish, salt salmon, and conger, pare away the skin;
salt fish, stock fish, marling, mackrel, and hake with butter, and take away
the bones and skins; a pike, lay the womb upon a trencher, with pike sauce
enough; a salt lamprey, gobbin it in seven or eight pieces, and so present it.
A plaice, put out the water, then cross him with your knife, and cast on salt,
wine, or ale. Bace, Gurnet, Rochet, Bream, Chevin, Mullet, Roch, Perch, Sole,
Mackrel, Whiting, Haddock, and Codling, raise them by the back, pick out the
bones, and cleanse the rest in the belly. Carp, Brean, Sole, and Trout, back
and belly together; Salmon, Conger, Sturgeon, Turbut, Thornback, Houndfish, and
Holibut, cut them in the dishes; the Porpos about; Tench in his sauce; cut two
Eels, and Lampreys roast, pull off the skin, and pick out the bones, put
thereto vinegar and powder. A Crab, break him afunder in a dish, make the shell
clean, and put in the stuff again, temper it with vinegar, and powder them,
cover it with bread and heat it; a Crevis dight him thus, part him asunder,
slit the belly, and take out the fish, pare away the red skin, mince it thin,
put vinegar in the dish, and set it on the Table without heating. A Jole of
Sturgeon, cut it into thin morsels, and lay it round about the dish. Fresh
Lamprey baked, open the pasty, then take white bread and cut it thin, lay it in
a dish, and with a spoon take out Gallentine, and lay it upon the bread with
red wine and powder of Cinnamon; then cut a gobbin of Lamprey, mince it thin and
lay it in the Gallentine, and set it on the fire to heat. Fresh-herting, with
salt and wine. Shrimps well picked, Flounders, Gudgeons, Minews, and Muskles,
Eels and Lampreys, Sprats is good in sew, musculade in worts, oysters in sew,
oysters in gravy, minews in porpos, salmon in jelly white and red, cream of
almonds dates in comfets, pears and quinces in sirrup, with parsley roots,
mortus of hound-fish raise standing.

Sauces for Fish.
MUstard is good for salt herring, salt fish, salt conger, salmon, sparling,
salt eel and ling; vinegar is good with salt porpus, turrentine, salt sturgeon,
salt thirlepole, and salt whale, lamprey with gallentine; verjuyce to roach,
dace, bream, mullet, flounders, salt crab and chevine with powder of cinnamon
and ginger; green sauce is good with green fish and hollibut, cottel, and fresh
turbut; put not your green sauce away for it is good with mustard.

Bills of FARE for every Season in the Year; also how to set forth the MEAT in
order for that Service; as it was used before Hospitality left this Nation.
A Bill of Fare for All Saints Day, being November. 1.
Oysters.
1 A Collar of Brawn and Mustard. 2 A Capon in stewed Broth with Marrow-bones.
3 A Goose in Stoffado, or two Ducks. 4 a Grand Sallet. 5 A Shoulder of Mutton
with Oysters. 6 A Bisk Dish baked. 7 A roste Chine of Beef. 8 Minced Pies or
Chewits of Capon, Tongue, or of veal. 9 A Chine of Pork. 10 A Pasty of Venison.
11 A Swan or 2 Geese roast. 12 A Loin of Veal. 13 A French Pie of diverse
Compounds. 14 A roast Turkey. 15 A Pig roast. 16 A forced Dish baked. 17 Two
Brangreese roasted, one larded. 18 Souc't Veal. 19 Two Capons roasted, one
larded, 20 A double bordered Custard.
Second Course for the same Mess. Oranges and Lemons.
1 A souc't Pig. 2 A young Lamb or kid roast. 3 Two Shovelers. 4 Two Herns, one
larded. 5 A Potatoe Pie. 6 A Duck and Mallard, one larded. 7 A souc't Turbut. 8
A couple of Pheasants one larded. 9 Marinated Carp, or Pike, or Bream. 10 Three
brace of Partridge, three larded. 11 Made Dish of Spinach, Cream baked, 12 A
roll of Beef. 13 Two Teels roasted, one larded. 14 A cold Goose Pie. 15 A soust
Mullet and Bace. 16 A Quince Pie. 17 Four Curlews, 2 larded. 18 A dried Neats
Tongue. 19 A dish of Anchoves. 20 A jole of Sturgeon.
Jellyes and Tarts Royal, and Ginger-breads, and other Fruits.

A Bill of Fare for Christmas Day, and how to set the Meat in order.
Oysters.
1 A collar of Brawn. 2 Stewed Broth of Mutton Marrow bones. 3 A grand Sallet.
4 A pottage of Caponets. 5 A Breast of Veal in Stoffado. 6 A boild Partridge. 7
A Chine of Beef, or Surloin roste. 8 Minced Pies. 9 A Jegote of Mutton with
Anchove sauce. 10 A made dish of Sweetbread. 11 A Swan roste. 12 A Pasty of
Venison. 13 A Kid with a Pudding in his Belly. 14 A Steak Pie. 15 A hanch of
Venison roasted. 16 A Turkey roste and stuck with Cloves. 17 A made dish of
Chickens in Puff-paste. 18 Two Brangeese roasted, one larded. 19 Two large
Capons one larded. 20 A Custard.
The second course for the same Mess. Oranges and Lemons.
1 A young Lamb or Kid. 2 Two couple of Rabits, two larded. 3 A Pig soust with
Tongues. 4 Three Ducks, one larded. 5 Three Pheasants, 1 larded. 6 A Swan Pie.
7 Three brace of Partridge, three larded. 8 Made dish in puff-paste. 9 Bolonia
Sausage, and Anchove, Mushrooms, and Caviare, and pickled Oysters in a dish. 10
Six Teels, three larded. 11 A Gammon of Westfalia Bacon. 12 Ten Plovers, five
larded. 13 A Quince Pie, or Warden Pie. 14 Six Woodcocks, 3 larded. 15 A
standing Tart in puffpaste, preserved fruits, Pippins, etc. 16 A dish of Larks.
17 Six dried Neats Tongues. 18 Sturgeon. 19 Powdered Geese.
Jellyes.

A Bill of Fare for Newyears Day.
Oysters.
1 Brawn and Mustard. 2 Two boild Capons in stewed Broth, or white Broth. 3 Two
Turkies in Stoffado. 4 A hash of twelve Partridges, or a Shoulder of Mutton. 5
Two brand Geese boild. 6 A forced boild meat with Snites or Ducks. 7 A Marrow
Pudding baked. 8 A Surloin of roste Beef. 9 Minced Pies, 10 in a dish, or what
number you please. 10 A Loin of Veal. 11 A Pasty of Venison. 12 A Pig roste. 13
Two Geese roste. 14 Two Capons, one larded. 15 Custard.
A second Course for the same Mess. Oranges and Lemons.
1 A side of Lamb. 2 A soust Pig. 3 Two couple of Rabits, two larded. 4 A Duck
and Mallard, one larded. 5 Six Teels, three larded 6 A dish made, or a Battalia
Pie. 7 Six Woodcocks, 3 larded. 8 A Warden Pie, or a dish of Quails. 9 Dried
Neats Tongues. 10 Six tame Pigeons, three larded. 11 A soust Capon. 12 Pickled
Mushrooms, pickled Oysters, and Anchoves in a dish. 13 Twelve Snites, six
larded. 14 Orangado Pie, or a Tart Royal of dried and wet Suckets. 15 Sturgeon.
16 Turkey, or Goole Pie.
Jelly of five or six sorts, Lay Tarts of diverse colors, and Ginger Bread, and
other Sweet Meats.

A Bill of Fare for February.
1 Eggs and Collops. 2 Brawn and Mustard. 3 A Hash of Rabits, four. 4 A grand
Fricase. 5 A grand Sallet. 6 A Chine of roste Pork.
A second Course.
1 A whole Lamb roste. 2 Three Widgeons. 3 A Pippin Pie. 4 A Jole of Sturgeon.
5 A Bacon Tart. 6 A cold Turkey Pie.
Jellyes and Ginger Bread, and Tarts Royal.

A Bill of Fare for March.
Oysters.
1 Brawn and Mustard. 2 A fresh Neats Tongue and Udder in Stoffado. 3 Three
Ducks in Stoffado 4 A roste Loin of Pork. 5 A Pasty of Venison. 6 A Steak Pie.
A second Course.
1 A side of Lamb. 2 Six Teels, three larded. 3 A Lambstone Pie. 4 200 of
Asparagus. 5 A Warden Pie. 6 Marinate Flounders,
Jellyes and Ginger Bread and Tarts Royal.

A Bill of Fare for April.
Oysters.
1 A Bisk. 2 Cold Lamb. 3 A Hanch of Venison roste. 4 Goslings four. 5 A Turkey
Chicken. 6 Custard of Almonds.
A second Course.
1 Lamb, a side in joints. 2 Turtle Doves eight. 3 Cold Neats Tongue Pie. 4 8
Pigeons four larded. 5 Lobsters. 6 A Collar of Beef.
Tanseys.

A Bill of Fare for May.
1 Scotch Pottage, or Skink. 2 Scotch Collops of Mutton. 3 A Loin of Veal. 4 An
Olive Pie, or a Pallat Pie. 5 Three Caponets, 1 larded. 6 Custard.
A second Course.
1 Lamb. 2 A Tart Royal, or Quince Pie. 3 Gammon of Bacon Pie. 4 A Jole of
Sturgeon. 5 Artichock Pie hot. 6 Bolonia Sausage.
Tanseys.

A Bill of Fare for June.
1 Shoulder of Mutton hasht. 2 A Chine of Beef. 3 Pasty of Venison, a cold
Hash. 5 A Leg of Mutton roste. 4 Four Turkey Chickens. 6 A Steak Pie.
A second Course.
1 Jane or Kid. 2 Rabits. 3 Shovelers. 4 Sweetbread Pie. 5 Olives, or Pewit. 6
Pigeons.
A Bill of Fare for July.
Musk-millions.
1 A Pottage of Capons. 2 Boild Pigeons. 3 A hash of Caponets. 5 A grand
Sallet. 4 A Fawn. 6 Custard.
A second Course.
1 Pease, or French Beans. 2 Gulls four, two larded. 3 Pewits eight, four
larded. 4 A Quodling Tart green. 5 Portinggale eggs, 2 sorts. 6 Buttered Brawn.
Selsey Cockles broild.

A Bill of Fare for August.
Musk-millions.
1 Scotch Collops of Veal. 2 Boild Breast of Mutton. 3 A Fricase of Pigeons. 4
A stewed Calves head. 5 Four Goslings. 6 Four Caponets.
A second Course.
1 Dotterel twelve, six larded. 2 Tarts Royal of Fruit. 3 Wheatears. 4 Pie of
Heath Pouts. 5 Marinate Smelts. 6 Gammon of Bacon.
Selsey Cockles.

A Bill of Fare for September.
Oysters.
1 An Ollio. 2 Breast of Veal in stoffado. 3 Twelve Partridge hashed. 4 Grand
Sallet. 5 Chaldron Pie. 6 Custard.
A second Course.
1 Rabits 2 Two Hearns, one larded. 3 Florentine of Tongues. 4 8 Pigeons
roste, 4 larded. 5 Pheasant Pouts, 2 larded. 6 A cold Hare Pie.
Selsey Cockles broild after.

A Bill of Fare for October.
Oysters.
1 Boild Ducks. 2 A Hash of a Loin of Veal. 3 Roste Veal. 4 Two drand Geese
roste. 5 Tart Royal. 6 Custard.
A second Course.
1 Pheasants, Pouts, Pigeons. 2 Knots twelve. 3 Twelve Quails, six larded. 4
Potato Pie. 5 Sparrows roste. 6 Turbut.
Selsey Cockles.

A Bill of Fare formerly used on Fasting Days and in Lent.
The first Course. Oysters if in season.
1 Butter and Eggs. 2 Barley Pottage, or Rice Pottage. 3 Stewed Oysters. 4
Buttered Eggs on Toasts. 5 Spinach Sallet boild. 6 Boild Rochet, or Gurnet. 7 A
Jole of Ling. 8 Stewed Carp. 9 Oyster Chewets. 10 Boild Pike. 11 Roste Eeels.
12 Hadducks, fresh Cod, or Whitings. 13 Eel, or Carp Pie. 14 Made dish of
Spinach. 15 Salt Eels. 16 Soust Turbut.
A second Course.
1 Fried Soles. 2 Stewed Oysters in Scollop Shells. 3 Fried Smelts. 4 Congers
head broild. 5 Baked dish of Potatoes, or Oyster Pie. 6 A Spitch-cock of Eels.
7 Quince Pie, or Tartsroyal. 8 Buttered Crabs. 9 Fried Flounders. 10 Jole of
fresh Salmon. 11 Fried Turbut. 12 Cold Salmon Pie. 13 Fried Skirrets. 14 Soust
Conger. 15 Lobsters. 16 Sturgeon.
THE Accomplished Cook, OR, The whole Art and Mystery of COOKERY, fitted for all
Degrees and Qualities.
Section 1.
Perfect Directions for the Al a mode Ways of dressing all manner of Boiled
Meats, with their several Sauces, etc.

To make an Olio Podrida.
TAke a pipkin or pot of some three gallons, fill it with fair water, and set
it over a fire of Charcoals, and put in first your hardest meats, a Rump of
Beef, Bolonia Sausages, Neats Tongues, two dry, and two green, boiled and
larded, about two hours after the pot is boiled and scummed: but put in more
presently after your Beef is scummed, Mutton, Venison, Pork, Bacon, all the
foresaid in gubbins, as big as a Ducks Egg, in equal pieces; put in also
Carrots, Turnips, Onions, Cabbidge, in good big pieces as big as your meat, a
faggot of sweet herbs well bound up, and some whole Spinedge, Sorrel, Burradge,
Endive, Marigolds, and other good Pothearbs a little chopped; and sometimes
French Barley, or Lupins green or dry.

Then a little before you dish out your Olio, put to your pot, Cloves, Mace,
Saffron, etc.

Then next have diverse Fowls; as first,

A Goose, or Turkey, two Capons, two Ducks, two Pheasants, two Widgeons, four
Partridges, four Stockdoves, four Teals, eight Snites, twenty four Quails,
forty eight Larks.

Boil these foresaid Fowls in water and salt in a pan, pipkin, or pot, etc.

Then have, Bread, Marrow, Bottoms of Artichocks, Yolks of hard Eggs, Large
Mace, Chestnuts boiled and blancht, two Collyflowers, Saffron.

And stew these in a pipkin together, being ready clenged with some good sweet
butter, a little white wine and strong broth.

Some other times for variety you may use Beets, Potato's, Skirrets, Pistaches,
Pine Apple seed, or Almonds, Poungarnet, and Lemons,

Now to dish your Olio, dish first your Beef, Veal, or Pork; then your Venison,
and Mutton, Tongues, Sausage, and Roots over all.

Then next your largest Fowl, Land Fowl, or Sea Fowl, as first, a Goose or
Turkey, two Capons, two Pheasants, four Ducks, four Widgeons, four Stock-doves,
four Partridges, eight Teals, twelve Snites, twenty four Quails, forty eight
Larks, etc.

Then broth it, and put on your pipkin of Collyflowers, Artichocks, Chestnuts,
some Sweat-breads fried, Yolks of hard Eggs, then Marrow boiled in strong broth
or water, large Mace, Saffron, Pistaches, and all the foresaid things being
finely stewed up, and some red Beets over all, slic't Lemons, and Lemon peels
whole, and run it over with beaten buttter.

Marrow Pies.
For the garnish of the Dish, make Marrow Pies made like round chewets, but not
so high altogether; then have Sweetbreads of Veal cut like small dice, some
Pistaches, and Marrow, some Potato's or Artichocks cut like the Sweatbreads; as
also some enterlarded Bacon, yolks of hard Eggs, Nutmegs, Salt, Gooseberries,
Grapes, or Barberies, and some minced Veal in the bottom of the pie minced with
some Bacon or Beef Suet, Sparagus, and Chestnuts, with a little Musk; close them
up, and baste them with Saffron water, bake them, and liquor it with beaten
butter, and set them about the dish side or brims, with some bottoms of
Artichocks, and yolks of hard Eggs, Lemons in quarters, Poungarnets, and red
Beets boiled and carved.

Other Marrow Pies.

Other ways for variety, you may make other Marrow Pies of minced Veal and
Beef Suet, seasoned with Pepper, Salt, Nutmegs, and boiled Sparagus, cut half
an inch long, yolks of hard Eggs cut in quarters, and mingled with the meat and
marrow: fill your Pies, bake them not too hard, musk them, etc.

Other Marrow Pies.

Other ways, Marrow Pies of bottoms of little Artichocks, Suckers, yolks of
hard Eggs, Chestnuts, Marrow, and interlarded Bacon cut like dice, some Veal
Sweetbreads cut also, or Lamb-stones, Potato's, or Skirrets, and Sparagus, or
none; season them lightly with Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt, close your Pies and
bake them.

Olio. Marrow Pies.
Butter three pound, Flower one quart, Lamb-stones three pair, Sweetbreads six,
Marrow-bones eight, large mace, Cocks-stones twenty, interlarded Bacon one
pound, knots of Eggs twelve, Artichocks twelve, Sparagus one hundred, Cocks
combs twenty, Pistaches one pound, Nutmegs, Pepper, and Salt.

Season the aforesaid lightly, and lay them in the Pie upon some minced Veal or
Mutton, your interlarded Bacon in thin slices of half an inch long, mingled
among the rest, fill the Pie, and put in some Grapes, and slic't Lemon,
Barberries or Gooseberries.

1 Pies of Marrow.

Flower, Sweetbread, Marrow, Artichocks, Pistaches, Nutmeg, Eggs, Bacon, Veal,
Suet, Sparagus, Chestnuts, Musk, Saffron, Butter.

2 Marrow Pies.

Flower, Butter, Veal, Suet, Pepper, Salt, Nutmeg, Sparagus, Eggs, Grapes,
Marrow, Saffron.

3 Marrow Pies.

Flower, Butter, Eggs, Artichocks, Sweet bread, Lambstones, Potato's, Nutmegs,
Pepper, Salt, Skirrets, Grapes Bacon.

To the Garnish of an extraordinary Olio: as follows.

Two, Collars of Pigbrawn, two Marrow Pies, twelve roste Turtle Doves in a Pie,
four Pies, eightteen Quails in a Pie, four Pies, two Sallets, two Jelleys of
two colors, two Forced meats, two Tarts.

Thus for an extraordinary Olio, or Olio Royal.

To make a Bisk diverse ways.
TAke a rack of Mutton, and a knuckle of Veal, put them a boiling in a pipkin
of a gallon with some fair water, and when it boils, scum it, and put to it
some salt, two or three blades of large Mace, and a Clove or two; boil it to
three pints, and strain the meat, save the broth for your use, and take off the
fat clean.

Then boil twelve Pigeon-Peepers, and eight Chicken-Peepers in a pipkin with
fair water, salt, and a piece of interlarded Bacon, scum them clean, and boil
them fine, white, and quick.

Then have a roste Capon minced, and put to it some Gravy, Nutmegs, and Salt,
and stew it together; then put to it the juice of two or three Oranges, and
beaten Butter, etc.

Then have ten Sweet breads, and ten pallets fried, and the same number of lips
and noses being first tender boiled and blanched, cut them like lard, and fry
them, put away the Butter, and put to them Gravy, a little Anchove, Nutmeg, and
a little garlic, or none, the juice of two or three oranges, and Marrow fried
in Butter with Sage leaves, and some beaten Butter.

Then again, have some boiled Marrow and twelve Artichocks, Suckers, and
Peaches finely boiled, and put into beaten Butter, some Pistaches boiled also
in some Wine and Gravy, eight Sheeps tongues larded and boiled, and one hundred
Sparagus boiled and put into beaten Butter, or Skirrets.

Then have Lemons carved, and some cut like little dice.

Again, fry some Spinach, and Parsley, etc.

These foresaid matterials being ready, have some French bread in the bottom of
your dish.

Then dish on it your Chickens, and Pigeons, broth it; next your Quails, then
Sweet breads, then your Pallets, then your Artichocks or Sparagus, and
Pistaches, then your Lemon, Poungarnet, or Grapes, Spinach and fried Marrow;
and if yellow, Saffron or fried Sage, then round the center of your boiled meat
put your minced Capon, then run all over with beaten Butter, etc.

1. For variety, Clary fried with yolks of Eggs. 2. Knots of Eggs. 3. Cocks
stones. 4. Cocks Combs. 5. If white, strained Almonds, with some of the broth.
6. Goosberries, or Barberries. 7. Minced meat in Balls. 8. If green, Juice of
Spinach stamped with manchet, and strained with some of the broth and give it a
walm. 9. Garnish with boiled Spinedge. 10. If yellow, yolks of hard Eggs
strained with some Broth and Saffron.
And many other varieties.

A Bisk other ways.
TAke a leg of Beef, cut it into two pieces, and boil it in a gallon or five
quarts of water, scum it, and about half an hour after put in a knuckle of
Veal, and scum it also, boil it from five quarts to two quarts or less; and
being three quarters boiled, put in some Salt, and some Cloves and Mace; being
through boiled, strain it from the meat, and keep the broth for your use in a
pipkin.

Then have eight Marrow bones clean scraped from the flesh, and finely cracked
over the middle, boil in water and falt three of them, and the other leave for
garnish, to be boiled in strong broth, and laid on the top of the Bisk when it
is dished.

Again, boil your Fowl in water and salt, Teals, Partridge, Pigeons, Plovers,
Quails, Larks.

Then have a joint of Mutton made into balls with sweet Herbs, Salt, Nutmegs,
grated Bread, Eggs, Suet, a Clove or two of Garlic, and Pistaches boiled in
broth, with some interladed Bacon, Sheeps Tongues larded and stewed, as also
some Artichocks, Marrow, Pistaches, Sweetbreads, and Lamb-stones in strong
broth, and Mace, a Clove or two, some white Wine and strained Almonds, or with
the yolk of an Egg, Verjuice, beaten Butter, and sliced Lemon or Crapes whole.

Then have fried Clary, and fried Pistaches in Yolks of Eggs.

Then carved Lemons over all.

To make another curious boiled meat, much like a Bisk.
TAke a Rack of Mutton, cut it in four pieces, and boil it in three quarts of
fair water in a pipkin, with a faggot of sweet Herbs very hard and close bound
up from end to end; scum your broth, and put in some salt: Then about half an
hour after put in three Chickens finely scalded and trust, three Partridges
boiled in water, the blood being well soaked out of them, and put to them also
three or four blades of large Mace.

Then have all manner of sweet herbs, as Parsley, Time, Savory, Marjoram,
Sorrel, Sage; these being finely picked, bruise them with the back of a ladle,
and a little before you dish up your boiled meat, put them to your broth, and
give them a walm or two.

Again, for the top of your boiled meat or garnish, have a pound of interlarded
Bacon in thin slices, put them in a pipkin with six marrow-bones, and twelve
bottoms of young Artichocks, and some six Sweetbreads of Veal, strong broth,
Mace, Nutmeg, some Gooseberries or Barberries, some Butter and Pistaches.

These things aforesaid being ready, and dinner called for, take a fine clean
scoured dish, and garnish it with Pistaches and Artichock, carved Lemon,
Grapes, and large Mace.

Then have sippets finely carved, and some slices of French Bread in the bottom
of the dish, dish three pieces of Mutton, and one in the middle, and between
the Mutton three Chickens, and up in the middle, the Partridge, and pour on the
broth with the herbs, then put on your pipkin over all, of Marrow, Artichocks,
and the other Materials, then carved Lemon, Barberries and beaten Butter over
all, your carved sippets round the dish, etc.

Another made Dish in the French Fashion, called, an Enter de Table, Entrance
to the Table.
TAke the bottoms of boiled Artichocks, the yolks of hard Eggs, young
Chicken-peepers or Pigeon-peepers finely trust, Sweetbreads of Veal,
Lamb-stones blanched, and put them in a Pipkin, with Cock-stones and combs, and
knots of Eggs; then put to them some strong broth, white Wine, large Mace,
Nutmeg, Pepper, Butter, Salt, and Marrow, and stew them softly together.

Then have Gooseberries or Grapes parboiled, or Barberries, and put to some
beaten Butter, and Potatoes, Skirrets, or Sparagus boiled, and put in beaten
butter, and some boiled Pistaches.

These being finely stewed, dish your fowls on fine carved sippets, and pour on
your Sweet breads, Artichocks, and Sparagus on them, Grapes, and slic't Lemon,
and run all over with beaten Butter, etc.

Sometimes for variety, you may put some boiled Cabbidge, Lettice,
Collyflowers, Balls of minced meat, or Sausages without skins, fried Almonds,
Calves Udder.

Another French boiled meat of Pine-molet.
TAke a manchet of French bread of a day old, chip it, and cut a round hole in
the top, save the piece whole, and take out the crumb, then make a composition
of a boiled or a roast Capon, minced and stamped with Almond-paste, muskefied
biscuit bread, yolks of hard Eggs, and some sweet Herbs chopped fine, some yolks
of raw Eggs, and Saffron, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Corrans, Sugar, Salt, Marrow, and
Pistaches; fill the loaf, and stop the hole with the piece, and boil it in a
clean cloth in a pipkin, or bake it in an oven.

Then have some forced Chickens flayed, save the skin, wings, legs, and neck
whole and mince the meat, two Pigeons also forced, two Chickens, two boned of
each, and filled with some minced Veal or Mutton, with some interladed Bacon or
Beef Suet, and season it with Cloves, Mace, Pepper, Salt, and some grated
parmisan, or none, grated bread, sweet Herbs chopped small, yolks of Eggs, and
Grapes, fill the skins, and stitch up the back of the skin, then put them in a
deep dish, with some Sugar, strong broth, Artichocks, Marrow, Saffron, Sparrows
or Quails, and some boiled Sparagus.

For the garnish of the foresaid dish, roast Turnips, and roast Onions, Grapes,
Cordons, and Mace.

Dish the forced loaf in the midst of the dish, the Chickens, and Pigeons round
about it, and the Quails or small birds over all, with marrow, Cardons,
Artichocks, or Sparagus, Pine-apple-seeds or Pistaches, Grapes, and
Sweetbreads, and broth it on sippets.

To boil a Chine of Veal, whole or in pieces.
BOil it in water, salt, or in strong broth with a faggot of sweet Herbs,
Capers, Mace, Salt, and interlarded Bacon in thin slices and some Oyster liquor.

Your Chines being finely boiled, have some stewed Oysters by themselves with
some Mace and fine Onions whole, some Vinegar, Butter, and Pepper, etc.

Then have Cucumbers boiled by themselves in water and salt, or pickled
Cucumbers boiled in water, and put in beaten Butter, and Cabbidge-lettice,
boiled also in fair water, and put in beaten Butter.

Then dish your chines on sippets, broth them, and put on your stewed Oysters,
Cucumbers, Lettice, and parboiled Grapes, Boclites, or slic't lemon, and run it
over with beaten Butter.

Chines of Veal otherwise, whole or in pieces.
STew them being first almost roasted, put them into a deep dish with some
Gravy, some strong broth, white Wine, Mace, Nutmeg, and some Oyster liquor, two
or three slices of Lemon and Salt, and being finely stewed, serve them on
sippets with that broth, and slic't Lemon, Gooseberries, and beaten Butter,
boiled Marrow, fried Spinach, etc. For variety, Capers or Sampier.

Chines of Veal boiled with fruit, whole.
PUt it in a stewing pan or deep dish, with some strong broth, large Mace, a
little white Wine, and when it boils scum it, then put some Dates to, being
half boiled, and Salt, some white Endive, Sugar and Marrow.

Then boil some fruit by it self, your meat and broth being finely boiled,
Prunes and Raisins of the Sun, strain some six yolks of Eggs, with a little
Cream, and put it in your broth, then dish it on sippets, your Chine, and
garnish your dish with Fruit, Mace, Dates, Sugar, slic't Lemon, and Barberries,
etc.

Chines of Veal other ways.
STew the whole with some strong broth, white Wine, and Caper-liquor, slices of
interlarded Bacon, Gravy, Cloves, Mace, whole Pepper, Sausages of minced meat,
without skins, or little Balls, some Marrow, Salt and some sweet sweet Herbs
picked of all sorts, and bruised with the back of a ladle; put them to your
broth, a quarter of an hour before you dish your chines, and give them a walm,
and dish up your chine on French bread or sippets, broth it, and run it over
with beaten Butter, Grapes, or slic't Lemon, etc.

Chines of Mutton boiled whole, or Loins, or any joint whole.
BOil it in a long stewing pan or deep dish, with fair water, as much as will
cover it, and when it boils cover it, being scumm'd first, and put to it some
Salt, white Wine, and some Carots cut like dice; your broth being half boiled,
strain it, blow off the fat, and wash away the dregs from your Mutton, wash
also your pipkin, or stewing pan, and put in again your broth, with some Capers
and large Mace: stew your broth and matterials together softly, and lay your
Mutton by in some warm broth or dish, then put in also some sweet Herbs,
chopped with Onions, boiled amongst your broth.

Then have Collyflowers ready boiled in water and salt, and put in beaten
Butter, with some boiled Marrow; then the Mutton and Broth being ready,
dissolve two or three yolks of Eggs, with white Wine, Verjuyce, or Sack; give
it a walm, and dish up your meat on sippets finely carved, or French Bread in
slices, and broth it; then lay on your Colliflowers, Marrow, Carrots, and
Gooseberries, Barberries, or Grapes, and run it over with beaten butter.

Sometimes for variety, according to the seasons, you may use Turnips,
Parsnips, Artichocks, Sparagus, Hopbuds, or Coleworts boiled in water and salt,
and put in beaten butter, Cabbidge sprouts, or Cabbidge Lettice, and Chestnuts.

And for the thickning of this broth sometimes, take strained Almonds, with
strong broth, and Saffron or none.

Other while grated bread, yolks of hard Eggs, and Verjuyce, etc.

To boil a Chine, Rack, or Loin of Mutton, other ways, whole, or in pieces,
BOil it in a stewing-pan or a deep dish, with fair water as much as will cover
it, and when it boils scum it, and put to it some salt; then being half boiled,
take up the meat, strain the broth, and blow off the fat, wash the stewing-pan
and meat: then put in again the crag end of the Mutton, to make the broth good,
and put to it some Mace.

Then a little before you take up your Mutton, a handful of picked Parsley,
chopped small, put it in the broth, with some whole Marigold flowers, and your
whole Chine of Mutton give it a walm or two, then dish it up on sippets, and
broth it: Then have Raisins of the sun and Currants boiled tender, lay on it,
and garnish your Dish with Prunes, Marigold-flowers, Mace, Lemon, and
Barberries, etc.

Other ways without Fruit, boil it with Capers, and all manner of sweet herbs
stripped, some Spinedge and Parsley bruised with the back of a ladle, Mace, and
Salt, etc.

To boil a Chine of Mutton whole or in pieces, or any Joint.
Boil it in a fair glazed pipkin, being well scummed, put a faggot of sweet
herbs, as Time, Parsley, sweet Marjoram, bound hard and stripped with your
knife, and put some Carrots cut like small dice, or cut like Lard, some
Raisins, Prunes Marigold-flowers and salt, and being finely boiled down, serve
it on sippets, garnish your dish with Raisins, Mace, Prunes, Marigold-flowers,
Carrots, Lemons, boiled Marrow, etc.

Sometimes for change leave out Carrots and Fruits.

Use all as before said, and add white Endive, Capers, Samphire, run it over
with beaten Butter and Lemon.

Barley Broth. Chine of Mutton or Veal in Barley Broth, Rack or any joint.
TAke a Chine or Knuckle, and joint it, put it in a pipkin with some strong
broth, and when it boils, scum it, and put in some French Barley, being first
boiled in two or three waters, with some large Mace, and a faggot of sweet
herbs, bound up, and close hard tied, some Raisins, Damask Prunes, and Currants
or no Prunes, and Marigold-flowers; boil it to an indifferent thickness, and
serve it on sippets.

Barley Broth otherwise.
BOil the Barley first in two waters, and then put it to a Knuckle of Veal, and
to the broth Salt, Raisins, sweet Herbs a faggot, large Mace, and the quantity
of a fine Manchet slic't together.

Otherwise.

Other ways without Fruit: Put some good Muttongravy, Saffron, and sometimes
Raisins only.

Chine or any Joint.
OTher ways, stew them with strong broth and white wine, put it in a pipkin to
them, scum it, and put to it some Oyster liquor, Salt, whole Pepper, and a
bundle of sweet Herbs well bound up; some Mace, two or three great Onions, some
interlarded Bacon cut like dice, and Chestnuts, or blanched Almonds and Capers.

Then stew your Oysters by themselves with Mace, Butter, Time, and two or three
great Onions; sometimes Grapes.

Garnish your Dish with Lemon peel, Oysters, Mace, Capers, and Chestnuts, etc.

Stewed Broth.
TO make stewed Broth; the Meat most proper for it is,

A Leg of Beef, Marrow Bones, Capon, or a Loin or Rack of Mutton, a Knuckle of
Veal.

Take a Knuckle of Veal, a Joint of Mutton, two Marrow bones, a Capon, boil
them in fair water, and scum them; then put in a bundle of sweet herbs well
bound up, or none, large Mace, whole Cinnamon, and Ginger bruised, and put in a
little rag, the spice being a little bruised also: Then beat some Oatmeal,
strain it, and put it to your broth: then have boiled Prunes and Currants
strained also, and put it to your broth, with some whole Raisins and Currants;
and boil not your fruit too much: then about half an hour before you dish your
meat, put in a pint of Claret Wine and Sugar, then dish up your meat on fine
sippets, and broth it.

Garnish your dish with Lemons, Prunes, Mace, Raisins, Corrans, and Sugar.

You may add to the former broth, Fennel roots and Parsley roots tied up in a
bundle.

Stewed broth new fashion.
OTher ways for change: take two Joints of Mutton, Rack and Loin, being half
boiled and scummed, take up the Mutton, and wash away the dregs from it, strain
the broth, and blow away the fat, then put to the broth in a pipkin a bundle of
sweet Herbs bound up hard, and some Mace, and boil in it also a pound of
Raisins of the Sun being strained, a pound of Prunes whole, with Cloves,
Pepper, Saffron, Salt, Claret, and Sugar: stew all well together, a little
before you dish out your broth, put in your meat again, give it a walm, and
serve it on fine carved sippets.

To stew a Loin or Rack of Mutton, or any Joint other ways.
I.

CHop a Loin into steakes, lay it in a deep dish or stewing pan, and put to it
half a pint of Claret or white Wine, as much water, some Salt and Pepper, three
or four whole Onions, a faggot of sweet Herbs bound up hard, and some large
Mace; cover them close, and stew them leasurely the space of two hours, turn
them now and then, and serve them on sippets.

II.

Otherwise for change, being half boiled, chop some sweet Herbs, and put to
them, give them a walme, and serve them on sippets with scalded Goosberries,
Barberries, Grapes, or Lemon.

III.

Otherwise for variety, put Raisins, Prunes, Currants, Dates and serve them
with slic't Lemon, and beaten Butter.

IV.

Sometimes you may alter the Spice, and put Nutmeg, Cloves, and Ginger.

V.

Sometimes to the first plain way, put Capers, pickled Cucumbers, Sampire, etc.

VI.

Otherwise, stew it between two dishes with fair water, and when it boils,
scum it, and put three or four blades of large Mace, gross Pepper, Salt, and
Cloves, and stew them close covered two hours; then have Parsley picked, and
some stripped Time, Spinach, Sorrel, Savory, and sweet Marjoram, chopped with
some onions, put them to your meat, and give it a walm, with some grated bread
amongst, dish them on carved sippets, and blow off the fat on the broth, and
broth it: lay Lemon on it, and beaten Butter, or stew it thus whole.

Before you put in your Herbs blow off the fat.

To boil a Leg of Mutton diverse ways.
I.

STuff a leg of Mutton with Parsley, being finely picked, boil it in water and
salt, and serve it in a fair dish with Parsley, and verjuyce in sawcers.

II.

Otherwise: boil it in water and salt, not stuffed, and being boiled, stuff it
with Lemon in bits like square dice, and serve it also with the peels square,
cut round about it, make sauce with the Gravy and beaten butter, with Lemon and
grated Nutmeg.

III.

Otherwise, boil it in water and salt, being stuffed with Parsley, and make
sauce with large Mace, Gravy, chopped Parsley, Butter, Vinegar, Juice of
Orange, Goosberries, Barberries, or Grapes, and Sugar: serve it on sippets.

To boil a leg of Mutton otherwise.

IV.

Take a good leg of Mutton, and boil it in water and salt, being stuffed with
sweet herbs chopped with some beefsuet, some salt and nutmeg.

Then being almost boiled, take up some of the broth into a pipkin, and put to
it some large mace, a few corrans, a handful of French capers, and a little
sack, the yolks of three or four hard eggs minced small, and some lemon cut
like square dice; and being finely boiled, dish it on carved sippets, broth it,
and run it over with beaten butter, and lemon shread small.

V. Otherwise.

Take a fair leg of mutton, boil it in water and salt, and make sauce with
gravy, some wine-vinegar, salt-butter and strong broth, being well stewed
together with nutmeg.

Then dish up the leg of mutton on fine carved sippets, and pour on your broth.

Garnish your dish with barberries, capers, and slic't lemon.

Garnish the leg of mutton with the same garnish, and run it over with beaten
butter, slic't lemon, and grated nutmeg.

To boil a Leg of Veal.
1. STuff it with Beef Suet and sweet Herbs chopped, nutmeg, salt, and boil it
in fair water and salt.

Then take some of the broth, and put to some capers, currants, large mace, a
piece of interlarded bacon, two or three whole Cloves, pieces of pears and some
artichocksuckers boiled, and put in beaten butter, boiled marrow and mace: Then
before you dish it up, have sorrel, sage, parsley, time, sweet marjoram coursly
minced, with two or three cuts of a knife, and bruised with the back of a ladle
on a clean board, put it into your broth to make it green, and give it a walm
or two. Then dish up the leg of veal on fine carved sippets, pour on the broth,
and then your other materials, some gooseberries, or barberries, beaten butter
and lemon.

2. To boil a Leg of Veal otherwise.

Stuff it with beef suet, nutmeg and salt, boil it in a pipkin, and when it
boils, scum it, and put into it some salt, parsley, and fennel roots in a
bundle close bound up; then being almost boiled, take up some of the broth in a
pipkin, and put to it some mace, raisins of the sun, gravy; stew them well
together and thicken it with grated bread strained with hard eggs; before you
dish up your broth, have parsley, time, sweet marjoram stripped, marigold
flowers, sorrel, and spinach picked: bruise it with the back of a ladle, give
it a walm, and dish up your leg of veal on fine carved sippets, pour on the
broth, and run it over with beaten butter.

3. To boil a Leg of Veal otherwise with Rice, or a Knuckle.

Boil it in a pipkin, put some salt to it, and seum it; then put to it some
mace and some rice finely picked and washed, some raisins of the sun and gravy;
and being fine and tender boild, put in some saffron, and serve it on fine
carved sippets, with the rice over all.

4. Other ways with paste cut like small lard, boil it in thin broth and
saffron.

5. Other ways in white broth, and with fruit, spinach, sweet herbs, and
gooseberries, etc.

To make all manner of forced Meats or Stuffings for any kind of Meats; as
Legs, Breasts, Shoulders, Loins, or Racks; or for any Poultry or Fowl
whatsoever, boiled, roste, stewed, or baked; or boiled in bags, round like a
quaking Pudding in a Napkin.
To force a Leg of Veal in the French Fashion, in a Feast for Dinner or Supper.
TAke a leg of veal, and take out the meat, but leave the skin and knuckle
whole together; then mince the meat that came out of the leg with some
beef suet or lard, and some sweet herbs minced also; then season it with
pepper, nutmeg, ginger, cloves, salt, a clove or two of garlic, and some three
or four yolks of hard eggs whole or in quarters, pine-apple-seed, two or three
raw eggs, pistaches, chestnuts, pieces of artichocks, and fill the leg, sow it
up, and boil it in a pipkin with two gallons of fair water and some white wine;
being scummed and almost boiled, take up some broth into a dish or pipkin, and
put to it some chestnuts, pistaches, pine-apple-seed, marrow, large mace, and
Artichock bottoms, and stew them well together; then have some fried toste of
manchet or roles finely carved. The leg being finely boiled, dish it on French
bread, and fried toste and sippets round about it; broth it, and put on marrow,
and your other materials, with sliced lemon and lemon peel, run it over with
beaten butter, and thicken your broth sometimes with strained almonds;
sometimes yolks of eggs and saffron, or saffron only.

You may add sometimes balls of the same meat.

Garnish.

For your garnish, you may use chestnuts, artichocks, pistaches, pine
apple-seed, and yolks of hard eggs in halves, or potatoes.

Other whiles: Quinces in quarters, or pears, pippins, gooseberries, grapes, or
barberries.

To force a Breast of Veal.
MInce some veal or mutton with some beef suet or fat bacon, and some sweet
herbs minced also, and seasoned with some cloves, mace, nutmeg, pepper, two or
three raw eggs and salt: then prick it up, the breast being filled at the lower
end, and stew it between two dishes with some strong broth, white wine, and
large mace; then an hour after have sweet herbs picked and stripped, time,
sorrel, parsley, sweet Marjoram bruised with the back of a ladle, and put it
into your broth with some beef-marrow, and give it a walm; then dish up your
breast of veal on fine sippets finely carved, broth it, and lay on it slic't
lemon, marrow, mace, and barberries, and run it over with beaten butter.

If you will have the broth yellow, put saffron into it.

To boil a Breast of Veal otherwise.
MAke a pudding of grated manchet, minced suet, and minced veal, season it with
nutmeg, pepper, and salt, three or four eggs, cinnamon, dates, currants, raisins
of the sun, some grapes, sugar, and cream; mingle them all together, and fill
the breast; prick it up, and stew it between two dishes with white wine and
strong broth, mace, dates, marrow; and being finely stewed serve it on sippets,
and run it over with beaten butter, lemon, barberries, or grapes.

Sometimes thick it with some almond-milk, sugar, and cream.

To boil a Breast of Veal in another manner.
Joint it well, and parboil it a little; then put it in a stewing-pan or deep
dish with some strong broth, and a bundle of sweet herbs well bound up, some
large mace, and some slices of interlarded bacon, two or three cloves, some
capers, samphire, salt, some yolks of hard eggs, and white wine; stew all these
well together, and being boiled tender, serve it on fine carved sippets, and
broth it. Then have some fried sweet breads. sausages of veal or pork, garlic
or none, and run all over with beaten butter, lemon, and fried parsley.

Thus you may boil a Rack or Loin.

To make several sorts of Pudding.
1. Bread Pudding, yellow or green.
GRate four penny loaves, and searce them through a cullender, put them in a
deep dish, and put to them four eggs, two quarts of cream, cloves, mace, and
some saffron, salt, rose water, sugar, currants, a pound of beef suet minced,
and a pound of dates.

If green, Juices of spinach, and all manner of sweet herbs stamped amongst the
spinach, and strain the juice, sweet herbs chopped very small, cream, cinnamon,
nutmeg, salt, and all other things, as is next before said: your herbs must be,
time stripped, savory, sweet marjoram, rosemary, parsley, peniroyal, dates; in
these seven or eight yolks of eggs.

Another Pudding, called Cinnamon Pudding.
TAke five penny loaves, and searce them through a cullender, put them in a
deep dish or tray, and put to them five pints of cream, cinnamon six ounces,
suet one pound minced, eggs six yolks, four whites, sugar, salt, slic't dates,
stamped almonds, or none, rose water.

To make Rice Puddings.
BOil your Rice with cream, strain it, and put to it two penny loaves grated,
eight yolks of eggs, and three whites, beef suet, one pound of sugar, salt,
rose water, nutmeg, coriander beaten, etc.

Other Rice Puddings.

Steep your rice in milk over night, and next morning drain it, and boil it in
cream, season it with sugar being cold, and eggs, beef suet, salt, nutmegs,
cloves, mace, currants, dates, etc.

To make Oatmeal Puddings, called Isings.
TAke a quart of whole Oatmeal being picked, steep it in warm milk over night,
next morning drain it, and boil it in a quart of sweet cream; and being cold,
put to it six eggs, of them but three whites, cloves, mace, saffron, pepper,
suet, dates, currants, salt, sugar. This put in bags, guts, or fowls, as capon,
etc.

If green, good store of herbs chopped small.

To make Blood pudding.
TAke the blood of a hog while it is warm, and steep in it a quart or more of
great oatmeal groats, at the end of three days take the groats out, and drain
them clean; then put to those groats more then a quart of the best cream warmed
on the fire: then take some mother of time, parsley, spinach, savory, endive,
sweet marjoram, sorrel, strawberry leaves, succory, of each a few chopped very
small, and mix them with the groats, with a little fennel seed finely beaten,
some pepper, cloves, mace, salt, and some beef suet, or flakes of the hog cut
small.

Otherwise you may steep your oatmeal in warm mutton broth, or scalding milk,
or boil it in a bag.

To make Andolians.
SOak the hogs guts, and turn them, scour them, and steep them in water a day
and a night, then take them and wipe them dry, and turn the fat side outermost.

Then have pepper, chopped sage, a little cloves and mace, beaten
coriander-seed, and salt; mingle all together, and season the fat side of the
guts, then turn that side inward again and draw one gut over another to what
bigness you please: thus of a whole belly of a fat hog. Then boil them in a pot
or pan in fair water, with a piece of interlarded bacon, some spices and salt;
tie them fast at both ends, and make them of what length you please.

Sometime for variety you may leave out some of the foresaid herbs, and put
pennyroyal, savory, leeks, a good big onion or two, marjoram, time, rosemary,
sage, nutmeg, ginger, pepper, salt, etc.

To make other blood puddings.
STeep great oatmel in eight pints of warm goose blood, sheeps blood, calves,
lambs, or fawns blood, and drain it, as is aforesaid, after three days put to
it in every point, as before.

Other Blood Puddings.

Take blood and strain it, put in three pints of the blood, and two of cream,
three penny manchets grated, and beef suet cut square like small dice or hogs
flakes, yolks of eight eggs, salt, sweet herbs, nutmeg, cloves, mace, and
pepper.

Sometimes, for variety, Sugar, Corrans, etc.

To make Marrow Puddings of Rice and grated Bread.
STeep half a pound of Rice in milk all night, then drain it from the milk, and
boil it in a quart of cream; being boiled, strain it, and put to it half a
pound of sugar, beaten nutmeg and mace steeped in rosewater, and put to the
foresaid materials eight yolks of eggs, and five grated manchets, put to it
also half a pound of marrow cut like dice, and salt; mingle all together, and
fill your bags or napkin, and serve it with beaten butter, being boiled and
stuck with almonds.

If in guts, being boiled, toste them before the fire in a silver dish or
tosting pan.

To make other Puddings of Turkey or Capon in bags, guts, or for any kind of
stuffing, or forcing, or in Cauls.
TAke a roast Turkey, mince it very small, and stamp it with some almond paste,
then put some corianderseed beaten, salt, sugar, rose water, yolks of eggs raw,
and marrow stamped also with it, and put some cream, mace soked in sack and
white wine, rose water and sack, strain it into the materials, and make not
your stuff too thin, then fill either gut or napkin, or any fowls boiled,
baked, or roste, or legs of veal or mutton, or breasts, or kid, or fawn, whole
lambs, suckers, etc.

Sheeps Haggas Pudding.
To make a Haggas Pudding in a Sheeps Panch.
TAke good store of parsley, savory, time, onions, and oatmeal groats chopped
together, and mingled with some beef or mutton-suet minced together, and some
cloves, mace, pepper, and salt; fill the panch, sow it up, and boil it. Then
being boiled, serve it in a dish, and cut a hole in the top of it, and put in
some beaten butter with two or three yolks of eggs dissolved in the butter, or
none.

Thus one may do for a Fasting day, and put no suet in it, and put it in a
napkin or bag, and being well boiled, butter it, and dish it in a dish, and
serve it with sippets,

A Haggas otherwise.

Steep the oatmeal over night in warm milk, next morning boil it in cream; and
being fine and thick boiled, put beef suet to it in a dish or tray, some
cloves, mace, nutmeg, salt, and some raisins of the sun, or none, and an onion:
sometime savory, parsley, and sweet Marjoram, and fill the panch, etc.

Other Haggas Puddings.
CAlves panch, calves chaldrons, or muggets being clenged, boil it tender, and
mince it very small, put to it grated bread, eight yolks of eggs, two or three
whites, cream, some sweet herbs, spinach, suckory, sorrel, strawberry leaves
very small minced, bits of butter, pepper, cloves, mace, cinnamon, ginger,
currants, sugar, salt, dates, and boil it in a napkin or calves panch, or bake
it; and being boiled, put it in a dish, trim the dish with scraped sugar, and
stick it with sliced almonds, and run it over with beaten butter, etc.

To make Liver Puddings.
TAke a good hogs, calves, or lambs liver, and boil it: being cold, mince it
very small or grate it, and searce it through a meal-five or cullender put to
it some grated manchet, two penny loaves, some three pints of cream, four eggs,
cloves, mace, currants, salt, dates, sugar, cinnamon, ginger, nutmegs, one pound
of beef suet minced very small; and mingle all together, fill a wet napkin, and
bind it in fashion of a ball, and serve it with beaten butter and sugar being
boiled.

Other Liver Puddings.

For variety, sometimes, sweet herbs, and sometimes flakes of the hog in place
of beef suet, fennel-seed, caraway-seed, or any other seed, and keep the order,
as is abovesaid.

To make Puddings of Blood after the Italian fashion.
TAke three pints of hogs blood, strain it, and put to it half a pound of
grated cheese, a penny manchet grated, sweet herbs chopped very small, a pound
of beef suet minced small, nutmeg, pepper, salt, ginger, cloves, mace, cinnamon,
sugar, currants, eggs, etc.

To make Puddings of a Heifers Vdder.
TAke an heifers udder, and boil it; being cold, mince it small, and put to it
a pound of almond paste, some grated manchet, three or four eggs, a quart of
cream, one pound of beef suet minced small, sweet herbs chopped small also,
currants, cinnamon, salt, one pound of sugar, nutmeg, saffron, yolks of hard eggs
in quarters, preserved pears in form of square dice, bits of marrow; mingle all
together, and put it in a clean napkin dipped in warm liquor, bind it up round
like a ball, and boil it.

Being boiled dish it in a clean scoured dish, scrape sugar, and run it over
with beaten butter, stick it with slic't almonds or slic't dates, candied lemon
peel, orange, or citeron, juice of orange over all.

Thus also lamb-stones, sweetbreads, turkey, capon, or any poultrey.

Forcing for any roots; as Mellons, Cucumbers, Collyflowers, Cabbiges,
Pompions, Gourds, great Onions, or Parsnips, and c.
TAke of Musk-mellon, and take out the seed, and cut it round the mellon two
fingers deep, then make a forcing of grated bread, beaten almonds, rose water,
and sugar, some musk-mellon stamped small with it, also bisketbread beaten to
powder, some coriander seed, candied lemon minced small, some beaten mace and
marrow minced small, beaten cinnamon, yolks of raw eggs, sweet herbs, saffron,
and musk a grain: then fill your rounds of mellons, and put them in a flat
bottomed dish, or earthen pan, with butter in the bottom, and bake them in the
dish.

Then have sauce made with white wine and strong broth, strained with beaten
almonds, sugar, and cinnamon; serve them on sippets finely carved, give this
broth a walm, and pour it on your mellons with some fine scraped sugar, dry
them in the oven, and so serve them.

Or you may do these whole; mellons, cucumbers, lemons, or turnips, and serve
them with any boiled fowls.

Other forcing, or Pudding, or stuffing for birds or any fowl, or any joint of
meat.
TAke veal or mutton, mince it, and put to it some grated bread, yolks of eggs,
cream, corrans, dates, sugar, nutmeg, cinnamon, ginger, mace, juice of spinage'
sweet herbs, salt, and mingle all together, with some whole marrow amongst. If
yellow, use saffron.

Other forcing for Fowls, or any Joint of meat.
MInce a leg of mutton or veal, and some beef suet or venison, with sweet
herbs, grated bread, eggs, nutmeg, pepper, ginger, salt, dates, corrans,
raisins, some dry candied oranges, coriander seed, and a little cream; bake
them or boil them, and stew them in white wine, grapes, marrow, and give them a
walm or two, thick it with two or three yolks of eggs, sugar, verjuyce, and
serve these puddings on sippets, pour on the broth, and strew on sugar and
slict lemon.

Other forcing of Veal, or Pork, Mutton, Lamb, Venison, Land, or Sea Fowls.
MInce them with beef suet or lard, and season them with pepper, cloves, mace,
and some sweet herbs grated, Bolonia sawsages, yolks of eggs, grated cheese,
salt, etc.

Other stuffings or forcing of grated cheese, calves brains or any brain, as
pork, goat, kid, or lamb, or any venison, or pigs brain, with some beaten
nutmeg, pepper, salt, ginger, cloves, saffron, sweet herbs, eggs, goosberries,
or grapes.

Other forcing of calves udder boiled and cold, and stamped with almond paste,
cheese-curds, sugar, cinnamon, ginger, mace, cream, salt, raw eggs, and some
marrow or butter, etc.

Other stuffings or Puddings.
TAke rice-flower, strain it with Goats milk or cream, and the brawn of a
poultrey roasted, minced, and stamped, boil them to a good thickness with some
marrow, sugar, rose water, and some salt; and being cold, fill your poultrey,
or in cauls of veal or other joints of meat, and bake them or boil them in bags
or guts, put in some nutmeg, almond paste, and some beaten mace.

Other stuffings of the brawn of a Capon, Chickens, Pigeons, or any tender Sea
Fowl.
TAke out the meat, and save the skins whole, leave on the legs and wings to
the skin, and also the necks and heads, and mince the meat raw with some
interlarded bacon or beef suet, season it with cloves, mace, sugar, salt, and
sweet herbs chopped small, yolks of eggs grated, parmisan or none, fill the
body, legs, and neck, prick up the back, and stew them between two dishes with
strong broth as much as will cover them, and put some bottoms of artichocks,
cardons, or boiled sparagus, goosberries, barberries, or grapes being boiled,
put in some grated parmisan, large mace, and saffron, and serve them on fine
carved sippets; garnish the dish with roste turnips, or roste onions, cardons,
and mace, etc.

Other forcing of Livers of Poultrey, or Kid or Lambs.
TAke the liver, and cut it into little bits like dice raw, and as much
interlarded bacon cut in the same form, some sweet herbs chopped small amongst;
also some raw yolks of eggs, and some beaten cloves and mace, pepper and salt,
a few prunes and raisins, or no fruit, but grapes or gooseberries, a little
grated parmisan, a clove or two of garlic; and fill your poultrey, either boil
d or roste, etc.

Other forcing for any dainty Fowl; as Turkey, Chickens, or Phesants, or the
like, boild or roste.
TAke minced veal raw, and bacon or beef suet minced with it; being finely
minced, season it with cloves and mace, a few corrans, salt, and some boild
bottoms of artichocks cut in form of dice small, and mingle amongst the
forcing, with pine-apple-seeds, pistaches, chestnuts, and some raw eggs, and
fill your poultrey, etc.

Other fillings or forcing of parboiled Veal or Mutton.
MInce the meat with beef suet or interlarded bacon, and some cloves, mace,
pepper, salt, eggs, sugar, and some quartered pears, damsons, or prunes, and
fill your fowls, etc.

Other fillings of raw Capons.
MInce it with fat bacon and grated cheese or parmisan, sweet herbs,
cheese-curd, corrans, cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg, pepper, salt, some pieces of
artichocks like small dice, sugar, saffron, and some mushrooms.

Otherwise.

Grated liver of veal, minced lard, fennel-seed, whole eggs raw, sugar, sweet
herbs, salt, grated cheese, a clove or two of garlic, cloves, mace, cinnamon
and ginger, etc.

Otherwise.

For a leg of mutton, grated bread, yolks of raw eggs, beef suet, salt, nutmeg,
sweet herbs, juice of spinach, cream, cinnamon, and sugar; if yellow, saffron.

Other forcing for Land or Sea-fowl boiled or baked, or a Leg of Mutton.
TAke out of the leg the meat, leave the skin whole, and mince the meat with
beef suet and sweet herbs; and put to it, being finely minced, grated bread,
dates, corrans, raisins, orange minced small, ginger, pepper, nutmeg, cream,
and eggs; being boiled or baked, make a sauce with marrow, strong broth, white
wine, verjuyce, mace, sugar, and yolks of eggs strained with verjuyce: serve it
on fine carved sippets and flic't lemon, grapes, or gooseberries: and thus you
may do it in calls of veal, or lamb, or kid.

Legs of Mutton forced either roast or boiled.
MInce the meat with beef suet or bacon, sweet herbs, pepper, salt, cloves and
mace, and two or three cloves of garlic, raw eggs, two or three chestnuts, and
work up altogether, fill the leg, and prick it up, then roast it or boil it:
make sauce with the remainder of the meat, and stew it on the fire with gravy,
chestnuts, pistaches, or pine-apple-seed, bits of artichocks, pears, grapes, or
pippins, and serve it hot on this sauce, or with gravy that drops from it
only, or stew it between dishes.

Other forcing of Veal.
MInce the veal, and cut some lard like dice, and put to it; with some minced
pennyroyal, sweet marjoram, winter-savory, nutmeg, a little camomile, pepper,
salt, ginger, cinnamon, sugar, and work all together, then fill it into beefs
guts of some three inches long, and stew them in a pipkin with claret wine,
large mace, capers, and marrow; being finely stewed, serve them on fine carved
sippets, flic't lemon, and barberries, and run them over with beaten butter and
scraped sugar.

Other forcing of Veal, Mutton, or Lamb.
EIther of these minced with beef suet, parsley, time, savory, marigolds,
endive, and spinach; mince all together, and put some grated bread, grated
nutmeg, currants, five dates, sugar, yolks of eggs, rose water, and verjuyce: of
this forcing you may make birds, fishes, beasts, pears, balls, or what you
will, and stew them, or fry them, or bake them, and serve them on sippets with
verjuyce, sugar and butter either dinner or supper.

Other forcing for Breast, Legs or Loins of Beef, Mutton, Veal, or any Venison
or Fowls roasted, baked, or stewed.
MInce any meat, and put to it beef suet or lard, dates, raisins, grated bread,
nutmeg, pepper, and salt, and two or three eggs, etc.

Otherwise.

Mince some mutton, with beef suet, some orange-peel, grated nutmeg, grated
bread, coriander-seed, pepper, salt, and yolks of eggs, mingle all together,
and fill any breast, or leg, or any joint of meat, and make sauce with gravy,
strong broth, dates, curraris, sugar, salt, lemons, and barberries, etc.

Other forcing for roste, or boiled, or baked Legs of any meat, or any other
Joint or Fowl.
MInce a leg of mutton with beef suet, season it with cloves, mace, pepper,
salt, nutmeg, rosewater, currants, raisins, caraway seeds and eggs; and fill
your leg of mutton, etc.

Then for sauce for the foresaid, if baked, bake it in an earthen pan or deep
dish, and being baked, blow away the fat, and serve it with the gravy.

If roste, save the gravy that drips from it, and put to it flic't lemon or
orange.

If boiled, put capers, barberries, white wine, hard eggs minced, beaten
butter, gravy, verjuyce and sugar, etc.

Other Forcing.
MInce a leg of mutton or lamb with beef suet, and all manner of sweet herbs
minced, cloves, mace, salt, currants, sugar, and fill the leg with half the
meat: then make the rest into little cakes as broad as a shilling, and put them
in a pipkin with strong mutton broth, cloves, mace, vinegar, and boil the leg,
or bake it, or roste it.

Forcing in the Spanish fashion in balls
MInce a leg of mutton with beef suet, and some marrow cut like square dice put
amongst, some yolks of eggs, and some salt and nutmeg; make this stuff as big
as a Tennis-ball, and stew them with strong broth the space of two hours; turn
them, and serve them on tostes of fine manchet, and serve them with the palest
of the balls.

Other manner of Balls.
MInce a leg of veal very small, yolks of hard eggs, and the yolks of seven or
eight raw eggs, some salt; make them into balls as big as a walnut, and stew
them in a pipkin with some mutton broth, mace, cloves, and flic't ginger, stew
them an hour, and put some marrow to them, and serve them on sippets, etc.

Other grand or forced dish.
TAke hard eggs, and part the yolks and whites in halves, take the yolks and
mince them, or stamp them in a mortar with marchpane stuff, and sweet herbs
chopped very small, and put amongst the eggs or paste, with sugar and cinnamon
fine beaten, put some currants also to them, and mingle all together with salt,
fill the whites, and set them by.

Then have preserved oranges candied, and fill them with marchpane paste and
sugar, and set them by also.

Then have the tops of sparagus boiled, and mixed with butter, a little sack,
and set them by also.

Then have boiled chestnuts peeled, and pistaches, and set them by also.

Then have marrow steeped first in rose water, then fried in butter, and set
that by also.

Then have green quodlings slic't, mixed with biscuit bread and egg, and fried in
little cakes, and set that by also.

Then have sweetbreads, or lamb-stones, and yolks of hard eggs fried, etc. and
dipped in butter.

Then have small tuttle-doves or pigeon-peepers and chicken peepers fried, or
finely roasted or boiled, and set them by, or any small birds, and some
artichocks and potato's boiled and fried in butter, and some balls as big as a
walnut, or less, made of parmisan, and dipped in butter, and fried.

Then last of all, put them all in a great charger, the chickens or fowls in
the middle, then lay a lay of sweetbreads, then a lay of bottoms of artichocks,
and the marrow; on them some preserved oranges.

Then next some hard eggs round that, fried sparagus, yolks of eggs, chestnuts,
and pistaches; then your green quodlings stuffed: the charger being full, put
to them marrow all over the meat, and juice of orange, and make a sauce of
strained almonds, grapes, and verjuyce; and being a little stewed in the oven,
dry it, etc.

The Dish.

Sweatbreads, Lambstones, Chickens, Marrow, Almonds, Eggs, Oranges, Biscuit,
Sparagus, Artichocks, Musk, Saffron, Butter, Potato's, Pistaches, Chestnuts.
Verjuyce, Sugar, Flower, Parmisan, Cinnamon.
To force a French Bread, called Pine-molet, or three of them
TAke a manchet, and make a hole in the top of it, take out the crum, and make
a composition of the brawn of a capon roste or boiled; mince it, and stamp it
in a mortar with marchpane paste, cream, yolks of hard eggs, muskefied biscuit
bread, the crum of very fine manchet, sugar, marrow, musk, and some sweet herbs
chopped small, beaten cinnamon, saffron, some raw yolks of eggs, and currants;
fill the bread, and boil them in napkins in capon broth, but first stop the top
with the pieces you took off. Then stew or fry some sweetbreads of veal and
forced chickens between two dishes, or Lamb-stones fried, with some mace,
marrow, and grapes, sparagus, sparagus, or artichocks, and skirrets, the
manchets being well boiled, and your chickens finely ftewed, serve them in a
fine dish, the manchets in the middle, and the sweatbreads, chickens, and
carved sippets round about the dish; being finely dished, thicken the chicken
broth with strained almonds, cream, sugar, and beaten butte.

Garnish your dish with marrow, pistaches, artichocks, puff-paste, mace,
grapes, pomegarnets, or barberries, and slic't lemon.

Another forced Dish.
TAke two pound of Beef-marrow, and cut it as big as great dice, and a pound of
dates cut as big as small dice; then have a pound of prunes, and take away the
outside from the stones with your knife, and a pound of Currants; and put these
aforesaid in a platter, twenty yolks of eggs, a pound of sugar, an ounce of
cinnamon, and mingle all together.

Then have the yolks of twenty eggs more, strain them with Rosewater, a little
musk and sugar, fry them in two pancakes with a little sweet butter fine and
yellow; and being fried, put one of them in a fair dish, and lay the former
material on it spread all over; then take the other, and cut it in long slices
as broad as your little finger, and lay it over the dish like a lattice window,
set it in the oven, and bake it a little; then fry it, etc. Bake it very
leasurely.

Another forced fried Dish.
MAke a little paste with yolks of eggs, flower, and boiling liquor.

Then take a quarter of a pound of sugar, a pound of marrow, half an ounce of
cinnamon, and a little ginger. Then have some yolks of Eggs, and mash your
marrow, and a little Rosewater, musk, or amber, and a few currants or none, with
a little suet, and make little pastes, fry them in clarified butter, and serve
them with scraped sugar, and juice of orange.

Otherwise.

Take good fresh water Eels, flay and mince them small with a warden or two,
and season it with pepper, cloves, mace, saffron: then put currants dates, and
prunes small minced amongst, and a little verjuyce, and fry it in little
pasties, bake it in the oven, or stew it in a pan in paste of diverse forms; as
pasties or stars, etc.

To make any kind of Sausages.
First, Bolonia Sausages.
THe best way and time of the year is to make them in September.

Take four stone of pork, of the legs the leanest, and take away all the skins,
sinnews, and fat from it; mince it fine and stamp it: then add to it three
ounces of whole pepper, two ounces of pepper more grossly cracked or beaten,
whole cloves an ounce nutmegs an ounce finely beaten, salt spanish, or
peter-salt, an ounce of coriander seed finely beaten, or caraway seed, cinnamon
an ounce fine beaten, lard cut an inch long, as big as your little finger, and
clean without rust; mingle all the foresaid together, and fill beefers guts as
full as you can possible, and as the wind gathers in the gut, prick them with
a pin, and shake them well down with your hands, for if they be not well
filled, they will be rusty.

These aforesaid Bolonia Sausages are most excellent of pork only: but some
use buttock beef with pork, half one, and as much of the other. Beef and pork
are very good.

Some do use pork of a weeks powder for this use beforesaid, and no more salt
at all.

Some put a little sack in the beating of these Sausages, and put in place of
coriander caraway-seed.

This is the most excellent way to make Bolonia Sausages, being carefully
filled, and tied fast with packthred, and moaked or smothered three or four
days, that will turn them red; then hang them in some cool cellar or higher
room to take the air.

Other Sausages.
SAusages of Pork with some of the fat of a chine of bacon or pork, some sage
chopped fine and small, salt and pepper; and fill them into porkets guts, or
hogs, or sheeps guts, or no guts, and let them dry in the chimney leasurely,
etc.

Otherwise.

Mince pork with beef suet, and mince some sage, and put to it with some
pepper, salt, cloves, and mace; make it into ball and keep in for your use, or
roll them into little Sausages some four or five inches long as big as your
finger; fry six or seven of them, and serve them within a dish with vinegar or
juice of orange.

Thus you may do of a leg of veal, and put nothing but salt and suet; and being
fried, serve it with gravy and juice of orange, or butter and vinegar; and
before you fry them flower them. And thus Mutton, or any meat.

Or you may add sweet herbs or nutmeg: and thus mutton.

Other Sausages.
MInce some buttock beef with beef suet, beat them well together, and season it
with cloves, mace, pepper, and salt; fill the guts, or fry it as before; if in
guts, boil them and serve them as Puddings.

Otherwise for change.

If without guts, fry them and serve them with gravy, juice of orange, or
vinegar, etc.

To make Links.
TAke the raring pieces of Pork or Hog-bacon, or fillets, or legs; cut the lean
into bits as big as great dice square, and the fleak in the same form, half as
much; and season them with good store of chopped sage chopped very small and
fine; and season it also with some pepper, nutmeg, cloves and mace also very
small beaten, and salt, and fill porkets guts, or beefs guts; being well
filled, hang them up and dry them till the salt shine through them; and when
you will spend them, boil them and broil them.

To make all manner of Hashes.
First, of raw Beef.
MInce it very small with some beef suet or lard, some sweet herbs, pepper,
salt, some cloves and mace, blanched chestnuts, or almonds blanc head, and put in
whole, some nutmeg, and a whole onion or two, and stew it finely in a pipkin
with some strong broth the space of two hours; put a little claret to it, and
serve it on sippets finely carved, with some grapes or lemon in it also, or
barberries, and blow off the fat.

Otherwise.

Stew beef in gobbets, and cut some fat and lean together as big as a good
pullets egg, and put them into a pot or pipkin with some Carrots cut in pieces
as big as a walnut, some whole onions, some parsnips, large mace, a faggot of
sweet herbs, salt, pepper, cloves, and as much water and wine as will cover
them, and stew it the space of three hours.

2. Beef hashed other ways, of the Buttock.
CUt it into thin slices, and hack them with the back of your knife, then fry
them with sweet butter; and being fried, put them in a pipkin with some claret,
strong broth, or gravy, cloves, mace, pepper, salt, and sweet butter; being
tender stewed the space of an hour, serve them on fine sippets, with slic't
lemon, gooseberries, barberries or grapes, and some beaten butter.

3. Beef hashed otherwise.
CUt some buttock beef into fine thin slices, and half as many slices of fine
interlarded bacon, stew it very well and tender with some claret and strong
broth, cloves, mace, pepper, and salt; being tender stewed the space of two
hours, serve them on fine carved sippets, etc.

4. A Hash of Bullocks Cheeks.
TAke the flesh from the bones, then with a sharp knife slice them into thin
slices like Scotch collops, and fry them in sweet butter a little; then put
them into a pipkin with gravy or strong broth and claret, salt, chopped sage,
and nutmeg, stew them the space of two hours, or till they be tender, then
serve them on fine carved sippets, etc.

Hashes of Neats Feet, or any Feet, as Calves, Sheeps, Dears, Hogs, Lambs,
Pigs, Fawns, or the like, many of the ways following.
BOil them very tender, and being cold, mince them small, then put currants to
them, beaten cinnamon, hard eggs minced, capers, sweet herbs minced small,
cloves, mace, sugar, white wine, butter, slic't lemon or orange, slic't
almonds, grated bread, saffron, sugar, gooseberries, barberries, or grapes; and
being finely stewed down, serve them on fine carved sippets.

2. Neats-feet hashed otherwise.
CUt them in pieces, being tender boild, and put to them some chopped onions,
parsley, time, butter, mace, pepper, vinegar, salt, and sugar: being finely
stewed, serve them on fine carved sippets, barberries, and sugar; sometimes
thicken the broth with yolks of raw eggs and verjuyce, run it over with beaten
butter, and sometimes no sugar.

3. Hashing otherwise of any Feat.
MInce them small, and stew them with white wine, butter, corrans, raifins,
marrow, sugar, prunes, dates, cinnamon, mace, ginger, pepper, and serve them on
tostes of fried manchets.

Sometimes dissolve the yolks of eggs.

4. Neats-feet, or any Feet otherwise.
BEing tender boiled and soused, part them and fry them in sweet butter fine
and brown; dish them in a clean dish with some mustard and sweet butter, and
fry some slic't onions, and lay them all over the top; run them over with
beaten butter.

5. Neats-feet, or other Feet otherwise sliced, or in pieces stewed.
TAke boiled onions, and put your feet in a pipkin with the onions aforesaid
being sliced, and cloves, mace, white wine, and some strong broth and salt;
being almost stewed or boiled, put to it some butter and verjuyce, and sugar,
give it a walm or two more, serve it on fine sippets, and run it over with
sweet butter.

6. Neats Feet other ways, or any Feet frycassed, or Trotters.
BEing boiled tender and cold, take out the hair or wool between the toes, part
them in halves, and fry them in butter; being fried, put away the butter, and
put to them grated nutmeg, salt, and strong broth.

Then being fine and tender, have some yolks of eggs dissolved with vinegar or
verjuice, some nutmeg in the eggs also, and into the eggs put a piece of fresh
butter, and put away the frying: and when you are ready to dish up your meat,
put in the eggs, and give it a toss or two in the pan, and pour it in a clean
dish.

To hash Neats-tongues, or any Tongues.
BEing fresh and tender boiled, and cold, cut them into thin slices, fry them
in sweet butter, and put to them some strong broth, cloves, mace, saffron,
salt, nutmegs grated, yolks of eggs, grapes, verjuice: and the tongue being
fine and thick, with a toss or two in the pan, dish it on fine sippets.

Sometimes you may leave out cloves and mace; and for variety put beaten
cinnamon, sugar, and saffron, and make it more brothy.

2. To hash a Neats-tongue otherwise.
SLice it into thin slices, no broader then a threepence, and stew it in a
dish or pipkin with some strong broth, a little sliced onion of the same
bigness of the tongue, and some salt, put to some mushrooms, and nutmeg, or
mace, and serve it on fine sippets, being well stewed, rub the bottom of the
dish with a clove or two of garlic, or mince a raw onion very small and put in
the bottom of the dish, and beaten butter run over the tops of your dish of
meat, with lemon cut small.

3. To hash a Tongue otherwise, either whole or in slices.
BOil it tender, and blanch it; and being cold, slice it in thin slices, and
put to it boild chestnuts or roste, some strong broth, a bundle of sweet herbs,
large mace, white endive, pepper, wine, a few cloves, some capers, marrow or
butter, and some salt; stew it well together, and serve it on fine carved
sippets, garnish it on the meat with gooseberries, barberries, or lemon.

4. To hash a Tongue otherwise.
BEing boild tender, blanch it, and let it cool, then slice it in thin slices,
and put it in a pipkin with some mace and raisins, slic't dates, some blanched
almonds, pistaches, claret or white wine, butter, verjuice, sugar, and strong
broth; being well stewed, strain in six eggs, the yolks being boild hard; or
raw, give it a walm, and dish up the Tongue on fine fippets.

Garnish the dish with fine sugar, or fine searsed manchet, and lay lemon on
your meat slic't, run it over with beaten butter, etc.

5. To hash a Neats-tongue otherwise.
BEing boild tender, slice it in thin slices, and put it in a pipkin with some
currants, dates, cinnamon, pepper, marrow, mace whole, verjuyce, eggs, butter,
bread, wine, and being finely stewed, serve it on fine sippets, with beaten
butter, sugar, strained eggs, verjuyce, etc.

6. To stew a Neats Tongue whole.
TAke a fresh Neats tongue raw, make a hole in the lower end, and take out some
of the meat, mince it with some bacon or beef suet, and some sweet herbs, and
put in the yolks of an egg or two, some nutmeg, salt, and some grated parmisan
or fat cheese, pepper and ginger; mingle all together, and fill the hole in the
tongue, then wrap a caul or skin of mutton about it, and bind it about the end
of the tongue, boil it till it will blanch: and being blanched, wrap about it
the caul of veal with some of the forcing, roast it a little brown, and put it
in a pipkin, and stew it with some claret and strong broth, cloves, mace, salt,
pepper, some strained bread or grated manchet, some sweet herbs chopped small,
marrow, fried onions and apples amongst; and being finely stewed down, serve it
on fine carved sippets with barberries and slic't lemon, and run it over with
beaten butter. Garnish the dish with grated or searced manchet.

7. To stew a Neats Tongue otherwise whole or in pieces boild, blanch it or
not.
TAke a tongue, and put it a stewing between two dishes, being raw, and fresh,
put some strong broth to it and white wine, with some whole cloves, mace, and
pepper whole, some capers, salt, turnips cut like lard, or carrots, or any
roots, and stew all together the space of two or three hours leasurely, then
blanch it, and put some marrow to it, give it a walm or two, and serve it on
fine sippets finely carved, and strew on some minced lemon and barberries or
grapes, and run over all with beaten butter.

Garnish your dish with fine grated manchet finely searced.

8. To boil a Tongue otherwise.
SAlt a tongue twelve hours, or boil it in water and salt till it be tender,
blanch it, and being finely boild, dish it in a clean dish, and stuff it with
minced lemon, mince the rind, and strew over all, and serve it with some of the
Gallandines, or some of the Italian sauces, as you may see in the book of
sauces.

To boil a Neats Tongue otherwise, of three of four days powder.
BOil it in fair water, and serve it on brewice, with boild turnips and onions,
run it over with beaten butter, and serve it on fine carved sippets, some
barberries, gooseberries, or grapes, and serve it with some of the sawces, as
you may see in the book of all manner of sawces.

To Fricas a Neats Tongue, or any Tongues.
BEing tender boiled, slice it into thin slices, and fry it with sweet butter,
then put away your butter, and put some strong broth, nutmeg, pepper, and sweet
herbs chopped small, some grapes or barberries picked, and some yolks of eggs,
or verjuyce, grated bread, or stamped Almonds and strained.

Sometimes you may add some saffron.

Thus udders may be dressed in any of the ways of the Neats-tongues beforesaid.

To hash any Land Fowl, as Turkey, Capon, Phesants, or Partridges, or any
Fowls, being roasted and cold.
Roste the Fowls for Hashes.
TAke a Capon, hash the wings, and slice it into thin slices, but leave the
rump and the legs whole; mince the wings into very thin slices no bigger then a
threepente in breadth, and put it in a pipkin with a little strong broth,
nutmeg, some sliced mushrooms, or pickled mushrooms, and an onion very thin
sliced no bigger then the minced capon; being well stewed down with a little
butter and gravy, dish it on fine sippets, and lay the rump or rumps whole on
the minced meat, also the legs whole, and run it over with beaten butter,
slices of lemon, and lemonpeel whole.

Collops, or hashed Veal.
TAke a leg of veal, and cut it into slices as thin as an half-crown piece, and
as broad as your hand, and hack them with the back of an knife, then lard them
with small lard good and thick, and fry them with sweet butter; being fried,
make sauce with butter, vinegar, some chopped time amongst, and yolks of eggs
dissolved with juice of oranges, give them a toss or two in the pan, and so put
them in a dish with a little gravy, etc,

Or you may make other sauce of mutton-gravy, juice of lemon. and grated nutmeg.

A Hash of any Tongues, Neats Tongues, Sheeps Tongues, or any great or small
Tongues.
BEing tender boiled and cold, cut them in thin slices, and fry them in sweet
butter; then put them in a pipkin with a pint of claret wine, and some beaten
cinnamon, ginger, sugar, salt, some capers, or samphire, and some sweet butter;
stew it well down, till the liquor be half wasted, and now and then stir it:
being finely and leasurely stewed, serve it on fine carved sippets, and wring
on the juice of a lemon, and marrow, etc.

Or sometimes lard them whole, roste them, and stew them as before, and put a
few carawayes, and large mace, sugar, marrow, chestnuts: serve them on fried
tostes, etc.

To make other Hashes of Veal.
TAke a fillet of Veal with the udder, roste it; and being roasted, cut away the
frothy flap, and cut it into thin slices; then mince it very fine with two
handfuls of French capers, and currants one handful; and season it with a little
beaten nutmeg, ginger, mace, cinnamon, and a handful of sugar; and stew these
with a pound of butter, a quarter of a pint of vinegar, as much caper liquor a
faggot of sweet herbs, and a little salt: Let all these boil softly the space
of two hours, now and then stirring it; being finely stewed, dish it up, and
stick about it fried toste, or stock-fritters, etc.

Or to this foresaid Hash, you may add some yolks of hard eggs minced among
the meat, or minced and mingled, and put whole currants, whole capers, and some
white wine.

Or to this foresaid Hash you may, being hashed, put nothing but beaten butter
only with lemon, and the meat cut like little square dice, and served with
beaten butter, and lemon on fine carved sippets.

To hash a Hare.
CUt it into pieces, and wash off the hairs in water and wine, strain the
liquor, and parboil the quarters; then take them and put them into a dish with
the legs, shoulders, and head whole, and the chine cut in two or three pieces,
and put to it two or three great onions whole, and some of the liquor where it
was parboiled: stew it between two dishes till it be tender; then put to it
some pepper, mace, nutmeg, and serve it on fine carved sippets, and run it over
with beaten butter, lemon, some marrow, and barberries.

To hash or boil Rabits diverse ways, either in quarters or slices, or cut like
small dice, or whole, or minced.
TAke a Rabit being flayed, and wiped clean, cut off the legs, thighs, wings,
and head, and part the chine into four pieces or six; put all into a dish, and
put to it a pint of white wine, as much fair water, and gross pepper, slic't
ginger, some salt butter, a little time, and other sweet herbs finely minced,
and two or three blades of mace; stew it the space of two hours leasurely; and
a little before you dish it, take the yolks of six new laid eggs, and dissolve
them with some grapes, verjuyce, or wine vinegar, give it a walm or two on the
fire, till the broth be somewhat thick; then put it in a clean dish, with salt
about the dish, and serve it hot.

A Rabit hashed otherwise.
STew it between two dishes in quarters, as the former, or in pieces as long as
your finger, with some strong broth, mace, a bundle of sweet herbs, and salt:
Being well stewed, strain the yolks of two hard eggs with some of the broth,
and put it into the broth where the Rabit stews; then have some cabbage lettice
boiled in boiling water; and being boiled, squeeze away the water, and put them
in beaten butter, with a few raisins of the sun boiled in water also by
themselves; or in place of lettice use white endive. Then being finely stewed,
dish up the Rabit on fine carved sippets, and lay on it mace, lettice in
quarters, raisins, grapes, lemon, sugar, gooseberries, or barberries, and broth
it with the former broth.

Thus Chickens, or Capons, or Partridge, and strained almonds in this broth for
change.

To hash a Rabit otherwise, with a forcing in his belly of minced sweet herbs,
yolks of hard eggs, parsley, pepper, and currants, and fill his belly.

To hash Rabits, Chickens, or Pigeons, either in pieces, or whole with Turnips.
BOil either the Rabit or fowls in water and salt, or strained oatmeal and salt.

Take Turnips, cut them in slices, and after cut them like small lard an inch
long, the quantity of a quart, and put them in a pipkin with a pound of butter,
three or four spoonfuls of strong broth, and a quarter of a pint of wine
vinegar, some pepper and ginger, sugar and salt; and let them stew leasurely
with some mace the space of two hours; being very finely stewed, put them into
beaten butter, beaten with cream and yolks of eggs, then serve them upon fine
thin toasts of french bread

Or otherwise being stewed as aforesaid without eggs, cream, or butter, serve
them as formerly. And these will serve for boiled Chickens, or any kind of
Fowl for garnish.

To make a Bisk the best way.
TAke a leg of beef and a knuckle of veal, boil them in two gallons of fair
water, scum them clean, and put to them some cloves and mace; then boil them
from two gallons to three quarts of broth; being boiled, strain it, and put it
in a pipkin; when it is cold, take off the fat and bottom, clear it into
another clean pipkin, and keep it warm till the Bisk be ready.

Boil the Fowl in the liquor of the marrow-bones of six peeping chickens, and
six peeping pigeons in a clean pipkin, either in some broth, or in water and
salt. Boil the marrow by it self in a pipkin in the same broth with some salt.

Then have pallets, noses, lips boiled tender, blancht and cut into bits as big
as a sixpence; also some sheeps tongues boiled, blancht, larded, fried, and
stewed in gravy, with some chestnuts blanched; also some cocks combs boiled and
blanched, and some knots of eggs, or yolks of hard eggs. Stew all the aforesaid
in some roast mutton, or beef gravy, with some pistaches, large mace, a good
big onion or two, and some salt.

Then have lamb-stones blanched and slic't, also sweetbreads of veal, and
sweetbreads of lamb slit, some great oysters parboild, and some cock-stones.
Fry the aforesaid materials in clarified butter, some fried spinach, or
Alexander leaves, and keep them warm in an oven, with some fried sausages made
of minced bacon, veal, yolks of eggs, nutmeg, sweet herbs, salt, and pistaches;
bake it in an oven in cauls of veal, and being baked and cold, slice it round,
fry it, and keep it warm in the oven with the foresaid fried things.

To make little Pies for the Bisk.
MInce a leg of veal or a leg of mutton with some interlarded bacon raw and
seasoned with a little salt, nutmeg, pepper, some sweet herbs, pistaches,
grapes, gooseberries, barberries, and yolks of hard eggs in quarters; mingle
all together, fill them, and close them up; and being baked, liquor them with
gravy and beaten butter, or mutton broth.

Make the paste of a pottel of flower, half a pound of butter, six yolks of
eggs, and boil the liquor and butter together.

To make gravy for the Bisk.
ROast eight pound of buttock beef, and two legs of mutton, being through
roasted press out the gravy, and wash them with some mutton broth, and when you
have done, strain it, and keep it warm in a clean pipkin for your present use.

To dish the Bisk.
TAke a great eight pound dish, and a six penny french pinemolet or bread, chip
it and slice it into large slices, and cover all the bottom of the dish; scald
it or steep it well with your strong broth, and upon that some mutton or beef
gravy; then dish up the fowl on the dish, and round the dish the fried tongues
in gravy with the lips, pallets, pistaches, eggs, noses, chestnuts, and
cocks-combs, and run them over the fowls with some of the gravy and large mace.

Then again run it over with fried sweetbread, sausage, lamb-stones,
cock-stones, fried spinach, or alexander leaves, then the marrow over all; next
the carved lemons upon the meat, and run it over with the beaten butter, yolks
of eggs, and gravy beat up together till it is thick, then garnish the dish
with the little pies, dolphines of puff-paste, cheseuts, boiled and fried
oysters, and yolks of hard eggs.

To boil Chines of Veal.
FIrst stew them in a stewing pan or between two dishes, with some strong broth
of either veal or mutton, some white wine, and some fausages made of minced
veal or pork, boil up the chines, scum them, and put in two or three blades of
large mace, a few cloves, oyster or caper liquor with a little salt; and being
finely boild down, put in some good mutton or beef gravy: and a quarter of an
hour before you dish them, have all manner of sweet herbs picked and stripped, as
time, sweet marjoram, savory, parsley bruised with the back of a ladle, and
give them two or three walms on the fire in the broth; then dish the chines in
thin slices of fine french bread, broth them, and lay on them some boiled beef
marrow, boild in strong broth, some slic't lemon, and run over all with a lear
made of beaten butter, the yolf of an egg or two, the juice of two or three
oranges, and some gravy, etc.

To boil or stew any Joint of Mutton.
TAke a whole loin of mutton being jointed, put it into a long stewing pan or
large dish, in as much fair water as will more then half cover it, and when it
is scumm'd cover it; but first put in some salt, white wine, and carrots cut
into dice work, and when the broth is half boiled strain it, blow off the fat,
and wash away the dregs from the mutton; wash also the stew pan or pipkin very
clean, and put in again the broth into the pan or pipkin, with some capers,
large mace, and carrots being washed, put them in again and stew them softly,
lay the mutton by in some warm place, or broth, in a pipkin; then put in some
sweet herbs chopped with an onion, and put it to your broth also, then have
collyflower ready boild in water and salt, put it into beaten butter with some
boild marrow: then the mutton and broth being ready, dissolve two or three
yolks of eggs, with white wine, verjuyce, or sack, and give it a walm or two;
then dish up the meat, and lay on the collyflowers, gooseberries, capers,
marrow, carrots, and grapes or barberries, and run it over with beaten butter.

For the garnish according to the season of the year, sparagus, artichocks,
parsnips, turnips, hop buds, coleworts, cabidge-lettice, chestnuts,
cabidge-sprouts.

Sometimes for more variety, for thickning of this broth, strained almonds,
with strong mutton broth.

To boil a Rack, Chine, or Loin of mutton a most excellent way either whole or
in pieces.
BOil it either in a flat large pipkin or stewing pan, with as much fair water
as will cover the meat, and when it boils scum it, put thereto some salt; and
being half boiled take up the meat and strain the broth, blow off the fat and
wash the stewing pan and the meat from the dregs, then again put in the crag
end of the rack of mutton to make the broth good, with some mace; then a little
before you take it up, take a handful of picked parsley, chop it very small and
put it in the broth, with some whole marygold flowers; put in the chine again,
and give it a walm or two, then dish it on fine sippets and broth it, then add
thereto raisins of the Sun, and currants ready boild and warm, lay them over the
chine of mutton, then garnish the dish with marygold-flowers, mace, lemon, and
barberries.

Otherwise for change without fruit.

To boil a Chine of mutton in Barley broth, or Chines, Racks, and Knuckles of
Veal.
TAke a chine of veal or mutton and joint it, put it in a pipkin with some
strong mutton broth, and when it boils and is scummed, put in some french
barley being first boiled in fair water, put into the broth also some large
mace, and some sweet herbs bound up in a bundle, a little rosemary, time,
winter-savory, salt, and sweet marjoram, bind them up very hard, and put in
some raisins of the sun, some good prunes, currants, and marygold-flowers; boil
it up to an indifferent thickness, and serve it on fine sippets; garnish the
dish with fruit and marigold-flowers, mace, lemon, and boiled marrow.

Otherwise without fruit, put some good mutton gravy, and sometimes raisins
only.

To stew a Chine of Mutton or Veal.
PUt it in a Pipkin with strong broth and white wine, and when it boils scum
it, and put to it some oyster liquor, salt, whole pepper, a bundle of sweet
herbs well bound up, two or three blades of large mace, a whole onion, with
some inter larded bacon cut into dice work, some chestnuts, and some capers;
then have some stewed oysters by themselves, as you may see in the Book of
Oysters. The chines being ready, garnish the dish with great oysters fried and
stewed, mace, chestnuts, and lemon peel; dish up the chines in a fair dish on
fine sippets, broth it, and garnish the chines with stewed oysters, chestnuts,
mace, slic't lemon, and some fried oysters.

To make a Dish of Steaks stewed in a Drying Pan.
TAke them and fry them in sweet butter; being half fried, put out the butter,
and put to them some good strong Ale, Pepper, Salt, a shred onion, and nutmeg;
stew them well together, and dish them on sippets, serve them, and pour on the
sauce with some beaten butter, etc.

To make stewed Broth.
TAke a knuckle of veal, a joint of mutton, loin or rack, two marrow-bones, a
capon, and boil them in fair water, scum them when they boil, and put to them a
bundle of sweet herbs bound up hard and close; then add some large mace, whole
cinnamon, and some ginger, bruised and put in a fine clean cloth bound up fast,
and a few whole cloves, some strained manchet, or beaten oatmeal strained and
put to the broth; then have prunes and currants boiled and strained; then put in
some whole raisins, currants, some good damask prunes, and boil not the fruit
too much: about half an hour before you dish your meat, put into the broth a
pint of claret wine, and some sugar; dish up the meat on fine sippets, broth
it, and garnish the dish with slic't lemons, prunes, mace, raisins, currants,
scraped sugar, and barberries; garnish the meat in the dish also.

Stewed Broth in the new Mode or Fashion.
TAke a joint of mutton, rack, or loin, and boil them in pieces or whole in
fair water, scum them, and being scummed and half boiled, take up the mutton,
and wash away the dregs from the meat; strain the broth, and blow away the fat;
then put the broth into a clean pipkin, with a bundle of sweet herbs bound up
hard; then put thereto some large mace, raisins of the sun boiled and strained,
with half as many prunes; also some saffron, a few whole cloves, pepper, salt,
claret wine, and sugar; and being finely stewed together, a little before you
dish it up, put in the meat, and give it a walm or two; dish it up, and serve
it on fine carved sippets.

To stew a Loin, Rack, or any Joint of mutton otherwise.
CHop a loin into steaks, lay it in a deep dish or stewingpan, and put to it
half a pint of claret, and as much water, salt and pepper, three or four whole
onions, a faggot of sweet herbs bound up bard, and some large mace; cover them
close, and stew them leasurely the space of two hours, turn them now and then,
and serve them on sippets.

Otherwise for change, being half boiled, put to them some sweet herbs
chopped, give them a walm, and serve them on sippets with scalded gooseberries,
barberries, grapes, or lemon.

Sometimes for variety put raisins, prunes, currants, dates, and serve them with
slic't lemon, and beaten butter.

Other times you may alter the spices, and put nutmeg, cloves, ginger, etc.

Sometimes to the first plain way put capers, pickled cucumbers, samphire, etc.

Otherwise.

Stew it between two dishes with fair water, and when it boils, scum it, and
put in three or four blades of large mace, gross pepper, cloves, and salt; stew
them close covered two hours: then have parsley picked, and some stripped, fine
spinach, sorrel, savory, and sweet marjoram chopped with some onions, put them
to your meat, and give it a walm, with some grated bread amongst them; then
dish them on carved sippets, blow off the fat on the broth, and broth it, lay
lemon on it and beaten butter, and stew it thus whole.

To dress or force a Leg of Veal a singular good way, in the newest Mode.
TAke a leg of veal, take out the meat, and leave the skin and the shape of the
leg whole together, mince the meat that came out of the leg with some beef suet
or lard, and some sweet herbs minced; then season it with pepper, nutmeg,
ginger, and cloves, all being fine beaten, with some salt, a clove or two of
garlic, three or four yolks of hard eggs in quarters, pine-apple-seed, two or
three raw eggs, also pistaches, chestnuts, and some quarters of boild artichocks
bottoms fill the leg and sow it up, boil it in a pipkin with two gallons of
fair water and some white wine; being scumm'd and almost boild, take up some
broth into a dish or pipkin, and put to it some chestnuts, pistaches,
pine-apple-seed, some large mace, marrow, and artichocks bottoms boild and cut
into quarters; stew all the aforesaid well together: then have some fried toast
of manchet or rouls finely carved. The leg being well boild (dainty and tender)
dish it on french bread, fry some toast of it, and sippets round about it,
broth it, and put on it marrow, and your other materials, as slic't lemon and
lemon peel, and run it over with beaten butter.

Thicken the broth sometimes with almond paste strained with some of the broth,
or for variety yolks of eggs and saffron strained with some of the broth, or
saffron only. One may add sometimes some of the minced meat made up into
balls, and stewed amongst the broth, etc.

To boil a Leg or Knuckle of Veal with Rice.
BOil it in a pipkin, put some salt to it and scum it, then put to it some mace
and some rice finely picked and washed, some raisins of the sun and gravy;
being fine and tender boild, put in some saffron, and serve it on fine carved
sippets, with the rice over all.

Otherwise with paste cut like small lard, and boil it in thin broth and
saffron.

Or otherwise in white broth, with fruit, sweet herbs, white wine and
gooseberries.

To boil a Breast of Veal.
Joint it well and parboil it a little, then put it in a stewing pan or deep
dish, with some strong broth and a bundle of sweet herbs well bound up, some
large mace, and some slices of interlarded bacon, two or three cloves, some
capers, samphire, salt, spinach, yolks of hard eggs, and white wine; stew all
these well together, being tender boild, serve it on fine carved sippets, and
broth it: then have some fried sweetbreads, sausages of veal or pork, garlic
or none, and run all over with butter, lemon, and fried parsley over all. Thus
you may boil rack or loin of veal.

To boil a Breast of Veal otherwise.
MAke a pudding of grated manchet, minced suet, and minced veal, season it with
nutmeg, pepper, salt, three or four eggs, cinnamon, dates, currants, raisins of
the sun, some grapes, sugar, and cream; mingle all together, fill the breast,
prick it up, and stew it between two dishes with white wine, strong broth,
mace, dates, and marrow; being finely stewed serve it on sippets, and run it
over with beaten butter, lemon, barberries, or grapes.

Sometime thick it with some almond-milk, sugar, and cream.

To force a Breast of Veal.
MInce some veal or mutton with some beef suet or fat bacon, some sweet herbs
minced, and seasoned with some cloves, mace, nutmeg, pepper, two or three raw
eggs, and salt; then prick it up: the breast being filled at the lower end,
stew it between two dishes, with some strong broth, white wine, and large mace;
then an hour after have sweet herbs picked and stripped, as time, sorrel,
parsley, and sweet marjoram, bruised with the back of a ladle, put it into your
broth with some marrow and give them a walm; then dish up your breast of veal
on sippets finely carved; broth it and lay on it slic't lemon, marrow, mace,
and barberries, and run it over with beaten butter.

If you will have the broth yellow put thereto saffron, etc.

To boil a Leg of Veal.
STuff it with beef suet, sweet herbs chopped, nutmeg and salt, and boil it in
fair water and salt; then take some of the broth and put thereto some capers,
currants, large mace, a piece of interlarded bacon, two or three whole cloves,
pieces of pears, some boild artichock suckers, some beaten butter, boild
marrow, and mace; then before you dish it up, have sorrel, sage, parsley, time,
sweet marjoram coursly minced with two or three cuts of a knife, and bruised
with the back of a ladle on a clean board; put them into your broth to make it
green, and give it a walm or two, then dish it up on fine carved sippets, pour
on the broth, and then your other matterials, some gooseberries, barberries,
beaten butter and lemon,

To boil a Leg of Mutton.
TAke a fair leg of mutton, boil it in water and salt, make sauce with gravy,
wine vinegar, white wine, salt, butter, nutmeg, and strong broth; and being
well stewed together, dish it up on fine carved sippets, and pour on your broth.

Garnish your dish with barberries, capers, and slic't lemon, and garnish the
leg of mutton with the same garnish, and run it over with beaten butter, slic't
lemon, and grated nutmeg.

To boil a Leg of Mutton otherwise.
TAke a good leg of mutton and boil it in water and salt, being stuffed with
sweet herbs chopped with beef suet, some salt and nutmeg; then being almost
boild, take up some of the broth into a pipkin, and put to it some large mace,
a few currants, a handful of french capers, a little sack, the yolks of three or
four hard eggs minced small, and some lemon cut like square dice; being finely
boild, dish it on carved sippets, broth it, and run it over with beaten butter,
and lemon shred small.

Otherwise.

Stuff a leg of mutton with parsley being finely picked, boil it in water and
salt, and serve it on a fair dish with parsley and verjuyce in saucers.

Otherwise.

Boil it in water and salt not stuffed, and being boild, stuff it with lemon in
bits like squaredice, and serve it with with the peel cut square round about
it; make sauce with the gravy, beaten butter, lemon, and grated nutmeg.

Otherwise.

Boil it in water and salt, being stuffed with parsley, make sauce for it with
large mace, gravy, chopped parsley, butter, vinegar, juice of orange,
gooseberries barberries, grapes, and sugar, and serve it on sippets.

To boil peeping Chickens, the best and rarest way, A la mode.
TAke three or four french manchets, and being chipped, cut a round hole in the
top of them, take out the crum, and make a composition of the brawn of a roast
capon, mince it very fine, and stamp it in a mortar with marchpane paste, the
yolks of hard eggs, muskefied biscuit bread, and the crum of the manchet of one
of the breads, some sugar and sweet herbs chopped small, beaten cinnamon, cream,
marrow, faffron, yolks of eggs, and some currants; fill the breads, and boil
them in a napkin, in some good mutton or capon broth; but first stop the holes
in the tops of the breads, then stew some sweetbreads of veal, and six peeping
chickens between two dishes, or in a pipkin with some mace, then fry some
lamb-stones slic't in butter made of flower, cream, two or three eggs, and
salt; put to it some juice of spinach, then have some boiled sparagus, or
bottoms of Artichocks boiled and beat up in beaten butter and gravy. The
materials being well boiled and stewed up, dish the boiled breads in a fair
dish with the chickens round about the breads, then the sweetbreads, and round
the dish some fine carved sippets; then lay on the marrow, fried lamb-stones,
and some grapes; then thicken the broth with strained almonds, some cream and
sugar, give them a walm, and broth the meat, garnish it which candied pistaches,
artichocks, grapes, mace, some poungarnet, and slic't lemon.

To hash a Shoulder of Mutton.
TAke a shoulder of mutton, roste it, and save the gravy, slice one half, and
mince the other, and put it into a pipkin with the shoulder blade, put to it
some strong broth of good mutton or beef gravy, large mace, some pepper, salt,
and a big onion or two, a faggot of sweet herbs, and a pint of white wine; stew
them well together close covered, and being tender stewed, put away the fat,
and put some oyster liquor to the meat, and give it a walm: Then have three
pints of great oysters parboild in their own liquor, and bearded; stew them in
a pipkin with large mace, two great whole onions, a little salt, vinegar,
butter, some white wine, pepper, and stripped time; the materials being well
stewed down, dish up the shoulder of mutton on a fine clean dish, and pour on
the materials or hashed mutton, then the stewed oysters over all, with slic't
lemon and fine carved sippets round the dish.

To hash a shoulder of Mutton otherwise.
STew it with claret wine, only adding these few varieties more then the
other; viz. two or three anchoves, olives, capers, samphire, barberries,
grapes, or gooseberries, and in all points else as the former. But then the
shoulder being roasted, take off the skin of the upper side whole, and when the
meat is dished, lay on the upper skin whole, and cox it.

To hash a shoulder of Mutton the French way.
TAke a shoulder of mutton, roste it thoroughly, and save the gravy; being well
roasted, cut it into fine thin slices into a stewing-pan or dish; leave the
shoulder bones with some meat on them, and hack them with your knife; then blow
off the fat from the gravy you saved, and put it to your meat with a quarter of
a pint of claret wine, some salt, and a grated nutmeg; stew all the foresaid
things together a quarter of an hour, and serve it in a fine clean dish with
sippets of French bread: then rub the dish bottom with a clove of garlic, or
an onion, as you please; dish up the shoulder bones first, and then the meat on
that; then have a good lemon cut into dice work, as square as small dice, peel
and all together, and strew it on the meat; then run it over with beaten
butter, and gravy of mutton.

Scotch Collops of Mutton.
TAke a leg of mutton, and take out the bone, leave the leg whole, and cut
large collops round the leg as thin as a half-crown piece; hack them, then salt
and broil them on a clear charcole fire, broil them up quick, and the blood
will rise on the upper side; then take them up plum off the fire, and turn the
gravy into a dish; this done, broil the other side, but have a care you broil
them not too dry; then make sauce with the gravy, a little claret wine, and
nutmeg; give the collops a turn or two in the gravy, and dish them one by one,
or two, one upon another; then run them over with the juice of orange or lemon.

Scotch Collops of a Leg or Loin of mutton otherwise.
BOne a leg of mutton, and cut it cross the grain of the meat, slice it into
very thin slices, and hack them with the back of a knife; then fry them in the
best butter you can get, but first salt them a little before they be fried; or
being not too much fried, pour away the butter, and put to them some mutton
broth or gravy only, give them a walm in the pan, and dish them hot.

Sometimes for change put to them grated nutmeg, gravy, juice of orange, and a
little claret wine; and being fried as the former, give it a walm, run it over
with beaten butter, and serve it up hot.

Otherwise for more variety, add some capers, oysters, and lemon.

To make a Hash of Partridges or Capons.
TAke twelve partridges and roste them, and being cold mince them very fine,
the brawns or wings, and leave the legs and rumps whole; then put some strong
mutton broth to them, or good mutton gravy, grated nutmeg, a great onion or
two, some pistaches, chestnuts, and salt; then stew them in a large earthen
pipkin or sauce pan; stew the rumps and legs by themselves in strong broth in
another pipkin; then have a fine clean dish, and take a French six penny bread,
chip it, and cover the bottom of the dish, and when you go to dish the Hash,
steep the bread with some good mutton broth, or good mutton gravy; then pour
the Hash on the steeped bread, lay the legs and the rumps on the Hash, with
some fried oysters, pistaches, chestnuts, slic't lemon, and lemon peel, yolks of
eggs strained with juice of orange and beaten butter beat together, and run
over all; garnish the dish with carved oranges, lemons, fried oysters,
chestnuts, and pistaches. Thus you may hash any kind of Fowl, whether water or
land Fowl.

To hash a Hare.
FLay it and draw it, then cut it into pieces, and wash it in claret wine and
water very clean, strain the liquor, and parboil the quarters; then take them
and slice them, and put them into a dish with the legs, wings, or shoulders and
head whole; cut the chine into two or three pieces, and put to it two or three
great onions, and some of the liquor where it was parboild, stew it between two
dishes close covered till it be tender, and put to it some mace, pepper, and
nutmeg; serve it on fine carved sippets, and run it over with beaten butter,
lemon, marrow, and barberries.

To hash a Rabit.
TAke a Rabit being flayed and wiped clean; then cut off the thighs, legs,
wings, and head, and part the chine into four pieces, put all into a dish or
pipkin, and put to it a pint of white wine, and as much fair water, gross
pepper, slic't ginger, salt, time, and some other sweet herbs being finely
minced, and two or three blades of mace; stew it the space of two hours, and a
little before you dish it, take the yolks of six new laid eggs, dissolve them
with some grape verjuyce, give it a walm or two on the fire, and serve it up
hot.

To stew or hash Rabits otherwise.
STew them between two dishes as the former, in quarters or pieces as long as
your finger, with some broth, mace, a bundle of sweet herbs, salt, and a little
white wine, being well stewed down, strain the yolks of two or three hard eggs
with some of the broth, and thicken the broth where the rabit stews; then have
some cabidge-lettice boild in fair water, and being boild tender put them in
beaten butter with a few boild raisins of the Sun; or in place of lettice you
may use white endive: then the rabits being finely stewed, dish them up on fine
carved sippets, and lay on the garnish of lettice, mace, raisins of the Sun,
grapes, slic't lemon or barberries; broth it, and scrape on sugar. Thus
chickens, pigeons, or partridge.

To hash Rabits otherwise.
MAke a forcing or stuffing in the belly of the rabits, with some sweet herbs,
yolks of hard eggs, parsley, sage, currants, pepper and salt, and boil them as
the former.

To hash any Land Fowl.
TAke a capon and hash the wings in fine thin slices, leave the rumps and legs
whole, put them into a pipkin with a little strong broth, nutmeg, some stewed
or pickled mushrooms, and an onion very small slic't, or as the capon is slic't
about the bigness of a threepence; stew it down with a little butter and
gravy, and then dish it on fine sippets, lay the rumps and legs on the meat,
and run it over with beaten butter, beaten with slices of lemon peel.

To boil Woodcocks or Snites.
BOil them either in strong broth, or in water and salt, and being boiled take
out the guts and chop them small with the liver, put to it some crumbs of
grated white bread, a little of the broth of the cock, and some large mace;
stew them together with some gravy, then dissolve the yolks of two eggs with
some wine vinegar, and a little grated nutmeg, and when you are ready to dish
it, put the eggs to it, and stir it amongst the sauce with a little butter;
dish them on sippets, and run the sauce over them with some beaten butter and
capers, or lemon minced small, barberries or whole pickled grapes.

Sometimes with this sauce boil some slic't onions, and currants boiled in a
broth by it self; when you boil it with onions rub the bottom of the dish with
garlic.

Boild Cocks or Larks otherwise.
BOil them with the guts in them, in strong broth, or fair water, and three or
four whole onions, large mace, and salt; the cocks being boild, make sauce with
some thin slices of manchet or grated bread in another pipkin, and some of the
broth where the fowl or cocks boil, then put to it some butter and the guts and
liver minced, then have some yolks of eggs dissolved with some vinegar and some
grated nutmeg, put it to the other ingredients, stir them together, and dish
the fowl on fine sippets, pour on the sauce with some slic't lemon, grapes, or
barberries, and run it over with beaten butter.

To boil any Land Fowl, as Turkey, Bustard, Pheasant, Peacock, Partridge, or the
like.
TAke a turkey and flay off the skin, leave the legs and rumps whole, then
mince the flesh raw with some beef suet or lard, season it with nutmeg, pepper,
salt, and some minced sweet herbs, then put to it some yolks of raw eggs and
mingle all together, with two bottoms of boild artichocks, roasted chestnuts
blanched, some marrow, and some boild skirrets or parsnips cut like dice, or
some pleasant pears, and yolks of hard eggs in quarters, some gooseberries,
grapes, or barberries; fill the skin, and prick it up in the back, stew it in a
stewing pan or deep dish, and cover it with another; but first put some strong
broth to it, some marrow, artichocks boild and quartered, large mace, white
wine, chestnuts, quarters of pears, salt, grapes, barberries, and some of the
meat made up in balls stewed with the turkey; being finely boild or stewed,
serve it on fine carved sippets, broth it, and lay on the garnish with slices
of lemon and whole lemon peel, run it over with beaten butter, and garnish the
dish with chestnuts, yolks of hard eggs, and large mace.

For the lears or thickning, yolks of hard eggs strained with some of the
broth, or strained almond paste with some of the broth, or else strained bread
and sorrel,

Otherwise you may boil the former fowls either boned and trust up with a
farsing of some minced veal or mutton, and seasoned as the former in all
points, with those materials, or boil it with the bones in being trust up. A
turkey to bake, and break the bones.

Otherwise bone the fowl, and fill the body with the foresaid farsing, or make
a pudding of grated bread, minced suet of beef or veal, seasoned with cloves,
mace, pepper, salt, and grapes, fill the body and prick up the back, and stew
it as is aforesaid.

Or make the pudding of grated bread, beef suet minced, some currants, nutmegs,
cloves, sugar, sweet herbs, salt, juice of spinach; if yellow, saffron. some
minced meat, cream, eggs and barberries: fill the fowl and stew it in mutton
broth and white wine, with the gizard, liver, and bones, stew it down well,
then have some artichock bottoms boild and quartered, some potatoes boild and
blanched, and some dates quartered, also some marrow boild in water and salt;
for the garnish some boild skirret or pleasant pears. Then make a lear of
almond paste strained with mutton broth, for the thickening of the former broth.

Otherwise simple being stuffed with parsley, serve it in with butter,
vinegar, and parsley boiled and minced; as also bacon boild on it or about it,
in two pieces, and two saucers of green sauce.

Or otherwise for variety, boil your fowl in water and salt, then take strong
broth and put in a faggot of sweet herbs, mace, marrow, cucumber slic't, and
thin slices of interlarded bacon, and salt, etc.

To boil Capons, Pullets, Chickens, Pigeons, Pheasants or Partridges.
FEarce them either with the bone or boned, then take off the skin whole, with
the legs, wings, neck, and head on, mince the body with some bacon or
beef suet, season it with nutmeg, pepper, cloves, beaten ginger, salt, and a
few sweet herbs, finely minced and mingled amongst some three or four yolks of
eggs, some sugar, whole grapes, gooseberries, barberries, and pistaches; fill
the skins and prick them up in the back, then stew them between two dishes,
with some strong broth, white wine, butter, some large mace, marrow,
gooseberries, and sweet herbs; being stewed serve them on sippets with some
marrow and slic't lemon; in winter, currants.

To boil a Capon or Chicken in White Broth.
FIrst boil the capon in water and salt, then take three pints of strong broth,
and a quart of white wine, and stew it in a pipkin with a quarter of a pound of
dates, half a pound of sine sugar, four or five blades of large mace, the
marrow of three marrow bones, a handful of white endive; stew these in a pipkin
very leasurely, that it may but only simper, then being finely stewed, and the
broth well tasted, strain the yolks of ten eggs with some of the broth. Before
you dish up the capon or chickens, put in the eggs into the broth, and keep it
stirring that it may not curdle, give it a walm and set it from the fire; the
fowls being dished up put on the broth, and garnish the meat with dates,
marrow, large mace, endive, preserved barberries, and oranges, boiled skirrets,
poungarnet, and curnells. Make a lear of almond paste and grape verjuyce.

A rare Frycase.
Take six pigeon and six chicken peepers, scald and truss them being drawn
clean, head and all on, then set them, and have some lamb-stones and
sweetbreads blanched, parboild and slic't, fry most of the sweetbreads flowred,
have also some asparagus ready, cut off the tops an inch long, the yolks of two
hard eggs, pistaches, the marrow of six marrow-bones, half the marrow fried
green, and white batter, let it be kept warm till it be almost dinner time,
then have a clean drying pan, and fry the fowl with good sweet butter, being
finely fried put out the butter, and put to them some roste mutton gravy, some
large fried oysters, and some salt; then put in the hard yolks of eggs, and the
rest of the sweetbreads that are not fried, the pistaches, asparagus, and half
the marrow: then stew them well in the frying pan with some grated nutmeg,
pepper (a clove or two of garlic if you please) a little white wine, and let
them be well stewed. Then have ten yolks of eggs dissolved in a dish with
grape-verjuyce or wine vinegar, and a little beaten mace and put it to the
frycase, then have a french six penny loaf slic't into a fair large dish set on
coals, with some good mutton gravy, then give the frycase two or three walms on
the fire, and pour it on the sop; in the dish; garnish it with fried
sweetbread, fried oysters, fried marrow, pistaches, slic't almonds, and the
juice of two or three oranges.

Capons in Pottage in the French Fashion.
DRaw and truss the Capons, set them, and fill their bellies with marrow; then
put them in a pipkin with a knuckle of veal, a neck of mutton, a marrow bone,
and some sweetbreads of veal, season the broth with cloves, mace, and a little
salt, and set it to the fire; let it boil gently till the capons be enough, but
have a care you boil them not too much; as your capons boil, make ready the
bottoms and tops of eight or ten rouls of French Bread, put them dried into a
fair silver dish, wherein you serve the capons; set it on the fire, and put to
the bread two ladles full of broth wherein the capons are boiled, and a ladle
full of mutton gravy; cover the dish and let it stand till you dish up the
capons; if need require, add now and then a ladle full of broth and gravy:
when you are ready toserve it, first lay on the marrow bone, then the capons on
each side; then fill up the dish with gravy of mutton, and wring on the juice
of a lemon or two; then with a spoon take off all the fat that swimmeth on the
pottage; garnish the capons with the sweetbreads, and some carved Lemon, and
serve it hot.

To boil a Capon, Pullet, or Chicken.
BOil them in good mutton broth, with mace, a faggot of sweet herbs, sage,
spinach, marigold leaves and flowers, white or green endive, burrage, bugloss,
parsley, and sorrel, and serve it on sippets.

To boil Capons or Chickens with Sage and Parsley.
FIrst boil them in water and salt, then boil some parsley, sage, two or three
eggs hard, chop them; then have a few thin slices of fine manchet, and stew all
together, but break not the slicesof bread; stew them with some of the broth
wherein the chickens boils, some large mace, butter, a little white wine or
vinegar, with a few barberies or grapes; dish up the chickens on the sauce, and
run them over with sweet butter and lemon cut like dice, the peel cut like
small lard, and boil a little peel with the chickens.

To boil a Capon or Chicken with diverse Compositions.
TAke off the skin whole, but leave on the legs, wings, and head; mince the
body with some beef suet or lard, puc to it some sweet herbs minced, and season
it with cloves, mace, pepper, salt, two or three eggs, grapes, gooseberries, or
barberries, bits of potato or mushrooms: In the winter with sugar, currants, and
prunes fill the skin, prick it up, and stew it between two dishes, with large
mace, and strong broth, pieces of artichocks, cardones or asparagus, and
marrow: being finely stewed, serve it on carved sippets, and run it over with
beaten butter, lemon slic't, and scrape on sugar.

To boil a Capon, Chicken with Cardones, Mushrooms, Artichocks, or Oysters.
THe foresaid Fowls being parboild, and cleansed from the grounds, stew them
finely; then take your cardones being cleansed and peeled into water, have a
skillet of fair water boiling hot, and put them therein; b^ing tender boild,
take them up and fry them in chopped lard or sweet butter, pour away the butter,
and put them into a pipkin, with strong broth, pepper, mace, ginger, verjuyce,
and juice of orange; stew all together with some strained almonds, and some
sweet herbs chopped, give them a walm, and serve your capon or chicken on
sippets.

Let them be fearsed, as you may see in the Book of fearst Meats, and wrap your
fearst Fowl in cauls of Veal, half roste them, then stew them in a pipkin with
the foresaid cardones and broth.

To boil a Capon or Chicken in the French Fashion with Skirrets or French Beans.
TAke a capon and boil it in fair water with a little salt, a faggot of time
and rosemary bound up hard, some parsley and sennel roots being picked and
finely cleansed, and two or three blades of large mace; being almost boild, put
in two whole onions boild and strained with oyster liquor, a little verjuyce,
grated bread, and some beaten pepper, give it a walm or two, and serve the
capon or chicken on fine carved sippets. Garnish it with an orange-peel boild
in strong broth, and some French Beans boild and put in thick butter, or some
skirret, cardones, artichocks, slic't lemon, mace, or orange.

To boil Capon or Chicken with sugar Pease.
WHen the cods be but young, string them and pick off the husks; then take two
or three handfuls, and put them into a pipkin with half a pound of sweet
butter, a quarter of a pint of fair water, gross pepper, salt, mace, and some
sallet oil: stew them till they be very tender, and strain to them three or
four yolks of eggs, with six spoonfuls of sack.

To boil a Capon or Chicken with Collyflowers.
CUt off the buds of your flowers, and boil them in milk with a little mace
till they be very tender; then take the yolks of two eggs, and strain them with
a quarter of, a pint of sack; then take as much thick butter being drawn with a
little vinegar and a slic't lemon, brew them together; then take the flowers
out of the milk, put them to the butter and sack, dish up your capon being
tender boiled upon sippets finely carved, and pour on the sauce, serve it to
the table with a little salt.

To boil a Capon or Chicken with Sparagus.
BOil your Capon or chicken in fair water and some salt, then put in their
bellies a little mace, chopped parsley, and sweet butter; being boild, serve
them on sippets, and put a little of the broth on them: then have a bundle or
two of sparagus boild, put in beaten butter, and serve it on your capon or
chicken.

To boil a Capon or Chicken with Rice.
BOil the capon in fair water and salt, then take half a pound of rice, and
boil it in milk; being half boiled, put away the milk, and boil it in two
quarts of cream, put to it a little rose water, large mace, or nutmeg, and the
foresaid materials. Being almost boiled, strain the yolks of six or seven eggs
with a little cream, and stir altogether; give them a walm, and dish up the
capon or chicken, then pour on the rice, being seasoned with sugar and salt,
and serve it on fine carved sippets. Garnish the dish with scraped sugar,
orange, preserved barberries, slic't lemon, or poungarnet kernels, as also the
capon or chicken, and marrow on them.

Diverse Meats boiled with Bacon hot or cold; as Calves-head, any Joint of Veal,
lean Venison, Rabits, Turkey, Peacock, Capons, Pullets, Pheasants, Pewets,
Pigeons, Partridges, Ducks, Mallards, or any Sea Fowl.
TAke a leg of veal and and soak it in fair water, the blood being well soaked
from it and white, boil it; but first stuff it with parsley and other sweet
herbs chopped small, as also some yolks of hard eggs minced; stuff it and boil
it in water and salt, then boil the bacon by its self either stuffed or not, as
you please; the veal and bacon being boiled white, serve them being dished up,
and lay the bacon by the veal with the rind on in a whole piece, or take off
the rind and cut it in four, six, or eight thin slices; let your bacon be of
the ribs, and serve it with parsley strowed on it, green sauce in saucers, or
others, as you may see in the Book of Sauces.

Cold otherwise.
BOil any of the meats, poultry, or birds abovesaid with the ribs of bacon,
when it is boiled take off the rind being finely cleansed from the rust and
filth; slice it into thin slices, and season it with nutmeg, cinnamon, cloves,
pepper, and fennel-seed all finely beaten, with fine sugar amongst them,
sprinkle over all rose vinegar, and put some of the slices into your boild
capon or other fowl lay some slices on it, and lay your capon or other fowl on
some blank manger in a clean dish, and serve it cold.

To boil Land Fowl, Sea Fowl, Lamb, Kid, or any Heads in the French Fashion,
with green Pease or Haslers.
TAke pease, sheal them, and put them into boiling mutton broth, with some thin
slices of interlarded bacon; being almost boiled, put in chopped parsley, some
anniseeeds, and strain some of the pease, thick them or not, as you please;
then put in some pepper, give it a walm, and serve kids or lambs head on
sippets, and stick it other ways with eggs and grated cheese, or some of the
pease and flower strained; sometimes for variety you may use saffron or mint.

To boil all other smaller Fowls, as Ruffes, Brewes, Godwits, Knots, Dotterels,
Strents, Pewits, Ollines, Gravelens, Oxeyes, Redshanks, etc.
HAlf roast any of these fowls, and stick on one side a few cloves as they
roste, save the gravy, and being half roasted, put them into a pipkin, with the
gravy, some claret wine, as much strong broth as will cover them, some broild
houshold-bread strained, also mace, cloves, pepper, ginger, some fried onions
and salt; stew all well together, and serve them on fine carved sippets:
sometimes for change add capers and samphire.

To boil all manner of small Birds, or Land Fowl, as Plovers, Quails, Railes,
Black birds, Thrushes, Snites, Wheatears, Larks, Sparrows, Martins.
TAke them and truss them, or cut off the legs and heads, and boil them in
strong broth or water, scum them, and put in large mace, white wine, washed
currants, dates, marrow, pepper, and salt; being well stewed, dish them on fine
carved sippets, thicken the broth with strained almonds, rose water and sugar,
and garnish them with lemon, barberries sugar, or grated bread strewed about
the dish. For leire otherwise, strained sweetbread, or strained bread and hard
eggs, with verjuyce and broth.

Sometimes for variety garnish them with potatoes, farsings, or little balls of
farsed meat.

To boil a Swan, Whopper, wild or tame Goose, Crane, Shoveller, Herne, Ducks,
Mallard, Bittor, Widgeons, Gulls, or Curlewes.
TAke a swan and bone it, leave on the legs and wings, then make a farsing of
some beef suet or minced lard, some minced mutton or venison being finely
minced with some sweet herbs, beaten nutmeg, pepper, cloves, and mace; then
have some oysters parboild in their own liquor, mingle them amongst the minced
meat, with some raw eggs, and fill the body of the fowl, prick it up close on
the back, and boil it in a stewing pan or deep dish, then put to the fowl some
strong broth, large mace, white wine, a few cloves, oyster liquor, and some
boild marrow; stew them all well together: then have oysters stewed by
themselves, with an onion or two, mace, pepper, butter, and a little white
wine. Then have the bottoms of artichocks ready boild, and put in some beaten
butter, and some boild marrow; dish up the fowl on fine carved sippets, then
broth them, garnish them with stewed oysters, marrow, artichocks; gooseberries,
slic't lemon, barberries, or grapes, and large mace; garnish the dish with
grated bread, oysters, mace, lemon, and artichocks, and run over the fowl with
beaten butter.

Otherwise fill the body with a pudding made of grated bread, yolks of eggs,
sweet herbs minced small, with an onion, and some beef suet minced, some beaten
cloves, mace, pepper, and salt, some of the blood of the fowl mixed with it,
and a little cream; fill the fowl, and stew it or boil it as before.

To boil any large water Fowl otherwise, as Swan, Whopper, wild or tame
Geese, etc.
TAke a goose and salt it two or three days, then truss it to boil, cut lard
as big us your little finger and lard the breast; season the lard with pepper,
mace, and salt; then boil it in beef-broth, or water and salt, put to it pepper
grossly beaten, a bundle of bay leaves, time, and rosemary bound up very well,
boil them with the fowl; then prepare some cabidge boild tender in water and
salt, squeese out the water from it, and put it in a pipkin with some strong
broth, claret wine, and a good big onion or two; season it with pepper, mace,
and salt, and three or four anchoves dissolved; stew these together with a
ladle full of sweet butter and a little vinegar: and when the goose is boild
enough, and your cabbidge on sippets, lay on the goose with some cabbidge on
the breast, and serve it up. Thus you may dress any large wild fowl.

To boil all manner of small Sea or Land Fowl.
BOil the fowl in water and salt, then take some of the broth, and put to it
some beefs udder boild and slic't into thin slices, with some pistaches
blanched, some slic't sausages stripped out of the skin, white wine, sweet herbs,
and large mace; stew these together till you think it sufficiently boild, then
put to it beet-root cut into slices, beat it up with butter, and carve up the
fowl, pour the broth on it, and garnish it with sippets or what you please.

Or thus.

Take and lard them, then half roast them, draw them, and put them in a pipkin,
with some strong broth or claret wine, some chestnuts, a pint of great oysters
taking the beards from them, two or three onions minced very small, some mace,
a little beaten ginger, and a crust of French bread grated; thicken it, and
dish them upon sops: if no oysters, chestnuts, or artichock bottoms, turnips,
collyflowers, interlarded bacon in thin slices, and sweetbreads, etc.

Otherwise.

Take them and roste them, save the gravy, and being roasted put them in a
pipkin, with the gravy, some slic't onions, ginger, cloves, pepper, salt.
grated bread, claret wine, currants, capers, mace, barberries, and sugar, serve
them on fine sippets, and run them over with beaten butter, slic't lemon, and
lemon peel; sometimes for change use stewed oysters or cockles.

To boil or dress any Land Fowl, or Birds in the Italian fashion, in a broth
called Brodo Lardiero.
TAke six pigeons being finely cleansed and trust, put them into a pipkin with
a quart of strong broth, or water, and half wine, then put therein some fine
slices of interlarded bacon; when it boils scum it, and put in nutmeg, mace,
ginger, pepper, salt, currants, sugar, some sack, raisins of the Sun, prunes,
sage, dried cherries, time, a little saffron, and dish them on fine carved
sippets.

To stew Pigeons in the French fashion.
THe Pigeons being drawn and trust, make a fearsing or stopping of some sweet
herbs minced, then mince some beef suet or lard, grated bread, currants, cloves,
mace, pepper, ginger, sugar, and three or four raw eggs. The pigeons being
larded and half roasted, stuff them with foresaid fearsing, and put a boild
cabidge stuck with a few cloves round about them; bind up every pigeon several
with packthred, then put them in a pipkin a boiling with strong mutton broth,
three or four yolks of hard eggs minced small, some large mace, whole cloves,
pepper, salt, and a little white wine; being boild, serve them on fine carved
sippets, and strew on cinnamon ginger, and sugar.

Otherwise in the French fashion.
TAke pigeons ready pulled or scalded, take the flesh out of the skin, and
leave the skin whole with the legs and wings hanging to it, mince the bodies
with some lard or beef suet together very small, then put to them some sweet
herbs finely minced, and season all with cloves, mace, ginger, pepper, some
grated bread or parmisan grated, and yolks of eggs; fill again the skins, and
prick them up in the back, then put them in a dish with some strong broth, and
sweet herbs chopped, large mace, gooseberrries, barerries or grapes; then have
some cabbidge-lettice boild in water and salt, put to them buttter, and the
pigeons being boild, serve them on fine sippets.

To boil Pigeons otherwise.
BEing trussed, put them in a pipkin, with some strong broth or fair water,
boil and scum them, then put in some mace, a faggot of sweet herbs, white
endive, marigold flowers, and salt; and being finely boild, serve them on
sippets, and garnish the dish with mace and white endive flowers.

Otherwise you may add cucumbers in quarters either pickled or fresh, and
some pickled capers; or boil the cucumbers by themselves, and put them in
beaten butter, and sweet herbs chopped small.

Or boil them with capers, samphire, mace nutmeg, spinach, endive, and a rack
or chine of mutton boiled with them.

Or else with capers, mace, salt, and sweet herbs in a faggot; then have some
cabbidge or collyflowers boild very tender in fair water and salt, pour away
the water, and put them in beaten butter, and when the fowls be boild, serve
the cabbidge on them.

To boil Pigeons otherwise.
TAke Pigeons being finely cleansed and trust, put them in a pipkin or skillet
clean scowred, with some mutton broth or fair water; set them a boiling and
scum them clean, then put to them large mace, and well washed currants, some
strained bread strained with vinegar and broth, put it to the pigeons with some
sweet butter and capers; boil them very white, and being boild, serve them on
fine carved sippets in the broth with some sugar; garnish them with lemon, fine
sugar, mace, grapes, gooseberries, or barberries, and run them over with beaten
butter; garnish the dish with grated manchet.

Pottages.
Pottage in the Italian Fashion.
BOil green pease with some strong broth, and interlarded bacon cut into
slices; the pease being boild, put to them some chopped parsley, pepper,
anniseed, and strain some of the pease to thicken the broth: give it a walm and
serve it on sippets, with boild chickens, pigeons, kids, or lambs head, mutton,
duck, mallard, or any poultrey.

Sometimes for variety you may thicken the broth with eggs.

Pottage otherwise in the Italian Fashion.
BOil a rack of mutton, a few whole cloves, mace, slic't ginger, all manner of
sweet herbs chopped, and a little salt; being finely boiled, put in some
strained almond paste, with grape verjuyce, saffron, grapes, or gooseberries;
give them a walm, and serve your meat on sippets.

Pottage of Mutton, Veal, or Beef, in the English fashion.
CUt a rack of mutton in two pieces, and take a knuckle of veal, and boil it in
a gallon pot or pipkin, with good store of herbs and a pint of oatmeal chopped
amongst the herbs, as time, sweet marjoram, parsley chives, salt, succory,
marigold-leaves, and flowers, strawberry-leaves, violet-leaves, beets, borage,
sorrel, blood-wort, sage, pennyroyal; and being finely boild, serve them on
fine carved sippets with the mutton and veal, etc.

To stew a Shoulder of Mutton with Oysters.
TAke a shoulder of mutton, and roste it, and being half roasted or more, take
off the upper skin whole, and cut the meat into thin slices, then stew it with
claret, mace, nutmeg, anchoves, oyster-liquor, salt, capers, olives, samphire,
and slices of orange, leave the shoulder blade with some meat on it, and hack
it, save also the marrowbone whole with some meat on it, and lay it in a clean
dish; the meat being finely stewed; pour it on the bones, and on that some
stewed oysters, and large oysters over all with slic't lemon and lemon peel.

The skin being first finely breaded, stew the oysters with large mace, a great
onion or two, butter, vinegar, white wine, a bundle of sweet herbs, and lay on
the skin again over all, etc.

To roste a Shoulder of mutton with onions and parsley, and baste it with
Oranges.
STuff it with parsley and onions, or sweet herbs, nutmeg, and salt; and in the
rosting of it, baste it with the juice of oranges, save the gravy and clear
away the fat, then stew it up with a slice or two of orange and an anchove,
without any fat on the gravy, etc.

Other hashes of Scotch Collops.
CUt a leg of mutton into thin slices, as thin as a shilling, cross the grain
of the leg, sprinkle them lightly with salt, and fry them with sweet butter,
serve them with gravy or juice of orange, and nutmeg, and run them over with
beaten butter, lemon, etc.

Otherwise the foresaid Collops.

For variety, sometimes season them with coriander-seed, or stamped
fennil-seed, pepper, and salt; sprinkle them with white wine, then flowerd,
fried, and served with juice of orange, for sauce, with sirrup of rose vinegar
or elder vinegar.

Other Hashes or Scotch Collops of any Joint of Veal, either a Loin, Leg, Rack,
or Shoulder.
CUt a leg into thin slices, as you do Scotch collops of mutton, hack and fry
them with small thin slices of interlarded bacon as big as the slices of veal,
fry them with sweet butter; and being finely fried, dish them up in a fine
dish, put from them the butter that you fried them with, and put to them beaten
butter, with lemon, gravy, and juice of orange.

A hash of a Leg of Mutton in the French fashion.
PArboil a leg of mutton, then take it up, and pare off some thin slices on the
under, upper side, or round it, prick the leg through to let out the gravy on
the slices, then bruise some sweet herbs, as time, parsley, marjoram, savory,
with the back of a ladle, and put to it a piece of sweet butter, pepper,
verjuyce; and when your mutton is boild, pour all over the slices herbs and
broth on the leg into a clean dish.

Another hash of Mutton or Lamb, either hot or cold.
ROste a shoulder of mutton, and cut it into slices, put to it oysters, white
wine, raisins of the sun, salt, nutmeg, and strong broth (or no raisins) slic't
lemon or orange; stew it all together, and serve it on sippets, and run it over
with beaten butter and lemon, etc.

Another hash of a Joint of Mutton or Lamb hot or cold.
CUt it in very thin slices, then put them in a pipkin or dish, and put to it a
pint of claret wine, salt, nutmeg, large mace, an anchove or two, stew them
well together with a little gravy; and being finely stewed, serve them on
carved sippets with some beaten butter and lemon, etc.

Otherwise.

Cut it into thin slices raw, and fry it with a pint of white wine till it be
brown, and put them in a pipkin with slic't lemon, salt, fried parsley, gravy,
nutmeg, and garnish your dish with nutmeg and lemon.

Other hashes of a Shoulder of Mutton.
BOil it and cut it in thin slices, hack the shoulder blade, and put all into a
pipkin or deep dish, with some salt, gravy, white wine, some strong broth, and
a faggot of sweet herbs, oyster-liquor, caper-liquor, and capers: being stewed
down, bruise some parsley, and put to it some beaten cloves and mace, and serve
it on sippets.

Diverse made Dishes or Capilotado's.
First, a dish of Chines of Mutton, Veal Capon, Pigeons, or other Fowls.
BOil a pound of rice in mutton broth, put to it some blanched chestnuts,
pine-apple-seeds, almonds or pistaches; being boild thick, put to it some
marrow or fresh butter, salt, cinnamon and sugar; then cut your veal into small
bits or pieces, and break up the fowl; then have a fair dish and set it on the
embers, and put some of your rice, and some of your meat, and more of the rice
and sugar, and cinnamon and pepper over all, and some marrow.

Capilotado, in the Lombardy fashion, of a Capon.
BOil rice in mutton broth, till it be very thick, and put to it some salt and
sugar.

Then have also some Bolonia sausages boild very tender, minced very small, or
grated, and some grated cheese, sugar and cinnamon mingled together: then cut up
the boild or roste capon, and lay it upon a clean dish with some of the rice,
strew on cinnamon and sausage, grated cheese and sugar, and lay on yolks of raw
eggs; thus make two or three layings and more, eggs and some butter or marrow
on the top af all, and set it on the embers, and cover it, or in a warm oven.

Capilotado of Pigeons, or wild Ducks, or any Land or Sea Fowls roasted.
TAke a pound of almond paste, and put to it a capon minced and stamped with
the almonds, and some crumbs of manchet, some sack or white wine, three pints of
strong broth cold, and eight or ten yolks of raw eggs; strain all the foresaid
together, and boil it in a skillet with some sugar to a pretty thickness, put
to it some cinnamon, nutmeg, and a few whole cloves; then have roast pigeons, or
any small birds roasted, cut them up, and do as is aforesaid, and strew on
sugar and cinnamon.

Capilotado for Roast Meats, as Partridge, Pigeons, eight or twelve, or any
other the like: or Sea Fowls, Ducks, or Wigeons.
TAke a pound of almonds, a pound of currants, a pound of sugar, half a pound of
muskefied biscuit bread, a pottle of strong broth cold, half a pint of grape
verjuyce, pepper half an ounce, nutmegs as much, an ounce of cinnamon, and a few
cloves: all these aforesaid stamped, strained, and boiled with the foresaid
liquor, and in all points as the former, only toasts must be added.

Other Capilotado common.
TAke two pound of parmisan grated, a minced kidney of veal, a pound of other
fat cheese, ten cloves of garlic boild, broth, or none, two capons minced and
stamped roast or boild, and put to it ten yolks of eggs raw with a pound of
sugar: temper the foresaid with strong broth, and boil all in a broad skillet
or brass pan, in the boiling, stir it continually, till it be incorporated, and
put to it an ounce of cinnamon, a little pepper, half an ounce of cloves, and as
much nutmeg beaten, some saffron; then break up your roast fowls, roast lamb,
kid, or fried veal, make three bottoms, and set it into a warm oven, till you
serve it in, etc,

Capilotado, or Custard, in the Hungarian Fashion, in the Pot, or baked in an
Oven.
TAke two quarts of goats or cows milk, or two quarts of cream, and the whites
of five new laid eggs, yolks and all, or ten yolks, a pound of sugar, half an
ounce of cinnamon, a little salt, and some saffron; strain it and bake it in a
deep dish, being baked, put on the juice of four or five oranges, a little
white wine, rose water, and beaten ginger, etc.

Capilotado Francois.
ROast a leg of mutton, save the gravy, and mince it small, then strain a pound
of almond paste with some mutton or capon broth cold, some three pints and a
half of grape verjuyce, a pound of sugar, some cinnamon, beaten pepper, and
salt; the meat and almonds being stamped and strained, put it a boiling softly,
and stir it continually, till it be well incorporate and thick; then serve it
in a dish with some roast chickens, pigeons, or capon: put the gravy to it, and
strew on sugar, some marrow, cinnamon, etc.

Sometimes you may add some interlarded bacon instead of marrow, some sweet
herbs, and a kidney of veal.

Sometimes eggs, currants, saffron, gooseberries, etc.

Other made Dishes, or little Pasties, called in Italian Tortelleti.
TAke a roast or boild capon, and a calves udder, or veal, mince it and stamp
it with some marrow, mint, or sweet marjoram, put a pound of fat parmisan
grated to it; half a pound of sugar, and a quarter of a pound of currants, some
chopped sweet herbs pepper, saffron, nutmeg, cinnamon four or five yolks of
eggs, and two whites: Mingle all together, and make a piece of paste of warm or
boiling liquor, and some rose water, sugar, butter, make some great, and some
very little, rouls, or stars, according to the judgment of the Cook; boil them
in broth, milk, or cream. Thus also fish. Serve them with grated fat cheese or
parmisan, sugar, and beaten cinnamon on them in a dish, etc.

Tortelleti, or little Pasties.
MInce some interlarded bacon, some pork or any other meat, with some calves
udder, and put to it a pound of fresh cheese, fat cheese, or parmisan, a pound
of sugar, and some roasted turnips or parsnips, a quarter of a pound of
currants, pepper, cloves, nutmegs, eight eggs, saffron; mingle all together, and
make your pasties like little fishes, stars, rouls, or like beans or pease,
boil them in flesh broth, and serve them with grated cheese and sugar, and
serve them hot.

Tortelleti, or little Pasties otherwise, of Beets or Spinach chopped very
small.
BEing washed and wrung dry, fry them in butter, put to them some sweet herbs
chopped small, with some grated parmisan, some cinnamon, cloves, saffron,
pepper, currants, raw eggs, and grated bread: Make your pasties, and boil them
in strong broth, cream, milk, or almond milk: thus you may do any fish. Serve
them with sugar, cinnamon, and grated cheese.

Tortelleti, of green Pease, French Beans, or any kind of Pulse green or dry.
TAke Pease green or dry, French Beans, or Garden Beans green or dry, boil them
tender, and stamp them; strain them through a strainer, and put to them some
fried onions chopped small, sugar, cinnamon, cloves, pepper, and nutmeg, some
grated parmisan, or fat cheese, and some cheese-curds stamped.

Then make paste, and make little pasties, boil them in broth, or as
beforesaid, and serve them with sugar, cinnamon, and grated cheese in a fine
clean dish.

To boil Capon or Chicken with Collyflowers in the French Fashion,
CUt off the buds of your flowers, and boil them in milk with a little mace
till they be very tender; then take the yolks of two eggs, strain them with a
quarter of a pint of sack; then take as much thick butter, being drawn with a
little vinegar, and a slic't lemon, brew them together; then take the flowers
out of the milk, and put them into the butter and sack: then dish up your
capon, being tender boild, upon sippets finely carved, and pour on the sauce,
and serve it to the table with a little salt.

To boil Capon, Chicken, Pigeons, or any Land Fowls in the French Fashion.
EIther the skin stuffed with minced meat, or boned, and fill the vents and
body; or not boned and trust to boil, fill the bodies with any of the farsings
following, made of any minced meat, and seasoned with pepper, cloves, mace, and
salt; then mince some sweet herbs with bacon and fowl, veal, mutton, or lamb,
and mix with it three or four eggs: Mingle all together with grapes,
gooseberries, barberries, or red currants, and sugar, or none, some pineapple
seed, or pistaches; fill the fowl, and stew it in a stewing pan with some
strong broth, as much as will cover them, and a little white wine; being
stewed, serve them in a dish with sippets finely carved, and slic't orange,
lemon, barberries, gooseberries, sweet herbs chopped, and mace.

To boil Partridges, or any of the former Fowls stuffed with any the filling
aforesaid.
BOil them in a pipkin with strong broth, white wine, mace, sweet herbs chopped
very fine, and put some falt, and stew them leasurely; being finely stewed, put
some marrow and strained almonds with rose water to thicken it, serve them on
fine carved sippets, and broth them, garnish the dish with grated bread and
pistaches, mace, and lemon, or grapes.

To boil Pigeons, Woodcocks, Snites, Blackbirds, Thrushes, Veldifers, Rails,
Quails, Larks, Sparrows, Wheat-ears, Martins, or any small Land Fowl.
Woodcocks or Snites.
BOil them either in strong broth, or water and salt; and being boild, take out
the guts, and chop them small with the liver, put to it some crum of white
bread grated, a little of the broth of the cock, and some large mace, stew them
together with some gravy; then dissolve the yolks of two eggs, with some wine
vinegar, and a little grated nutmeg, and when you are ready to dish it, put the
eggs to it, and stir it amongst the sauce with a little butter, dish them on
sippets, and run the sauce over them with some beaten butter and capers, lemon
minced small, barberries, or pickled grapes whole.

Sometimes with this sauce. boil some slic't onions and corrans in a broth by
it self: when you boil it not with onions, rub the bottom of the dish with a
clove or two of garlic.

Boild Woodcocks or Larks otherwise.
TAke them with the guts in, and boil them in some strong broth or fair water,
and three or four whole onions, large mace, and salt; the cocks being boild,
make sauce with some thin slices of manchet, or grated, in another pipkin, and
some of the broth where the fowl or cocks boil, and put to it some butter, the
guts and liver minced, and then have some yolks of eggs dissolved with some
vinegar and some grated nutmeg, put it to the other ingredients, and stir them
together, and dish the fowl on fine sippets, and pour on the sauce, and some
slic't lemon, grapes, or barberries, and run it over with beaten butter.

To boil all manner of Sea Fowl, or any wild Fowl, as Swan, Whopper, Crane,
Geese, Shoveler, Hern, Bittor, Duck, Widgeon, Gulls, Curlew, Teels, Ruffs, etc.
STuff either the skin with his own meat, being minced with lard or beef suet,
some sweet herbs, beaten nutmeg, cloves, mace, and parboild oysters; mix all
together, fill the skin, and prick it fast on the back, boil it in a large
stewing-pan or deep dish, with some strong broth, claret, or white wine, salt,
large mace, two or three cloves, and a bundle of sweet herbs, or none,
oyster-liquor and marrow: stew all well together. Then have stewed oysters by
themselves ready stewed with an onion or two, mace, pepper, butter, and a
little white wine.

Then have the bottoms of artichocks put in beaten butter, and some boild
marrow ready also; then again dish up the fowl on fine carved sippets, broth
the fowl, and lay on the oysters, artichocks, marrow, barberries, slic't lemon
gooseberries or grapes: and garnish your dish with grated manchet strowed, and
some oysters, mace, lemon, and artichocks, and run it over with beaten butter.

Otherwise. Bone it and fill the body with a farsing or stuffing made of
minced mutton with spices, and the same materials as aforesaid.

Otherwise. Make a pudding and fill the body, being first boned, and make the
pudding of grated bread, sweet herbs chopped, onions, minced suet or lard,
cloves, mace, pepper, salt, blood, and cream: mingle all together, as
beforesaid in all points.

Or a bread pudding without blood, or onions, and put minced meat to it, fruit,
and sugar.

Otherwise. Boil them in strong broth, claret wine, mace, cloves, salt,
pepper, saffron, marrow, minced onions, and thickened with strained sweetbread
of veal, or hard eggs strained with broth, and garnished with barberries,
lemon, grapes, red currants or gooseberries.

To boil all manner of Sea Fowls, as a Swan, Whopper, Geese, Ducks, Teells, etc.
PUt your fowl being clenged and trussed into a pipkin fit for it, and boil it
with strong broth or fair springwater, scum it clean, and put in three or four
slic't onions, some large mace, corrans raisins, some capers, a bundle of sweet
herbs, grated or strained bread, white wine, two or three cloves and pepper;
being finely boild slash it on the breast, and dish it on fine carved sippets,
broth it, and lay on slic't lemon and a lemon peel, barberries, or grapes; run
it over with beaten butter, sugar, or ginger, and trim the dish sides with
grated bread in place of beaten ginger.

To boil these Fowls otherwise.

You may add some oyster-liquor, barberries, grapes, gooseberries, or lemon.

And sometimes prunes, or raisins, or corrans.

Otherwise. Half roste any of your fowls, slash them down the breast, and put
them in a pipkin with the breast downward, put to them two or three slic't
onions and carrots cut like lard, some mace, pepper, and salt, butter, savory,
time, some strong broth and some white wine, let the broth be half wasted, and
stew it very softly: being finely stewed, dish it up, serve it on sippets, and
pour on the broth, etc.

Otherwise. Boil the fowl and not roste them, boil them in strong mutton
broth, and put the fowls into a pipkin, boil and scum it, put to it slic't
onions, a bunch of sweet herbs, some cloves, mace, whole pepper and salt; then
slash the breast from end to end three or four flashes, and being boild, dish
it upon fine carved sippets, put some sugar to it, and prick a few cloves on
the breast of the fowl, broth it, and strew on fine sugar and grated bread.

Otherwise. Put them in a stewing-pan with some wine and strong broth, and
when they boil, scum them, then put to them some slices of interlarded bacon,
pepper, mace, ginger, cloves, cinnamon, sugar, raisins of the sun, sageflowers
or seeds, or leaves of sage: serve them on fine carved sippets, and trim the
dish sides with sugar or grated bread.

Or you may make a farsing of any of the foresaid fowls, make it of grated
cheese and some of their own fat, two or three eggs, nutmeg, pepper, and
ginger, sow up the vents, boil them with bacon, and serve them with a sauce
made of almond paste, a clove of garlic, and roasted turnips or green sauce.

To boil any old Geese, or any Geese.
TAke them being powdered, and fill their bellies with oat-meal; being steeped
first in warm milk or other liquor; then mingle it with some beef suet, minced
onions, and apples, seasoned with cloves, mace, some sweet herbs minced, and
pepper, fasten the neck and vent, boil it and serve it on brewis with colly
flowers, cabbidge, turnips, and barberries, run it over with beaten butter.

Thus the smaller Fowls, as is before specified, or any other.

To boil Wild Fowl otherwise.
BOil your Fowl in strong broth or water, scum it clean, and put some white
wine to it, currants, large mace, a clove or two, some parsley and onions
minced, boil these together: then have some stewed turnips cut like lard, and
stewed in a pot or little pipkin with butter, mace, a clove, white wine, and
sugar: Being finely stewed, serve your fowls on sippets finely carved, broth
the fowls, and pour on your Turnips, run it over with beaten butter, a little
cream, yolks of eggs, sack, and sugar. Scraped sugar to trim the dish, or
grated bread.

Otherwise. Half roast your fowls, save the gravy, and carve the breast
jagged; then put it in a pipkin, and stick it here and there a clove, and put
some slic't onions, chopped parsley, slic't ginger, pepper, and gravy, strained
bread, with claret wine, currants, or capers, or both, mace, barberries, and
sugar; being finely boild, or stewed, serve it on carved sippets, and run it
over with beaten butter, and a lemon peel.

To boil these aforesaid Fowls otherwise, with Muscles, Oysters, or Cockels;
or fried Wickels, in butter, and after stewed with butter, white wine, nutmeg,
a slic't orange, and gravy.
EIther boil the fowls, or roast them, boil them by themselves in water and
salt, scum them clean, and put to them mace, sweet herbs and onions chopped
together, some white wine, pepper, and sugar, if you please, and a few cloves
stuck in the fowls, some grated or strained bread with some of the broth, and
give it a walm; dish up the fowls on fine sippets or French Bread, and carve
the breast, broth it, and pour on your shellfish, run it over with beaten
butter, and slic't lemon or orange,

Otherwise, in the French Fashion.
HAlf roast the fowls, and put them in a pipkin with the gravy, then have time,
parsley, sage, marjoram, and savory; mince all together with a handful of
raisins of the sun, put them into the pipkin with some mutton broth, some fack
or white wine, large mace, cloves, salt, and sugar.

Then have the other half of the fruit and herbs being minced, beat them with
the white of an egg, and fry it in suet or butter as big as little figs, and
they will look green.

Dish up the Fowls on sippets, broth it, and serve the fried herbs with eggs on
them and scraped sugar.

To boil Goose-giblets, or any giblets of any Fowl.
BOil them whole, being finely scalded; boil them in water and salt, two or
three blades of mace, and serve them on sippets finely carved with beaten
butter, lemon, scalded gooseberries, and mace, or scalded grapes, barberries,
or slic't lemon.

Or you may for variety use the yolks of two or three eggs, beaten butter,
cream, a little sack and sugar for lear.

Otherwise. Boil them whole, or in pieces, and boil them in strong broth or
fair water, mace, pepper, and salt; being first finely scummed, put two or
three whole onions, butter and goosberries, run it over with beaten butter,
being first dished on sippets; make a pudding in the neck, as you may see in
the Book of all manner of Puddings and Farsings, etc.

Otherwise. Boil them with some white wine, strong broth, mace, slic't ginger,
butter, and salt; then have some stewed turnips or carrots cut like lard, and
the giblets being finely dished on sippets, put on the stewed turnips, being
thickened with eggs, verjuyce, sugar, and lemon, etc.

Sauce for green Geese.
1. TAke the juice of sorrel mixed with scalded gooseberries, and served on
sippets and sugar with beaten butter, etc.

Otherwise.

2. Their bellies roasted full of gooseberries, and after mixed with sugar,
butter, verjuyce, and cinnamon, and served on sippets.

To make a grand Sallet of minced Capon, Veal, roast Mutton, Chicken, or Neats
Tongue.
MInced Capon or Veal, etc Dried Tongues in thin slices, Lettice shred small as
the tongue, Olives, Capers, Mushrooms pickled, samphire, Broom-buds, Lemon or
Oranges, Raisins, Almonds, Figs blew, Virginia Potato, Caparones, or Crucifix
pease, Currants, pickled Oysters, Taragon.

How to dish it up.
ANy of these being thin slic't, as is shown abovesaid, with a little minced
taragon and onion amongst it; then have lettice minced as small as the meat by
it self, olives by themselves, capers by themselves, samphire by it self,
broom-bud by it self, and pickled mushrooms by themselves, or any of the
materials abovesaid.

Garnish the the dish with oranges and lemons in quarters or slices, oil and
vinegar beaten together, and poured over all, etc.

To boil all manner of Land Fowl, as follows.
Turkey, Bustard, Peacock, Capon, Pheasant, Pullet, Heathpouts, Partridge,
Chicken, Woodcocks, Stockdoves, Turtle-doves, Tame Pigeons, Wild Pigeons,
Reils, Quails, Black birds, Thrushes, Veldifers, Snites, Wheat-ears, Larks,
Sparrows, and the like.

Sauce for the Land Fowl.
TAke boild prunes and strain them with the blood of the fowl, cinnamon, ginger,
and sugar; boil it to an indifferent thickness, and serve it in saucers, and
serve in the dish with the fowl, gravy, sauce of the same fowl.

To boil Pigeons.
TAke Pigeons, and when you have farsed and boned them, fry them in butter or
minced lard, and put to them broth, pepper, nutmeg, slic't ginger, cinnamon,
beaten coriander-seed, raisins of the sun, currants; vinegar, and serve them
with this sauce, being first steeped in it four or hours, and well stewed down.

Or you may add some quince or dried cherries boild amongst.

In summer you may use damsins, sweet herbs chopped, grapes, bacon in slices,
white wine.

Thus you may boil any small Birds, Larks, Veldifers, Blackbirds, etc.

Pottage in the French Fashion.
CUt a breast of mutton into square bits or pieces, fry them in butter, and put
them in a pipkin with some strong broth, pepper, mace, beaten ginger, and salt;
stew it with half a pound of strained almonds, some mutton broth, crumbs of
manchet, and some verjuyce; give it a walm, and serve it on sippets.

If you would have it yellow, put in saffron, sometimes for change white wine,
sack, currants, raisins, and sometimes incorporated with eggs and grated cheese.

Otherwise change the color green, with juice of spinach, and put to it
almonds strained.

Pottage otherwise in the French Fashion of Mutton, Kid, or Veal.
TAke beaten oatmeal and strain it with cold water, then the pot being boiled
and scummed, put in your strained oatmeal, and some whole spinach, lettice,
endive, colliflowers, slic't onions, white cabbidge, and salt; your pottage
being almost boild, put in some verjuyce, and give it a walm or two; then serve
it on sippets, and put the herbs on the meat.

Pottage in the English Fashion.
TAke the best old pease you can get, wash and boil them in fair water, when
they boil scum them, and put in a piece of interlarded bacon about two pound,
put in also a bundle of mince, or other sweet herbs; boil them not too thick,
serve the bacon on sippets in thin slices, and pour on the broth.

Pottage without sight of Herbs.
MInce your herbs and stamp them with your oatmeal, then strain them through a
strainer with some of the broth of the pot, boil them among your mutton and
some salt; for your herbs take violet leaves, strawberry leaves, suckory,
spinach, lang de beef, scallions, parsley and marigold flowers; being well
boiled, serve it on sippets.

To make Sausages.
TAke the lean of a leg of Pork, and four pound of beefsuet, mince them very
fine, and season them with an ounce of pepper, half an ounce of cloves and
mace, a handful of sage minced small, and a handful of salt; mingle all
together, then break in ten eggs, and but two whites; mix these eggs with the
other meat, and fill the hogs guts; being filled, tie the ends, and boil them
when you use them.

Otherwise you may make them of mutton, veal, or beef, keeping the order
abovesaid.

To make most rare Sausages without skins.
TAke a leg of young pork, cut off all the lean, and mince it very small, but
leave none of the strings or skins amongst it; then take two pound of beef suet
shred small, two handfuls of red sage, a little pepper, salt, and nutmeg, with
a small piece of an onion; mince them together with the flesh and suet, and
being fine minced, put the yolks of two or three eggs, and mix all together,
make it into a paste, and when you will use it, roll out as many pieces as you
please in the form of an ordinary sausage, and fry them: this paste will keep a
fortnight upon occasion. Otherwise stamp half the meat and suet, and mince the
other half, and season them as the former.

To make Links.
TAke the fillets or a leg of pork, and cut it into dicework, with some of the
steak of the pork cut in the same form; season the meat with cloves, mace, and
pepper, a handful of sage fine minced, with a handful of salt; mingle all
together, fill the guts and hang them in the air, and boil them when you spend
them. These Links will serve to stew with diverse kinds of meats.

Section 2.
An hundred and twelve Excellent Ways for the dressing of Beef.

To boil Ox Cheeks.
TAke them and bone them, soak them in fair water four or five hours, then wash
out the blood very clean, pair off the ruff of the mouth, and take out the
balls of the eyes; then stuff them with sweet herbs, hard eggs, and fat, or
beef suet, pepper, and salt; mingle all together, and stuff them on the inside,
prick both the insides together; then boil them amongst other beef, and being
very tender boiled, serve them on brewis, with interlarded bacon and Bolonia
sausages, or boild links made of pork on the cheeks, cut the bacon in thin
slices, serve them with saucers of mustard, or with green sauce,

To dress Ox Cheeks otherwise.
TAke out the bories and the balls of the eyes, make the mouth very clean, soak
it, and wash out the blood; then wipe it dry with a clean cloth, and season it
with pepper, salt, and nutmeg; then put it in a pipkin or earthen pan, with two
or three great onions, some cloves, and mace; cut the jaw-bones in pieces, and
cut out the teeth, lay the bones on the top of the meat, then put to it half a
pint of claret wine and half as much water; close up the pot or pan with a
course piece of paste, and set it a baking in an oven over night for to serve
next day at dinner, serve it on toasts of fine manchet fried; then have boild
carrots and lay on it, with the toasts of manchet laid round the dish, as also
fried greens to garnish it, and run it over with beaten butter. This way you
may also dress a leg of beef.

Or thus.

Take them and cleanse them as before, then roast them, and season them with
pepper, salt, and nutmeg, save the gravy, and being roasted put them into a
pipkin with some claret wine, large mace, a clove or two, and some strong
broth; stew them till they be very tender, then put to them some fried onions,
and some prunes, and serve them on toasts of fried bread, or slices of French
bread, and slices of orange on them; garnish the dish with grated bread.

To dress Ox Cheeks in Stofadoe, or the Spanish Fashion.
TAke the cheeks, bone them and cleanse them, then lay them in steep in claret
or white wine, and wine vinegar, whole cloves, mace, beaten pepper, salt,
slic't nutmegs, slic't ginger, and six or seven cloves of garlic, steep them
the space of five or six hours, and close them up in an earthen pot or pan,
with a piece of paste, and the same liquor put to it, set it a baking over
night for next day dinner, serve it on toasts of fine manchet fried; then have
boiled carrots and lay on it, with the toasts of manchet laid round the dish:
garnish it with slic't lemons or oranges, and fried toast, and garnish the dish
with bay leaves.

To Marinate Ox Cheeks.
BEing boned, roste or stew them very tender in a pipkin, with some claret,
slic't nutmegs, pepper, salt, and wine vinegar; being tender stewed take them
up, and put to the liquor in the pipkin a quart of wine vinegar, and a quart of
white wine, boil it with some bay leaves, whole pepper, a bundle of rosemary,
time, sweet marjoram, savory, sage, and parsley, bind them very hard the
streightest sprigs; boil also in the liquor large mace, cloves, slic't ginger,
slic't nutmegs and salt; then put the cheeks into a barrel, and put the liquor
to them, with some slic't lemons, close up the head and keep them. Thus you may
do four or five heads together, and serve them hot or cold.

Ox Cheeks in Sallet.
TAke ox cheeks being boned and cleansed, steep them in claret, white wine; or
wine vinegar all night, the next day season them with nutmegs, cloves, pepper,
mace, and salt, roll them up, boil them tender in water, vinegar, and salt,
then press them, and being cold slice them in thin slices, and serve them in a
clean dish with oil and vinegar.

To bake Ox cheeks in a pasty or pie.
TAke them being boned and soaked, boil them tender in fair water, and cleanse
them, take out the balls of the eyes, and season them with pepper, salt, and
nutmeg, then have some beef suet and some buttock-beef minced and laid for a
bed, then lay the cheeks on it, and a few whole cloves, make your pasty in good
crust; to a gallon of flower two pound and a half of butter, five eggs whites
and all, work the butter and eggs up dry into the flower, then put in a little
fair water to make it up into a stiff paste, and work up all cold.

To dress Pallets, Noses, and Lips, of any Beast, Steer, Ox, or Calf.
TAke the pallets, lips, or noses, and boil them very tender, then blanch them,
and cut them in little square pieces as broad as a sixpence, or like lard, fry
them in sweet butter, and being fried, pour away the butter, and put to it some
anchove, grated nutmeg, mutton gravy, and salt; give it a walm on the fire, and
then dish it in a clean dish, with the bottom first rubbed with a clove of
garlic, run it over with beaten butter, juice of oranges, fried parsley, or
fried marrow in yolks of two eggs, and sage leaves.

Sometime add yolks of eggs strained, and then it is a fricase.

Otherwise.

Take the pallets, lips, or noses, and boil them very tender, blanch them, and
cut them two inches long, then take some interlarded bacon and cut it in the
like proportion, season the pallets with salt, and broil them on paper; being
tender broild put away the fat, and put them in a dish being rubbed with a
clove of garlic, put some mutton gravy to them on a chafing dish of coals, and
some juice of orange, etc.

To fricase Pallets.
TAke beef pallets being tender boild and blanched, season them with beaten
cloves, nutmeg, pepper, salt, and some grated bread; then the pan being ready
over the fire, with some good butter fry them brown, then put them in a dish,
put to them good mutton gravy. and dissolve two or three anchoves in the sauce,
a little grated nutmeg, and some juice of lemons, and serve them up hot.

To stew Pallets, Lips, and Noses.
TAke them being tender boild and blanched, put them into a pipkin, and cut to
the bigness of a shilling, put to them some small cowcumbers pickled, raw
calves udders, some artichocks, potatoes boild, or muskmillion in square
pieces, large mace, two or three whole cloves, some small links or sausages,
sweetbreads of veal, some larks or other small birds, as sparrows or oxeyes,
salt, butter, strong broth, marrow, white wine, grapes, barberries, or
gooseberries, yolks of hard eggs, and stew them all together; serve them on
toasts of fine French bread, and slic't lemon; sometimes thicken the broth with
yolks of strained eggs and verjuyce.

To marinate Pallets, Noses, and Lips whole.
TAke them being tender boild and blanched, fry them in sweet sallet oil, or
clarified butter; and being fried make a pickle for them with whole pepper,
large mace, cloves, slic't ginger, slic't nutmeg, salt, and a bundle of sweet
herbs, as rosemary, time, bay leaves, sweet marjoram, savory, parsley, and
sage; boil the spices and herbs in wine vinegar and white wine, then put them
in a barrel with the pallets, lips, and noses, and lemons, close them up for
your use, and serve them in a dish with oil.

To dress Pallets, Lips, and Noses, with collops of Mutton and Bacon.
TAke them being boild tender and blanched, cut them as broad as a shilling, as
also some thin collops of interlarded bacon, and of a leg of mutton, finely
backed with the back of a knife, fry them all together with some butter, and
being finely fried, put out the butter, and put to it some gravy, or a little
mutton broth, salt, grated nutmeg, and a dissolved anchove; give it a walm over
the fire, and dish it, but rub the dish with a clove of garlic, and then run
it over with butter, juice of orange, and salt about the dish.

To make a Pottage of Beef Pallets.
TAke beef pallets that are tender boild and blanched, cut each pallet in two
pieces, and set them a stewing between two dishes with a fine piece of
interlarded bacon, a handful of champignions, and five or six sweetbreads of
veal, a ladle full of strong broth, and as much mutton gravy, an onion or two,
two or three cloves, a blade or two of large mace, and an orange; as the
pallets stew make ready a dish with the botoms and tops of French bread slic't
and steeped in mutton gravy, and the broth the pallets were stewed in; then you
must have the marrow of two or three beef bones stewed in a little strong broth
by it self in good big gobbets: and when the pallets, marrow, sweetbreads, and
the rest are enough, take out the bacon, onions, and spices, and dish up the
foresaid materials on the dish of steeped bread, lay the marrow uppermost in
pieces, then wring on the juice of two or three oranges, and serve it to the
table very hot.

To roast a dish of Ox Pallets with great Oysters, Veal, Sweetbreads,
Lamb-stones, peeping Chickens, Pigeons, slices of inter larded Bacon, large
Cock-combs and Stones, Marrow. Pistaches, and Artichocks.
TAke the ox pallets and boil them tender, blanch them, and cut them two
inches long, lard one half with small lard, then have your chicken and pigeon
peepers scalded, drawn, and trust, set them, and lard half of them, then have
the lamb-stones parboild and blanched, as also the combs, and cock-stones, next
have interlarded bacon and sage; but first spit the birds on a small bird spit,
and between each chicken or pigeon put on first a slice of interlarded bacon
and a sage leaf, then another slice of bacon and a sage leaf, thus do till all
the birds be spitted; thus also the sweetbreads, lamb-stones, and combs, then
the oysters being parboild, lard them with lard very small, and also a small
larding prick, then beat the yolks of two or three eggs, and mix them with a
little fine grated manchet, salt, nutmeg, time, and rosemary minced very small,
and when they are hot at the fire baste them often, as also the lamb-stones and
sweetbreads with the same ingredients; then have the bottoms of artichocks
ready boild, quartered, and fried, being first dipped in butter and kept warm,
and marrow dipped in butter and fried, as also the fowls and the other
ingredients; then dish the fowl, piled up in the middle upon another roast
material round about them in the dish, but first rub the dish with a clove of
garlic: the pallets by themselves, the sweetbreads by themselves, and the
cocks-stones, combs, and lamb-stones by themselves; then the artichocks, fried
marrow, and pistaches by themselves; then make a sauce with some claret wine,
and gravy, nutmeg, oyster liquor, salt, a slic't or quartered onion, an anchove
or two dissolved, and a little sweet butter, give it a walm or two, and put to
it two or three slices of an orange, pour on the sauce very hot, and garnish it
with slic't oranges and lemons.

The smallest birds are fittest for this dish of meat, as wheatears, martins,
larks, ox-eyes, quails, snites, or rails.

Ox Pallets in Jellies.
TAke two pair of neats or calves feet, scald them, and boil them in a pot with
two gallons of water, being first very well boned, and the bone and fat between
the claws taken out, and being well soaked in diverse water, scum them clean,
and boil them down from two gallons to three quarts; strain the broth, and
being cold take off the top and bottom, and put it into a pipkin with whole
cinnamon, ginger, slic't and quartered nutmeg, two or three blades of large
mace, salt, three pints of white wine, and half a pint of grape verjuyce or
rose vinegar, two pound and a half of sugar, the whites of ten eggs well beaten
to froth, stir them all together in the pipkin, being well warmed and the jelly
melted, put in the eggs, and set it over a charcole fire kindled before, stew
it on that fire half an hour before you boil it up, and when it is just a
boiling take it off, before you run it let it cool a little, then run it
through your jelly bag once or twice: then the pallets being tender boild and
blanched, cut them into dice work with some lamb-stones, veal, sweetbreads,
cocks-combs and stones, potatoes or artichocks all cut into dice work,
preserved barberries, or calves noses, and lips, preserved quinces, dried or
green neats tongue, in the same work, or neats feet, all of these together, or
any one of them; boil them in white wine or sack, with nutmeg, slic't ginger,
coriander, caraway, or fennil-seed, make several beds or lays of these things,
and run the jelly over them many times after one is cold, according as you have
sorts of colors of jellies, or else put it all at once; garnish it with
preserved oranges, or green cittern cut like lard.

To bake Beef Pallets.
PRovide pallets, lips, and noses, boild tender and blanched, cocks-stones and
combs, or lamb-stones, and sweetbreads cut into pieces, scald the stones,
combs, and pallets slic't or in pieces as big as the lamb-stones, half a pint
of great oysters parboild in their own liquor, quartered dates, pistaches a
handful, or pine kernels, a few pickled broom buds, some fine interlarded bacon
slic't in thin slices being also scalded, ten chestnuts roasted and blanched;
season all these together with salt, nutmeg, and a good quantity of large mace,
fill the pie, and put to it good butter, close it up and bake it, make liquor
for it, then beat some butter, and three or four yolks of eggs with white or
claret wine, cut up the lid, and pour it on the meat, shaking it well together,
then lay on slic't lemon and pickled barberries, etc.

To dress a Neats Tongue boild diverse ways.
TAke a neats tongue of three or four days powdering, being tender boild serve
it on cheat bread for brewis, dish on the tongue in halves or whole, and serve
an udder with it being of the same powdering or salting finely blanched, put to
them the clear fat of the beef on the tongue, and white sippets round the dish,
run them over with beaten butter, etc.

Otherwise for greater service, two udders and two tongues finely blanched,
and served whole.

Sometimes for variety you may make brewis with some fresh beef or good mutton
broth, with some of the fat of the beef pot; put it in a pipkin with some large
mace, a handful of parsley and sorrel grossly chopped, and some pepper, boil
them together and scald the bread, then lay on the boild tongue, mace, and some
of the herbs, run it over with beaten butter, slic't lemon, gooseberries,
barberries, or grapes.

Or for change, put some pared turnips in boiling fair water, and being tender
boild, drain the water from them, dish them in a clean dish, and run them over
with beaten butter, dish your tongues and udders on them, and your collyflowers
on the tongues and udders, run them over with beaten butter; or in place of
collyflowers, carrots in thin quarters, or sometimes on turnips and great boild
onions, or butterd cabbidge and carrots, or parsnips and carrots buttered.

Neats Tongues and a fresh Vdder in Stofado.
SEeason them with peppper, salt, and nutmeg, then lard them with great lard,
and steep them all night in claret wine, wine vinegar, slic't nutmegs and
ginger, whole cloves, beaten pepper and salt; steep them in an earthen pot or
pan, and cover or close them up, bake them, and serve them on sops of French
bread, and the spices over them, with some slic't lemon, and sausages or none.

Neats Tongue stewed whole or in halves.
TAke them being tender boild and fry them whole or in halves, put them in a
pipkin with some gravy or mutton broth large mace, slic't nutmeg, pepper,
claret, a little wine vinegar, butter, and salt; stew them well together, and
being almost stewed, put to the meat two or three slices of orange, sparagus,
skirrets, or chestnuts, and serve on fine sippets; run them over with beaten
butter, slic't lemon, and boild marrow over all.

Sometimes for the broth put some yolks of eggs, beaten with grape verjuyce.

To stew a Neats Tongue otherwise.
MAke a hole in the butt end of it, and mince it with some fat bacon or
beef suet, season it with nutmeg, salt, the yolk of a raw egg, some sweet herbs
minced small, and grated parmisan, or none, some pepper or ginger, and mingle
all together, fill the tongue and wrap it in a caul of veal, boil it till it
will blanch, and being blanched, wrap about it some of the fearsing with a caul
of veal; then put it in a pipkin with some claret and gravy, cloves, mace,
salt, pepper, some grated bread, sweet herbs chopped small, fried onions,
marrow boild in strong broth, and laid over all, some grapes, gooseberries,
slic't orange or lemon, and serve it on sippets, run it over with beaten
butter, and stale grated manchet to garnish the dish.

Or sometimes in a broth called Brodo Lardiero.

To hash or stew a Neats Tongue diverse ways.
TAke a Neats Tongue being tender boild and blanched, slice it into thin
slices, as big and as thick as a shilling, fry it in sweet butter; and being
fried, put to it some strong broth or good mutton gravy, some beaten cloves,
mace, nutmeg, salt, and saffron; stew them well together, then have some yolks
of eggs dissolved with grape verjuyce, and put them into the pan, give them a
toss or two, and the gravy and eggs being pretty thick, dish it on fine sippets.

Or make the same, and none of those spices, but only cinnamon, sugar, and
saffron.

Sometimes sliced as aforesaid, but in slices no bigger nor thicker then a
threepence, and used in all points as before, but add some onions fried with
the tongue, some mushrooms, nutmeg, and mace; and being well stewed, serve it
on fine sippets, but first rub the dish with a clove of garlic, and run over
all with beaten butter, a shred lemon, and a spoonful of fair water.

Sometimes you may add some boild chestnuts, sweet herbs, capers, marrow, and
grapes or barberries.

Or stew them with raisins put in a pipkin, with the sliced tongue, mace,
slic't dates, blanched almonds, or pistaches, marrow, claret wine, butter,
salt, verjuyce, sugar, strong broth, or gravy; and being well stewed, dissolve
the yolks of six eggs with vinegar or grape verjuyce, and dish it up on fine
sippets, slic't lemon and beaten butter over all.

To marinate a Neats Tongue either whole or in halves.
TAke seven or eight Neats Tongues, or Heifer, Calves, Sheeps, or any Tongues,
boil them till they will blanch, and being blanched lard them or not lard them,
as you please; then put them in a barrel, then make a pickle of whole pepper,
slic't ginger, whole cloves, slic't nutmegs, and large mace; next have a bundle
of sweet herbs, as time, rosemary, bay leaves, sage leaves, winter savory,
sweet marjoram, and parsley; take the streightest sprigs of these herbs that
you can get, and bind them up hard in a bundle every sort by it self, and all
into one; then boil us these spices and herbs in as much wine vinegar and white
wine as will fill the vessel where the tongues are, and put some salt and
slic't lemons to them; close them up being cold, and keep them for your use
upon any occasion; serve them with some of the spices, liquor, sweet herbs,
sallet oil, and slic't lemon or lemon peel. Pack them close.

To Fricase Neats Tongues.
BEing tender boild, slice them into thin slices, and fry them with sweet
butter; being fried put away the butter, and put to them some strong gravy or
broth, nutmeg, pepper, salt, some sweet herbs chopped small, as time, savory,
sweet marjoram, and parsley; stew them well together, then dissolve some yolks
of eggs with wine vinegar or grape verjuyce, some whole grapes or barberries.
For the thickening use fine grated manchet, or almond paste strained, and
sometimes put saffron to it. Thus you may fricase any Udder being tender boild,
as beforesaid.

To dress Neats Tongues in Brodo Lardiero, or the Italian Way.
BOil a neats tongue in a pipkin, whole, halves, or in gubbins till it may be
blanched, cover it close, and put to it two or three blades of large mace, with
some strong mutton, or beef broth, some sack or white wine, and some slices of
interlarded bacon, scum it when it boils, and put to it large mace, nutmeg,
ginger, pepper, raisins, two or three whole cloves, currants, prunes, sage-seed,
saffron, and dried cherries; stew it well, and serve it in a fine clean scoured
dish, on slices of French bread.

To dress Neats Tongues, as Beefs Noses, Lips, and Pallets.
TAke neats tongues being tender boild and blanched, slice them thin, and fry
them in sweet butter, being fried put away the butter, and put to them
anchoves, grated nutmeg, mutton, gravy, and salt; give them a walm over the
fire, and serve them in a clean scowred dish: but first rub the dish with a
clove of garlic, and run the meat over with some beaten butter, juice of
orange, fried parsley, fried marrow, yolks of eggs, and sage leaves.

To hash a Neats Tongue whole or in slices.
BOil it tender and blanch it, then slice it into thin slislices or whole, put
to it some boild or roste chestnuts, some strong broth, whole cloves, pepper,
salt, claret wine, large mace, and a little bundle of sweet herbs; stew them
all together very leasurely, and being stewed serve it on fine carved sippets,
either with slic't lemon, grapes, gooseberries, or barberries, and run it over
with beaten butter,

To dry Neats Tongues.
TAke salt beaten very fine, and saltpeter of each a like, rub your tongues
very well with the salts, and cover them all over with it, and as it wastes put
on more; when they are hard and stiff they are enough, then roll them in bran,
and dry them before a soft fire, before you boil them let them lie in pump
water one night, and boil them in pump water.

Otherwise powder them with bay salt, and being well smoakt, hang them up in a
garret or seller, and let them come no more at the fire till they be boild.

To prepare a Neats Tongue or Vdder to roste, a Stag, Hind, Buck, Do, Sheep,
Hog, Goat, Kid or Calf.
BOil them tender and blanch them, being cold, lard them, or roste them plain
without lard, baste them with butter, and serve them on gallendine sauce.

To roste a Neats Tongue.
TAke a neats tongue being tender boild, blanched, and cold, cut a hole in the
butt end, and mince the meat that you take out, then put some sweet herbs
finely minced to it, with a minced pippin or two, the yolks of eggs slic't,
some minc't beef suet, or minced bacon, beaten ginger and salt, fill the
tongue, and stop the end with a caul of veal, lard it and roste it; then make
sauce with butter, nutmeg, gravy, and juice of oranges; garnish the dish with
slic't lemon, lemon peel, and barberries.

To roste a Neats Tongue or Vdder otherwise.
BOil it a little, blanch it, lard it with pretty big lard all the length of
the tongue, as also udders; being first seasoned with nutmeg, pepper, cinnamon,
and ginger, then spit and roste them, and baste them with sweet butter: being
roasted, dress them with grated bread and flower, and some of the spices
abovesaid, some sugar, and serve it with juice of oranges, sugar, gravy, and
slic't lemon on it.

To make minced Pies of a Neats Tongue.
TAke a fresh neats tongue, boil, blanch, and mince it hot or cold, then mince
four pound of beef-fuet by it self, mingle them together, and season them with
an ounce of cloves and mace beaten, some salt, half a preserved orange, and a
little lemon peel minced, with a quarter of a pound of sugar, four pound of
currants, a little verjuyce and rose water, and a quarter of a pint of sack,
stir all together and fill your pies.

To bake Neats Tongues to eat cold, according to this figure.
TAke the tongues being tender boild and blanched, leave on the fat of the
roots of the tongues, and season to bake neats tongue to eat cold them well
with nutmeg, pepper, and salt; but first lard them with pretty big lard, and
put them in the pie with some whole cloves and some butter, close them up and
bake them in fine or course paste, made only of boiling liquor and flower; and
baste the crust with eggs, pack the crust very close in the filling with raw
beef or mutton.

To bake two Neats Tongues in a pie to eat hot, according to this figure.
TAke one of the tongues and mince it raw, then boil the other very tender,
blanch it, and cut it into pieces to bake neats tongue in a pie to eat hot as
big as a walnut, lard them with small lard being cold and seasoned; then have
another Tongue being raw, take out the meat, and mince it with some beef suet
or lard: then lay some of the minced Tongues in the bottom of the pie, and the
pieces on it; then make balls of the other meat as big as the pieces of tongue,
with some grated bread; cream, yolks of eggs, bits of artichocks, nutmeg, salt,
pepper, a few sweet herbs, and lay them in the pie, with some boild artichocks,
marrow, grapes, chestnuts blanched, slices of interlarded bacon, and butter;
close it up and bake it, then liquor it with verjuyce, gravy, and yolks of eggs.

To bake a Neats Tongue hot otherwise.
BOil a fresh Tongue very tender, and blanch it; being cold slice it into thin
slices, and season it lightly with pepper, nutmeg, cinnamon, and ginger finely
beaten, then put into the pie half a pound of currants, lay the meat on, and
dates in halves, the marrow of four bones, large mace, grapes, or barberries,
and butter; close it up and bake it, and being baked, liquor it with white or
claret wine, butter, sugar, and ice it

Otherwise.

Boil it very tender, and being blanched and cold, take out some of the meat at
the butt end, mince it with some beef suet, and season it with pepper, ginger
beaten fine, salt, currants, grated bread, two or three yolks of eggs, raisins
minced, or in place of currants, a little cream, a little orange minced, also
sweet herbs chopped small; then fill the tongue and season it with the foresaid
spices, wrap it in a caul of veal, and put some thin slices of veal under the
tongue, as also thin slices of interlarded bacon, and on the top large mace,
marrow, and barberries, and butter over all; close it up and bake it, being
baked, liquor it and ice it with butter, sugar, white wine, or grape verjuyce.

For the paste a pottle of flour, and make it up with boiling liquor, and half
a pound of butter.

To roast a Chine, Rib, Loin, Brisket, or Fillet of Beef,
DRaw them with parsley, rosemary, time, sweet marjoram, sage, winter savory,
or lemon, or plain without any of them, fresh or salt, as you please; broth it,
roast it, and baste it with butter: a good chine of beef will ask six hours
roasting.

For the sauce take strait tops of rosemary, sage leaves, picked parsley, time,
and sweet marjoram; and stew them in wine vinegar, and the beef gravy; or
otherwise with gravy and juice of oranges and lemons. Sometimes for change in
saucers of vinegar and pepper.

To roast a Fillet of Beef.
TAke a fillet which is the tenderest part of the beef, and lies in the inner
part of the surloyn, cut it as big as you can, broach it on a broach not too
big, and be careful not to broach it through the best of the meat; roast it
leasurely, and baste it with sweet butter, set a dish to save the gravy while
it roasts, then prepare sauce for it of good store of parsley, with a few sweet
herbs chopped small, the yolks of three or four eggs, sometimes gross pepper
minced amongst them with the peel of an orange, and a little onion; boil these
together, and put in a little butter, vinegar, gravy, a spoonful of strong
broth, and put it to the beef.

Otherwise.

Sprinkle it with rose vinegar, claret wine, elder vinegar, beaten cloves,
nutmeg, pepper, cinnamon, ginger, coriander-seed, fennel-seed, and salt; beat
these things fine, and season the fillet with it, then roast it, and baste it
with butter, save the gravy, and blow off the fat, serve it with juice of
orange or lemon, and a little elder vinegar.

Or thus.

Powder it one night, then stuff it with parsley, time, sweet marjoram, beets,
spinach, and winter savory, all picked and minced small, with the yolks of hard
eggs mixed amongst some pepper, stuff it and roast it, save the gravy, and stew
it with the herbs, gravy, as also a little onion, claret wine, and the juice of
an orange or two; serve it hot on this sauce, with slices of orange on it,
lemons, or barberries.

To stew a Fillet of Beef in the Italian Fashion.
TAke a young tender fillet of beef, and take away all the skins and sinnews
clean from it, put to it some good white wine (that is not too sweet) in a
boul, wash it and crush it well in the wine, then strew upon it a little
pepper, and a poulder called Tamara in Italian, and as much salt as will season
it, mingle them together very well, and put to it as much white wine as will
cover it, lay a trencher upon it to keep it down in a close pan with a weight
on it, and let it steep two nights and a day; then take it out and put it into
a pipkin with some good beef broth, but put none of the pickle to it, but only
beef broth, and that sweet, not salt; cover it close, and set it on the embers,
then put to it a few whole cloves and mace, and let it stew till it be enough,
it will be very tender and of an excellent taste; serve it with the same broth
as much as will cover it.

To make this Tamara, take two ounces of corianderseed, an ounce of anniseed,
an ounce of fennel-seed, two ounces of cloves, and an ounce of cinnamon; beat
them into a gross powder, with a little powder of winter-savory, and put them
into a viol glass to keep.

To make an excellent Pottage called Skinke.
TAke a leg of beef, and chop it into three pieces, then boil it in a pot with
three pottles of spring water, a few cloves, mace, and whole pepper; after the
pot is scummed, put in a bundle of sweet marjoram, rosemary, time, winter
savory, sage and parsley, bound up hard, some salt, and two or three great
onions whole; then about an hour before dinner put in three marrow bones, and
thicken it with some strained oatmeal, or manchet slic't and steeped with some
gravy, strong broth, or some of the pottage: then a little before you dish up
the Skinke, put into it a little fine poulder of saffron, and give it a walm or
two; dish it on large slices of French Bread, and dish the marrow bones on them
in a fine clean large dish; then have two or three manchets cut into toasts,
and being finely toasted, lay on the knuckle of beef in the middle of the dish,
the marrow bones round about it, and the toasts round about the dish brim,
serve it hot.

To stew a Rump, or the fat end of a Brisket of Beef in the French Fashion.
TAke a rump of beef, boil it and scum it clean, in a stewing pan or broad
mouthed pipkin, cover it close, and let it stew an hour; then put to it some
whole pepper, cloves, mace, and salt, scotch the meat with your knife to let
out the gravy, then put in some claret wine, and half a dozen of slic't onions;
having boild, an hour after put in some capers, or a handful of broom buds, and
half, a dozen of cabbidge-lettice being first parboild in fair water, and
quartered, two or three spoonfuls of wine vinegar, and as much verjuyce, and
let it stew till it be tender; then serve it on sippets of French Bread, and
dish it on those sippets; blow off the fat clean off the broth, or scum it, and
stick it with fried bread.

A Turkish Dish of Meat.
TAke an interlarded piece of Beef, cut it into thin slices, and put it into a
pot that has a close cover, or stewing-pan; then put into it a good quantity
of clean picked rice, skin it very well, and put into it a quantity of whole
pepper, two or three whole onions, and let this boil very well, then take out
the onions, and dish it on sippets, the thicker it is the better.

To boil a Chine, Rump, Surloin, Brisket, Rib, Flank, Buttock, or Fillet of
Beef powdered.
TAke any of these, and give them in summer a weeks powdering, in winter a
fortnight, stuff them or plain; if you stuff them, do it with all manner of
sweet herbs, fat beef minced, and some nutmeg; serve them on brewis, with roots
or cabbidge boild in milk, with beaten butter, etc.

To pickle roast Beef, Chine, Surloin, Rib, Brisket, Flank, or Neats Tongues.
TAke any of the foresaid Beef, as chine or fore-rib, and stuff it with
penniroyal, or other sweet herbs, or parsley minced small, and some salt, prick
in here and there a few whole cloves, and roste it; then take claret wine, wine
vinegar, whole pepper, rosemary, and bays, and time bound up close in a
bundle, and boild in some claret wine, and wine vinegar, make the pickle, and
put some salt to it, then pack it up close in a barrel that will but just hold
it, put the pickle to it, close it on the head, and keep it for your use.

To stew Beef in gobbets in the French fashion.
TAke a flank of beef or any part but the leg, cut it into slices or gobbets as
big as a pullets egg, with some gobbets of fat, and boil it in a pot or pipkin
with some fair spring water, scum it clean, and put to it an hour after it has
boild carrots, parsnips, turnips, great onions, salt, some cloves, mace, and
whole pepper, cover it close, and stew it till it be very tender; then half an
hour before dinner, put into it some picked time, parsley, winter-savory, sweet
marjoram, sorrel and spinach (being a little bruised with the back of a ladle)
and some claret wine: then dish it on fine sippers, and serve it to the table
hot, garnish it with grapes, barberries, or gooseberries. Sometimes use spices,
the bottoms of boild artichocks put into beaten butter, and grated nutmeg,
garnished with barberries.

Stewed Collops of Beef.
TAke some of the buttock of beef, and cut it into thin slices, cross the grain
of the meat, then hack them and fry them in sweet butter, and being fried fine
and brown, put them in a pipkin with some strong broth, a little claret wine,
and some nutmeg, stew it very tender; and half an hour before you dish it put
to it some good gravy, elder vinegar, and a clove or two: when you serve it put
some juice of orange, and three or four slices on it, stew down the gravy
somewhat thick, and put into it when you dish it some beaten butter.

Olines of Beef stewed and roste.
TAke a buttock of beef, and cut some of it into thin slices as broad as your
hand, then hack them with the back of a knife, lard them with small lard, and
season them with pepper, salt, and nutmeg; then make a farsing with some sweet
herbs, time, onions, the yolks of hard eggs, beef suet or lard all minced, some
salt, barberries, grapes, or gooseberries; season it with the former spices
lightly, and work it up together, then lay it on the slices, and roll them up
round with some caul of veal, beef or mutton, bake them in a dish in the oven,
or roste them, then put them in a pipkin with some butter, and saffron, or
none, blow off the fat from the gravy and put it to them, with some artichocks,
potato, or skirrets blanched, being first boild, a little claret wine, and
serve them on sippets, with some slic't orange, lemon, barberries, grapes, or
gooseberries.

To make a hash of raw Beef.
MInce it very small with some beef suet, or lard, and some sweet herbs, some
beaten cloves and mace, pepper, nutmeg, and a whole onion or two, stew all
together in a pipkin, with some blanched chestnuts, strong broth, and some
claret; let it stew softly the space of three hours, that it may be very
tender, then blow off the fat, dish it, and serve it on sippets, garnish it
with barberries, grapes, or gooseberries.

To make a hash of Beef otherwise.
TAke some of the buttock, cut it into thin slices, and hack them with the back
of your knife, then fry them with sweet butter, and being fried put them into a
pipkin with some claret, strong broth, or gravy, cloves, mace, pepper, salt and
sweet butter; being tender stewed, serve them on fine sippets, with slic't
lemon, grapes, barberries, or gooseberries, and rub the dish with a clove of
garlic.

Otherwise.

Cut some buttock beef into thin slices, and hack it with the back of a knife,
then have some fine slices of interlarded bacon; stew them together in a
pipkin, with some gravy, claret wine, and strong broth, cloves, mace, pepper,
and salt; being tender stewed, serve it on French bread sippets.

Otherwise.

Being roasted and cold cut it into very fine thin slices, then put some gravy
to it, nutmeg, salt, a little thin slic't onion, and claret wine, stew it in a
pipkin, and being well stewed, dish it and serve it up, run it over with beaten
butter, and slic't lemon, garnish the dish with sippets, etc.

Carbonadoes of Beef, raw, roasted, or tosted.
TAke a fat surloin and cut it into steaks half an inch thick, or the fore-rib,
sprinkle it with salt, and broil it on the embers on a very temperate fire, and
in an hour it will be broild enough; then serve it with gravy, and onions
minced and boild in vinegar and pepper, or juice of oranges, nutmeg, and gravy,
or vinegar and pepper only, or gravy alone.

Or steep the beef in claret wine, salt, pepper, nutmeg, and broil them as the
former, boil up the gravy where it was steeped, and serve it for sauce with
beaten butter.

And thus you may also broil or toste the sweetbreads when they are new, and
serve them with gravy.

To Carbonado, broil, or toste beef in the Italian fashion.
TAke the ribs, cut them into steaks, and hack them, then season them with
pepper, salt, and coriander-seed, being first sprinkled with rose vinegar, or
elder-vinegar, then lay them one upon another in a dish the space of an hour,
and broil or toste them before the fire, and serve them with the gravy that
came from them, or juice of orange and the gravy boild together. Thus also you
may do heifers udders, ox cheeks, or neats tongues, being first tender broild
or tosted.

In this way also you may make scotch collops, in thin slices, hack them with
your knife, being salted, and fine and softly broild, serve them with gravy.

Beef fried diverse ways raw or roasted
1. CUt it in slices half an inch thick, and three fingers broad, salt it a
little, and being hacked with the back of your knife, fry it in butter with a
temperate fire. 2. Cut the other a quarter of an inch thick, and fry it as the
former. 3. Cut the other collops to fry as thick as a half-crown, and as long
as a card, hack them, and fry them as the former, but fry them not too hard.
Thus you may fry sweetbreads of the beef.

Beef fried otherwise, being roasted and cold.
SLice it in good big slices, then fry them in butter, and serve them with
butter and vinegar, garnish them with fried parsley.

Sauces for the raw fried Beef.
1. Beaten butter, with slic't lemon beaten together. 2. Gravy and butter, etc.
3. Mustard, butter, and vinegar. 4. Butter, vinegar, minced capers, and nutmeg.
For the garnish of this fried meat, either parsley, sage, clary, onions,
apples, carrots, parsnips, skirrets, spinach, artichocks, pears, quinces,
slic't oranges, or lemons, or fry them in butter.

Thus you may fry sweetbreads, udders, and tongues in any of the foresaid
ways, with the same sauces and garnish.

To bake Beef in lumps several ways, or Tongues in lumps raw, or Heifrrs
Vdders raw or boild.
TAke the buttock, brisket, fillet, or fore-rib, cut it into gobbets as big as
a pullets egg, with some equal gobbets of fat, season them with pepper, salt,
and nutmeg, and bake them with some butter or none.

Make the paste with a quarter of a pound of butter, and boiling liquor, boil
the butter in the liquor, make up the paste quick and pretty stiff for a round
pie.

To bake Beef red Deer fashion in Pies or Pasties, either Surloin, Brisket,
Buttock, or Fillet, larded or not.
TAke the surloin, bone it, and take off the great sinnew that lies on the
back, lard the leanest parts of it with great lard, being seasoned with
nutmegs, pepper, and lard three pound; then have for the seasoning four ounces
of pepper, four ounces of nutmegs, two ounces of ginger, and a pound of salt,
season it and put it into the pie: but first lay a bed of good sweet butter,
and a bay leaf or two, half an ounce of whole cloves, lay on the venison, then
put on all the rest of the seasoning, with a few more cloves, good store of
butter, and a bay-leaf or two, close it up and bake it, it will ask eight hours
soaking: being baked and cold, fill it up with clarified butter, serve it, and
a very good judgment shall not know it from red deer. Make the paste either
fine or course to bake't hot or cold.

To this quantity of flesh you must have three gallons of fine flower heapt
measure, and three pound of butter; but the best way to bake red deer, is to
bake it in course paste, either in pie or pasty: make it in rye meal to keep
long. Otherwise you may make it of meal as it comes from the mill, and make it
only of boiling water, and no stuff in it.

Otherwise to be eaten cold.

Take two stone of buttock beef, lard it with great lard, and season it with
nutmeg, pepper, and the lard, then steep it in a boul, tray, or earthen pan,
with some wine vinegar, cloves, mace, pepper, and two or three bay leaves: thus
let it steep four or five days, and turn it twice or thrice a day: then take
it and season it with cloves, mace, pepper, nutmeg, and salt, put it into a pot
with the back side downward, with butter under it, and season it with a good
thick coat of seasoning, and some butter on it, then close it up and bake it,
it will ask six or seven hours baking. Being baked draw it, and when it is cold
pour out the gravy, and boil it again in a pipkin, and pour it on the venison,
then fill up the pot with clarified butter, etc.

To make minced Pies of Beef.
TAke of the buttock of beef, cleanse it from the skins, and cut it into small
pieces, then take half as much more beef suet as the beef, mince them together
very small, and season them with pepper, cloves, mace, nutmeg, and salt, then
have half as much fruit as meat, three pound of raisins, four pound of currants,
two pound of prunes, etc. or plain without fruit, but only seasoned with the
same spices.

To make a Collar of Beef.
TAke the thinnest end of a coast of beef, boil it a little and lay it in
pump-water, and a little salt three days, shifting it once a day; the last day
put a pint of claret wine to it, and when you take it out of the water let it
lie two or three hours a draining, then cut it almost to the end in three
slices, and bruise a little cochinel and a very little allom, and mingle it
with the claret wine, color the meat all over with it, then take a dozen of
anchoves, wash and bone them, lay them on the beef, and season it with cloves,
pepper, mace, two handful of salt, a little sweet marjoram, and time; and when
you make it up, roll the innermost slice first, and the other two upon it,
being very well seasoned every where, and bind it up hard with tape, then put
it into a stone pot a little bigger then the collar; and pour upon it a pint of
claret wine, and half a pint of wine vinegar, a sprig of rosemary, and a few
bay leaves; bake it very well, and before it be quite cold, take it out of the
pot, and you may keep it dry as long as you please.

To bake a Flank of Beef in a Collar.
TAke a flank of Beef, and lay it in pump water four days and nights, shift it
twice a day, then take it out and dry it very well in clean clothes, cut it in
three layers, and take out the bones and most of the fat: then take three
handfuls of salt, and good store of sage chopped very small, mingle them, and
strew it betwixt the three layers, and lay them one upon another; then take an
ounce of cloves and mace, and another of nutmegs, beat them very well, and
strew it between the layers of beef, roll it up close together, then take some
packthread and tie it up very hard, put it in a long earthen pot, which are
made of purpose for that use, tie up the top of the pot with cap paper, and let
it into the oven; let it stand eight hours, when you draw it, and being between
hot and cold, bind it up round in a cloth, tie it fast at both ends with
packthred, and hang it up for your use.

Sometimes for variety you may use slices of bacon betwixt the layers, and in
place of sage sweet herbs, and sometimes cloves of garlic. Or powder it in
saltpeter four or five days, then wash it off, roll it and use the same
spices as abovesaid, and serve it with mustard and sugar, or Gallendine.

To stuff Beef with Parsley to serve cold.
PIck the parsley very fine and short, then mince some suet not too small,
mingle it with the parsley, and make little holes in ranks, fill them hard and
full, and being boild and cold, slice it in thin slices, and sere it with
vinegar and green parsley.

To bake Vdders either in Pie or Pasty according to this Figure.
TAke a young Udder and lard it with great lard, being seasoned with nutmeg,
pepper, cloves, and mace, boil to bake udders in pie or pastry it tender, and
being cold wrap it in a caul of veal, but first season it with the former
spices and salt; put it in the pie with some slices of veal under it, season
them, and some also on the top, with some slices of lard and butter; close it
up, and being baked, liquor it with clarified butter. Thus for to eat cold; if
hot, liquour it with white wine, gravy and butter.

To bake a Heifers Vdder in the Italian Fashion.
THe Udder being boild tender, and cold, cut it into dice-work like samll dice,
and season them with some cloves, mace, cinnamon, ginger, salt, pistaches, or
pine-kernels, some dates, and bits of marrow; season the aforesaid materials
lightly and fit, make your pie not above an inch high, like a custard, and of
custard paste, prick it, and dry it in the oven, and put in the abovesaid
materials; put to it also some custard stuff made of good cream, ten eggs, and
but three whites, sugar, salt, rosewater, and some dissolved musk; bake it, and
stick it with slic't dates, candied pistaches, and scrape fine sugar on it.

Otherwise.

Boil the udder very tender, and being cold slice it into thin slices, as also
some thin slices of parmisan and interlarded bacon, some sweet herbs chopped
small, some currants, cinnamon, nutmeg, sugar, rosewater, and some butter, make
three bottoms of the aforesaid things in a dish, patty-pan, or pie, with a cut
cover, and being baked, scrape on sugar on it, or ice it.

Otherwise to eat hot.

Take an Udder boild and cold, slice it into thin slices, and season it with
pepper, cinnamon, nutmeg, ginger, and salt, mingle some currants amongst the
slices, and fill the pie; put some dates on the top, large mace, barberries, or
grapes, butter, and the marrow of marrow bones; close it up and bake it, being
baked ice it, and liquour it with white wine verjuyce, or grape verjuyce.

To stew Calves or Neats feet.
BOil and blanch them, then part them in halves, and put them into a pipkin
with some strong broth, a little powder of saffron, sweet butter, pepper,
sugar, and some sweet herbs finely minced, let them stew an hour, and serve
them with a little grape verjuyce stewed among them.

Neats feet being soust serve them cold with mustard.

To make a Fricase of Neats Feet.
TAke them being boild and blanched, fricase them with some butter, and being
finely fried make a sauce with six yolks of eggs dissolved with some wine
vinegar, grated nutmeg, and salt.

Otherwise.

First bone and pick them clean, then being boild, blanched, and cold, cut them
into gubbins and put them in a frying pan with a ladle full of strong broth, a
piece of butter, and a little salt; after they have fried a while, put to them
a little chopped parsley, green chibbolds, young spearmint, and time, all shred
very small, with a little beaten pepper: being almost fried, make a lear for
them with the yolks of four or five eggs, some mutton gravy, a little nutmeg,
and the juice of a lemon wrung therein: put this lear to the neats feet as they
fry in the pan, then toss them once or twice, and so serve them.

Neats Feet larded and roasted on a spit:
TAke neats feet being boild, cold, and blanched, lard them whole and roste
them; being roasted, serve them with venison sauce, made of claret wine, wine
vinegar, and tostes of household bread strained with the wine through a
strainer, with some beat cinnamon and ginger; put it in a dish or pipkin and
boil it on the fire; with a few whole cloves, stir it with a sprig of rosemary,
and make it not too thick.

To make black Puddings of the Beefers Blood.
TAke the blood of the beefer when it is warm, put in some salt and strain it,
and when it is through cold put in the groats of oatmeal well picked, and let
it stand soaking all night, then put in some sweet herbs, pennyroyal,
rosemary, time, savory, fennil, or fennil-seed, pepper, cloves, mace, nutmegs,
and some cream or good new milk; then have four or five eggs well beaten and
put into the blood with good beef suet not cut too small, mix all well together
and fill the beefers guts, being first well cleansed, steeped, and scalded.

To dress a dish of Tripes hot out of the pot or pan.
BEing tender boild, make a sauce with some beaten butter, gravy, pepper,
mustard, and wine vinegar, rub a dish with a little garlic and dish them
therein, then run the sauce over them with a little bruised garlic amongst it,
and a little wine vinegar sprinkled over the meat.

To make Bolonia Sausages.
TAke a good leg of pork, and take away all the fat, skins, and sinnews, mince
and stamp it very fine in a wooden or brass mortar, weigh the meat, and to
every five pound thereof take a pound of good lard cut as small as your little
finger about an inch long, mingle it amongst the meat, and put to it half an
ounce of whole cloves, as much beaten pepper, with the same quantity of nutmegs
and mace finely beaten also, an ounce of whole carawayseed, salt eight ounces,
cochenel bruised with a little allom beaten and dissolved in sack, and stamped
amongst the meat: then take beefers guts, cut of the biggest of the small guts,
a yard long, and being clean scowred put them in brine a week or eight days,
it strengthens and makes them tuff to hold filling. The greatest skill is in
the filling of them, for if they be not well filled they will grow rusty; then
being filled put them a smoking three or four days, and hang them in the air,
in some Garret or in a Seller, for they must not come no more at the fire, and
in a quarter of a year they will be eatable.

Section 3.
The A la mode ways of dressing the Heads of any Beasts.

To boil a Bullocks Cheek in the Italian way.
BReak the bones and steep the head in fair water, shift it, and scrape off the
slime, let it lie in steep thus twelve hours; then boil it in fair water with
some Bolonia sausage and a piece of interlarded bacon: the cheeks being tender
boild and the other materials, dish it up and serve it, with some flowers and
greens on it, and mustard in saucers.

To stew Bullocks Cheeks.
TAke them being well soaked or steeped, spit and half roste them, save the
gravy, and put them into a pipkin with some claret wine, gravy, and some strong
broth, slic't nutmeg, ginger, pepper, salt, and some minced onions fried, stew
it the space of two hours on a soft fire, and being finely stewed, serve it on
carved sippets.

Otherwise.

Take out the bones, balls of the eyes, and the ruff of the mouth, steep it
well in fair water and shift it often, being well cleansed from the blood and
slime take it out of the water, wipe it dry, and season it with nutmeg, pepper,
and salt, put them in an earthen pot one upon another, and put to them a pint
of claret wine, a few whole cloves, a little fair water, and two or three whole
onions; close up the pot and bake it, it will ask six hours baking; being
tender baked, serve it on tostes of fine manchet.

Or thus.

Being baked or stewed, you may take out the bones and lay them close together,
pour the liquor to them, and being cold slice them into slices, and serve them
cold with mustard and sugar.

To boil a Calves Head.
TAke the head, skin, and all unflayed, scald it, and soke it in fair water a
whole night or twelve hours, then take out the brains and boil them with some
sage, parsley, or mint; being boild chop them small together, butter them and
serve them in a dish with fine sippets about them: Then the head being finely
cleansed, boil it in a clean cloth and close it together again in the cloth;
being boild, lay it one side by another with some fine slices of boild bacon,
and lay some fine picked parsley upon it, with some burrage or other flowers.

To hash a Calves Head.
TAke a calves head well steeped and cleansed from the blood and slime, boil it
tender, then take it up and let it be through cold, cut it into dice-work, as
also the brains in the same form, and some thin slices of interlarded bacon
being first boild; put some gooseberries to them, as also some gravy or juice
of lemon or orange, and some beaten butter; stew all together, and being finely
stewed, dish it on carved fippets, and run it over with beaten butter.

Otherwise.

The head being boild and cold, slice it into thin slices, with some onions and
the brains in the same manner, stew them in a pipkin with some gravy or strong
mutton broth, nutmeg, some mushrooms, a little white wine and beaten butter;
being well stewed together dish them on fine sippets, and garnish the meat with
slic't lemon or barberries.

To souce a Calves Head.
FIrst scald it and bone it, then steep it in fair water the space of six
hours, dry it with a clean cloth, and season it with some salt and bruised
garlic (or none) then roll it up in a collar, bind it close, and boil it in
white wine, water, and salt; being boild keep it in that souce drink, and serve
it in the collar, or slice it and serve it with oil, vinegar, and pepper. This
dish is very rare, and to a good judgment scarce decernable.

To roste a Calves Head.
TAke a calves head, cleave it and take out the brains, skins, and blood about
it, steep them and the head in fair warm water the space of four or five hours,
shift them three or four times and cleanse the head, then boil the brains, and
make a pudding with some grated bread, brains, some beef suet minced small,
with some minced veal and sage; season the pudding with some cloves, mace,
salt, ginger, sugar, five yolks of eggs, and saffron; fill the head with this
pudding, then close it up and bind it fast with some packthread, spit it, and
bind on the caul round the head with some of the pudding round about it, roste
it and save the gravy, blow off the fat, and put to the gravy, for the sauce a
little white wine, a slic't nutmeg, and a piece of sweet butter, the juye of an
orange, salt, and sugar. Then bread up the head with some grated bread, beaten
cinnamon, minced lemon peel and a little salt.

To roste a Calves Head with Orsters.
SPlit the head as to boil, and take out the brains washing them very well with
the head, cut out the tongue, boil it a little, and blanch it, let the brains
be parboild as well as the tongue, then mince the brains and tongue, a little
sage, oysters, beef suet, very small, being finely minced mix them together
with three or four yolks of eggs, beaten ginger, pepper, nutmegs, grated bread,
salt, and a little sack, if the brains and eggs make it not moist enough. This
being done, parboil the calves head a little in fair water, then take it up and
dry it well in a cloth, filling the holes where the brains and tongue lay with
this farcing or pudding, bind it up close together and spit it, then stuff it
with oysters being first parboild in their own liquor, put them into a dish
with minced time, parsley, mace, nutmeg, and pepper beaten very small, mix all
these with a little vinegar, and the white of an egg, roll the oysters in it,
and make little holes in the head, stuff it as full as you can, put the oysters
but half way in, and scure them in with sprigs of time, roste it.. and set a
dish under it to save the gravy, wherein let there be oysters, sweet herbs
minced, a little white wine and a slic't nutmeg. When the head is roasted set
the dish wherein the sauce is on the coals to stew a little, then put in a
piece of butter, the juice of an orange and salt, beating it up thick together;
dish the head, and put the sauce to it, and serve it up hot to the table.

To stew a Calves Head.
FIrst boil it in fair water half an hour, then take it up and pluck it to
pieces, then put it into a pipkin with great oysters and some of the broth
which boild it, (if you have no stronger) a pint of white wine or claret, a
quarter of a pound of interlarded bacon, some blanched chestnuts, the yolks of
three or four hard eggs cut into halves, sweet herbs minced, and a little
horse-raddish-root scraped, stew all these an hour, then slice the brains
(being parboild) and strew a little ginger, salt, and flower, you may put in
some juice of spinach and fry them green with butter; then dish the meat, and
lay these fried brains, oysters, chestnuts, half yolks of eggs, and sippet it,
serve it up hot to the table.

To hash a Calves Head.
TAke a calves head, boil it tender, and let it be through cold, then take one
half and broil or roste it, do it very white and fair, then take the other half
and slice it into thin slices, fry it with clarified butter fine and white,
then put it in a dish a stewing with some sweet herbs, as rosemary, time,
savory, salt, some white wine or claret, some good roste mutton gravy, a little
pepper and nutmeg; then take the tongue being ready boild, and a boild piece of
interlarded bacon, slice it into thin slices, and fry it in a batter made of
flower, eggs, nutmeg, cream, salt, and sweet herbs chopped small, dip the
tongue and bacon into the batter, then fry them and keep them warm till dinner
time, season the brains with nutmegs, sweet herbs minced small, salt, and the
yolks of three or four raw eggs, mix all together, and fry them in spoonfulls,
keep them warm, then the stewed meat being ready, dish it, and lay the broiled
side of the head on the stewed side, then garnish the dish with the fried
meats, some slices of oranges, and run it over with beaten butter and juice of
oranges.

To broil a Calves Head.
TAke a calves head being cleft and cleansed, and also the brains, boil the
head very white and fine, then boil the brains with some sage and other sweet
herbs, as time and sweet marjoram, chop and boil them in a bag, being boild put
them out and butter them with butter, salt, and vinegar, serve them in a little
dish by themselves with fine thin sippets about them.

Then broil the head or toste it against the fire, being first salted and
scotched with your knife, baste it with butter; being finely broild, bread it
with fine manchet, or fine flower, brown it a little and dish it on a sauce of
gravy, minced capers, grated nutmeg, and a little beaten butter.

To boil a Lambs Head in white Broth.
TAke a lambs head, cleave it, and take out the brains, then open the pipes of
the appurtenances, and wash and soke the meat very clean, set it a boiling in
fair water, and when it boils scum it, and put in some large mace, whole
cinnamon, slic't dates, some marrow, and salt, and when the head is boild, dish
it up on fine carved sippets, and trim the dish with scraping sugar: Then
strain six or seven yolks of eggs with sack or white wine, and a ladle full of
cream, put it into the broth, and give it a walm on the fire, stir it, and
broth the head, then lay on the head some slic't lemon, gooseberries, grapes,
dates, and large mace.

To stew a Lambs Head.
TAke a lambs head, cleave it and take out the brains, wash and pick the head
from the slime and filth, and steep it in fair water, shift it twice in an
hour, as also the appurtenances then set it a boiling on the fire with some
strong broth, and when it boils scum it, and put in a large mace or two, some
capers quarters of pears, a little white wine, some gravy, marrow, and some
marygold-flowers; being finely stewed, serve it on carved sippets and broth it,
lay on it slic't lemon, and scalded gooseberries or barberries.

To boil a Lambs Head otherwise.
MAke a forcing or pudding of the brains, being boild and cold cut them into
bits, then mince a little veal or lamb with some beef suet, and put to it some
grated bread, nutmeg, pepper, salt, some sweet herbs minced small, and three or
four raw eggs, work all together, and fill the head with this pudding, being
cleft, steeped, and after dried in a clean cloth, stew it in a stewing pan or
between two dishes with some strong broth: then take the remainder of this
forcing or pudding and make it into balls, put them a boiling with the head,
and add some white wine, a whole onion, and some slic't pippins or pears, or
square bits like dice, some bits of artichocks, sage leaves, large mace, and
lettice boild and quartered and put in beaten butter; being finely stewed, dish
it up on sippets, and put the balls and the other materials on it, broth it,
and run it over with beaten butter and lemon.

Section 4.
The rarest ways of dressing of all manner of Roste Meats, either of Flesh or
Fowl, by Sea or Land, with their Sauces that properly belong to them.

Diverse ways of bredding or dredging of Meats and Fowls.
1. GRated bread and flower.

2. Grated bread, and sweet herbs minced and dried, or beat to powder, mixed
with the bread.

3. Lemon in powder; or orange-peel mixed with bread and flower, minced small or
in powder.

4. Cinnamon, bread, flower sugar, made fine or in powder.

5. Grated bread, fennil-seed, coriander-seed, cinnamon, and sugar.

6. For pigs, grated bread, flower, nutmeg, ginger, pepper, sugar; but first
baste it with the juice of lemons or oranges, and the yolks of eggs.

7. Bread, sugar, and salt mixed together.

Diverse bastings for roste meats.
1. FResh butter. 2. Clarified suet. 3. Claret wine, with a bundle of sage,
rosemary, time, and parsley, baste the mutton with these herbs and wine. 4.
Water and salt. 5. Cream and melted butter, thus flayed pigs commonly. 6. Yolks
of eggs, juice of oranges, and biskets, the meat being almost roasted, comfets
for some fine large fowls, as a peacock, bustard, or turkey.
To roste a Shoulder of mutton in a most excellent new way with Oysters and
other materials.
TAke three pints of great oysters and parboil them in their own liquor, then
put away the liquor and wash them with some white wine, then dry them with a
clean cloth and season them with nutmeg and salt, then stuff the shoulder and
lard it with some anchoves; being clean washed, spit it, and lay it to the
fire, and baste it with white or claret wine, then take the bottoms of six
artichocks, pared from the leaves and boild tender, then take them out of the
liquor and put them into beaten butter, with the marrow of six marrow bones,
and keep them warm by a fire or in an oven, then put to them some slic't
nutmeg, salt, the gravy of a leg of roste mutton, the juice of two oranges, and
some great oysters, a pint, being first parboild, and mingle with them a little
musk or ambergris: then dish up the shoulder of mutton, and have a sauce
made for it of the gravy which came from the roste shoulder of mutton stuffed
with oysters, and anchoves, and blow off the fat, then put to the gravy a
little white wine, some oyster liquor, a whole onion, and some stripped time,
and boil up the sauce, then put it in a fair dish, and lay the shoulder of
mutton on it, and the bottoms of the artichocks round the dish brims, and put
the marrow and the oysters on the artichock bottoms, with some slic't lemon on
the shoulder of mutton, and serve it up hot.

To roste a Shoulder of Mutton with Oysters otherwise.
TAke great oysters, and being opened, parboil them in their own liquor, beard
them and wash them in some vinegar then wipe them dry, and put to them grated
nutmeg, pepper, some broom buds and two or three anchoves; being finely
cleansed, washed, and cut into little bits, the yolk of a raw egg or two
dissolved, some salt, a little samphire cut small, and mingle all together,
then stuff the shoulder, roste it, and baste it with sweet butter, and being
roasted make sauce with the gravy, white wine, oyster liquor, and some oysters,
then boil the sauce up and blow off the fat, beat it up thick with the yolk of
an egg or two, and serve the shoulder up hot with the sauce and some slic't
lemon on it.

Otherwise.

The oysters being opened parboil them in their own liquor, beard them, and
wipe them dry, being first washed out of their own liquor with some vinegar,
put them in a dish with some time, sweet marjoram, nutmeg, and lemon peel, all
minced very small, but only the oysters whole, and a little salt, and mingle
all together; then make little holes in the upper side of the mutton, and fill
them with this composition. Roste the shoulder of mutton, and baste it with
butter, set a dish under it to save the gravy that drippeth from it; then for
the sauce take some of the oysters, and a whole onion, stew them together with
some of the oyster liquor they were parboild in, and the gravy that dripped
from the shoulder, (but first blow off the fat) and boil up all together pretty
thick, with the volk of an egg, some verjuyce, the slice of an orange, and
serve the mutton on it hot.

Or make sauce with some oysters being first parboild in their liquor, put to
them some mutton gravy, oyster liquor, a whole onion, a little white wine, and
large mace, boil it up, and garnish the dish with barberries, slic't lemon,
large mace, and oysters.

Other times for change make sauce with capers, great oysters, gravy, a whole
onion, claret wine, nutmeg, and the juice of two or three oranges beaten up
thick with some butter and salt.

To roste a Shoulder of Mutton without Oysters.
TAke a shoulder of mutton and roste it, then make sauce with some gravy,
claret wine, pepper, grated nutmeg, slic't lemon, and broom buds, give it a
walm or two, then dish the mutton, and put the sauce to it, and garnish it with
barberries and slic't lemon.

To roste a Chine of Mutton either plain or with diverse stuffings, lardings,
and sauces.
FIrst lard it with lard, or lemon peel cut like lard, or with orange-peel,
stick here and there a clove, or in place of cloves tops of rosemary, time,
sage, winter-savory, or sweet marjoram, baste it with butter, and make sauce
with mutton gravy, and nutmeg, boil it up with a little claret and the juice of
an orange, and rub the dish you put it in with a clove of garlic.

Or make sauce with pickled or green cucumbers slic't and boild in strong broth
or gravy, with some slic't onions, an anchove or two, and some grated nutmeg,
stew them well together, and serve the mutton with it hot.

Diverse Sauces for roste Mutton.
1. GRavy, capers, samphire, and salt, and stew them well together. 2. Water,
onion, claret wine, slic't nutmeg and gravy boild up. 3. Whole onions stewed in
strong broth or gravy, white wine, pepper, pickled capers, mace, and three or
four slices of a lemon. 4. Mince a little roste mutton hot from the spit, and
add to it some chopped parsley and onions, verjuyce or vinegar, ginger, and
pepper; stew it very tender in a pipkin, and serve it under any joint with some
gravy of the mutton. 5. Onions, oyster liquor, claret, capers, or broom buds,
gravy, nutmeg, and salt boild together. 6. Chopped parsley, verjuyce, butter,
sugar, and gravy. 7. Take vinegar, butter, and currants, put them in a pipkin
with sweet herbs finely minced, the yolks of two hard eggs, and two or three
slices of the brownest of the leg, mince it also, some cinnamon, ginger, sugar,
and salt. 8. Picked capers, and gravy, or gravy and samphire cut an inch long.
9. Chopped parsley and vinegar. 10. Salt, pepper, and juice of oranges. 11.
Strained prunes, wine and sugar. 12. White wine, gravy, large mace and butter
thickened with two or three yolks of eggs.
Oyster Sauce.
13. Oyster liquor and gravy boild together, with eggs and verjuyce to thicken
it, then juice of orange and slices of lemon over all. 14. Onions chopped with
sweet herbs, vinegar, gravy, and salt boild together.
To roste Veal diverse ways with many excellent farcings, puddings, and sauces,
both in the French, Italian, and English fashion.
To make a Pudding in a Breast of Veal.
OPen the lower end with a sharp knife close between the skin and the ribs,
leave hold enough of the flesh on both sides, that you may put in your hand
between the ribs and the skin; then make a pudding of grated white bread, two
or three yolks of eggs, a little cream, clean washed currants picked and dried,
rosewater, cloves, and mace fine beaten, a little saffron, salt, beef suet
minced fine, some slic't dates and sugar; mingle all together, and stuff the
breast with it, make the pudding pretty stiff, and prick on the sweetbread
wrapped in the caul, spit it, and roast it; then make sauce with some claret
wine, grated nutmeg, vinegar, butter, and two or three slices of an orange, and
boil it up, etc.

To roast a Breast of Veal otherwise.
PArboil it, and lard it with small lard all over, or the one half with lard,
and the other with lemon peel, sage-leaves, or any kind of sweet herbs; spit it
and roast it, baste it with sweet butter, and being roasted, bread it with
grated bread flower, and salt; make sauce with gravy, juice of oranges, and
slic't lemon laid on it.

Or thus.

Make a stuffing or farcing with a little minced veal, and some time minced,
lard, or fat bacon, a few cloves and mace beaten, salt, and two or three yolks
of eggs; mingle them all together, and fill the breast, scure it up with a
prick or scure, then make little puddings of the same stuff you stuffed the
breast, and having spitted the breast, prick upon it those little puddings, as
also the sweetbreads, roast all together, and baste them with good sweet
butter; being finely roasted, make sauce with juice of oranges and lemons.

To roast a Loyn of Veal.
SPit it, and lay it to the fire, baste it with sweet butter, then set a dish
under it with some vinegar, two or three sage leaves, and two or three tops of
rosemary and time; let the gravy drop on them, and when the veal is finely
roasted, give the herbs and gravy a walm or two on the fire, and serve it under
the veal.

Another Sauce for the Loin of Veal.

All manner of sweet herbs minced very small, the yolks of two or three hard
eggs minced very small, and boil them together with a few currants, a little
grated bread, beaten cinnamon, sugar, and a whole clove or two; dish the veal on
this sauce, with two or three slices of an orange.

To roast Olives on a Leg of Veal.
CUt a leg of veal into thin slices, and hack them with the back of a knife;
then strew on them a little salt, grated nutmeg, sweet herbs finely minced and
the yolks of some hard eggs minced also, grated bread, a little beef suet
minced, currants, and sugar: mingle all together, and strew it on the olives,
then roll it up in little rouls, spit them, and roll the caul of the veal about
them, roaste them, and baste them with sweet butter; being roasted, make sauce
with some of the stuffing, verjuyce, the gravy that drops from them, and some
sugar, and serve the olives on it.

To roast a Leg or Fillet of Veal.
TAke it and stuff it with beef suet, seasoned with nutmeg, salt, and the yolks
of two or three raw eggs, mix them with the suet, stuff it and roast it; then
make sauce with the gravy that dripped from it, blow off the fat, and give it
two or three walms on the fire, and put to it the juice of two or three oranges.

To roast Veal in pieces.
TAke a leg of veal, and cut it into square pieces as big as a hens egg, season
them with pepper, salt, some beaten cloves, and fennel-seed; then spit them
with slices of bacon between every piece; being spitted, put the caul of the
veal about them and roast them, then make the sauce of the gravy and the juice
of oranges. Thus you may do of veal sweetbreads and lambstones.

To roast Calves Feet.
FIrst boil them tender and blanch them, and being cold lard them thick with
small lard, then spit them on a small spit and roast them; serve them with a
sauce made of vinegar, cinnamon, sugar, and butter.

To roast a Calves Head with Oysters.
TAke a Calves head and cleave it, take out the brains and wash them very well
with the head, cut out the the tongue, and boil, blanch, and parboil the
brains, as also the head and tongue; then mince the brains and tongue with a
little sage, oysters, marrow, or beef suet very small, mix with it three or
four yolks of raw eggs, beaten ginger, pepper, nutmeg, grated bread, salt, and
a little sack: this being done, then take the calves head, and fill it with
this composition where the brains and tongue lay; bind it up close together,
spit it, and stuff it with oysters, compounded with nutmeg, mace, time, grated
bread, salt, and pepper: Mix all these with a little vinegar, and the white of
an egg, and roll the oysters in it; stuff the head with it as full as you can,
and roast it thoroughly, setting a dish under it to catch the gravy, wherein let
there be oysters, sweet herbs minced, a little white wine and slic't nutmeg;
when the head is roasted, set the dish wherein the sauce is on the coals to
stew a little, then put in a piece of butter, the juice of an orange, and salt,
beating it up thick together, dish the head, and put the sauce to it, and serve
it hot to the table.

Several Sauces for roast Veal.
1. Gravy, Claret, nutmeg, vinegar, butter, sugar, and oranges. 2. Juice of
orange, gravy, nutmeg, and slic't lemon on it. 3. Vinegar and butter. 4. All
manner of sweet herbs chopped small, with the yolks of two or three eggs, and
boil them in vinegar, butter, a few bread crumbs, currants, beaten cinnamon,
sugar, and a whole cloave or two, put it under the veal, with slices of orange
and lemon about the dish. 5. Claret sauce of boild carrots, and boild quinces
stamped and strained, with lemon, nutmeg, pepper, rose vinegar, sugar, and
verjuyce, boild to an indifferent height or thickness, with a few whole cloves.
To roast Red Dear.
TAke a side, or half hanch, and either lard them with small lard, or stick
them with cloves; but parboil them before you lard them, then spit and roast
them.

Sauces for Red Dear.
1. THe gravy and sweet herbs chopped small and boild together, or the gravy
only. 2. The juice of oranges or lemons and gravy. 3. A Gallendine sauce made
with strained bread, vinegar, claret wine, cinnamon, ginger, and sugar; strain
it, and being finely beaten with the spices, boil it up with a few whole
cloves, and a sprig of rosemary. 4. White bread boild in water pretty thick
without spices, and put to it some butter, vinegar, and sugar.
If you will stuff or force any Venison, stick them with rosemary, time,
savory, or cloves, or else with all manner of sweet herbs, minced with
beef suet, lay the caul over the side or half hanch, and so roast it.

To roast Pork with the Sauces belonging to it.
TAke a chine of pork, draw it with sage on both sides, being first spitted,
then roast it; thus you may do of any other joint, whether Chine, Loin, Rack,
Breast, or Spare-rib, or Harslet of a bacon-hog, being salted a night or two.

Sauces.
1. Gravy, chopped sage, and onions boild together with some pepper. 2.
Mustard, vinegar, and pepper. 3. Apples pared, quartered, and boild in fair
water, with some sugar and butter. 4. Gravy, onions, vinegar, and pepper.
To roast Pigs diverse ways with their different Sauces.
To roste a Pig with the Hair on.
TAke a Pig and draw out his intrails or guts, liver and lights, draw him very
clean at vent, and wipe him, cut off his feet, truss him, and prick up the
belly close, spit it, and lay it to the fre, but scotch it not, being a quarter
roasted, the skin will rise up in blisters from the flesh, then with your knife
or hands pull off the skin and hair, and being clean flayed, cut slashes down
to the bones, baste it with butter and cream, being but warm, then bread it
with grated white bread, corrans, sugar, and salt mixed together, and thus
apply basting upon dregging till the body be covered an inch thick; then the
meat being thoroughly roasted, draw it and serve it up whole, with sauce made of
wine vinegar, whole cloves, whole cinnamon, and sugar boild to a syrup.

Otherwise.

You may make a pudding in his belly, with grated bread and some sweet herbs
minced small, a little beef suet also minced, two or three yolks of raw eggs,
grated nutmeg, sugar, currants, cream, salt, pepper, etc. Dredge it or bread it
with flower, bread, sugar, cinnamon, slic't nutmeg, etc.

To roste a Pig the plain way.
SCald and draw it, wash it clean, and put some sage in the belly, prick it up
and spit it, roste it, and baste it with butter, and salt it; being roasted fine
and crisp, make sauce with chopped sage and corrans well boild in vinegar and
fair water, then put to them the gravy of the pig, a little grated bread, the
brains, some barberries, and sugar, give these a walm or two, and serve the pig
on this sauce, with a little beaten butter.

To roste a Pig otherwise.
TAke a pig, scald and draw it, then mince some sweet herbs, either sage or
pennyroyal, and roll it up in a ball with some butter, prick it up in the pigs
belly and roste him; being roasted, make sauce with butter, vinegar, the brains,
and some barberries.

Otherwise.

Draw out his bowels, and flay it but only the head, truss the head looking
over his back, and fill his belly with a pudding made of grated bread, nutmeg,
a little minced beef suet, two or three yolks of raw eggs, salt, and three or
four spoonfuls of good cream, fill his belly and prick it up, roste it and
baste it with yolks of eggs; being roasted, wring on the juice of a lemon, and
bread it with grated bread, pepper, nutmeg, salt, and ginger, bread it quick
with the bread and spices.

Then make sauce with vinegar, butter, and the yolks of hard eggs minced, boil
them together with the gravy of the pig, and serve it on this sauce.

To roste Hares with their several stuffings and sauces.
TAke a hare, flay it, set it, and lard it with small lard, stick it with
cloves, and make a pudding in his belly with grated bread, grated nutmeg,
beaten cinnamon, salt, corrans, eggs, cream and sugar; make it good and stiff,
fill the hare and roste it: if you would have the pudding green, put juice of
spinach, if yellow, saffron.

Sauce.

Beaten cinnamon nutmegs, ginger, pepper, boild prunes and corrans strained,
muskefied bisket-bread beaten into powder, sugar, and cloves, all boild up as
thick as water-grewel.

To roste a Hare with the Skin on.
DRaw a Hare (that is the bowels out of the body) wipe it clean, and make a
farsing or stuffing of all manner of swet herbs, as time, winter-savory, sweet
marjoram, and parsley, mince them very small, and roll them in some butter,
make a ball thereof and put it in the belly of the hare, prick it up close, and
roste it with the skin and hair on it, baste it with butter, and being almost
roasted flay off the the skin and stick a few cloves on the hare; bread it with
fine grated manchet, flower, and cinnamon, bread it good and thick, froth it up,
and dish it on sauce made of grated bread, claret wine, wine vinegar, cinnamon,
ginger, sugar and barberries, boil it up to an indifferency.

Several Sauces belonging to Rabits.
1. BEaten butter, and rub the dish with a clove of garlic. 2. Sage and
parsley minced, roll it in a ball with some butter, and fill the belly with
this stuffing. 3. Beaten butter with lemon and pepper. 4. In the French
fashion, onions minced small and fried, and mingled with mustard and pepper. 5.
The rabit being roasted, wash the belly with the gravy of mutton, and add to it
a slice or two of lemon.
To roste Woodcocks in the English Fashion.
FIrst pull and draw them, then being washed and trust, roste them, baste them
with butter, and save the gravy, then broil tostes and butter them; being
roasted, bread them with bread and flower, and serve them in a clean dish on the
toste and gravy.

Otherwise in the French Fashion.
BEing new and fresh killed that day you use them, pull, truss, and lard them
with a broad piece of lard or bacon pricked over the breast: being roasted,
serve them on broild toste put in verjuyce, or the juice of orange with the
gravy, and warmed on the fire.

Or being stale, draw them, and put a clove or two in the bellies, with a piece
of bacon.

To roast a Hen or Pullet.
TAke a Pullet or Hen full of eggs, draw it and roast it; being roasted break
it up, and mince the brauns in thin slices, save the wings whole, or not mince
the brauns, and leave the rump with the legs whole; stew all in the gravy and a
little salt.

Then have a minced lemon, and put it into the gravy, dish the minced meat in
the midst of the dish, and the thighs, wings, and rumps about it. Garnish the
dish with oranges and lemon quartered, and serve them up covered.

Sauce with Oysters and Bacon.
TAke Oysters being parboild and clenged from the grands, mingle them with
pepper, salt, beaten nutmeg, time, and sweet marjoram, fill the pullets belly
and roast it, as also two or three ribs of interlarded bacon, serve it in two
pieces in the dish with the Pullet; then make sauce of the gravy, some of the
oyster liquor, oysters and juice of oranges boild together, take some of the
oysters out of the Pullets belly, and lay on the breast of it, then put the
sauce to it with slices of lemon.

Sauce for Hens or Pullets to prepare them to roast.
TAke a Pullet or Hen, if lean, lard it, if fat, not; or lard either fat or
lean with a piece or slice of bacon over it, and a piece of interlarded bacon
in the belly, seasoned with nutmeg and pepper, and stuck with cloves.

Then for the sauce take the yolks of six hard eggs minced small, put to them
white wine or wine vinegar, butter, and the gravy of the hen, juice of orange,
pepper, falt, and if you please add thereto mustard.

Several other Sauces for roast Hens.
1. TAke beer, salt, the yolks of three hard eggs minced small, grated bread,
three or four spoonfuls of gravy; and being almost boild, put in the juice of
two or three oranges, slices of a lemon and orange, with lemon peel shred
small. 2. Beaten butter with juice of lemon or orange, white or claret wine. 3.
Gravy and claret wine boild with a piece of an onion, nutmeg, and salt, serve
it with the slices of oranges or lemons, or the juice in the sauce. 4. Or with
oyster liquor, an anchove or two, nutmeg and gravy, and rub the dish with a
clove of garlic. 5. Take the yolks of hard eggs and lemon peel mince them very
small, and stew them in white wine, salt, and the gravy of the fowl.
Several Sauces for roast Chickens.
1. GRavy, and the juice or slices of orange. 2. Butter, verjuyce, and gravy of
the Chicken, or mutton gravy. 3. Butter and vinegar boild together, put to it a
little sugar, then make thin sops of bread, lay the roste chicken on them, and
serve them up hot. 4. Take sorrel, wash and stamp it, then have thin slices of
manchet, put them in a dish with some vinegar, strained sorrel, sugar, some
gravy, beaten cinnamon, beaten butter, and some slices of orange or lemon, and
strew thereon some cinnamon and sugar, 5. Take slic't oranges, and put to them a
little white wine, rose water, beaten mace, ginger, some sugar, and butter; set
them on a chafing dish of coals and stew them; then have some slices of manchet
round the dish finely carved, and lay the chickens being roasted on the sauce.
6. Slic't onions, claret wine, gravy, and salt boild up.
Sauces for roast Pigeons or Doves.
1. GRavy and juice of orange. 2. Boild parsley minced, and put amongst some
butter and vinegar beaten up thick. 3. Gravy, claret wine and an onion stewed
together with a little salt. 4. Vine leaves roasted with the pigeons minced and
put in claret wine and salt, boild together, some butter and gravy. 5. Sweet
butter and juice of orange beat together, and made thick. 6. Minced onions
boild in claret wine almost dry, then put to it nutmeg, sugar, gravy of the
fowl, and a little pepper. 7. Or gravy of the Pigeons only.
Sauces for all manner of roast Land Fowl, as Turkey, Bustard, Peacock,
Pheasant, Partridge, etc.
1. Slic't onions being boild, stew them in some water, salt, pepper, some
grated bread, and the gravy of the fowl. 2. Take slices of white bread and boil
them in fair water with two wholes onions, some gravy, half a grated nutmeg,
and a little salt; strain them together through a strainer, and boil it up as
thick as water grewel; then add to it the yolks of two eggs dissolved with the
juice of two oranges, etc. 3. Take thin slices of manchet, a little of the
fowl, some sweet butter, grated nutmeg, pepper, and salt; stew all together,
and being stewed, put in a lemon minced with the peel. 4. Onions slic't and
boild in fair water, and a little salt, a few bread crumbs, beaten pepper,
nutmeg, three spoonfuls of white wine, and some lemon peel finely minced, and
boild all together; being almost boild, put in the juice of an orange, beaten
butter, and the gravy of the fowl. 5. Stamp small nuts to a paste, with bread,
nutmeg, pepper, saffron, cloves, juice of orange, and strong broth, strain and
boil them together pretty thick. 6. Quince, prunes, currants, and raisins boild,
muskefied biscuit stamped and strained with white wine, rose vinegar, nutmeg,
cinnamon, cloves, juice of oranges and sugar; boil it not too thick. 7. Boil
carrots and quinces, strain them with rose vinegar and verjuyce, sugar,
cinnamon, pepper, and nutmeg, boild with a few whole cloves, and a little musk.
8. Take a manchet, pare off the crust and slice it, then boil it in fair water,
and being boild somewhat thick, put in some white wine, wine vinegar, rose, or
elder vinegar, some sugar and butter, etc. 9. Almond paste and crumbs of
manchet, stamp them together with some sugar, ginger, and salt, strain them
with grape verjuyce and juice of oranges; boil it pretty thick.
Sauces for a Stubble or fat Goose.
1. The goose being scalded, drawn, and trust, put a handful of salt in the
belly of it, roast it, and make sauce with sour apples slic't, and boild in
beer all to mash; then put to it sugar and beaten butter. Sometimes for variety
add barberries and the gravy of the fowl. 2. Roast sour apples or pippins,
strain them, and put to them vinegar, sugar, gravy, barberries, grated bread,
beaten cinnamon, mustard, and boild onions strained and put to it.
Sauces for a young Stubble Goose.
TAke the liver and gizzard, mince it very small with some beets, spinach,
sweet herbs, sage, salt, and some minced lard; fill the belly of the goose, and
sow up the rump or vent, as also the neck; roast it, and being roasted take
out the farsing and put it in a dish, then add to it the gravy of the goose,
verjuyce, and pepper, give it a walm on the fire, and serve it with this sauce
in a clean dish.

The French Sauce for a Goose is butter, mustard, sugar, vinegar, and
barberries.

Sauce for a Duck.
ONions slic't, and carrots cut square like dice, boild in white wine, strong
broth, some gravy, minced parsley, savory chopped, mace, and butter; being well
stewed together, it will serve for diverse wild fowls, but most proper for
water fowl.

Sauce for Duck and Mallard in the French Fashion.
1. VInegar and sugar boild to a Syrrup, with two or three cloves, and cinnamon,
or cloves only. 2. Oyster liquor, gravy of the fowl, whole onions boild in it,
nutmeg, and an anchove. If lean, force and lard them.
Sauces for any kind of roast Sea Fowl, as Swan, Whopper, Crane, Shoveler,
Hern, Bitter, or Geese.
MAke a Gallandine with some grated bread, beaten cinnamon and ginger, a
quartern of sugar, a quart of claret wine, a pint of wine vinegar, strain the
foresaid materials, and boil them in a skillet with a few whole cloves; in the
boiling stir it with a sprig of rosemary, add a little red sanders, and boil
it as thick as water grewel.

Green Sauce for Pork, Goslings, Chickens, Lamb, or Kid.
STamp sorrel with white bread and pared pippins in a stone or wooden mortar,
put sugar to it, and wine vivinegar, then strain it through a fine thin cloth,
pretty thick, dish it in saucers, and scrape sugar on it.

Otherwise.

Mince sorrel and sage, and stamp them with bread, the yolks of hard eggs,
pepper, salt, and vinegar, but no sugar at all.

Or thus.

Juice of green wheat, lemon, bread, and sugar.

To make diverse sorts of Vinegar.
TAke good white wine, and fill a firkin half full, or a lesser vessel, leave
it unstopped, and set it in some hot place in the sun, or on the leads of a
house or gutter.

If you would desire to make vinegar in haste, put some salt, pepper, sour
leven mingled together, and a hot steel, stop it up, and let the sun come hot
to it.

If more speedy, put good wine into an earthen pot or pitcher, stop the mouth
with a piece of paste, and put it in a brass pan or pot, boil it half an hour,
and it will grow sour.

Or not boil it, and put into it a beet root, medlers, cervices, mulberries,
unripe flowers, a slice of barley bread hot out of the oven, or the blossoms of
cervices in their season, dry them in the sun in a glass vessel in the manner
of rosevinegar, fill up the glass with clear wine vinegar, white or claret
wine, and set it in the sun, or in a chimney by the fire.

To make Vinegar of corrupt Wine.
BOil it, and scum it very clean, boil away one third part, then put it in a
vessel, put to it some charnel, stop the vessel close, and in a short time it
will prove good vinegar.

To make Vinegar otherwise.
TAke six gallons of strong ale of the first running, set it abroad to cool,
and being cold, put barm to it, and head it very thoroughly; then tun it up in a
firkin, and lay it in the sun, then take four or five handfuls of beans, and
parch them on a fire-shovel or pan, being cut like chestnuts to roast, put them
into the vinegar as hot as you can, and stop the bunghole with clay; but first
put in a handful of rye leven, then strain a good handful of salt, and put in
also; let it stand in the sun from May to August, and then take it away.

Rose Vinegar.
KEep Roses dried, or dried Elder-flowers, put them into several double glasses
or stone-bottles, write upon them, and set them in the sun, by the fire, or in
a warm oven; when the vinegar is out, put in more flowers, put out the old, and
fill them up with vinegar again.

Pepper Vinegar.
PUt whole pepper in a fine cloth, bind it up and put it in the vessel or
bottle of vinegar the space of eight days.

Vinegar for Digestion and Health
TAke eight drams of sea onions, a quart of vinegar, and as much pepper as
onions, mints, and juniperberries.

To make strong Wine Vinegar into Balls.
TAke bramble briars when they are half ripe, dry them and make them into
powder, with a little strong vinegar, make little balls, and dry them in the
sun, and when you will use them, take wine and heat it, put in some of the ball
or a whole one, and it will be turned very speedily into strong vinegar.

To make Verjuyce.
TAke crabs as soon as the kernels turn black, and lay them in a heap to sweat,
pick them from stalks and rottenness; then in a long trough with stamping
beetels stamp them to mash, and make a bag of course hair cloth as square as
the Press, fill it with stamped crabs, and being well pressed, put it up in a
clean barrel or hogshead.

To make Mustard diverse ways.
HAve good seed, pick it, and wash it in cold water, drain it, and rub it dry
in a cloth very clean, then beat it in a mortar with strong wine vinegar; and
being fine beaten, strain it and keep it close covered. Or grind it in a
mustard quern, or a boul with a cannon bullet.

Otherwise.

Make it with grape verjuyce, common verjuyce, stale beer, ale, butter-milk,
white wine, claret, or juice of cherries.

Mustard of Dijon, or French Mustard.
THe seed being cleansed, stamp it in a mortar with vinegar and honey, then
take eight ounces of seed, two ounces of cinnamon, two of honey, and vinegar as
much as will serve good mustard not too thick, and keep it close covered in
little oyster barrels.

To make dry Mustard very pleasant in little Loaves or Cakes to carry in ones
Pocket, or to keep dry for use at any time.
TAke two ounces of seamy, half an ounce of cinnamon, and beat them in a mortar
very fine with a little vinegar and honey, make a perfect paste of it, and make
it into little cakes or loaves, dry them in the sun or in an oven, and when you
would use them, dissolve half a loaf or cake with some vinegar, wine, or
verjuyce.

Section 5.
The best way of making all manner of Sallets.

To make a grand Sallet of diverse Compounds.
TAke a cold roast capon and cut it into thin slices square and small, (or any
other roast meat, as chicken, mutton, veal, or neats tongue) mingle with it a
little minced taragon and an onion; then mince lettice as small as the capon,
mingle all together, and lay it in the middle of a clean scowred dish. Then lay
capers by themselves, olives by themselves, samphire by it self, broom-buds,
pickled mushrooms, pickled oysters, lemon, orange, raisins, almonds, blew figs,
Virginia Potato, caperons, crucifex pease, and the like, more or less, as
occasion serves, lay them by themselves in the dish round the meat in
partitions. Then garnish the dish sides with quarters of oranges and lemons, or
in slices, oil and vinegar beaten together, and poured on it over all.

On fish days, a roast, broild, or boild pike, boned, and being cold, slice it
as abovesaid.

Another way for a grand Sallet
TAke the buds of all good sallets herbs, capers, dates, raisins, almonds,
currants, figs, orangado. Then first of all lay it in a large dish, the herbs
being finely picked and washed, swing them in a clean napkin; then lay the
other materials round the dish, and amongst the herbs some of all the foresaid
fruits, some fine sugar, and on the top slic't lemon, and eggs scarce hard cut
in halves, and laid round the side of the dish, and scrape sugar over all; or
you may lay every fruit in partitions several.

Otherwise.

Dish first round the center slic't figs, then currants, capers, almonds, and
raisins together; next heyond that, olives, beets, cabbidge-lettice, cucumbers,
or slic't lemon carved; then oil and vinegar beaten together, the best oil you
can get, and sugar or none, as you please; garnish the brims of the dish with
orangado, slic't lemon jagged, olives stuck with slic't almonds, sugar or none.

Another grand Sallet.
TAke all manner of knots of buds of sallet herbs, buds of potherbs, or any
green herbs, as sage, mint, balm, burnet, violet leaves, red coleworts streaked
of diverse fine colors, lettice, any flowers, blanched almonds, blew figs,
raisins of the sun, currants, capers, olives: then dish the sallet in a heap or
pile, being mixed with some of the fruits, and all finely washed and swung in a
napkin, then about the center lay first slic't figs, next capers and currants,
then almonds and raisins, next olives, and lastly either jagged beets, jagged
lemons, jagged cucumber, or cabbidge lettice in quarters, good oil and wine
vinegar, sugar or none.

Otherwise.

The youngest and smallest leaves of spinach, the smallest also of sorrel, well
washed currants, and red beets round the center being finely carved, oil and
vinegar, and the dish garnished with lemon and beets.

Other grand Sallet.
TAke green purslan and pick it leaf by leaf, wash it and swing it in a napkin,
then being dished in a fair clean dish, and finely piled up in a heap in the
midst of it, lay round about the center of the sallet pickled capers, currants,
and raisins of the sun, washed, picked, mingled, and laid round it; about them
some carved cucumbers, in slices or halves, and laid round also. Then garnish
the dish brims with burrage or clove-jelly-flowers. Or otherwise with jagged
cucumber-peels, olives, capers, and raisins of the sun, then the best sallet
oil and wine vinegar.

Other grand Sallet.
ALL sorts of good herbs, the little leaves of red sage, the smallest leaves of
sorrel, and the leaves of parsley picked very small, the youngest and smallest
leaves of spinach, some leaves of burnet, the smallest leaves of lettice, white
endive and charvel all finely picked, washed, and swung in a strayner or clean
napkin, and well drained from the water; then dish it in a clean scowred dish,
and about the center, capers, currants, olives, lemons carved and slic't, boild
beet roots carved and slic't, and dished round also, with good oil and vinegar.

A grand Sallet otherwise.
TAke corn sallet, rampons, ellicksander-buds, pickled mushrooms, and make a
sallet of them; then lay the corn sallet through the middle of the dish from
side to side, and on the other side rampons, then ellicksander buds, and in the
other four quarters mushrooms, salt over all, and put good oil and vinegar to
it.

Other grand Sallet.
TAke the tenderest, smallest, and youngest ellicksanderbuds, and small Sallet
or young lettice mingled together being washed and picked, with some capers.
Pile it or lay it flat in the dish, first lay about the center olives, capers,
currants, and about those carved oranges and lemons, or in a cross partition
ways, and salt, run oil and vinegar over all.

Otherwise.

Boild parsnips in quarters laid round in the dish, and in the midst some small
sallet, or watercresses finely washed and picked, on the watercresses some
little small lettice finely picked and washed also, then some ellicksander-buds
in halves, and some in quarters, and between the quarters of the parsnips some
small lettice, some watercresses, and ellicksander-buds, oil and vinegar, and
round the dish some slices of parnsnips.

Another grand Sallet.
TAke small sallet of all good sallet herbs, then mince some white cabbidge
leaves, or striked coleworts, mingle them amongst the small sallet, or some
lilly-flowers slit with a pin; then first lay some minced cabbidge in a clean
scowred dish, and the minced fallet round about it; then some well washed and
picked capers, currants, olives, or none; then about the rest, a round of boild
red beets, oranges or lemons carved. For the garnish of the brim of the dish,
boild collyflowers, carved lemons, beets, and capers.

BEing finely picked short, well soaked in clean water, and swung dry, dish it
round in a fine clean dish, with capers and currants about it, carved lemon and
orange round that, and eggs upon the center not boild too hard, and parted in
halves, then oil and vinegar; over all scraping sugar, and trim the brim of the
dish.

A grand Sallet of Ellicksander-buds.
TAke large ellicksander-buds, and boil them in fair water after they be
cleansed and washed, but first let the water boil, then put them in, and being
boild, drain them on a dish bottom, or in a cullender; then have boild capers
and currants and lay them in the midst of a clean scowred dish, the buds parted
in two with a sharp knife, and laid round about upright, or one half on one
side, and the other against it on the other side, so also carved lemon, scrape
on sugar, and serve it with good oil and wine vinegar.

Other grand Sallet of Watercresses.
BEing finely picked, washed, and laid in the middle of a clean dish, with
slic't oranges and lemons finely carved one against the other, in partitions,
or round the dish, with some ellick sander-buds boild or raw, currants, capers,
oil, and vinegar, sugar, or none.

A grand Sallet of picked Capers.
PIcked capers and currants bashed and boild together, dished in the middle of a
clean dish, with red beets boild and jagg'd, and dished round the capers and
currants, as also jagg'd lemon, and serve it with oil and vinegar.

To pickle Samphire, Broom-buds, Kitkeys, Crucifex Pease, Purslane, or the like.
TAke samphire, and pick the branches from the dead leaves or straws, then lay
it in a pot or barrel, and make a strong brine of white or bay salt, in the
boiling scum it clean; being boild and cold put it to the samphire, cover it
and keep it for all the year, and when you have any occasion to use it, take
and boil it in fair water, but first let the water boil before you put it in,
being boild and become green, let it cool, then take it out of the water, and
put it in a little bain or double viol with a broad mouth, put strong wine
vinegar to it, close it up close and keep it.

Otherwise.

Put samphire in a brass pot that will contain it, and put to it as much wine
vinegar as water, but no salt; set it over a charcoal fire, cover it close, and
boil it till it become green, then put it up in a barrel with wine vinegar,
close on the head, and keep it for use.

To pickle Cucumbers.
PIckle them with salt, vinegar, whole pepper, dill-seed, some of the stalks
cut, charnel, fair water, and some sicamore leaves, and barrel them up close in
a barrel.

Pickled Quinces the best ways.
1. TAke Quinces not cored nor pared, boil them in fair water not too tender,
and put them up in a barrel, fill it up with their liquor, and close on the
head. 2. Pare them and boil them with white wine, whole cloves, cinnamon, and
slic't ginger, barrel them up and keep them. 3. In the juice of sweet apples,
not cored, but wiped, and put up raw. 4. In white wine barrelled up raw. 5.
Being pared and cored, boil them up in sweet wort and sugar, keep them in a
glazed pipkin close covered. 6. Core them and save the cores, cut some of the
crab quinces, and boil them after the quinces be parboild and taken up; then
boil the cores, and some of the crab quinces in quarters, the liquor being
boild, strain it through a strainer, put it in the barrel with the quinces, and
close up the barrel.
To pickle Lemons.
BOil them in water and salt, and put them up with white wine.

To pickle any kind of Flowers:
PUt them into a gally-pot or double glass, with as much sugar as they weigh;
fill them up with wine vinegar; to a pint of vinegar a pound of sugar, and a
pound of flowers; so keep them for sallets or boild meats in a double glass
covered over with a blade and leather.

To pickle Grapes, Gooseberries, Barberries, red and white Currants.
PIck them and put them in the juice of crab-cherries, grape verjuyce, or other
verjuyce, and then barrel them up.

To Candy Flowers for Sallets, as Violets, Cowslips, Clovegelly-flowers, Roses,
Primroses, Burrage, Bugloss, etc.
TAke weight for weight of sugar candy, or double refined sugar, being beaten
fine, searsed, and put in a silver dish with rosewater, set them over a
charcoal fire, and stir them with a silver spoon till they be candied, or boil
them in a candy sirrup height in a dish or skillet, keep them in a dry place
for your use, and when you use them for sallets put a little wine vinegar to
them and dish them.

For the compounding and candying the foresaid pickled and candied Sallets.
THough they may be served simply of themselves, and are both good and dainty,
yet for better curiosity and the finer ordering of a table, you may thus use
them.

First, if you would set forth a red flower that you know or have seen, you
shall take the pot of preserved gillyflowers, and suiting the colors
answerable to the flower, you shall proportion it forth, and lay the shape of a
flower with a purslane stalk, make the stalk of the flower, and the dimensions
of the leaves and branches with thin slices of cucumbers, make the leaves in
true proportion jagged or otherwise, and thus you may set forth some blown,
some in the bud, and some half blown, which will be very pretty and curious; if
yellow, set it forth with cowslips or primroses; if blew, take violets or
burrage: and thus of any flowers.

Section 6.
To make all manner of Carbanadoes, either of Flesh or Fowl; as also all manner
of fried Meats of Flesh, Collops, and Eggs, with the most exquisitest way of
making Pancakes, Fritters, and Tansies.

To Carbonado a Chine of Mutton.
TAke a chine of mutton, salt it and broil it on the embers, or toast it
against the fire; being finely broild, baste it, and bread it with fine grated
manchet, and serve it with gravy only.

To Carbonado a Shoulder of Mutton.
TAke a shoulder of mutton, half boil it, scotch it and salt it; save the
gravy, and broil it on a soft fire, being finely colored and fitted, make
sauce with butter, vinegar, pepper, and mustard.

To Carbonado a Rack of Mutton.
CUt it into steaks, salt and broil them on the embers, and being finely
soaked, dish them and make sauce of good mutton gravy, beat up thick with a
little juice of orange, and a piece of butter.

To Carbonado a Leg of Mutton.
CUt it round cross the bone about half an inch thick, then hack it with the
back of a knife, salt it, and broil it on the embers on a soft fire the space
of an hour; being finely broild, serve it with gravy sauce, and juice of orange.

Thus you may broil any hanch of Venison, and serve it with gravy only.

To broil a Chine of Veal.
CUt it in three or four pieces, lard them (or not) with small lard, season
them with salt, and broil them on a soft fire with some branches of sage and
rosemary between the gridiron and the chine; being broild, serve it with gravy,
beaten butter, and juice of lemon or orange.

To broil a Leg of Veal.
CUt it into rowels, or round the leg in slices as thick as ones finger, lard
them or not, then broil them softly on embers, and make sauce with beaten
butter, gravy, and juice of orange.

To Carbonado a Rack of Pork.
TAke a rack of pork, take off the skin, and cut it into steaks, then salt it,
and strew on some fennel-seeds whole, and broil it on a soft fire, being finely
broiled, serve it on wine vinegar and pepper.

To broil a Flank of Pork.
FLay it and cut it into thin slices, salt it, and broil it on the embers in a
dripping-pan of white paper, and serve it on the paper with vinegar and pepper.

To broil Chines of Pork.
BRoil them as you do the rack, but bread them, and serve them with vinegar and
pepper, or mustard and vinegar.

Or sometimes apples in slices, boild in beer and beaten butter unto a mash.

Or green sauce, cinnamon, and sugar.

Otherwise, sage and onions minced, with vinegar and pepper boild in strong
broth till they be tender.

Or minced onions boild in vinegar and pepper.

To broil a fat Venison.
TAke a half hanch, and cut the fattest part into thick slices half an inch
thick, salt and broil them on the warm embers, and being finely soaked, bread
them, and serve them with gravy only.

Thus you may broil a side of Venison, or boil a side fresh in water and salt,
then broil it and dredge it, and serve it with vinegar and pepper.

Broil the chine raw as you do the half hanch, bread it, and serve it with
gravy.

To fry Lambs or Kids Stones.
TAke the stones, parboil them, then mince them small, and fry them in sweet
butter; strain them with some cream, some beaten cinnamon, pepper, and grated
cheese being put to it when it is strained, then fry them, and being fried,
serve them with sugar and rose water.

Thus may you dress calves or lambs brains.

To Carbonado Land or Water Fowl.
BEing roasted, cut them up and sprinkle them with salt, then scotch and broil
them, and make sauce with vinegar and butter, or juice of orange.

To dress a Dish of Collops and Eggs the best way for service.
TAke fine young and well colored bacon of the ribs, the quantity of two
pound, cut it into thin slices, and lay them in a clean dish, toast them before
the fire fine and crisp; then poach the eggs in a fair scowred skillet white
and fine, dish them on a dish and plate, and lay on the collops, some upon
them, and some round the dish.

To broil Bacon on paper.
MAke the fashion of two dripping pans of two sheets of white paper, then take
two pound of fine interlarded bacon, pare off the top, and cut the bacon into
slices as thin as a card, lay them on the papers, then put them on a gridiron,
and broil them on the embers.

To broil Brawn.
CUt a collar into six or seven slices round the collar, and lay it on a plate
in the oven, being broild, serve it with juice of orange, pepper, gravy, and
beaten butter.

To fry Eggs.
TAke fifteen eggs and beat them in a dish, then have interlarded bacon cut
into square bits like dice, and fry them with chopped onions, and put to them
cream, nutmeg, cloves, cinnamon, pepper, and sweet herbs chopped small, (or no
herbs nor spice) being fried, serve them on a clean dish, with sugar and juice
of orange.

To fry an Egg as round as a ball.
TAke a broad frying posnet, or a deep frying pan, and three pints of clarified
butter or sweet suet, heat it as hot as you do for fritters; then take a stick
and stir it till it run-round like to a whirle pit; then break an egg into the
middle of the whirle, and turn it round with your stick till it be as hard as a
soft poached egg, and the whirling round of the butter or suet will make it as
round as a ball; then take it up with a slice, and put it in a warm pipkin or
dish, set it a leaning against the fire, so you may do as many as you please,
they will keep half an hour yet be soft; you may serve them with fried or
toasted collops.

To make the best Fritters.
TAke good mutton broth being cold, and no fat, mix it with flower and eggs,
some salt, beaten nutmeg and ginger, beat them well together, then have apples
or pippins, pare and core them, and cut them into dice-work, or square bits,
and when you will fry them, put them in the butter, and fry them in clear
clarified suet, or clarified butter, fry them white and fine, and sugar them.

Otherwise.

Take a pint of sack, a pint of ale, some ale yeast or barm, nine eggs yolks
and whites beaten very well: the eggs first, then all together, then put in
some ginger, salt, and fine flower, let it stand an hour or two, then put in
apples, and fry them in beef suet clarified, or clarified butter.

Other Fritters.

Take a quart of flower, three pints of cold mutton broth, a nutmeg, a quartern
of cinnamon, a race of ginger, five eggs, and salt, and strain the foresaid
materials; put to them twenty slic't pippins, and fry them in six pound of suet.

Sometimes make the batter of cream, eggs, cloves, mace, nutmeg, saffron, barm,
ale, and salt.

Other times flower, grated bread, mace, ginger, pepper, salt, barm, saffron,
milk, sack, or white wine.

Sometimes you may use marrow steeped in musk and rose water, and pleasant
pears or quinces.

Or use raisins, currants, and apples cut like square dice, and as small, in
quarters or in halves.

Fritters in the Italian Fashion.
TAke a pound of the best holland cheese or parmisan grated, a pint of fine
flower, and as much fine biscuit bread muskefied beaten to powder, the yolks of
four or five eggs, some saffron and rose water, sugar, cloves, mace, and cream,
make it into a stiff paste, then make it into balls, and fry them in clarified
butter. Or stamp this paste in a mortar, and make the balls as big as a nutmeg
or musket bullet.

Otherwise in the Italian Fashion.

Take a pound of rice and boil it in a pint of cream, being boild something
thick, lay it abroad in a clean dish to cool, then stamp it in a stone mortar,
with a pound of good fat cheese grated, some musk, and yolks of four or five
hard eggs, sugar, and grated manchet or biscuit bread; then make it into balls,
the paste being stiff, and you may color them with marigold flowers stamped,
violets, blew bottels, carnations or pinks, and make them balls of two or three
colors. If the paste be too tender, work more bread to them and flower, fry
them, and serve them with scraping sugar and juice of orange. Garnish these
balls with stock-fritters.

Fritters of Spinach.
TAke spinach, pick and wash it, then set on a skillet of fair water, and when
it boileth put in the spinach, being tender boild put it in a cullender to
drain away the liquor; then mince it small on a fair board, put it in a dish
and season it with cinnamon, ginger, grated manchet, six eggs with the whites
and yolks, a little cream or none, make the stuff pretty thick, and put in some
boild currants. Fry it by spoonfuls, and serve it on a dish and plate with sugar.

Thus also you may make fritters of beets, clary, burrage, bugloss, or lettice.

To make Stock Fritters, or Fritters of Arms.
STrain half a pint of fine flower, with as much water, and make the batter no
thicker then thin cream; then heat the brass moulds in clarified butter; being
hot wipe them, dip the moulds half way in the batter and fry them, to garnish
any boild fish meats, or stewed oysters. View their form.

form of fish meats or stewed oysters

Other fried Dishes of diverse forms, or Stock Fritters in the Italian Fashion.
TAke a quart of fine flower, and strain it with some almond milk, leven, white
wine, sugar, and saffron; fry it on the foresaid moulds, or dip clary in it,
sage leaves, or branches of rosemary, then fry them in clarified butter.

Little Pasties, Balls, or Toasts fried.
TAke a boild or raw pike, mince it and stamp it with some good fat old cheese
grated, season them with cinnamon, sugar, boild currants, and yolks of hard eggs,
make this stuff into balls, toasts, or pasties, and fry them.

Otherwise.

Make your paste into little pasties, stars, half moons, scollops, balls, or
suns.

Or take grated bread, cake, or biscuit bread, and fat cheese grated, almond
paste, eggs, cinnamon, saffron, and fry them as abovesaid.

Otherwise Pasties to fry.

Take twenty apples or pippins, pared, cored, and cut into bits like square
dice, stew them in butter, and put to them three ounces of biscuit bread, stamp
all together in a stone mortar, with six ounces of fat cheese grated, six yolks
of eggs, cinnamon, six ounces of sugar, make it in little pasties, or half
moons, and fry them,

Otherwise.

Take a quart of fine flour, wet it with almond milk, sack, white wine,
rosewater, saffron, and sugar, make thereof a paste into balls, cakes, or any
cut or carved branches, and fry them in clarified butter, and serve them with
fine scraping sugar.

To fry Paste out of a Seringe or Butter-squirt.
TAke a quart of fine flour and a little leven, dissolve it in warm water, and
put it to the flour, with some white wine, salt, saffron, a quarter of butter,
and two ounces of sugar; boil the foresaid things in a skillet as thick as a
hasty pudding, and in the boiling stir it continually, being cold beat it in
mortar, fry it in clarified butter, and run it into the butter through a
butter-squirt.

To make Pancakes.
TAke three pints of cream, a quart of flour, eight eggs, three nutmegs, a
spoonful of salt, and two pound of clarified butter; the nutmegs being beaten,
strain them with the cream, flour, and salt, fry them into pancakes, and serve
them with fine sugar.

Otherwise.

Take three pints of spring water, a quart of flour, mace and nutmeg beaten,
six cloves, a spoonful of salt, and six eggs, strain them, and fry them into
pancakes.

Or thus.

Make stiff paste of fine flour, rose water, cream, saffron, yolks of eggs,
salt, and nutmeg, and fry them in clarified butter.

Otherwise.

Take three pints of cream, a quart of flour, five eggs, salt, three spoonfuls
of ale, a race of ginger, cinnamon as much, strain these materials, then fry
them and serve them with fine sugar.

To make a Tansie the best way.
TAke twenty eggs, and take away five whites, strain them with a quart of good
thick: sweet cream, and put to it a grated nutmeg, a race of ginger grated, as
much cinnamon beaten fine, and a penny white loaf grated also, mix them all
together with a little salt, then stamp some green wheat with some tansie
herbs, strain it into the cream and eggs, and stir all together; then take a
clean frying pan, and a quarter of a pound of butter, melt it, and put in the
tansie, and stir it continually over the fire with a slice, ladle, or saucer,
chop it, and break it as it thickens, and being well incorporated put it out of
the pan into a dish, and chop it very fine; then make the frying pan very
clean, and put in some more butter, melt it, and fry it whole or in spoonfuls;
being finely fried on both sides, dish it up, and sprinkle it with rose
vinegar, grape verjuyce; elder vinegar, cowslip vinegar, or the juice of three
or four oranges, and strew on good store of fine sugar.

Otherwise.

Take a little tansie, featherfew, parsley, and violets, stamp and strain them
with eight or ten eggs and salt, fry them in sweet butter, and serve them on a
plate and dish with some sugar.

A Tansie for Lent.
TAke tansie and all manner of herbs as before, and beaten almond, stamp them
with the spawn of a Pike or Carp, and strain them with the crumb of a fine
manchet; sugar, and rose water, and fry it in sweet butter.

Toasts of diverse sorts. First, in Butter or Oil.
TAke a cast of fine roles or round manchets, chip them. and cut them into
toasts, fry them in clarified butter, frying oil, or sallet oil, but before you
fry them, dip them in fair water, and being fried, serve them in a clean dish
piled one upon another, and sugar between.

Otherwise.

Toast them before the fire, and run them over with butter, sugar, or oil.

Cinnamon Toasts.
CUt fine thin toasts, then toast them on a gridiron, and lay them in ranks in
a dish, put to them fine beaten cinnamon mixed with sugar and some claret, warm
them over the fire, and serve them hot.

French Toasts.
CUt French Bread, and toast it in pretty thick toasts on a clean gridiron, and
serve them steeped in claret, sack, or any wine, with sugar and juice of orange.

Section 7.
The most Excellent Ways of making all Sorts of Puddings.

A boild Pudding.
BEat the yolks of three eggs with rose water, and half a pint of cream, warm
it with a piece of butter as big as a walnut, and when it is melted mix the
eggs and that together, and season it with nutmeg, sugar, and salt; then put in
as much bread as will make it as thick as batter, and lay on as much flour as
will lie on a shilling, then take a double cloth, wet it and flour it, tie it
fast, and put it in the pot; when it is boild; serve it up in a dish with
butter, verjuyce, and sugar.

Otherwise.

Take flour, sugar, nutmeg, salt, and water, mix them together with a spoonful
of gum-dragon, being steeped all night in rose water, strain it, then put in
suet, and boil it in a cloth.

To boil a Pudding otherwise.
TAke a pint of cream or milk, and boil it with a stick of cinnamon, being
boild, let it cool, then put in six eggs, take out three whites, and beat the
eggs before you put them in the milk, then slice a penny roll very thin, and
being slic't beat all together, then put in some sugar and flour the cloth;
being boild for sauce, put butter, sack, and sugar, beat them up together, and
scrape sugar on it.

Other Pudding.

Sift grated bread through a cullender, and mix it with flour, minced dates,
currants, nutmeg, cinnamon, minced suet, new milk warm, sugar, and eggs, take
away some of the whites, and work all together, then take half the pudding for
one side, and half for the other side, and make it round like a loaf, then take
butter and put it into the midst, and the other side aloft on the top, when the
liquor boils, tie it in a fair cloth and boil it, being boild cut it in two,
and so serve it in.

To make a Cream Pudding to be boild.
TAke a quart of cream and boil it with mace, nutmeg, and ginger quartered, put
to it eight eggs, and but four whites beaten, a pound of almonds blanched,
beaten and strained in with the cream, a little rose water, sugar, and a
spoonful of fine flour; then take a thick napkin, wet it, and rub it with
flour, and tie the pudding up in it; being boild, make sauce for it with sack,
sugar and butter beat up thick together with the yolk of an egg, then blanch
some almonds, slice them, and stick the pudding with them very thick, and
scrape sugar on it.

To make a green boild Pudding of sweet Herbs.
TAke and steep a penny white loaf in a quart of cream, and only eight yolks
of eggs, some currants, sugar, cloves, beaten mace, dates, juice of spinach,
saffron, cinnamon, nutmeg, sweet marjoram, time, savory, penniroyal minced very
small, and some salt, boil it with beef suet, marrow, (or none) These puddings
are excellent for stuffings of rroast or boild Poultrey, Kid, Lamb, or Turkey,
Veal, or Breasts of Mutton.

To make a Pudding in haste.
TAke a pint of good milk or cream, put thereto a handful of raisins of the
sun, with as many currants, and a piece of butter, then grate a manchet and a
nutmeg, and put thereto a handful of flour; when the milk boils, put in the
bread, let it boil a quarter of an hour, then dish it up on beaten butter.

To make a Quaking Pudding.
SLice the crumbs of a penny manchet, and infuse it three or four hours in a
pint of scalding hot cream, covering it close, then break the bread with a
spoon very small, and put to it eight eggs, and but only four whites, beat
them together very well, and season it with sugar, rose water, and grated
nutmeg: If you think it too stiff, put in some cold cream, and beat them well
together; then wet the bag or napkin and flour it, put in the pudding, tie it
hard, and boil it half an hour, then dish it, and put to it butter, rose water,
and sugar, and serve it up to the table.

Otherwise baked.
SCald the bread with a pint of cream as abovesaid, then put to it a pound of
almonds blanched and beaten small with rose water in a stone mortar, or
wallnuts, and season it with sugar, nutmeg, salt, the yolks of six eggs, a
quarter of a pound of dates slic't and cut small, a handful of currants boiled,
and some marrow minced, beat them all together and bake it.

To make a Quaking Pudding either boild or baked.
TAke a pint of good thick cream, boil it with some large mace, whole cinnamon,
and slic't nutmeg, then take six eggs, and but three whites, beat them well,
and grate some stale manchet, the quantity of a half penny loaf, put it to the
eggs with a spoonful of flour, then season the cream according to your own
taste with sugar and salt; beat all well together, then wet a cloth or butter
it, and put in the pudding when the water boils; an hour will bake or boil it.

Otherwise.

Take a penny white loaf, pare off the crust, and slice the crumb, steep it in
a quart of good thick cream warmed, some beaten nutmeg, six eggs, whereof but
two whites, and some salt. Sometimes you may use boild currants, or boild
raisins.

If to bake, make it a little stiffer, sometimes add saffron; on Flesh Days
use beef suet, or marrow; (or neither) for a boild pudding butter the napkin
being first wetted in water, and bind it up like a ball, an hour will boil it.

To make a Shaking Pudding.
TAke a pint of cream, and boil it with large mace, slic't nutmeg and ginger,
put in a few almonds blanched and beaten with rose water, strain them all
together, then put to it slic't ginger, grated bread, salt, and sugar, flour
the napkin or cloth, and put in the pudding, tie it hard, and put it in boiling
water, (as you must do all puddings) then serve it up with verjuyce, butter,
and sugar.

To make a hasty Pudding in a Bag.
BOil a pint of thick cream with a spoonful of flour, season it with nutmeg,
sugar, and salt, wet the cloth and flour it, then pour in the cream being hot
into the cloth, and when it is boild, butter it as a hasty Pudding. If it be
well made, it will be as good as a Custard.

To make a hasty Pudding otherwise.
GRate a two penny manchet, and mingle it with a quarter of a pint of flour,
nutmeg, and salt, a quarter of sugar, and half a pound of butter; then set it a
boiling on the fire in a clean scowred skillet a quart or three pints of good
thick cream, and when it boils put in the foresaid materials, stir them
continually, and being half boild, put in six yolks of eggs, stir them
together, and when it is boild, serve it in a clean scowred dish, and stick it
with some preserved orange-peel thin sliced, run it over with beaten butter and
scraping sugar.

To make an Almond Pudding.
BLanch and beat a pound of almonds, strain them with a quart of cream, a
grated penny manchet searsed, four eggs, some sugar, nutmeg grated, some dates,
and salt; boil it, and serve it in a dish with beaten butter, stick it with
some muskedines or wafers, and scraping sugar.

Otherwise.

Take a pound of almond paste, some grated bisketbread, cream, rose water,
yolks of eggs, beaten cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg, some boild currants, pistaches,
and musk, boil it in a napkin, and serve it as the former.

To make an Almond Pudding in Guts.
TAke a pound of blanched almonds, beat them very small with rose water and a
little good new milk or cream, with two or three blades of mace, and some
sliced nutmeg; when it is boild, take the spice clean from it, then grate a
penny loaf and searce it through a cullender, put it into the cream, and let it
stand till it be pretty cool, then put in the almonds, five or six yolks of
eggs, salt, sugar, and good store of marrow or beef suet finely minced, and
fill the guts.

To make a Rice Pudding to bake.
BOil the rice tender in milk, then season it with nutmeg, mace, rose water,
sugar, yolks of eggs with half the whites, some grated bread, and marrow minced
with ambergreese, and bake it in a buttered dish.

To make Rice Pudding in guts.
BOil half a pound of rice with three pints of milk, and a little beaten mace,
boil it until the rice be dry, but never stir it, if you do, you must stir it
continually, or else it will burn; pour your rice into a cullender or strainer,
that the moisture may run clean from it, then put to it six eggs, (put away the
whites of three) half a pound of sugar, a quarter of a pint of rose water, a
pound of currants, and a pound of beef suet shred small; season it with nutmeg,
cinnamon, and salt; then dry the small guts of a hog, shecp, or beefer, and
being finely cleansed for the purpose, steep and fill them, cut the guts a foot
long, and fill them three quarters full, tie both ends together, and put them
in boiling water, a quarter of an hour will boil them.

Otherwise.

Boil the rice first in water, then in milk, after with salt in cream; then
take six eggs, grated bread, good store of marrow minced small, some nutmeg,
sugar, and salt; fill the guts, put them into a pipkin, and boil them in milk
and rose water.

Otherwise.

Steep it in fair water all night, then boil it in new milk, and drain out the
milk through a cullender, then mince a good quantity of beef suet not too
small, and put it into the rice in some bowl or tray, with currants being first
boild, yolks of eggs, nutmeg, cinnamon, sugar, and barberries mingled all
together; then wash the second guts, fill them and boil them.

To make a Cinnamon Pudding,
TAke and steep a penny white loaf in a quart of cream, six yolks of eggs, and
but two whites, dates, half an ounce of beaten cinnamon, and some almond paste.
Sometimes add rose water, salt, and boild currants, either bake or boil it for
stuffings.

To make a Haggas Pudding.
TAke a calves chaldron being well scowred or boild, mince it being cold very
fine and small, then take four or five eggs, and leave out half the whites,
thick cream, grated bread, sugar, salt, currants, rose water, some beefsuet or
marrow, (and if you will) sweet marjoram, time, parsley, and mix all together;
then having a sheeps maw ready dressed, put it in and boil it a little.

Otherwise.

Take good store of parsley, time, savory, four or five onions, and sweet
marjoram, chop them with some whole oatmeal; then add to them pepper, and
salt, and boil them in a napkin, being boild tender, butter it, and serve it on
sippets.

To make a Chiveridge Pudding.
LAy the fattest of a hog in fair water and salt to scower them, then take the
longest and fattest gut, and stuff it with nutmeg, sugar, ginger, pepper, and
slic't dates, boil them and serve them to the table.

To make Liveridge Puddings.
BOil a hogs liver, and let it be thoroughly cold, then grate and sift it
through a cullender, put new milk to it, and the fleck of a hog minced small,
put it to the liver and some grated bread, divide the meat in two parts, then
take store of herbs, mince them fine, and put the herbs into one part with
nutmeg, mace, pepper, anniseed, rose water, cream, and eggs, fill them up and
boil them. To the other part or sort put barberries, slic't dates, currants,
cream, and eggs.

Other Liveridge Puddings.
BOil a hogs liver very dry, and when it is cold grate it, and take as much
grated manchet as liver, sift them through a cullender, and season them with
cloves, mace, and cinnamon, as much of all the other spices, half a pound of
sugar, a pound and half of currants, half a pint of rose water, three pound of
beef suet minced small, eight eggs, and but four whites.

A Swan or Goose Pudding.
STrain the swan or goose blood, and steep with it oatmeal or grated bread in
milk or cream, with nutmeg, pepper, sweet herbs minced, suet, rose water,
minced lemon-peels very small, and a small quantity of corianderseed. This for
a pudding in a swan or gooses neek.

To make a forced Pudding.
MInce a leg of mutton with sweet herbs, grated bread, minced dates, currants,
raisins of the sun, a little orangado or preserved lemon sliced thin, a few
coriander-seeds, nutmeg, pepper, and ginger, mingle all together with some
cream and raw eggs, and work it together like a pasty, then wrap the meat in a
caul of mutton or veal, and so you may either boil or bake them. If you bake
them, indorse them with yolks of eggs, rose water, and sugar, and stick them
with little sprigs of rosemary and cinnamon.

To make a Pudding of Veal.
MInce raw veal very fine, and mingle it with lard cut into the form of dice,
then mince some sweet marjoram, pennyroyal, cammomile, winter savory, nutmeg,
ginger, pepper, salt, work all together with good store of beaten cinnamon,
sugar, barberries, sliced figs, blanched almonds, half a pound of beef suet
finely minced, put these into the guts of a fat mutton or hog well cleansed,
and cut an inch and a half long, set them a boiling in a pipkin of claret wine
with large mace; being almost boild, have some boild grapes in small bunches,
and barberries in knots, then dish them on French Bread being scalded with the
broth of some good mutton gravy, and lay them on garnish of slic't lemons.

To make a Pudding of Wine in guts.
SLice the crumbs of two manchets, and take half a pint of wine, and some
sugar, the wine must be scalded; then take eight eggs, and beat them with
rose water, put to them sliced dates, marrow, and nutmeg, mix all together, and
fill the guts to boil.

Bread Pudding in guts.
TAke cream and boil it with mace, and mix beat almonds with rose water, then
take cream, eggs, nutmeg, currants, salt, and marrow, mix them with as much
bread as you think fit, and fill the guts.

To make an Italian Pudding.
TAke a fine manchet and cut it in square pieces like dice, then put to it half
a pound of beef suet minced small, raisins of the sun, cloves, mace, minced
dates, sugar, marrow, rose water, eggs, and cream, mingle all these together,
put them in a buttered dish, in less then an hour it will be baked, then when
you serve it scrape sugar on it.

Other pudding in the Italian fashion with blood of Beast or Fish.
TAke half a pound of grated cheese, a penny manchet grated, sweet herbs
chopped very small, cinnamon, pepper, salt, nutmeg, cloves, mace, four eggs,
sugar, and currants, bake it in a dish or pie, or boil it in a napkin and bind
it up like a ball, being boild serve it with beaten butter, sugar, and beaten
cinnamon.

To make a French Pudding.
TAke half a pound of raisins of the sun, a penny white loaf pared and cut into
dice-work, half a pound of beef suet finely minced, three ounces of sugar,
eight slic't dates, a grain of musk, twelve or sixteen lumps of marrow salt,
half a pint of breame, three eggs beaten with it and powered on the pudding,
cloves, mace, nutmeg, salt, and a pun-water or a pippin or two pared, slic't,
and put in the bottom of the dish before you bake the pudding.

To make a French Barley Pudding.
BOil the Barley, and put to one quart of barley a manchet grated, then beat a
pound of almonds, and strain them with cream, then take eight eggs and but four
whites, and beat them with rose water, season it with nutmeg, mace, salt, and
marrow, or beef suet cut small, mingle all together, then fill the guts and
boil them.

To make an excellent Pudding.
TAke crumbs of white bread, as much fine flower, the yolks of four eggs, but
one white, and as much good cream as will temper it as thick as you would make
pancake batter, then butter the dish, bake it, and scrape sugar on it being
baked.

Puddings of Swines Lights.
PArboil the lights, mince them very small with suet, and mix them with grated
bread, cream, currants, eggs, nutmeg, salt, and rose water, and fill the guts.

To make an Oatmeal Pudding.
PIck a quart of whole oatmeal, being finely picked and cleansed, steep it in
warm milk all night, next morning oatmeal pudding drain it, and boil it in
three pints of cream, being boild and cold, put to it six yolks of eggs, and
but three whites, cloves, mace, saffron, salt, dates slic't, and sugar, boil it
in a napkin, and boil it as the bread pudding, serve it with beaten butter, and
stick it with slic't dates, and scrape sugar; or you may bake these foresaid
materials in dish, pie, etc.

Sometimes add to this pudding raisins of the sun, and all manner of sweet
herbs chopped small, being seasoned as before.

Other Oatmeal Pudding.
TAke great oatmeal, pick it and scald in in cream, being first put in a dish
or basin, season it with nutmeg, cinnamon, ginger, pepper, and currants, bake it
in a dish or boil it in a napkin, being baked or boiled, serve it with beaten
butter and scraping sugar.

Otherwise.

Season it with cloves, mace, saffron, salt, and yolks of eggs, and but five
that have whites, and some cream to steep the groats in, boil it in a napkin,
or bake it in a dish or pie.

To make Oatmeal-Pudding-pies.
STeep oatmeal in warm milk three or four hours, then strain some blood into it
of flesh or fish, mix it with oatmeal pudding pies cream, and add to it suet
minced small, sweet herbs chopped fine, as time, parsley, spinach, succory,
endive, strawberry leaves, violet leaves, pepper, cloves, mace, fat beef suet,
and four eggs, mingle all together, and so bake them.

To make an Oatmeal-pudding boild.
TAke the biggest oatmeal, mince what herbs you like best and mix with it,
season it with pepper and salt, tie it straight in a bag, and when it is boild,
butter it and serve it up.

Oatmeal Puddings otherwise of fish or flesh blood.
TAke a quart of whole oatmeal, steep it in warm milk over night, and then
drain the groats from it, boil them in a quart or three pints of good cream;
then the oatmeal being boild and cold, have time, pennyroyal, parsley, spinach,
savory, endive, marjoram, sorrel, succory, and strawberry leaves, of each a
little quantity, chop them fine and put them to the oatmeal, with some fennil
seed, pepper, cloves, mace, and salt, boil it in a napkin, or bake it in dish,
pie, or guts.

Sometimes of the former pudding you may leave out some of the herbs, and add
these, pennyroyal, savory, leeks, a good big onion, sage, ginger, nutmeg,
pepper, salt, either for fish or flesh days, with butter or beef suet, boild
or baked in dish, napkin, or pie.

To make a baked Pudding.
TAke a pint of cream, warm it, and put to it eight dates minced, four eggs,
marrow, rose water, nutmegs raced and beaten, mace, and salt, butter the dish,
and put it in; and if you please, lay puff paste on it, and scrape sugar on it,
and in it.

To make a bake Pudding otherwise.
TAke a pint and a half of cream, and a pound of butter, set them on the fire
till the butter be melted, then take three or four eggs, season it with nutmeg,
rose water, sugar, and salt, make it as thin as pancake batter, butter the
dish, and baste it with a garnish of paste about it.

Otherwise.

Take a penny loaf, pare it, slice it, and put it into a quart of cream with a
little rose water, break it very small, then take four ounces of almond paste,
and put in eight eggs beaten, the marrow of three or four marrowbones, three or
four pippins slic't thin, or what way you please, mingle these together with a
little ambergreece and butter, then dish and bake it.

Otherwise.

Take a quart of cream, put thereto a pound of beef suet minced small, put it
into the cream, and season it with nutmeg, cinnamon, and rose water, put to it
eight eggs, and but four whites, and two grated manchets; mingle them well
together, and put them in a buttered dish, bake it, and being baked, scrape on
sugar, and serve it.

To make Black Puddings.
TAke half the oatmeal, pick it, and take the blood while it is warm from the
hog, strain it and put it in the oatmeal as soon as you can, let it stand all
night; then take the other part of the oatmeal, pick it also, and boil it in
milk till it be tender, and all the milk consumed, then put it to the blood and
stir it well together, put in good store of beef or hog suet, and season it
with good pudding herbs, salt, pepper, and fennil-seed, fill not the guts too
full, and boil them.

To make Black Puddings otherwise.
TAke the blood of the hog while it is warm, put in some salt, and when it is
thorough cold put in the groats or oatmeal well picked; let it stand soaking
all night, then put in the herbs, which must be rosemary, time, pennyroyal,
savory, and fennel, make the blood soft with putting in some good cream until
the blood look pale; then beat four or five eggs whites and all, and season it
with cloves, mace, pepper, fennil-seed, and put good store of hogs fat or
beef suet to the stuff, cut not the fat too small.

To make white Puddings an excellent way.
AFter the hogs humbles are tender boild, take some of the lights with the
heart and all the flesh about them, picking from them all the sinnewy skins;
then chop the meat as small as you can, and put to it a little of the liver
very finely searced, some grated nutmeg, four or five yolks of eggs, a pint of
very good cream, two or three spoonfuls of sack, sugar, cloves, mace, nutmeg,
cinnamon, carraway-seed, a little rose water, good store of hogs fat, and some
salt; roll it in rouls two hours before you go to fill them in the guts, and
lay the guts in steep in rose water till you fill them.

Section 8.
The rarest Ways of making all manner of Souces and Jellies.

To souce a Brawn.
TAke a fat brawn of two or three years growth, and bone the sides, cut off the
head close to the ears, and cut five collers of a side, bone the hinder leg, or
else five collers will not be deep enough, cut the collers an inch deeper in
the belly then on the back; for when the collers come to boiling, they will
shrink more in the belly then in the back, make the collers very even when you
bind them up, not big at one end, and little at the other, but fill them
equally, and lay them again a soaking in fair water; before you bind them up,
let them be well watered the space of two days, and twice a day soak and
scrape them in warm water, then cast them in cold fair water, before you roll
them up in collers, put them into white clouts, or sow them up with white tape.

Or bone him whole, and cut him cross the flitches, make but four or five
collers in all, and boil them in clothes, or bind them up with white tape;
then have your boiler ready, make it boil, and put in your collers of the
biggest bulk first, a quarter of an hour before the other lesser, boil them at
their first putting in the space of a hour with a quick fire, and keep the
boiler continually filled up with warm clean liquor, scum off the fat clean
still as it rises; after an hour let it boil leasurely, and keep it still
filled up to the brim; being fine and tender boild, that you may put a straw
through it, draw your fire, and let your brawn rest till the next morning, then
being between hot and cold, take it into moulds of deep hoops, bind them about
with packthred, and being cold, take them out and put them in souce-drink made
of boild oatmeal ground or beaten, and bran boild in fair water; being cold,
strain it through a cullender into the tub or earthen pot, put salt to it, and
close up the vessel close from the air.

Or you may make other souce-drink of whey and salt beaten together, it will
make your brawn look more white and better.

To make Pig Brawn.
TAke a white or red pig, for a spotted is not so handsome, take a good large
fat one, and being scalded and drawn, bone it whole, but first cut off the head
and the hinder quarters, (and leave the bone in the hinder quarters) the rest
being boned cut it into two collers overthwart both the sides, or bone the
whole pig but only the head; then wash them in diverse waters, and let it soak
in clean water two hours, the blood being well soaked out, take them and dry
the collers in a clean cloth, and season them in the inside with minced
lemon peel and salt, role them up, and put them into fine clean clouts, but
first make your collers very equal at both ends, round and even, bind them up
at the ends and middle hard and close with packthred; then let your pan boil
and put in the collers, boil them with water and salt, and keep it filled up
with warm water as you do the brawn, scum off the fat clean, and being tender
boild put them in a whoop as deep as the collar, bind it and frame it even;
being cold put it into your souce-drink made of whey and salt, or oatmeal boild
and strained, then put them in a pipkin or little barrel, and stop them close
from the air.

When you serve it, dish it on a dish and plate, the two collers, two quarters
and head, or make but two collers of the whole pig.

To garnish Brawn or Pig Brawn.
LEach your brawn, and dish it on a plate in a fair clean dish, then put a
rosemary branch on the top being first dipped in the white of an egg well
beaten to froath, or wet in water and sprinkled with flour, or a sprig of
rosemary gilt with gold; the brawn spotted also with gold and silver leaves, or
let your sprigs be of a straight sprig of ewe tree, or a straight firs bush,
and put about the brawn stuck round with bay leaves three ranks round, and
spotted with red and yellow jelly about the dish sides, also the same jelly and
some of the brawn leached, jagged, or cut with tin moulds, and carved lemons,
oranges, barberries, bay leaves gilt, red beets, pickled barberries, pickled
gooseberries, or pickled grapes.

To souce a Pig.
TAke a pig being scalded, cut off the head, and part it down the back, draw it
and bone it, then the sides being well cleansed from the blood, and soaked in
several clean waters, take the pig and dry the sides, season them with nutmeg,
ginger, and salt, roll them and bind them up in clean clouts as the pig brawn
aforesaid, then have as much water as will cover it in a boiling pan two inches
over, and two bottles of white wine over and above; first let the water boil,
then put in the collers with salt, mace, slic't ginger, parsley-roots, and
fennil-roots scraped and picked; being half boiled, put in two quarts of white
wine, and when it is boild quite, put in slices of lemon to it, and the
whole-peel of a lemon.

Otherwise in Collers.
SEason the sides with beaten nutmeg, salt, and ginger, or boil the sides whole
and not bone them; boil also a piece or breast of veal with them, being well
joynted and soaked two hours in fair water, boil it in half wine and half
water, mace, slic't ginger, parsley and fennel roots, being boild leave it in
this souce, and put some slic't lemon to it, with the whole pieces; when it is
cold serve it with yellow, red, and white jelly, barberries, slic't lemon, and
lemon peel.

Or you may make but one collar of both the sides to the hinder quarters, or
bone the two sides and make but two collers of all, and save the head only
whole, or souce a pig in quarters or halves, or make of a good large fat pig
but one collar only, and the head whole.

Or souce it with two quarts of white wine to a gallon of water, put in your
wine when your pig is almost boild, and put to it four maces, a few cloves, two
races of slic't ginger, salt, a few bay leaves, whole pepper, some slices of
lemon, and lemon peel; before you boil your pig, season the sides or collers
with nutmeg, salt, cloves, and mace.

To souce a Pig otherwise.
SCald it and cut it in four quarters, bone it, and let it lie in water a day
and a night, then roll it up (like brawn) with sage leaves, lard in thin
slices, and some grated bread mixed with the juice of an orange, beaten nutmeg,
mace, and salt; roll it up in the quarters of the pig very hard, and bind it
up with tape, then boil it with fair water, white wine, large mace, slic't
ginger, a little lemon peel, a faggot of sweet herbs, and salt; being boild put
it in an earthen pot to cool in the liquor, and souce there two days, then
dish it out on plates, or serve it in collers with mustard and sugar.

Otherwise.

Season the sides with cloves, mace, and salt, then roll it in collers or sides
with the bones in it; then take to two gallons of water a pottle of white wine,
and when the liquor boils put in the pig, with mace, cloves, slic't ginger,
salt, bay leaves, and whole pepper; being half boild, put in the wine, etc.

Otherwise.

Season the collers with chopped sage, beaten nutmeg, pepper, and salt.

To Souce or Jelly a Pig in the Spanish Fashion.
TAke a Pig being scalded, boned, and chined down the back, then soke the
collers clean from the blood the space of two hours, dry them in a clean
cloth, and season the sides with pepper, salt, and minced sage; then have two
dried neats tongues, that are boild tender and cold, that they look fine and
red, pare them, and slice them from end to end the thickness of a half-crown
piece, lay them on the inside of the seasoned pig, one half of the tongue for
one side, and the other for the other side; then make two collers and bind
them up in fine white clouts, boil them as you do the soust pigs with wine,
water, salt, slic't ginger, and mace, keep it dry, or in souce drink of the pig
brawn.

If dry serve it in slices as thick as a trencher cut round the collar, or
slices in jelly, and make jelly of the liquor wherein it was boild, adding to
it juice of lemon, isingglass, spices, sugar, clarified with eggs, and run it
through the bag.

How to divide a Pig into Collers diverse ways either for Pig, Brawn, or Soust
Pig.
1. CUt a large fat Bore Pig into one collar only, bone it whole and not chine
it, the head only cut off. 2. Take off the hinder quarters and buttocks with
the bones in them, bone all the rest whole, only the head cut off. 3. Take off
the hinder quarters, and make two collers, bone all the rest, only cut off the
head and leave it whole. 4. Cut off the head, and chine it through the back,
and collar both sides at length from end to end. 5. Chine it as before with the
bones in, and souce it in quarters.
To souce a Capon.
TAke a good bodied Capon, young, fat, and finely pulled, drawn and trussed,
lay it in soke two or three hours with a knuckle of veal well joynted, and
after set them a boiling in a fine deep brass pan, kettel, or large pipkin, in
a gallon of fair water; when it boils scum it, and put in four or five blades
of mace, two or three races of ginger slic't, four fennel roots, and four
parsley roots, scraped and picked, and salt. The Capon being fine and tender
boild, take it up, and put it in other warm liquor or broth; then put to your
souced broth a quart of white wine and boil it to a jelly, then take it off and
put it into an earthen pan or large pipkin, put your capon to it, with two or
three slic't lemons, and cover it close, serve it at your pleasure, and garnish
it with slices and pieces of lemon, barberries, roots, mace, nutmeg, and some
of the jelly.

Some put to this souc't capon, whole pepper, and a faggot of sweet herbs, but
that makes the broth very black.

In this manner you may souce any Land Fowl.

To souce a Breast of Veal, Side of Lamb, or any Joint of Mutton, Kid, Fawn, or
Venison.
BOne a breast of veal and soke it well from the blood, then wipe it dry, and
season the side of the breast with beaten nutmeg, ginger, some sweet herbs
minced small, whole coriander-seed, minced lemon peel, and salt, and lay some
broad slices of sweet lard over the seasoning, then roll it into a collar, and
bind it up in a white clean cloth, put it into boiling liquor, scum it well,
and then put in slic't ginger, slic't nutmeg, salt, fennil and parsley roots,
being almost boild put in a quart of white wine, and when it is quite boild
take it off and put in slices of lemon, the peel of two lemons whole, and a
dozen bay leaves; boil it close covered to make the veal look white.

Thus you may do a breast of mutton, either rouled or with the bones in, and
season them with nutmeg, pepper, and salt; roll them, and bake them in a pot
with wine and water, or any sea or land fowl, being stuffed or forced, and
filled up with butter afterward, and served dry, or lard the fowls, bone them,
and roll them.

To souce a Leg of Veal.
TAke a leg of veal, bone it and lard it, but first season the lard with
pepper, cloves, and mace, lard it with great lard as big as your little finger,
season the veal also with the same seasoning and some salt with it; lard it
very thick, then have all manner of sweet herbs minced and strewed on it, roll
it up like a collar of brawn, and boil it or stew it in the oven in a pipkin,
with water, salt, and white wine; serve it in a collar cold, whole or in
slices, or put away the liquor and fill it up with butter, or bake it with
butter in a roll, jelly it, and mix some of the broth with almond milk, and
jellies in slices of two colors when you serve it.

Otherwise.

Stuff or force a leg of veal, with sweet herbs minced, beef suet, pepper,
nutmeg, and salt, collar it, and boil or bake it, being cold, either serve it
dry in a collar, or in slices, or in a whole collar with gallendines of diverse
sorts, or in thin slices with oil and vinegar.

Thus you may dress any meat, venison or fowls.

To souce Bullocks Cheeks, a Hank, Brisket, or Rand of Beef, etc.
TAke a bullocks cheek or flank of beef and lay it in peter salt four days,
then roll it as even as you can, that the collar be not bigger in one place
then another, boil it in water and salt, or amongst other beef, boil it very
tender in a cloth as you do brawn, and being tender boild, take it up, and put
it into a whoop to fashion it upright and round, then keep it dry, and take it
out of the clout, and serve it whole with mustard and sugar, or some
gallendines. If lean, lard it with great lard.

To Collar a Surloyn, Hank, Brisket, Rand, or Forerib of Beef.
TAke the flank of beef, take out the sinews and most of the fat, put it in
pickle with as much water as will cover it, and put a handful of peter salt to
it; let it steep three days and not shift it, then take it out and hang it a
draining in the air, wipe it dry, then have a good handful of red sage, some
tops of rosemary, favory, marjoram, and time, but twice as much sage, mince
them very small, then take a quarter of an ounce of mace, half as many cloves,
a little ginger, half an ounce of pepper, and half an ounce of pepper, and half
an ounce of peter salt, mingle them together, then take your beef, splat it,
and lay it even that it may roll up handsomely in a collar; then take your
seasoning of herbs and spices, and strew it all over, roll it up close, and
bind it fast with packthread, put it into an earthen pipkin or pot, and put a
pint of claret wine to it, an onion, and two or three cloves of garlic, close
it up with a piece of course paste, and bake it in a bakers oven, it will ask
six hours soaking.

To souce a Collar of Veal in the same manner, or Venison, Pork, or Mutton.
TAke out the bones, and put them in steep in the pickle with peter salt, as
was aforesaid, steep them three days, and hang them in the air one day, lard
them (or not lard them) with good big lard, and season the lard with nutmeg,
pepper, and herbs, as is aforesaid in the collar of beef, strew it over with
the herbs and spices, being mingled together, and roll up the collar, bind it
fast, and bake it tender in a pot, being stopped close, and keep it for your
use to serve either in slices or in the whole collar, garnish it with bays and
rosemary.

To make Jelly for any kind of soust meats, dishes, or other works of that
nature.
TAke six pair of calves feet, scald them and take away the fat betwixt the
claws, and also the long shank bones, lay them in soke in fair water three or
four hours, and boil them in two gallons of fair spring water to three quarts
of stock; being boild strain it through a strainer, and when the broth is cold
take it from the grounds, and divide it into three pipkins for three several
colors, to every pipkin a quart of white wine, and put saffron in one,
catcheneler in another, and put a race of ginger, two blades of mace, and a
nutmeg to each pipkin, and cinnamon to two of the pipkins, the spices being
first slic't, then set your pipkins on the fire and melt the jelly: then have a
pound and half of sugar for each pipkin: but first take your fine sugar being
beaten, and put it in a long dish or tray, and put to it the whites of eighteen
eggs, and beat them well together with your rouling pin, and divide it into
three parts, put each part equally into the several pipkins, and stir it well
together; the broth being almost cold, then set them on a charcoal fire and let
them stew leasurely, when they begin to boil over take them off, let it cool a
little, run them through the bags once or twice, and keep it for your use.

For variety sometimes in place of wine, you may use grapes stamped and
strained, wood sorrel, juice of lemons, or juice of oranges.

To jelly Hogs or Porkers Feet, Ears, or Snouts.
TAke twelve feet, six ears, and six snouts or noses, being finely scalded, and
lay them in soak twenty four hours, shift and scrape them very white, then boil
them in a fair clean scowred brass pot or pipkin in three gallons of liquor,
five quarts of water, three of wine vinegar, or verjuyce, and four of white
wine, boil them from three gallons to four quarts waste; being scummed put in
an ounce of pepper whole, an ounce of nutmegs in quarters, an ounce of ginger
slic't, and an ounce of cinnamon, boil them together, as is abovesaid, to four
quarts.

Then take up the meat and let them cool, divide them into dishes, and run it
over with the broth or jelly being a little first settled, take the clearest,
and being cold put juice of orange over all, serve it with bay leaves about the
dish.

To make Crystal Jelly.
TAke three pair of calves feet, and scald off the hair very clean, knock off
the claws, and take out the great bones and fat, and cast them into fair water,
shift them three or four times in a day and a night, then boil them next
morning in a glazed pipkin or clean pot, with six quarts of fair spring water,
boil it and scum it clean, boil away three quarts or more; then strain it into
a clean earthen pan or basin, and let it be cold: then pare the dross from the
bottom, and take the fat off the top clean, put it in a large pipkin of six
quarts, and put into it two quarts of old clear white wine, the juice of four
lemons, three blades of mace, and two races of ginger slict; then melt or
dissolve it again into broth, and let it cool. Then have four pound of hard
sugar fine beaten, and mix it with twelve whites of eggs in a great dish with
your roulingpin, and put it into the pipkin to your jelly, stir it together
with a grain of musk and ambergreece, put it in a fine linen clout bound up,
and a quarter of a pint of damask rose water, set it a stewing on a soft
charcoal fire, before it boils, put in a little ising-glass, and being boild
up, take it, let it cool a little, and run it.

Other Jelly for service of several colors.
TAke four pair of calves feet, a knuckle of veal, a good fleshly capon, and
prepare these things as is said in the crystal jelly; boil them in three
gallons of fair water, till six quarts be wasted, then strain it into an
earthen pan, let it cool, and being cold pare the bottom, and take off the fat
on the top also; then dissolve it again into broth, and divide it into four
equal parts, put it into four several pipkins, as will contain five pints a
piece each pipkin, put in a little saffron into one of them, into another
churcenela beat with album, into another turnsole, and the other his own
natural white; also to every pipkin a quart of white wine, and the juice of two
lemons. Then also to the white jelly one race of ginger pared and sliced, and
three blades of large mace, to the red jelly two nutmegs, as much in quantity
of cinnamon as nutmegs, also as much ginger; to the turnsole put also the same
quantity, with a few whole cloves; then to the amber or yellow color, the same
spices and quantity. Then have eighteen whites of eggs, and beat them with six
pound of double refined sugar, beaten small and stirred together in a great
tray or basin with a rouling pin; divide it into four parts into the four
pipkins, and stir it to your Jelly broth, spice and wine, being well mixed
together with a little musk and ambergreece. Then have new baggs, wash them
first in warm water, and then in cold, wring them dry, and being ready strung
with packthred and sticks, hang them on a spit by the fire from any dust, and
set new earthen pans under them, being well seasoned with boiling liquor.

Then again set on your jelly on a fine charcoal fire, and let it stew softly
the space of an hour or almost, then make it boil up a little, and take it off,
being somewhat cooled, run it through the bag twice or thrice, or but once if it
be very clear; and into the bags of colors put in a sprig of rosemary, keep it
for your use in those pans, dish it as you see good, or cast it into what mould
you please; as for example these.

Scollop shells, Cockel shells, Eggs shells, half Lemon, or Lemon Peel, Wilks,
or Winkle shells, Muskle shells, or molded out of a butter squirt.

Or serve it on a great dish and plate, one quarter of white, another of red,
another of yellow, the fourth of another color, and about the side of the dish
oranges in quarters of jelly, in the middle a whole lemon full of jelly finely
carved, or cast out of a wooden or tin mould, or run into little round glasses
four or five in a dish, on silver trencher plates, or glass trencher plates.

The quantities for a quart of Jelly Broth for the true making of it.
A quart of white wine, a pound and half of sugar, eggs, two nutmegs, or mace,
two races of ginger, as much cinnamon, two grains of musk and ambergreece,
calves feet or a knuckle of veal.

Sometimes for variety, in place of wine use grape verjuyce; if juice of grapes
a quart, juice of lemons a pint, juice of oranges a quart, juice of wood sorrel
a quart, and juice of quinces a quart.

How to prepare to make a good Stock for Jellies of all sorts, and the Meats
most proper for them, both for service and sick folks; also the quantities
belonging to a quart of Jelly.
For the Stock for service.
TWo pair of calves feet finely cleansed, the fat and great bones taken out and
parted in halves; being well soaked in fair water twenty four hours, and often
shifted, boil them in a brass pot or pipkin close covered, in the quantity of a
gallon of water, boil them to three pints, then strain the broth through a
clean strong canvas into an earthen pan or basin; when it is cold take off the
top, and pare off the dregs off the bottom. Put it in a clean well glazed
pipkin of two quarts, with a quart of white wine, a quarter of a pint of
cinnamon water, as much of ginger water, and as much of nutmeg water, or these
spices sliced. Then have two pound of double refined sugar beaten with eggs in
a deep dish or basin, your jelly being new melted, put in the eggs with sugar,
stir all the foresaid materials together, and set it a stewing on a soft
charcole fire the space of half an hour or more, being well digested and clear
run.

Take out the bone and fat of any meat for jellies, for it does but stain the
stock, and make it will never be white nor pure clear.

Meats proper for Jelly for service or sick folk.
1. Three pair of calves feet, 2. Three pair of calves feet, a knuckle of veal,
and a fine well fleshed capon. 3. One pair of calves feet, a well fleshed
capon, and half a pound of hearts horn or isingglass. 4. An old cock and a
knuckle of veal. 5. Hearts horn jelly only, or with a poultrey. 6. Good bodied
capons. 7. Isingglass only, or with a cock or capon. 8. Jellly of hogs feet,
ears and snouts. 9. Sheeps feet, lambs feet, and calves feet.
Neats Feet for a Jelly for a Neats Tongue.
BEing fresh and tender boild and cold, lard it with candied cittern, candied
orange, lemon, or quinces, run it over with jelly, and some preserved
barberries, or cherries.

To make a Jelly as white as snow of Jorden Almonds.
TAke a pound of almonds, steep them in cold water till they will blanch, which
will be in six hours; being blanched into cold water, beat them with a quart of
rosewater; then have a decoction of half a pound of isingglass, boild with a
gallon of fair spring water, or else half wine, boil it till half be wasted,
then let it cool, strain it, and mingle it with your almonds, and strain with
them a pound of double refined sugar, the juice of two lemons, and cast it into
egg-shells; put saffron to some of it, and make some of it blew, some of it
green, and some yellow; cast some into oranges, and some into lemon rindes
candied; mix part of it with some almond paste colored, and some with
cheese-curds; serve of diverse of these colors on a great dish and plate.

To make other white Jelly.
BOil two capons being cleansed, the fat and lungs taken out, truss them and
soak them well in clean water three or four hours; then boil them in a pipkin,
or pot of two gallons or less, put to them a gallon or five quarts of white
wine, scum them, and boil them to a jelly, next strain the broth from the
grounds and blow off the fat clean; then take a quart of sweet cream, a quart
of the jelly broth, a pound and half of refined sugar, and a quarter of a pint
of rose water, mingle them all together, and give them a walm on the fire with
half an ounce of fine searced ginger; then set it a cooling, dish it, or cast
it in lemon or orange-peels, or in any fashion of the other jellies, in moulds
or glasses, or turn it into colors; for sick folks in place of cream use
stamped almonds.

To make Jellies for souces, made dishes, and other works.
TAke six pair of calves feet, scald them and take away the fat between the
claws, as also the great long shank bones, and lay them in water four or five
hours; then boil them in two gallons of fair spring water, scum them clean, and
boil them from two gallons to three quarts, then strain it through a strong
canvas, and let the broth cool, being cold clenge it from the grounds, pare off
the top, and melt it; then put to it in a good large pipkin, three quarts of
white wine, three races of ginger slic't, some six blades of mace, a quarter of
an ounce of cinnamon, a grain of musk, and eighteen whites of eggs beaten with
four pound of sugar, mingle them with the rest in the pipkin, and the juice of
three lemons, set all on the fire, and let it stew leasurely; then have your
bag ready washed, and when your pipkin boils up, run it, etc.

Hearts Horn Jelly.
TAke half a pound of hearts horn, boil it in fair spring water leasurely, close
covered, and in a well glazed pipkin that will contain a gallon, boil it till a
spoonful will stand stiff being cold, then strain it through a fine thick
canvas, or fine boultering, and put it again in another lesser pipkin, with the
juice of eight or nine good large lemons, a pound and half of double refined
sugar, and boil it again a little while, then put it in a gally pot, or small
glasses, or cast it into moulds, or any fashions of the other jellies. It is
held by the Physicians for a special Cordial.

Or take half a pound of hearts horn grated, and a good capon, being finely
clenged and soaked from the blood, and the fat taken off, truss it, and boil it
in a pot or pipkin, with the hearts horn, in fair spring water, the same things
as the former, etc.

To make another excellent Jelly of Hearts horn and Isingglass for a Consumption.
TAke half a pound of isingglass, half a pound of hearts horn, half a pound of
slic't dates, a pound of beaten sugar, half a pound of slic't figs, a pound of
slic't prunes, half an ounce of cinnamon, half an ounce of ginger a quarter of
an ounce of mace, a quarter of an ounce of cloves, half an ounce of nutmegs,
and a little red sanders, slice your spices, and also a little stick of
liquorish and put in your cinnamon whole.

To make a Jelly for weakness in the Back.
TAke two ounces of hearts horn, and a wine quart of spring water, put it into a
pipkin, and boil it over a soft fire till it be one half consumed, then take it
off the fire, and let it stand a quarter of an hour, and strain it through a
fine holland cloth, crushing the hearts horn gently with a spoon: then put to
it the juice of a lemon, two spoonfuls of red rose water, half a spoonful of
cinnamon water, four or five ounces of fine sugar, or make it sweet according to
the parties taste; then put it out into little glasses or pipkins, and let it
stand twenty four hours, then you may take of it in the morning or at four of
the clock in the afternoon, what quantity you please. To put two or three
spoonfuls of it into broth is very good.

To make another dish of meat called a Press, for service.
DO in this as you may see in the jelly of the porker, being tender boild, take
the feet, ears, snouts, and cheeks, being finely boild, and tender, to a jelly
with spices, and the same liquor as is said in the Porker; then take out the
bones and make a lay of it like a square brick, season it with coriander or
fennil-seed, and bind it up like a square brick in a strong canvas with
packthread, press it till it be cold, and serve it in slices with bay leaves,
or run it over with jellies.

To make a Sausage for Jelly.
BOil or roste a capon, mince and stamp it with some almond paste, then have a
fine dried neats-tongue, one that looks fine and red ready boild, cut it into
little pieces, square like dice, half an inch long, and as much of interlarded
bacon cut into the same form ready boild and cold, some preserved quinces and
barberries, sugar and cinnamon, mingle all together with some scraped isingglass
amongst it warm; roll it up in a sausage, knit it up at the ends and sow the
sides; then let it cool, slice it, and serve it in a jelly in a dish in thin
slices, and run jelly over it, let it cool and lay on more, that cool, run
more, and thus do till the dish be full; when you serve it, garnish the dish
with jelly and preserved barberries, and run over all with juice of lemon.

To make the best Almond Leach.
TAke an ounce of isingglass, and lay it two hours in water, shift it, and boil
it in fair water, let it cool; then take two pounds of almonds, lay them in the
water till they will blanch, then stamp them and put to them a pint of milk,
strain them and put in large mace and slic't ginger, boil them till it taste
well of the spice, then put in your digested isingglass, sugar, and a little
rose water, run it through a strainer, and put it into dishes.

Some you may color with saffron, turn-sole, or green wheat, and blue bottels
for blue.

To keep Sparagus all the year.
PArboil them a very little, and put them into clarified butter, cover them
with it, the butter being cold, cover them with a leather, and about a month
after refresh the butter, melt it, and put it on them again, then set them
under ground being covered with a leather.

Section 9.
The best way of making all manner of baked Meats.

To make a Bisk or Battalia Pie.
TAke six peeping pigeons, and as many peeping small chickens, truss them to
bake; then have six ox pallets well boiled, blanched, and cut in little
pieces; then take six lamb-stones, and as many good veal sweetbreads, cut in
halves and parboild, twenty cocks combs boild and blanched, the bottoms of four
artichocks boild and blanched, a quart of great oysters parboild and bearded,
also the marrow of four bones seasoned with pepper, nutmeg, mace, and salt;
fill the pie with the meat, and mingle some pistaches amongst it, cock-stones,
knots, or yolks of hard eggs, and some butter, close it up and bake it, (an
hour and half will bake it) but before you set it in the oven, put into it a
little fair water: Being baked, pour out the butter, and liquor it with gravy,
butter beaten up thick, slic't lemon, and serve it up.

Or you may bake this bisk in a patty-pan or dish.

Sometimes use asparagus and interlarded bacon.

For the paste for this dish, take three quarts of flour, and three quarters of
a pound of butter, boil the butter in fair water, and make up the paste hot and
quick.

Otherwise in the summer time, make the paste of cold butter; to three quarts
of flour take a pound and a half of butter, and work it dry into the flour,
with the yolks of four eggs and one white, then put a little water to it, and
make it up into a stiff paste.

To bake Chickens or Pigeons.
TAke either six pigeon peepers or six chicken peepers, if big cut them in
quarters, then take three sweetbreads to bake chickens or pigeons of veal
slic't very thin, three sheeps tongues boiled tender, blanched, and slic't with
as much veal, as much mutton, six larks, twelve cocks-combs, a pint of great
oysters parboild and bearded, calves udder cut in pieces, and three marrow
bones, season these foresaid materials with pepper, salt, and nutmeg, then fill
them in Pies of the forms as you see, and put on the top some chestnuts, marrow,
large mace, grapes, or gooseberries; then have a little piece of veal and mince
it with as much marrow, some grated bread, yolks of eggs, minced dates, salt,
nutmeg, and some sweet marjoram, work up all with a little cream, make it up
into little balls or rouls, put them in the pie, and put in a little mutton
gravy, some artichock bottoms, or the tops of boild sparagus, and a little
butter; close up the pie and bake it, being baked liquor it with juice of
oranges, one lemon, and some claret wine, shake it well together, and so serve
it.

To make a Chicken Pie otherwise.
TAke and truss them to bake, then season them lightly with pepper, salt, and
nutmeg; lay them in the pie, and lay on them some dates in halves, with the
marrow of three marrow bones, some large mace, a quarter of a pound of eringo
roots, some grapes or barberries, and some butter, close it up, and put it in
the oven; being half baked, liquor it with a pound of good butter, a quarter of
a pint of grape verjuyce, and a quartern of refined sugar, ice it and serve it
up.

Otherwise you may use the giblets, and put in some pistaches, but keep the
former order as aforesaid for change.

Liquor it with caudle made of a pint of white wine or verjuyce, the yolks of
five or six eggs, sugar, and a quarter of a pound of good sweet butter; fill
the pie, and shake this liquor well in it, with the slices of a lemon. Or you
may make the caudle green with the juice of spinach; ice these pies, or scrape
sugar on them.

Otherwise for the liquoring or garnishing of these pies, for variety you may
put in them boild skirrets, bottoms of artichocks boild, or boild cabbidge
lettice.

Sometimes sweet herbs, whole yolks of hard eggs, interlarded bacon in very
thin slices, and a whole onion; being baked, liquor it with white wine, butter,
and the juice of two oranges,

Or garnish them with barberries, grapes, or gooseberries, red or white
currants, and some sweet herbs chopped small, boild in gravy, and beat up thick
with butter.

Otherwise liquor it with white wine, butter, sugar, some sweet marjoram, and
yolks of eggs strained.

Or bake them with candied lettice stalks, potatoes boild and blanched, marrow,
dates, and large mace; being baked cut up the pie, and lay on the chickens
slic't lemon, then liquor the pie with white wine, butter, and sugar, and serve
it up hot.

You may bake any of the foresaid in a patty-pan or dish, or bake them in cold
butter paste.

To bake Turkey, Chicken, Pea-Chicken, Pheasant Pouts, Heath Pouts, Caponets,
or Partridge for to be eaten cold.
TAke a turkey chicken, bone it and lard it with pretty big lard, a pound and
half will serve, then season it with an ounce of pepper, an ounce of nutmegs,
and two ounces of salt, lay some butter in the bottom of the pie, then lay on
the fowl, and put in it six or eight whole cloves, then put on all the
seasoning with good store of butter, close it up, and baste it over with eggs,
bake it, and being baked fill it up with clarified butter.

Thus you may bake them for to be eaten hot, giving them but half the
seasoning, and liquor it with gravy and juice of orange.

Bake this pie in fine paste; for more variety you may make a stuffing for it
as follows; mince some beef suet and a little veal very fine, some sweet
herbs, grated nutmeg, pepper, salt, two or three raw yolks of eggs, some boild
skirrets or pieces of artichocks, grapes, or gooseberries, etc.

To bake Pigeons wild or tame, Stock-Doves, Turtle-Doves, Quails, Rails, etc.
to be eaten cold.
TAke six pigeons, pull, truss, and draw them, wash and wipe them dry, and
season them with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, the quantity of two ounces of the
foresaid spices, and as much of the one as the other, then lay some butter in
the bottom of the pie, lay on the pigeons, and put on all the seasoning on them
in the pie, put butter to it, close it up and bake it, being baked and cold,
fill it up with clarified butter.

Make the paste of a pottle of fine flour, and a quarter of a pound of butter
boild in fair water, made up quick and stiff.

If you will bake them to be eaten hot, leave out half the seasoning. Bake them
in dish, pie, or patty pan, and make cold paste of a pottle of flower, six
yolks of raw eggs, and a pound of butter, work it into the flower dry, and
being well wrought into it, make it up stiff with a little fair water.

Being baked to be eaten hot, put it into yolks of hard eggs, sweet-breads,
lamb-stones, sparagus, or bottoms of artichocks, chestnuts, grapes, or
gooseberries.

Sometimes for variety make a lear of butter, verjuyce, sugar, some sweet
marjoram chopped and boild up in the liquor, put them in the pie when you serve
it up, and dissolve the yolk of an egg into it; then cut up the pie or dish,
and put on it some slic't lemon, shake it well together, and serve it up hot.

In this mode or fashion you bake larks, black-birds, thrushes, veldifers,
sparrows, or wheat-ears.

To bake all manner of Land Fowl, as Turkey, Bustard, Peacock, Crane, etc. to
be eaten cold.
TAke a turkey and bone it, parboil and lard it thick with great lard as big as
your little finger, then season it with two ounces of beaten pepper, two ounces
of beaten nutmeg, and three ounces of salt, season the fowl and lay it in a pie
fit for it, put first butter in the bottom, with some ten whole cloves, then
lay on the turkey and the rest of the seasoning on it, lay on good store of
butter, then close it up and baste it either with saffron water, or three or
four eggs beaten together with their yolks; bake it, and being baked and cold,
liquor it with clarified butter, etc.

To bake all manner of Sea Fowl, as Swan, Whopper, to be eaten cold.
TAke a swan, bone, parboil, and lard it with great lard, season the lard with
nutmeg and pepper only, forms of sea fowl pies then take two ounces of pepper,
three of nutmeg, and four of salt, season the fowl and lay it in the pie, with
good store of butter, strew a few whole cloves on the rest of the seasoning,
lay on large sheets of lard over it, and good store of butter; then close it up
in rye paste or meal course boulted, and made up with boiling liquor, and make
it up stiff: or you may bake them to eat hot, only giving them half the
seasoning. Make the pyes according to these forms.

In place of baking any of these fowls in pyes, you may bake them in earthen
pans or pots, for to be preserved cold they will keep longer.

In the same manner you may bake all sorts of wild geese, tame geese, bran
geese, muscovia ducks, gulls, shovellers, herns, bitters, culews, heath cocks,
teels, ollines, ruffes, brewes, pewits, mewes, sea pyes, dap chickens, strents,
dotterels, knots, gravelins, ox eyes, redshanks, etc.

In baking of these fowls to be eaten hot, for the garnish put in a big onion,
gooseberries, or grapes in the pie, and sometimes capers or oysters, and liquor
it with gravy, claret, and butter.

To bake any kinds of Heads, and first of the Ox or Bullocks Cheeks to be
eaten hot or cold.
Being first cleansed from the slime and filth, cut them in pieces, take out
the bones, and season them with forms of heads pies pepper, salt, and nutmeg,
then put them in a pie with a few whole cloves, a little seasoning, slices of
bacon, and butter over all; bake them very tender, and liqnor them with butter
and claret wine.

Or boil your chickens, take out the bones and make a pasty with some minced
meat, and a caul of mutton under it, on the top spices and butter, close it up
in good crust, and make your pyes according to these forms.

Otherwise.

BOne and lard them with lard as big as your little finger, seasoned with
pepper, salt, and nutmeg, and laid into the pie or pasty, with slices of
interlanded forms of pies bacon, and a clove or two, close it up, and bake it
with some butter; make your pie or pasty of good fine crust according to these
forms. Being baked fill it up with good sweet butter.

Otherwise. You may make a pudding of some grated bread, minced veal,
beef suet, some minced sweet herbs, a minced onion, eggs, cream, nutmeg,
pepper, and salt, and lay it on the top of your meat in the pie, and some
butter, close it up and bake it.

Otherwise.

Take a calves head, soak it well and take out the brains, boil the head, and
take out the bones, being cold stuff it calveshead pie with sweet herbs and
hard eggs chopped small, minced bacon, and a raw egg or two, nutmeg, pepper,
and salt; and lay in the bottom of the pie minced veal raw, and bacon; then lay
the cheeks on it in the pie, and slices of bacon on that, then spices, butter,
and grapes or lemon, close it up, bake it, and liquor it with butter only.

Otherwise.

Boil it and take out the bones, cleanse it, and season it with pepper, salt,
and nutmeg, put some minced veal or forms of pies suet in the bottom of the
pie, then lay on the cheeks, and on them a pudding made of minced veal raw, and
suet, currants, grated bread or parmisan, eggs, saffron, nutmeg, pepper, and
salt, put it on the head in the pie, with some thin slices of interlarded
bacon, thin slices also of veal, and butter, close it up and make it according
to these forms; being baked, liquor it with butter only.

To bake a Calves Chaldron.
BOil it tender, and being cold mince it, and season it with nutmeg, pepper,
cinnamon, ginger salt, carawayseeds, verjuyce, or grapes, some currants, sugar,
rose water, and dates, stir them all together and fill your pie, bake it, and
being baked ice it.

Minced Pyes of Calves Chaldrons, or Mug gets?
BOil it tender, and being cold mince it small, then put to it bits of lard cut
like dice, or interlarded bacon, some forms of minced pies yolks of hard eggs
cut like dice also, some bits of veal and mutton cut also in the same bigness,
as also lamb, some sgooseberries, grapes, or barberries, and eason it with
nutmeg, pepper, and salt, fill your pie, and lay on it some thin slices of
interlarded bacon, and butter; close it up and bake it, liquor it with white
wine beaten with butter.

To bake a Pig to be eaten cold called a Maremaid Pie.
TAke a pig, flay it and quarter it, then bone it, take also a good eel flayed,
speated, boned, and seasoned maremaid pie with pepper, salt, and nutmeg, then
lay a quarter of your pig in a round pie, and part of the eel on that quarter
then lay on another quarter on the other, and then more eel, and thus keep the
order till your pie be full, then lay a few whole cloves, slices of bacon and
butter, and close it up, bake it in good fine paste, being baked and cold, fill
it up with good sweet butter.

Otherwise.
Scald it, and bone it being first cleansed, dry the sides in a clean cloth,
and season them with beaten nutmeg, pepper, salt, and chopped sage; then have
two neats tongues dried, well boild, and cold, slice them out all the length as
thick as a half crown, and lay a quarter of your pig in a square or round pie,
and slices of the tongue on it, then another quarter of pig and more tongue,
thus do four times double, and lay over all slices of bacon, a few cloves,
butter, and a bay leaf or two; then bake it, and being baked, fill it up with
good sweet butter. Make your paste white of butter and flower.

Otherwise.

Take a pig, being scalded, flayed, and quartered, season it with beaten
nutmeg, pepper, salt, cloves, and mace, lay it in your pie with some chopped
sweet herbs, hard eggs, currants, or (none) put your herbs between every lay,
with some gooseberries, grapes, or barberries, and lay on the top slices of
interlarded bacon and butter, close it up, and bake it in good fine crust,
being baked, liquor it with butter, verjuyce, and sugar. If to be eaten cold,
with butter only.

Otherwise to be eaten hot.

Cut it to pieces, and make a pudding of grated bread, cream, suet, nutmeg,
eggs and dates, make it into balls, and stick them with slic't almonds; then
lay the pig in the pie, and balls on it, with dates, potato, large mace, lemon,
and butter; being baked liquor it.

To bake four Hares in a Pie.
BOne them and lard them with great lard, being first seasoned with nutmeg and
pepper, then take four ounces of pepper, four ounces of nutmegs, and eight
ounces of salt, mix them together, season them, and make a round or square pie
of course boulted rye meal; then the pie being made, put some butter in the
bottom of it, and lay on the hares one upon another; then put upon it a few
whole cloves, a sheet of lard over it, and good store of butter, close it up
and bake it, being first basted over with eggs beaten together, or saffron;
when it is baked liquor them with clarified butter.

Or bake them in white paste or pasty, if to be eaten hot, leave out half the
seasoning.

To bake three Hares in a Pie to be eaten cold.
BOne three hares, mince them small, and stamp them with the seasoning of
pepper, salt, and nutmeg, then have lard cut as big as ones little finger, and
as long as will reach from side to side of your pie; then lay butter in the
bottom of it, and a lay of meat, then a lay of lard and a lay of meat, and thus
do five or six times, lay your lard all one way, but last of all a lay of meat,
a few whole cloves, and slices of bacon over all, and some butter, close it up
and bake it, being baked fill it up with sweet butter, and stop the vent.

Thus you may bake any venison, beef, mutton, veal, or rabits; if you bake them
in earthen pans they will keep the longest.

To bake a Hare with a Pudding in his Belly.
form of hare pie

FOr to make this pie you must take as follows, a gallon of flower, half an
ounce of nutmegs, half an ounce of pepper, salt, capers, raisins, pears in
quarters, prunes, with grapes, lemon or gooseberries, and for the liquor a
pound of sugar, a pint of claret or verjuyce, and some large mace.

Thus also may you bake a fawn, kid, lamb, or rabit. Make your hare pie
according to the foregoing form.

To make minced Pyes of a Hare.
TAke a hare, flay it and cleanse it, then take the flesh from the bones, and
mince it with some fat bacon or beef suet raw, season it with pepper, mace,
nutmeg, cloves, and salt, mingle all together with some grapes, gooseberries,
or barberries; fill the pie, close it up, and bake it.

Otherwise.

Mince it with beef suet, a pound and a half of raisins minced, some currants,
cloves, mace, salt, and cinnamon, mingle all together, and fill the pie, bake
it, and liquor it with claret.

To make a Pumpion Pie.
TAke a pound of pumpion and slice it, a handful of time, a little rosemary,
and sweet marjoram stripped off the stalks, chop them small, then take cinnamon,
nutmeg, pepper, and a few cloves all beaten, also ten eggs and beat them, then
mix and beat them all together, with as much sugar as you think fit, then fry
them like a froise, after it is fried let it stand till it is cold, then fill
your pie after this manner. Take sliced apples sliced thin round ways, and lay
a layer of the froise, and a layer of apples, with currants betwixt the layers.
While your pie is fitted, put in a good deal of sweet butter before you close
it. When the pie is baked, take six yolks of eggs, some white wine or verjuyce,
and make a caudle of this, but not too thick, cut up the lid, put it in, and
stir them well together whilst the eggs and pumpion be not perceived, and so
serve it up.

To make a Lumber Pie.
TAke some grated bread and beef suet cut into bits like great dice, and some
cloves and mace, then some veal or capon minced small with beef suet, sweet
herbs, salt, sugar, the yolks of six eggs boild hard and cut into quarters, put
them to the other ingredients, with some barberries, some yolks of raw eggs and
a little cream, work up all together and put it in the cauls of veal like
little sausages, then bake them in a dish, and being half baked, have a pie
made and dried in the oven; put these puddings into it with some butter,
verjuyce, sugar, some dates on them, large mace, grapes, or barberries, and
marrow; being baked serve it with a cut cover on it, and scrape sugar on it.

Otherwise.

Take some minced meat of chewits of veal, and put to it some three or four raw
eggs, make it into balls, then form of lumber pie put them in a pie fitted for
them according to this form, first lay in the balls, then lay on them some
slic't dates, large mace, marrow, and butter; close it up and bake it, being
baked, liquor it with verjuyce, sugar, and butter, then ice it, and serve it up.

To make an Ollive Pie.
TAke time, sweet marjoram, savory, spinach, parsley, sage, endive, sorrel,
violet leaves, and strawberry leaves, mince them very small with some yolks of
hard eggs, then put to them half a pound of currants, nutmeg, pepper, cinnamon,
sugar, and salt, minced raisins, gooseberries, or barberries, and dates minced
small, mingle all together, then have slices of a leg of veal, or a leg of
mutton, cut thin and hacked with the back of a knife, lay them on a clean
board, and strew on the foresaid materials, roll them up and put them in a pie;
then lay on them some dates, marrow, large mace, and some butter, close it up
and bake it, being baked, cut it up, liquor it with butter, verjuyce and sugar,
put a slic't lemon into it, and serve it up with scraped sugar.

To bake a Loin, Breast, or Rack of Veal, or Mutton.
IF you bake it with the bones, joint a loyn very well, and season it with
nutmeg, pepper, and salt, put it in your pie, and put butter to it, close it up
and bake it in good crust, and liquor it with sweet butter.

Thus also you may bake the breast, either in pie or pasty; as also the rack or
shoulder, being stuffed with sweet herbs, and fat of beef minced together, and
baked either in pie or pasty.

In the summer time you may add to it spinach, gooseberries, grapes,
barberries, or slic't lemon: and in winter, prunes, and currants, or raisins,
and liquor it with butter, sugar, and verjuyce.

To make a Steak Pie the best way.
CUt a neck, loyn, or breast into steaks, and season them with pepper, nutmeg,
and salt; then have some few sweet herbs minced small, with an onion, and the
yolks of three or four hard eggs minced also: the pie being made put in the
meat and a few capers, and strew these ingredients on it, then put in butter,
close it up, and bake it three hours moderately, etc. Make the pie round and
pretty deep.

Otherwise.

The meat being prepared as before, season it with nutmeg, ginger, pepper, a
whole onion, and salt; fill the pie, then put in some large mace, half a pound
of currants, and butter, close it up and put it in the oven; being half baked,
put in a pint of warmed claret, and when you draw it to send it up, cut the lid
in pieces and stick it in the meat round the pie; or you may leave out onions,
and put in sugar and verjuyce.

Otherwise.

Take a loin of mutton, cut it into steaks, and season it with nutmeg, pepper,
and salt, then lay a layer of raisins form of steak pie and prunes in the
bottom of the pie, steaks on them, and then whole ciamon, then more fruit and
steaks, thus do it three times, and on the top put more fruit, and grapes or
slic't orange, dates, large mace, and butter, close it up and bake it, being
baked, liquor it with butter, white wine, and sugar, ice it, and servit hot.

To bake Steak Pyes the French way.
SEason the Steaks with pepper, nutmeg, and salt lightly, and set them by; then
take a piece of the leanest of a leg of mutton, and mince it small with some
beef-fuet and a few sweet herbs, as tops of time, pennyroyal, young red sage,
grated bread, yolks of eggs, sweet cream, raisins of the sun, etc. work all
together, and make it into little balls, and rolls, put them into a deep round
pie on the steaks, then put to them some butter, and sprinkle it with verjuyce,
close it up and bake it, being baked cut it up, then roll sage leaves in
butter, fry them, and stick them in the balls, serve the pie without a cover,
and liquor it with the juice of two or three oranges, or lemons.

Otherwise.

Bake these steaks in any of the foresaid ways in pattypan or dish, and make
other paste called cold butter paste; take to a gallon of flour a pound and a
half of butter, four or five eggs and but two whites, work up the butter and
eggs into the flour, and being well wrought, put to it a little fair cold
water, and make it up a stiff paste.

To bake a Gammon of Bacon.
STeep it all night in water, scrape it clean, and stuff it with all manner of
sweet herbs, as sage, time, parsley, sweet marjoram, savory, violet leaves,
strawberry leaves, fennil, rosemary, pennyroyal, etc. being cleansed and
chopped small with some yolks of hard eggs, beaten nutmeg and pepper, stuff it
and boil it, and being fine and tender boild and cold, pare the under side,
take off the skin, and season it with nutmeg and pepper, then lay it in your
pie or pasty with a few whole cloves, and slices of raw bacon over it, and
butter; close it up in pie or pasty of short paste and bake it.

To bake wild Bore.
TAke the leg, season it, and lard it very well with good big lard seasoned
with nutmeg, pepper, and beaten form of wild bore pie ginger, lay it in a pie
of the form as you see, being seasoned all over with the same spices and salt,
then put a few whole cloves on it, a few bay leaves, large slices of lard, and
good store of butter, bake it in fine or course crust, being baked liquor it
with good sweet butter and stop up the vent.

If to keep long bake it in an earthen pan in the abovesaid seasoning, and
being baked fill it up with butter, and you may keep it a whole year.

To bake your wild Bore that comes out of France.
LAy it in soak two days, then parboil it, and season it with pepper, nutmeg,
cloves, and ginger; and when it is baked fill it up with butter.

To bake Red Deer.
TAke a side of red deer, bone it and season it, then take out the back sinnew
and the skin, and lard the fillets or back with great lard as big as your
middle finger; being first seasoned with nutmeg forms of red deer pie and
pepper: then take four ounces of pepper, four ounces of nutmeg, and six ounces
of salt, mix them well together, and season the side of venison; being well
slashed with a knife in the inside for to make the seasoning enter; being
seasoned, and a pie made according to these forms, put some butter in the
bottom of the pie, a quarter of an ounce of cloves, and a bay leaf or two, lay
on the flesh, season it, and coat it deep, then put on a few cloves, and good
store of butter, close it up and bake it the space of eight or nine hours, but
first baste the pie with six or seven eggs, beaten well together; being baked
and cold, fill it up with good sweet clarified butter.

Take for a side or half hanch of red deer, half a bushel of rye meal, being
coursely searced, and make it up very stiff with boiling water only.

If you bake it to eat hot, give it but half the seasoning, and liquor it with
claret wine and good butter.

To bake Fallow Deer for hot or cold.
TAke a side of venison, bone and lard it with great lard as big as ones little
finger, and season it with two ounces of pepper, two ounces of numeg, and four
ounces of salt; then have a pie made, and lay some butter in the bottom of it,
then lay in the flesh, the inside downward, coat it thick with seasoning, and
put to it on the top of the meat, with a few cloves, and good store of butter,
close it up and bake it; the pie being first basted with eggs, being baked and
cold, fill it up with clarified butter, and keep it to eat cold. Make the paste
as you do for red deer, course dressed through a boulter, a peck and a pottle of
this meal will serve for a side or half hanch of a buck.

To bake a side or half Hanch to be eaten hot.
TAke a side of a buck being boned and the skins taken away, season it only
with two ounces of pepper, and as much salt, or half an ounce more, lay it on a
sheet of fine paste with two pound of beef suet finely minced and beat with a
little fair water and laid under it, close it up and bake it, and being fine
and tender baked, put to a good ladle full of gravy, or good strong mutton
broth.

To make a Paste for it.
TAke a peck of flour by weight, and lay it on the pastery board, make a hole
in the midst of the flour and put to it five pound of good fresh butter, the
yolks of six eggs and but four whites, work up the butter and eggs into the
flour, and being well wrought together put some fair water to it, and make it
into a stiff paste.

In this fashion of fallow deer you may bake goat, do, or a pasty of venison.

To make mere sauce, or a pickle to keep venison in that is tainted.
TAke strong ale and as much vinegar as will make it sharp, boil it with some
bay salt, and make a strong brine, scum it and let it stand till it be cold,
then put in your venison twelve hours, press it, parboil it, and season it,
then bake it as before is shown.

Other sauce for tainted venison.
TAke your venison, and boil water, beer, and wine vinegar together, and some
bay leaves, time, savory, rosemary and fennil, of each a handful, when it boils
put in your venison, parboil it well and press it, and season it as aforesaid,
bake it for to be eaten cold or hot, and put some raw minced mutton under it.

Otherwise to preserve tainted Venison.
BUry it in the ground in a clean cloth a whole night, and it will take away
the corruption, savor, or stink.

Other mere sauce to counterfeit Beef or Mutton to give it a Venison color.
TAke small beer and vinegar, and parboil your beef in it, let it steep all
night, then put some turnsole to it, and being baked, a good judgment shall
not decerne it from red or fallow deer.

Otherwise to counterfeit Ram, Weather, or any Mutton for Venison.
BLoody it in sheeps, lambs, or pigs blood, or any good and new blood, season
it as before, and bake it either for hot or cold. In this fashion you may bake
mutton, lamb, or kid.

To make Vmble Pyes.
LAy minced beef suet in the bottom of the pie, or slices of interlarded bacon,
and the umbles cut as big as small dice, with some bacon cut in the same form,
and seasoned with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, fill your pyes with it and slices
of bacon and butter, close it up and bake it, and liquor it with claret,
butter, and stripped time.

To make Pies of Sweet-breads or Lamb-stones, according to these Forms.
forms of sweet-breads or lamb-stones pies

PArboil them and blanch them, or raw sweet-breads or stones, part them in
halves, and season them with pepper, nutmeg, and salt, season them lightly;
then put in the bottom of the pie some slices of interlarded bacon, and some
pieces of artichoaks or mushrooms, then sweetbreads or stones, marrow,
gooseberries, barberries, grapes, or slic't lemon, close it up and bake it,
being baked liquor it with butter only. Or otherwise with butter, white wine,
and sugar, and sometimes add some yolks of eggs.

To make minced Pies or Chewits of a Leg of Veal, Neats Tongue, Turkey, or
Capon.
TAke to a good leg of veal six pound of beef suet, then take the leg of veal,
bone it, parboil it, and mince it very fine when it is hot; mince the suet by
its self very fine also, then when they are cold mingle them together, then
season the meat with a pound of sliced dates, a pound of sugar, an ounce of
nutmegs an ounce of pepper, an ounce of cinnamon, half an ounce of ginger, half
a pint of verjuyce, a pint of rose water, a preserved orange, or any peel fine
minced, an ounce of caraway comfets, and six pound of currants; put all these
into a large tray with half a handful of salt, stir them up all together and
fill your pies, close them up, bake them, and being baked, ice them with double
refined sugar, rose water, and butter.

Make the Paste with a peck of flour, and two pound of butter boild in fair
water or liquor, make it up boiling hot.

To make minced Pies of Mutton.
TAke to a leg of mutton four pound of beef suet, bone the leg, and cut it raw
into small pieces, as also the suet, mince them together very fine, and being
minced season it with two pound of currants, two pound of raisins, two pound of
prunes, an ounce of carrawayseed an ounce of nutmegs, an ounce of pepper, an
ounce of cloves and mace, and six ounces of salt; stir up all together, fill
the Pies, and bake them as the former.

To make minced Pies of Beef.
TAke a stone or eight pound of beef, also eight pound of suet, mince them very
small, and put to them eight ounces of salt, two ounces of nutmegs, an ounce of
pepper, an ounce of cloves and mace, four pound of currants, and four pound of
raisins, stir up all these together, and fill your pies.

Minced in the French Fashion, called Pelipate, or in English, Petits, made of
Veal, Pork, or Lamb, or any kind of Venison, Beef, Poultry, or Fowl.
MIce them with lard, and being minced, season them with salt, and a little
nutmeg, mix the meat with some pine-apple-seed, and a few grapes or
gooseberries; fill the Pies and bake them, being baked, liquor them with a
little gravy.

Sometimes for variety in the winter time you may use currants instead of grapes
or gooseberries, and yolks of hard eggs minced among the meat.

Minced Pies in the Italian Fashion.
PArboil a leg of veal, and being cold mince it with beef suet, and season it
with pepper, salt, and gooseberries; mix with it a little verjuyce, currants,
sugar, and a little saffron in powder.

forms of minced pies Forms of minced Pies.


To make an exraordinary Pie, or a Bride Pie, of several Compounds, being
several distinct Pies on one bottom.
form of bride pie

PRovide cock-stones and combs, or lamb-stones and sweet-breads of veal, a
little set in hot water and cut to pieces; also two or three ox pallets
blanched and slic't, a pint of oysters, sliced dates, a handful of pine
kernels, a little quantity of broom-buds pickled, some fine interlarded bacon
sliced, nine or ten chestnuts roasted and blanched, season them with salt,
nutmeg, and some large mace, and close it up with some butter. For the caudle,
beat up some butter, with three yolks of eggs, some white or claret wine, the
juice of a lemon or two; cut up the lid, and pour on the lear, shaking it well
together; then day on the meat, slic't lemon, and pickled barberries, and cover
it again; let these Ingredients be put into the moddle or scollops of the Pie.

Several other Pies belong to the first form, but you must be sure to make the
three fashions proportionably answering one the other; you may set them on one
bottom of paste, which will be more convenient; or if you set them several you
may bake the middle one full of flour, it being baked and cold, take out the
flour in the bottom, and put in live birds, or a snake, which will seem strange
to the beholders, which cut up the Pie at the table. This is only for a
Wedding to pass away time.

Now for the other Pies you may fill them with several Ingredients, as in one
you may put oysters, being parboild and bearded, season them with large mace,
pepper, some beaten ginger, and salt, season them lightly, and fill the Pie,
then lay on marrow and some good butter, close it up and bake it. Then make a
lear for it with white wine, the oyster liquor, three or four oysters bruised
in pieces to make it stronger, but take out the pieces, and an onion, or rub
the bottom of the dish with a clove of garlic; it being boild, put in a piece
of butter, with a lemon, sweet herbs will be good boild in it, bound up fast
together; cut up the lid, or make a hole to let the lear in, etc.

Another you may make of Prawns and Cockles, being seasoned as the first, but
no marrow: a few pickled mushrooms, (if you have them) it being baked, beat up
a piece of butter, a little vinegar, a slic't nutmeg, and the juice of two or
three oranges thick, and pour it into the Pie.

A third you may make a Bird Pie; take young Birds, as larks, pulled and drawn,
and a force meat to put in the bellies made of grated bread, sweet herbs minced
very small, beef suet, or marrow minced, almonds beat with a little cream to
keep them from oyling, a little parmisan (or none) or old cheese; season this
meat with nutmeg, ginger, and salt; then mix them together with cream and eggs
like a pudding, stuff the larks with it, then season the ^arks with nutmeg,
pepper, and salt, and lay them in the Pie, put in some butter, and scatter
between them pine-kernels, yolks of eggs, and sweet herbs, the herbs and eggs
being minced very small; being baked make a lear with the juice of oranges and
butter beat up thick, and shaken well together.

For another of the Pies, you may boil artichocks, and take only the bottoms
for the Pie, cut them into quarters or less, and season them with nutmeg. Thus
with several Ingredients you may fill up the other Pies.

To make Custards diverse ways.
form of custard

TAke to a quart of cream, ten eggs, half a pound of sugar, half a quarter of
an ounce of mace, half as much ginger beaten very fine, and a spoonful of salt,
strain them through a strainer; then the forms being finely dried in the oven,
fill them full on an even hearth, and bake them fair and white, draw them and
dish them on a dish and plate; then strew on them biskets red and white, stick
muskedines red and white, and scrape thereon double refined sugar.

Make the paste for these Custards of a pottle of fine flour, make it up with
boiling liquor, and make it up stiff.

To make an Almond Custard.
TAke two pound of almonds, blanch and beat them very fine with rose water,
then strain them with some two quarts of cream, twenty whites of eggs, and a
pound of double refined sugar; make the paste as beforesaid, and bake it in a
mild oven fine and white, garnish it as before, and scrape fine sugar over all.

To make a Custard without Eggs.
TAke a pound of almonds, blanch and beat them with rose water into a fine
paste, then put the spawn or row of a Carp or Pike to it, and beat them well
together, with some cloves, mace, and salt, the spices being first beaten, and
some ginger, strain them with some fair spring water, and put into the strained
stuff half a pound of double refined sugar, and a-little saffron; when the
Paste is dried and ready to fill, put into the bottom of the coffin some slic't
dates, raisins of the sun stoned, and some boiled currants, fill them and bake
them; being baked scrape sugar on them. Be sure always to prick your custards
or forms before you set them in the oven.

If you have no row or spawn, put rice flour instead thereof.

To make an extraordinary good Cake.
TAke half a bushel of the best flour you can get very finely searsed, and lay
it upon a large Pastrey board, make a hole in the midst thereof, and put to it
three pound of the best butter you can get, with fourteen pound of currants
finely picked and rubbed, three quarts of good new thick cream warmed, two
pound of fine sugar beaten, three pints of good new ale barm or yeast, four
ounces of cinnamon fine beaten and searsed, also an ounce of beaten ginger, two
ounces of nutmegs fine beaten and searsed; put in all these materials together,
and work them up into an indifferent stiff paste, keep it warm till the oven be
hot; then make it up and bake it being baked an hour and a half, ice it, then
take four pound of double refined sugar, beat it and searce it, and put it in a
deep clean scowred skillet the quantity of a gallon, boil it to a candy height
with a little rose water, then draw the cake, run it all over it, and set it
into the oven till it be candied.

To make a Cake otherwise.
TAke a gallon of very fine flour, and lay it on the Pastry board, then strain
three or four eggs with a pint of barm, and put it into a hole made in the
middle of the flour, with some two nutmegs fine beaten, an ounce of cinnamon,
and an ounce of cloves and mace beaten fine also, half a pound of sugar, and a
pint of cream; put these into the flower with two spoonfuls of salt, and work
it up good and stiff; then take half the paste, and work three pound of currants
well picked and rubbed into it, then take the other part and divide it into two
equal pieces, drive them out as broad as you would have the cake, then lay one
of the sheets of paste on a sheet of paper, and upon that the half that has
the currants, and the other part on the top, close it up round, prick it, and
bake it; being baked, ice it with butter, sugar, and rose water, and set it
again into the oven.

To make French Bread the best way.
TAke a gallon of fine flour, and a pint of good new ale barm or yeast, and put
it to the flour, with the whites of six new laid eggs well beaten in a dish,
and mixed with the barm in the middle of the flour, also three spoonfuls of fine
salt; then warm some milk and fair water, and put to it, and make it up pretty
stiff, being well wrought and worked up, cover it in a boul or tray with a warm
cloth till your oven be hot; then make it up either in rouls, or fashion it in
little wooden dishes and bake it, being baked in a quick oven, chip it hot.

Section 10.
To bake all manner of Curneld Fruits in Pyes, Tarts, or made Dishes, raw or
preserved, as Quinces, Wardens, Pears, Pippins, etc.

To bake a Quince Pie.
TAke fair quinces, core and pare them very thin, and put them in a pie, then
put in it two races of ginger slic't, as much cinnamon broken into bits, and
some eight or ten whole cloves, lay them in the bottom of the pie, and lay on
the quinces close packed, with as much fine refined sugar as the quinces
weighs, close it up and bake it; and being well soaked the space of four or
five hours, ice it.

Otherwise.

Take a gallon of flour, a pound and a half of butter, six eggs, thirty
quinces, three pound of sugar, half an ounce of cinnamon, half an ounce of
ginger, half an ounce of cloves, and some rosewater, make them in a pie or
tart, and being baked strew on double refined sugar.

Otherwise.

Bake these quinces raw, slic't very thin, with beaten cinnamon and the same
quantity of sugar, as before, either in tart, patty-pan, dish, or in cold
butter paste, sometimes mix them with wardens, pears, or pippins, and some
minced citron.

To make a Quince Pie otherwise, according to this Form.
form of quince pie

TAke Quinces and preserve them, being first coared and pared, then make a
sirrup of fine sugar and spring water, take as much as the quinces weigh, and
to every pound of sugar a pint of fair water, make your sirrup in a preserving
pan; being scum'd and boild to a sirrup, put in the quinces, boil them up till
they be well colored, and being cold, bake them in pyes whole or in halves, in
a round tart, dish, or patty pan with a cut cover, or in quarters; being baked,
put in the same sirrup, but before you bake them, put in more fine sugar, and
leave the sirrup to put in afterward, then ice it.

Thus you may do of any Curneld fruits, as wardens, pippins, pears, pearmains,
green quodlings, or any good apples, in laid tarts, or cuts.

To make a slic't Tart of Quinces, Wardens, Pears, Pippins, in slices raw of
diverse Compounds.
THese foresaid fruits being finely pared, and slic't in very thin slices,
season them with beaten cinnamon, and canded citron minced, canded orange, or
both, or raw orange-peel, raw lemon peel, fennil-seed, or caraway-seed, or
without any of these compounds or spices, but the fruits alone one amongst the
other; put to ten pippins six quinces, six wardens, eight pears, and two pound
of sugar, close it up, bake it, and ice it as the former tarts.

Thus you may also bake it in patty-pan, or dish, with cold butter paste.

To bake Quinces, Wardens, Pears, Pippins, or any Fruits preserved to be baked
in Pyes, Tarts, Patty-pan or Dish.
PReserve any of the foresaid in white wine and sugar till the sirrup grow
thick, then take the quinces out of it, and lay them to cool in a dish, then
set them into the pie, and prick cloves on the tops with some cinnamon and good
store of refined sugar, close them up with a cut cover, and being baked, ice
it, and fill it up with the sirrup they were first boiled in.

Otherwise.

You may bake them in an earthen pot with some claret wine and sugar and keep
them for your use.

To make a Trotter Pie of Quinces, Wardens, Pears, etc.
TAke them either severally or altogether in quarters, or slic't raw, if in
quarters put some whole ones amongst them, if slic't beaten spices, and a
little butter and sugar; take to twelve quinces a pound of sugar, and a quarter
of a pound of butter, close it up and bake it, and being baked cut it up and
mash the fruit to pieces, then put in some cream, and yolks of eggs beaten
together, and put it into the pie, stir all together, and cut the cover into
five or six pieces like lozenges or three square, and scrape on sugar.

To make a Pippin Pie.
TAke thirty good large pippins, pare them very thin and make the pie, then put
in the pippins, thirty cloves, a quarter of an ounce of whole cinnamon, and as
much pared and slic't, a quarter of a pound of orangado, as much of lemon in
sucket, and a pound and half of refined sugar, close it up and bake it, it will
ask four hours baking, then ice it with butter, sugar, and rose water.

To make a Pippin Tart according to this Form.
form of pippin tart

TAke fair pippins and pare them, then cut them in quarters, coar them and stew
them in claret wine, whole cinnamon, and slic't ginger; stew them half an hour,
then put them into a dish and break them not, when they are cold, lay them one
by one into the tart, then lay on some green cittern minced small, candied
orange or coriander, put on sugar and close it up, bake it and ice it, then
scrape on sugar and serve it.

To make a Pippin Tart, either in Tart, Patty-pan, or Dish.
TAke ten fair pippins, preserve them in white wine, sugar, whole cinnamon,
slic't ginger, and eight or ten cloves, being finely preserved and well
colored, lay them on a cut tart of short paste; or in place of preserving you
may bake them between two dishes in the oven for the foresaid use.

A made Dish of Pippins.
TAke pippins, pare and slice them, then boil them in claret wine in a pipkin,
or between two dishes with some sugar, and beaten cinnamon, form of pippins dish
when it is boiled good and thick, mash it like marmalade, and put it in a dish
of puff-paste or short paste, according to this form, with a cut cover, and
being bake dice it.

To preserve Pippins in slices.
TAke pippins and slice them round with the coars or kernels in, as thick as a
half-crown piece, and some lemon peel amongst them in slices, or else cut like
small lard, or orange peel, first boild and cut in the same manner; then make
the sirrup weight for weight, and being clarified and scummed clean, put in the
pippins and boil them up quick; to a pound of sugar, a pint of fair water, or a
pint of white wine or claret, and make them of two colors.

To make a Warden or a Pear Tart quartered.
TAke twenty good wardens, pare them, and cut them in a tart, and put to them
two pound of refined sugar, twenty whole cloves, a quarter of an ounce of
cinnamon broke into little bits, and three races of ginger pared and slic't
thin; then close up the tart and bake it, it will ask five hours baking, then
ice it with a quarter of a pound of double refined sugar, rose water, and
butter.

Other Tart of Wardens, Quinces, or Pears.
form of tart

FIrst bake them in a pot, then cut them in quarters and coat them, put them in
a tart made according to this form, close it up, and when it is baked, scrape
on sugar.

To make a Tart of green Pease.
TAke green pease and boil them tender, than pour them out into a cullender,
season them with saffron, salt, and put sugar to them and some sweet butter,
then close it up and bake it almost an hour, then draw it forth of the oven and
ice it, put in a little verjuyce, and shake them well together, then scrape on
sugar, and serve it in

To make a Tart of Hips.
TAke hips, cut them, and take out the feeds veryclean, then wash them and
season them with sugar, cinnamon, and ginger, close the tart, bake it, ice it,
scrape on sugar, and serve it in.

To make a Tart of Rice.
BOil the rice in milk or cream, being tender boild, pour it into a dish and
season it with nutmeg, ginget, cinnamon, pepper, salt, sugar, and the yolks of
six eggs, put it in the tart with some juice of orange; close it, and bake it,
being baked scrape on sugar, and so serve it up.

To make a Tart of Medlers.
TAke medlers that are rotten, strain them, and set them on a chafing dish of
coals, season them with sugar, cinnamon, and ginger, put some yolks of eggs to
them, let it boil a little, and lay it in a cut tart; being baked, scrape on
sugar.

To make a Cherry Tart.
TAke out the stones, and lay the cherries into the tart, with beaten cinnamon,
ginger, and sugar, then close it up, bake it, and ice it; then make a sirrup of
muskedine, and damask water, and pour it into the tart, scrape on sugar, and so
serve it.

To make a Strawberry Tart.
WAsh the strawberries, and put them into the tart, season them with cinnamon,
ginger, and a little red wine, then put on sugar, bake it half an hour, ice it,
scrape on sugar, and serve it.

To make a Taffety Tart.
FIrst wet the paste with butter and cold water, roll it very thin, then lay
apples in lays, and between every lay of apples strew some fine sugar, and
some lemon peel cut very small, you may also put some fennil-seed to them; let
them bake an hour or more, then ice them with rose water, sugar, and butter
beaten together, and wash them over with the same, strew more fine sugar on
them, and put them into the oven again, being iced dish them, and serve them
hot or cold.

To make an Almond Tart.
STrain beaten Almonds with cream, yolks of eggs, sugar, cinnamon, and ginger,
boil it thick, and fill your tart, being baked ice it.

To make a Damsin Tart.
BOil them in wine, and strain them with cream, sugar, cinnamon, and ginger,
boil it thick and fill your tart.

To make a Spinach Tart of three colors, green, yellow, and White.
TAke two handfuls of young tender spinach, wash it and put it into a skillet
of boiling liquor; being tender boild have a quart of cream boild with some
whole cinnamon, quartered nutmeg, and a grain of musk; then strain the cream,
twelve yolks of eggs, and the boild spinach into a dish, with some rose water,
a little sack, and some fine sugar, boil it over a chafing dish of coals, and
stir it that it curd not, keep it till the tart be dried in the oven, and dish
it in the form of three colors, green, white, and yellow.

To make Cream Tarts.
THicken cream with muskefied biscuit bread, and serve it in a dish, stick
wafers round about it, and slices of forms of cream tarts preserved citteron,
and in the middle a preserved orange with biskets, the garnish of the dish
being of puff-paste.

Or you may boil quinces, wardens pears, and pippins in slices or quarters, and
strain them into cream, as also these fruits, melacattons, necturnes,
apricocks, peaches, plums, or cherries, and make your tarts of these forms.

To make a French Tart.
TAke a pound of almonds, blanch and beat them into fine paste in a stone
mortar, with rose water, then beat the white breast of a roast cold turkey
being minced, and beat with it a pound of lard minced, with the marrow of four
bones, and a pound of butter, the juice of three lemons, two pound of hard
sugar; being fine beaten, slice a whole green piece of citron in small slices,
a quarter of a pound of pistaches, and the yolks of eight or ten eggs, mingle
all together, then make a paste for it with cold butter, two or three eggs, and
cold water, etc.

To make a Quodling Pie.
TAke green quodlings and quodle them, peel them and put them again into the
same water, cover them close and let them simper on embers till they be very
green, then take them up and let them drain, pick out the noses, and leave on
the stalks, then put them in a pie, and put to them fine sugar, whole cinnamon,
slic't ginger, a little musk, and rose water, close them up with a cut cover,
and as soon as it boils up in the oven, draw it, and ice it with rose water,
butter, and sugar.

Or you may preserve them and bake them in a dish, with paste, tart, or
patty-pan.

To make a Dish in the Italian Fashion.
TAke pleasant pears, slice them into thin slices, and put to them half as much
sugar as they weigh, then mince some candied citron, and candied orange small,
mix it with the pears and lay them on a bottom of cold butter paste in a
patty-pan with some fine beaten cinnamon; lay on the sugar and close it up, bake
it, and being baked, ice it with rose water, fine sugar, and butter.

For the several colors of Tarts.
IF to have them yellow, preserved quinces, apricocks, necturnes, and
melacattons, boil them up in white wine, with sugar, and strain them

Otherwise, strained yolks of eggs, and cream.

For green tarts, take green quodlings, green preserved apricocks, green
preserved plums, green grapes, and green gooseberries.

For red tarts, quinces, pippins, cherries, rasberries, barberries, red
currants, red gooseberries, damsons.

For black tarts, prunes, and many other berries preserved.

For white tarts, whites of eggs and cream.

Of all manner of tart stuff strained, that carries his color black, as
Prunes, Damsins, etc. for laid or set Tarts, Dishes, or Patty-pans.

Tart Stuff of Damsins.
TAke a pottle of damsins and good ripe apples, being pared and cut into
quarters, put them into an earthen pot with a little whole cinnamon, slic't
ginger, and sugar, bake them, and being cold strain them with some rose water,
and boil the stuff thick, etc.

Other Tart Stuff that carries his color black.
TAke three pound of prunes, and eight fair pippins pared and cored, stew them
together with some claret wine, some whole cinnamon, slic't ginger, a sprig of
rosemary, sugar, and a clove or two, being well stewed and cold, strain them
with rose water and sugar.

To make other black Tart Stuff.
TAke twelve pound of prunes, and sixteen pound of raisins, wash them clean,
and stew them in a pot with water, boil them till they be very tender, and then
strain them through a course strainer; season it with beaten ginger and sugar,
and give it a walm on the fire.

Yellow Tart Stuff.
TAke twelve yolks of eggs, beat them with a quart of cream, and bake them in a
soft oven; being baked strain them with some fine sugar, rose water, musk,
ambergreece, and a little sack; or in place of baking, boil the cream and eggs.

White Tart Stuff.
MAke the white Tart stuff with cream, in all points as the yellow, and the
same seasoning.

Green Tart Stuff.
TAke spinach, boild green pease, green apricocks, green plumbs quodled,
peaches quodled, quodled green necturnes, gooseberries quodled, green sorrel,
and the juice of green wheat.

To bake Apricocks green.
TAke young green apricocks, so tender, that you may thrust a pin through the
stone, scald them and scrape the outside, often putting them in water as you peel
them till your tart be ready, then dry them and fill the tart with them, and
lay on good store of fine sugar, close it up and bake it, ice it, scrape on
sugar, and serve it up.

To bake Mellacattons.
TAke and wipe them clean, and put them in a pie made scollop ways or in some
other pretty work, fill the pie, and put them in whole with weight for weight
in refined sugar, close it up and bake it, being baked ice it.

Sometimes for change add to them some chips or bits of whole cinnamon, a few
whole cloves, and slic't ginger.

To preserve Apricocks or any Plumbs green.
TAke apricocks when they are so young and green, that you may put a needle
through stone and all, but all other plumbs must be taken green, and at the
highest growth, then put them in indifferent hot water to break them, let them
stand close covered in that hot water till a thin skin will come off with
scraping, all this while they will look yellow, then put them into another
skillet of hot water, and let them stand covered until they turn to a perfect
green, then take them out, weigh them, take their weight in sugar and something
more, and so preserve them. Clarify the sugar with the white of an egg and
some water.

To preserve Apricocks being ripe.
STone them, then weigh them with sugar, and take weight for weight, pare them
and strew on the sugar, let them stand till the moisture of the apricocks has
wet the sugar, and stands in a sirrup; then set them on a soft fire not
suffering them to boil till your sugar be all melted; then boil them a pretty
pace for half an hour, still stirring them in the sirrup, then set them by two
hours, and boil them again till your sirrup be thick, and your apricocks look
clear, boil up the sirrup higher, then take it off, and being cold put in the
apricocks into a gallipot or glass, close them up with a clean paper, and
leather over all.

To preserve Peaches after the Venetian way.
TAke twenty young peaches, part them in two, and take out the stones, then
take as much sugar as they weigh, and some rose water, put in the peaches, and
make a sirrup that it may stand and stick to your fingers, let them boil softly
a while, then lay them in a dish, and let them stand in the same two or three
days, then set your sirrup on the fire, let it boil up, and then put in the
peaches, and so preserve them.

To preserve Mellacattons.
STone them and parboil them in water, then peel off the outward skin of them,
they will boil as long as a piece of beef, and therefore you need not fear the
breaking of them; when they are boild tender, make sirrup of them as you do of
any other fruit, and keep them all the year.

To preserve Cherries.
TAke a pound of the smallest cherries, but let them be well colored, boil
them tender in a pint of fair water, then strain the liquor from the cherries,
and take two pound of other fair cherries, stone them, and put them in your
preserving-pan, with a laying of cherries and a laying of sugar, then pour the
sirrup of the other strained cherries over them, and let them boil as fast as
may be with a blazing fire, that the sirrup may boil over them; when you see
that the sirrup is of a good color, something thick, and begins to jelly, set
them a cooling, and being cold pot them, and so keep them all the year.

To preserve Damsins.
TAke damsins that are large and well colored, (but not through ripe, for then
they will break) pick them clean, and wipe them one by one; then weigh them,
and to every pound of damsins you must take a pound of Barbery sugar, white and
good dissolved in half a pint or more of fair water, boil it almost to the
height of a sirrup, and then put in the damsins, keeping them with a continual
scumming and stirring, so let them boil on a gentle fire till they be enough,
then take them off and keep them all the year.

To preserve Grapes as green as Grass.
TAke grapes very green, stone them, and cut them into little bunches, then
take the like quantity of refined sugar finely beaten, and strew a row of sugar
in your preserving pan, and a lay of grapes upon it, then strew on more sugar
upon them, put to them four or five spoonfulls of fair water, and boil them up
as fast as you can.

To preserve Barberries.
TAke barberries very fair and well colored, pick out the stones, weigh them,
and to every ounce of barberries take three ounces of hard sugar, half an ounce
of pulp of barberries, and an ounce of red rose water to dissolve the sugar:
boil it to a sirrup, then put in the barberries and let them boil a quarter of
an hour, then take them up, and being cool pot them, and they will keep their
color all the year. Thus you may preserve red currants, etc.

To preserve Gooseberries green.
TAke some of the largest gooseberries that are called Gascoyn gooseberries,
set a pan of water on the fire, and when it is lukewarm put in the berries and
cover them close, keep them warm half an hour; then have another posnet of warm
water, put them into that, in like sort quodle them three times over in hot
water till they look green; then pour them into a sieve, let all the water run
from them, and put them to as much clarified sugar as will cover them, let them
simper leasurely close covered, then your gooseberries will look as green as
leek blades, let them stand simpering in that sirrup for an hour, then take
them off the fire, and let the sirrup stand till it be cold, then warm them
once or twice, take them up, and let the sirrup boil by it self, pot them, and
keep them.

To preserve Rasberries.
TAke fair ripe rasberries, (but not over ripe) pick them from the stalks, then
take weight for weight of double refined sugar, and the juice of rasberries; to
a pound of rasberries take a quarter of a pint of raspass juice, and as much of
fair water, boil up the sugar and liquor, and make the sirrup, scum it, and put
in the raspass, stir them into the sirrup, and boil them not too much; being
preserved take them up, and boil the sirrup by it self, not too long, it will
keep the color: being cold, pot them and keep them. Thus you may also preserve
strawberries.

The time to preserve green Fruits.
GOseberries must be taken about Whitsuntide, as you see them in bigness, the
long gooseberry will be sooner then the red, the white Wheat plum which is ever
ripe in Wheat Harvest, must be taken in the midst of July, the Pear plumb in
the midst of August, the Peach and Pippin about Bartholomew tide or a little
before, the Grape in the first week of September. Note that to all your green
fruits in general that you will preserve in sirrup, you you must take to every
pound of fruit, a pound and two ounces of sugar, and a grain of musk; your
plumb, pippin and peach will have three quarters of an hour boiling, or rather
more, and that very softly, keep the fruit as whole as you can; your grapes and
gooseberries must boil half an hour something fast and they will be the fuller.
Note also that to all your Conserves you take the full weight of sugar, then
take two skillets of water, and when they are scalding hot, put the fruits
first into one of them, and when that grows cold put them in the other,
changing them till they be about to peel, then peel them, and afterward settle
them in the same water till they look green, then take them and put them into
sugar sirrup, and so let them gently boil till they come to a jelly; let them
stand therein a quarter of an hour, then put them into a pot and keep them.

Section 11.
To make all manner of made Dishes, with, or without Paste.

To make a Paste for a Pie.
TAke to a gallon of flour a pound of butter, boil it in fair water, and make
the paste up quick.

To make cool Butter Paste for Patty-pans or Pasties.
TAke to every peck of flour five pound of butter, the whites of six eggs, and
work it well together with cold spring water; you must bestow a great deal of
pains and but little water, or you put out the Millers eyes. This paste is good
only for patty-pan and pasty.

Sometimes for this paste put in but eight yolks of eggs, and but two whites,
and six pound of butter.

To make Paste for thin bake't Meats.
THe paste for your thin and standing bake't meats must be made with boiling
water, put to every peck of flour two pound of butter, but let your butter boil
first in your liquor.

To make Custard Paste.
LEt it be only boiling water and flour without butter, or put sugar to it,
which will add to the stifness of it, and thus likewise all pastes for Cuts
and Orangado Tarts, or such like.

Paste for made Dishes in the Summer.
TAke to a gallon of flour three pound of butter, eight yolks of eggs, and a
pint of cream or almond milk, work up the butter and eggs dry into the flour,
then put cream to it, and make it pretty stiff.

Paste Royal for made Dishes.
TAke to a gallon of flour a pound of sugar, a quart of almond milk, a pound
and a half of butter, and a little saffron, work up all cold together, with
some beaten cinnamon, two or three eggs, rose water, and a grain of ambergreece
and musk.

Otherwise.

Take a pottle of flour, half a pound of butter, six yolks of eggs, a pint of
cream, a quarter of a pound of sugar, and some fine beaten cinnamon, and work up
all cold.

Otherwise.

Take to a pottle of flour, four eggs, a pound and a half of butter, and work
them up dry in the flour, then make up the paste with a pint of white wine,
rose water, and sugar.

To make Paste for Lent for made Dishes.
TAke a quart of flour, make it up with almond milk, half a pound of butter,
and some saffron.

To make Puff Paste diverse ways.
The first way.
TAke a pottle of flour, mix it with cold water, half a pound of butter, and
the whites of five eggs, work these together very well and stiff, then roll it
out very thin, and put flour under it and over it, then take near a pound of
butter, and lay it in bits all over it, double it in five or six doubles; this
being done, roll it out the second time, and serve it as at the first, then
roll it out and cut it into what form, or for what use you please; you need not
fear the curle, for it will divide as often as you double it, which ten or
twelve times is enough for any use.

The second way.
Take a quart of flour, and a pound and a half of butter, work the half pound
of butter dry into the flour, then put three or four eggs to it, and as much
cold water as will make it leith paste, work it in a piece of a foot long, then
strew a little flour on the table, take it by the end, and beat it till it
stretch to be long, then put the ends together, and beat it again, and so do
five or six times, then work it up round, and roll it up broad; then your pound
of butter with a rouling-pin, that it may be little, take little bits thereof,
and stick it all over the paste, fold up your paste close and coast it down
with your rouling-pin, roll it out again, and so do five or six time, then use
it as you will.

The third way.
Break two eggs into three pints of flour, make it with cold water, and roll it
out pretty thick and square, then take so much butter as paste, lay it in
ranks, and divide your butter in five pieces, that you may lay it on at five
several times, roll your paste very broad, and stick one part of the butter in
little pieces all over your paste, then throw a handful of flour slightly on,
fould up your paste and beat it with a rouling-pin, so roll it out again, thus
do five times, and make it up.

The fourth way.
Take to a quart of flour, four whites and but two yolks of eggs, and make it
up with as much cream as will make it up pretty stiff paste, then roll it out,
and beat three quarters of a pound of butter of equal hardness of the paste,
lay it on the paste in little bits at ten several times; drive out your paste
always one way, and being made use it as you will.

The fifth way.
Work up a quart of flour with half pound of butter, three whites of eggs, and
some fair spring water, make it a pretty stiff paste and drive it out, then
beat half a pound of more butter of equal hardness of the paste, and lay it on
the paste in little bits at three several times, roll it out and use it for
what use you please.

Drive the paste out every time very thin.

A made Dish, or Florentine, of any kind of Tongue, in Dish, Pie, or Patty-pan.
TAke a fresh neats tongue, boil it tender and blanch it, being cold cut it
into little square bits as big as a nutmeg, and lard it with very small lard;
then have another tongue raw, take off the skin, and mince it with beef suet,
then lay on one half of it in the dish or patty-pan upon a sheet of paste: then
lay on the tongue being larded and finely seasoned with nutmeg, pepper, and
salt; then with the other minced tongue put grated bread to it, some yolks of
raw eggs, some sweet herbs minced small, and made up into balls as big as a
walnut, lay them on the other tongue, with some chestnuts, marrow, large mace,
some grapes, gooseberries, or barberries, some slices of interlarded bacon and
butter, close it up and bake it, being baked liquor it with grape-verjuyce,
beaten butter, and the yolks of three or four eggs strained with the verjuyce.

Made Dish of Tongues otherwise.
TAke neats tongues or smaller tongues, boil them tender and slice them thin,
then season them with nutmeg, pepper, beaten cinnamon, salt, and some ginger,
season them lightly and lay them in a dish on a bottom or sheet of paste
mingled with some currants, marrow, large mace, dates, slic't lemon, grapes,
barberries, or gooseberries, and butter, close up the dish, and being almost
baked, liquor it with white wine, butter, and sugar, and ice it.

Made Dish in Paste of two Rabits, with sweet liquor.
TAke the rabits, flay them, draw them, and cut them into small pieces as big
as a walnut, then wash and dry them with a clean cloth, and season them with
pepper, nutmeg, and salt; lay them on a bottom of paste, also lay on them
dates, preserved lettice stalks, marrow, large mace, grapes, and slic't orange
or lemon, put butter to it, close it up and bake it, being baked, liquor it
with sugar, white wine, and butter; or in place of wine, grape verjuyce, and
strained yolks of raw eggs.

In winter bake them with currants, prunes, skirrets, raisins of the sun, etc.

A made Dish, or Florentine, of a Partridge or Capon.
BEing roasted and minced very small with as much beef marrow, put to it two
ounces of orangado minced small with as much green citron minced also, season
the meat with a little beaten cloves, mace, nutmeg, salt, and sugar, mix all
together, and bake it in puff-paste; when it is baked, open it and put in half
a grain of musk or ambergreece, dissolved with a little rose water, and the
juice of oranges, stir all together amongst the meat, cover it again and serve
it to the table.

To make a Florentine, or Dish without Paste, or on Paste.
TAke a leg of mutton or veal, shave it into thin slices, and mingle it with
some sweet herbs, as sweet marjoram, time, savory, parsley, and rosemary, being
minced very smail, a clove of garlic, some beaten nutmeg, pepper, a minced
onion, some grated manchet, and three or four yolks of raw eggs, mix all
together with a little salt, some thin slices of interlarded bacon, and some
oyster liquor, lay the meat round the dish on a sheet of paste, or in the dish
without paste, bake it, and being baked, stick bay leaves round the dish.

To bake Potatoes, Artichocks, in Dish, Pie, or Patty-pan, either in Paste, or
little Pasties, according to these forms.
forms of pies

TAke any of these roots and boil them in fair water, but put them not in till
the water boils, being tender boild, blanch them, and season them with nutmeg,
pepper, cinnamon, and salt, season them lightly, then lay on a sheet of paste in
a dish, and lay on some bits of butter, then lay on the potatoes round the
dish, also some eringo-roots, and dates in halves, beef-marrow, large mace,
slic't lemon, and some butter, close it up with another sheet of paste, bake
it, and being baked, liquor it with grape verjuyce, butter, and sugar, and ice
it with rose water and sugar.

To make a made Dish of Spinach in Paste baked.
TAke some young spinach, and put it into boiling hot fair water, having boiled
two or three walms, drain it from the water, chop it very small, and put it in
a dish with some beaten cinnamon, salt, sugar, a few slic't dates, a grain of
musk dissolved in rose water, some yolks of hard eggs chopped small, some
currants and butter; stew these foresaid materials on a chafing dish of coals,
then have a dish of short paste on it, and put this composition upon it, either
with a cut, a close cover, or none; bake it, and being baked, ice it with some
fine sugar, rose water, and butter.

Other made Dish of Spinach in Paste baked.
BOil spnage as beforesaid, being tender boild, drain it in a cillender, chop
it small, and strain it with half a pound of almond paste, three or four yolks
of eggs, half a grain of musk, three or four spoonfulls of cream, a quartern of
fine sugar and a little salt; then bake it on a sheet of piste, on a dish
without a cover, in a very softly oven, being fine and green baked, stick it
with preserved barberries or strew on red and white biskets, or red and white
muskedines, and scrape on fine sugar.

A made Dish of Spinach otherwise.
TAke a pound of fat and well relished cheese, and a pound of cheese-curds,
stamp them in a mortar with some sugar, then put in a pint of the juice of
spinach, a pint of cream, ten eggs, cinnamon, pepper, nutmeg, and cloves; make
your dish without a cover, according to this form, being baked ice it.

form of spinach dish

To make a made Dish of Barberries.
TAke a good quantity of them and boil them with claret wine, rose water, and
sugar, being boild very thick, strain them, and put them on a bottom of puff
paste in a dish, or short fine paste made of sugar, fineflour, cold butter, and
cold water, and a cut cover of the sime paste, bake it, and ice it, and cast
biscuit on it, but before you lay on the iced cover, stick it with raw
barberries is the pulp or stuff.

To make a Pescod Dish in Puff paste.
TAke a pound of almonds, and a quarter of a pound of sugar, beat the almonds
finely to a paste with some rose water, then beat the sugar amongst them,
mingle some sweet butter with it, and make this stuff up in puff paste like
pescods, bake them upon papers, and being baked, ice them with rose water,
butter, and fine sugar.

In this fashion you may make pescod stuff of preserved quinces, pippins,
pears, or preserved plumbs in puff paste.

Made Dishes of Frogs in the Italian Fashion.
TAke the thighs and fry them in clarified butter, then have slices of salt
eels watered, flayed, boned, boiled, and cold, slice them in thin slices and
season both with pepper, nutmeg, and ginger, lay butter on your paste, and lay
a rank of frog and a rank of eel, some currants, gooseberries, or grapes,
raisins, pineapple seeds, juice of orange, sugar, and butter; thus do three
times, close up your dish, and being baked ice it.

Make your paste of almond milk, flour, butter, yolks of eggs, and sugar.

In the foresaid dish you may add fried onions, yolks of hard eggs,
cheese-curds, almond paste, or grated cheese.

To make a made Dish of Marrow.
TAke the marrow of two or three marrow bones, cut it into pieces like great
square dice, and put to it a penny manchet grated fine, some slic't dates, half
a quarter of currants, a little cream, roasted wardens, pippins or quinces
slic't, and two or three yolks of raw eggs, season them with cinnamon, ginger,
and sugar, and mingle all together.

A made Dish of Rice in Puff Paste.
BOil your rice in fair water very tender, scum it, and being boild put it in a
dish, then put to it butter, sugar, nutmeg, salt, rose water, and the yolks of
six or eight eggs, put it in a dish of Puff-paste, close it up and bake it,
being baked ice it, and cast on red and white biskets, and scraping sugar.

Sometimes for change you may add boild currants and beaten cinnamon, and leave
out nutmeg.

Otherwyes, of Almond Paste and boild Rice.
MIX all together with some cream, rose water, sugar-cinamon, yolks of eggs,
salt, some boild currants, and butter; close it up and bake it in Puff-paste,
ice it, and cast on red and white biskets and scraping sugar.

Otherwise, a made Dish of Rice in Paste.
WAsh the rice clean, and boil it in cream till it be somewhat thick, then put
it out into a dish, and put to it some sugar, butter, six or eight yolks of
eggs, beaten cinnamon, slie't dates, currants, rose water, and salt, mix all
together, and bake it in puff-paste or short paste, being baked ice it, and
cast on biskets on it.

To make a made Dish of Rice, Flour, and Cream.
TAke half a pound of rice, dust it and pick it clean, then wash it, dry it,
lay it abroad in a dish as thin as you can, or dry in a temperate oven; being
well dried rub it, and beat it in a mortar till it be as fine as flour; then
take a pint of good thick cream, the whites of three new laid eggs well beaten
together, and a little rose water, set it on a soft fire, and boil it till it
be very thick, then put it in a platter and let it stand till it be cold, then
slice it out like leach, cast some biscuit upon it, and so serve it.

To make a made Dish of Rice, Prunes, and Raisins.
TAke a pound of prunes, and as many raisins of the sun, pick and wash them,
then boil them with water and wine, of each a like quantity; when you first set
them on the fire, put rice flour to them, being tender boild strain them with
half a pound of sugar, and some rose water, then stir the stuff till it be
thick like leach, put it in a little earthen pan, being cold slice it, dish it,
and cast red and white biskets on it.

To make a made Dish of Blanchmanger.
TAke a pint of cream, the whites of six new laid eggs, and some sugar, set
them over a soft fire in a skillet, and stir it continually till it be good and
thick, then strain it, and being cold, dish it on a puff-paste bottom with a
cut cover, and cast biskets on it.

A made Dish of Custard-stuff, called an Artichock Dish.
BOil custard stuff in a clean scowred skillet, stir it continually till it be
somewhat thick, then put it in a clean strainer, and let it drain in a dish,
strain it with a little musk or ambergreece, then bake a star of puff-paste on
a paper; being baked take it off the paper, and put it in a dish for your
stuff, then have lozenges also ready baked of puff-paste, stick it round with
them, and scrape on fine sugar.

A made Dish of Butter and Eggs.
TAke the yolks of twenty four eggs, and strain them with cinnamon, sugar, and
salt, then put melted butter to them, some fine minced pippins, and minced
citron, put it on your dish of paste, and put slices of citron round about it,
bar it with puff-paste, and the bottom also, or short paste in the bottom.

To make a made Dish of Curds.
TAke some very tender curds, wring the whey from them very well, then put to
them two raw eggs, currants, sweet butter, rose water, cinnamon, sugar, and
mingle all together; then make a fine paste with flour, yolks of eggs,
rose water, and other water, sugar, saffron, and butter wrought up cold, bake
it either in this paste or in puff-paste, being baked ice it with rose water,
sugar, and butter.

To make Paste of Violets, Cowslips, Burrage, Bugloss, Rosemary Flowers, etc.
TAke any of these flowers, pick the best of them, and stamp them in a stone
mortar, then take double refined sugar, and boil it to a candy height with as
much rose water as will melt it, stir it continually in the boiling, and being
boild thick, cast it into lumps upon a pie plate, when it is cold box them, and
keep them all the year in a stove.

To make the Portingal Tarts for Banqueting.
TAke a pound of marchpane Paste being finely beaten, and put into it a grain
of musk, six spoonfuls of rose water, and the weight of a groat of Oris Powder,
boil all on a chafing dish of coals till it be something stiff; then take the
whites of two eggs beaten to froath, put them into it, and boil it again a
little, let it stand till it be cold, mould it, and roll it out thin; then take
a pound more of almond paste unboiled, and put to it four ounces of caraway
seed, a grain of musk, and three drops of oil of lemons, roll the paste into
small rouls as big as walnuts, and lap these balls into the first made paste,
flat them down like puffs with your thumbs a little like figs, and bake them
upon marchpane wafers.

To make a Marchpane.
TAke two pound of almonds blanched and beaten in a stone mortar, till they
begin to come to a fine paste, form of marchpane then take a pound of sifted
sugar, put it in the mortar with the almonds, and make it into a perfect paste,
putting to it now and then in the beating of it a spoonful of rose water to
keep it from oyling, when you have beaten it to a puff paste, drive it out as
big as a charger, and set an edge about it as you do upon a quodling tart, and
a bottom of wafers under it, thus bake it in an oven or baking-pan; when you
see it is white, hard, and dry, take it out and ice it with rose water and
sugar, being made as thick as butter for fritters, so spread it on with a wing
feather, and put it into the oven again; when you see it rise high, then take
it out and garnish it with some pretty conceits made of the the same stuff,
stick long comfets upright on it, and so serve it.

To make Collops like Bacon of Marchpans.
TAke some of your Marchpane paste and work it with red sanders till it be red,
then roll a broad sheet of white marchpane paste, and a sheet of red paste,
three of the white, and four of the red, lay them one upon another, other, dry
it, cut it overthwart, and it will look like collops of bacon.

To make Almond Bread.
TAke almonds and lay them in water all night, blanch them and slice them, take
to every pound of almonds a pound of fine sugar finely beaten, and mingle them
together, then beat the whites of three eggs to a high froath, and mix it well
with the almonds and sugar; then have some plates and strew some flour on them,
lay wafers on them and almonds with the edges upwards, lay them as round as you
can, and scrape a little sugar on them when they are ready to set in the oven,
which must not be so hot as to color white paper; being a little baked take
them out, set them on a plate, then put them in again, and keep them in a stove.

To make Almond Biscuit.
TAke the whites of four new laid eggs and two yolks, beat them together very
well for an hour, then have in readiness a quarter of a pound of the best
almonds blanched in cold water, beat them very small with rose water to keep
them from oyling, then have a pound of the best loaf sugar finely beaten, beat
it in the eggs a while, then put in the almonds, and five or six spoonfuls of
fine flour, so bake them on paper, plates, or wafers; then have a little fine
sugar in a piece of tiffany, dust them over as they go into the oven, and bake
them as you do biscuit.

To make Almond Cakes.
TAke a pound of almonds, blanch them and beat them very small with a little
rose water where some musk has been steeped, put a pound of sugar to them fine
beaten, and four yolks of eggs, but first beat the sugar and the eggs well
together, then put them to the almonds and rose water, and lay the cakes on
wafers by half spoonfuls, set them into an oven after manchet is baken.

To make Almond Cakes otherwise.
TAke a pound of the best Jordan almonds, blanch them in cold water as you do
marchpane, being blanched wipe them dry in a clean cloth, and cut away all the
rotten from them, then pound them in a stone mortar, and sometimes in the
beating put in a spoonful of rose water wherein you must steep some musk; when
they are beaten small mix the almonds with a pound of refined sugar beaten and
searsed; then put the stuff on a chafing dish of coals in a made dish, keep it
stirring, and beat the whites of seven eggs all to froath, put it into the
stuff, and mix it very well together, drop it on a white paper, put it on
plates, and bake them in an oven, but they must not be colored.

To make white Ambergreece Cakes.
TAke the purest refined sugar that can be got, beat it and searce it; then
have six new laid eggs and beat them into a froath, take the froath as it
rises, and drop it into the sugar by little and little, grinding it still
round in a marble mortar with the pestle till it be thoroughly moistened, and
wrought thin enough to drop on plates; then put in some ambergreece, a little
civet, and some anniseed well picked, then take your pie plates, wipe them,
butter them, and drop the stuff on them with a spoon in form of round cakes,
put them into a very mild oven, and when you see them be hard and rise a
little, take them out and keep them for use.

To make Sugar Cakes or Jamballs.
TAke two pound of flour, dry it and season it very fine, then take a pound of
loaf sugar, beat it very fine, and searce it, mingle your flour and sugar very
well; then take a pound and a half of sweet butter, wash out the salt, and
break it into bits into the flour and sugar, then take the yolks of four new
laid eggs, four or five spoonfulls of sack, and four spoonfulls of cream, beat
all these together, put them into the flour, and work it up into paste, make
them into what fashion you please, lay them upon paper or plates, and put them
into the oven; be careful of them, for a very little thing bakes them.

To make Jemelloes.
TAke a pound of fine sugar being finely beaten, and the yolks of four new laid
eggs, and a grain of musk, a thimble full of caraway seed searsed, a little
gum-dragon steeped in rose water, and six spoonfulls of fine flour; beat all
these into a thin paste a little stiffer then butter, then run it through a
butter squirt of two or three else long, bigger then a wheat straw, and let
them dry upon sheets of paper a quarter of an hour, then tie them in knots or
what pretty fashion you please, and when they be dry, boil them in rose water
and sugar; it is an excellent sort of banqueting.

To make Jamballs.
TAke a pint of fine wheat flour, the yolks of three or four new laid eggs,
three or four spoonful of sweet cream, a few anniseeds, and some cold butter,
make it into paste, and roll it into long rouls as big as a little arrow, make
them into diverse knots, then boil them in fair water Iske simnells; bake them,
and being baked, box them and keep them in a stove. Thus you may use them and
keep them all the year.

To make Sugar Plate.
TAke double refined sugar, sift it very small through a fine searce, then take
the white of an egg, gum-dragon, and rose water, wet it, and beat it in a
mortar till you are able to mould it, but wet it not too much at the first. If
you will color it, and the color be of a watery substance, put it in with the
rose water, if a powder, mix it with your sugar before you wet it; when you
have beat it in the mortar, and that it is all wet, and your color well mixed
in every place, then mould it and make it into what form you please.

To make Muskedines, called Rising Comfits or Kissing Comfits.
TAke half a pound of refined sugar, being beaten and searced, put into it two
grains of musk, a grain of civet, two grains of ambergreece, and a thimble full
of white orris powder, beat all these with gum-dragon steeped in rose water;
then roll it as thin as you can and cut it into little losinges with your iging
iron, and stow them in some warm oven or stove, then box them and keep them all
the year.

To make Cracknells.
TAke half a pound of fine flour dried and searced, and as much fine sugar
searced, mingled with a spoonful of coriander feed bruised, and two ounces of
butter rubbed amongst the flour and sugar, wet it with the yolks of two eggs,
half a spoonful of white rose water, and two spoonfulls of cream, or as much
as will wet it; work the paste till it be soft and limber to roll and work,
then roll it very thin, and cut them round by little plats, lay them upon
buttered papers, and when they go into the oven, prick them, and wash the tops
with the yolk of an egg, beaten and made thin with rose water or fair water;
they will give with keeping, therefore before they are eaten they must be dried
in a warm oven to make them crisp.

To make Mackeroons.
TAke a pound of the finest sugar, and a pound of the best jordan almonds,
steep them in cold water, blanch them, and pick out the spots; then beat them
to a perfect paste in a stone mortar, in the beating of them put rose water to
them to keep them from oyling, being finely beat, put them in a dish with the
sugar, and set them over a chafing dish of coals, stir it till it will come
clean from the bottom of the dish, then put in two grains of musk, and three of
ambergreece.

To make the Italian Chips.
TAke some paste of flowers, beat them to fine powder, and searce or sift them;
then take some gum-dragon steeped in rose water, beat it to a perfect paste in
a marble mortar, then roll it thin and lay one color upon another in a long
roll, roll them very thin, then cut them overthwart, and they will look of
diverse pretty colors like marble.

To make Biscuit bread.
TAke a pound of sugar searced very fine, a pound of flour well dried, twelve
eggs, and but six whites, a handful of caraway-seed, and a little salt; beat
all these together the space of an hour, then your oven being hot, put them
into plates or tin things, butter them, and wipe them, a spoonful into a plate
is enough, so fet them into the oven, and make it as hot as to bake them for
manchet.

To make Bisquite du Roy.
TAke a pound of fine searced sugar, a pound of fine flour, and six eggs, beat
them very well, then put them all into a stone mortar, and pound them for the
space of an hour and a half, let it not stand still, for then it will be heavy,
and when you have beaten it so long a time, put in half an ounce of anniseeds;
then butter over some pie plates, and drop the stuff on the plate as fast as
two or three can with spoons, shape them round as near as you can, and set them
into an oven as hot as for manchet, but the less they are colored the better.

Bisquite du Roy otherwise.
TAke to a pound of flour a pound of sugar, and twelve new laid eggs, beat them
in a deep dish, then put to them two grains of musk dissolved, rose water,
anniseed, and coriander seed, beat them the space of an hour with a wooden
spatter; then the oven being ready, have white tin moulds buttered, and fill
them with this bisquite, strew double refined sugar on them, and bake them;
when they rise out of the moulds draw them, and put them on a great pasty
plate, or pie plate, and dry them in a stove, or put them in a square lattin
box and lay white papers betwixt every range or rank, have a padlock to it, and
set it over a warm oven, so keep them, and thus for any kind of biscuit,
makeroons, march-pane, sugar plates or pasties, set them in a temperate place
where they may not give with every change of weather, and thus you may keep
them very long.

To make Shell Bread.
TAke a quarter of a pound of rice flour, a quarter of a pound of fine flour,
the yolks of four new laid eggs, and a little rose water, and a grain of musk;
make these into a perfect paste, then roll it very thin and bake it in great
muscle shells, but first toste the shells in butter melted, when they be baked,
boil them in melted sugar as you boil a simnell, then lay them on the bottom of
a wooden sieve, and they will eat as crisp as a wafer.

To make Bean Bread.
TAke two pound of blanched almonds and slice them, take to them two pound of
double refined sugar, finely beaten and searsed, five whites of eggs beaten to
froth, a little musk steeped in rose water, and some anniseeds, mingle them
altogether in a dish, and bake them on pewter plates buttered, then afterward
dry them and stove them.

To make Ginger Bread.
TAke a pound of jordan almonds, and a penny manchet grated and sifted and
mingled amongst the almond paste very fine beaten, an ounce of slic't ginger,
two thimble fulls of liquoras and anniseed in powder finely searced, beat all
in a mortar together, with two or three spoonfulls of rose water, beat them to
a perfect paste with half a pound of sugar, mould it and roll it thin, then
print it and dry it in a stove, and gild it if you please.

Thus you may make ginger bread of sugar plate, putting sugar to it as
abovesaid.

To make Ipocras.
TAke to a gallon of wine, three ounces of cinnamon, two ounces of slic't
ginger, a quarter of an ounce of cloves, an ounce of mace, twenty corns of
pepper, an ounce of nutmegs, three pound of sugar, and two quarts of cream.

Otherwise.

Take to a pottle of wine an ounce of cinnamon, an ounce of ginger, an ounce of
nutmegs, a quarter of an ounce of cloves, seven corns of pepper, a handful of
rosemary flowers, and two pound of sugar.

To make excellent Mead much commended.
TAke to every quart of honey a gallon of fair spring water, boil it well with
nutmeg and ginger bruised a little, in the boiling scum it well, and being
boild, set it a cooling in several vessels that it may stand thin, then the
next day put it in the vessel and let it stand a week or two, then draw it in
bottles.

If it be to drink in a short time you may work it as bear, but it will not
keep long.

Or take to every gallon of water, a quart of honey, a quarter of an ounce of
mace, as much ginger and cinnamon, and half as much cloves, bruise them, and use
them as abovesaid.

Otherwise.

Take five quarts and a pint of water, warm it, and put to it a quart of honey,
and to every gallon of liquor one lemon, and a quarter of an ounce of nutmegs;
it must boil till the scum rise black, and if you will have it quickly ready to
drink, squeese into it a lemon when you tun it, and tun it cold.

To make Metheglin.
TAke all sorts of herbs that are good and wholesome, as balm, mint, rosemary,
fennil, angelica, wild time, hysop, burnet, agrimony, and such other field
herbs, half a handful of each, boil and strain them, and let the liquor stand
till the next day, being settled take two gallons and a half of honey, let it
boil an hour, and in the boiling scum it very clean, set it a cooling as you do
beer, and when it is cold take very good barm, and put it into the bottom of
the tub, by a little and a little as to beer, keeping back the thick settling
that lies in the bottom of the vessel that it is cooled in; when it is all put
together cover it with a cloth and let it work very near three days, then when
you mean to put it up, skim off all the barm clean, and put it up into a
vessel, but you must not stop the vessel very close in three or four days, but
let it have some vent to work; when it is close stopped you must look often to
it, and have a peg on the top to give it vent when you hear it make a noise as
it will do, or else it will break the vessel.

Sometimes make a bag and put in good store of slic't ginger, some cloves and
cinnamon, boild or not.

Section 12.
To make all manner of Creams, Sack-Possets, Sillabubs, Blamangers, White-Pots,
Fools, Wassels, etc.

To make Apple Cream.
TAke twelve pippins, pare, and slice, or quarter them, then put them in a
skillet with some claret wine, and a race of ginger sliced thin, a little lemon
peel cut small, and some sugar; let all these stew together till they be soft,
then take them off the fire and put them in a dish, and when they be cold take
a quart of cream boild with a little nutmeg, and put in of the apple stuff to
make it of what thickness you please, and so serve it up.

To make Codling Cream.
TAke twenty fair codlings being peeld and codled tender and green, put them in
a clear silver dish, filled half full of rose water, and half a pound of sugar,
boil all this liquor together till half be consumed, and keep it stirring till
it be ready, then fill up the dish with good thick and sweet cream, stir it
till it be well mingled, and when it has boild round about the dish, take it
off, sweeten it with fine sugar, and serve it cold.

Otherwise.

Codle forty fair codlings green and tender, then peel and core them, and beat
them in a mortar, strain them with a quart of cream, and mix them well together
in a dish with fine sugar, sack, musk, and rose water. Thus you may do with any
fruit you please.

To boil Cream with Codlings.
BOil a quart of cream with mace, sugar, two yolks of eggs, two spoonfuls of
rose water, and a grain of ambergreece, put it into the cream, and set them
over the fire till they be ready to boil, then set them to cool, stirring it
till it be cold; then take a quart of green codling stuff strained, put it into
a silver dish, and mingle it with cream.

To make Quince Cream.
TAke and boil them in fair water, but first let the water boil, then put them
in, and being tender boiled take them up and peel them, strain them and mingle
it with fine sugar, then take some very good and sweet cream, mix all together,
and make it of a fit thickness, or boil the cream with a stick of cinnamon, and
let it stand till it be cold before you put it to the quinces. Thus you may do
wardens or pears.

To make Plumb Cream.
TAke any kind of plumbs, apricocks, or the like, and put them in a dish with
some sugar, white wine, sack, claret, or rose water, close them up with a piece
of paste between two dishes; being baked and cold, put to them cream boild with
eggs, or without, or raw, and scrape on sugar, etc.

To make Gooseberry Cream.
COdle them green, and boil them up with sugar, being preserved put them into
the cream strained or whole, scrape sugar on them, and so serve them cold in
boild or raw cream. Thus you may do strawberries, raspas, or red currants, put
in raw cream whole, or serve them with wine and sugar in a dish without cream.

To make Snow Cream.
TAke a quart of cream, six whites of eggs, a quartern of rose water, a quarter
of a pound of double refined sugar, beat them together in a deep basin or a
boul-dish; then have a fine silver dish with a penny manchet, the bottom and
upper crust being taken away, and made fast with paste to the bottom of the
dish, and a straight sprig of rosemary set in the middle of it; then beat the
cream and eggs together, and as it froatheth take it off with a spoon, and lay
it on the bread and rosemary till you have filled the dish. You may beat
amongst it some musk and ambergreece dissolved, and guild it if you please.

To make Snow Cream otherwise.

Boil a quart of cream with a stick of cinnamon, and thicken it with rice flour,
the yolks of two or three eggs, a little rose water, sugar, and salt, give it a
walm, and put it in a dish, lay clouted cream on it and fill it up with whipped
cream, or cream that comes out of the top of a churm when the butter is come,
dish out of a squirt or some other fine way, scrape on sugar, sprinkle it with
rose water, and stick some pine-apple-seeds on it.

Otherwise.

Take three pints of cream, and the whites of seven eggs, strain them together
with a little rose water, and as much sugar as will sweeten it; then take a
stick of a foot long, and split it in four quarters, beat the cream with it, or
else with a whisk, and when the snow rises, put it in a cullender with a
spoon, that the thin may run from it; when you have snow enough, boil the rest
with cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, seethe it till it be thick, then strain it,
and when it is cold, put it in a clean dish, and lay your snow upon it.

To make Snow Cream otherwise with Almonds.
TAke a quart of good sweet cream, and a quarter of a pound of almond paste
fine beaten with rose water, and strained with half a pint of white wine, put
some orange-peel to it, a slic't nutmeg, and three sprigs of rosemary, let it
stand two or three hours in steep; then put some double refined sugar to it,
and strain it into a basin, beat it till it froath and bubble, and as the
froath rises, take it off with a spoon, and lay it in the dish you serve it up
in.

To make a Jelly of Almond as white as Snow.
TAke a pound of almonds, steep them in cold water six hours, and blanch them
into cold water, then make a decoction of half a pound of isingglass, with two
quarts of white wine and the juice of two lemons, boil it till half be wasted,
then let it cool and strain it, mingle it with the almonds, and strain them
with a pound of double refined sugar, and the juice of two lemons, turn it into
colors, red, white, or yellow, and put it into egg shells, or orange-peels,
and serve them on a pie plate upon a dish.

To make Almond Cream.
TAke half a pound of almond paste beaten with rose water, and strain it with a
quart of cream, put it in a skillet with a stick of cinnamon and boil it, stir
it continually, and when it is boiled thick, put sugar to it, and serve it up
cold.

To make Almond Cream otherwise.
Take thick almond milk made with fair spring water, and boil it a little, then
take it from the fire, and put to it a little salt and vinegar, cast it into a
clean strainer, and hang it upon a pin over a dish, then being finely drained,
take it down and put it in a dish, put to it some fine beaten sugar, and a
little sack, muskedine, or white wine, dish it on a silver dish, and strew on
red biskets.

Otherwise.

Take a quart of cream, boil it over night, then in the morning have half a
pound of almonds blanched and fine beaten, strain them with the cream, and put
to it a quarter of a pound of double refined sugar, a little rose water, a
little fine ginger and cinnamon finely searced, and mixed all together, dish it
in a clean silver dish with fine carved sippets round about it.

To make an Almond Cheese.
TAke almonds being beaten as fine as marchpane paste, then make a sack posset
with cream and sack, mingle the curd of the posset with almond paste, and set
it on a chafing dish of coals, put some double refined sugar to it, and some
rose water; then fashion it on a pie-plate like a fresh cheese, put it in a
dish, put a little cream to it, scrape sugar on it, and being cold serve it up.

To make an excellent Cream.
TAke a quart of cream, and set it a boiling with a large mace or two, whilst
it is boiling cut some thin sippets and lay them in a fine clean dish; then
have seven or eight yolks of eggs strained with rose water, put some sugar to
them, then take the cream from the fire, put in the eggs and stir all together,
then pour it on the slices of fine manchet, and being cold scrape on sugar, and
so serve it.

To make Cream otherwise.

Take a quart of cream, and boil it with four or five large maces, and a stick
of whole cinnamon; when it has boiled a little while, have seven or eight yolks
of eggs dissolved with a little cream, take the cream from the fire and put in
the eggs, stir them well into the boiled cream, and put it in a clean dish,
take out the spices, and when it is cold stick it with those maces and cinnamon.
Thus you may do with the whites of the eggs with cream.

To make Cast Cream.
TAke a quart of cream, a pint of new milk, and the whites of six eggs, strain
them together and boil it, in the boiling stir it continually till it be thick,
then put to it some verjuyce, and put it into a strainer, hang it on a nail or
pin to drain the whey from it, then strain it, put some sugar to it and
rose water; dish it in a fair dish, and strew on some preserved pine-kernels,
or candied pistaches. In this fashion you may do it of the yolks of eggs.

To make Clouted Cream.
TAke three gallons of new milk, and set it on the fire in a clean scowred
brass pan or kettle till it boils, then make a hole in the middle of the milk,
and take three pints of good cream and put into the hole as it boileth, boil it
together half an hour, then divide it into four milkpans, and let it cool two
days if the weather be not too hot, then take it up with a slice or scummer,
put it in a dish, and sprinkle it with rose water, lay one clod upon another,
and scrape on sugar.

To make clouted Cream otherwise extraordinary.
TAke four gallons of new milk from the Cow, set it over the fire in a clean
scowred pan or kettle to scald ready to boil, strain it through a clean
strainer and put it into several pans to cool, then take the cream some six
hours after, and put it in the dish you mean to serve it in, season it with
rose water, sugar, and musk, put some raw cream to it, and some snow cream on
that.

To make clouted Cream otherwise.
TAke a gallon of new milk from the Cow, two quarts of cream, and twelve
spoonfulls of rose water, put these together in a large milk pan, and set it
upon a fire of charcoal well kindled, (you must be sure the fire be not too
hot) and let it stand a day and a night, then take it off and dish it with a
slice or scummer, let no milk be in it, and being disht and cut in fine little
pieces, scrape sugar on it.

To make a very good Cream.
WHen you churm butter, take out half a pint of cream just as it begins to turn
to butter, (that is when it is a little frothy) then boil a quart of good thick
and new cream, season it with sugar and a little rose water, when it is quite
cold mingle it very well with that you take out of the churm, and so dish it.

To make a Sack Cream.
TAke a quart of cream and set it on the fire, when it is boiled drop in six or
eight drops of sack, and stir it well to keep it from curding, then season it
with sugar and strong water.

To make Cabidge Cream.
SEt six quarts of new milk on the fire, and when it boils, empty it into ten
or twelve earthen pans or bouls as fast as you can without frothing, set them
where they may come, and when they are little cold gather the cream that is on
the top with your hand, rumpling it together, and lay it on a plate; when you
have laid three or four layings on one another, wet a feather in rose water and
musk and stroke over it, then searce a little grated nutmeg, and fine sugar,
(and if you please, beat some musk and ambergreece in it) and lay three or four
lays more on as before; thus do till you have off all the cream in the bouls,
then put all the milk to boil again, and when it boils set it as you did before
in bouls, and so use it in like manner, it will yield four or five times
seething, which you must use as before that it may lie round and high like a
cabidge; or let one of the first bouls stand because the cream may be thick and
most crumpled, take that up last to lay on uppermost, and when you serve it up
searse or scrape sugar on it; this must be made over night for dinner, or in
the morning for supper.

To make Stone Cream.
TAke a quart of cream, two or three blades of large mace, two or three little
sticks of cinnamon, and six spoonfulls of rose water, season it sweet with
sugar, and boil it till it taste well of the spice, then dish it, and stir it
till it be as cold as milk from the Cow, then put in a little runnet and stir
it together, let it stand and cool, and serve it to the table.

To make Whipped Cream.
TAke a whisk or a rod and beat it up thick in a boul or large basin, till it
be as thick as the cream that comes of the top of a churm, then lay fine linen
clouts on saucers being wet, lay on the cream and let it rest two or three
hours, then turn them into a fine silver dish, put raw cream to them and scrape
on sugar.

To make Rice Cream.
TAke a quart of cream, two handfulls of rice flour, and a quarter of a pound
of sugar, mingle the flour and sugar very well together and put it in the
cream; then beat the yolk of an egg with a little rose water, put it to the
cream and stir them all together, set it over a quick fire, keeping it
continually stirring till it be as thick as pap.

To make another rare Cream.
TAke a pound of almond paste fine beaten with rose water, mingle it with a
quart of cream, six eggs, a little sack, half a pound of sugar, and some beaten
nutmeg; strain them and put them in a clean scowred skillet, and set it on a
soft fire, stir it continually, and being well incorporated dish it, and serve
it with juice of orange, sugar, and stick it full of candied pistaches.

To make a white Leach of Cream.
TAke a quart of cream, twelve sponfulls of rose water, two grains of musk, two
drops of oil of mace, or two large maces, boil them with half a pound of sugar
and half a pound of the whitest isingglass; being first steeped and washed
clean, then run it through your jelly bag into a dish; when it is cold slice it
into chequer work, and serve it on a plate. This is the best way to make leach.

To make other Leach with Almonds.
TAke two ounces of isingglass, lay it two hours in fair water, then boil it in
clear spring water, and being well disgested set it to cool; then have a pound
of almonds beaten very fine with rose water, strain them with a pint of new
milk, and put in some mace and slic't ginger, boil them till it taste well of
the spices, then put into it the disgested isingglass, some sugar, and a little
rose water, give it a walm over the fire, and run it through a strainer into
dishes, and slice it into dishes.

To make a Cream in the Italian fashion to eat cold.
TAke twenty yolks of eggs, and two quarts of cream, strain it with a little
salt, saffron, rose water, juice of orange, a little white wine, and a pound of
fine sugar; then bake it in a deep dish with-some fine cinnamon, and some
candied pistaches stuck on it, and when it is baked, white muskedines.

Thus you may do with the whites of the eggs, and put in no spices.

To make Pyramidis Cream.
TAke a quart of water, and six ounces of hartshorn, put it into a bottle with
gum-dragon, and gum arabic, of each as much as a walnut; put them all into the
bottle, which must be so big as will hold a pint more, for if it be full it
will break, stop it very close with a cork, and tie a cloth over it, put the
bottle in the beef pot, or boil it in a pot with water, let it boil three
hours, then take as much cream as there is jelly, and half a pound of almonds
well beaten with rose water, mingle the cream and the almonds together, strain
it, then put the jelly when it is cold into a silver basin, and the cream to
it, sweeten it as you please, and put in two or three grains of musk and
ambergreece, set it over the fire, and stir it continually till it be seething
hot, but let it not boil; then put it in an old fashioned drinking glass, and
let it stand till it be cold; when you will use it, put the glass in some warm
water and whelm it in a dish, then take pistaches boild in white wine and
sugar, stick it all over, and serve it in with cream.

French Barley Cream.
TAke a porringer full of French perle barley, boil it in eight or nine several
waters very tender, then put it in a quart of cream, with some large mace, and
whole cinnamon, boil it a little a quarter of an hour; then have two pound of
almonds blanched and beaten fine with rose water, put to them some sugar, and
strain the almonds with some cold cream, then put all over the fire, and stir
it till it be ready to boil, take it off the fire, still stirring it till it be
half cold, then put to it two spoonfulls of sack or white wine, and a little
salt, and serve it in a dish cold

To make Cheesecakes.
LEt your paste be very good, either puff-paste or cold butter paste, with
sugar mixed with it; then the whey being dried very well from the cheese curds
which must be made of new milk or better, beat them in a mortar or tray, with a
quarter of a pound of butter to every pottle of curds, a good quantity of rose
water, three grains of ambergreece or musk prepared the trumbs of a small
manchet rubbed through a cullender, the yolks of ten eggs, a grated nutmeg, a
little salt, and good store of sugar, mix all these well together with a little
cream, but do not make them too soft; instead of bread you may take almonds
which are much better; bake them in a quick oven, and let them not stand too
long in lest they should be too dry.

To make Cheesecakes otherwise.
MAke the crust of milk and butter boiled together, put into the flour and made
up pretty stiff, to a pottle of fine flour, take half a pound of butter; then
take a fresh cheese made of morning milk, and a pint of cream, put it to the
new milk, and set the cheese with some runnet, when it is come, put it in a
cheese cloth and press it from the whay, stamp in the curds a grated fine small
manchet, some cloves and mace, a pound and a half of well washed and picked
currants, the yolks of eight eggs, some rose water salt, half a pound of refined
white sugar, and a nutmeg or two; work all these materials well together with a
quarter of a pound of good sweet butter, and some cream, but make it not too
soft, and make your cheesecakes according to these forms.

forms of cheesecakes

To make Cheesecakes otherwise.
MAke the paste of a pottle of flour, half a pound of butter, as much ale barm
as two egg shells will hold, and a little saffron made into fine powder and put
into the flour, melt the butter in milk, and make up the paste; then take the
curds of a gallon of new milk cheese, and a pint of cream, drain the whey very
well from it, pound it in a mortar, then mix with it half a pound of sugar, a
pound of well washed and picked currants, a grated nutmeg, some fine beaten
cinnamon, salt, rose water a little saffron made into fine powder, and some
eight yolks of eggs, work it up very stiff with some butter and a little cream.

Otherwise.

Take six quarts of new milk, run it pretty cold, and when it is tender come,
drain from it the whey, and hang it up in a strainer, press the whey from it,
and beat it in a mortar till it be like butter, then strain it through a
strainer, and mingle it with a pound of butter with your hand; then beat a
pound of almonds with rose water till they be as fine as the curds; put to them
the yolks of twenty eggs; a quart of cream, two grated nutmegs, and a pound and
a half of sugar, when the coffins are ready to be set into the oven, then
mingle them together and let them bake half an hour; the paste must be made of
milk and butter warmed together, dry the coffins as you do for a custard, make
the paste very stiff, and make them into works.

To make Cheesecakes without Milk.
TAke twelve eggs, take away six whites and beat them very well; then take a
quart of cream and boil it with mace, take it off the fire, put in the eggs and
stir them well together, then set it on the fire again, and let it boil till it
curds; then set it off, and put to it a good quantity of sugar, some grated
nutmeg, and beaten mace: then dissolve musk and ambergreece in rosewater, three
or four spoonfuls of grated bread, with half a pound of almonds beat small, a
little cream, and some currants; then make the paste for them of flour, sugar,
cream and butter, bake them in a mild oven; a quarter of an hour will bake
them. Make them according to this form.

form of cheesecake without milk

Cheesecakes otherwise.
FOr the paste take a pottle of flour, half a pound of butter, and the white of
an egg, work it well into the flour with the butter, then put a little cold
water to it and work it up stiff; then take a pottle of cream, half a pound of
sugar, and a pound of currants boild before you put them in, a whole nutmeg
grated, and a little pepper fine beaten, boil these gently, and stir it
continually with twenty eggs well beaten amongst the cream, being boild and
cold, fill the cheesecakes.

To make Cheesecakes otherwise.
TAke eighteen eggs and beat them very well, beat some flour amongst them to
make them pretty thick; then have a pottle of cream and boil it, being boiled
put in your eggs, flour, anst half a pound of butter, some cinnamon, salt, boild
currants, and sugar, set them over the fire and boil it pretty thick, being cold
fill them and bake them, make the crust as beforesaid.

To make Cheesecakes in the Italian Fashion.
TAke four pound of good fat Holland cheese, and six pound of good fresh
cheese-curd of a morning milk cheese, or better, beat them in a stone or wooden
mortar, then put sugar to them, and two pound of well washed currants, twelve
eggs, whites and all being first well beaten, a pound of sugar, some cream,
half an ounce of cinnamon, a quarter of an ounce of mace, and a little saffron,
mix them well together, and fill your talmouse or cheesecakes pasty ways in
good cold butter paste; sometimes use beaten almonds amongst it, and some
pistaches whole; being baked, ice them with yolks of eggs, rose water, and
sugar, cast on red and white biskets, and serve them up hot.

Cheesecakes in the Italian Fashion otherwise.
TAke a pound of pistaches stamped with two pound of morning milk cheese curd
fresh made, three ounces of elder-flowers, ten eggs, a pound of sugar, a pound
of butter, and a pottle of flour, strain these in a course strainer, and put
them in short or puff-paste.

To make Cheeesecakes otherwise.
TAke a good morning milk cheese, or better, of some eight pound weight, stamp
it in a mortar, and beat a pound of butter amongst it, and a pound of sugar,
then mix with it beaten mace, two pound of cutrans well picked and washed, a
penny manchet grated, or a pound of almonds blanched and beaten fine with
rose water, and some salt; then boil some cream, and thicken it with six or
eight yolks of eggs, mixed with the other things, work them well together, and
fill the cheesecakes, make the curd not too soft, and make the paste of cold
butter and water according to these forms.

forms of cheesecakes

To make a Triffel.
TAke a quart of the best and thickest cream, set it on the fire in clean
skillet, and put to it whole mace, cinnamon, and sugar, boil it well in the
cream before you put in the sugar, then your cream being well boiled, pour it
into a fine silver piece or dish, and take out the spices, let it cool till it
be no more then blood warm, then put in a spoonful of good runnet, and set it
well together, being cold scrape sugar on it, and trim the dish sides finely.

To make fresh Cheese and Cream.
TAke a pottle of milk as it comes from the cow, and a pint of cream, put to it
a spoonful of runnet, and let it stand two hours, then stir it up and put it in
a fine cloth, let the whey drain from it, and put the curd into a bowldish, or
basin; then put to it the yolk of an egg, a spoonful of rose water, some salt,
sugar, and a little nutmeg finely beaten, put it to the cheese in the cheese
fat on a fine cloth, scrape on sugar, and serve it on a plate in a dish.

Thus you may make fresh cheese and cream in the French Fashion called Jonches,
or rush cheese, being put in a mould of rushes tied at both ends, and being
dished put cream to it.

To make a Posset.
TAke the yolks of twenty eggs, then have a pottle of good thick sweet cream,
boil it with good store of whole cinnamon, and stir it continually on a good
fire, then strain the eggs with a little raw cream; when the cream is well
boiled and tastes of the spice, take it off the fire, put in the eggs, and
stir them well in the cream, being pretty thick, have some sack in a posset pot
or deep silver basin, half a pound of double refined sugar, and some fine
grated nutmeg, warm it in the basin and pour in the cream and eggs, the cinnamon
being taken out, pour it as high as you can hold the skillet, let it spatter in
the basin to make it froth, it will make a most excellent posset; then have
loaf sugar finely beaten, and strew on it good store.

To the curd you may add some fine grated manchet, some claret or white wine,
or ale only.

To make a Posset otherwise.
TAke two quarts of new cream, a quarter of an ounce of whole cinnamon, and two
nutmegs quartered, boil it till it taste well of the spice, and keep it always
stirring or it will burn too, then take the yolks of fourteen or fifteen eggs
beaten well together with a little cold cream, put them to the cream on the
fire, and stir it till it begin to boil, then take it off and sweeten it with
sugar, and stir on till it be pretty cool; then take a pint and a quarter of
sack, sweeten that also and set it on the fire till it be ready to boil, then
put it in a fine clean scowred basin, or posset pot, and pour the cream into
it, elevating your hand to make it froth, which is the grace of your posset; if
you put it through a tunnel or a cullender, it is held the more exquisite way.

To make Sack Posset otherwise.
TAke two quarts of pure good cream, and a quarter of a pound of the best
almonds stamped with some rose water or cream, strain them with the cream, and
boil with it amber and musk; then take a pint of sack into a basin, and set it
on a chafing dish till it be blood warm; then take the yolks of twelve eggs
with four whites, beat them very well together, and so put the eggs into the
sack, make it good and hot, then stir all together in the basin, let the cream
cool a little before you put it into the sack, and stir all together over the
coals, till it be as thick as you would have it, then take some amber and musk,
grind it small with sugar, and strew it on the top of the posset, it will give
it a most delicate and pleasant taste.

Sack Posset otherwise.
TAke eight eggs, whites, and yolks, beat them well together, and strain them
into a quart of cream, season them with nutmeg and sugar, and put to them a
pint of sack, stir them all together, and put it into your basin, set it in the
oven no hotter then for a custard, and let it stand two hours.

To make a Sack Posset without Milk or Cream.
TAke eighteen eggs whites and all, take out the cocktreads and beat them very
well, then take a pint of sack and a quart of ale boiled, scum it, and put into
it three quarters of a pound of sugar, and half a nutmeg, let it boil a little
together, then take it off the fire stirring the eggs still, put into them two
or three ladlefulls of drink, then mingle all together, set it on the fire, and
keep it stirring till you find it thick, then serve it up.

Other Posset.
TAke a quart of cream, and a quarter of a nutmeg in it, set it on the fire and
let it boil a little, as it is boiling take a pot or basin that you make the
posset in* and put in three spoonfulls of sack and some eight spoonfulls of
ale, sweeten it with sugar, then set it over the coals to warm a little while,
being warmed take it off and let it stand till it be almost cold, then put it
into the pot or basin, stir it a little, and let it stand to simper over the
fire an hour or more, the longer the better.

An excellent Sillabub.
FIll your Sillabub pot half full with sider, good store of sugar, and a little
nutmeg, stir it well together, and put in as much thick cream by two or three
spoonfulls at a time, as hard as you can, as though you milkt it in, then stir
it together very softly once about, and let it stand two hours before you eat
it, for the standing makes the curd.

To make a White Pot.
TAke a quart of good thick cream, boil it with three or four blades of large
mace, and some whole cinnamon, then take four whites of eggs, and beat them very
well, when the cream boils up, put them in, and cake them off the fire keeping
them stirring a little while, and put in so me sugar, then take five or six
pippins, pare and slice them, then put in a pint of claret wine, some raisins
of the sun, some sugar, beaten cinnamon, and beaten ginger, boil the pippins to
pap, then cut some sippets very thin and dry them before the fire; when the
apples and cream are boild and cold, take half the sippets and lay them in a
dish, lay half the apples on them, then lay on the rest of the sippets and
apples as you did before, then pour on the rest of the cream and bake it in the
oven as a custard, and serve it with scraping sugar.

Bake these in paste, in dish, or pan, or make the paste as you would do for a
custard, make it three inches high, and in the forms following.

forms of white pot

Otherwise to make a White pot.
TAke a quart of sweet cream, boil it, and put to it two ounces of picked rice,
some beaten mace, ginger, cinnamon, and sugar, let these steep in it till it be
cold, and strain into it eight yolks of eggs and but two whites; then put in
two ounces of clean washed and picked currants, and some salt, stir all well
together, and bake it in paste, earthen pan, dish or deep basin; being baked,
trim it with some sugar, and comfits of orange, cinnamon or white biskets.

To make a Wasseb.
TAke muskedine or ale, and set it on the fire to warm, then boil a quart of
cream and two or three whole cloves, then have the yolks of three or four eggs
dissolved with a little cream; the cream being well boiled with the spices, put
in the eggs and stir them well together, then have sops or sippets of fine
manchet or french bread, put them in a basin, and pour in the warm wine, with
some sugar and thick cream on that; stick it with blanched almonds and cast on
cinnamon, ginger, and sugar, or wafers, sugar plate, or comfits.

To make a Norfolk Fool.
TAke a quart of good thick sweet cream, and set it a boiling in a clean
scowred skillet, with some large mace and whole cinnamon; having boiled a walm
or two, take the yolks of five or six eggs dissolved and put to it, being taken
from the fire, then take out the cinnamon and mace; the cream being pretty
thick, slice a fine manchet into thin slices, as much as will cover the bottom
of the dish, pour on the cream on them, and more bread, some two or three times
till the dish be full, then trim the dish side with fine carved sippets, and
stick it with slic't dates, scrape on sugar, and cast on red and white biskets.

To make Pap.
TAke milk and flour, strain them, and set it over the fire till it boil, being
boiled, take it off and let it cool; then take the yolks of eggs, strain them,
and put it in the milk with some salt, set it again on the embers, and stir it
till it be thick, and stew leasurely, then put it in a clean scowred dish, and
serve it for pottage, or in paste, add to it sugar and rose water.

To make Blamanger.
TAke a capon being boild or roasted and mince it small, then have a pound of
blanched almonds beaten to a paste, and beat the minced capon amongst it, with
some rose water, mingle it with some cream, ten whites of eggs, and grated
manchet, strain all the foresaid things with some salt, sugar, and a little
musk, boil them in a pan or broad skillet clean scowred as thick as pap, in the
boiling stir it continually, being boiled strain it again, and serve it in
paste in these forms, or made dishes with paste royal.

forms of blancmange

To make your paste for these forms, take to a quart of flour, a quarter of a
pound of butter, and the yolks of four eggs, boil your butter in fair water,
and put the yolks of the eggs on one side of your dish, make up your paste
quick, not too dry, and make it stiff.

Otherwise.

Take to a quart of fine flour, a quarter of a pound of butter, a quarter of a
pound of sugar, a little saffron, rose water, a little beaten cinnamon, and the
yolk of an egg or two, work up all cold together with a little almond milk.

Blamanger otherwise.
TAke a boild or roast capon, and being cold take off the skin, mince it and
beat it in a mortar, with some almond paste, then mix it with some capon broth,
and crumbs of fine manchet, strained together with some rosewater, salt, and
sugar; boil it to a good thickness, then put it into paste of the former forms,
of an inch high, or in dishes with paste royal, the paste being first baked.

In this manner you may make Blamanger of a pike.

Otherwise.

Boil or roste a capon, mince it, and stamp it with almond paste, and strain it
either with capon broth, cream, goats milk, or other milk, strain them with
some rice flour, sugar, and rose water, boil it in a pan like pap, with a
little musk, and stir it continually in the boiling, then put it in the forms
of paste as aforesaid.

Sometimes use for change pine apple seeds and currants, other times put in
dates, cinnamon, saffron, figs, and raisins being minced together, put them in
as it boils, with a little sack.

To make Blamanger otherwise.
TAke half a pound of fine searsed rice flour, and put to it a quart of morning
milk, strain them through a strainer into a broad skillet; and set it on a sost
fire, stir it with a broad stick, and when it is a little thick take it from
the fire, then put in a quartern of rose water, set it to the fire again, and
stir it well, in the stirring beat it with the stick from the one side of the
pan to the other, and when it is as thick as pap, take it from the fire and put
it in a fair platter, when it is cold lay three slices in a dish, and scrape on
sugar.

Blamanger otherwise.
TAke a capon or a pike and boil it in fair water very tender, then take the
pulp of either of them and chap it small, then take a pound of blanched almonds
beat to a paste, beat the pulp and the almonds together, and put to them a
quart of cream, the whites of ten eggs, and the crumbs of a fine manchet,
mingle all together, and strain them with some sugar and salt, put them in a
clean broad stew pan, and set them over the fire, stir it and boil it thick;
being boiled put it into a platter till it be cold, strain it again with a
little rose water, and serve it with sugar.

Otherwise.

Blanch some almonds and beat them very fine to a paste with the boild pulp of
a pike or capon, and crumbs of fine manchet, strain all together with sugar,
and boil it to the thickness of an apple moise; then let it cool, strain it
again with a little rose water, and so serve it.

To make Blamanger in the Italian fashion.
BOil a capon in water and salt very tender, or all to mash, then beat almonds,
and strain them with your capon broth, rice flour, sugar, and rose water: boil
it like pap, and serve it in this form; sometimes in place of broth use cream.

form of Italian blancmange

Section 13. Or, The first Section for Dressing of Fish.
Showing the most ways, and the most excellent, for Dressing of Carps, either
Boiled, Stewed, Broiled, Roasted, or Baked, etc.

To boil a Carp in Corbolion.
TAke as much wine as water, and a good handful of salt, when it boils, draw
the carp and put it in the liquor, boil it with a continual quick fire, and
being boiled, dish it up in a very clean dish with sippets round about it, and
slic't lemon, make the sauce of sweet butter beaten up with slic't lemon and
grared nutmeg, garnish the dish with beaten ginger.

To boil a Carp the best way to be eaten hot.
TAke a special male carp of eighteen inches, draw it, wash out the blood, and
lay it in a tray, then put to it some wine vinegar and salt, put the milt to
it, the gall being taken from it; then have three quarts of white wine or
claret, a quart of white wine vinegar, and five pints of fair water, or as much
as will cover it; put the wine, water, and vinegar, in a fair scowred pan or
kettle, with a handful of salt, a quarter of an ounce of large mace, half a
quartern of whole cloves, three sliced nutmegs, six races of ginger pared and
sliced, a quarter of an ounce of pepper, four or five great onions whole or
sliced; then make a faggot of sweet herbs, of the tops of straight sprigs of
rosemary, seven or eight bay leaves, six tops of sweet marjoram, as much of the
straight tops of time, winter-savory, and parsley; being well bound up, put
them into the kettle with the spices, and some orange and lemon peels; make
them boil a pace before you put in the carp, and boil it up quick with a strong
fire; being finely boild and crisp, dish it in a large clean scowred dish, lay
on the herbs and spices on the carp, with slic't lemons and lemon peels, put
some of the broth to it, and run it over with beaten butter, put fine carved
sippets round about it, and garnish the dish with fine searsed manchet.

Or you may make sauce for it only with butter beat up thick, with slices of
lemon, some of the liquor, and an anchove or two, and garnish the dish with
beaten ginger.

Or take three or four anchoves and dissolve them in some white wine, put them
in a pipkin with some slic't horse-raddish, gross pepper, some of the carp
liquor, and some stewed oyster liquor, or stewed oysters, large mace, and a
whole onion or two; the sauce being well stewed, dissolve the yolks of three or
four eggs with some of the sauce, and give it a walm or two, pour it on the
carp with some beaten butter, the stewed oysters and slic't lemon, barberries,
or grapes.

Otherwise.

Dissolve three or four anchoves, with a little grated bread and nutmeg, and
give it a walm in some of the broth the carp was boiled in, beat it up thick
with some butter, and a clove of garlic, and pour it on the carp.

Or make sauce with beaten butter, grape verjuyce, white wine, slic't lemon,
juyee of oranges, juyee of sorrel, or white wine vinegar.

Or otherwise, take white or claret wine, put it in a pipkin with some pared
or sliced ginger, large mace, dates quartered, a pint of great oysters with the
liquor, a little vinegar and salt, boil these a quarter of an hour, then mince
a handful of parsley and some sweet herbs, boil it as much longer till half be
consumed, then beat up the sauce with half a pound of butter, and a slic't
lemon, and pour it on the carp.

Sometimes for the foresaid carp use grapes, barberries, gooseberries, and
horse-raddish, etc.

To make a Bisque of Carps.
TAke twelve handsome male carps, and one larger then the rest, take out all
the milts, and flea the twelve small carps, cut off their heads, take out their
tongues, and take the fish from the bones, then take twelve large oysters, and
three or four yolks of hard eggs minced altogether, season it with cloves,
mace, and salt, make thereof a stiff fearce, add thereto the yolks of four or
five eggs to bind, and fashion it into balls or rolls as you please, lay them
into a deep dish or earthen pan, and put thereto twenty or thirty great
oysters, two or three anchoves, the milts and tongues of the twelve carps, half
a pound of fresh butter, the liquor of the oysters, the juice of a lemon or
two, a little white wine, some of the corbolion wherein the great carp is
boild, and a whole onion, so set them a stewing on a soft fire, and make a soop
therewith. For the great carp you must scald, draw him, and lay him for half an
hour with the other carps heads in a deep pan, with as much white wine vinegar
as will cover and serve to boil him and the other heads in, then put therein
pepper, whole mace, a race of ginger slic't, nutmeg, salt, sweet herbs, an
onion or two slic't, and a lemon; when you have boiled the carps pour the
liquor with the spices into the kettle wherein you boil him, when it boils put
in the carp, and let it not boil too fast for breaking, after the carp has
boild a while put in the heads, and being boiled, take off the liquor and let
the carps and the heads keep warm in the kettle till you go to dish them. When
you dress the bisk take a large silver dish, set it on the fire, lay therein
slices of French bread, and steep it with a ladle full of the corbolion, then
take up the great carp and lay him in the midst of the dish, range the twelve
heads about the carp, then lay the fearse of the carp, lay that into the
oysters, milts, and tongues, and pour on the liquor wherein the fearse was
boild, wring in the juice of a lemon and two oranges, and serve it very hot to
the table.

To make a Bisk with Carps and other several Fishes.
MAke the Corbolion for the Bisk of some jacks or small carps boild in half
white wine and fair spring water, some cloves, salt, and mace, boil it down to
a jelly, strain it, and keep it warm for to scald the bisk; then take four
carps, four tenches, four peaches, two pikes, two eels flayed and drawn; the
carps being scalded, drawn, and cut into quarters, the tenches scalded and left
whole, also the pearches and the pikes, all finely scalded, cleansed, and cut
into twelve pieces, three of each side; then put them into a large stew pan
with three quarts of claret wine, an ounce of large mace, a quarter of an ounce
of coves, half an ounce of pepper, a quarter of an ounce of ginger pared and
slic't, sweet herbs chopped small, as stripped time, savory, sweet marjoram,
parsley, rosemary, three or four bay leaves, salt, chestnuts, pistaches, five or
six great onions, and stew all together on a quick fire.

Then stew a pottle of oysters the greatest you can get, parboil them in their
own liquor, cleanse them from the dregs, and wash them in warm water from the
grounds and shells, put them into a pipkin with three or four great onions
peeled, then take large mace, and a little of their own liquor, or a little
wine vinegar or white wine.

Next, take twelve flounders being drawn and cleansed from the guts, fry them
in clarified butter, with a hundred of large smelts; being fried stew them in a
stew pan, with some claret wine, grated nutmeg, slic't orange, butter, and salt.

Then have a hundred of prawns, boiled, picked, and buttered, or fried.

Next, bottoms of artichocks, boiled, blanched, and put in beaten butter,
grated nutmeg, salt, white wine, skirrets, and sparagus in the soresaid sauce.

Then mince a pike and an eel, cleanse them, and season them with cloves, mace,
pepper, salt, some sweet herbs minced, some pistaches, barberries, grapes, or
gooseberries, some grated manchet, and yolks of raw eggs, mingle all the
foresaid things together, and make it into balls, or force some cabbidge
lettice, and bake the balls in an oven, being baked stick the balls with
pineapple seeds, and pistaches, as also the lettice.

Then all the foresaid things being made ready, have a large clean scowred
dish, with large sops of French bread, lay the carps upon them, and between
them some tench, perch, pike, and eels, and the stewed oysters all over the
other fish, then the fried flounders and smelts over the oysters, then the
balls and lettice stuck with pistaches, the artichocks, skirrets, sparagus,
buttered prawns, yolks of hard eggs, large mace, fried smelts, grapes, slic't
lemon, oranges, red beets or poungarnets, broth it with the leer that was made
for it, and run it over with beaten butter.

The best way to Stew a Carp.
DRess the carp and take out the milt, put it in a dish with the carp, and take
out the gall, save the blood, and scotch the carp on the back with your knife;
if the carp be eighteen inches, take a quart of claret or white wine, four or
five blades of large mace, ten cloves, two good races of ginger slic't, two
slic't nutmegs, and a few sweet herbs, as the tops of sweet marjoram, time,
savory, and parsley chopped very small, four great onions whole, three or four
bay leaves, and some salt; stew them all together in a stew pan or clean
scowred kettle with the wine, when the pan boils put in the carp with a quarter
of a pound of good sweet butter, boil it on a quick fire of charcoal, and being
well stewed down, dish it in a clean large dish, pour on the sauce on it with
the spices, lay on slic't lemon and lemon peel, or barberries, grapes, or
gooseberries, and run it over with beaten butter, garnish the dish with dried
manchet grated and searsed, and carved sippets laid round the dish.

In feasts the carp being scaled, garnish the body with stewed oysters, some
fried white batter, some in green made with the juice of spinach; sometimes in
place of sippets use fritters of arms, sometimes horse-raddish, and rub the
dish with a clove or two of garlic.

For more variety, in the order abovesaid, sometimes dissolve an anchove or
two, with some of the broth it was stewed in and the yolks of two eggs
dissolved with some verjuyce, wine, or juice of orange; sometimes add some
capers and hard eggs chopped, as also sweet herbs, etc.

To Stew a Carp in the French Fashion.
TAke a carp, split it down the back alive, and put it in boiling liquor, then
take a good large dish or stew pan that will contain the carp; put in as much
claret wine as will cover it, and wash off the blood, take out the carp, and
put into the wine in the dish three or four slic't onions, three or four blades
of large mace, gross pepper, and salt; when the stew pan boils put in the carp
and cover it close, being well stewed down, dish it up in a clean scowred dish
with fine carved sippets round about it, pour the liquor it was boiled in on
it, with the spices, onions, slic't lemon, and lemon peel, run it over with
beaten butter, and garnish the dish with dried grated bread.

Another most excellent way to Stew a Carp.
TAke a carp and scale it, being well cleansed and dried with a clean cloth,
then split it and fry it in clarified butter, being finely fried put it in a
deep dish with two or three spoonfuls of claret wine, grated nutmeg, a blade or
two of large mace, salt, three or four slices of an orange and some sweet
butter, set it on a chafing dish of coals, cover it close and stew it up quick,
then turn it, and being very well stewed, dish it on fine carved sippets, run
it over with the sauce it was stewed in, the spices, beaten butter, and the
slices of a fresh orange, and garnish the dish with dry manchet grated and
searsed.

In this way you may stew any good fish, as soles, lobsters, prawns, oysters,
or cockles.

Otherwise.

Take a carp and scale it, scrape off the slime with a knife, and wipe it clean
with a dry cloth; then draw it, and wash the blood out with some claret wine
into the pipkin where you stew it, cut it into quarters, halves, or whole, and
put it into a broad mouthed pipkin or earthen pan, put to it as much wine as
water, a bundle of sweet herbs, some raisins of the sun, currants, large mace,
cloves, whole cinnamon, slic't ginger, salt, and some prunes boiled and
strained, put in also some strained bread or flower, and stew them altogether;
being stewed, dish the carp in a clean scowred dish on fine carved sippets,
pour the broth on the carp, and garnish it with the fruit, spices, some slic't
lemon, barberries, or grapes, some orangado or preserved barberries, and scrape
on sugar.

Otherwise.

Do it as before, save only no currants, but prunes strained, beaten pepper,
and some saffron.

To Stew a Carp seven several ways.
1. TAke a carp, scale it, and scrape off the slime, wipe it with a dry cloth,
and give it a cut or two cross the back, then put it a boiling whole, parted
down the back in halves, or in quarters, put it in a broad mouthed pipkin with
some claret or white wine, some wine vinegar, and good fresh fish broth or
some fair water, three or four blades of large mace, some slic't onions fried,
currants, and some good butter; cover up the pipkin, and being finely stewed,
put in some almond milk, and some sweet herbs finely minced, or some grated
manchet, and being well stewed, serve it up on fine carved sippets, broth it,
and garnish the fish with some barberries or grapes, and the dish with some
stale manchet grated and searst, being first dried. 2. For the foresaid broth,
yolks of hard eggs strained with some steeped manchet, some of the broth it is
stewed in, and a little saffron. 3. For variety of garnish, carrots in
dice-work, some raisins, large mace, a few prunes, and marigold flowers boild
in the foresaid broth. 4 Or leave out carrots and fruit. and put samphire and
capers, and thicken it with French barley tender boiled. 5. Or no fruit, but
keep the order aforesaid, only adding sweet marjoram, stripped time, parsley,
and savory, bruise them with the back of a ladle, and put them into the broth.
6. Otherwise, stewed oysters to garnish the carp, and some boild bottoms of
artichocks, put them to the stewed oysters or skirrets being boild, grapes,
barberries, and the broth thickened with yolks of eggs strained with some sack,
white wine, or caper liquor. 7. Boil it as before, without fruit, and add to
it capers, carrots in dice-work, mace, a faggot of sweet herbs, slic't onions
chopped with parsley and boild in the broth, then have boild collyflowers,
turnips, parsnips, sparagus, or chestnuts in place of carrots, and the leire
strained with yolks of eggs and white wine.
To make French Herb Pottage for fasting days.
TAke half a handful of lettice, as much of spinach, half as much of bugloss
and burrage, two handfulls of sorrel, a little parsley, sage, a good handful
of purslan, half a pound of butter, some pepper and salt, and sometimes some
cowcumbers.

Other Broth or Pottage of a Carp.
TAke a carp, scale it, and scrape off the slime, wash it, and wipe it with a
clean cloth, then draw it, and put it in a broad mouthed pipkin that will
contain it, put to it a pint of good white or claret wine, and as much good
fresh fish broth as will cover it, or as much fair water, with the blood of the
carp, four or five blades of large mace, a little beaten pepper, some slic't
onions, a clove or two, some sweet herbs chopped, a handful of capers, and
some salt; stew all together, the carp being well stewed, put in some almond
paste, with some white wine, give it a walm or two with some stewed oyster
liquor, and serve it on French bread in a fair scowred dish, pour on the
liquor, and garnish it with dried grated manchet.

To dress a Carp in Stoffado.
TAke a carp alive, scale it, and lard it with a good salt eel, steep it in
claret or white wine, in an earthen pan, and put to it some wine vinegar, whole
cloves, large mace, gross pepper, slic't ginger, and four or five cloves of
garlic, then have an earthen pan that will contain it, or a large pipkin, put
to it some sweet herbs, three or four sprigs of rosemary, as many of time and
sweet marjoram, two or three bay leaves and parsley, put the liquor to it into
the pan or pipkin wherein you will stew it, and paste on the cover, stew it in
the oven, in an hour it will be baked, then serve it hot for dinner or supper,
serve it on fine carved sippets of French bread, and the spices on it, with the
herbs, slic't lemon, and lemon peel; and run it over with beaten butter.

To Hash a Carp.
TAke a carp, scale, and scrape off the slime with your knife, wipe it with a
dry cloth, bone it, and mince it with a fresh water eel being fleaed and
boned; season it with beaten cloves, mace, salt, pepper, and some sweet herbs,
as time, parsley, and some sweet marjoram minced very small, stew it in a broad
mouthed pipkin, with some claret wine, gooseberries, or grapes, and some
blanched chestnuts; being finely stewed, serve it on carved sippets about it,
and run it over with beaten butter, garnish the dish with stale grated manchet
searsed, and some fried oysters in butter, cockles, or prawns.

Sometimes for variety, use pistaches, pineapple seeds, or some blanched
almonds stewed amongst the hash, or asparagus, or artichocks boild and cut as
big as chestnuts, and garnish the dish with scraped horse-raddish, and rub the
bottom of the dish in which you serve the meat, with a clove or two of garlic.
Sometimes mingle it with some stewed oysters, or put to it some oyster liquor.

To Marrinate a Carp to be eaten hot or cold.
TAke a carp, scale it, and scrape off the slime, wipe it clean with a dry
cloth, and split it down the back, flour it, and fry it in sweet sallet oil,
or good clarified butter; being fine and crisp fried, lay it in a deep dish or
earthen pan, then have some white or claret wine, or wine vinegar, put it in a
broad mouthed pipkin with all manner of sweet herbs bound up in a bundle, as
rosemary, time, sweet marjoram, parsley, winter savory, bay leaves, sorrel, and
sage, as much of one as the other, put it into the pipkin with the wine, with
some large mace, slic't ginger, gross pepper, slic't nutmeg, whole cloves, and
salt, with as much wine and vinegar as will cover the fish, then boil the
spices and wine with some salt a little while, pour it on the fish hot, and
presently cover it close to keep in the spirits of the liquor, herbs and spices
for an hours space; then have slic't lemons, lemon-peels, orange and
orange-peels, lay them over the fish in the pan, and cover it up close; when
you serve them hot lay on the spices and herbs all about it, with the slic't
lemons, oranges, and their peels, and run it over with sweet sallet oil, (or
none) but some of the liquor it is soust in.

Or marrinate the carp or carps without sweet herbs for hot or cold, only bay
leaves, in all points else as is abovesaid; thus you may marrinate soles, or
any other fish, whether sea, or fresh water fish.

Or barrel it, pack it close, and it will keep as long as sturgeon, and as good.

To Broil or Toste a Carp diverse ways, either in sweet Butter or Sallet Oil.
TAke a carp alive, draw it, and wash out the blood in the body with claret
wine into a dish, put to it some wine vinegar and oil, then scrape off the
slime, and wipe it dry both outside and inside, lay it in the dish with the
vinegar, wine, oil, salt, and the straight sprigs of rosemary and parsley, let
it steep there the space of an hour or two, then broil it on a clean scowred
gridiron, (or toste it before the fire) broil it on a soft fire, and turn it
often, being finely broiled, serve it on a clean scowred dish, with the oil,
wine, and vinegar, being stewed on the coals, put it to the fish, the rosemary
and parsley round the dish, and some about the fish, or with beaten butter and
vinegar, or butter and verjuyce, or juice of oranges beaten with the butter, or
juice of lemons; garnish the fish with slices of orange, lemon, and branches of
rosemary; boil the milt or spawn by it self, and lay it in the dish with the
carp.

Or make sauce otherwise with beaten butter, oyster liquor, the blood of the
carp, grated nutmeg, juice of orange, white wine or wine vinegar boild
together, crumbs of bread, and the yolk of an egg boild up pretty thick, and
run it over the fish.

To broil a Carp in Stoffado.
TAke a live carp, scale it, and scrape off the slime, wipe it clean with a dry
cloth, and draw it, wash out the blood, and steep it in claret, white wine,
wine vinegar, large mace, whole cloves, two or three cloves of garlic, some
slic't ginger, gross pepper, and salt; steep it in this composition in a dish
or tray the space of two hours, then broil it on a clean scowred gridiron on a
soft fire, and baste it with some sweet sallet oil, sprigs of rosemary, time,
parsley, sweet marjoram, and two or three bay leaves; being finely broild,
serve it with the sauce it was steeped in, boild up on the fire with a little
oyster liquor, the spices on it, and herbs round about it on the dish, run it
over with sauce, either with sweet sallet oil, or good beaten butter, and broil
the milt or spawn by it self.

To Roste a Carp.
TAke a live carp, draw and wash it, and take away the gall, and milt, or
spawn; then make a pudding with some grated manchet, some almond paste, cream,
currants, grated nutmeg, raw yolks of eggs, sugar, caraway seed candied, or any
peel, some lemon and salt, make a stiff pudding and put it through the gills
into the belly of the carp, scale it not, nor fill it not too full; then spit
it, and roste it in the oven upon two or three sticks cross a brass dish, turn
it, and let the gravy drop into the dish; being finely roasted, make sauce with
the gravy, butter, juice of orange or lemon, some sugar, and cinnamon, beat up
the sauce thick with the butter, and dish the carp, put the sauce over it with
slices of lemon.

Otherwise.

Scale it, and lard it with salt eel, pepper, and nutmeg, then make a pudding
of some minced eel, roach, or dace, some sweet herbs, grated bread, cloves,
mace, nutmeg, pepper, salt, yolks of eggs, pistaches, chestnuts, and the milt of
the carp parboild and cut into dice-work, as also some fresh eel, and mingle it
amongst the pudding or fearce.

Sauces for Roste Carp.
1. GRavy and oyster liquor, beat it up thick with sweet butter, claret wine,
nutmeg, slices of orange; and some capers, and give it a walm or two. 2. Beaten
butter, with slices of orange, and lemon, or the juice of them only. 3.
Butter, claret wine, grated nutmeg, salt, slices of orange, a little wine
vinegar, and the gravy. 4. A little white wine, gravy of the carp, an anchove
or two dislolved in it, some grated nutmeg, and a little grated manchet, beat
them up thick with some sweet butter, and the yolk of an egg or two, dish the
carp, and pour it on it.
To make a Carp Pie a most excellent way.
TAke a carp, scale it and scrape off the slime, wipe it with a dry clean
cloth, and split it down the back, then cut it in quarters or six pieces, three
of each, and take out the milt or spawn, as also the gall; season it with
nutmeg, pepper, salt, and beaten ginger, lay some butter in the pie bottom,
then the carp upon it, and upon the carp two or three bay leaves, four or five
blades of large mace, four or five whole cloves, some blanched chestnuts, slices
of orange, and some sweet butter, close it up and bake it, being baked, liquor
it with beaten butter, the blood of the carp, and a little claret wine.

For variety, in place of chestnuts, use^pine-apple seeds, or bottoms of
artichocks, gooseberries, grapes, or barberries. Sometimes great oysters bake
with the carp, and a great onion or two, sometimes sweet herbs chopped, or
sparagus boiled.

Or bake it in a dish as you do the pie.

To make paste for the pie, take two quarts and a pint of fine flour, four or
five yolks of eggs, and half a pound of sweet butter, boil the butter till it
be melted, and make the paste with it.

Paste for a Florentine of Carps made in a Dish or Patty-pan.
TAke a pottle of fine flour three quarters of a pound of butter, and six yolks
of eggs, work up the butter, eggs, and flour, dry them, then put to it as much
fair spring water cold as will make it up into paste.

To bake a Carp otherwise to be eaten hot.
TAke a carp, scale it alive, and scrape off the slime, draw it, and take away
the gall and guts, scotch it, and season it with nutmeg, pepper, and salt
lightly, lay it into the pie, and put the milt into the belly, then lay on
slic't dates in halves, large mace, orange, or slic't lemon, gooseberries,
grapes, or barberries, raisins of the sun, and butter; close it up and bake it,
being almost baked liquor it with verjuyce, butter, sugar, claret or white
wine, and ice it.

Sometimes make a pudding in the carps belly, make it of grated bread, pepper,
nutmegs, yolks of eggs, sweet herbs, currants, sugar, gooseberries, grapes, or
barberries, orangado, dates, capers, pistaches, raisins, and some minced fresh
eel.

Or bake it in a dish or patty pan in cold butter paste.

To bake a Carp with Oysters.
SCale a carp, scrape off the slime, and bone it; then cut it into large
dice-work, as also the milt being parboild; then have some great oysters
parboild, mingle them with the bits of carp, and season them together with
beaten pepper, salt, nutmeg, cloves, mace, grapes, gooseberries, or barberries,
blanched chestnuts and pistaches, season them lightly, then put in the bottom of
the pie a good big onion or two whole, fill the pie, and lay upon it some large
mace and butter, close it up and bake it, being baked liquor it with white wine
and sweet butter, or beaten butter only.

To make minced Pyes of Carps and Eels.
TAke a carp being cleansed, bone it, and also a good fat fresh water eel,
mince them together, and season them with pepper, nutmeg, cinnamon, ginger, and
salt, put to them some currants, caraway seed, minced orange-peel, and the yolks
of six or seven hard eggs minced also, slic't dates, and sugar; then lay some
butter in the bottoms of the pyes, and fill them, close them up, bake them, and
ice them.

To bake a Carp minced with an Eel in the French Fashion called Peti Paetes.
TAke a carp, scale it, and scrape off the slime, then roste it with a flayed
eel, and being roasted draw them from the fire, and let them cool, then cut them
into little pieces like great dice one half of them, and the other half minced
small and seasoned with nutmeg, pepper, salt, gooseberries, barberries, or
grapes, and some bottoms of artichocks boild and cut as the carp; season all
the foresaid materials and mingle all together, then put some butter in the
bottom of the pie, lay on the meat and butter on the top, close it up and bake
it, being baked liquor it with gravy, and the juice of oranges, butter, and
grated nutmeg.

Sometimes liquor it with verjuyce and yolks of eggs strained, sugar, and
butter.

Or with currants, white wine and butter boild together, some sweet herbs
chopped small, and saffron.

To bake a Carp according to these Forms to be eaten hot.
forms of carp

TAke a carp, scale it, and scrape off the slime, bone it, and cut it into
dice-work; the milt being parboild, cut it into the same form, then have some
great oysters parboild and cut in the same form also; put to it some grapes,
gooseberries, or barberries, the bottoms of artichocks boild, the yolks of hard
eggs in quarters, boild sparagus cut an inch long, and some pistaches, season
all the foresaid things together, with pepper, nutmegs, and salt, fill the
pyes, close them up, and bake them, being baked, liquor them with butter, white
wine and some blood of the carp, boil them together, or beaten butter with
juice of oranges.

To bake a Carp with Eels to be eaten cold.
TAke four large carps, scale them and wipe off the slime clean, bone them and
cut each side into two pieces of every carp, then have four large fresh water
eels, fat ones, boned, flayed, and cut in as many pieces as the carps, season
them with nutmeg, pepper, and salt; then have a pie ready, either round or
square, put butter in the bottom of it, then lay a lay of eel and a lay of carp
upon that, and thus do till you have ended; then lay on some large mace and
whole cloves on the top, some sliced nutmeg, sliced ginger, and butter, close
it up and bake it, being baked and cold, fill it up with clarified butter.

Otherwise.

TAke eight carps, scale, and bone them, scrape and wash off the slime, wipe
them dry, and mince them very fine, then have four good fresh water eels, flay
and bone them, and cut them into lard as big as your finger, then have pepper,
cloves, mace and ginger, severally beaten, and mingled with some salt, season
the fish and also the eels cut into lard; then make a pie according to this
form, lay some butter in the bottom of the pie, then a lay of carp upon the
butter, so fill it, close it up and bake it.

form of carp pie

Section 14. Or, The second Section of Fish.
Showing the most Excellent Way of Dressing of Pikes.

To boil a Pike.
WAsh him very clean, then truss him either round whole, with his tail in his
mouth, and his back scotched, or splatted and trust round like a heart, with his
tail in his mouth, or in three pieces, and divide the middle piece into two
pieces; then boil it in water, salt, and vinegar, put it not in till the liquor
boils, and let it boil very fast at first to make it crisp, but afterward
softly; for the sauce put in a pipkin a pint of white wine, slic't ginger,
mace, dates quartered, a pint of great oysters with the liquor, a little
vinegar and salt, boil them a quarter of an hour, then mince a few sweet herbs
and parsley, stew them till half the liquor be consumed; then the pike being
boiled dish it, and garnish the dish with grated dry manchet fine searsed, or
ginger fine beaten, then beat up the sauce with half a pound of butter, mineed
lemon, or orange, put it on the pike, and sippet it with cut of puff-paste or
lozenges, some fried greens, and some yellow butter. Dish it according to these
forms.

form of dished pike

To boil a Pike otherwise.
TAke a male pike alive, splat him in halves, take out his milt and civet, and
take away the gall, cut the sides into three pieces of a side, lay them in a
large dish or tray, and put upon them half a pint of white wine vinegar, and
half a handful of bay salt beaten fine; then have a clean scowred pan set over
the fire with as much rhenish or white wine as will cover the pike, so set it
on the fire with some salt, two slic't nutmegs, two races of ginger slic't, two
good big onions slic't, five or six cloves of garlic, two or three tops of
sweet marjoram, three or four straight sprigs of rosemary bound up in a bundle
close, and the peel of half a lemon; let these boil with a quick fire, then put
in the pike with the vinegar and boil it up quick; whilst the pike is boiling,
take a quarter of a pound of anchoves, wash and bone them, then mince them and
put them in a pipkin with a quarter of a pound of butter, and three or four
spoonfuls of the liquor the pike was boiled in; the pike being boiled, dish it,
and lay the ginger, nutmegs, and herbs upon it, run it over with the sauce,
and cast dried searsed manchet on it.

This foresaid liquor is far better to boil another pike, by renewing the
liquor with a little wine.

To boil a Pike and Eel together.
TAke a quart of white wine, a pint and a half of white wine vinegar, two
quarts of water, almost a pint of salt, a handful of rosemary and time, let
your liquor boil before you put in your fish, the herbs, a little large mace,
and some twenty corns of whole pepper.

To boil a Pike otherwise.
BOil it in water, salt, and wine vinegar, two parts water and one vinegar,
being drawn, set on the liquor to boil, cleanse the civet and truss him round,
scotch his back, and when the liquor boils put in the fish and boil it up
quick; then make sauce with some white wine vinegar, mace, whole pepper, a good
handful of cockles broiled or boiled out of the shells and washed with vinegar,
a faggot of sweet herbs, the liver stamped and put to it, and horseradish
scraped or slic't, boil all the foresaid together, dish the pike on sippets,
and beat up the sauce with some good sweet butter and minced lemon, make the
sauce pretty thick, and garnish it as you please.

Otherwise.

Take as much white wine and water as will cover it, of each a like quantity,
and a pint of vinegar, put to this liquor half an ounce of large mace, two
lemon-peels, a quarter of an ounce of whole cloves, three slic't nutmegs, four
races of ginger slic't, some six great onions slic't, a bundle of six or seven
sprigs or tops of rosemary, as much of time, winter savory, and sweet marjoram
bound up hard in a faggot; put into the liquor also a good handful of salt, and
when it boils put in the fish being cleansed and trussed, and boil it up quick.

Being boiled, make the sauce with some of the broth where the pike was boiled,
and put it in a dish with two or three anchoves being cleansed and minced, a
little white wine, some grated nutmeg, and some fine grated manchet, stew it on
a chafing dish, and beat it up thick with some sweet butter, and the yolk of an
egg or two dissolved with some vinegar, give it a walm, and put to it three or
four slices of lemon.

Then dish the pike, drain the liquor from it upon a chafing dish of coals,
pour on the sauce, and garnish the fish with slic't lemons, and the spices,
herbs and boild onions, run it over with beaten butter, and lay on some
barberries or grapes.

Sometimes for change you may put some horse radish scraped, or the juice of it.

To Boil a Pike in white Broth.
CUt your pike in three pieces, then boil it in water, salt, and sweet herbs,
put in the fish when the liquor boils; then take the yolks of six eggs, beat
them with a little sack, sugar, melted butter, and some of the pike broth; then
put it on some embers to keep warm, stir it sometimes lest it curdle; then take
up your pike, put the head and rail together in a clean dish, cleave the other
piece in two, and take out the back bone, put the one piece on one side, and
the other piece on the other side, but blanch all, pour the broth on it, and
garnish the fish with sippets, strew on fine ginger or sugar, wipe the edge of
the dish round, and serve it.

To boil a Pike in the French Fashion, a la Sauces d' lmaigne, or in the
Germane Fashion.
TAke a pike, draw him, dress the revet, and cut him in three pieces, boil him
in as much wine as water, and some lemon peel, when the liquor boils put in the
fish with a good handful of salt, and boil him up quick.

Then have a sauce made of beaten butter, water, the slices of two or three
lemons, the yolks of two or three eggs, and some grated nutmeg; the pike being
boiled dish it on fine sippets, and stick it with some fried bread, run it over
with the sauce, some barberries or lemon, and garnish the dish with some pared
and slic't ginger, barberries, and lemon peel.

To boil a Pike in the City Fashion.
TAke a live male pike, draw him and slit the rivet, wash him clean from the
blood, and lay him in a dish or tray, then put some salt and vinegar to it, (or
no vinegar) but only salt; then set on a kettle with some water and salt, and
when it boils put in the pike, boil it softly, and being boiled take it off the
fire, and put a little butter into the kettle to it, then make a sauce with
beaten butter, the juice of a lemon or two, grape verjuyce or wine vinegar,
dish up the pike on fine carved sippets, and pour on the sauce, garnish the
fish with scalded parsley, large mace, barberries, slic't lemon, and
lemon peel, and garnish the dish with the same.

To stew a Pike in the French Fashion.
TAke a pike, splat it down the back alive, and let the liquor boil before you
put it in, then take a large deep dish or stewing-pan that will contain the
pike, put as much claret wine as will cover it, and wash off the blood, take
out the pike, and put to the wine in the dish three or four slic't onions, four
blades of large mace, gross pepper, and salt; when it boils put in the pike,
cover it close, and being stewed down, dish it up in a clean scowred dish with
carved sippets round about it, pour on the broth it was stewed in all over it,
with the spices and onions, and put some slic't lemon over all, with some
lemon peel; run it over with beaten butter, and garnish the dish with dry
grated manchet. Thus you may also stew it with the scales on or off.

Sometimes for change use horseradish.

To stew a Pike otherwise in the City Fashion.
TAke a pike, splat it, and lay it in a dish, when the blood is clean washed
out, put to it as much white wine as will cover it, and set it a stewing; when
it boils put in the fish, scum it, and put to it some large mace, whole
cinnamon, and some salt, being finely stewed dish it on sippets finely carved.

Then thick the broth with two or three egg yolks, some thick cream, sugar, and
beaten butter, give it a walm and pour it on the pike, with some boild currants
and boild prunes laid all over it, as also mace, cinnamon, some knots of
barberries, and slic't lemon, garnish the dish with the same garnish, and
scrape on fine sugar.

In this way you may do Carp, Bream, Barbel, Chevin, Rochet, Gurnet, Conger,
Tench, Perch, Bace, or Mullet.

To hash a Pike.
SCale and bone it, then mince it with a good fresh eel being also boned and
fleyed, put to it some sweet herbs fine stripped and minced small, beaten
nutmeg, mace, ginger, pepper, and salt; stew it in a dish with a little white
wine and sweet butter, being well stewed, serve it on fine carved sippets and
lay on some great stewed oysters, some fried in batter, some green with juice
of spinach, other yellow with saffron; garnish the dish with them, and run it
over with beaten butter.

To souce a Pike.
DRaw and wash it clean from the blood and slime, then boil it in fair water
and falt, when the liquor boils put it to it, and boil it leasurely simpering,
season it pretty savoury of the salt, boil it not too much, nor in more water
then will but just cover it.

If you intend to keep it long, put as much white wine as water, of both as
much as will cover the fish, some wine vinegar, slic't ginger, large mace,
cloves, and some salt; when it boils put in the fish, spices, and some
lemon peel, boil it up quick, but not too much, then take it up into a tray,
and boil down the liquor to a jelly, lay on some slic't lemon on it, pour on
the liquor, and cover it up close; when you serve it in jelly, dish and melt
some of the jelly, and run it all over, garnish it with bunches of barberries
and slic't lemon.

Or being soust and not jellyed, serve it with fennil and parsley.

When you serve it, you may lay round the dish diverse small fishes, as Tench,
Perch, Gurnet, Chevin, Roach, Smelts, etc. and run them over with jelly.

To souce and jelly Pike, Eel, Tench, Salmon, Conger, etc.
SCale the foresaid fishes, being scaled, cleansed, and boned, then season them
with nutmeg and salt, or no spice at all, roll them up and bind them like
brawn, being first rouled in a clean white cloth close bound up round it, boil
them in water, white wine, and salt, but first let the pan or vessel boil, put
it in and scum it, then put in some large mace and slic't ginger. If you will
only souce them, boil them not down so much; to jelly them, put to them some
isingglass, and serve them in collers whole standing in the jelly.

Otherwise to souce and jelly the foresaid Fishes.
MAke jelly of three tenches, three perches, and two carps, scale them, wash
out the blood, and soak them in fair water three or four hours, leave no fat on
them, then put them into a large pipkin with as much fair spring water as will
cover them, or as many pints as pounds of fish, put to it some isingglass, and
boil it close covered till two parts and a half be wasted, then take it off and
strain it, let it cool, and being cold take off the fat on the top, pare the
bottom, and put the jelly into three pipkins, put three quarts of white wine to
them, and a pound and a half of double refined sugar into each pipkin; then to
make one red put a quarter of an ounce of whole cinnamon, two races of ginger,
two nutmegs, two or three cloves, and a little piece of turnsole dried, the
dust rubbed out and steeped in some claret wine, put some of the wine into the
jelly.

To make another yellow, put a little saffron water, nutmeg, as much cinnamon as
to the red jelly, and a race of ginger sliced.

To the white put three blades of large mace, a race of ginger slic't, then set
the jelly on the fire till it be melted, then have fifteen whites of eggs
beaten, and four pound and a half of refined sugar, beat it amongst the eggs,
being first beaten to fine powder, then divide the sugar and eggs equally into
the three foresaid pipkins, stir it amongst the sugar very well, set them on
the fire to stew, but not to boil up till you are ready to run it; let each
pipkin cool a little before you run it, put a rosemary branch in each bag, and
wet the top of your bags, wring them before you run them, and being run, put
some into orange rinds, some into scollop shells, or lemon rindes in halves,
some into egg shells or muskle shells, or in moulds for Jellies. Or you may
make four colors, and mix some of the jelly with almond milk.

You may dish the foresaid jellies on a pie-plate on a great dish in four
quarters, and in the middle a lemon finely carved or cut into branches, hung
with jellies, and orange-peels, and almond jellies round about; then lay on a
quarter of the white jelly on one quarter of the plate, another of red, and
another of amber jelly, the other whiter on another quarter, and about the
outside of the plate, of all the colors one by another in the rindes of
oranges and lemons, and for the quarters, four scollop shells of four several
colors, and dish it as the former.

Pike Jelly otherwise.
TAke a good large pike, draw it, wash out the blood, and cut it in pieces,
then boil it in a gallon or six quarts of fair spring water, with half a pound
of isingglass close covered, being first clean scummed, boil it on a soft fire
till half be wasted, then strain the stock or broth into a clean basin or
earthen pan, and being cold pare the bottom and top from the fat and dregs, put
it in a pipkin and set it over the fire, melt it, and put to it the juice of
eight or nine lemons, a quart of white wine, a race of ginger pared and slic't,
three or four blades of large mace, as much whole cinnamon, and a grain of musk
and ambergreece tied up in a fine clean clout; then beat fifteen whites of
eggs. and put to them in a basin four pound of double refined sugar first
beaten to fine powder, stir it with the eggs with a rouling-pin, and then put
it amongst the jelly in the pipkin, stir them well together, and set it a
stewing on a soft charcoal fire, let it stew there, but not boil up but one
walm at last, let it stew an hour, then take it off and let it cool a little,
run it through your jelly bag, put a sprig of rosemary in the bottom of the
bag, and being run cast it into moulds. Amongst some of it put some almond
milk, or make it in other colors as aforesaid.

To make white Jelly of two Pikes.
TAke two good handsome pikes, scale and draw them and wash them clean from the
blood, then put to them six quarts of good white wine, and an ounce of
isingglass, boil them in a good large pipkin to a jelly, being clean scummed,
then strain it and blow off the fat.

Then take a quart of sweet cream, a quart of the jelly, a pound and half of
double refined sugar fine beaten, and a quarter of a pint of rose water, put
all together in a clean basin, and give them a walm on the fire, with half an
ounce of fine searsed ginger, then set it a cooling, dish it into dice-work, or
cast it into moulds, and some other colored jellies. Or in place of cream put
in almond milk.

To roast a Pike.
TAke a pike, scour off the slime, and take out the entrails, lard the back
with pickled herrings, (you must have a sharp bodkin to make the holes to lard
it) the take some great oysters and claret wine, season the oysters with pepper
and nutmeg, stuff the belly with the oysters, and intermix the stuffing with
rosemary, time, winter savory, sweet marjoram, a little onion and garlic, sow
these in the belly of the pike; then prepare two sticks about the breadth of a
lath, these two sticks and the spit must be as broad as the pike being tied on
the spit, tie the pike on, winding packthred about it, tie also along the side
of the pike which is not defended by the spit and the laths, rosemary and
bays, baste the pike with butter and claret wine with some anchoves dissolved
in it; when the pike is wasted or roasted, take it off, rip up the belly and
take out the whole herbs quite away, boil up the gravy, dish the pike, put the
wine to it, and some beaten butter.

To fry Pikes.
DRaw them, wash off the slime, and the blood clean, wipe them dry with a clean
cloth, flour them, and fry them in clarified butter, being fried crisp and
stiff, make sauce with beaten butter, slic't lemon, nutmeg, and salt beaten up
thick with a little fried parssey.

Or with beaten butter, nutmeg, a little claret, salt, and slic't orange.

Otherwise, oyster liquor, a little claret, beaten butter, slic't orange, and
nutmeg, rub the dish with a clove of garlic, give the sauce a walm, and
garnish the fish with slic't lemon, or orange, and barberries. Small pikes are
best to fry.

To fry a Pike otherwise.
THe pike being scaled and splatted, hack the white or inside with a knife and
it will be ribbed, then fry it brown and crisp in clarified butter, being fried
take it up, dram all the butter from it, and wipe the pan clean; then put it
again into the pan with claret, slic't ginger, nutmeg, an anchove, salt, and
saffron beat, fry it till half be consumed, then put in a piece of butter,
shake it well together with a minced lemon or slic't orange, and dish it,
garnish it with lemon, and rub the dish with a clove of garlic.

To broil a Pike.
TAke a pike, draw it and scale it, broil it whole, splat it, or scotch it with
your knife, wash out the blood clean, and lay it on a clean cloth, salt it and
heat the gridiron very hot, broil it on a soft fire, baste it with butter, and
turn it often; being finely broiled, serve it in a dish with beaten butter, and
wine vinegar, or juice of lemons or oranges, and garnish the fish with slices
of oranges or lemons, and bunches of rosemary.

Otherwise.

Take a pike as abovesaid, being drawn wash it clean, dry it and put it in a
dish with some good sallet oil, wine vinegar, and salt, there let it steep the
space of half an hour, then broil it on a soft fire, turn it and baste it often
with some fine straight sprigs of rosemary, parsley, and time, baste it out of
the dish where the oil and vinegar is; then the pike being finely broiled, dish
it in a clean dish, put the same basting to it being warmed on the coals, lay
the herbs round the dish, with some orange or lemon slices.

To bake Pikes.
BAke your pikes as you do carp, as you may see in the foregoing Section, only
remember that small pikes are best to bake.

Section 15. Or, The third Section for Dressing of Fish.
The most excellent ways of Dressing Salmon, Bace, or Mullet.

To calver Salmon to eat hot or cold.
CHine it, and cut each side into two or three pieces according to the bigness,
wipe it clean from the blood, and not wash it; then have as much wine and water
as you imagine will cover it, make the liquor boil and put in a good handful of
salt; when the liquor boils put in the salmon, and boil it up quick with a
quart of white wine vinegar, keep up the fire stiff to the last, and being
thoroughly boild, which will be in the space of half an hour or less, then take
it off the fire and let it cool, take it up into broad bottomed earthen pans,
and being quite cold, which will be in a day, a night, or twelve hours, then
put in the liquor to it, and so keep it.

Some will boil in the liquor some rosemary bound up in a bundle hard, two or
three cloves, two races of slic't ginger, three or four blades of large mace,
and a lemon peel. Others will boil it in beer only.

Or you may serve it being hot, and dish it on sippets in a clean scowred dish;
dish it round the dish or in pieces, and garnish it with slic't ginger, large
mace, a clove or two, gooseberries, grapes, barberries, slic't lemon, fried
parsley, ellicksanders, sage, or spinach fried.

To make sauce for the foresaid salmon; beat some butter up thick with a little
fair water, put two or three yolks of eggs dissolved into it with a little of
the liquor, grated nutmeg, and some slic't lemon, pour it on the salmon, and
garnish the dish with fine searsed manchet, barberries, slic't lemon, some
spices, and fried greens as aforesaid.

To Stew a small Salmon, Salmon Peal, or Trout.
TAke a Salmon, draw it, scotch the back, and boil it whole in a stew pan with
white wine, (or in pieces) put to it also some whole cloves, large mace, slic't
ginger, a bay leaf or two, a bundle of sweet herbs well and hard bound up, some
whole pepper, salt, some butter and vinegar, and an orange in halves; stew all
together, and being well stewed, dish them in a clean scowred dish with carved
sippets, lay on the spices and slic't lemon, and run it over with beaten
butter, and some of the gravy it was stewed in; garnish the dish with some fine
searsed manchet, or searsed ginger.

Otherwise, a most excellent way to stew Salmon.
TAke a rand or jole of salmon, fry it whole raw, and being fried stew it in a
dish on a chafing dish of coals, with some claret wine, large mace, slic't
nutmeg, salt, wine vinegar, slic't orange, and some sweet butter; being stewed
and the sauce thick, dish it on sippets, lay the spices on it and some slices
of oranges, garnish the dish with some stale manchet finely searsed and strewed
over all.

To Pickle Salmon to keep all the year.
TAke a Salmon, cut it in six round pieces, then boil it in white wine,
vinegar, and a little water, three parts wine and vinegar, and one of water;
let the liquor boil before you put in the salmon, and boil it a quarter of an
hour, then take it out of the liquor, drain it very well, then take rosemary
sprigs, bay leaves, cloves, mace, and gross pepper, a good quantity of each,
boil them in two quarts of white wine, and two quarts of white wine vinegar,
boil it well, then take the salmon being quite cold, and rub it well with
pepper and salt, pack it in a vessel that will but just contain it, lay a layer
of salmon and a layer of spice that is boild in the liquor; but let the liquor
and spice be very cold before you put it to it: the salmon being close packed
put in the liquor, and once in half a year, or as it grows dry, put some white
wine or sack to it, it will keep above a year; put some lemon peel into the
piekle, let the salmon be new taken if possible.

An excellent way to Dress Salmon, or other Fish.
TAke a piece of fresh Salmon, wash it clean in a little wine vinegar, and let
it lie a little in it, in a broad pipkin with a cover, put to it six spoonfuls
of water, four of vinegar, as much of white wine, some salt, a bundle of sweet
herbs, a few whole cloves, a little large mace, and a little stick of cinnamon,
close up the pipkin with paste, and set it in a kettle of seething water, there
let it stew three hours; thus you may do carps, trouts, or eels, and alter the
taste at your pleasure.

To hash Salmon.
TAke salmon and set it in warm water, take off the skin, and mince a jole,
rand, or tail with some fresh eel; being finely minced season it with beaten
cloves, mace, salt, pepper, and some sweet herbs; stew it in a broad mouthed
pipkin with some claret wine, gooseberries, barberries, or grapes, and some
blanched chestnuts; being finely stewed serve it on sippets about it, and run it
over with beaten butter, garnish the dish with stale grated manchet searsed,
some fried oysters in batter, cockles, or prawns; sometimes for variety use
pistaches, asparagus boild and cut an inch long, or boild artichocks and cut as
big as a chestnut, some stewed oysters, or oyster liquor, and some horse raddish
scraped or some of the juice, and rub the bottom of the dish wherein you serve
it with a clove of garlic.

To dress Salmon in Stoffado.
TAke a whole rand or jole, scale it, and put it in an earthen stew pan, put to
it some claret or white wine, some wine vinegar, a few whole cloves, large
mace, gross pepper, a little slic't ginger, salt, and four or five cloves of
garlic; then have three or four straight sprigs of rosemary, as much of time
and sweet marjoram, two or three bay leaves and parsley bound up into a bundle
hard, and a quarter of a pound of good sweet butter, close up the earthen pot
with course paste, bake it in an oven, and serve it on sippets of French bread,
with some of the liquor and spices on it, run it over with beaten butter and
barberries, lay some of the herbs on it, slic't lemon and lemon peel.

To marrinate Salmon to be eaten hot or cold.
TAke a Salmon, cut it into joles and rands, and fry them in good sweet sallet
oil or clarified butter, then set them by in a charger, and have some white or
claret wine, and wine vinegar as much as will cover it; put the wine and
vinegar into a pipkin with all manner of sweet herbs bound up in a bundle, as
rosemary, time, sweet marjoram, parsley, winter savory, bay leaves, sorrel, and
sage, as much of one as the other, large mace, slic't ginger, gross pepper,
slic't nutmeg, whole cloves, and salt; being well boild together pour it on the
fish, spices and all, being cold, then lay on slic't lemons and lemon peel, and
cover it up close: so keep it for present spending, and serve it hot or cold
with the same liquor it is soust in, with the spices, herbs, and lemons on it.

If to keep long, pack it up in a vessel that will but just hold it, put to it
no lemons nor herbs, only bay leaves: if it be well packed it will keep as
long as sturgeon, but then it must not be splatted, but cut round ways through
chine and all.

To boil Salmon in stewed Broth.
TAke a jole, chine, or rand, put it in a stew pan or large pipkin with as much
claret wine and water as will cover it, some raisins of the sun, prunes,
currants, large mace, cloves, whole cinnamon, slic't ginger, and salt, set it a
stewing over a soft fire, and when it boils put in some thickening of strained
bread, or flour, strained with some prunes, being finely stewed dish it up on
sippets in a clean scowred dish, put a little sugar in the broth, the fruit on
it, and some slic't lemon.

To fry Salmon.
TAke a jole, rand, or chine, or cut it round through chine and all half an
inch thick, or in square pieces, fry it in clarified butter; being stiff and
crisp fried make sauce with two or three spoonfuls of claret wine, some sweet
butter, grated nutmeg, some slices of orange, wine vinegar, and some oyster
liquor; stew them altogether, and dish the salmon, pour on the sauce, and lay
on some fresh slices of oranges and fried parsley, ellicksanders, sage leaves
fried in batter, pippins sliced and fried, or clary fried in batter, or yolks
of eggs, and quarters of oranges and lemons round the dish sides, with some
fried greens in halves or quarters.

To roste a Salmon according to this Form.
form of roasted salmon

TAke a salmon, draw it at the gills and put in some sweet herbs in his belly
whole; the salmon being scaled and the slime wiped off, lard it with pickled
herrings, or a fat salt eel, sill his belly with some great oysters stewed, and
some nutmeg; let the herbs be time, rosemary, winter savory, sweet marjoram, a
little onion, and garlic, put them in the belly of the salmon, baste it with
butter and set it in an oven in a latten dripping pan, lay it on sticks and
baste it with butter, draw it, turn it, and put some claret wine in the pan
under it, let the gravy drip into it, baste it out of the pan with rosemary and
bays, and put some anchoves into the wine also, with some pepper and nutmeg;
then take the gravy and clear off the sat, boil it up, and beat it thick with
butter; then put the fish in a large dish, pour the sauce on it, and rip up his
belly, take out some of the oysters and put them in the sauce, and take away
the herbs.

Otherwise.

Take a rand or jole, cut it into four pieces, and season it with a little
nutmeg and salt, stick a few cloves, and put it on a small spit, put between it
some bay leaves, and stick it with little sprigs of rosemary, roste it and
baste it with butter, save the gravy, with some wine vinegar, sweet butter, and
some slices of orange; the meat being roasted, dish it, and pour on the sauce.

To broil or toste Salmon.
TAke a whole salmon, a jole, rand, chine, or slices cut round it the thickness
of an inch, steep these in wine vinegar, good sweet sallet oil and salt, broil
them on a soft fire, and baste them with the same sauce they were steeped in,
with some straight sprigs of rosemary, sweet marjoram, time, and parsley; the
fish being broild, boil up ths gravy and oyster liquor, dish up the fish, pour
on the sauce, and lay the herbs about it.

To broil or roste Salmon in Stoffado.
TAke a jole, rand, or chine, and steep it in claret wine, wine vinegar, white
wine, large mace, whole cloves, two or three cloves of garlic, slic't ginger,
gross pepper, and salt; being steeped about two hours, broil it on a soft fire,
and baste it with butter, or very good sallet oil, sprigs of rosemary, time,
parsley, sweet marjoram, and some two or three bay leaves; being broiled, serve
it with the sauce it was steeped in, with a little oyster liquor put to it,
dish the fish, warm the sance it was stewed in, and pour it on the fish either
in butter or oil, lay the spices and herbs about it: and in this way you may
roste it, cut the jole, rand in six pieces if it be large, and spit it with
bays and rosemary between, and save the gravy for sauce.

Sauces for roast or broild Salmon.
TAke the gravy of the salmon, or oyster liquor, beat it up thick with beaten
butter, claret wine, nutmeg, and some slices of orange.

Otherwise, with gravy of the salmon, butter, juice of orange or lemon, sugar,
and cinnamon, beat up the sauce with the butter pretty thick, dish up the
salmon, pour on the sauce, and lay on it slices of lemon.

Or beaten butter, with slices of orange or lemon, or the juice of them, or
grape verjuyce and nutmeg.

Otherwise, the gravy of the salmon, two or three anchoves dissolved in it,
grated nutmeg, and grated bread beat up thick with butter, the yolk of an egg,
and slices of oranges, or the juice of it.

To bake Salmon.
form of baked salmon

TAke a salmon being new, scale it, draw it, and wipe it dry, scrape out the
blood from the backbone, scotch it on the back and side, then season it with
pepper, nutmeg, and salt; the pie being made put butter in the bottom of it, a
few whole cloves, and some of the seasoning, lay on the salmon, and put some
whole cloves on it, some slic't nutmeg and butter, close it up and baste it
over with eggs, or saffron water, being baked fill it up with clarified butter.

Or you may fley the salmon, and season it as aforesaid with the same spices,
and not scotch it, but lay on the skin again, and lard it with eel.

For the paste only boiling liquor, with three gallons of fine or course flour
made up very stiff.

To make Minced Pies of Salmon.
MInce a rand of fresh salmon very small, with a good fresh water eel being
fleyed and boned; then mince some violet leaves, sorrel, strawberry leaves,
parsley, sage, savory, marjoram, and time, mingle all together with the meat,
currants, cinnamon, nutmeg, pepper, salt, sugar, carawayes, rose water, white
wine, and some minced orangado, put some butter in the bottom of the pies, fill
them, and being baked ice them, and scrape on sugar. Make them according to
these forms.

forms of minced pies of salmon

To make Chewets of Salmon.
MInce a rand of salmon with a good fresh water cel, being boned, fleyed, and
seasoned with pepper, salt, nutmeg, cinnamon, beaten ginger, caraway-seed,
rosewater, butter, verjuyce, sugar, and orange-peel minced, mingle all together
with some slic't dates, and currants, put butter in the bottom, fill the pies,
close them up, bake them and ice them.

To make a Lumber Pie of Salmon.
MInce a rand, jole, or tail with a good fat fresh eel seasoned in all points
as beforesaid, put some five or six yolks of eggs to it with one or two whites,
make it into balls or rouls, with some hard eggs in quarters, put some butter
in the pie, lay on the rouls, and on them large mace, dates in halves, slic't
lemon, grapes, or barberries, and butter, close it up, bake it, and ice it;
being baked, cut up the cover, fry some sage leaves in batter, in clarified
butter, and stick them in the rouls, cut the cover and lay it on the plate
about the pie, or mingle it with an eel cut into dice-work, liquor it with
verjuyce, sugar, and butter.

To boil Bace, Mullet, Gurnet, Rochet, Wivers, etc.
TAke a mullet, draw it, wash it, and boil it in fair water and salt with the
scales on, either splatted or whole, but first let the liquor boil, being
finely boiled, dish it upon a clean scowred dish, put carved sippets round
about it, and lay the white side uppermost, garnish it with slict't lemon,
large mace, lemon peels, and barberries; then make a lear or sauce with beaten
butter, a little water, slices of lemon, juice of grapes or orange, strained
with the yolks of two or three eggs.

To souce Mullets or Bace.
DRaw them and boil them with the scales, but first wash them clean, and lay
them in a dish with some salt cast upon them, some slic't ginger and large
mace, put some wine vinegar to them, and two or three cloves; then set on the
fire a kettle with as much wine as water, when the pan boils put in the fish
and some salt, boil it with a soft fire, and being finely boiled and whole,
take them up with a false bottom and two wires all together. If you will jelly
them, boil down the liquor to a jelly with a piece of isingglass; being boild
to a jelly, pour it on the fish, spices, and all into an earthen flat bottomed
pan, cover it up close, and when you dish the fish, serve it with some of the
jelly on it; garnish the dish with slic't ginger and mace, and serve with it in
saucers wine vinegar, minced sennil, and slic't ginger; garnish the dish with
green fennil and flowers, and parsley on the fish.

To marinate Mullets or Bace.
SCale the mullets, draw them, and scrape off the slime, wash and dry them with
a clean cloth, flour them and fry them in the best fallet oil you can get, fry
them in a frying pan or in a preserving pan, but first before you put in the
fish to fry make the oil very hot, fry them not too much, but crisp and stiff;
being clear, white, and fine fried, lay them by in an earthen pan or charger
till they be all fried, lay them in a large flat bottomed pan that they may lie
by one another, and upon one another at length, and pack them close; then make
pickle for them with as much wine vinegar as will cover them the breadth of a
finger, boil it in a pipkin with salt, bay leaves, sprigs or tops of rosemary,
sweet marjoram, time, savory, and parsley, a quarter of a handful of each, and
whole pepper; give these things a walm or two on the fire, pour it on the fish,
and cover it close hot; then slice three or four lemons being pared, save the
peels, and put them to the fish, strew the slices of lemon over the fish with
the peels, and keep them close covered for your use. If this fish were barreld
up, it would keep as long as sturgeon, put half wine vinegar, and half white
wine, the liquor not boiled, nor no herbs in the liquor but fried bay leaves,
slic't nutmegs, whole cloves, large mace, whole pepper, and slic't ginger, pack
the fishes close, and once a month turn the head of the vessel downward; it
will keep half a year without barrelling.

Marinate these Fishes following as the Mullet, viz. Bace, Soals, Plaice,
Flounders, Dabs, Pike, Carp. Bream, Perch, Tench, Wivers, Trouts, Smelts,
Gudgeons, Mackrel, Turbut, Holly-burt, Gurnet, Rochet, Conger, Oysters,
Scollops, Cockles, Lobsters, Prawns, Crawfish, Muskles, Snails, Mushrooms,
Welks, Frogs, etc.

To marinate Bace, Mullet, Gurnet, or Rochet otherwise.
TAke a gallon of vinegar, a quart of fair water, a good handful of bay leaves,
as much of rosemary, and a quarter of a pound of pepper beaten, put these
together, and let them boil softly, season it with a little salt, then fry your
fish in special good sallet oil being well clarified, the fish being fried, put
them in an earthen vessel or barrel, lay the bay leaves and rosemary between
every layer of the fish, and pour the broth upon it, when it is cold close up
the vessel; thus you may use it to serve hot or cold, and when you dish it to
serve, garnish it with slic't lemon, the peel, and barberries.

To broil Mullet, Bace, or Bream.
TAke a mullet, draw it and wash it clean, broil it with the scales on or
without scales, and lay it in a dish with some good sallet oil, wine vinegar,
salt, some sprigs of rosemary, time, and parsley, then heat the gridiron and
lay on the fish, broil it on a soft fire on the embers, and baste it with the
sauce it was steeped in; being broild serve it in a clean warm dish with the
sauce it was steeped in, the herbs on it, and about the dish, cast on salt, and
so serve it with slices of orange, lemon, or barberries.

Or broil it in butter and vinegar with herbs as abovesaid, and make sauce with
beaten butter and vinegar.

Or beaten butter and juice of lemon and orange.

Sometimes for change, with grape verjuyce, juice of sorrel, beaten butter and
the herbs.

To fry Mullets.
SCale, draw, and scotch them, wash them clean, wipe them dry and flour them,
fry them in clarified butter, and being fried, put them in a dish, put to them
some claret wine, slic't ginger, grated nutmeg, an anchove, salt, and some
sweet butter beat up thick, give the fish a walm with a minced lemon, and dish
it, but first rub the dish with a clove of garlic.

The least mullets are the best to fry.

To bake a Mullet or Bace.
SCale, garbidge, wash and dry the mullet very well, then lard it with a salt
eel, season it, and make a pudding for it with grated bread, sweet herbs, and
some fresh eel minced, put also the yolks of hard eggs, an anchove washed and
minced very small, some nutmeg and salt; fill the belly, or not fill it at all,
but cut it into quarters, or three of a side, and season them with nutmeg,
ginger, and pepper, lay them in your pie, and make balls and lay them upon the
pieces of mullet, then put on some capers, prawns, or cockles, yolks of eggs
minced, butter, large mace, and barberries, close it up, and being baked cut up
the lid, and stick it full of cuts of paste, lozenges, or other pretty garnish,
fill it up with beaten butter, and garnish it with slic't lemon.

Or you may bake it in a patty-pan with better paste then that which is made
for pyes.

This is a very good way for tench or bream.

Section 16. Or, The fourth Section of Dressing Fish.
Showing the exactest ways of Dressing Turbut, Plaice, Flounders, and Lampry.

To boil Turbut to eat hot.
DRaw and wash them clean, then boil them in white wine and water, as much of
the one as the other, with some large mace, a few cloves, salt, sliced ginger,
a bundle of time and rosemary fast bound up; when the pan boils put in the
fish, scum it as it boils, and being half boild, put in some lemon peel; being
through boild, serve it in this broth, with the spices, herbs, and slic't lemon
on it; or dish it on sippets with the foresaid garnish and serve it with beaten
butter.

Turbut otherwise Calvered.
Draw the turbut, wash it clean, and boil it in half wine and half water, salt,
and vinegar; when the pan boils put in the fish, with some slic't onions, large
mace, a clove or two, some slic't ginger, whole pepper, and a bundle of sweet
herbs, as time, rosemary, and a bay leaf or two; scotch the fish on the white
side before you put it a boiling very thick overthwart only one way; being
half boiled, put in some lemon or orange-peel; and being through boild, serve
it with the spices, herbs, some of the liquor, onions, and slic't lemon.

Or serve it with beaten butter, slic't lemon, herbs, spices, onions, and
barberries. Thus also you may dress holyburt.

To boil Turbut or Holyburt otherwise.
BOil it in fair water and salt, being drawn and washed clean, when the pan
boils put in the fish and scum it; being well boild dish it, and pour on it
some stewed oysters and slic't lemon; run it over with beaten butter beat up
thick with juice of oranges, pour it over all, then cut sippets and stick it
with fried bread.

Otherwise.

Serve them with beaten butter, vinegar, barberries, and sippets about the fish.

To Souce Turbut and Holyburt.
TAke and draw the fish, wash it clean from the blood and slime, and when the
pan boils put in the fish in fair water, and salt, boil it very leasurely, scum
it. and season it pretty savory of the salt, boil it well with no more water
then will cover it. If you intend to keep it long, boil it in as much water as
white wine, some wine vinegar, slic't ginger, large mace, two or three cloves,
and some lemon peel; being boild and cold, put in a slic't lemon or two, take
up the fish, and keep it in an earthen pan, close covered, boil these fishes in
no more liquor then will cover them, boil them on a soft fire simpering.

To stew Turbut and Holy-burt.
TAke it and cut it into slices, then fry it, and being half fried put it in a
stew pan or deep dish, then put to it some claret, grated nutmeg, three or four
slices of an orange, a little wine vinegar, and sweet butter, stew it well,
dish it, and run it over with beaten butter, slic't lemon or orange, and orange
or lemon peel.

To fry Turbut or Holy-burt.
CUt the fish into thin slices, hack it with a knife and it will be ribbed,
then fry it almost brown with butter, take it up draining all the butter from
it, then the pan being clean put it in again with claret, slic't ginger,
nutmeg, anchove, salt, and saffron beat, fry it till half be consumed, then put
in a piece of butter, shaking it well together with a minced lemon, and rub the
dish with a clove of garlic.

To hash turbut, make a forced meat of it; to roste or broil it, use it in all
points as you do sturgeon; and marrinate it as you do carp.

The best way to Calver Flounders.
TAke them alive, draw them and scotch them very thick on the white side, then
have a pan of white white wine and wine vinegar over the fire with all manner
of spices, as large mace, salt, cloves, slic't ginger, some great onions
slic't, the tops of rosemary, time, sweet marjoram, picked parsley, and winter
savory; when the pan boils put in the flounders, and no more liquor then will
cover them, cover the pan close, and boil them up quick, serve them hot or cold
with slic't lemon, the spices and herbs on them, and lemon peel.

Broil flounders as you do bace and mullet, souce them as pike, marrinate and
dress them in stoffado as carp, and bake them as oysters.

To boil Plaice hot to butter.
DRaw them, and wash them clean, then boil them in fair water and salt, when
the pan boils put them in being very new, boil them up quick with a lemon peel;
dish them upon fine sippets round about them, slic't lemon on them, the peel,
and some barberries, beat up some butter very thick with some juice of lemon
and nutmeg grated, and run it over them hot.

Otherwise.

Boil them in white wine vinegar, large mace, a clove or two, and slic't
ginger; being boild serve them in beaten butter, with juce of sorrel, strained
bread, slic't lemon, barberries, grapes, or gooseberries.

To stew Plaice.
TAke and draw them, wash them clean, and put them in a dish, stew pan or
pipkin, with some claret or white wine, butter, some sweet herbs, nutmeg,
pepper, an onion, and salt; being finely stewed, serve them with beaten butter
on carved sippets, and slic't lemon.

Otherwise.

Draw, wash, and scotch them, then fry them not too much; being fried put them
in a dish or stew pan, put to them some claret wine, grated nutmeg, wine
vinegar, butter, pepper, and salt, stew them together with some slices of
orange.

To bake a Lampry.
DRaw it, and split the back on the inside from the mouth to the end of the
tail, take out the string in the back, fley her and truss her round, parboil it
and season it with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, put some butter in the bottom of
the pie, and lay on the lamprey with two or three good big onions, a sew whole
cloves and butter, close it up and baste it over with yolks of eggs, and bear,
or saffron water, bake it, and being baked, fill it up with clarified butter,
stop it up with butter in the vent hole, and put in some claret wine, but that
will not keep long.

To bake a Lampry otherwise with an Eel.
FLey it, splat it, and take out the garbidge; then have a good fat eel, fley
it, draw it, and boneit, wipe them dry from the slime, and season them with
pepper, salt, and nutmeg, cut them in equal pieces as may conveniently lie in a
square or round pie, lay butter in the bottom, and three or four good whole
onions, then lay a layer of eels over the butter, and on that a lay of lampry,
then another of eel, thus do till the pie be full, and on the top of all put
some whole cloves and butter, close it up and bake it, being basted over with
saffron water, yolks of eggs, and bear, bake it, and being baked and cold, fill
it up with beaten butter. Make your pies according to these forms.

forms of lampry pies

To bake a Lampry in the Italian Fashion to eat hot.
FLey it, and season it with nutmeg, pepper, salt, cinnamon, and ginger, fill
the pie either with the Lampry cut in pieces, or whole, put to it raisins,
currants, prunes, dried cherries, dates, and butter, close it up and bake it,
being baked liquor it with strained almonds, grape verjuyce, sugar, sweet herbs
chopped and boiled all together, serve juice of orange, white wine, cinnamon,
and the blood of the lampry, and ice it; thus you may also do lampurns baked
for hot.

To bake a Lampry otherwise in Patty-pan or Dish.
TAke a lampry, roast it in pieces, being drawn and fleyed, baste it with
butter, and being roasted and cold, put it into a dish with paste or puff
paste, put butter to it, being first seasoned with pepper, nutmeg, cinnamon,
ginger, and salt, seasoned lightly, some sweet herbs chopped, grated bicket
bread, currants, dates, or slic't lemon, close it up and bake it, being baked
liquor it with butter, white wine, or sack, and sugar.

Section 17. OR. The fifth Section of Fish.
Showing the best way to Dress Eels, Conger, Lump, and Soals.

To boil Eels to be eaten hot.
DRaw them, fley them; and wipe them clean, then put them in a posnet or
stew pan, cut them three inches long, and put to them some white wine, white
wine vinegar, a little fair water, salt, large mace, and a good big onion, stew
the foresaid together with a little butter; being finely stewed and tender,
dish them on carved sippets, or on ssices of French bread, and serve them with
boild currants boild by themselves, slic't lemon, barberries, and scrape on
sugar.

Otherwise.

Draw and fley them, cut them into pieces, and boil them in a little fair
water, white wine, an anchove, some oyster liquor, large mace, two or three
cloves bruised, salt, spinach, sorrel, and parsley grossly minced with a little
onion, and pepper, dish them upon fine carved sippets; then broth them with a
little of that broth, and beat up a lear with some good butter, the yolk of an
egg or two, and the rind and slices of a lemon.

To stew Eels.
FLey them, cut them into pieces; and put them into a skillet with butter,
verjuyce, and fair water as much as will cover them, some large mace, pepper, a
quarter of a pound of currants, two or three onions, three or four spoonfuls of
yeast, and a bundle of sweet herbs, stew all these together till the fish be
very tender, then dish them, and put to the broth a quarter of a pound of
butter, a little salt, and sugar, pour it on the fish, sippet it, and serve it
hot.

To stew Eels in an Oven.
CUt them in pieces, being drawn and fleyed, then season them with pepper,
salt, and a few sweet herbs chopped small, put them into an earthen pot, and
set them up an end, put to them four or five cloves of garlic, and two or
three spoonfuls of fair water, bake them, and serve them on sippets.

To stew Eels otherwise to be eaten hot.
DRaw the eels, fley them, and cut them into pieces three inches long, then put
them into a broad mouthed pipkin with as much white wine and water as will
cover them, put to them some stripped time, sweet marjoram, savory, picked
parsley, and large mace, stew them well together, and serve them on fine
sippets, stick bayleaves round the dish, garnish the meat with flic't lemon;
and the dish with fine grated manchet.

To stew whole Eels to eat hot.
TAke three good eels, draw, fley them, and truss them round, (or in pieces)
then have a quart of white wine, three half pints of wine vinegar, a quart of
water, some salt, and a handful of rosemary and time bound up hard, when the
liquor boils put in the eels with some whole pepper, and large mace; being
boiled serve them with some of the broth, beat up thick with some good butter,
and slic't lemon, dish them on sippets with some grapes, barberries, or
gooseberries.

Otherwise.

Take three good eels, draw, fley, and scotch them with your knife, truss them
round, or cut them in pieces, and fry them in clarified butter, then stew them
between two dishes, put to them some two or three spoonfuls of claret or white
wine, some sweet butter, two or three slices of an orange, some salt, and
slic't nutmeg; stew all well together, dish them, pour on the sauce, and run it
over with beaten butter, and slices of fresh orange; and put fine sippets round
the dish.

To dress Eels in Stoffado.
TAke two good eels, draw, fley them, and cut them in pieces three inches long,
put to them half as much claret wine as will cover them, or white wine, wine
vinegar, or elder vinegar, some whole cloves, large mace, gross pepper, slic't
ginger, salt, four or five cloves of garlic; being put into a pipkin that will
contain it, put to them also three or four sprigs of sweet herbs, as rosemary,
time, or sweet marjoram, two or three bay leaves, and some parsley; cover up
the pipkin, and paste the cover, then stew it in an oven, in one hour it will
be baked, serve it hot for dinner or supper on fine sippets of French bread,
and the spices upon it, the herbs, slic't lemon, and lemon peel, and run it
over with beaten butter.

To souce Eels in Collers.
TAke a good large silver eel, flay it (or not) take out the backbone, and
wash and wipe away the blood with a dry cloth, then season it with beaten
nutmeg and salt, cut off the head and roll in the tail; being seasoned in the
inside, bind it up in a fine white cloth close and straight; then have a large
skillet or pipkin, put in it some fair water and white wine, of each a like
quantity, and some salt, when it boils put in the eel; being boild tender take
it up, and let it cool, when it is almost cold keep it in sauce for your use in
a pipkin close covered, and when you will serve it take it out of the cloth,
pare it, and dish it in a clean dish or plate, with a sprig of rosemary in the
middle of the collar; garnish the dish with jelly, barberries, and lemon.

If you will have it jelly, put in a piece of isingglass after the eel is taken
up, and boil the liquor down to a jelly.

To Jelly Eels otherwise.
FLey an eel, and cut into rowels, wash it clean from the blood, and boil it in
a dish with some white wine, and white wine vinegar, as much water as wine and
vinegar and no more of the liquor then will just cover it; being tender boild
with a little salt, take it up and boil down the liquor with a piece of
isingglass, a blade of mace, a little juice of orange and sugar; then the eel
being dished, run the clearest of the jelly over it.

To souce Eels otherwise in Collers.
TAke two fair eels, fley them, and part them down the back, take out the back
bone; then take time, parsley, and sweet marjoram, mince them small, and mingle
them with nutmeg, ginger, pepper, and salt, strew it on the inside of the eels,
then roll them up like a collar of brawn, and put them in a clean cloth, bind
the ends of the cloth, and boil them tender with vinegar, white wine, salt, and
water; but let the liquor boil before you put in the eels.

To souce Eel otherwise in a Collar or Roll.
TAke a large great eel, and scour it with a handful of salt, then split it
down the back, take out the backbone and the guts, wipe out the blood clean,
and season the eel with pepper, nutmeg, salt, and some sweet herbs minced and
strowed upon it, roll it up, and bind it up close with packthread like a
collar of brawn, boil it in water, salt, vinegar, and two or three blades of
mace, boil it half an hour; and being boild, put to it a slic't lemon, and keep
it in the same liquor; when you serve it, serve it in a collar, or cut it out
in round slices, lay six or seven in a dish, and garnish it in the dish with
parssey and barberries, or serve with it vinegar in saucers.

To souce Eels otherwise cut in pieces, or whole.
TAke two or three great eels, scour them in salt, draw them and wash them
clean, cut them in equal pieces three inches long, and scotch them cross on
both sides, put them in a dish with wine, vinegar, and salt, then have a kettle
over the fire with fair water and a bundle of sweet herbs, two or three great
onions, and some large mace; when the kettle boils put in the eels, wine,
vinegar, and salt; being finely boild and tender, drain them from the liquor,
and when they are cold take some of the broth and a pint of white wine, boil it
up with some saffron beaten to powder, or it will not color the wine; then
take out the spices of the liquor where it was boild, and put it in the last
broth made for it, leave out the onions and herbs of the first broth, and keep
it in the last.

To make a Hash of Eels.
TAke a good large eel, or two, fley, draw, and wash them, bone and mince them,
then season them with cloves and mace, mix with them some good large oyfters, a
whole onion, salt, a little white wine, and an anchove, stew them upon a soft
fire, and serve them on fine carved sippets, garnish them with some slic't
orange, and run them over with beaten butter thickened with the yolk of an egg
or two, some grated nutmeg, and juice of orange.

To make a Spitch-Cock or broild Eels.
TAke a good large eel, splat it down the back, and joint the backbone; being
drawn and the blood washed out, leave on the skin, and cut it in four pieces
equally, salt them, and baste them with butter, or oil and vinegar; broil them
on a soft fire, and being finely broild, serve them in a clean dish, with
beaten butter, and juice of lemon, or beaten butter, and vinegar, with sprigs
of rosemary round about them.

To broil salt Eels.
TAke a salt eel and boil it tender, being fleyed and trust round with scuers,
boil it tender on a soft fire, then broil it brown, and serve it in a clean
dish with two or three great onions boild whole and tender, and then broild
brown; serve them on the eel with oil and mustard in saucers.

To roast an Eel.
CUt it three inches long, being first fleyed and drawn, split it, put it on a
small spit, and roast it, set a dish under it to save the gravy, and roast it
fine and brown, then make sauce with the gravy, a little vinegar, salt, pepper,
a clove or two, and a little grated parmisan, or old English cheese, or a
little buttargo grated; the eel being roasted, blow the fat off the gravy, and
put to it a piece of sweet butter, shaking it well together with some salt, put
it in a clean dish, lay the eel on it, and some flices of oranges.

To roast Eels otherwise.
TAke a good large silver eel, draw it, and fley it in pieces of four inches
long, spit it on a small spit, with some bay leaves, or large sage leaves
between each piece, spit it cross ways and roast it; being roasted, serve it
with beaten butter, beaten with juice of oranges, lemons, or elder vinegar, and
beaten nutmeg, or serve it with venison sauce, and dredge it with beaten
caraway-seed, cinnamon, flour, or grated bread.

To bake Eels in Pie, Dish, or Patty-pan.
TAke good fresh water eels, draw and fley them, cut them in pieces, and season
them with pepper, salt, and nutmeg, lay them in a pie with some prunes,
currants, grapes, gooseberries, or barberries, large mace, slic't dates, and
butter, close it up and bake it, being baked, liquor it with white wine, sugar,
and butter, and ice it.

If you bake it in a dish in paste, bake it in cold butter paste, roast the eel
and let it be cold, season it with nutmeg, pepper, ginger, cinnamon, and salt,
put butter on the paste, and lay on the eel with a few sweet herbs chopped, and
grated biscuit bread, grapes, currants, dates, large mace, and butter, close it
up and bake it, liquor it and ice it.

Otherwise.

Take good fresh water eels, fley and draw them, season them with nutmeg,
pepper, and salt, being cut in pieces lay them in the pie, and put to them some
two or three onions in quarters, some butter, large mace, grapes, barberries,
or gooseberries, close them up and bake them; being baked liquor them with
beaten butter, beat up thick with the yolks of two eggs, and slices of an
orange.

Sometimes you may bake them with a minced onion, some raisins of the sun, and
season them with some ginger, pepper, and salt.

To bake Eels otherwise.
TAke half a dozen good eels, fley them and take out the bones, mince them, and
season them with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, lay some butter in the pie, and lay
a lay of eel, and a lay of watered salt eel, cut into great lard as big as your
finger, lay a lay of it, and another of minced eels, thus lay six or seven
lays, and on the top lay on some whole cloves, slic't nutmeg, butter, and some
slices of salt eel, close it up and bake it, being baked fill it up with some
clarified butter, and close the vent. Make your pie round according to this
form.

form of eel pie

To bake Eels with Tenches in a round or square pie to eat cold.
TAke four good large eels fleyed and boned, and six good large tenches, scale,
splat, and bone them, cut off the heads and fins as also of the eels, cut both
eels and tenches a handful long, and season them with pepper, salt, and nutmeg;
then lay some butter in the bottom of the pie, lay a lay of eels, and then a
lay of tench, thus do five or six layings, lay on the top large mace, and whole
cloves, and on that butter, close it up and bake it; being baked and cold, fill
it up with clarified butter.

Or you may bake them whole, and lay them round in the pie, being fleyed,
boned, and seasoned as the former, bake them as you do a lampry, with two or
three onions in the middle.

To make minced Pies of an Eel.
TAke a fresh eel, fley it and cut off the fish from the bone, mince it small,
and pare two or three wardens or pears, mince of them as much as of the eel, or
oysters; temper and season them together with ginger, pepper, cloves, mace,
salt, a little sanders, some currants, raisins, prunes, dates, verjuyce, butter,
and rose water.

Minced Eel Pies otherwise.
TAke a good fresh water eel, fley, draw, and parboil it, then mince the fish
being taken from the bones, mince also some pippins, wardens, figs, some great
raisins of the sun, season them with cloves, mace, pepper, salt, sugar, saffron
prunes, currants, dates on the top, whole raisins, and butter; make pies
according to these forms, fill them, close them up and bake them, being baked
liquor them with grape verjuyce, slic't lemon, butter, sugar and white wine.

forms of minced eel pies

Other minced Eel Pyes.
TAke two or three good large eels being cleansed, mince them and season them
with cloves, mace, pepper, nutmeg, salt, and a good big onion in the bottom of
your pie, some sweet herbs chopped, and onions, put some gooseberries and
butter to it, and fill your pie, close it up and bake it; being baked, liquor
it with butter and verjuyce, or strong fish broth, butter, and saffron.

Otherwise.

Mince some wardens or pears, figs, raisins, prunes, and season them as
abovesaid with some spices, but no onions nor herbs, put to them gooseberries,
saffron, slic't dates, sugar, verjuyce, rosewater, and butter; then make pyes
according to these forms, fill them and bake them, being baked, liquor them
with white batter, white wine and sugar, and ice them.

forms of minced eel pies

To boil Conger to be eaten hot.
TAke a piece of conger being scalded and washed from the blood and slime, lay
it in vinegar and salt, with a slice or two of lemon, some large mace, slic't
ginger, and two or three cloves; then set some liquor a boiling in a pan or
kettle, as much wine and water as will cover it; when the liquor boils put in
the fish, with the spices, and salt; when it is boild put in the lemon, and
serve the fish on fine carved sippets; then make a leir or sauce with beaten
butter, beaten with juice of oranges or lemons, serve it with slic't lemon on
it, slic't ginger, and barberries; and garnish it with the same.

To stew Conger.
TAke a piece of conger, and cut it into pieces as big as a hens egg, put them
in a stew pan or two deep dishes, with some large mace, salt, pepper, slic't
nutmeg, some white wine, wine vinegar, as much water, butter, and slic't
ginger; stew these well together, and serve them on sippets, with slic't
orange, lemon, and barberries, and run them over with beaten butter.

To marinate Conger.
SCald and draw it, cut it into pieces, and fry it in the best sallet oil you
can get; being fried put it in a little barrel that will contain it; then have
some fried bay leaves, large mace, slic't ginger, and a few whole cloves; lay
these between the fish, put to it white wine vinegar, and salt, close up the
head and keep it for your use.

To souce Conger.
TAke a good fat conger, draw it at two several vents or holes, being first
scalded and the finns shaved off, cut it into three or four pieces; then have a
pan of fair water and make it boil, put in the fish, with a good quantity of
salt, let it boil very softly half an hour; being tender boild, set it by for
your use for present spending: but to keep it long, boil it with as much wine
as water, and a quart of white wine vinegar.

To souce Conger in Collers like Brawn.
TAke the forepart of a conger from the gills, splat it, and take out the bone;
being first fleyed or scalded, then have a good large eel or two, fleyed also
and boned, seasoned in the inside with minced nutmeg, mace and salt, seasoned
and cold with the eel in the inside, bind it up hard in a clean cloth, boil it
in fair water, white wine, and salt.

To roast Conger.
form of roasted conger

TAke a good fat conger, draw it, wash it, and scrape off the slime, cut off
the finns, and spit it like an S, draw it with rosemary and time, put some
beaten nutmeg in his belly, salt, some stripped time, and some great oysters
parboild, roste it with the skin on, and save the gravy for the sauce, boild up
with a little claret wine, beaten butter, wine vinegar, and an anchove or two,
the fat blown off, and beat up thick with some sweet butter, two or three
slices of an orange, and elder vinegar.

Or roste it in short pieces, and spit it with bay leaves between, stuck with
rosemary. Or make venison sauce, and instead of rosting it on a spit, roste it
in an oven.

To broil Conger.
TAke a good fat conger being scalded and cut into pieces, salt them and broil
them raw; or you may broil them being first boiled and basted with butter, or
steeped in oil and vinegar, broil them raw, and serve them with the same sauce
you steeped them in, baste them with rosemary, time, and parsley, and serve
them with the sprigs of those herbs about them, either in beaten butter and
vinegar, or oil and vinegar, and the foresaid herbs: or broil the pieces
spiatted like a spitch-cock of an eel, with the skin on.

To fry Conger.
BEing scalded, and the finns shaved off, splat it, cut it into rouls round the
conger, flour it, and fry it in clarified butter crisp, sauce it with butter
beaten with vinegar, juice of orange or lemon, and serve it with fried parsley,
fried ellicksanders, or clary in batter.

To bake Conger in Pasty proportion.
form of conger pastry

form of conger pie In Pie proportion.


BAke it any way of the sturgeon, as you may see in the next Section, to be
eaten either hot or cold; and make your pyes according to these forms.

To stew a Lump.
TAke it either fleyed (or not) and boil it, being splatted in a dish with some
white wine, a large mace or two, salt, and a whole onion; stew them well
together, and dish them on fine sippets, run it over with some beaten butter,
beat up with two or three slices of an orange, and some of the gravy of the
fish, run it over the lump, and garnish the meat with slic't lemon, grapes,
barberries, or gooseberries.

To bake a Lump.
TAke a lump, and cut it in pieces skin and all, or fley it, and part it in two
pieces of a side, season it with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, and lay it in the
pie, lay on it a bay leaf or two, three or four blades of large mace, the
slices of an orange, gooseberries, grapes, barberries, and butter, close it up
and bake it, being baked liquor it with beaten butter.

Thus you may bake it in dish, pie, or patty-pan.

To boil Soals.
DRaw and fley them, then boil them in vinegar, salt, white wine, and mace, but
let the liquor boil before you put them in; being finely boild take them up and
dish them in a clean dish on fine carved sippets, garnish the fish with large
mace, slic't lemon, gooseberries, grapes, or barberries, and beat up some
butter thick with juice of oranges, white wine, or grape verjuyce, and run it
over the fish. Sometimes you may put some stewed oysters on them.

Otherwise.

Take the soals, flay and draw them, and scotch one side with your knife, lay
them in a dish, and pour on them some vinegar and salt, let them lie in it half
an hour, in the mean time set on the fire some water, white wine, six cloves of
garlic, and a faggot of sweet herbs; then put the fish into the boiling
liquor, and the vinegar and salt where they were in steep; being boild, take
them up and drain them very well, then beat up sweet butter very thick, and mix
with it some anchoves minced small and dissolved in the butter, pour it on the
fish being dished, and strew on a little grated nutmeg, and minced orange mixed
in the butter.

To stew Soals.
BEing fleyed and scotched, draw them and half fry them, then take some claret
wine, and put to it some Falt, grated ginger, and a little garlic, boil this
sauce in a dish, when it boils put the soals therein, and when they are
sufficiently stewed upon their backs, lay the two halves open an the one side
and on the other, then lay anchoves finely washed and boned all along, and on
the anchoves slices of butter, then turn the two sides over again, and let them
stew till they be ready to be eaten, then take them out of the sauce and lay
them on a clean dish, pour some of the liquor wherein they were stewed upon
them, and squeeze on an orange.

Otherwise.

Draw, fley, and scotch them, then flour them and half fry them in clarified
butter, put them in a clean pewter dish, and put to them three or four
spoonfuls of claret wine, two of wine vinegar, two ounces of sweet butter, two
or three slices of an orange, a little grated nutmeg, and a little salt; stew
them together close covered, and being well stewed, dish them up in a clean
dish, lay some sliced lemon on them, and some beaten butter with juice of
oranges.

To dress Soals otherwise.
TAke a pair of soals, lard them with watered salt salmon, then lay them on a
pie-plate, and cut your lard all of an equal length, on each side lear it but
short; then flour the soals, and fry them in the best ase you can get; when
they are fried lay them on a warm dish, and put to them anchove sauce made of
some of the gravy in the pan, and two or three anchoves, grated nutmeg, a
little oil or butter, and an onion sliced small, give it a walm, and pour it on
them with some juice, and two or three slices of orange.

To souce Soals.
TAke them very new, and scotch them on the upper or white side very thick not
too deep; then have white wine, wine vinegar, cloves, mace, sliced ginger, and
salt, set it over the fire to boil in a kettle fit for it; then take parsley,
time, sage, rosemary, sweet marjoram, and winter savory, the tops of all these
herbs picked, in little branches, and some great onions sliced, when it boils
put in all the foresaid materials with no more liquor then will just cover
them; cover them close in boiling, and boil them very quick, being cold dish
them in a fair dish, and serve them with sliced lemon, and lemon-peels about
them and on them.

Otherwise.

Draw them and wash them clean, then have a pint of fair water with as much
white wine, some wine vinegar, and salt; when the pan or kettle boils, put in
the soals with a clove or two, slic't ginger, and some large mace; being boild
and cold, serve them with the spices, some of the gravy they were boild in,
slic't lemon, and lemon peel.

To jelly Soals.
TAke three tenches, two carps, and four pearches, scale them and wash out the
blood clean, take out ali the fat, and to every pound of fish take a pint of
fair spring water, or more, set the fish a boiling in a clean pipkin or pot.
and when it boils scum it, and put in some isingglass, boil it till one fourth
part be wasted, then take it off and strain it through a strong canvas cloth,
set it to cool, and being cold divide it into three or four several pipkins, as
much in the one as the other, take off the bottom and top, and to every quart
of broth put to a quart of white wine, a pound and half of refined sugar, two
nutmegs, two races of ginger, two pieces of whole cinnamon, a grain of musk, and
eight whites of eggs, stir them together with a rouling-pin, and equally divide
it into the several pipkins amongst the jellies, set them a stewing upon a soft
charcoal fire, when it boils up, run it through the jelly-bags, and pour it
upon the soals.

To roast Soals.
DRaw them, fley off the black skin, and dry them with a clean cloth, season
them lightly with nutmeg, salt, and some sweet herbs chopped small, put them in
a dish with some claret wine and two or three anchoves the space of half an
hour, being first larded with small lard of a good fresh eel, then spit them,
roast them, and set the wine under them, baste them with butter, and being
roasted, dish them round the dish, then boil up the gravy under them with three
or four slices of an orange, pour on the sauce, and lay on some slices of lemon.

Marinate, broil, fry, and bake Soals according as you do Carps, as you may see
in the thirteenth Section.

Section 18. Or, The sixth Section of Fish.
The Ala mode ways of Dressing and Ordering of Sturgeon, etc.

To boil Sturgeon to serve hot.
TAke a rand wash off the blood, and lay it in vinegar and salt with the slice
of a lemon, some large mace slic't ginger, and two or three cloves, then set on
a pan of fair water, put in some salt, and when it boils put in the fish, with
a pint of white wine, a pint of wine vinegar, and the foresaid spices, but not
the lemon; being finely boild, dish it on sippets, and sauce it with beaten
butter and juice of orange beaten together, or juice of lemon, large mace,
slic't ginger, and barberries; and garnish the dish with the same.

Otherwise.

Take a rand and cut it in square pieces as big as a hens egg stew them in a
broad mouthed pipkin with two or three good big onions, some large mace, two or
three cloves, pepper, salt, some slic't nutmeg, a bay leaf or two, some white
wine and water, butter, and a race of slic't ginger, stew them well together,
and serve them on sippets of French bread, run them over with beaten butter,
slic't lemon and barberries, and garnish the dish with the same.

Sturgeon buttered.
BOil a rand, tail, or jole in water and salt, boil it tender, and serve it
with beaten butter and slic't lemon.

To make a hot Hash of Sturgeon.
TAke a rand, wash it out of the blood, and take off the scales, and skin,
mince the meat very small, and season it with beaten mace, pepper, salt, and
some sweet herbs minced small, stew all in an earthen pipkin with two or three
big whole onions, butter, and white wine; being finely stewed, serve it on
sippets with beaten butter, minced lemon, and boild chestnuts.

To make a cold Hash of Sturgeon.
TAke a rand of sturgeon being fresh and new, bake it whole in an earthen pan
dry, and close it up with a piece of course paste; being baked and cold, slice
it into little slices as small as a three pence, and dish them in a fine clean
dish, lay them round the bottom of it, and strew on them pepper, salt, a minced
onion, a minced lemon, oil, vinegar, and barberries.

To Marinate a whole Sturgeon in rands and joles.
TAke a sturgeon fresh taken, cut it in joles and rands, wash off the blood,
and wipe the pieces dry from the blood and slime, flour them, and fry them in a
large kettle in four gallons of rape oil clarified; being fried fine and crisp,
put it into great chargers, trayes, or bowls; then have two firkins, and being
cold, pack it in them as you do boild sturgeon that is kept in pickle, then
make the sauce or pickle of two gallons of white wine, and three gallons of
white wine vinegar; put to them six good handfulls of salt, three in each
vessel, a quarter of a pound of large mace, six ounces of whole pepper, and
three ounces of slic't ginger, close it up in good sound vessels, and when you
serve it, serve it in some of its own pickle, the spices on it, and slic't
lemon.

To make a forced meat of Sturgeon.
Mince it raw with a good fat eel, and being fine minced, season it with cloves
mace, pepper, and salt, mince some sweet herbs and put to it, and make your
forcings in the forms of balls, pears, stars, or dolphins; if you please stuff
carrots or turnips with it.

To dress a whole Sturgeon in Stoffado cut into Rands and Joles to eat hot or
cold.
sturgeon

TAke a sturgeon, draw it and part it in two halves from the tail to the head,
cut it into rands-and joles a foot long or more, then wash off the blood and
slime, and steep it in wine vinegar, and white wine, as much as will cover it,
or less, put to it eight ounces of slic't ginger, six ounces of large mace,
four ounces of whole cloves, half a pound of whole pepper, salt, and a pound of
slic't nutmegs; let these steep in the foresaid liquor six hours, then put them
into broad earthen pans flat bottomed, and bake them with this liquor and
spices, cover them with paper, it will ask four or five hours baking; being
baked serve them in a large dish in joles or rands, with large slices of French
bread in the bottom of the dish, steep them well with the foresaid broth they
were baked in, some of the spices on them, some slic't lemon, barberries,
grapes, or gooseberries, and lemon peel, with some of the same broth, beaten
butter, juice of lemons and oranges, and the yolks of eggs beat up thick.

If to eat cold, barrel it up close with this liquor and spices, fill it up
with white wine or sack, and head it up close, it will keep a year very well,
when you serve it, serve it with slic't lemons, and bay leaves about it.

To souce Sturgeon to keep all the year.
TAke a sturgeon, draw it, and part it down the back in equal sides and rands,
put it in a tub into water and salt, and wash it from the blood and slime,
bind it up with tape or packthred, and boil it in a vessel that will contain
it, in water, vinegar, and salt, boil it not too tender; being finely boild,
take it up, and being pretty cold, lay it on a clean flasket or tray till it be
through cold, then pack it up close.

To souce Sturgeon in two good strong sweet Firkins.
IF the sturgeon be nine foot in length, two firkins will serve it, the vessels
being very well filled and packed close, put into it eight handfuls of salt,
six gallons of white wine, and four gallons of white wine vinegar, close on the
heads strong and sure, and once in a month turn it on the other end.

To broil Sturgeon, or toast it against the fire.
BRoil or toast a rand or jole of sturgeon that comes new out of the sea or
river, (or any piece) and either broil it in a whole rand, or slices an inch
thick, salt them, and steep them in oil olive, and wine vinegar, broil them on
a soft fire, and baste them with the sauce it was steeped in, with branches of
rosemary, time, and parsley; being finely broiled, serve it in a clean dish,
with some of the sauce it was basted with, and some of the branches of
rosemary; or baste it with butter, and serve it with butter and vinegar, being
either beaten with slic't lemon, or juice of oranges.

Otherwise.

Broil it on white paper, either with butter or sallet oil, if you broil it in
oil, being broild, put to it on the paper some oil, vinegar, pepper, and
branches or slices of orange. If broild in butter, some beaten butter, with
lemon, claret, and nutmeg.

To fry Sturgeon.
TAke a rand of fresh sturgeon, and cut it into slices of half an inch thick,
hack it, and being fried, it will look as if it were ribbed, fry it brown with
clarified butter; then take it up, make the pan clean, and put it in again with
some claret wine, an anchove, salt, and beaten saffron; fry it till half be
consumed, and then put in a piece of butter, some grated nutmeg, grated ginger,
and some minced lemon; garnish the dish with lemon, dish it, the dish being
first rubbed with a clove of garlic.

To Jelly Sturgeon.
SEason a whole rand with pepper, nutmeg, and salt, bake it dry in an earthen
pan, and being baked and cold, slice it into thin slices, dish it in a clean
dish, and run jelly on it.

To roast Sturgeon.
TAke a rand of fresh sturgeon, wipe it very dry, and cut it in pieces as big
as a goose egg, season them with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, and stick each piece
with two or three cloves, draw them with rosemary, and spit them through the
skin, and put some bay leaves or sage leaves between every piece, baste them
with butter, and being roasted serve them on the gravy that droppeth from them,
beaten butter, juice of orange or vinegar, and grated nutmeg; serve also with
it venison sauce in saucers.

To make Olives of Sturgeon stewed or roasted.
TAke spinach, red sage, parsley, time, rosemary, sweet marjoram, and winter
savory, wash and chop them very small, and mingle them with some currants,
grated bread, yolks of hard eggs chopped small, some beaten mace, nutmeg,
cinnamon, and salt; then have a rand of fresh sturgeon cut into thin broad
pieces, and hacked with the back of a chopping-knife laid on a smooth pie
plate, strew on the minced herbs with the other materials, and roll them up in
a roll, stew them in a dish in the oven, with a little white wine or wine
vinegar, some of the forcing under them, and some sugar; being baked, make a
leir with some of the gravy, and slices of orange and lemons.

To make Olives of Sturgeon otherwise.
TAke a rand of sturgeon being new, cut it in fine thin slices, and hack them
with the back of a knife; then forms of olives of sturgeon make a compound of
minced herbs, as time, savory, sweet marjoram, violet leaves, strawberry
leaves, spinach, mince, sorrel, endive, and sage; mince these herbs very fine
with a few scallions, some yolks of hard eggs, currants, cinnamon, nutmegs,
sugar, rose water, and salt, mingle all together, and strew on the compound
herbs on the hacked olives, roll them up, and make pies according to these
forms, put butter in the bottom of them, and lay the olives on it; being full,
lay on some raisins, prunes, large mace, dates, slic't lemon, some
gooseberries, grapes, or barberries, and butter, close them up and bake them,
being baked, liquor them with butter, white wine, and sugar, ice them and serve
them up hot.

To bake a Sturgeon in Joles and Rands dry in earthen Pans, and being baked and
cold, pickled and barreld up, to serve hot or cold.
TAke a sturgeon fresh and new, part him down from head to tail, and cut it
into rands and Joles, cast it into fair water and salt, wash off the slime and
blood, and put it into broad earthen pans, being first stuffed with penniroyal,
or other sweet herbs; stick it with cloves and rosemary, and bake it in pans
dry, (or a little white wine to save the pans from breaking) then take white or
claret wine, and make a pickle, half as much wine vinegar, some whole pepper,
large mace, slic't nutmegs, and six or seven handfuls of salt; being baked and
cold, pack and barrel it up close, and fill it up with this pickle raw, head it
up close, and when you serve it, serve it with some of the liquor, and slic't
lemon.

To bake Sturgeon Pies to eat cold.
TAke a fresh jole of sturgeon, scale it and wash off the slime, wipe it dry,
and lard it with a good salt eel, seasoned with nutmeg and pepper, cut the lard
as big as your finger, and being well larded, season the jole or rand with the
foresaid spices and salt, lay it in a square pie in fine or course paste, and
put some whole cloves on it, some slic't nutmeg, slic't ginger, and good store
of butter, close it up and bake it, being baked fill it up with clarified
butter.

To bake Sturgeon otherwise with Salmon.
TAke a rand of sturgeon, cut it into large thick slices, and two rands of
fresh salmon in thick slices as broad as the sturgeon, season it with the same
seasoning as the former, with spices and butter, close it up and bake it; being
baked, fill it up with clarified butter, Make your sturgeon pies or pasties
according to these forms.

forms of sturgeon pies

To bake a Sturgeon Pie to eat cold otherwise.
TAke a rand of sturgeon, fley it and wipe it with a dry cloth, and not wash
it, cut it into large slices; then have carps, tenches, or a good large eel
fleyed and boned, your Tenches and Carps scaled, boned, and wiped dry, season
your sturgeon and the other fishes with pepper, nutmeg, and salt, put butter in
the bottom of the pie, and lay a lay of sturgeon, and on that a lay of carps,
then a lay of sturgeon, and a lay of eels, next a lay of sturgeon, and a lay of
tench, and a lay of sturgeon above that; lay on it some slic't ginger, slic't
nutmeg, and some whole cloves, put on butter, close it up and bake it, being
baked, liquor it with clarified butter. Or bake it in pots as you do venison,
and it will keep long.

Otherwise.

Take a rand of sturgeon, fley it, and mince it very fine, forms of sturgeon
pies season it with pepper, cloves, mace, and salt; then have a good fresh and
fat eel or two fleyed and boned, cut it into lard as big as your finger, and
lay some in the bottom of the pie, some butter on it, and some of the minced
meat or sturgeon, and so lard and meat till you have filled the pie, lay over
all some slices of sturgeon, sliced nutmeg, slic't ginger and butter, close it
up and bake it, being baked fill it up with clarified butter. If to eat hot,
give it but half the seasoning, and make your pyes according to these forms.

To bake Sturgeon Pyes to be eaten hot.
FLey off the scales and skin of a rand, cut it in pieces as big as a walnut,
and season it lightly with pepper, nutmeg, and salt; lay butter in the bottom
of the pie, put in the sturgeon, and put to it a good big onion or two whole,
some large mace, whole cloves, slic't ginger, some large oysters, slic't lemon,
gooseberries, grapes, or barberries, and butter, close it up and bake it, being
baked, fill it up with beaten butter, beaten with white wine, or claret, and
juice or slices of lemon or orange.

To this pie in Winter, you may use prunes, raisins, or currants, and liquor it
with butter, verjuyce, and sugar; and in Summer, pease boild and put in the
pie, being baked, and leave out fruit.

Otherwise.

Cut a rand of sturgeon into pieces as big as a hens egg, cleanse it, and
season them with pepper, salt, ginger, and nutmeg, then make a pie and lay some
butter in the bottom of it, then the pieces of sturgeon, and two or three bay
leaves, some large mace, three or four whole cloves, some blanched chestnuts,
gooseberries, grapes, or barberries, and butter, close it up and bake it, and
being baked liquor it with beaten butter, and the blood of the sturgeon boild
together with a little claret wine.

To bake Surgeon Pyes in Dice-work to be eaten hot.
TAke a pound of sturgeon, a pound of a fresh fat eel, a pound of a carp, a
pound of turbut, a pound forms of sturgeon pies in dice-work of mullet, scaled,
cleansed, and boned, a tench and a lobster, cut all these fishes into the form
like dice, and mingle with them a quart of prawns, season them altogether with
pepper, nutmeg, and salt, mingle some cockles amongst them, boild artichocks,
fresh salmon, and asparagus all cut into dice-work. Then make pyes according to
these forms, lay butter in the bottom of them, then the meat being well mingled
together, next lay on some gooseberries, grapes, or barberries, slic't orange
or lemons, and put butter on it, with yolks of hard eggs and pistaches, close
it up and bake it, and being baked liquor it with good sweet butter, white
wine, or juice of oranges.

To make minced Pyes of Sturgeon.
FLey a rand of it, and mince it with a good fresh water eel, being fleyed and
boned, then mince some sweet herbs with an onion, season it with cloves, mace,
pepper, nutmeg, and salt, mingle amongst it some grapes, gooseberries, or
barberries, and fill the pie, having first put some butter in the bottom of it,
lay on the meat and more butter on the top, close it up, bake it, and serve it
up hot.

Otherwise.

Mince a rand of fresh sturgeon, or the fattest part of it very small, then
mince a little spinach, violet leaves, strawberry leaves, sorrel, parsley,
sage, savory, marjoram, and time, mingle them with the meat, some grated
manchet, currants, nutmeg, salt, cinnamon, cream eggs, sugar, and butter, fill
the pie, close it up and bake it, being baked ice it.

Minced Pyes of Surgeon otherwise.
FLey a rand of sturgeon and lard it with a good fat salt eel, roste it in
pieces and save the gravy, being roasted mince it small, but save some to cut
into dice-work, also some of the eel in the same form, mingle it amongst the
rest with some beaten pepper, salt, nutmeg, some gooseberries, grapes, or
barberries, put butter in the bottom of the pie, close it up and bake it, being
baked liquor it with gravy, juice of orange, nutmeg, and butter.

Sometimes add to it currants, sweet herbs, and saffron, and liquor it with
verjuyce, sugar, butter, and yolks of eggs.

To make Chewits of Sturgeon.
MInce a rand of sturgeon the fattest part, and season it with pepper, salt,
nutmeg, cinnamon, ginger, caraway seed, rose water, butter, sugar, and
orange-peel minced, mingle all together with some sliced dates and currants, and
fill your pyes.

To make a Lumber Pie of Sturgeon.
MInce a rand of sturgeon with some of the fattest of the belly, or a good fat
fresh eel, being minced, season it with pepper, nutmeg, salt, cinnamon, ginger,
carawayes, slic't dates, eight or four raw eggs, and the yolks of six hard eggs
in quarters, mingle altogether, and make them into balls or rolls, fill the
pie, and lay on them some slic't dates, large mace, slic't lemon, grapes,
gooseberries, or barberries, and butter, close it up and bake it; being baked
liquor it with butter, white wine, and sugar.

Or only add some grated bread, some of the meat cut into dice-work, and some
rose water, baked in all points as the former; being baked cut up the cover,
and stick it with balls, with fried sage leaves in batter; liquor it as
aforesaid, and lay on it a cut cover, scrape on sugar.

To make an Olive Pie of Sturgeon in the Italian Fashion.
MAke slices of sturgeon, hack them, and lard them with salt salmon, or salt
eel, then make a composition of some of the sturgeon cut into dice-work, some
fresh eel, dried cherries, prunes taken from the stones, grapes, some
mushrooms, and oysters; season the foresaid things altogether in a dish or
tray, with some pepper, nutmeg, and salt, roll them in the slices of the hacked
sturgeon with the larded side outmost, lay them in the pie with the butter
under them; being filled lay on it some oysters, blanched chestnuts, mushrooms,
cockles, pineapple seed, grapes, gooseberries, and more butter; close it up,
bake it, and liquor it with butter, verjuyce, and sugar, serve it up hot.

To bake Sturgeon to be eaten hot with diverse forcings or stuffings.
TAke a rand and cut it into small pieces as big as a walnut, mince it with
fresh eel, some sweet herbs, a few green onions, penniroyal, grated bread,
nutmeg, pepper, salt, currants, gooseberries, and eggs; mingle altogether and
make it into balls, fill the pie with the whole meat and the balls, and lay on
them some large mace, barberries, chestnuts, yolks of hard eggs, and butter;
fill the pie and bake it, being baked liquor it with butter, and grape verjuyce.

Or mince some sturgeon, grated parmisan, or good Holland cheese, mince the
sturgeon and fresh eel together, being fine minced put some currants to it,
nutmeg, pepper, and cloves beaten, some sweet herbs minced small, some salt,
saffron, and raw yolks of eggs.

Other Stuffings or Puddings.
GRated bread, nutmeg, pepper, sweet herbs minced very fine, four or five yolks
of hard eggs minced very small, two or three raw eggs, cream, currants, grapes,
barberries, and sugar, mix them altogether, and lay them on the sturgeon in the
pie, close it up and bake it, and liquor it with butter, white wine, sugar, the
yolk of an egg, and ice it.

To make an Olio of Sturgeon with other Fishes.
TAke some sturgeon and mince it with a fresh eel, put to it some sweet herbs
minced small, some grated bread, yolks of eggs, salt, nutmeg, pepper, some
gooseberries, grapes, or barberries, and make it into little balls or rolls.
Then have fresh fish scaled, washed, dried, and parted into equal pieces,
season them with pepper, nutmeg, salt, and set them by; then make ready shell
fish and season them as the other fishes lightly with the same spices. Then
make ready roots, as potatoes, skirrets, artichocks, and chestnuts, boil them,
cleanse them, and season them with the former spices. Next have yolks of hard
eggs, large mace, barberries, grapes, or gooseberries, and butter: make your
pie, and put butter in the bottom of it, mix them altogether, and fill the pie,
then put in two or three bay leaves, and a few whole clove, mix the minced
balls amongst the other meat, and roots; then lay on the top some large mace,
potatoes, barberries, grapes, or gooseberries, chestnuts, pistaches, and butter;
close it up and bake it, fill it up with beaten butter, beaten with the juice
of oranges, dish and cut up the cover, and put all over it slic't lemons, and
sometimes to the lear the yolk of an egg or two.

To make minced Herring Pies.
TAke salt herrings being watered, crush them between your hands, and you shall
loose the fish from the skin, take off the skin whole, and lay them in a dish;
then have a pound of almond paste ready, mince the herrings, and stamp them
with the almond paste, two of the milts or rows, five or six dates, some grated
manchet, sugar, sack, rose water, and saffron, make the composition somewhat
stiff, and fill the skins, put butter in the bottom of your pie, lay on the
herring, and on them dates, gooseberries, currants, barberries, and butter,
close it up and bake it, being baked liquor it with butter, verjuyce, and sugar.

Otherwise.

Bone them, and mince them being finely cleansed with two or three pleasant
pears, raisins of the sun, some currants, dates, sugar, cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg,
pepper, and butter, mingle all together, fill your pies, and being baked,
liquor them with verjuyce, claret, or white wine.

To make minced Pies of Ling, Stock Fish, Haberdine, etc.
BEing boild take it from the skin and bones, and mince it with some pippins,
season it with nutmeg, cinnamon, ginger, pepper, carraway-seed, currants, minced
raisins, rose water, minced lemon peel, sugar, slic't dates, white wine,
verjuyce, and butter, fill your pies, bake them, and ice them.

Otherwise.

Mince them with yolks of hard eggs, mince also all manner of good pot herbs,
mix them together, and season them with the seasoning aforesaid, liquor it with
butter, verjuice, sugar, beaten cinnamon, and ice them.

forms of minced pies

Section 19. Or, The seventh Section of Fish.
Showing the exactest way of dressing all manner of Shellfish.

To stew Oysters the French way.
TAke oysters, open them and parboil them in their own liquor, the quantity of
three pints or a pottle; being parboild, wash them in warm water clean from the
dregs, beard them and put them in a pipkin with a little white wine, and some
of the liquor they were parboiled in, a whole onion, some salt, and pepper, and
stew them till they be half done; then put them and their liquor into a frying
pan, fry them a pretty while, put to them a good piece of sweet butter, and fry
them therein so much longer, then have ten or twelve yolks of eggs dissolved
with some vinegar, wherein you must put in some minced parsley, and some grated
nutmeg, put these ingredients into the oysters, shake them in the drying pan a
walm or two, and serve them up.

To stew Oysters otherwise.
TAke a pottle of large great oysters, parboil them in their own liquor, then
wash them in warm water from the dregs, and put them in a pipkin with a good
big onion or two, and five or six blades of large mace, a little whole pepper,
a slic't nutmeg, a quarter of a pint of white wine, as much wine vinegar, a
quarter of a pound of sweet butter, and a little salt, stew them finely
together on a soft fire the space of half an hour, then dish them on sippets of
French bread, slic't lemon on them; and barberries, run them over with beaten
butter, and garnish the dish with dried manchet grated and searsed.

To stew Oysters otherwise.
TAke a pottle of large great oysters, parboil them in their own liquor, then
wash them in warm water, wipe them dry, and pull away the finns, flour them and
fry them in clarified butter fine and white, then take them up and put them in
a large dish with some white or claret wine, a little vinegar, a quarter of a
pound of sweet butter some grated nutmeg, large mace, salt, and two or three
slices of an orange, stew them two or three walms, then serve them in a large
clean scowred dish, pour the sauce on them, and run them over with beaten
butter, slic't lemon or orange, and sippets round the dish.

Otherwise.

Take a pottle of great oysters, and stew them in their own liquor, then take
them up, wash them in warm water; take off the finns, and put them in a pipkin
with some of their own liquor, a pint of white wine, a little wine vinegar, six
large maces, two or three whole onions, a race of ginger slic't, a whole nutmeg
slic't, twelve whole pepper corns, salt, a quarter of a pound of good sweet
butter, and a little faggot of sweet herbs; stew all these together very well,
then drain them through a cullender, and dish them on fine carved sippets; then
take some of the liquor they were stewed in, and beat it up thick with a minced
lemon, and half a pound of butter, pour it on the oysters being dished, and
garnish the dish and the oysters with grapes, grated bread, slic't lemon, and
barberries.

Or thus.

Broil great oysters in their shells brown and dry, but burn them not, then
take them out and put them in a pipkin, with some good sweet butter, the juice
of two or three oranges, a little pepper and grated nutmeg, give them a walm,
and dish them in a fair scowred dish with carved sippets, and garnish it with
dried, grated, searsed fine manchet.

To make Oyster Pottage.
TAke some boild pease, strain them and put them in a pipkin with some capers,
some sweet herbs finely chopped, some salt, and butter; then have some great
oysters fried with sweet herbs, and grossly chopped, put them to the strained
pease, stew them together, serve them on a clean scowred dish on fine carved
sippets, and garnish the dish with grated bread.

Otherwise.

Take a quart of great oysters, parboil them in their own liquor, and stew them
in a pipkin with some capers, large mace, a faggot of sweet herbs, salt, and
butter; being finely stewed, serve them on slices of dried French bread, round
the oysters slic't lemon, and on the pottage, boild spinach, minced, and
buttered, but first pour on the broth.

To make a Hash of Oysters.
TAke three quarts of great oysters, parboil them and save their liquor, then
mince two quarts of them very fine, and put them a stewing in a pipkin with
half a pint of white wine, a good big onion or two, some large mace, a grated
nutmeg, some chestnuts, and pistaches, three or four spoonfulls of wine vinegar,
a quarter of a pound of good sweet butter, some oyster liquor, pepper, salt,
and a faggot of sweet herbs; stew the foresaid together upon a soft fire the
space of half an hour, then take the other oysters and season them with pepper,
salt, and nutmeg, fry them in batter made of fine flour, eggs, salt, and cream,
make one half of it green with juice of spinach, and sweet herbs chopped small,
dip them in these batters, and fry them in clarified butter, being fried keep
them warm in an oven; then have a fine clean large dish, lay slices of French
bread all over the bottom of the dish, scald and steep the bread with some
gravy of the hash, or oyster liquor, and white wine boild together; dish the
hash all over the slices of bread, lay on that the fried oysters, chestnuts, and
pistaches; then beat up a leir or sauce of butter, juice of lemon or oranges,
five or six, a little white wine, the yolks of three or four eggs, and pour on
this sauce over the hash, with some slic't lemon, and lemon peel; garnish the
dish with grated bread, being dried and searsed, some pistaches, chestnuts,
carved lemons, and frved oysters.

Sometimes you may use mushrooms boild in water, salt, sweet herbs, large mace,
cloves, bay leaves, two or three cloves of garlic, then take them up, dip them
in batter and fry them brown, make sauce for them with claret and the juice of
two or three oranges, salt, butter, the juice of horse-raddish roots beaten and
strained, grated nutmeg, and pepper, beat them up thick with the yolks of two
or three eggs, do this sauce in a drying pan, shake them well together, and
pour it on the hash with the mushrooms.

To marinate great Oysters to be eaten hot.
TAke three quarts of great oysters ready opened, parboil them in their own
liquor, then take them out and wash them in warm water, wipe them dry and flour
them, fry them crisp in a drying pan with three pints of sweet sallet oil, put
them in a dish, and set them before the fire, or in a warm oven; then make
sauce with white wine, wine vinegar, four or five blades of large mace, two or
three slic't nutmegs, two races of slic't ginger, some twenty cloves, twice as
much of whole pepper, and some salt; boil all the foresaid spices in a pipkin
with a quart of white wine, a pint of wine vinegar, rosemary, time, winter
savory, sweet marjoram, bay leaves, sage, and parsley, the tops of all these
herbs about an inch long; then take three or four good lemons slic't, dish up
the oysters in a clean scowred dish, pour on the broth, herbs, and spices on
them, lay on the slic't lemons, and run it over with some of the oil they were
fried in, and serve them up hot. Or fry them in clarified butter.

Oysters in Stoffado.
PArboil a pottle or three quarts of great oysters, save the liquor and wash
the oysters in warm water, then after steep them in white wine, wine vinegar,
slic't nutmeg, large mace, whole pepper, salt, and cloves; give them a walm on
the fire, set them off and let them steep two or three hours; then take them
out, wipe them dry, dip them in batter made of fine flour, yolks of eggs, some
cream and falt, fry them, and being fried keep them warm, then take some of the
spices liquor, some of the oyster liquor, and some butter, beat these things up
thick with the slices of an orange or two, and two or three yolks of eggs; then
dish the fried oysters in a fine clean dish on a chafing dish of coals, run on
the sauce over them with the spices, slic't orange, and barberries, and garnish
the dish with searsed manchet.

To jelly Oysters.
TAke ten flounders, two small pikes or plaice, and four ounces of isingglass;
being finely cleansed, boil them in a pipkin, in a pottle of fair spring water,
and a pottle of white wine, with some large mace, and slic't ginger; boil them
to a jelly, and strain it through a strainer into a basin or deep dish; being
cold pare off the top and bottom, and put it into a pipkin, with the juice of
six or seven great lemons to a pottle of this broth, three pound of fine sugar
beaten in a dish with the whites of twelve eggs rubbed altogether with a
rouling pin, and put amongst the jelly; being melted but not too hot, set the
pipkin on a soft fire to stew, put in it a grain of musk and as much
ambergreece well rubbed, let it stew half an hour on the embers, then boil it
up, and let it run through your jelly bag; then stew the oysters in white wine,
oyster liquor, juice of orange, mace, slic't nutmeg, whole pepper, some salt,
and sugar; dish them in a fine clean dish with some preserved barberries, large
mace, or poungarnet kernels, and run the jelly over them in the dish, garnish
the dish with carved lemons, large mace, and preserved barberries.

To pickle Oysters.
TAke eight quarts of oysters, and parboil them in their own liquor, then take
them out, wash them in warm water, and wipe them dry, then take the liquor they
were parboild in, and clear it from the grounds into a large pipkin or skillet,
put to it a pottle of good white wine, a quart of wine vinegar, some large
mace, whole pepper, and a good quantity of salt, set it over the fire, boil it
leasurely, scum it clean, and being well boild put the liquor into eight
barrels of quarts apiece, being cold put in the oysters, and close up the head.

Otherwise.

Take eight quarts of the fairest oysters that can be gotten, fresh and new, at
the full of the Moon, parboil them in their own liquor, then wipe them dry with
a clean cloth, clear the liquor from the dregs, and put the oysters in a well
seasoned barrel that will but just hold them; then boil the oyster liquor with
a quart of white wine, a pint of wine vinegar, eight or ten blades of large
mace, an ounce of whole pepper, four ounces of white salt, four races of slic't
ginger, and twenty cloves, boil these ingredients four or five walms, and being
cold put them to the oysters, close up the barrel, and keep it for your use.

When you serve them, serve them in a fine clean dish, with bay leaves round
about them, barberries, slic't lemon, and slic't orange.

To souce Oysters to serve hot or cold.
TAke a gallon of great oysters ready opened, parboil them in their own liquor,
and being well parboild, put them into a cullender, and save the liquor; then
wash the oysters in warm water from the grounds and grit, set them by and make
a pickle for them with a pint of white wine, and half a pint of wine vinegar,
put it in a pipkin with some large mace, slic't nutmegs, slic't ginger, whole
pepper, three or four cloves, and some salt, give it four or five walms, and
put in the oysters into the warm pickle with two slic't lemons and lemon peels;
cover the pipkin close to keep in the spirits, spices, and liquor.

To roast Oysters.
STrain the liquor from the oysters, wash them very clean and give them a scald
in boiling liquor or water; then cut small lard of a fat salt eel, and lard
them with a very small larding-prick, spit them on a small spit for that
service; then beat two or three yolks of eggs with a little grated bread, or
nutmeg, salt, and a little rosemary and time minced very small; when the
oysters are hot at the fire, baste them continually with these ingredients,
laying them pretty warm at the fire. For the sauce boil a little white wine,
oyster liquor, a sprig of time, grated bread, and salt, beat it up thick with
butter, and rub the dish with a clove of garlic.

To roast Oysters otherwise.
TAke two quarts of large great oysters, and parboil them in their own liquor;
then take them out, wash them from the dregs, and wipe them dry on a clean
cloth; then have slices of a fat salt eel, as thick as a half crown piece,
season the oysters with nutmeg and salt, spit them on a fine small wooden spit
for that purpose, spit first a sage leaf, then a slice of eel, and then an
oyster, thus do till they be all spitted, and bind them to another spit with
packthred, baste them with yolks of eggs, grated bread, and stripped time, and
lay them to a warm fire with here and there a clove in them; being finely
roasted make sauce with the gravy that drops from them, blow off the fat, and
put to it some claret wine, the juice of an orange, grated nutmeg, and a little
butter; beat it up thick together with some of the oyster liquor, and serve
them on this sauce with slices of orange.

Otherwise.

Take the greatest oysters you can get, being opened parboil them in their own
liquor, save the liquor, and wash the oysters in some water, wipe them dry, and
being cold, lard them with eight or ten lardons through each oyster, the lard
being first seasoned with cloves, pepper, and nutmeg beaten very small; being
larded, spit them on two wooden scuers, bind them to an iron spit and roast
them, baste them with anchove sauce made of some of the oyster liquor, let them
drip in it, and being enough. bread them with the crust of a roll grated, then
dish them, blow the fat off the gravy, put it to the oysters, and wring on the
juice of a lemon.

To broil Oysters.
TAke great oysters and set them on a gridiron with the heads downwards, put
them up an end, and broil them dry, brown, and hard, then put two or three of
them in a shell with some melted butter, set them on the gridiron till they be
finely stewed, then dish them on a plate, and fill them up with good butter
only melted, or beaten with juice of orange, pepper them lightly, and serve
them up hot.

To broil Oysters otherwise upon paper.
BRoil them on a gridiron as before, then take them out of the shells into a
dish, and choose out the fairest, then have a sheet of white paper made like a
drippingpan, set it on the gridiron, and run it over with clarified butter, lay
on some sage leaves, some fine thin slices of a fat fresh eel being parboild,
and some oysters, stew them on the hot embers, and being finely broild serve
them on a dish and a plate in the paper they are broild in, and put to them
beaten butter, juice of orange, and slices of lemon.

To broil large Oysters otherwise.
TAke a pottle of great oysters opened, and parboil them in their own liquor,
being done, pour them into a cullender, and save the liquor, then wash the
oysters in warm water from the grounds, wipe them with a clean cloth, beard
them, and put them in a pipkin, put to them large mace, two great onions, some
butter, some of their own liquor, some white wine, wine vinegar, and salt; stew
them together very well, then set some of the largest shells on a gridiron, put
two or three in a shell, with some of the liquor out of the pipkin, broil them
on a soft fire, and being broild set them on a dish and plate, and fill them up
with beaten butter.

Sometimes you may bread them in the broiling.

To fry Oysters.
TAke two quarts of great oysters being parboild in their own liquor, and
washed in warm water, bread them, dry them, and flour them, fry them in
clarified butter crisp and white; then have buttered prawns or shrimps,
buttered with cream and sweet butter, lay them in the bottom of a clean dish,
and lay the fried oysters round about them, run them over with beaten butter,
juice of oranges, bay leaves stuck round the oysters, and slices of oranges or
lemons.

Otherwise.

Strain the liquor from the oysters, wash them, and parboil them in a kettle.
then dry them and roll them in flour, or make a batter with eggs, flour, a
little cream, and salt, rouling them in it, and fry them in butter. For the
sauce boil the juice of two or three oranges, some of their own liquor, a
slic't nutmeg, and claret; being boild a little, put in a piece of butter,
beating it up thick, then warm the dish, rub it with a clove of garlic, dish
the oysters, and garnish them with slices of orange.

To bake Oysters.
PArboil your oysters in their own liquor, then take them out and wash them in
warm water from the dregs, dry them and season them with pepper, nutmeg, yolks
of hard eggs, and salt; the pie being made, put a few currants in the bottom,
and lay on the oysters, with some slic't dates in halves, some large mace,
slic't lemon, barberries, and butter, close it up and bake it, then liquor it
with white wine, sugar, and butter; or in place of white wine use verjuyce.

The Forms of Oysters Pies.
forms of oyster pies

To bake Oysters otherwise.
SEason them with pepper, salt, and nutmegs, the same quantity as beforesaid,
and the same quantity of oysters, two or three whole onions, nor no currants nor
sugar, but add to it in all respects else; as slic't nutmeg on them, large
mace, hard eggs in halves, barberries, and butter, liquor it with beaten
butter, white wine, and juice of oranges.

Otherwise for change, in the seasoning put to them chopped time, hard eggs,
some anchoves, and the foresaid spices.

Or take large oysters, broil them dry and brown in the shells, and season them
with the former spices, bottoms of boild artichocks, pickled mushrooms, and no
onions, but all things else as the former, liquor them with beaten butter,
juice of orange, and some claret wine.

Otherwise.

Being parboild in their own liquor, season them with a little salt, sweet
herbs minced small one spoonful, fill the pie, and put into it three or four
blades of large mace, a slic't lemon and on flesh days a good handful of
marrow rouled in yolks of eggs and butter, close it up and bake it, make liquor
for it with two nutmegs grated, a little pepper, butter, verjuyce, and sugar.

To make an Oyster Pie otherwise.
TAke a pottle of oysters being parboild in their own liquor, beard and dry
them, season them with large mace, whole pepper, a little beaten ginger, salt,
butter, and marrow, close it up, and being baked, make a leir with white wine,
the oyster liquor, and one onion, or rub the ladle with garlic you beat it up
withal; it being boild, put in a pound of butter, with a minced lemon, a faggot
of sweet herbs, and being boild put in the liquor.

To make Mince Pies or Chewits of Oysters.
TAke three quarts of great oysters ready opened and parboild in their own
liquor, then wash them in warm water from the dr^ dry them and mince them very
fine, season them light^^ (...) nutmeg, pepper, salt, cloves, mace, cinnamon,
carra^seed, some minced raisins of the sun, slic't dates, sug^ ^urrans, and
half a pint of white wine, mingle all to^^^^^r, and put butter in the bottoms
of the pies, fill the (...) and bake them.

To bake Oysters otherwise.
SEason them with pepper, salt, nutmeg, and sweet herbs strowed on them in the
pie, large mace, barberries, butter, and a whole onion or two, for liquor a
little white wine, and wine vinegar, beat it up thick with butter, and liquor
the pie, cut it up and lay on a slic't lemon, let not the lemon boil in it, and
serve it hot.

Otherwise.

Season them as before with pepper, nutmeg, and salt, being bearded, but first
fry them in clarified butter, then take them up and season them, lay them in
the pie being cold, put butter to them and large mace, close it up and bake it;
then make liquor with a little claret wine and juice of oranges, beat it up
thick with butter, and a little wine vinegar, liquor the pie, lay on some
slices of orange and set it again into the oven a little while.

To bake Oysters otherwise.
TAke great oysters, beard them, and season them with grated nutmeg, salt, and
some sweet herbs minced small, lay them in the pie, with a small quantity of
the sweet herbs strowed on them, some twenty whole corns of pepper, slic't
ginger, a whole onion or two, large mace, and some butter, close it up and bake
it, and make liquor with white wine, some of their own liquor, and a minced
lemon, and beat it up thick.

Otherwise.

Broil great oysters dry in the shells, then take them out and season them with
grated nutmeg, pepper, and salt, lay them in the pie, and strew on them the
yolks of two hard eggs minced, some stripped time, some capers, large mace, and
butter; close it up, and make liquor with claret wine, wine vinegar, butter,
and juice of oranges, beat it up thick, and liquor the pie, set it again into
the oven a little while, and serve it hot.

To make a made Dish of Oysters and other Compounds.
TAke oysters, cockles, prawns, craw-fish, and shrimps; being finely cleansed
from the grit, season them with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, next have chestnuts
roasted and blanched, skirrets boild, blanched, and seasoned; then have a dish
or patty-pan ready with a sheet of cool butter paste, lay some butter on it,
then the fishes, and on them the skirrets, chestnuts, pistaches, slic't-lemon,
large mace, barberries, and butter; close it up and bake it, and being baked
fill it up with beaten butter, beat with juice of oranges, and some white wine,
or beaten butter with a little wine vinegar, verjuyce, or juice of green
grapes, or a little good fresh fish broth, cut it up and liquor it, lay on the
cover, or cut it into four or five pieces, lay it round the dish, and serve it
hot.

To make cool Butter Paste for this Dish.
TAke to every peck of flour five pound of butter, and the whites of six eggs,
work it well together dry, then put cold water to it; this paste is good only
for pattypans and pasties.

To make Paste for Oyster Pies.
THe paste for thin baked meats must be made with boiling liquor, put to every
peck of flour two pound of butter, but let the butter boil in the liquor first.

To fry Mushrooms.
BLanch them and wash them clean, if they be large, quarter them, and boil them
with water, salt, vinegar, sweet herbs, large mace, cloves, bay leaves, and two
or three cloves of garlic, then take them up, dry them, dip them in batter,
and fry them in clarified butter till they be brown, make sauce for them with
claret wine, the juice of two or three oranges, salt, butter, the juice of
horse-raddish root beaten and strained, slic't nutmeg, and pepper; put these
into a drying pan with the yolks of two or three eggs dissolved with some
mutton gravy, beat and shake them well togerher in the pan that they curddle
not, then dish the mushrooms on a dish, being first rubbed with a clove of
garlic, and garnish it with oranges and lemons.

To dress Mushrooms in the Italian Fashion.
TAke mushrooms, peel and wash them, and boil them in a skillet with water and
salt, but first let the liquor boil with sweet herbs, parsley, and a crust of
bread, being boild drain them from the water, and fry them in sweet sallet oil;
being fried serve them in a dish with oil, vinegar, pepper, and fried parsley.
Or fry them in clarified butter.

To stew Mushrooms.
PEel them, and put them in a clean dish, strew salt on them, and put an onion
to them, some sweet herbs, large mace, pepper, butter, salt, and two or three
cloves; being tender stewed on a soft fire, put to them some grated bread, and
a little white wine, stew them a little more, and dish them (but first rub the
dish with a clove of garlic) sippet them, lay slic't orange on them, and run
them over with beaten butter.

To broil Mushrooms.
TAke the biggest and the reddest, peel them, and season them with some sweet
herbs, pepper, and salt, broil them on a dripping-pan of paper, and fill it
full, put some oil into it, and lay it on a gridiron, broil it on a soft fire,
turn them often, and serve them with oil and vinegar.

Or broil them with butter, and serve them with beaten butter, and juice of
orange.

To stew Cockles being taken out of the Shells.
WAsh them well with vinegar, boil or broth them before you take them out of
the shells, then put them in a dish with a little claret, vinegar, a handful of
capers, mace, pepper, a little grated bread, minced time, salt, and the yolks
of two or three hard eggs minced, stew altogether till you think them enough,
then put in a good piece of butter, shake them well together, heat the dish,
rub it with a clove of garlic, and put two or three toasts of white bread in
the bottom, laying the meat on them. Crawfish, prawns, or shrimps are excellent
good the same way being taken out of their shells, and make variety of garnish
with the shells.

To stew Cockles otherwise.
STew them with claret wine, capers, rose or elder vinegar, wine vinegar, large
mace, gross pepper, grated bread, minced time, the yolks of hard eggs minced,
and butter; stew them well together. Thus you may stew scollops, but leave out
capers.

To stew Scollops.
BOil them very well in white wine, fair water, and salt, take them out of the
shells, and stew them with some of the liquor, elder vinegar, two or three
cloves, some large mace, and some sweet herbs chopped small; being well stewed
together, dish four or five of them in scollop shells and beaten butter, with
the juice of two or three oranges.

To stew Muskles.
WAsh them clean and boil them in water, or beer and salt; then take them out
of the shells and beard them from gravel and stones, fry them in clarified
butter, and being fried put away some of the butter, and put to them a sauce
made of some of their own liquor, some sweet herbs chopped, a little white
wine, nutmeg, three or four yolks of eggs dissolved in wine vinegar, salt, and
some sliced orange; give these materials a walm or two in the drying pan, make
the sauce pretty thick, and dish them in the scollop shells.

To fry Muskles.
TAke as much water as will cover them, set it a boiling, and when it boils put
in the muskles, being cleanly washed, put some salt to them, and being boild
take them out of the shells, and beard them from the stones, moss, and gravel,
wash them in warm water, wipe them dry, flour them, and fry them crisp, serve
them with beaten butter, juice of orange, and fried parsley, or fried sage
dipped in batter, fried ellicksander leaves, and slic't orange.

To make a Muskle Pie.
TAke a peck of muskles, wash them clean, and set them a boiling in a kettle of
fatr water, (but first let the water boil) then put them into it, give them a
walm, and as soon as they are opened, take them out of the shells, stone them,
and mince them with some sweet herbs, some leeks, pepper, and nutmeg; mince six
hard eggs and put to them, put some butter in the pie, close it up and bake it,
being baked liquor it with some butter, white wine, and slices of orange.

To stew Prawns, Shrimps, or Crawfish.
BEing boild and picked, stew them in white wine, sweet butter, nutmeg, and
salt, dish them in scollop shells; and run them over with beaten butter, and
juice of orange or lemon.

Otherwise, stew them in butter and cream, and serve them in scollop shells.

To stew Lobsters.
TAke claret wine, vinegar, nutmeg, salt, and butter, stew them down somewhat
dry, and dish them in a scollop shell, run them over with butter and slic't
lemon.

Otherwise, cut it into dice-work, and warm it with white wine and butter, put
it in a pipkin with claret wine or grape verjuyce, and grated manchet, and fill
the scollop shells.

Otherwise.

Being boild, take out the meat, break it small, but break the shells as little
as you can, then put the meat into a pipkin with claret wine, wine vinegar,
slic't nutmeg, a little salt, and some butter; stew all these together softly
an hour, being stewed almost dry, put to it a little more butter, and stir it
well together; then lay very thin toasts in a clean dish, and lay the meat on
them. Or you may put the meat in the shells, and garnish the dish about with
the legs, and lay the body or barrel over the meat with some sliced lemon, and
rare colored flowers being in summer, or pickled in winter. Crabs are good the
same way, only add them the juice of two or three oranges, a little pepper,
and grated bread.

To stew Lobsters otherwise.
TAke the meat out of the shells, slice it, and fry it in clarified butter,
(the lobsters being first boild and cold) then put the meat in a pipkin with
some claret wine, some good sweet butter, grated nutmeg, salt, and two or three
slices of an orange; let it stew leasurely half an hour, and dish it up on fine
carved sippets in a clean dish, with sliced orange on it, and the juice of
another, and run it over with beaten butter.

To hash Lobsters.
TAke them out of the shells, mince them small, and put them in a pipkin with
some claret wine, salt, sweet butter, grated nutmeg, slic't oranges, and some
pistaches; being finely stewed, serve them on sippets, dish them, and run them
over with beaten butter, slic't oranges, some cut of paste, or lozenges of puff
paste,

To boil Lobsters to eat cold the common way.
Take them alive or dead, lay them in cold water to make the claws tuff, and
keep them from breaking off; then have a kettle over the fire with fair water,
put in it as much bay salt as will make it a good strong brine, when it boils
scum it and put in the lobsters, let them boil leasurely the space of half an
hour or more, according to the bigness of them, being well boild take them up,
wash them, and wipe them with beer and butter, and keep them for your use.

To keep Lobsters a quarter of a year very good.
TAke them being boild as aforesaid, wrap them in course rags having been
steeped in brine, and bury them in a cellar in some sea-sand pretty deep.

To force a Lobster.
TAke a lobster being half boild, take the meat out of the shells, and mince it
small with a good fresh eel, season it with cloves and mace beaten, some sweet
herbs minced small and mingled amongst the meat, yolks of eggs, gooseberries,
grapes, or barberries, and sometimes boild artichocks cut into dice-work, or
boild asparagus, and some almond paste mingled with the rest, fill the lobsters
shells, claws, tail, and body, and bake it in a bloat oven, make sauce with the
gravy and white wine, and beat up the sauce or leir with good sweet butter, a
grated nutmeg, juice of oranges, and an anchove, and rub the dish with a clove
of garlic.

To this forcing you may sometimes add almond paste, currants, sugar,
gooseberries, and make balls to lay about the lobsters, or serve it with
venison sauce.

To marinate Lobsters.
TAke lobsters out of the shells being half boild, then take the tails and lard
them with a salt eel, (or not lard them) part the tails into two halves the
longest way, and fry them in sweet sallet oil, or clarified butter; being
finely fried, put them into a dish or pipkin, and set them by, then make sauce
with white wine, and white wine vinegar, four or five blades of large mace,
three or four slic't nutmegs, two races of ginger slic't, so me ten or twelve
cloves, twice as much of whole pepper, and some salt, boil them altogether with
rosemary, time, winter savory, sweet marjoram, bay leaves, sage, and parsley,
the tops of all these herbs about an inch long; then take three or four lemons
and slice them, dish up the lobsters in a clean dish, and pour on the broth,
herbs, and spices on the fish, lay on the lemons, run it over with some of the
oil or butter they were fried in, and serve them up hot

To broil Lobsters.
BEing boild lay them on a gridiron, or toast them against the fire, and baste
them with vinegar and butter, or butter only, broil them leasurely, and being
broild serve them with butter and vinegar beat up thick with slic't lemon and
nutmeg.

Otherwise.

Broil them the tail being parted in two halves long ways, also the claws
cracked and broild, broil the barrel whole being salted, baste it with sweet
herbs, as time, rosemary, parsley, and savory, being broild dish it, and serve
it with butter and vinegar.

To broil Lobsters on Paper.
SLice the tails round, and also the claws in long slices, then butter a
dripping-pan made of paper, lay it on a gridiron, and put some slices of
lobster seasoned with nutmeg, and salt, and slices of a fresh eel, some sage
leaves, tops of rosemary, two or three cloves, and sometimes some bay leaves or
sweet herbs chopped; broil them on the embers, and being finely broild serve
them on a dish and a plate in the same dripping-pan, put to them beaten butter,
juice of oranges, and slices of lemon.

To roste Lobsters.
TAke a lobster and spit it raw on a small spit, bind the claws and tail with
packthread, baste it with butter, vinegar, and sprigs of rosemary, and salt it
in the roasting.

Otherwise.

Half boil them, take them out of the shells, and lard them with small lard
made of a salt eel, lard the claws and tails, and spit the meat on a small
spit, with some slices of the eel, and sage or bay leaves between, stick in the
fish here and there a clove or two, and some sprigs of rosemary; roast the
barrel of the lobster whole, and baste them with sweet butter: make sauce with
claret wine, the gravy of the lobsters, juice of oranges, an anchove or two,
and sweet butter beat up thick with the core of a lemon, and grated nutmeg.

Otherwise.

Half boil them and take the meat out of the tail, and claws, as whole as can
be, and stick it with cloves and tops of rosemary; then spit the barrels of the
lobsters by themselves, the tails and claws by themselves, and between them a
sage or bay leaf: baste them with sweet butter, and dredge them with grated
bread, yolks of eggs, and some grated nutmeg. Then make sauce with claret wine,
vinegar, pepper, the gravy of the meat, some salt, slices of oranges, grated
nutmeg, and some beaten butter; then dish the b rrels of the lobsters round the
dish, the claws and tails in the middle, and put to it the sauce.

Otherwise.

Make a forcing in the barrels of the lobsters with the meat in them, some
almond paste, nutmeg, time sweet marjoram, yolks of raw eggs, salt, and some
pistaches, and serve them with venison sauce.

To fry Lobsters.
BEing boild take the meat out of the shells, and slice it long ways, flour
it, and fry it in clarified butter, fine, white, and crisp, or in place of
flouting it in batter, with eggs, flour, salt, and cream, roll them in it and
fry them, being fried make a sauce with the juice of oranges, claret wine, and
grated nutmeg beaten up thick with some good sweet butter, then warm the dish
and rub it with a clove of garlic, dish the lobsters, garnish it with slices
of oranges or lemons, and pour on the sauce.

To bake Lobsters to be eaten hot.
lobster

BEing boild and cold take the meat out of the shells, and season it lightly
with nutmeg, pepper, salt, cinnamon, and ginger; then lay it in a pie made
according to this form, and lay on it some dates in halves, large mace, slic't
lemons, barberries, yolks of hard eggs and butter, close it up and bake it, and
being baked liquor it with white wine, butter, and sugar, and ice it. On flesh
days put marrow to it.

Otherwise.

Take the meat out of the shells being boild and cold, and lard it with a salt
eel or salt salmon, season it with beaten nutmeg, pepper, and salt; then make
the pie, put some butter in the bottom, and lay on it some slices of a fresh
eel, and on that a layer of lobsters, put to it a few whole cloves, and thus
make two or three layers, last of all slices of fresh eel, some whole cloves,
and butter, close up the pie; and being baked fill it up with clarified butter

If you bake it this ways to eat hot, season it lightly, and put in some large
mace; liquor it with claret wine, beaten butter, and slices of orange.

Otherwise.

Take four lobsters being boild, and some good fat conger raw, cut some of it
into square pieces as broad as your forms of lobster pies hand, then take the
meat of the lobsters and slice the tails into halves or two pieces long ways
as also the claws, season both with pepper, nutmeg, and salt; then make the
pie, put butter in the bottom, lay on the slices of conger, and then a layer of
lobsters; thus do three or four times till the pie be full, then lay on a few
whole cloves and some butter; close it up and bake it, being baked liquor it
with butter and white wine, or only clarified butter. Make your pies according
to these forms.

If to eat hot season it lightly, and being baked liquor it with butter, white
wine, slic't lemon, gooseberries, grapes, or barberries.

To pickle Lobsters.
BOil them in vinegar, white wine, and salt; being boild take them up and lay
them by, then have some bay leaves, rosemary tops, winter savory, time large
mace, and whole pepper: boil these foresaid materials all together in the
liquor with the lobsters, and some whole cloves; being boild barrel them up in
a vessel that will but just contain them, and pack them close, pour the liquor
to them, herbs, spices, and some lemon-peels; close up the head of the kegg or
firkin, and keep them for your use; when you serve them, serve them with the
spices, herbs, peels, and some of the liquor or pickle.

To jelly Lobsters, Crawfish, or Prawns.
TAke a tench being new, draw out the garbish at the gills, and cut out all the
gills, it will boil the whiter, then set on as much clear water as will
conveniently boil it, season it with salt, wine vinegar, five or six bay
leaves, large mace, three or four whole cloves, and a faggot of sweet herbs
bound up hard together: so soon as this preparative boils, put in the tench
being clean wiped, do not scale it, it being boild take it up and wash off all
the loose scales, then strain the liquor through a jelly bag, and put to it a
piece of isingglass being first washed and steeped for the purpose, boil it
very cleanly, and run it through a jelly bag; then having the fish taken out of
the shells, lay them in a large clean dish, lay the lobsters in slices, and the
crawfish and prawns whole, and run this jelly over them. You may make this
jelly of diverse colors, as you may see in the Section of Jellies, page 188.

Garnish the dish of jellies with lemon-peels cut in branches, or long slices
as you fancy, barberries, and fine colored flowers.

Or lard the lobsters with salt eel, or stick it with candied oranges, green
citterns, or preserved barberries, and make the jelly sweet.

To stew Crabs.
BEing boild take the meat out of the bodies or barrels, and save the great
claws and the small legs whole to garnish the dish, strain the meat with some
claret wine, grated bread, wine vinegar, nutmeg, a little salt, and a piece of
butter; stew them together an hour on a soft fire in a pipkin, and being stewed
almost dry, put in some beaten butter, with juice of oranges beat up thick;
then dish the shells being washed and finely cleansed, the claws and little
legs round about them, put in the meat into the shells and so serve them.

Sometimes you may use yolks of eggs strained with butter.

To stew Crabs otherwise.
BEing boild take the meat out of the shells, and put it in a pipkin with some
claret wine, and wine vinegar, minced time, pepper, grated bread, salt, the
yolks of two or three hard eggs strained or minced very small, some sweet
butter, capers, and some large mace; stew it finely, rub the shells with a
clove or two of garlic, and dish them as is shown before.

Otherwise.

Take the meat out of the bodies and put it in a pipkin with some cinnamon, wine
vinegar, butter, and beaten ginger, stew them and serve them as the former,
dished with the legs about them.

Sometimes you may add sugar to them, parboild grapes, gooseberries, or
barberries, and in place of vinegar, juice of oranges, and run them over with
beaten butter.

To butter Crabs.
THe crabs being boild, take the meat out of the bodies, and strain it with the
yolks of three or four hard eggs, beaten cinnamon, sugar, claret wine, and wine
vinegar, stew the meat in a pipkin with some sweet butter the space of a
quarter of an hour, and serve them as the former.

Otherwise.

Being boild, take the meat out of the shells, as also out of the great claws,
cut it into dice-work, and put both the meats into a pipkin together, with some
white wine, juice of oranges, nutmeg, and some slices of oranges, stew it two
or three walms on the fire, and the shells being finely cleansed and dried, put
the meat into them, and lay the legs round about them in a clean dish.

To make a Hash of Crabs.
TAke two crabs being boild, take out the meat of the claws, and cut it into
dice-work, mix it with the meat of the body, then have some pine-apple-seed,
and some pistaches or artichock bottoms boild, blanched, and cut into
dice-work, or some asparagus boild and cut half an inch long; stew all these
together with some claret wine, vinegar, grated nutmeg, salt, some sweet
butter, and the slices of an orange; being finely stewed dish it on sippets,
cuts, or lozenges of puff-paste, and garnish it with fritters of arms, slic't
lemon carved, barberries, grapes, or gooseberries, and run it over with beaten
butter, and yolks of eggs beaten up thick together.

To force a Crab.
TAke a boild crab, take the meat out of the shell, and mince the claws with a
good fresh eel, season it with cloves, mace, some sweet herbs chopped, and
salt, mingle all together with some yolks of eggs, some grapes, gooseberries,
or barberries, and sometimes boild artichocks in dice-work, or boild asparagus,
some almond paste, the meat of the body of the crab, and some grated bread,
fill the shell with this compound, and make some into balls, bake them in a
dish with some butter and white wine in a soft oven; being baked, serve them in
a clean dish with a sauce made of beaten butter, large mace, scalded grapes,
gooseberries, or barberries, or some slic't orange or lemon, and some yolks of
raw eggs dissolved with some white wine or claret, and beat up thick with
butter; brew it well together, pour it on the fish, and lay on some slic't
lemon, stick the balls with some pistaches, slic't almonds, pine apple-seeds,
or some pretty cuts in paste.

To broil Crabs in Oil or Butter.
TAke crabs being boild in water and salt, steep them in oil and vinegar, and
broil them on a gridiron on a soft fire of embers, in the broiling baste them
with some rosemary branches, and being broild serve them with the sauces they
were broild with, oil and vinegar, or beaten butter, vinegar, and the rosemary
branches they were basted with.

To fry Crabs.
TAke the meat out of the great claws being first boild, flour and fry them,
and take the meat out of the body, strain half of it for sauce, and the other
half to fry, and mix it with grated bread, almond paste, nutmeg, salt, and
yolks af eggs, fry it in clarified butter, being first dipped in batter, put in
a spoonful at a time; then make sauce with wine vinegar, butter, or juice of
orange, and grated nutmeg, beat up the butter thick, and put some of the meat
that was strained into the sauce, warm it and put it in a clean dish, lay the
meat on the sauce, slices of orange over all, and run it over with beaten
butter, fried parsley round the dish brim, and the little legs round the meat.

Otherwise.

Being boild and cold, take the meat out of the claws, flour and fry them, then
take the meat out of the body, butter it with butter, vinegar, and pepper, and
put it in a clean dish, put the fried crab round about it, and run it over with
beaten butter, juice and slices of orange, and lay on it sage leaves fried in
batter, or fried parsley.

To bake Crabs in Pie, Dish, or Patty-pan.
TAke four or five crabs being boild, take the meat out of the shells and claws
as whole as you can, season it with nutmeg and salt lightly; then strain the
meat that came out of body shells with a little claret wine, some cinnamon,
ginger, juice of orange and butter; make the pie, dish, or patty-pan, lay
butter in the bottom, then the meat of the claws, some pistaches, asparagus,
some bottoms of artichocks, yolks of hard eggs, large mace, grapes,
gooseberries, or barberries, dates or slic't orange, and butter, close it up
and bake it, being baked, liquor it with the meat out of the body.

Otherwise.

Mince them with a tench or fresh eel, and season it with sweet herbs minced
small, beaten nutmeg, pepper, and salt, lightly seasoned, and mingle the meat
that was in the bodies of the crabs with the other seasoned fishes; mingle also
with this foresaid meat some boild or roasted chestnuts, or artichocks,
asparagus boild and cut an inch long, pistaches, or pine-apple-seed, and
grapes, gooseberries or barberries; fill the pie, dish, or patty-pan, close it
up and bake it, being baked, liquor it with juice of oranges, some claret wine,
good butter beat up thick, and the yolks of two or three eggs, fill up the pie,
lay slices of an orange on it, and stick in some lozenges of puff-paste, or
branches of short paste.

To make minced Pies of a Crab.
BEing boild, mince the legs, and strain the meat in the body with two or three
yolks of eggs, mince also form of minced crab pie some sweet herbs and put to
it, some almond paste or grated bread, a minced onion, some fat eel cut like
little dice, or some fat belly of salmon; mingle it altogether, and put it in a
pie made according to this form, season it with nutmeg, pepper, salt, currants,
and barberries, grapes, or gooseberries, mingle also some butter, and fill your
pie, bake it, and being baked, liquor it with beaten butter and white wine. Or
with butter, sugar, cinnamon, sweet herbs chopped, and verjuyce.

To dress Tartoise.
CUt off the head, feet, and tail, and boil it in water, wine, and salt, being
boild, pull the shell asunder, and pick the meat from the skins, and the gall
from the liver, save the eggs whole if a female, and stew the eggs, meat, and
liver in a dish with some grated nutmeg, a little sweet herbs minced small, and
some sweet butter, stew it up, and serve it on fine sippets, cover the meat
with the upper shell of the tortoise, and slices or juice of orange.

Or stew them in a pipkin with some butter, white winesome of the broth, a
whole onion or two, time, parsley, winter savory, and rosemary minc't; being
finely stewed, serve them on sippets or put them in the shells, being cleansed;
or make a fricase in a drying pan with three or four yolks of eggs and some of
the shells amongst them, and dress them as aforesaid.

To dress Snails.
TAke shell snails, and having water boild, put them in, then pick them out of
the shells with a great pin into a basin, cast salt to them, scour the slime
from them, and after wash them in two or three waters; being clean scowred, dry
them with a clean cloth; then have rosemary, time, parsley, winter savory, and
pepper very small, put them into a deep basin or pipkin, put to them some salt
and good sallet oil, mingle altogether, then have the shells finely cleansed,
fill them, and set them on a gridiron, broil them upon embers softly, and being
broild, dish four or five dozen in a dish, fill them up with oil, and serve
them hot.

To stew Snails.
BEing well scowred and cleansed as aforesaid, put to them some claret wine and
vinegar, a handful of capers, mace, pepper, grated bread, a little minced time,
salt, and the yolks of two or three hard eggs minced; let all these stew
together till you think it be enough, then put in a good piece of butter,
shaking it together, heat the dish and rub it with a clove of garlic, put them
on fine sippets of French bread, pour on the snails, and some barberries, or
slic't lemons.

Otherwise.

Being cleansed, fry them in oil or clarified butter, with some slices of a
fresh eel, and some fried sage leaves; stew them in a pipkin with some white
wine, butter, and pepper, and serve them on sippets with beaten butter, and
juice of oranges.

Otherwise.

Being finely boild and cleansed, fry them in clarified butter; being fried
take them up, and put them in a pipkin, put to them some sweet butter, chopped
parsley, white or claret wine, some grated nutmeg, slices of orange, and a
little salt; stew them well together, serve them on sippets, and run them over
with beaten butter, and slices of oranges.

To fry Snails.
TAke shell snails in January, February, or March, when they be closed up, boil
them in a skillet of boiling water, and when they be tender boild, take them
out of the shells with a pin, cleanse them from the slime, flour them, and fry
them; being fried serve them in a clean dish, with butter, vinegar, fried
parsley, fried onions, or ellicksander leaves fried, or served with beaten
butter, and juice of orange, or oil, vinegar, and slic't lemon.

Otherwise.

Fry them in oil and butter, being finely cleansed, and serve them with butter,
vinegar, and pepper; or oil, vinegar, and pepper.

To make a Hash of Snails.
BEing boild and cleansed, mince them small, put them in a pipkin with some
sweet herbs minced, the yolks of hard eggs, some whole capers, nutmeg, pepper,
salt, some pistaches, and butter, or oil; being stewed the space of half an
hour on a soft fire, then have some fried toast of French bread, lay some in
the bottom, and some round the meat in the dish.

To dress Snails in a Pottage.
WAsh them very well in many waters, then put them in an earthen pan, or a wide
dish, put as much water as will cover them, and set your dish on some coals;
when they boil take them out of the shells, and scour them with water and salt
three or four times, then put them in a pipkin with water and salt, and let
them boil a little, then take them out of the water and put them in a dish with
some excellent sallet oil; when the oil boils put in three or four slic't
onions, and fry them, put the snails to them, and stew them well together, then
put the oil, snails, and onions altogether in a pipkin of a fit size for them,
and put as much warm water to them as will make a pottage; with some salt, and
so let them stew three or four hours, then mince time, parsley, penniroyal, and
the like herbs; when they are minced beat them to green sauce in a mortar, put
in some crumbs of bread soked with that broth or pottage, some saffron and
beaten cloves; put all into the snails, and give them a walm or two, and when
you serve them up, squeese in the the juice of a lemon, put in a little
vinegar, and a clove of garlic amongst the herbs, and beat them in it; serve
them up in a dish with sippets in the bottom of it.

This pottage is very nourishing, and excellent good against a Comsumption.

To bake Snails.
BEing boild and scowred season them with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, put them
into a pie with some marrow, large mace, a raw chicken cut in pieces, some
little bits of lard and bacon, the bones out, sweet herbs chopped, slic't
lemon, or orange, and butter; being full, close it up and bake it, and liquor
it with butter and white wine.

To bake Frogs.
BEing fleyed take the hind legs, cut off the feet and season them with nutmeg,
pepper and salt, put them in a pie with some sweet herbs chopped small, large
mace, slic't lemon; gooseberries, grapes, or barberries, pieces of skirret,
artichocks, potatoes, or parsnips, and marrow; close it up and bake it, being
baked liquor it with butter, and juice of orange, or grape verjuyce.

Section 20.
To make all manner of Pottages for Fish Days.

French Barley Pottage.
CLeanse the barley from dust, and put it in boiling milk, being boild down,
put in large mace, cream, sugar, and a little salt; boil it pretty thick, then
serve it in a dish, scrape sugar on it, and trim the dish sides.

Otherwise.

Boil it in fair water, scum it, and being almost boild, put to it some
saffron, or dissolved yolks of eggs.

To make Gruel Pottage the best way for service.
PIck your oatmeal, and boil it whole on a stewing fire; being tender boild,
strain it through a strainer, then put it into a clean pipkin with fair boiling
water, make it pretty thick of the strained oatmeal, and put to it some picked
raisins of the sun well washed, some large mace, salt, and a little bundle of
sweet herbs, with a little rose water and saffron; set it a stewing on a fire
of charcoal, boil it with sugar till the fruit be well allom'd, then put to it
butter and the yolks of three or four eggs strained.

Otherwise.

Good herbs and oatmeal chopped, put them into boiling liquor in a pipkin, pot,
or skillet, with some salt, and being boild put to it butter.

Otherwise.

With a bundle of sweet herbs and oatmeal chopped, some onions and salt,
seasoned as before with butter.

To make Furmenty.
TAke wheat and wet it, then beat it in a sack with a wash beatle, being finely
hulled and cleansed from the dust and hulls, boil it over night, and let it
soak on a soft fire all night, then next morning take as much as will serve the
turn, put it in a pipkin, pan, or skillet, and put it a boiling in cream or
milk, with mace, salt, whole cinnamon, and saffron, or yolks of eggs, boil it
thick and serve it in a clean scowred dish, scrape on sugar, and trim the dish.

To make Rice Pottage.
PIck the rice and dust it clean, then wash it, and boil it in water or milk;
being boild down, put to it some cream, large mace, whole cinnamon, salt, and
sugar, boil it on a soft stewing fire, and serve it in a fair deep dish or a
standing silver piece.

Otherwise.

Boild rice strained with almond milk, and seasoned as the former.

Milk Pottage.
BOil whole oatmeal, being cleanly picked, boil it in a pipkin or pot, but
first let the water boil; being well boild and tender, put in milk or cream,
with salt and fresh butter, etc.

Ellicksander Pottage.
CHop ellicksanders and oatmeal together, being picked and washed, then set on
a pipkin with fair water, and when it boils put in your herbs, oatmeal, and
salt, boil it on a soft fire and make it not too thick, being almost boild put
in some butter.

Pease Pottage.
TAke green pease being shelled and cleansed, put them into a pipkin of fair
boiling water; when they be boild and tender, take and strain some of them, and
thicken the rest, put to them a bundle of sweet herbs, or sweet herbs chopped,
salt, and butter, being through boild dish them, and serve them in a deep clean
dish with salt and sippets about them.

Otherwise.

Put them into a pipkin or skillet of boiling milk or cream, put to them two or
three sprigs of mint, and salt, being fine and tender boild, thick them with a
little milk and flour.

Dry, or old Pease Pottage.
TAke the choicest pease, (that some call seed-way pease) commonly they be a
little worm eaten, (those are the best boiling pease) pick and wash them, and
put them in boiling liquor in a pot or pipkin; being tender boild, take out
some of them, strain them and set them by for your use, then season the rest
with salt, a bundle of mints and butter, let them stew leasurely, and put to
them some pepper.

Strained Pease Pettage.
TAke the former strained pease pottage, put to them salt, large mace, a bundle
of sweet herbs, and some pickled capers; stew them well together, then serve
them in a deep dish clean scowred, with thin slices of bread in the bottom, and
grated manchet to garnish it.

An excellent stewed Broth for Fish days.
SEt a boiling some fair water in a pipkin, then strain some oatmeal and put to
it, with large mace, whole cinnamon, salt, a bundle of sweet herbs, some
strained and whole prunes, and some raisins of the sun; being well stewed on a
soft fire, and pretty thick, put in some claret wine and sugar, serve it in a
clean scowred deep dish or standing piece, and scrape on sugar.

Onion Pottage.
FRy good store of slic't onions, then have a pipkin of boiling liquor over the
fire, when the liquor boils put in the fried onions butter and all, with pepper
and salt; being well stewed together, serve it on sops of French bread or
pine-molet.

Almond Pottage.
TAke a pound of almond paste, and strain it with some new milk; then have a
pottle of cream boiling in a pipkin or skillet, put in the milk and almonds
with some mace, salt, and sugar; serve it in a clean dish on sippets of French
bread, and scrape on sugar.

Otherwise.

Strain them with fair water, and boil them with mace, salt, and sugar (or
none) add two or three yolks of eggs dissolved or saffron; and serve it as
before.

Almond Caudle.
STrain half a pound of almonds being blanched and stamped, strain them with a
pint of good ale, then boil it with slices of fine mancher, large mace, and
sugar; being almost boild put in three or four spoonfuls of sack.

Oatmeal Caudle.
BOil ale, scum it, and put in strained oatmeal, mace, sugar, and sliced bread,
boil it well, and put in two or three spoonfuls of sack, white wine, or claret.

Egg Caudle.
BOil ale or beer, scum it, and put to it two or three blades of large mace,
some sliced manchet and sugar; then dissolve four or five yolks of eggs with
some sack, claret, or white wine, and put it into the rest with a little grated
nutmeg; give it a walm and serve it.

Sugar or Honey-sops.
BOil beer or ale, scum it, and put to it slices of fine manchet, large mace,
sugar or honey. Sometimes currants, and boil all well together.

To make an Alebury.
BOil bear or ale, scum it, and put in some mace, and a bottom of a manchet,
boil it well, then put in some sugar.

Buttered Beer.
TAke beer or ale and boil it, then scum it, and put to it some liquoras and
anniseeds, boil them well together; then have in a clean flaggon or quart pot
some yolks of eggs well beaten with some of the foresaid beer, and some good
butter; strain your buttered beer, put it in the flaggon, and brew it with the
butter and eggs.

Buttered Beer or Ale otherwise.
BOil beer or ale and scum it, then have six eggs, whites and all, and beat
them in a flaggon or quart pot with the shells, some butter, sugar, and nutmeg,
put them together, and being well brewed, drink it when you go to bed.

Otherwise.

Take three pints of beer or ale, put five yolks of eggs to it, strain them
together, and set it in a pewter pot to the fire, put to it half a pound of
sugar, a penniworth of beaten nutmeg, as much beaten cloves, half an ounce of
beaten ginger, and bread it.

Panado's.
BOil fair water in a skillet, put to it grated bread or cakes, good store of
currants, mace, and whole cinnamon; being almost boild and indifferent thick, put
in some sack or white wine, sugar, and some strained yolks of eggs.

Otherwise with slic't bread, water, currants, and mace, and being well boild,
put to it some sugar, white wine, and butter.

To make a Compound Posset of Sack, Claret, White Wine, Ale, Beer, or Juice of
Oranges, etc.
TAke twenty yolks of eggs with a little cream, strain them and set them by;
then have a clean scowred skillet, and put into it a pottle of good sweet
cream, and a good quantity of whole cinnamon, set it a boiling on a soft
charcoal fire, and stir it continually; the cream having a good taste of the
cinnamon, put in the strained eggs and cream into your skillet, stir them
together, and give them a walm; then have some sack in a deep basin or
posset-pot, good store of fine sugar, and some sliced nutmeg; the sack and
sugar being warm, take out the cinnamon, and pour your eggs and cream very high
into the basin, that it may spatter in it, then strew on loaf sugar.

To make a Posset simple.
BOil your milk in a clean scowred skillet, and when it boils take it off, and
warm in the pot, bowl, or basin, some sack, claret, beer ale, or juice of
orange; pour it into the drink, but let not your milk be too hot; for it will
make the curd hard, then sugar it.

Otherwise.

Beat a good quantity of sorrel, and strain it with any of the foresaid
liquors, or simply of its self, then boil some milk in a clean scowred skillet,
being boild, take it off and let it cool, then put it to your drink, but not
too hot, for it will make the curd tuff.

Possets of Herbs otherwise.
TAke a fair scowred skillet, put in some milk into it, and some rosemary, the
rosemary being well boild in it, take it out and have some ale or beer in a
pot, put to it the milk and sugar, (or none.)

Thus of time, cardus, camomile, mint, or marigold flowers.

To make French Puffs.
TAke spinach, time, parsley, endive, savory, and marigram, chop or mince them
small; then have twenty eggs beaten with the herbs, that the eggs may be green,
some nutmeg, ginger, cinnamon, and salt; then cut a lemon in slices, and dip it
in batter, fry it, and put on a spoonful on every slice of lemon, fry it finely
in clarified butter, and being fried, strew on sack, or claret, and sugar.

Soops, or buttered Meats of Spinach.
TAke fine young spinach, pick and wash it clean; then have a skillet or pan of
fair liquor on the fire, and when it boils, put in the spinach, give it a walm
or two, and take it out into a cullender, let it drain, then mince it small,
and put it in a pipkin with some slic't dates, butter, white wine, beaten
cinnamon, salt, sugar, and some boild currants, stew them well together, and dish
them on sippets finely carved, and about it hard eggs in halves or quarters;
not too hard boild, and scrape on sugar.

Soops of Carrots.
BEing boild, cleanse, stamp, and season them in all points as before; thus
also potatoes, skirrets, parsnips, turnips, virginia artichocks, onions, or
beets, or fry any of the foresaid roots being boild and cleansed, or peeled,
and floured, and serve them with beaten butter and sugar.

Soops of Artichocks, Potatoes, Skirrets, or Parsnips.
BEing boild and cleansed, put to them yolks of hard eggs, dates, mace cinnamon,
butter, sugar, white wine, salt, slic't lemon, grapes, gooseberries, or
barberries, stew them together whole, and being finely stewed, serve them on
carved sippets in a clean scowred dish, and run it over with beaten butter and
scraped sugar.

To butter Onions.
BEing peeled, put them into boiling liquor, and when they are boild, drain
them in a cullender, and butter them whole with some boild currants, butter,
sugar, and beaten cinnamon, serve them on fine sippets, scrape on sugar, and run
them over with beaten butter.

Otherwise.

TAke apples and onions, mince the onions and slice the apples, put them in a
pot, but more apples then onions, and bake them with household bread, close up
the pot with paste or paper; when you use them butter them with butter, sugar,
and boild currants, serve them on sippets, and scrape on sugar and cinnamon.

Buttered Sparagus.
TAke two hundred of sparagus, scrape the roots clean, and wash them, then take
the heads of an hundred and lay them even, bind them hard up into a bundle,
and so likewise of the other hundred; then have a large skillet of fair water,
when it boils put them in, and boil them up quick with some salt; being boild
drain them, and serve them with beaten butter and salt about the dish, or
butter and vinegar.

Buttered Collyflowers.
HAve a skillet of fair water, and when it boils put in the whole tops of the
collyflowers, the root being cut away, put some salt to it; and being fine and
tender boild dish it whole in a dish, with carved sippets round about it, and
serve it with beaten butter and water, or juice of orange and lemon.

Otherwise.

Put them into boiling milk, boil them tender, and put to them a little mace
and salt; being finely boild, serve them on carved sippets, the yolk of an egg
or two, some boild raisins of the sun, beaten butter, and sugar.

To butter Quinces.
ROast or boil them, then strain them with sugar and cinnamon, put some butter
to them, warm them together, and serve them on fine carved sippets.

To butter Rice.
PIck the rice and sift it, and when the liquor boils put it in and scum it,
boil it not too much, then drain it, butter it, and serve it on fine carved
sippets, and scraping sugar only, or sugar and cinnamon,

Butter wheat and French barley as you do rice, but hull your wheat and barley,
wet the wheat and beat it in a sack with a wash beetle, fan it, and being clean
hulled, boil it all night on a soft fire very tender.

To butter Gourds, Pumpions, Cowcumbers, or Muskmillions.
CUt them into pieces, and pare and cleanse them; then have a boiling pan of
water, and when it boils put in the pumpions, etc. with some salt, being boild
drain them well from the water, butter them, and serve them on sippets with
pepper.

Otherwise.

Bake them in an oven, and take out the seed at the top, fill them with onions,
slic't apples, butter, and salt, butter them, and serve them on sippets.

Otherwise.

Fry them in slices being cleansed and peeled, either floured or in batter;
being fried serve them with beaten butter and vinegar, or beaten butter and
juice of orange, or butter beaten with a little water, and served in a clean
dish with fried parsley, ellicksanders, apples, slic't onions fried, or sweet
herbs.

To make buttered Loaves.
SEason a pottle of flour with cloves, mace, and pepper, half a pound of sweet
butter melted, and half a pint of ale-yeast or barm, mixed with warm milk from
the Cow, and three or four eggs to temper altogether, make it as soft as
manchet paste, and make it up into little manchets as big as an egg, cut and
prick them, and put them on paper, bake them like manchet with the oven open,
they will ask an hours baking; being baked melt in a great dish a pound of
sweet butter, and put rose water in it, draw your loaves, and pare away the
crusts, then slit them in three toasts and put them in the melted butter, turn
them over and over in the butter; then take a warm dish and put in the bottom
pieces, and strew on sugar in a good thickness, then put in the middle pieces
and sugar them likewise, then set on the tops and scrape on sugar, and serve
five or six in a dish. If you be not ready to send them in, set them in the
oven again, and cover them with a paper to keep them from drying.

To boil French Beans or Lupins.
FIrst take away the tops of the cods and the strings, then have a pan or
skillet of fair water boiling on the fire, when it boils put them in with some
salt, and boil them up quick; being boild serve them with beaten butter in a
fair scowred dish, and salt about it.

To boil Garden Beans.
BEing shelled and cleansed, put them into boiling liquor with some salt, boil
them up quick, and being boild, drain away the liquor and butter them, dish
them in a dish like a cross, and serve them with pepper and salt on the dish
side.

Thus also green pease, haslers, broom-buds, or any kind of pulse.

Section 21.
The exactest way for the Dressing of Eggs.

To make Omlets diverse ways.
The first way.
BReak six, eight, or ten eggs more or less, beat them together in a dish, and
put salt to them; then put some butter a melting in a drying pan, and fry it
more or less according to your descretion, only on one side or bottom.

You may sometimes make it green with juice of spinach and sorrel beat with the
eggs, or serve it with green sauce, a little vinegar and sugar boild together,
and served up in a dish with the omlet.

The second way.
TAke twelve eggs, and put to them some grated white bread finely searsed,
parsley minced very small, some sugar beaten fine, and fry it well on both
sides.

The third way.
FRy toasts of manchet, and put the eggs to them being beaten and seasoned with
salt, and some fried; pour the butter and fried parsley over all.

The fourth way.
TAke three or four pippins, cut them in round slices and fry them with a
quarter of a pound of butter, when the apples are fried, pour on them six or
seven eggs beaten with a little salt, and being finely fried dish it on a
platedish, or dish, and strew on sugar.

The fifth way.
MIx with the eggs pine-kernels, currants, and pieces of preserved lemons; being
fried roll it up like a pudding, and sprinkle it with rose water,
cinamon-water, and strew on fine sugar.

The sixth way.
BEat the eggs, and put to them a little cream, a little grated bread, a little
preserved lemon peel, minced or grated very small, and use it as the former.

The seventh way.
TAke a quarter of a pound of interlarded bacon, take it from the rind, cut it
into dice-work, fry it, and being fried put in some seven or eight beaten eggs
with some salt, fry them, and serve them with some grape verjuyce.

The eighth way.
WIth minced bacon among the eggs fried and beaten together, or with thin
slices of interlarded bacon, and fried slices of bread.

The ninth way.
MAde with eggs and a little cream.

The tenth way.
MInce herbs small, as lettice, bugloss, or burridge, sorrel, and mallows, put
currants to them, salt, and nutmeg, beat all these amongst the herbs, and fry
them with swet butter, and serve it with cinnamon and sugar, or fried parsley
only, put the eggs to it in the pan.

The eleventh way.
MInce some parsley very small being short and fine picked, beat it amongst the
eggs, and fry it. Or fry the parsley being grossly cut, beat the eggs and pour
it on, etc.

The twelfth way.
MInce leeks very small, beat them with the eggs and some salt, and fry them.

The thirteenth way.
TAke endive that is very white, cut it grossly, fry it with nutmeg, and put the
eggs to it, or boil it being fried, and serve it with sugar.

The fourteenth way.
SLice cheese very thin, beat it with the eggs, and a little salt, then melt
some butter in the pan and fry it.

The fifteenth way.
Take six or eight eggs, beat them with salt, and make a stuffing with some
pine-kernels, currants, sweet herbs, some minced fresh fish, or some of the
milts of carps that have been fried or boiled in good liquor, and some
mushrooms half boild and slic't; mingle altogether with some yolks or whites of
eggs raw, and fill up great cowcumbers therewith being coared, fill them up
with the foresaid forcing, pare them, and bake them in a dish, or stew them
between two deep basins, or deep dishes; put some butter to them, some strong
broth of fish, or fair water, some verjuyce or vinegar, and some grated nutmeg,
and serve them on a dish with sippets.

The sixteenth way according to the Turkish mode.
Take the flesh of a hinder part of a hare, or any other venison, and mince it
small with a little fat bacon, some pistaches or pine-apple-kernels, almonds,
Spanish or hazel nuts peeled, Spanish chestnuts or French chestnuts roasted and
peeled, or some crusts of bread cut in slices and toasted like unto chestnuts;
season this minced stuff with salt; spices, and some sweet herbs, if the flesh
be raw add thereunto butter and marrow, or good sweet suet minced small and
melted in a skillet, pour it into the seasoned meat that is minced and fry it;
then melt some butter in a skillet or pan, and make an omlet thereof, when it
is half fried put to the minced meat, and take the omlet out of the drying pan
with a skimmer, break it not, and put it in a dish that the minced meat may
appear uppermost, put some gravy on the minced meat, and some grated nutmeg,
stick some sippets of fried manchet on it, and slices of lemon. Roast-meat is
the best for this purpose.

The seventeenth way.
Take the kidneys of a loin of veal after it has been well roasted, mince it
together with its fat, and season it with salt, spices, and some time or other
sweet herbs, add thereunto some fried bread, some boild mushrooms or some
pistaches, make an omlet, and being half fried put the minced meat on it.

Fry them well together, and serve it up with some grated nutmeg and sugar.

The eighteenth way.
TAke a carp or some other fish, bone it very well, and add to it some milts
of carps, season them with pepper and salt, or with other spices, add some
mushrooms, and mince them altogether, put to them some apple kernels, some
currants, and preserved lemons in pieces shred very small; fry them in a
drying pan or tart pan, with some butter, and being fried make an omlet. Being
half fried, put the fried fish on it, and dish them on a plate, roll it round,
cut it at both ends, and spread them abroad, grate some sugar on it, and
sprinkle on rose water.

The nineteenth way.
MInce all kind of sweet herbs, and the yolks of hard eggs together, some
currants, and some mushrooms half boild, being all minced cover them over, fry
them as the former, and strew sugar and cinnamon on it.

The twentieth way.
TAke young and tender sparagus, break or cut them into small pieces, and half
fry them brown in butter, put into them eggs beaten with salt and thus make
your omlet.

Or boil them in water and salt, then fry them in sweet butter, put the eggs to
them and make an omlet, dish it, and put a drop or two of vinegar or verjuyce
on it.

Sometimes take mushrooms, being stewed make an omlet, and sprinkle it with the
broth of the mushrooms, and grated nutmeg.

The one and twentieth way.
SLice some apples and onions, fry them, but not too much, and beat some six or
eight eggs with some salt, put them to the apples and onions, and make an
omlet; being fried, make sauce with vinegar or grape verjuyce, butter, sugar,
and mustard.

To dress hard Eggs diverse ways.
The first way.
PUt some butter into a dish, with some vinegar or verjuyce, and salt; the
butter being melted, put in two or three yolks of hard eggs, dissolve them in
the butter and verjuyce for the sauce; then have hard eggs, part them in halves
or quarters, lay them in the sauce, and grate some nutmeg over them, or the
crust of white bread.

The second way.
Fry some parsley, some minced leeks, and young onions, when you have fried
them pour them into a dish, season them with salt and pepper, and put to them
hard eggs cut in halves, put some mustard to them, and dish the eggs, mix the
sauce well together, and pour it hot on the eggs.

The third way.
The eggs being boild hard, cut them in two, or fry them in butter, with flour
and milk or wine; being fried, put them in a dish, put to them salt, vinegar,
and juice of lemon, make a sweet sauce for it with some sugar, juice of lemon,
and beaten cinnamon.

The fourth way.
Cut hard eggs in twain, and season them with a white sauce made in a
drying pan with the yolks of raw eggs, verjuyce, and white wine dissolved
together, and some salt, a few spices, and some sweet herbs, and pour this
sauce over the eggs.

The fifth way in the Portugal Fashion.
Fry some parsley small minced, some onions or leeks in fresh butter, being
half fried, put into them hard eggs cut into rounds, a handful of mushrooms
well picked, washed and slic't, and salt; fry all together, and being almost
fried, put some vinegar to them, dish them, and grate nutmeg on them, sippet
them, and on the sippets slic't lemons.

The sixth way.
Take sweet herbs, as purslain, lettice, burrage, sorrel, parsley, chervel, and
time, being well picked and washed mince them very small, and season them with
cloves, pepper, salt, minced mushrooms, and some grated cheese, put them to
some grated nutmeg, crusts of manchet, some currants, pine-kernels, and yolks of
hard eggs in quarters, mingle altogether, fill the whites and stew them in a
dish, strew over the stuff being fried with some butter, pour the fried force
over the whites being dished, and grate some nutmeg, and crusts of manchet.

Or fry sorrel and put it over the eggs.

To butter a Dish of Eggs.
TAke twenty eggs more or less, whites and yolks as you please, break them into
a silver dish, with some salt, and set them on a quick charcoal fire, stir them
with a silver spoon, and being finely buttered put to them the juice of three
or four oranges, sugar, grated nutmeg, and sometimes beaten cinnamon; being thus
dressed, strain them at the first, or afterward being buttered.

To make a Bisk of Eggs.
TAke a good big dish, lay a lay of slices of cheese between two lays of
toasted cheat bread, put on them some clear mutton broth, green or dry pease
broth, or any other clear pottage that is seasoned with butter and salt, cast
on some chopped parsley grossly minced, and upon that some poached eggs.

Or dress this dish whole or in pieces, lay between some carps milts fried,
boild, or stewed, as you do oysters, stewed and fried gudgeons, smelts, or
oysters, some fried and stewed, capers, mushrooms, and such like junkets.

Sometimes you may use currants, boild or stewed prunes, and put to the foresaid
mixture, with some whole cloves, nutmegs, mace, ginger, some white wine,
verjuyce, or green sauce, some grated nutmeg over all, and some carved lemon.

Eggs in Moonshine.
BReak them in a dish upon some butter and oil, melted or cold, strew on them a
little salt, and set them on a chafing dish of coals, make not the yolks two
hard, and in the doing cover them, and make a sauce for them of an onion cut
into round slices, and fried in sweet oil or butter, then put to them verjuyce,
grated nutmeg, a little salt, and so serve them.

Eggs in Moonshine otherwise.
TAke the best oil you can get, and set it over the fire on a silver dish,
being very hot, break in the eggs, and before the yolks of the eggs do become
very hard, take them up and dish them in a clean dish; then make sauce made of
fried onions in round slices, fried in oil or sweet butter, salt, and some
grated nutmeg.

Otherwise.

Make a sirrup of rose water, sugar, sack, or white wine, make it in a dish and
break the yolks of the eggs as whole as you can, put them in the boiling sirrup
with some ambergreece, turn them and keep them one from the other, make them
hard, and serve them in a little dish with sugar and cinnamon.

Otherwise.

Take a quarter of a pound of good fresh butter, balm it on the bottom of a
fine clean dish, then break some eight or ten eggs upon it, sprinkle them with
a little salt, and set them on a soft fire till the whites and yolks be pretty
clear and stiff, but not too hard, serve them hot, and put on them the juice of
orange and lemons.

Or before you break them put to the butter sprigs of rosemary, juice of
orange, and sugar; being baked on the embers, serve them with sugar and beaten
cinnamon, and in place of orange, verjuyce.

Eggs otherwise.

Fry them whole in clarified butter with sprigs of rosemary under, fry them not
too hard, and serve them with fried parsley on them, vinegar, butter, and
pepper.

To dress Eggs in the Spanish Fashion, called, wivos me quidos.
TAke twenty eggs fresh and new, and strain them with a quarter of a pint of
sack, claret, or white wine, a quartern of sugar, some grated nutmeg, and salt;
beat them together with the juice of an orange, and put to them a little musk,
(or none) set them over the fire, and stir them continually till they be a
little thick, (but not too much serve them with scraping sugar being put in a
clean warm dish, on fine toasts of manchet soaked in juice of orange and sugar,
or in claret, sugar, or white wine, and shake the eggs with orange comfits, or
muskedines red and white.

To dress Eggs in the Portugal Fashion.
STrain the yolks of twenty eggs, and beat them very well in a dish, put to
them some musk and rose water, made of fine sugar, boild thick in a clean
skillet, put in the eggs, and stew them on a soft fire; being finely stewed,
dish them on a french plate in a clean dish, scrape on sugar, and trim the dish
with your finger.

Otherwise.

Take twenty yolks of eggs, or as many whites, put them severally into two
dishes, take out the cocks tread, and beat them severally the space of an hour;
then have a sirrup made in two several skillets, with half a pound a piece of
double refined sugar, and a little musk and ambergreece bound up close in a
fine rag, set them a stewing on a soft fire till they be enough on both sides,
then dish them on a silver plate, and shake them with preserved pistaches,
muskedins white and red, and green citron slic't.

Put into the whites the juice of spinach to make them green.

To dress Eggs called in French, A la Hugenotte, or the Protestant way.
BReak twenty eggs, beat them together, and put to them the pure gravy of a leg
of mutton, or the gravy of roast beef, stir and beat them well together over a
chafing dish of coals with a little salt, add to them also juice of orange and
lemon, or grape verjuyce; then put in some mushrooms well boild and seasoned.
Observe as soon as your eggs are well mixed with the gravy and the other
ingredients, then take them off from the fire, keeping them covered a while,
then serve them with some grated nutmeg over them.

Sometimes to make them the more pleasing and toothsome, strew some powdered
ambergreece, and fine loaf sugar scraped into them, and so serve them.

To dress Eggs in fashion of a Tansie.
TAke twenty yolks of eggs, and strain them on flesh days with about half a
pint of gravy, on fish days with cream and milk, add salt, and four makeroons
small grated, as much biscuit, some rose water, a little sack or claret, and a
quarter of a pound of sugar, put these things to them with a piece of butter as
big as a walnut, and set them on a chafing dish with some preserved citron or
lemon grated, or cut into small pieces or little bits, and some pounded
pistaches; being well buttered dish it on a plate, and brown it with a hot
fire-shovel, strew on fine sugar, and stick it with preserved lemon peel in
thin slices.

Eggs and Almonds.
TAke twenty eggs and strain them with half a pound of almond paste, and almost
half a pint of sack, sugar, nutmeg, and rose water, set them on the fire, and
when they be enough, dish them on a hot dish without toast, stick them with
blanched and slic't almonds, and wafers, scrape on fine sugar, and trim the
dish with your finger.

To broil Eggs.
TAke an oven peel, heat it red hot, and blow off the dust, break the eggs on
it, and put them into a hot oven, or brown them on the top with a red hot fire
shovel; being finely broild, put them into a clean dish, with some gravy, a
little grated nutmeg, and elder vinegar; or pepper, vinegar, juice of orange,
and grated nutmeg on them.

To dress poached Eggs.
TAke a dozen of new laid eggs, and the meat of four or five partridges; or any
roast poultrey, mince it as small as you can, and season it with a few beaten
cloves, mace, and nutmeg, put them into silver dish with a ladle full or two of
pure mutton gravy, and two or three anchoves dissolved, then set it a stewing
on a chafing dish of coals; being half stewed, as it boils put in the eggs one
by one, and as you break them, put by most of the whites, and with one end of
your egg-shell put in the yolks round in order amongst the meat, let them stew
till the eggs be enough, then put in a little grated nutmeg, and the juice of a
couple of oranges, put not in the seeds wipe the dish, and garnish it with four
or five whole onions boild and broild.

Otherwise.

The eggs being poached, put them in a dish, strew salt on them, and grate on
cheese which will give them a good relish.

Otherwise.

Being poached and dished, strew on them a little salt, scrape on sugar, and
sprinkle them with rose water, verjuyce, juice of lemon, or orange, a little
cinamon-water, or fine beaten cinnamon.

Otherwise to poach Eggs.
TAke as many as you please, break them into a dish, and put to them some sweet
butter being melted, some salt, sugar, and a little grated nutmeg, give them a
cullet in the dish, etc.

Otherwise.

Poach them, and put green sauce to them, let them stand a while upon the fire,
then season them with salt, and a little grated nutmeg.

Or make a sauce with beaten butter, and juice of grapes mixed with ipocrass,
pour it on the eggs, and scrape on sugar.

Otherwise.

Poach them either in water, milk, wine, sack, or clear verjuyce, and serve
them with vinegar in saucers.

Or make broth for them, and serve them on fine carved sippets, make the broth
with washed currants, large mace, fair water, butter, white wine, and sugar,
vinegar, juice of orange, and whole cinnamon; being dished run them over with
beaten butter, the slices of an orange, and fine scraping sugar.

Or make sauce with beaten almonds, strained with verjuyce, sugar, beaten,
butter, and large mace, boild and dished as the former.

Or almond milk and sugar.

A grand Forced Dish of Eggs.
TAke twenty hard eggs, being blanched part them in halves long ways, take out
the yolks and save the whites, mince the yolks, or stamp them amongst some
march-pane paste, a few sweet herbs chopped small, and mingled amongst sugar,
cinnamon, and some currants well washed, fill again the whites with this forcing,
and set them by.

Then have candied oranges or lemons, filled with march-pane paste, and sugar,
and set them by also,

Then have the tops of boild asparagus, mix them with a batter made of flour,
salt, and fair water, and set them by.

Next boild chestnuts and pistaches, and set them by.

Then have skirrets boild, peeled, and laid in batter.

Then have prawns boild and picked, and set by in batter also, oysters parboild
and cockles, eels cut in pieces being fleyed, and yolks of hard eggs.

Next have green quodling stuff, mixed with biscuit bread and eggs, fry them in
little cakes, and set them by also.

Then have artichocks and potatoes ready to fry in batter, being boild and
cleansed also.

Then have balls of parmisan as big as a walnut, made up and dipped in batter,
and some balls of almond paste.

These aforesaid being finely fried in clarified butter, and muskefied, mix
them in a great charger one amongst another, and make a sauce of strained grape
verjuyce, or white wine, yolks of eggs, cream, beaten butter, cinnamon and
sugar, set them in an oven to warm: the sauce being boild up pour it over all,
and set it again in the oven, ice it with fine sugar, and so serve it.

Otherwise.

Boil ten eggs hard, and part them in halves long ways, take out the yolks,
mince them and put to them some sweet herbs minced small, some boild currants,
salt, sugar, cinnamon, the yolks of two or three raw eggs, and some almond paste
(or none) mix altogether, and fill again the whites, then lay them in a dish on
some butter with the yolks downwards, or in a patty-pan, bake them, and make
sauce of verjuyce and sugar, strained with the yolk of an egg and cinnamon, give
it a walm and put to it some beaten butter; being dished, serve them with fine
carved sippets, slic't orange, and sugar.

To make a great compound Egg as big as twenty Eggs.
TAke twenty eggs, part the whites from the yolks and strain the whites by
themselves, and the yolks by themselves; then have two bladders, boil the yolks
in one bladder, fast bound up as round as a ball, being boild hard put it in
another bladder, and the whites round about it, bind it up round like the
former, and being boild it will be a perfect egg. This serves for grand sallets.

Or you may add to these yolks of eggs, musk and ambergreece, candied
pistaches, grated biscuit bread, and sugar, and to the whites almond paste,
musk, juice of oranges, and beaten ginger, and serve it with butter, almond
milk, sugar, and juice of oranges.

To butter eggs upon toasts.
TAke twenty eggs, beat them in a dish with some salt, and put butter to them;
then have two large rolls or fine manchets, cut them into toasts and toast them
against the fire with a pound of fine sweet butter; being finely buttered, lay
the toasts in a fair clean scowred dish, put the eggs on the toasts, and
garnish the dish with pepper, and salt. Otherwyes, half boil them in the
shells, then butter them, and serve them on toasts, or toasts about them.

To these eggs sometimes use musk and ambergreece, and no pepper.

Otherwise.

Take twenty eggs, and strain them whites and all with a little salt, then have
a skillet with a pound of clarified butter, warm on the fire, then fry a good
thick toast of fine manchet as round as the skillet, and an inch thick; the
toast being finely fried, put in the eggs on it into the skillet, to fry on the
manchet, but not too hard; being finely fried put it on a trencher plate with
the eggs uppermost, and salt about the dish.

An excellent way to butter Eggs.
TAke twenty yolks of new laid or fresh eggs, put them into a dish with as many
spoonfuls of jelly, or mutton gravy without fat, put to it a quarter of a pound
of sugar, two ounces of preserved lemon peel, either grated or cut into thin
slices or very little bits, with some salt, and four spoonfuls of rose water,
stir them together on the coals, and being buttered dish them, put some musk on
them with some fine sugar; you may as well eat these eggs cold as hot, with a
little cinnamon water or without.

Otherwise.

Dress them with claret, white wine, sack, or juice of oranges, nutmeg, fine
sugar, and a little salt, beat them well together in a fine clean dish, with
carved sippets, and candied pistaches stuck in them.

Eggs buttered in the Polonian Fashion.
TAke twelve eggs and beat them in a dish, then have steeped bread in gravy or
broth, beat them together in a mortar, with some salt, and put it to the eggs,
then put a little preserved lemon peel into it, either small shred or cut into
slices, put some butter into it, butter them as the former, and serve them on
fine sippers.

Or with cream, eggs, salt, preserved lemon-peels grated or in slices.

Or grated cheese in buttered eggs and salt.

Otherwise.

Boil herbs, as spinach, sage, sweet marjoram, and endive, butter the eggs
amongst them with some salt, and grated nutmeg.

Or dress them with sugar, orange juice, salt, beaten cinnamon, and grated
nutmeg, strain the eggs with the juice of oranges, and so butter them without
butter; being well buttered, put some more juice over them and sugar.

To make Minced Pies of Eggs.
BOil them hard, then mince them and mix them with cinnamon, raw currants,
caraway-seed, sugar, dates, minced lemon peel, verjuyce, rose water, butter,
and salt; fill your pie or pies, close them, and bake them; being baked, liquor
them with white wine, butter, and sugar, and ice them. Make your pies according
to these forms.

forms of minced egg pies

Eggs or Quelque-shose.
BReak forty eggs, and beat them together with some salt, fry them at four
times, half, or but of one side; before you take them out of the pan make a
composition or compound of hard eggs and sweet herbs minced, some boild
currants, beaten cinnamon, almond paste, sugar, and juice of orange, strew all
over these omlets, roll them up like a wafer, and so of the rest, put them in a
dish with some white wine, sugar, and juice of lemon; then warm and ice them in
an oven, with beaten butter and fine sugar.

Otherwise.

Set on a skillet either full of milk, wine, water, verjuyce, or sack, make the
liquor boil, then have twenty eggs beaten together with salt, and some sweet
herbs chopped, run them through a cullender into the boiling liquor, or put
them in by spoonfuls, or altogether; being not too hard boild, take them up and
dish them with beaten butter, juice of orange, lemon, or grape verjuyce, and
beaten butter.

Blanch Manchet in a Drying Pan.
TAke six eggs, a quart of cream, a penny manchet grated, nutmeg grated, two
spoonfulls of rose water, and two ounces of sugar, beat it up like a pudding,
and fry it as you fry a tansey, being fried turn it out on a plate, quarter it,
and put on the juice of an orange and sugar.

Quelque-shose otherwise.
TAke ten eggs, and beat them in a dish with a penny manchet grated, a pint of
cream, some beaten cloves, mace, boild currants, some rose water, salt, and
sugar; beat altogether, and fry it either in a whole form of a tansey, or by
spoonfulls in little cakes; being finely fried, serve them on a plate with
juice of orange and scraping sugar.

Other Fricase, or Quelque-shose.
TAke twenty eggs and strain them with a quart of cream, some nutmeg, salt,
rose water, and a little sugar; then have sweet butter in a clean drying pan,
and put in some pieces of pippins cut as thick as a half-crown piece round the
apple being coared; when they are finely fried put in half the eggs, fry them a
little, and then pour on the rest or other half, fry it at two times, stir the
last, dish the first on a plate, and put the other on it, with juice of orange
and sugar.

Other Fricases of Eggs.
BEat a dozen of eggs with cream, sugar, nutmeg, mace, and rose water; then
have two or three pippins or other good apples, cut in round slices through
core and all, put them in a frying pan, and fry them with sweet butter; when
they be enough take them up and fry half the eggs and cream in other fresh
butter, stir it like a tansey, and being enough put it out into a dish, put in
the other half of the eggs and cream, lay the apples round the pan, and the
other eggs fried before, uppermost; being finely fried dish it on a plate, and
put to it the juice of an orange and sugar.

The best ways for Dressing of Artichocks.
To stew Artichocks.
THe artichocks being boild, take out the core, and take off all the leaves,
cut the bottoms into quarters splitting them in the middle; then have a flat
stewing-pan or dish, with manchet toasts in it, lay the artichocks on them;
then the marrow of two bones, five or six large maces, half a pound of
preserved plumbs with the sirrup, verjuyce, and sugar, if the sirrup do not
make them sweet enough; let all these stew together two hours, if you stew them
in a dish; serve them up in it, not stirring them, only laying on some
preserves which are fresh, as barberries, and such like, sippet it and serve it
up.

Instead of preserved, if you have none, stew ordinary plumbs which will be
cheaper, and do nigh as well.

To fry Artichocks.
BOil and sever all from the bottoms, then slice them in the midst, quarter
them, dip them in batter, and fry them in butter. For the sauce take verjuyce,
butter, and sugar, with the juice of an orange, lay marrow on them, garnish
them with oranges, and serve them up.

To fry young Artichocks otherwise.
TAke young artichocks or suckers, pare off all the outside as you pare an
apple, and boil them tender; then take them up and split them through the
midst, do not take out the core, but lay the split side downward on a dry cloth
to drain out the water; then mix a little flour with two or three yolks of
eggs, beaten ginger, nutmeg, and verjuyce, make it into batter, and roll them
well in it; then get some clarified butter, make it hot, and fry them in it
till they be brown. Make sauce with yolks of eggs, verjuyce or white wine,
cinnamon, ginger, sugar, and a good piece of butter, keep it stirring upon the
fire till it be thick, then dish them on white bread toafts, put the caudle on
them, and serve them up.

Section 22.
Showing the best way of making Diet for the Sick.

To make a Broth for a sick body.
TAke a leg of veal and set it a boiling in a gallon of fair water, scum it
clean, and when you have so done, put in three quarters of a pound of currants,
half a pound of prunes, a handful of burrage, as much mint, and as much
hart's-tongue; let them seethe together till all the strength be sodden out of
the flesh, then strain it as clean as you can. If you think the party be in any
heat, put in violet leaves and succory.

To stew a Cock against a Consumption.
CUt him in six pieces and wash him clean, then take prunes; currants, dates,
raisins; sugar, three or four leaves of gold, cinnamon; ginger; nutmeg, and some
maidenhair cut very small; put all these foresaid things into a flaggon with a
pint of muskadine, and boil them in a great brass pot of half a bushel, stop
the mouth of the flaggon with a piece of paste, and let it boil the space of
twelve hours; being well stewed strain the liquor, and give it to the party to
drink cold, two or three spoonfuls in the morning fasting, and it shall help
him; this is an approved Medicine.

Otherwise.

Take a good sleshy cock, draw him and cut him to pieces, wash away the blood
clean, and take away the lights that lie at his back, wash it in white wine and
no water; then put the pieces in a flaggon, and put to it two or three blades
of large mace, a leaf of gold, ambergreece, some dates, and raisins of the Sun;
close up the flaggon with a piece of paste, and set it in a pot a boiling six
hours; keep the pot filled up continually with hot water; being boild strain
it, and when it is cold give of it to the weak party the bigness of a hazel nut.

Stewed Pullets against a Consumption.
TAke two pullets being finely cleansed, cut them to pieces, and put them in a
narrow mouthed pitcher pot well glazed, stop the mouth of it with a piece of
paste, and set it a boiling in a good deep brass pot or vessel of water, boil
it eight hours, keep it continually boiling, and still filled up with warm
water; being well stewed strain it and blow off the fat, when you give it to
the party give it warm with the yolk of an egg dissolved with the juice of an
orange.

To distill a Pig good against a Consumption.
TAke a Pig, fley it, and cast away the guts; then take the liver, lungs, and
all the entrails, and wipe all with a clean cloth; then put it into a still
with a pound of dates, the stones taken our, and sliced into thin slices, a
pound of sugar, and an ounce of large mace. If the party be hot in the stomach,
then take these cool herbs, as violet leaves, strawberry leaves, and half a
handful of bugloss, still them with a soft fire as you do roses, and let the
party take of it every morning and evening in any drink or broth he pleases.

You may sometimes add raisins and cloves.

To make Broth good against a Consumption.
TAke a cock and a knuckle of veal, being well soaked from the blood, boil them
in an earthen pipkin of five quarts, with raisins of the sun, a few prunes,
succory, lange de beef roots, fennil roots, parsley, a little anniseed, a pint
of white wine, hyssop, violet leaves, strawberry leaves; bind all the foresaid
roots and herbs a little quantity of each in a bundle, boil it leasurely, scum
it, and when it is boild strain it through a strainer of strong canvas, when
you use it, drink it as often as you please blood warm.

Sometimes in the broth, or of any of the meats aforesaid, use mace, raisins of
the Sun, a little balm, endive, fennill and parsley roots.

Sometimes sorrel, violet leaves, spinach, endive, succory, sage, a little
hyssop, raisins of the Sun, prunes, a little saffron, and the yolk of an egg,
strained with verjuyce or white wine.

Otherwise.

Fennil roots, coltsfoot, agrimony, bettany, large mace, white sanders slic't
in thin slices the weight of six pence, made with a chicken and a crust of
manchet, take it morning and evening.

Otherwise.

Violet leaves, wild tansey, succory roots, large mace, raisins, and damask
prunes boild with a chicken and a crust of bread,

Sometimes broth made of a chop of mutton, veal, or chicken, French barley,
raisins, currants, capers, succory roots, parssey roots, fennil roots, balm,
burrage, bugloss, endive, tamarisk, hartshorn, ivory, yellow sanders, and
fumitory, put to these all, or some, in a moderate quantity.

Otherwise, a sprig of rosemary, violet leaves, time, mace, succory, raisins,
and a crust of bread.

To make a Paste for a Consumption.
TAke the brawn of a roasted capon, the brawns of two partridges, two rails,
two quails, and twelve sparrows all roasted; take the brawns from the bones,
and beat them in a stone mortar with two ounces of the pith of roast veal, a
quarter of a pound of pistaches, half a dram of ambergreece, a grain of musk,
and a pound of white sugarcandy beaten fine; beat all these in a mortar to a
perfect paste, now and then putting in a spoonful of goats milk, also two or
three grains of bezar; when you have beaten all to a perfect paste, make it
into little round cakes and bake them on a sheet of white paper.

To make a Jelly for a Consumption of the Lungs.
TAke half a pound of isingglass, as much hartshorn, an ounce of cinnamon an
ounce of nutmegs, a few cloves, a pound of sugar, a stick of liquoras, four
blades of large mace, a pound of prunes, an ounce of ginger, a little red
sanders, and as much rubarb as will lie on a six pence, boil the foresaid in a
gallon of water, and a pint of claret till a pint be wasted or boild away; boil
them on a soft fire close covered, and slice all your spices very thin.

An excellent Water for a Consumption.
TAke a pint of new milk, and a pint of good red wine, the yolks of twenty four
new laid eggs raw, and dissolved in the foresaid liquors; then have as much
fine slic't manchet as will drink up all this liquor, put it in a fair rose
still with a soft fire, and being distilled, take this water in all drinks and
pottages the sick party shall eat, or the quantity of a spoonful at a draught
in beer; in one month it will recover any consumption.

Other Drink for a Consumption.
TAke a gallon of running water of ale measure, put to it an ounce of cinnamon,
an ounce of cloves, an ounce of mace, and a dram of acter roots, boil this
liquor till it come to three quarts, and let the party daily drink of it till
he mends.

To make an excellent Broth or Drink for a sick body.
TAke a good fleshy capon, take the flesh from the bones, or chop it in pieces
very small, and not wash it; then put them in a rose still with slices of
lemon peel, wood sorrel, or other herbs according to the Physicians direction;
being distilled, give it to the weak party to drink.

Or soak them in malmsey and some capon broth before you distill them.

To make a strong Broth for a sick party.
ROast a leg of mutton, save the gravy, and being roasted prick it and press
out the gravy with a wooden press; put all the gravy into a silver porrenger
or piece, with the juice of an orange and sugar, warm it on the coals, and give
it the weak party.

Thus you may do a roast or boild capon, partridge pheasant, or chicken, take
the flesh from the bones, and stamp it in a stone or wooden mortar, with some
crumbs of fine manchet, strained with capon broth, or without bread, and put
the yolk of an egg, juice of orange, lemon, or grape verjuyce and sugar.

To make China Broth.
TAke an ounce of China thin sliced, put it in a pipkin of fair water, with a
little veal or chicken, stopped close in a pipkin, let it stand four and twenty
hours on the embers but not boil; then put to it colts foot, scabious,
maidenhair, violet leaves half a handful, candied eringo, and two or three
marsh mallows, boil them on a soft fire till the third part be wasted, then put
in a crust of manchet, a little mace, a few raisins of the Sun stoned, and let
it boil a while longer. Take of this broth every morning half a pint for a
month, then leave it a month, and use it again.

China Broth otherwise.
TAke two ounces of China root thin sliced, and half an ounce of long pepper
bruised; then take of balm, time, sage, marjoram, nepe, and smalk, of each two
slices, clary, a handful of cowslips, a pint of cowssip water, and three
blades of mace; put all into a new and well glazed pipkin of four quarts, and
as much fair water as will fill the pipkin, close it up with paste, and set it
on the embers to warm but not to boil, let it stand thus soaking four and
twenty hours; then take it off and put to it a good big cock chicken, a calves
foot, a knuckle of mutton, and a little salt; stew all with a gentle fire to a
pottle, scum it very clean, and being boild strain the clearest from the dregs,
and drink of it every morning half a pint blood warm.

To make Almond Milk against a hot Disease.
BOil half a pound of French barley in three several waters, keep the last
water to make your milk of; then stamp half a pound of almonds with a little of
the same water to keep them from oyling; being finely beaten, strain it with
the rest of the barley water, put some hard sugar to it, boil it a little, and
give it the party warm.

An excellent Restorative for a weak Back.
TAke clary, dates, the pith of an ox, and chop them together, put some cream
to them, eggs, grated bread, and a little white sanders; temper them all well
together, fry them, and eat it in the morning fasting.

Otherwise.

Take the leaves of clary, and nepe, fry them with yolks of eggs and eat them
to breakfast.

Excellent ways for Feeding Poultrey.
To feed Chickens.
IF you will have a sat crammed chicken, coop them up when the damn has
forsaken them, the best cramming for them is wheat meal and milk made into
dough, the crams steeped in milk and so thrust down their throats; but in any
case let the crams be small and well wet for choking. Fourteen days will feed
a chicken sufficiently.

To feed Capous.
EIther at the barn doors with scraps of corn and chavings of pulse, or else in
pens in the house, by cramming them, which is the most dainty. The best way to
cram a capon (setting all strange inventions apart) is to take barley meal
reasonably sifted, and mixing it with new milk, make it into good stiff dough;
then make it into long crams thickest in the middle, and small at both ends:
then wetting them in lukewarm milk, give the capon a full gorge thereof three
times a day, morning, noon, and night, and he will in a fortnight or three
weeks be as fat as any man need to eat.

The ordering of Goslings.
AFter they are hatched you shall keep them in the house ten or twelve days,
and feed them with curds, scalded chippins, or barley meal in milk knodden and
broken, also ground malt is exceeding good, or any bran that is scalded in
water, milk, or tappings of drink. After they have got a little strength, you
may let them go abroad with a keeper five or six hours in a day, and let the
dam at her leisure intise them in the water; then bring them in, and put them
up, and thus order them till they be able to defend themselves from vermin.
After a gosling is a month or six weeks old you may put it up to feed for a
green goose, and it will be perfectly fed in another month following; and to
feed them, there is no better meat then skeg oats boild, and given plenty
thereof thrice a day, morning, noon, and night, with good store of milk, or
milk and water mixed together to drink.

For fatting of elder Geese.
FOr elder geese which are five or six months old, having been in the stubble
fields after harvest, and got into good flesh, you shall then choose out such
geese as you would feed, and put them in several pens which are close and dark,
and there feed them thrice a day with good store of oats, or spelted beans, and
give them to drink water, and barley meal mixed together, which must evermore
stand before them. This will in three weeks feed a goose so fat as is needful.

The fatting of Ducklings.
YOu may make them fat in three weeks, giving them any kind of pulse or grain,
and good store of water.

Fatting of Swans and Cygnets.
FOr swans and their feeding, where they build their nests, you shall suffer
them to remain undisturbed, and it will be sufficient, because they can better
order themselves in that business then any man.

Feed your cygnets in all sorts as you feed your geese, and they will be
through fat in seven or eight weeks. If you will have them sooner fat, you
shall feed them in some pond hedged or placed in for that purpose.

Of fatting Turkies.
FOr the fatting of turkeys sodden barley is excellent, or sodden oats for the
first fornight, and then for another fornight cram them in all sorts as you
cram your capon, and they will be fat beyond measure. Now for their infirmities
when they are at liberty, they are so good Physicians for themselves that they
will never trouble their owners, but being coopt up you must cure them as you
do pullen. Their eggs are exceeding wholesome to eat, and restore nature decayed
wonderfully.

Having a little dry ground where they may sit and prune themselves, place two
troughs, one full of barley and water, and the other full of old dried malt
whereon they may feed at their pleasure. Thus doing they will be fat in less
then a month: but you must turn his walks daily.

Of nourishing and fatting Hearns, Puets, Gulls, and Bitters.
HEarns are nourished for two causes, either for Noblemens sports, to make
trains for the entering their hawks, or else to furnish on the table at great
feasts; the manner of bringing them up with the least charge, is to take them
out of their nests before they can fly, and put them into a large high barn,
where there is many and high cross beams for them to perch on; then to have on
the floor diverse square boards with rings in them, and between every board
which would be two yards square to place round shallow tubs full of water, then
to the boards you shall tie great gobbets of dogs flesh, cut from the bones,
according to the number which you feed, and be sure to keep the house sweet,
and shift the water often, only the house must be made so that it may rain in
now and then, in which the hearn will take much delight; but if you feed her
for the dish, then you shall feed them with livers, and the intrails of beasts,
and such like cut in great gobbets.

To feed Godwits, Knots, Gray Plovers, or Curlews.
TAke fine chilter wheat, and give them water thrice a day, morning, noon, and
night, which will do very effectually; but if you intend to have them
extraordinary crammed fowl, then you shall take the finest dressed wheat-meal,
and mixing it with milk, make it into paste, and ever as you knead it, sprinkle
into it the grains of small chilter-wheat, till the paste be fully mixed
therewith, then make little small crams thereof, and dipping them in water,
give to every fowl according to his bigness, and that his gorge be well filled:
do thus as often as you shall find their gorges empty, and in one fornight they
will be fed beyond measure: and with these crams you may feed any fowl of what
kind or nature soever.

Otherwise.

Feed them with good wheat and water, given them thrice a day, morning, noon,
and night. If you will have them very fat and crammed fowl, take fine
wheat-meal and mix it with milk and make it into paste, and as you knead it put
in some corn of wheat sprinkled in amongst the paste, till the paste be fully
mixed therewith, then make little small cra^s thereof, and dipping them in
water, give to every fowl according to his bigness, and that his gorge be well
filled: do thus as often as you shall find their gorges empty, and in one
fortnight they will be fed very fat, with these crams you may feed any fowl of
what kind or nature soever.

To feed Blackbirds, Thrushes, Felfares, or any small Birds whatsoever.
BEing taken old and wild, it is good to have some of their kinds tame to mix
among them, and then putting them into great cages of three or four yards
square, to have diverse troughs placed therein, some filled with haws, some with
hemp seed, and some with water, that the tame teaching the wild to eat, and
the wild finding such change and alteration of food, they will in twelve or
fourteen days grow exceeding fat, and fit for the kitching.

To feed Ollines.
PUt them into a fine room where they may have air, give them water and feed
them with white bread boild in good milk, and in one week or ten days they
will be extraordinary fat.

To feed Pewets.
FEed them in a place where they may have the air, set them good store of
water, and feed them with sheeps lungs cut small into little bits, give it them
on boards, and sometimes feed them with shrimps where they are near the sea,
and in one fortnight they will be fat if they be followed with meat. Then two
or three days before you spend them give them cheese-curd to purge them.

The feeding of Pheasant, Partridge, Quails, and Wheatears.
FEed them with good wheat and water, given them thrice a day, morning, noon,
and night, will do it very effectually; but if you intend to have them
extraordinary crammed fowl, then take the finest dressed wheat-meal, mix it with
milk, and make it into paste, ever as you knead it, sprinkle in the grains of
corns of wheat, till the paste be full mixed therewith; then make little small
crams, dip them in water, and give to every fowl according to his bigness, that
his gorge be well filled: do thus as often as you shall find his gorge empty,
and in one fortnight they will be fed beyond measure. Thus you may feed turtle
Doves.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
ANdolians, page 23 Almond Pudding 167 Almond Leach 195 Almond Custard 221
Almond tart 231 Almond bread, biscuit, and cakes 254 Almond cream 266 Almond
cheese 267 Almond caudle 406 Apricocks baked 235 Apricocks preserved ibid
Ambergreece cakes 255 Apple cream 263 Alebury 406 Artichocks baked 246
Artichocks stewed 433 Artichocks fried 433, 434
B
BArley broth, page 13 Broth stewed 14, 55 Bisk diverse ways 5, 6, 7, 49 Bisk
or Battalia pie 196 Beef fillet roasted 100 Beef roasted to pickle 103 Beef
collops stewed 104 Beef carbonado'd 106 Beef baked red Dear fashion 108 Beef
minced pies 109 Bullocks cheeks souced 185 Boar wild baked 211 Bacon broild
155 Brawn broild ibid Brawn souced 178 Brawn of pig 179 Brawn garnisht 180
Bredding of meats and fowls 122 Bacon gammon baked 211 Bread the French fashion
223 Biscuit bread 258 Bisquite du Boy 259 Bean bread 260 Bear buttered 407
Barberries preserved 238 Blamanger 284 Blanch manchet in a drying pan 431
C
CAlves head boild 116 Calves head souced 117 Calves head roasted ibid Calves
head hashed 119 Calves head broild ibid Calves head roasted with Oysters. 129
Calves feet roasted ibid Calves chaldron baked 203 Capons in pottage 70 Capons
souc't 183 Calves chaldron in minced pies 204 Capons boild 68, 70, VIII Capons
fillings raw 30 Cocks boild 66 Cock stewed against a Consumption 435 Chicken
pie 197 Chickens peeping boild 60 Chickens how to feed them 442 China broth 440
Capilotadoes, or made dishes 4, 5 Collops and eggs 155 Collops like bacon of
marchpane 253 Cowcumbers pickled 149 Collystowers buttered 411 Custards how to
make them 220 Custards without eggs 221 Cheesecakes how to make them 273
Cheesecakes without milk 275 Cheesecakes in the Italian Fashion 277 Cream and
fresh cheese 278 Codling cream 263 Cast cream 268 Clouted cream ibid Cabbidge
cream 270 Cream tart 232 Cherry tart 230 Cherries preserved 237 Cake a very
good one 222 Cracknells 257 Carp boild in Corbolion 287 Carp bisk 289 Carp
stewed 291 Carp stewed the French way 292 Carp broth 295 Carp in stoffadd 296
Carp hashed ibid Carp marinated 297 Carp boild or broild 298 Carp roasted 299
Carp pie 300 Carp pie minced with eels 302 Carp baked the French way ibid
Conger boild 345 Conger stewed 346 Conger marinated ibid Conger souc't ibid
Conger roasted 347 Conger broild ibid Conger fried 348 Conger baked ibid
Cockles stewed 383 Crabs stewed 394 Crabs boiled ibid Crabs hashed ibid Crabs
forced 395 Crabs broild ibid Crabs fried ibid Crabs baked 396 Crab minced pies
397
D
DEar red roasted 130 Dear red baked 212 Dear fallow baked 213 Dish in the
Italian way 233 Damson tart 231 Dampsons preserved 237 Ducklings how to fat
them 443
E
Enter de Table a French dish 8 Eggs fried 156 Egg fried as round as a ball
ibid Egg caudle 406 Eggs dressed hard 419 Eggs buttered 420 Egg bisk 421 Eggs
in Moonshine ibid Eggs in the Spanish Fashion called, Wivos me quidos 422 Eggs
in the Portingal Fashion 423 Eggs A la Hugenote ibid Eggs in fashion of a
tansey 424 Eggs and Almonds ibid Eggs broild ibid Eggs poached 425 Eggs, grand
forced dish 426 Eggs compounded as big as twenty eggs 427 Eggs buttered on
toasts 428 Eggs buttered in the Polonian way 429 Egg minced pies 430 Eggs or
Quelque-shose ibid Egg fricasie 432 Eels boild 336 Eels stewed 337 Eels in
stoffado 338 Eels souced or jellyed 339 Eels hashed 341 Eels broiled ibid Eels
roasted 342 Eels baked 343 Eel minced pies 344, 345
F
FRitters how to make them 156 Fritters in the Italian fashion 157 Fritters of
arms ibid Fried dishes of diverse forms 159 Fried pasties, balls, or toasts ibid
French tart 232 French barley cream 273 Florentine of tongues 244 Florentine of
partridge or capon 245 Florentine without paste 246 Flounders calvered 332
Frogs baked 401 Furmenty 403 Fowl hashed 40 Fowl forced 28 Forcing in the
Spanish Fashion 33 Forcing French bread called Pinemolet 35 Fricase a rare one
69 Flowers pickled 150 Flowers candied 151
G
GRapes and gooseberries pickled 150 Grapes preserved 238 Gooseberries
preserved ibid Gooseberry cream 265 Ginger bread 260 Geese boild XII Goose
giblets boild XIV Goslings how to order them 443 Geese old ones to fat them
ibid
H
HAshes all manner of ways 39, 40, 41 Hashes of Scotch collops II Hare hashed
47, 64 Hares roasted 133 Hares four baked in a pie 205 Hares three in a pie 206
Hare baked with a pudding in his belly ibid Hens roasted 135 Hip tart 230
Herring minced pies 366 Haberdine pies 367 Hogs feet jellyed 187 Herns to
nourish and fat them 444
I
IElly crystal 188 Jelly of several colors ibid Jelly as white as snow 191
Jellies for souces 192 Jelly of hearts horn 193 Jelly for a Consumption ibid
Jelly for a Consumption of the Lungs 438 Jelly for weakness in the back 194
Jamballs 256 Italian chips 258 Ipocras 261
L
LAmbs head boild 121 Lambs head in white broth 120 Lambs stones fried 154 Land
or sea-fowl boiled 74, 75, 76 Leach with almonds 272 Lamprey how to bake 334,
335 Links how to make 83 Lemons pickled 150 Loaves buttered 411 Lump baked 349
Ling pies 367 Lobsters stewed 385 Lobsters hashed 386 Lobsters boild ibid
Lobsters forced 387 Lobsters marinated ibid Lobsters broild 388 Lobsters roasted
389 Lobsters fried 390 Lobsters baked ibid Lobsters pickled 391 Lobsters
jellied 392
M
MArrow pies 3, 4 Marrow puddings 24 Maremaid pie 204 Mad dish of tongues 245
Made dish of spinach 247 Made dish of barberries 248 Made dish of frogs 249
Made dish of marrow ibid Made dish of rice ibid Made dish of blanchmanger 251
Made dish of butter and eggs ibid Made dish of curds 252 Made dish of oysters
381 Marchpane 253 Mead 261 Metheglin 262 Makeroons 258 Melacatoons baked 235
Melacatoons preserved 237 Medler tart 230 Minced pies of veal, mutton, beef,
etc. 216 Minced pies in the French Fashion 217 Minced pies in the Italian
Fashion ibid Mutton legs forced 31 Mutton shoulder hashed 61 Mutton shoulder
roasted, 123 124 Mutton loyn stewed 15 Mutton shoulder stewed I Mutton or veal
stewed 54, 55 Mutton chines boild 11 Mutton carbonadoed 152 Mutton boild 52, 53
Mustard how to make it 142 Mustard of Dijon 143 Mustard in cakes ibid
Musquedines 257 Mullet souc't 326 Mullet marinated 327 Mullet broild 328 Mullet
fried 329 Mullet baked ibid Mushrooms fried 322 Mushrooms in the Italian
Fashion ibid Mushrooms stewed ibid Mushrooms broild 383 Muskles stewed 384
Muskles fried ibid Muskle pie ibid
N
Neats tongue boild 43, 92 Neats tongue in stoffado 93 Neats tongue stewed ibid
Neats tongues in Brodo Lardiero 96 Neats tongues roasted 97 Neats tongue hashed
42 Neats tongues baked 98, 99 Neats feet larded and roasted 113 Norfolk fool 283
O
OLio podrida 1 Olines of beef 105 Olines of a Leg of Veal 128 Oline pie 208
Olines how to feed them 446 Oatmeal caudle 406 Omlets of eggs 414, 415 Onions
buttered 310 Oysters stewed the French way 364 Oysters stewed otherwise 369
Oyster pottage 370 Oysters hashed 371 Oysters marinated 372 Oysters in stoffado
ibid Oysters jellyed 373 Oysters pickled ibid Oysters souc't 374 Oysters roasted
375 Oysters broild 376 Oysters fried 377 Oysters baked 378 Oyster mince pies
379 Ox cheeks boild 84 Ox cheeks in stoffado 85 Ox cheeks baked 202
P
PArtridges hashed 63 Partridge how to feed them 447 Paste how to make it 241
Paste royal 242 Paste for made dishes in Lent ibid Puff paste 243 Paste of
Violets, Cowslips, etc. 252 Paste for a Consumption 438 Pallets of Ox how to
dress them 87 Pallet pottage 89 Pallets roasted ibid Pallets in jellies 90
Pallets baked 91 Pancakes 160 Panado's 407 Pap 283 Pease tarts 229 Pescod dish
in Puff Paste 248 Pease pottage 404 Peaches preserved 236 Pewets to nourish
them 444 Pheasants how to feed them 447 Pheasant baked 199 Pinemolet 9 Pie
extraordinary, or a Bride pie 218 Pie of pippins 227 Pippins preserved 228 Pig
roasted with the hair on 131 Pig roasted otherwise 132 Pig souc't 180 Pig
jellied 182 Pig distilled against a Consumption 436 Pigeons boild XVI, 79
Pigeons baked 199 Pike boild 305 Pike stewed 307 Pike hashed 310 Pike souc't
311 Pike jellyed 313 Pike roasted 314 Pike fried 315 Pike broild ibid Pike baked
316 Plumb cream 264 Plaice boild or stewed 333 Plovers how to feed them 445
Pork broild 154 Pork roasted 131 Pottages 80 Pottage in the French fashion 81
Pottage without sight of herbs 82 Pottage called skink 102 Pottage of
ellicksanders 404 Pottage of onions 405 Pottage of almonds ibid Pottage grewel
402 Pottage of rice 403 Pottage of milk ibid Potato's baked 246 Portingale
tarts for Banqueting 252 Posset how to make it 279 Posset of sack 280 Posset
compounded 408 Posset simple ibid Posset of herbs ibid Posset the French way
409 Prawns stewed 385 Preserved green fruits 239 Pudding of several sorts 21,
22, 23 Puddings of Turkey or Capon 24 Puddings of liver 26 Puddings of heifers
udder ibid Puddings black 113, 176 Pudding in a breast of veal 127, 171 Pudding
boild 163 Pudding of cream 164 Pudding of sweet herbs ibid Pudding in haste
165, 166 Pudding quaking ibid Pudding shaking ibid Pudding of rice 168 Pudding
of cinnamon 169 Pudding haggas 25, 169 Pudding cheveridge ibid Pudding Liveridge
170 Pudding of swan or goose ibid Pudding of wine in guts 171 Pudding in the
Italian fashion 172 Pudding the French way ibid Pudding of swines lights 173
Pudding of oatmeal ibid Pudding pies of oatmeal 174 Pudding baked 175 Puddings
white 177 Pullets stewed against a Consumption 436 Pyramides cream 272
Q
QVinces pickled 149 Quince pies 224 Quince tarts 226 Quince cream 264 Quinces
buttered 411 Quodling pie 232 Quails how to feed them 447
R
RAsberries preserved 239 Rabbets hashed 48, 64 Restorative for a weak back 441
Rice tart 230 Rice cream 271 Rice buttered 411 Roots forced 27
S
SAuce for green geese XV Sauce for land fowl XVI 137 Sauce for roast mutton
125 Sauce for roast veal 130 Sauce for red dear ibid Sauce for Rabbits 134
Sauce for Hens 135, 136 Sauce for Chickens 136 Sauce for pigeons 137 Sauce for
a goose 138 Sauce for a Duck 139 Sauce for sea fowl ibid Sauce for roast salmon
324 Sauce for veal, lamb, or mutton 184 Sausages 37, 38, 82 Sausages Bolonia
114 Sausage for Jelly 194 Salet grand of minc't fowls xv Sallet grand of diverse
compounds 144, 145, 146 Sallet of scurvey-grass 148 Sallet of ellicksander buds
ib. Scotch collops of mutton 62 Salmon calvered 317 Salmon stewed 318 Salmon
pickled 319 Salmon hashed ibid Salmon marinated 320 Salmon in Stoffado ibid
Salmon fried 321 Salmon roasted 322 Salmon broild or roasted in Stoffado 323
Salmon baked 324 Salmon chewits, or minced pies 325 Salmon lumber pie 326 Sack
cream 269 Stone cream 270 Snow cream 265 Scollops stewed 384 Sea fowl baked 201
Sillabub an excellent way 281 Shell bread 260 Snails stewed 398 Snails fried
399 Snails hashed ibid Snails in pottage 400 Snails bake't ibid Snites boild 65
Soals boild 349 Soals stewed 350 Soals souc't 351 Soals jellied ibid Soals
roasted 352 Soops of spinach 409 Soops of carrots ibid Soops of artichocks 410
Sparagus to keep all the year 195 Sparagus buttered 410 Spinach tart 231 Steak
pie 209 Steak pies the French way 210 Strawberry tart 230 Sturgeon boild 353
Sturgeon buttered 354 Sturgeon hashed ibid Sturgeon marinated ibid Sturgeon
forced 355 Sturgeon whole in Stoffado ibid Sturgeon souc't 356 Sturgeon broild
357 Sturgeon fried ibid Sturgeon roasted 358 Sturgeon olines of it 358, 359
Sturgeon baked 359, 360, 361 Sturgeon minced pies 363 Sturgeon lumber pie 364
Sturgeon oline pie ibid Sturgeon baked with forcings 365 Sturgeon olio 366
Sugar plate 257 Swans how to fat them 444 Sweetbread pies 215
T.
TAnsey how to make 160 Taffety tart 231 Tart stuff of several colors 234
Tortelleti, or little pasties VI, VII Toasts how to make them 161 Toasts
cinnamon 162 Toasts the French way ibid Tortoise how to dress it 397 Tripes how
to dress them 114 Trotter pie 226 Triffel how to make it 278 Turkish dish of
meat 103 Turkey baked 199 Turkies how to fat them 444 Turbut boild 330 Turbut
souc't 331 Turbut stewed or fried. 332
V
VEal breast forced 20 Veal breast boild ibid Veal breast roasted 127 Veal
breast, Loin, or rack, baked 209 Veal leg boild 18 Veal leg forced 19 Veal
chines boild 10 Veal loin roasted 128 Veal broild 123 Veal hashed 47, 64 Veal
forced 28, 29, 31 Venison broild 154 Venison tainted how to preserve it 214
Vdders baked 111 Verjuyce how to make it 142 Vinegar to make it 140 Rose
Vinegar 141 Pepper Vinegar ibid Vmble pies 215
W
WArden tarts 229 Water for a Consumption 438 Wassel to make it 283 Wheatears
how to feed them 447 Whip cream 271 White leach of cream ibid White pot to make
it 281 Woodcocks boild 65, X Woodcocks roasted 134
These Books, with others, are Printed for Nathanael Brook and are to be sold
at his Shop at the Angel in Cornhil.
THe Catholic History collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councils, and
Ancient Fathers, in Answer to Dr. Vane's lost Sheep returned home: by Edward
Chesensale, Esquire Octavo. Bishop Morton on the Sacrament, in Folio.

The Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in taking away the Sacred Cup from
the Laity at the Lords Table: by D. Featly, D. D. Quarto.

The Quakers Cause at second hearing, being a full answer to their Tenets.

Anabaptists anatomized and silenced: or a Dispute with Mr. Tombs, by Mr. J.
Crag; where all may receive clear satisfaction in that Controversy. The best
extant, Octavo.

The Zealous Magistrate; a Sermon by T. Threscos, Quarto.

New Jerusalem, in a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers, in the Year 1651.

Divinity no enemy to Astrology, a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers, in
the Year 1643. by Dr. Thomas Swaddling.

Britannia Rediviva, a Sermon before the Judges, August 1648. by J. Shaw
Minister of Hull.

The Princess Royal, in (...) Judges, March 24. by J. Shaw.

Judgment set, and (...), Religion tried whether it be of God or Man, in
several Sermons: by J. We^^ster, Quarto.

Isreal's Redemption, (...) Prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on
Earth, by ^. Matton.

The Cause and Cu^e of (...), and Profaneness, or a more hopeful way to Grace
and Salvation; by K. Young, Octavo.

A Bridle for the Times, tending to still the murmuring, to settle the
wavering, to stay the wandering, and to strengthen the fainting: by J. Brinsley
of Yarmouth.

Comforts against the fear of death; wherein are discovered several Evidences
of the work of Grace: by J. Collins of Norwich.

The sum of Practical Divinity; or the Grounds of Religion in a Catechisticall
way, by Mr. Christopher Love late Minister of the Gospel: a useful Piece.

Heaven and Earth shaken; a Treatise showing how Kings and Princes, and all
other Governments are turned and changed. by J. Davis Minister in Dover,
admirably useful, and seriously to be considered in these times.

The Treasure of the Soul, wherein we are taught by dying to sin, to attain to
the perfect love of God.

A Treatise of Contentation, fit for these sad and troublesome times. by J. Hall
Bishop of Norwich, newly published.

Select Thoughts, or choice helps for a pious spirit, beholding the excellency
of her Lord Jesus: by J. Hall Bishop of Norwich.

The Holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion: to which is added songs in
the night, or cheerfulness under afflictions: by J. Hall Bishop of Norwich,
newly published.

The Celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed soul from the depth of
everlasting darkness: by T. Fetisplace.

Magic and Astrology vindicated by H. Warren.

Lux Veritatis, Judicial Astrology vindicated, and Demonology confuted: by W.
Ramsey Gent.

An Introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy, being a determination of the
Original of the Soul: by C. Hotham Fellow of Peter House in Cambridge.

Cornelius Agrippa his fourth Book of Occult Philosophy, or Geomancy; Magical
Elements of Peter de Abona, the nature of spirits: made English by R. Turner.

Paracelsus Occult Philosophy of the Mysteries of Nature, and his secret
Alchimy.

The admired piece of Physiognomy, and Chyromancy, Metoposcopy, the Symmetrical
proportions, and signal Moles of the Body, the Interpretation of Dreams; to
which is added the Art of Memory illustrated with Figures's by R. Sanders,
Folio.

The incomparable Treatise of Tactometria, seu Tetagmenometria; or the Geometry
of Regulars, practically proposed, after a new and most expeditious manner,
together with the Natural or Vulgar, by way of Mensural comparison, and in the
Solids, not only in respect of Magnitude or Demension, but also of Gravity or
Ponderosity, according to any Metal assigned: together with useful Experiments
of Measures and Weights, observations on gauging, useful for those that are
practiced in the Art Metricald: by T. Wyhard.

The unparalleled Work for ease and expedition, entitled, The Exact Surveyor,
or the whole Art of Surveying of Land, showing how to plot all manner of
Grounds, whether small Enclosures, Champian, Plain, Woodlands, or Mountains, by
the plain Table; as also how to find the Area, or Content of any Land, to
protect, reduce, or divide the same; as also to take the plot or cart, to make
a Map of any Manor; whether according to Rathburne, or any other eminent
Surveyours Method; a Book excellently useful for those that sell, purchase, or
are otherwise employed about Buildings: by J. Air.

The Golden Treatise of Arithmetic, Natural and Artificial, or Decimals; the
Theory and Practice united in a simpathetical proportion betwixt Lines and
Numbers, in their Quantities and Qualities, as in respect of Form, Figure,
Magnitude, and affection; demonstrated by Geometry, illustrated by
Calculations, and confirmed with variety of Examples in every Species; made
compendious and easy for Merchants, Citizens, Seamen, Accomptants, etc. by
Th. Wilsford Corrector of the last Edition of Record.

Semigraphy, or the Art of Short-writing, as it has been proved by many
hundreds in the City of London, and other places by them practiced, and
acknowledged to be the easiest, exactest, and swiftest Method; the meanest
capacity by the help of this Book, with a few hours practice may attain to a
perfection in this art; by J. Rich Author and Tercher thereof, dwelling in
Swithins-Lane in London.

Milk for children; a plain and easy Method teaching to read and write, useful
for Schools and Families, by J. Thomas D. D.

Culpeper's Semiatica Vranica, his astrological Judgment of Diseases from the
decumbiture of the sick, much enlarged; the way and manner of finding out the
cause, change, and end of the Disease; also whether the sick be likely to live
or die, and the time when Recovery or death is to be expected, according to the
judgment of Hypocrates and Hermes Trismegistus; to which is added Mr.
Culpeppers censure of Urines.

Culpeper's last Legacy, left to his Wife for the public good, being the
choicest and most profitable of those secrets in Physic and Chyrurgery, which
whilst he lived, were locked up in his breast and resolved never to be
published till after his death.

The Yorkshire Spaw; or, the virtue and use of that water in curing of
desperate Diseases, with directions and rules necessary to be considered by all
that repair thither.

Most approved medicines and remedies for the diseases in the body of man: by
A. Read Doctor in Physic.

The art of simpling, an introduction to the knowledge of gathering of plants,
wherein the definition, divisions, places, descriptions, differences, names,
virtues, times of gathering, temperatures of them, are compendiously discoursed
of: also a discovery of the lesser World: by W. Coals.

Adam in Eden, or Natures Paradise: the History of Plants, Herbs, and Flowers,
with their several original names, the places where they grow, their
descriptions and kinds, their times of flourishing and decreasing; as also
their several signatures, anatomical appropriations, and particular physical
virtues; with necessary Observations on the seasons of planting and gathering
of our English plants. A work admirable useful for Apothecaries, Chyrurgeons,
and other ingenious persons, who may in this Herbal find comprised all the
English physical Simples, that Gerard or Parkinson in their two voluminous
Herbals have discoursed of; even so as to be on emergent occasions their own
Physicians, the Ingredients being to be had in their own Fields and Gardens:
published for the general good, by W. Coals, M. D.

The complete Midwives Practice, in the high and weighty concernments of the
body of mankind: the second Edition corrected and enlarged, with a full supply
of such most useful and admirable secrets which Master Nicholas Culpeper in his
brief Treatise, and other English Writers in the art of Midwifry have hitherto
wilfully passed by, kept close to themselves, or wholly omitted: by T.
Chamberlain, M. P. illustrated with copper figures.

The Queens Closet opened: incomparable secrets in Physic, Chyrurgery,
Preserving, Candying, and Cookery; as they were presented to the Queen by the
most experienced persons of our times; many whereof were honored with her own
practice.

Times Treasury, or Academy, for the accomplishment of the English Gentry in
Arguments of Discourse, Habit, Fashion, Behavior, etc. all summed up in
Characters of Honor, by R. Brathwaite, Esquire

Oedipus, or the Resolver of the Secrets of Love, and other natural problems
by way of Question and Answer.

The Tears of the Indians: the History of the bloody and most cruel proceedings
of the Spaniards in the Island of Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica, Mexico, Peru, and
other places of the West Indies; in which to the life are discovered the
tyrannies of the Spaniards, as also the justness of our War so successfully
managed against them.

The Illustrious Shepherdess, the Imperious Brother; written originally in
Spanish by that Incomparable Wit, Don John Perez de Montalbans; translated at
the request of the Marchioness of Dorchester, and the Countess of Stafford: by
E. P.

The Unfortunate Mother: a Tragedy by T. N.

The Rebellion: a Comedy by T. Rawlins.

The Tragedy of Messalina the insatiate Roman Empress: by N. Richards.

Fons Lachrymarum, or a Fountain of tears; the Lamentations of the Prophet
Jeremiah in Verse, with an Elegy on Sir Charles Lucas: by J. Quarles.

Nocturnal Lucubrations, with other witty Epigrams and Epitaphs: by R.
Chamberlain.

The admirable ingenuous Satyr against Hypocrites.

Wits Interpreter, the English Parnassus; or a sure Guide to those admirable
accomplishments that complete the English Gentry, in the most acceptable
Qualifications of Discourse or Writing: an Art of Logic, acurate Complements,
Fancies, Devices, and Experiments, Poems, poetical Fictions, and A la mode
Letters: by J. C.

Wit and Drollery, with other Jovial poems: by Sir J. M. M. L. M. S. W. D.

Sportive Wit, the Muses Merriment, a new Spring of Drollery, Jovial Fancies,
etc.

The Conveyancer of Light, or the complete Clark and Scriveners Guide; being an
exact draught of all presidents and assurances now in use, as they were penned
and perfected by diverse Learned Judges, Eminent Lawyers, and great
Conveyancers, both Ancient and Modern; whereunto is added a concordance from
King Richard the Third to this present.

Themis Aurea, the Laws of the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross; in which the
occult Secrets of their philosophical Notions are brought to light; written by
Count Mayerus, and now English: by T. H.

J. Tradiscan's Rareties, published by himself.

The proceedings of the High Court of Justice against the late King Charles,
with his Speech upon the Scaffold, and other proceedings, January 30. 1648.

The perfect Cook: a right Method in the Art of Cookery whether for Pastry, or
all other manner of A la Mode Kickshaws; with the most refined ways of
dressing flesh, fowl, or making of the most poinant Sawces, whether after the
French, or English manner, with fifty five ways of dressing of Eggs: by M. M.

The expert Doctors Dispensatory: the whole Art of Physic restored to
practice: the Apothecaries shop, and Chyrurgions closet opened; with a Survey,
as also a correction of most Dispensatories now extant, with a Judicious
Censure of their defects: and a supply of what they are deficient in: together
with a learned account of the virtues and quantities, and uses of Simples and
Compounds; with the Symptoms of Diseases: as also prescriptions for their
several cures: by that renowned P. Morellus, Physician to the King of France; a
Work for the order, usefulness, and plainness of the Method, not to be
paralelled by any Dispensatory, in what Language soever.

Cabinet of Jewels, Man's Misery, Gods Mercy, Christ's Treasury, etc. in eight
excellent Sermons: with an Appendix of the nature of Tithes under the Gospel:
with the expediency of Marriage in public Assemblies: by J. Crag, Minister of
the Gospel.

Natures Secrets: or the admirable and wonderful History of the generation of
Meteors: describing the Temperatures of the Elements, the heights, magnitudes,
and influences of Stars, the causes of Comets, Earthquakes, Deluges, Epidemical
Diseases, and Prodigies of Precedent times: with presages of the weather: and
descriptions of the weather-glass: by T. Wilsford.

The Mystery of Love and Eloquence, or the Arts of Wooing and Complementing; as
they are managed in the Spring Garden, Hide Park, the New Exchange, and other
eminent places: A work, in which is drawn to the life the Deportments of the
most Accomplished Persons; the Mode of their Courtly entertainments, Treatment
of their Ladies at balls, their accustomed Sports, Drolls and Fancies, the
Witchcrafts of their persuasive Language, in their Approaches, or other more
Secret Dispatches, etc. by E. P.

Helmont disguised: or, the vulgar errors of impartial and unskilful Practicers
of Physic confuted: more especially as they concern the Cures of Fevers, the
Stone, the Plague, and some other Diseases by way of Dialogue, in which the
chief rareties of Physic are admirably discoursed of: by J. T.

The so well entertained Work, the New World of English Words, or, a general
Dictionary, containing the Terms, Etymologies, Definitions, and perfect
Interpretations of the proper significations of hard English Words, throughout
the Arts and Sciences, Liberal, or Mechanic; as also other subjects that are
useful, or appertain to the Language of our Nation: to which is added the
signification of Proper Names, Mythology, and Poetical Fictions, Historical
Relations, Geographical Descriptions of the Countries and Cities of the World,
especially of these three Nations, wherein their Antiquities, Battles, and
other most memorable Passages are mentioned: A Work very necessary for
Strangers, as well as our Country men, for all persons that would rightly
understand what they discourse, or read. Collected and published by E. P. for
the greater honor of those learned Gentlemen and Artists that have been
assistant in the most Practical Sciences, their Names are presented before the
Book.

The so much desired, and learned Commentary on Psalm the fifteenth, by that
Reverend and Eminent Divine, Mr. Christopher Cartwright, Minister of the Gospel
in York; to which is prefixed a brief account of the Authors Life, and of his
Work: by R. Bolton.

The way to bliss in three Books, being a learned Treatise of the Philosophers
Stone; made public by Elias Ashmole Esquire

Wit restored in several Select Poems, not formerly published: by Sir John
Mennis, Mr Smith and others.

The Modern Assurancer, the Clerks Directory, containing the Practick part of
the Law, in the exactest Forms and Draughts of all manner of Presidents for
Bargains, and Sales, Grants, Feoffements, Bonds, Bills, Conditions, Covenants,
Joyntures, Indentures; to lead the uses of Fines and Recoveries, with good
Proviso's, and Covenants to stand seized, Charter parties for Ships, Leases,
Releases, Surrenders, etc. And all other Instruments and Assurances now in use,
intended for all young Students and Practicers of the Law: by John Hern.

Moor's Arithmetic, the second Edition much refined and diligently cleared
from the former mistakes of the Press. A Work containing the whole art of
Arithmetic, as well in Numbers as Species. Together with many Additions by the
Author, now published.

Exercitatio Elleiptica Nova, or a new Mathematical Contemplation on the Oval
Figure called an Elleipsis; together with the two first Books of Midorgius his
Conicks Analiz'd, and made so plain, that the Doctrine of Conical sections may
be easily understood; a Work much desired, and never before published in the
English Tongue: by Jonas Moor, Surveyor General of the great Level of the
Fennes, now published.

America painted to the Life, the History of the Conquest, and first Original
undertakings of the advancement of the Plantations in those parts, with an
exquisite Map: by F. Gorges. Esquire

Culpeper's Scool of Physic, or the Experimental practice of the whole Art; so
reduced, either into Aphorisms, or choice and tried Receipts, that the
freeborn Students of the three Kingdoms may in this Method find perfect ways
for the operation of such Medicines, so Astrologically and Physically
prescribed, as that they may themselves be competent Judges of the Cures of
their Patients: by N. C.

Blagrave's admirable Ephemerides for the Year 1659.

The Joys of Heaven promised to the Saints on Earth, Christ's Sermon on the
Beatitudes preached on the Mount. An Exposition on the fifth Chapter of St.
Matthew, delivered in several Sermons by Master Jeremiah Buroughs, being the
last Sermons he preached a little before his death at St. Giles Cripplegate
London; printed with the approbation of those godly and learned Divines, who
were entrusted for the publishing of his Works.

Dr. Martin Luthers Treatise of the Liberty of a Christian: an useful Treatise
for the stating of the Controversies so much disputed in these times about this
great point.

The Key of Knowledge, a little Book by way of Question and Answer, intended
for the use of all degrees of Christians, especially for the Saints of
Religious Families: by John Jackson.

The true Evangelical temper, a Treatise modestly and soberly fitted to the
present grand concernments of the State and Church: by John Jackson.

The Book of Conscience opened and read: by John Jackson.

History and Policy Reviewed in the Heroic Transactions on Oliver late
Protector, declaring his steps to princely perfection drawn in lively parallels
to the Ascents of the great Patriarch Moses, to the height of thirty degrees of
Honor: by H. D. Esquire.

J. Cleaveland Revived, Poems, Orations, Epistles, and other of his Genuine
Incomparable pieces: a second Impression with many Additions.

The Exquisite Letters of Master Robert Loveday, the late admired Translatour
of the Volumes of the famed Romance Cleopatra, for the perpetuating his memory;
published by his dear Brother, Mr. A. L.

England's Worthies, Select Lives of the most Eminent persons from Constantine
the great to the Death of Oliver Cromwell late Protector: by W. Winstanley,
Gent. in 47. Lives.

A Character of France, to which is added Gallus Castratus; or an Answer to a
late slanderous pamphlet, called, the Character of England; as also a fresh
Whip for the Mounsieur, in answer to his Letter, in vindication to his Madam:
the second Edition.

The Scales of Commerce and Trade, the Mystery revealed as to traffic with a
Debtor or Creditor, for Merchants accounts after the Italian way, and easiest
method; as also a Treatise of architecture, and a computation as to all the
charges of Building: by T. Wilsford, Gent.

FINIS.

