POEMA MORTUALE: OR, AN ELEGY UPON DEATH, THE LAW of NATURE, AND TRIBUTE of
MORTALS.

By R. M. No Poet, nor the Son of a Poet.

Dust (Bodies) are, and unto Dust return:
Souls, locked are not in a sable URN.
In Christo vixi; morior; vivamque perenne:
Gratia, Christ, mihi; Gloria, Christ, Tibi.
Anno Praedicto 1679.

I. The Prologue.
The Vale of the Author, to the Reader.
AS with Hortensius, it is not with Me;
Unapt to write, but apt to speak was He:
Nor do I with ALBERICUS compare,
Unapt to speak, but apt to write his share:
For words, or works, their Genius rarely lay,
But (haltingly) do I go (either) way.
Death, subject is; a Cup full to the Brim;
An Ocean, where Elephants may swim.
In POETRY I Am learning but to spell;
Are Deeps exhausted with a Muscle-shell?
One was a Mute, wise Cato being there;
Give fancy Vent, Du-Bartas was not here.
This Poem (now) takes air, our mortal Fate,
As to CONDOLE, so to Congratulate.
Do live to dye? this shows a (doleful) state:
Do dye to live? this (Dolor) antiquate.
Is Truth the White? let that Man never speed,
Who (from the Issue) censures of the Deed.
Man may attempt all Men to please as soon,
As He that made a Vestment for the Moon,
To suit (each) interchange: ah (juggling) Ape!
Days (scarcely) two She keeps in a Shape.
Prose ( Poems too) meet with a (critic) wound;
Some (Faults will find) besides Faults to be found:
Wing Momus (then) this Book is not for Thee;
And Zoilus take they Flight as far as He.
Art Notional? 'twas no Prophetic Bram,
Art Critical? it is no Poetic Strain;
But art Celestial? (here lies the STRESS)
Most (lovely) Truth shows in her (native) Dress.
Now, Reader, take; taste; eat; but (also) wish;
It Is (Lordly) Fare, though in an (earthen) Dish.
II. The Description.
PAle Death the Subject is; but what is Death?
From (lifened) dust, but a (departed) Breath.
But is not Death (so worthy Meditation)
An Essence? No, nor Substance, but Privation.
There Beings are, but Death no Being have;
No Creature it is; for Creatures it is a Grave.
Death's but a Fall, which (by a Fall) invaded
This Microcosm; whereby he was degraded.
Some Persons are for Debts in PRISON laid;
This Debt pays Man, though Man be left unpaid.
Man, mortal is; this Microcosmus must
Strike Sail to Death, and graved be in dust.
Life's but a breathing Death; a Tale that is told;
He does but live, that lives to be old.
A Vapor is man's Life; a Taper burning;
It Is like the wind that passes not returning.
Ah! what is Life? a Flood; and Ebb; and Man,
Sails (then) into a (timeless) OCEAN.
Ah puzling Theme! was Austin at a loss
What Life to call? let not my Gold be Dross.
Man's Nostril is a passage for his Breath;
It Is then a (dying) Life, or (living) Death.
Life's but a (dying) Death; our Bodies are
But (living) Graves; the longest Liver share
But in a span of days; Death (homeward) sends;
A CIRCLE it is, beginning where it ends.
Ah daring Death! the Tribute due to Nature;
The Law of Mortals, not reflecting Stature;
And of the Universe the Emperess;
That visit Mortals in a various dress.
III. The Assertion.
THE Hebrew Proverb travels very far,
In Golgotha Skulls of all Sizes are.
Death's not a (bie) but (beaten) path for All;
Here Croesus, Codrus, stumble may, and fall.
One shoots the Gulf, yet grounds upon a Shelf;
A Manuscript deceives DEATH it self.
No distance does this Law of Nature know,
But Mortals reap according as they sow.
Death (to the Grave) is path for (any) Foot;
This (common) Gulf, the mean and mighty shoot.
They blessed are much more (let this take Air)
In Peter's Chain, than He in Peter's Chair:
Ah Miscreant to refuge in a Lie!
Ah Monster-Man! I see (as I pass by)
Thy Triple-Crown begins to stand awry;
Down (Dagon-like) let this fall from on high;
Break Crown, Head, Neck, this is the (common) Cry;
Thus wished it is, that thou may (ever) dye.
Popes (dyed) have, without a (doleful) Song,
Unless it were because they (lived) long.
Where Is Adam? Abram? Isa'c? Jacob? Where?
Inventi non sunt; they SEPULCRED were.
What Proto-Adam? Yea, He was a Man;
Red-earth I find, when that his name I scan.
This Proto-Man finds Death on Nature enter;
Thus earth to earth returns, as to its Center.
What Abraham? it is strange; it is true, he dies,
And in the CAVE of Mackpelah he lies.
What Isa'c too, a TYPE so eminent?
Types, Shadows are; Death pitched has his Tent
With Abraham: Ah when his Days were spent!
He (like a Son) unto his FATHER went.
The Assertion.
WHat Jacob too? Esau supplanted He;
One named right, for Name and Act agree:
Ah but Supplanters may supylanted be!
Him daring) Death transplanted have I see.
Mortality (whatever Men suggest)
Antiquity has for her (native) Crest:
Did not Death reign from ADAM unto MOSES?
Where Is Matthew? Mark? Paul? Peter? James? and Joses?
Our Fathers where are They? the greatest Sage
Is slily passing; going off the STAGE.
Well styled (then) is Death, most aged King,
Who led the Van, and up the Rear does bring.
Ah read Death's Motto in a Ladies Line!
My lot's to Day; to morrow may be thine:
And wonder not at that true Celled-sense,
Amongst these Skulls I find no difference.
But where is Methuselah of all most gray?
Scan but his name, the word the man bewray:
Years lived he Nine hundred sixty nine,
But dyed then; no longer was his Line.
Though many (now) on Beds of IVORY
Do stretch themselves; yet these must also lie
In Beds of Earth; this Tribute pay they must,
And for their Heads a Pillow have of Dust.
The great Mogul erects his Nest on high;
But lives he, that shall not (also) dye?
All dyed have, that lived have; or have
Translated been, and so deceived the Grave:
Thus dye shall All that live, or changed be;
From ADAM all derive their Pedigree.
Now, Reasons take (from one so low in Stature)
Why Death should be a Tribute due to Nature.
IV. The Reasons.
1. The Decree of God.
DEath, seizes All, for this is God's Decree;
She seizes, but will not surrender Thee.
Death (Heavens Statute is) in Scripture-sense,
Each man's line meets in this Circumference.
Earth, Heaven, Hell, their Laws are different,
(If writing thus be not impertinent:)
Earths Law municipal, is (once) to dye;
But Heavens is to live eternally:
Hell (also) has a LAW, to dye for ever;
Take prospect (here) of three; Once; always; never.
2. The Matter of the Body.
ADd (nextly) now the Matter of the Man;
This Fabric (then) Eternize if ye can.
Ah mortal Man! made up of Elements;
Earth, Air, Fire, Water, are Ingredients:
For Man to dye, to me appears just,
Who (at the first) was reared out of dust.
The Breath of God, the Soul I find to be;
The Work of God, the Body seems to me.
The Building's Clay, the Basis (also) Dust;
The Creature to the Center (dying) must.
3. The Merit of Sin.
ALl sinned have, and therefore All must dye;
This must be true, or Truth must be a Lie.
The Soul dies not, it is an (immortal) Spirit:
The Body dies, it is Sins (undoubted) Merit.
Sins venial, and mortal, Papists make;
But this distinction is a gross mistake.
As Adam's bounds were set, and Soul endued;
So breaking these, a (double) Death ensued.
It Is better thus (infernal) Sophistry
To naus'ate, than a (double) Death to dye.
V. The Uses.
THree Uses (now) of daring Death be making;
High Prudence it is right Measures to be taking.
I. Of Trial.
TRy, mortal Man; come to the Test, and try;
Stage Persons; also Things; yet Man must dye.
Can any PERSON? Or, can any THING
(That Persons deck) match Death? this (timely) bring.
1. Of Beauty.
CAN Beauty (that is a Snare) from Death's Arrest
Bail MORTALS? No; as Ages do attest.
Can Beauty (so admired by the Tall?)
No, mortal Man, for Nature caught a Fall,
When she was young (as did a petty Prince)
Which caused has her halting ever since.
She Is courted; painted; spotted; yet I see,
It Is (native) Beauty without spots to be.
Some try to mend, but while they mend, they mar;
For Beauty-speets, the SPOTS of Beauty are.
Fade Beauty will like Flowers of the Field;
Not shot-free girded with an Ajax's Shield.
She fades; faints; falls; and ( running of her Race)
Has for her Scutch'on but a (wrinkled) Face.
Where Is Sarah that the Court of Pharaoh charm?
This (daring) Death, this Beauty does alar'm.
Where Is Absalom, the Beauty of his Age?
He acts his part, and goes off the Stage.
From Head to Foot, no Blemish could be found;
But Beauty dies; Death marching is her Round.
This Tribute due to Nature paid He;
The Halter was his Hair upon a Tree.
Here (Isr'el's Mirror) had his mortal Stroke;
Will others (now) call this the Royal Oak?
II. Of Men, and Means.
CAn Men, or Means? each Creature in its Station,
From Natures instinct plot its Conservation.
What Drug by Galen could preseribed be?
Or could Hippocrates by DOSES free
His Pat'ents? No; they differ as to Staure,
Yet payment make of Tribute due to Nature.
For Spirits Chemists are; Phlebotomy
A Monster seems in that extracting eye:
They breathe no Veins; rare Spirits they apply;
But salved is not DEATH by Chemistry.
Two ways there are Diseases for to cure;
But neither can face-paling Death allure:
Is Sympathy the way? the Arrow's wide,
For Digby that admired Artist died.
Or is ANTIP ATHY? ah but undarted.
Is still the White! beloved Luke's departed.
Speak Borgius (that I may hear the sound)
Who Remedies for all Diseases found,
But Death; He dies, and dying did assure
No Drug, or Dose, of Death could make a Cure.
Let Nature (now) most fortify that can,
Health's highest sphere a Crisis proves to Man.
One way to come (into) the World had all;
But to go (out) a thousand; and to fall;
A Nail kills Sisera; but, by a Stone
Goliath falls; for he would stand alone:
This Giant (now) meets with a mortal Blow;
Right goes an Arrow out of Heavens Bow:
One wound Goliath kills, but twenty three
Great Caesar had, and then departed he.
Strong Samson enters now, of whom it is said,
He Rubbish made, and under Rubbish laid.
Thus Men, and Means, disputing Con and Pro,
Do act their Parts, and off the Stage do go.
III. Of Honor and Policy.
CAN Honor? No, the tallest Pines are shaken
By smallest winds; and may not this awaken?
Sure footing (Soul) has not Magnificence;
This may be in the Preterperfect Tense:
This (Bucket-like) now up, now down, is She;
But (down) the mot'on swiftest seem to me.
Could I prefer, such have Preferment should,
Not that would Places, but that Places would.
All worldly Grandeur in the Dust is laid;
As Caesar took, so Caesar Tribute paid.
Thus ROMAN Honor passes as a Blast,
Though Pompey slew, slain Pompey was at last.
High Haman staged is (making uproar;)
Next to the King does now this Abject soar:
As to Design, in fewish blood he wallows;
As to Desert, ascends He the Gallows.
CAN Policy? No; MAZIRINI may
Strike Sail to Death, and go this (common) way.
Ah where is Pythagoras, with prudent Cato?
Where Is Seneca, with Socrates and Plato?
Where Is Cicero, with Athen's Legislators?
And where is Apollo, with the Commentators?
But where is that (admired) Aristotle?
(Yet Euripus would not into his Bottle:)
So (often) ebb, and flow this Deep, that He
(Unsatisfied.) would the Bottom see.
But where is Achitophel? accursed may
Such Policy be to the (latter) Day:
An ORACLE was He within his Age;
But hangs himself, and falls off the Stage.
Where Is Solomon, more wise than any other?
That could defect the true from feigned Mother:
Ah (turbid.) Death! He was a (mortal) Sage;
And being mortal goes off the STAGE.
IV. Of Wealth.
CAN Riches? No; or Truth is made a Lie;
But Wealth's a gilded, lying VANITY.
The World (says One) to Man is God's Epistle;
But (often) prove to Man a vexing Thistle.
The World's a Labyrinth; my Soul beware;
And ( Michal-like) is given as a Snare.
Ah bitter-sweet, and that but for an hour!
Sweet is the Promise, but the Payment sour.
The World's a Cheat; the things thereof decay;
And (Laban-like) for Rachel Leah pay.
A Sirens Song, and unto Whoredom pander,
Which causes many (Dinah-like) to wander.
Ah England mourn, and grow into a Passion!
The Spanish Mode, is now an English Fashion.
Most vainly Mortals worldly things aspire;
These are not Food, but Fuel to Desire.
Shall Hearts be set on that, where (only) Feet
Should standing be? hence bearing but a Sheet!
Job staged is, and not for Wealth the least,
But greater than the greatest of the East;
His Substance winged is (the Blow was such;)
But Jah Jehovah gives him twice as much.
No Object for the Eye is Wealth, and can
This Object be unto the Heart of Man?
But worldly Men make for themselves a Rod,
Below a Soul, is all below a GOD.
Where Is Crassus? Croesus? Crates? Aristippus?
Or Cyrus? Xerzes? Dives and Philippus?
Left by the World are they, where (living) find them;
And (dying) they do leave the World behind them.
Where Is He that had so vast a Territory?
Who Ruler was (according to the Story)
Of Provinces an Hundred twenty seven;
The Man is dead, and gone to Hell, or Heaven.
V. Of Fortitude.
CAn Fortitude? This Mortals rarely deck;
A (rare) but (rich) Gem it is about the neck
Of Potentates; refute it if ye can,
Son unto Caesar Valor makes a Man.
Great Alexander would immortal be
Unwounded; wounded mortal proved he.
Where Is (little) David? yet has (little) Fear;
who killed both the Lion and the Bear:
Philistine-foreskins hanged up may be,
As (signal) Trophies for a Saul to see:
Yea, Gath-Goliah, dreadful in his motion,
Had (native) Blood prescribed for a Potion?
Ah but he dies (as Scripture has averred!)
And in the (Royal) City was interred.
Stout Hannibal (Rome's Terror) where is He?
Or those stout Scipio's, that would not flee?
Where Is Saladine, that (Oriental) Victor?
Or where should I dig for (puissant) Hector?
Huniades does next ascend the STAGE,
Who (all his Race) did war with Turcists wage;
In Battles many (stoutly) he engage,
And (thorough Valor) Turkey did enrage:
To this (vast) Empire dreadful was his name,
Their (crying) Babes were stilled with the same;
Jobs (iron) Pen take to engrave his Fame,
(My Narrative defective is, and lame;)
That to Posterity transmitted may
His Valor and his Conquest be I say.
Where Is Scanderbeg? who was so valorous;
And with his Valor so victorious:
In more than twenty Battles he engage
Proud Saracens; whose right Arm did presage
His Valor and his Conquest in his Age:
This (matchless) Valor goes off the Stage.
VI. Of Learning.
CAn Learning? This to Tully does allye;
Knots-Gordian this (thorough Art) untye;
Which one no way but (by his Sword) epsy:
But did not Tully, and his Nephew dye?
Keep Learning in her (native) Orb, and thus
Shall due Respect be for Philologus.
Where Is Homer? Horace? Zeno and Prochorus?
Or Xenophon? Tertullus? Theodorus?
Where Is Plato? Plautus? Plutarch? Theophrastus?
Or Memucan? Alvarez and Erastus?
Where Is Austin with his Tract of Recantation?
Or Ambrose, modest in his Meditation?
Though Ignorance to Learning gives check,
Yet (surely) this the Sons of Adam deck.
Thus Learning in a Lord (as was of old)
Assimilates a DIAMOND in Gold.
Where Is Origin so full of Allegories?
Or Moderators in the Consistories?
Where Is Jewel, who the Truth defended well?
Or Bolton, on Death, Judgment, Heaven, Hell?
Where Is Chrysippus? his Study might have bled him,
(For ought I see) had not Melissa fed him.
Where Is Hilary for Style so greatly eyed?
Or Gregory, that was so mortified?
Where Is Basil? Beda too? so preaching then
(If one speaks Truth) the stones did cry Amen.
Where are those prying Ones of Issachar?
And where is Erasmus learnings morning Star?
Where Is CYPRIAN so worthy Martyrdom?
With very many more? but here is no room.
Where Is Moses, mighty, both in Words and Deeds?
Death (unto Death) the man in Moab bleeds.
Where Is Cranmer? Ridley? Lambert? and the rest?
Ah dead are these, and dying are the best!
II. Of Terror.
ART out of Christ? On Ebal stand I mul
And Lectures (now) not (only) read of Dus.
But (also) Wrath, that is blown into a flame:
Almighty Breath is kindler of the same.
To Souls in Christ, Death is most amiable;
Most terrible of all things formidable
To Christless Ones; yea (this) appears to me
Of HELL the very Suburbs for to be.
Ah mortal Man! If I may speak my Sense,
Infernal Dregs are in the (future) Tense.
It Is pity that an ENOSH is deterred
From (dying) Thoughts, for Bildad has averred
That Death the King of Terrors is to thee,
If Christless dying; and thus unto me.
Lend but an Ear to what the Romists say,
Rome (unto Heaven) is the (only) way:
Ah but (my Soul) go not so far about!
A Papal-Toe may (sometimes) have the Gout:
Rome's Monster goes wrong, and will not suffer
A going right; this Candle wants a Snuffer;
Yea, an Extinguisher, that lighted may
A better be, and light a (better) way.
Ah needs must Hell a dismal Dung'on be!
Where Heavens Sun shall never shine to thee.
Sin, has no Mean, but not at all to be;
Sin, is the Means for to endanger thee.
Prepare for Death; let this appear to thee
Certain; uncertain is the Time to me.
Death (if no Children) did a Rachel cry;
Ah crying be a Christ, or else I dye!
Does Death arrest, and find thee without Grace?
With Judas (then) go to thy proper place.
If (true Grace here) shall not implanted be,
Then Woe, Woe, Woe (hereafter) unto thee.
III. Of Triumph.
A Scend (my Soul) on Mount Gerizim stand;
A taking Prospect is the Holy LAND.
Be joyous Saint, no Corrosive to thee,
Of (stingless) Death can a Memento be.
Not fuller is of light the Worlds bright eye;
Nor yet the Sea with water (never dry)
Then that man's Heart with joy who (truly) see
The Death of Christ, the Death of Death to be.
Had Heaven Sin (thus Anselm speaks about it)
Much rather would He be in Hell without it.
A drop of Sin, does unto Mortals bring
More evil than a Sea of Suffering.
There may be Sorrow without Sin, but can
Sin (without Sorrow) be unto the man?
Death's an Eclipse; to man this happen may
As in a (clear) so on a (cloudy) day.
None (until Deatth) were blessed in Solon's eye;
They blessed are, that in a JESUS dye.
Ah (moment) Man! be winged like a Dove;
And restless too, till Arked with thy Love:
Solace thy self with Loves; If Christ be thine,
GALL into Honey, WATER into Wine,
Converted are: Now Marah tastes sweet;
And (lovely) will appear a (winding) sheet.
Make Death familiar; this welcome thus;
Come Life, come Death, with good Ignatius.
The presence of all Good, is Heaven; and
The absence of all Evil: Here Is a Land!
Oh then (my Soul) suck sweetly here, and crave it!
An Heaven it is to hope it; what to have it?
Thus, Time's a Space, lent from Eternity;
A Globe, that rells with (fly) Celerity:
As it is true, Aloba it is that lends it;
It is as true, Omega it is that ends it.
VI. The Epilogue.
FAith (thorough Grace) make (now) of Sacred Truth:
Must NESTOR dye? so may the Shumem-Youth.
It Is true, Life is the Triumph of each Stature;
It Is true, Death is the Tribute due to Nature.
All Ages; Statures; Sexes; Sises must,
This payment make, and bedded be in dust.
And he dyed, this Epitaph must have
Each individual, upon his Grave.
Death (ingress) had by Sin; this (sadly) wounds;
Sin (egress) has by Death; this (gladly) sounds.
Reader; the (Bodies-death) does perfectly
From (Deaths-body) the Saint indempnifie.
Death, a Dilemma is; non-plust are All,
Who enter Lists, and so Resign the Wall.
The Fear of Death, the Soul with Terror fill;
Death kills (once) but Fear does (often) kill.
A Creature (with the Ephemera) may
Be (as to Life) a Creature of a Day.
Years unto One the God of Nature gives;
Another not a Day in Nature lives:
View Nature (now) and in this (Glass) descry;
Art a Day old? then old enough to dye.
The best of Men, they are but Men at best;
The worst of Men, dye sooner than the rest.
In hearing, hear; in saying (also) say:
In trying, try; in praying (also) pray:
In doing, do; in giving (also) give:
In living, dye; in dying (also) live.
Are grace-ful Veins found running thorough Thee?
All Glory (then) be given unto THREE.
FINIS.

