King Charles the II. HIS RESTITUTION. 1 Star


The best Cure for ENGLANDS CONFVSION; OR A most Sovereign Salve for healing
the Sores of the three NATIONS.

BEING AN ALARM To the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and Commonalty to bend and
lend their Hearts, Heads and Hands unanimously for the speedy and peaceable
Restitution of their Liege, Lord and KING to his Crown and Dignity, and
recovery of their Native Country from ruin and slavery; By certain Prophecies
and Texts of holy truth properly applicable, and even parallel to the present
times and occasions in the Nations.

By Ed. Mat. a Cordial Lover of his KING and Country.

O ye Children of Israel, turn again in as much as ye are sunk deep in
Rebellion.

Isa. 3.6. Fear the Lord and the KING, and meddle not with the seditious, for
their destruction shall rise suddenly.

Prove. 24. 21, 22. Nullus est casus pro dignitate, et liberate patriae non
ferendus.

Cicer. Phil. 13. LONDON; Printed in the Year, 1660.

A Sovereign Salve for healing the Sores of the Nation.
IT IS storyed of Craesus King of Lydia, that when a dumb Son of his, saw a
Traitor ready to stab his Father, he conquered the natural impediments of
speech, and distinctly cried out, kill not the King. That which wrought this
wonder, was the power of natural affection, by the operation of an
extraordinary Sympathy. Surely they are chargeable with a more then brutish
(even insensate) stupidity and want of affection and Sympathy, who will not now
use, what nature ordinarily affords to all (speech at least) yea employ the
primest powers and faculties of soul and body, not the tongue and pen only but
hearts, heads, and hands also, to rescue their dear mother, their native
Country from ruin and slavery and restore the Father thereof, their liege
Sovereign Lord and King, to his just rights Crown and dignity, and preserve
both from the destructive designs and Traitorous attempts contrived and
intended against them. An honest Heathen will not be bribed by the offer of
immortality to do his Country injury, ne immortalitatem contra patriam
acceperim.

It Is a fire in bones and I cannot suppress it, etc.

David's zeal on this occasion is to be desired if I forget thee O England, let
my right hand forget etc. if I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to
the roof of my mouth, yea if I prefer not the good of my King and Country to
my chief joy, Psalm. 137.5, 6.

This duty puts the pen into my hand, and (without paint of Apology) presses
me (though least able of any) to declare how dangerously the States Empericks
practice upon the Bodies Politic of great Britain and Ireland; making it (as
the evil one) their main work to propagate the since of their rebellion unto
others, otherwise well affected loyal and fai^thful to their King and Country:
and their poisonous pills are gilded with the pretense of piety, the public
peace, and safety of the people; whereas sad experience too truly shows,
nothing is produced, but oppression and slavery, confusion and calamity both in
Church and State to the three Nations; a flourishing glorious Commonweald is
pretended and promised, whilst a common woe and misery, is the sole fruit we
find of these golden promises. And the principal design of the contrivers
hereof, being to make themselves Masters of those, that deserve better servants
then themselves, to continue an unlimited command and domination over the
Nations, exercise an arbitrary power over the people, forcing them by an Army
(which the people must also maintain) to submit to their insupporable
oppressive taxes and impositions; assuming to themselves, the disposition of
all the wealth and treasure, places of profit, trust and honor in the three
Kingdoms, yea arrogating a power over the lives, liberties, and estates of the
freeborn people thereof.

By this time, I hope it is clear day, even their eyes whose unwillingnesse to
believe it, made them as blind as Bartimeus, are now open and awake; to see how
sadly a settled happy Government is subverted our lawful liberties infringed,
our fundamental laws contemned and everted, and freemen made vassals to vile
usurpers, so that we may take up that sad lamentation with Jeremiah, Lam. 5.5,
8, 12, 14, 15, 16. Our necks are under persecution: we are weary and have no
rest: Servants have ruled over us, none would deliver us out of their hands.
The Princes are hanged up by their hands: the faces of the Elders were not had
in honor. The Elders ceased from the gate; there is no law nor form of
Government, the joy of our heart is gone, our dance is turned into mourning.
The Crown of our head is fallen, woe now unto us, that we have sinned, ver. 12,
14, 15, 16. Our Idolatry of a pretended Parliament and rebellion against our
King, has brought this woe upon us whiles we waited for our vain help, our
eyes fail for in our waiting, we looked for a people that could not save us,
Sam. 4.17. There the Prophet sets forth a twofold cause of Isreal's
destruction, their cruelty and their vain confidence in an arm of flesh, which
is cursed. Jer. 17.5. Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh
his arm, and Isa. 31.1, 3. Woe unto them that stay upon their horses and trust
in horsemen: the help, and the helped shall fall and fail together.

The Breath of our Nostrels, the anointed of the Lord was taken in their nets,
of whom we said under his shadow, we shall be preserved, our good King Josiah
is slain by them ver. 20. does not the Prophet speak of our times think ye? I
am sure it is a perfect parallel of our present condition. And not unlike to
this, is that of the Prophet Isaiah, where a Chaos like confusion is described.
The Nobles thereof shall call to the Kingdom, and there shall be none none,
and all the Princes thereof shall be as nothing, Isa. 34.12. etc. Intimating
that there shall be neither order, nor policy, nor state, nor Commonweal, a
sad presage for any place or people: yet this has been the portion of these
Nations, for almost twenty years last past.

God by his Prophet Zachariah sharply charge Israel, as justly he may
England, with great ingratitude, which would not be ruled by his most
beautiful order of Government, nor continue in the bands of brotherly unity;
and therefore he breaks the two staves of beauty and bands; the beauty of
orderly Government, and bands of unity, Zech. 11. Not unlike that judgment
denounced against Israel, for the wild Grapes: I will take away the hedge and
fence from the vineyard, Isa. 5.4.5. etc. So the Foxes of the Wood and the
Bores of the Forest may devour and destroy. So here the Lord menaceth them
with merciless destructive Governors, who should consume them without any
remorse, thinking they did no evil. They that possess them slay them, and sin
nor: and they that sell them say, blessed be the Lord for I am rich: Zech.
11.5. etc. Their own sheephards spare them not: A just judgment, upon them that
spared not their mild and gentle Ruler, therefore oppressing Hypocrites are
set over them; who have the name of God in their mouths, but in their doings
deny God; attributing their gain to Gods blessing, which comes of the spoil
of their brethren: and for those and such like accounts have days set apart
for public thanksgiving.

The Children of Israel (says the Prophet Hosea) shall remain many days
without a KING, and without a Prince, and without an Offering, and without an
Ephod, and without Teraphim, etc. Hosea 3.4 signifying that they should have
neither Religion nor Policy, Ecclesiastical nor Civil Government, and their
Idols wherein they trusted should be destroyed, as the margent renders it.
Has not this prophesy had full accomplishment in England? has not that
Beautiful and flourishing Government both in Church and State settled, and
famous throughout Christendom, been not for many days only, but many years
broken and interrupted? and the Idolized Parliament the cause thereof, and many
other doleful breaches in the Nations, often also dissolved, and now totally
determined, and infamously branded with an odious name of unfavoury reproach?
and their pillars of power, their arm of flesh shrunk up, and like Jeroboams
hand withered, most of their principal Officers cashiered, etc. who sees not
the hand of God herein? none but digitus dei has done this.

The Prophet proceeds in the next verse to prescribe a cure for this confusion,
verse. 5. Afterward shall the Children of Israel return, convert, and seek the
Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord, and his
Goodness in latter days. The accomplishment hereof is at hand, The Lord has
touched the hearts of the People, and now after they have tasted the bitter
fruit arising and growing from the root of Rebellion, which bears naught but
the wormwood of woe and wretchedness, and the gall of grief and oppression,
they feel and find the want of their gracious KING, and of an happy Government
under him, and resolve to return from Rebellion, and call home their banished,
and restore their lawful KING CHARLES, the most renouned Prince in Christendom
to his rightful Throne and Dominion.

The same Prophet proceeds, cap. 10. to show how the great disposer, in whose
hands are the hearts of both King. and People, has changed the Subjects
hearts; so that in stead of their former crucifige's, they are now ready to
receive their King with Hosannahs and Allelviahs, and to make Recantation of
their rebellion; their heart is divided, and now are they found faulty: for now
they shall say we have no King: because we feared not the Lord: is not our
condition correspondent to Isreal's in that respect? may we not say truly, that
the want of the fear of God has been the cause we have so long wanted our
Kin?g behold says the Lord the voice of the cry of the people; is not the Lord
in Zion, Jer. 8.19. in England? Is not her King in her? why have they provoked
me to anger? intimating that, as an argument of his displeasure, has nor the
Government been tossed and tumbled from hand to hand, and none stands, still
remains unsettled? Has not the Lord divided the hearts of the people and still
continues a spirit of division among them, that they shall not unite, until he
come whose right it is to rule these Nations? Set up what Governors or
Government you can, with all your turning devises, contrive to resist your true
King, there is a mean, mean, etc. ordained for prevention of all your designs.
The hand writing on the wall shall set you on shaking, so that all your powers
and policys shall fall and fail, a tremor cordis shall possess you, trembling
of soul shall cerify you, and God shall blast all those unjust enterprises,
that tend to the resistance of the Kings restitution, with a triple defeat and
disappointment. According to that of the Prophet Ezekiel. 21.27. I will overturn,
overturn, overturn, and it shall be no more, until he come whose right it is
and I will give it him.

But hereof more in the next, this being but the first of seven stars, which
(by divine assistance) shall be set forth to shine as bright beams and
illustrious rays of the Sun like glory of this right Royal Plant of Renown.

FINIS.

