A DECLARATION TO THE City and Kingdom, FROM Major General Massey, Sir
William Waller, Colonel Birch,
And the rest rest of the Impeached Members of Parliament;

CONC^RNING The proceedings of the Lord General Fairfax, and the Army; and
their Protestation to the people of England, touching the Parliament.

ALSO, Major General Browns Declaration and Speech to the Lord General
Fairfax, touching the King, the Prince of Wales, the Duke of York, the
Parliament, City, and Kingdom.

AND The Declaration of his Excellency the Lord General, to the Kingdom of
England, and his Resolution thereupon.

LIKEWISE, A new Covenant and Agreement from the Army, to be tendered to all
free born Englishmen, throughout the City of London, and the respective
Counties within the Kingdom of England.

Dec. 18th Printed for C. VV. near the Royal Exchange, 1648.

A DECLARATION TO THE KINGDOM FROM [Major General Massey, Sir William Waller,
Commissary Copley, and the rest of the impeached Members concerning the
proceedings of the Army*
Fellow-Commoners, and Contrymen,
WHereas, there has been lately a most high attempt and violation put upon the
House o^ Commons, by the Army, under the Command of Thomas Lord Fairfax;
Therefore, We, whose names are hereunto subscribed, being Members thereof, and
Freeborn subjects of the Realm of England, Do hereby Declare, and protest, in
the presence of the Almighty Jehovah of Heaven, That the General and Officers
of the Army, being raised by the authority of Parliament and for defense and
maintenance of the privileges thereof; have not power or jurisdiction to
apprehend, secure, detein, imprison, or remove our persons from place to place
by any color or authority whatsoever; nor yet to question or try us or any of
us by Martial Law, or otherwise, for any offense or crime whatsoever; nor yet
to question or try us, or any of us by Martial Law, or otherwise, for any
offense or crime whatsoever, which can or shall be objected against us; And
that the present imprisonment and removal of our persons is a high violation of
the rights and privileges of Parliament, and of the fundamental Laws of the
Land, and a higher usurpation and exercise of an arbytrary and unlawful power,
then has been heretofore pretended to, or attempted by this, of any King, or
other power whatsoever, within this Realm; notwithstanding which, we and every
of us do declare our readiness to submit our selves to the lawful trial of a
free Parliament, f^r any crime or misdemeanour that can or shall be objected
against Us.

Subscribed, Edwa^d Massey, William Waller, Thomas Birch.


Major Genesis Browns Speech to the Lord Genesis Fairfax.
TO be your prisoner, is by much the less displeasing to me, for that my
Accusation is for nothing else but Loyalty to the King and Parliament, and the
endeavors which I have undertaken to prevent the subversion of his Majesty,
and his posterity, Parliament, City, and Kingdom, the final loss of Common
right and freedom of all the subjects of England, the utter extirpation of all
Law, Government and Religion, and the preposterous converting of our well
regulated Monarchy into that monstrous conception, a Military, Anarchy, with a
popular parliament of the meanest of the Commons, and such also of them only,
as shall be constantli at the beck of the Army.

His Excellencies Declaration.
WHereas, in the adventuring of our lives and blood, we have sought nothing
more then the prosperity of this Kingdom, and the establishing of Justice and
Righteousness in the Land; so there is nothing that we more abhor then those
wicked calumnies, that we should invade the propriety of any not wilfully
making themselves, or do any thing any way, to hinder or obstruct that Trade
and Commerce by which this Kingdom does most subsist and flourish: But that we
shall, in a most special manner, protect, defend, encourage and maintain, in all
just ways, all manner of Trade and Commerce, either by English or Strangers:
and that we shall neither do, nor suffer to be done, as far as is in our power,
any violence or injury, to the persons or goods of any, either by Sea or Land.

The Desires of the Soldiery to their General.
Whereas it has pleased the Lord of Hosts to write his name upon your Sword in
very legible characters, as appears upon record twice, viz. in the year -- 45,
where we had 114 Victories, and now this last Summer above 30, even to our
astonishment, who were used by you in that service, that those proud Billows in
Wales, England, and Scotland, have bin bounded and calmed, in less then six
months, yet behold, we have our sorrows repeated, and our fears increased,
making our wounds even to bleed afresh.

Wherefore, we desire, in the name of our selves, and the abused and betrayed
people of England, that your Excellency will be pleased to assist us, in these
ensuing requests and groans of our souls, which may not long be denied us,
lest we faint or struggle as we can for the life of good men, and a good Cause.

1. That justice may suddenly and equally be dispensed, according to the
desires of our honored friends in London, Liecestershire, and others
manifested by their several Petitions, and the Parliaments Declaration
concerning the Kings evil asserted, or bewailed, and repented of. 2 That your
Army be instantly reckoned withal, and paid and so dealt with for future (if
they must be used) that every Reg. may know their own country, and there
receive their pay immediately, without any other Treasurers or ways of trouble,
that so the people themselves may see what they have for their money. In this
we are impatient, or so passionately affected, that we gasp for help: this
Regiment has had but one months pay since May, having marched 1300 miles this
Summer. 3 That the people may know in print, with all speed, which way all
public moneys are disposed of in all counties and places* and that of all
kinds, which may be done, if every collector and receiver of money be forthwith
enjoined to print their receipts and disbursments; for if the soldiers be not
paid, the people ask what is become of the Revenue, Compositions, Sequestrations,
Excise, Lands, etc. 4 That we may have just and righteous Government settled in
this Nation, advancing Godliness, we abhorring Anarchy, Confusion, and
levelling men's estates; so often charged upon us: for which end, we desire
these two things, in pursuance of which (by help from Heaven) we are resolved
to venture all.


First that the grand and capital enemies, may without delay, be brought to
Justice, which is the maine root of our misery, we finding all other ways
attempted altogether invalid to carty on this work of common safety.

Secondly, for the dispatch of Justice upon all Delinquents for rectifying all
crooked things among us, and for the good of us, and the Generations to come,
we humbly conceive our last and surest way will be for your Excellency and this
army, to make a speedy offer to the Commons house in your name and the Armies,
and in the behalf of all England, that such of them as have been faithful to
the Kingdoms interest, to declare with you and the Nation; and that the
contrary minded, false, royal, and neutral party may know, that our enemies
must not be our rulers, we professing, that good men, rather then good laws
must save us, though we disjoyn them not. And if any shall object, we put
violence upon authority, we hereby proclaim to the world, that neither your
Excellency, nor our selves, have received Co^missions from the parl as now
constituted, but from that good party in it, who strugled through many hazards
to model this army for the kingdoms safety; not are we to attend forms and
customs in this extremity; we can as willingly s^t down as march, suffer, as
act, would but the godly party in the Kingdom call us thereunto, and think
themselves preserved by it.

But the people call to us for these things, and we to your Excellency, your
known worth inviting us hereunto: in prosecution of which, as an unparaller'd
instrument, we shall live or die with your Excellency, having solemnly
promised, to attempt and attend these two last expedients through all hazard.
We cannot so undervalue our God, and the rich experienre we have had in the
behalf of this Nation, as to see them lie (like Issachar) under these sinful
burdens, our colds nakedness, want hunger, hardship, difficulties, dangers,
out of which our blessed, and ever to be praised God has brought us,
suggesting these things unto us, for that flock of slaughter in this Kingdom.

Sir, we can die, but not endure to see our Mother England die before us.

A new Breviate for the Agreement of the people.
1 That to prevent the many inconveniences apparently arising from the ^ong
continuance of the same persons in authority, this present Parl. be dissolyed
upon or before the last day of April, in the year of our Lord, 1649. 2 That the
people of England being at this day very unequally distributed, by Counties,
Cities, or Buroughs, for the election of their Representatives, be more
indifferently proportioned, and to this end, that the Representative of the
whole Nation, shall consist of 300. persons. 3 That 150 members at least be
always present in each sitting of the Representatives, at the lost passing of
any Law, or doing of any Act whereby the people are to be bound 4 That the
power of the peoples Representatives extend to the enacting, altering
repeeling, and declaring of Laws; to the erecting and abolishing Officers of
Courts of Justice, and to whatsoever is not in this agreement excepted or
reserved from them. Lastly and particularly, we do not empower our
Representatives, to continue in foace or make any Law, Oaths or Covenants,
whereby to compel by penalties or otherwise, any person any to any thing, in
or about matters of faith* religion, or Gods Worship, or to restrain any person
from professing his faith, or exercise of Religion, according to his
conscience, in any place or house whatsoever.
THE END.

