THE Copy of a Letter written From DERMOND MACCONNOR, One of the Chiefetaines
of the Irish Rebels, unto the King of Spain, for Aid and Assistance against
the English, and Protestants, being brought by an English Merchant from Madrid
and Translated out of the Spanish Original.

ALSO, A Copy of another Letter written from Lisbon in Portugal, concerning
the execution of 4. Noblemen, 4. Gentlemen, and 3. Bishops, and one of the
Inquisition.

All Traitors against the King of Portugal, JOHN the fourth.

And to make up the 13th. the Bishop of Lamego, who had lately Crowned the
King, yet since found guilty, with others, in a great Treason and cruel
Massacre plotted, intending to kill the King of Portugal, his Queen, his
Son, and two Daughters, and to burn the Palace, and City, all in one day.

London, Printed for R. Harford, 1642.

A Letter from DERMOND MAC CONNOR, one of the Chiefetaines of the Irish Rebels,
unto the King of Spain.
Most Mighty Monarch,
I Humbly Salute Your Imperial Majesty, Giving Your Highness to understand
of our great misery, and violent order, wherewith we have been of long time
oppressed by the English Nation. Their government has been such, as Pharach
himself never used the like; for they contented not themselves with all
temporal Superiority, but by cruelty desired our blood, and perpetual
destruction, to blot out the whole remembrance of our Progeny, as also our old
Catholic Religion, and to swear that the King of England is Supreme of the
Church. I refer the consideration hereof to your Majesty's high judgment,
for that Nero in his time never used that kind of cruelty. Wherefore, and for
the respects thereof, high and mighty Potentate, my self with my followers and
retainers, And being also requested by the Prelates, Priests, and Religious men
of my Country, have drawn my sword, and proclaimed wars against them, for
the recovery, first, of Christ's Catholic Religion, and next for the
mainetenance of mine own right, which of long time, has been wrongfully
detained from me, and my Father; who by right Succession was lawful heir to
the Earldom of Cormock, for he was eldest Son to Lames my Grandfather, who
was Earl of Cormock. And for that my Uncle Gerald (being the younger brother)
took part with the wicked proceedings of the late Queen of England, to
further the unlawful claim of Supremacy, usurped the named of Earl of
Cormock, being my Fathers true Title: Yet notwithstanding, he had not long
enjoyed his name of Earl, when the wicked English annoyed him, and prosecuted
wars; insomuch that he with the most part that held of his side were slain,
and his Country thereby planted with Englishmen. And now by the just
judgment, and providence of God, I have utterly rooted those mallepert weeds
out of the Orchard of my Country, and have profited so much in my proceedings,
that my dastardly enemies dare not show their faces in any part of my Country,
but having taken my Towns and Cities for their refuge and strength, where they
do remain (as it were Prisoners) for want of means to assail them, as Canon
and Powder, which my Country does not yield

Having these wants (Most noble Potentate) I have presumed, with all humility,
to address these my Letters to your high Majesty, Craving the same of your
gracious Clemency and goodness, to assist me in this godly enterprise, with
some help of such necessaries for the wars, as your Majesty shall think
requisite: And (after the quiet of my Country) Satisfaction shall be made for
the same, and my self in person, with all my Forces, shall be ready to serve
your Highness in any Country your Majesty shall command me.

And if your Majesty will vouchase to send me a competent number of
Soldiers, I will place them in some of my Towns and Cities, to remain in
your Gracious disposition, till such time as my ability shall make good, what
your Majesty shall lend me in Money and Munition; And also your Majesty's high
Commission under your broad Seal, for leading and conducting of these
Soldiers, according to the prescript order and articles of Martial
discipline, as your Majesty shall appoint me, and as the service of the Land
shall require: I praise the Almighty God, I have done, by his goodness, more
then all my predecessors; for I have reclaimed all the Nobility of this part
under the dutiful obedience of Christ's Church, and mine own authority, and
accordingly have taken pledges and corporal oaths never to swerve from the
same; And would have sent them to your Majesty by this bearer, but that the
ship was not of sufficiency and strength to carry so noble personages, and will
send them whenever your highness please: So there rests nothing to quiet
this part of the World, but your Majesty's assistance, which I daily expect:
Thus most mighty Monarch, I humbly take my leave, and do kiss your Royal
hand, beseeching the Almighty for your Majesty's health and happiness: From my
camp, the 24. day of December 1641.

Your Majesty's most humble at all command CORMOCK.


COnsider I beseech thee (Gentle Reader) into what proud arrogance, and
audations insolency, this Arch-Traytor is elevated (like a vapor in a Sunshine
day) now that blind Fortune laughs upon him; (Our King, the most gracious
Prince in the World) is with him a Tyrant, the English all cowards, the Cities
and walled Towns all his, and the Connaght Nobility subdued under his
authority. Was there ever Rebel so far transported with ambitious
presumption, beyond the limits of reason? is it not sufficient for him like
cursed Shimei, or black mouthed railing Rabshakch, to revile the Lords
anointed, but he must challenge his territories, his Cities, his people, and
his Nobility, (whom he and his Ancestors had created) to be his own, who
has no portion, nor inheritance in any part thereof, being the Impe of a born
Bastard? But surely, I must persuade my self all this is permitted by the
unsearchable Sapience of the All-seeing Deity, that he may for ever be pointed
at, as an exemplary mirror of all insolent Traitors.

And as for the King of Spain, whom he calls to assist and support him in
this his current of Murders, Rapines, and Rebellion; We conceive he will not
so far forget himself, and his league with us, as to regard their wicked
inticements, of whose little trust, and less worth, his Predecessors have had
sufficient experience; especially at this time, when as he has such store of
employment, for both his hands, in other places; but if he think fit to
begin the breach, and to thrust his Iron into this fire also; let him not
doubt to find that England has hearts and hands to repel all injuries, and to
vindicate her right, and honor, as well now, as heretofore.

A Copy of another Letter written from LISBON in PORTVGALL.
THere have bin brought unto the Place of Execution, the Marquess de Villa
Real, and his Son, the Duke de Camucha; together with the Earl de Armamar,
and Don Augustino Manuel; they were lodged that night at the house of Diego
Duarta. Presently after, there was in the same night set up a Scaffold in the
midst of the Place of Execution; made with steps or degrees of Assent; upon
the highest step there were set two Chaires, and made fast, one for the Duke,
and the other for his Father: and on another step lower there was set a chair
for the Earl of Armamar; and upon the boards lower there was set another
chair for Don Augustino Manuel: so that they all did sit upon chaires, or
stools, but one higher than the other. And there was made a Gallery from the
house, (wherein they were) unto the Scaffold all hung with Baies. After that,
there were two high gallows set up, one at the side of S. Antonies gate, and
the other in the Street named Escudeiros; so that the Scaffold was in the
midst. The next day between eleven and twelve of the clock there came unto the
windows of the House four Corrigidours of the Court, and some authorized
Officers Thereupon came the Marquess de Villa Real with a Monteere upon his
head, a little stick in his hand, and with a Cloak about him. After that he
had made the first Step, he fell upon his Knees, and made an elegant Speech,
or lamentation, with great constancy, more than was thought; Then the Herald
at Arms began presently to cry, The King our Lord desires, that Right be
done: Don Lonys, late Marquis de Villa Real, Traitor against the person of
the King, and for the good of the Kingdom, and of the Common People; shall be
beheaded, his Goods confiscated for the Royal Exchequer, and his memory
banished out of the world. The Marquess came, as I mentioned before, upon the
Scaffold, with great courage, and sat down upon the chair: then came the
executioner, made his body and arms fast, and cut off his head; and presently
the Marquess was covered with a garment of Bays. This being done, the Duke
his son, came forth, accompanied as the Father; and the Herald cried, as
before, until the Duke, came unto the Chair, upon which his Fathers body was,
before whose feet he kneeled down (kissing the same a thousand times and
craved time, To say one Pater noster for his Fathers Soul. Which being done,
he went unto his seat, but more fainthearted, and so was beheaded, and
covered. Then came the Earl of Armamar (with a common Doore-keeper,) and Don
Augustino Manuel, which were executed likewise. Besides Pero de Baessa and
Belchior Correnda Franca, were hanged up at the side of Saint Anthonies-gate;
And in the Street, named Esondeiros, there hung Manuel Valente, and a Clerk;
Whereupon all the people began to part, and to Cry, God save Don John the
Fourth.

Two hours after, the four hanged were quartered, and their quarters carried
away. But (believe me) this relation, and spectacle following does change my
blood, viz: The two Bishops, and with them, the Bishop de Braga, and the
Inquisitor Mor, for the same Treason, are cast into the Tower of Belem, into
deep Pits, which run under the water, wherein there is no light, to end their
lives there. The Bishop de Braga recanted not, but said to his last, that King
Philip was his Lord, and that he did lose his life for him. The rest confessed
their crimes, and always cried for the mercy of the King, Don John the Fouth;
and especially, the Marquess de Villa Real, who had written 3. or 4. sheers of
paper, craving his mercy; but the King had committed it unto Justice, and
therefore would not intermeddle in pardoning any one of them. Beassa would
confess nothing, and dyed resolutely.

Since that time, the Dutch Printed Coranto relates, A Discovery of a great
Treason and cruel Massacre, plotted by 25. persons, wherein there are many of
the Grandees of the Land, some of those 25. are taken. Their intent was to kill
the King of Portugal, his Queen, his Son, and two Daughters, and to burn
the Palace and City upon one day. The Bishop of Lamego in Portugal has been
since hanged at Lisbon being found guilty of this conspiracy: This was he,
that had put the Crown upon his Majesty's head. And besides, 8. others have
been han'gd.

J remain your Servant, etc.


FINIS.

