AN ANSWER BY LETTER TO A WORTHY GENTLEMAN Who desired of a Divine some reasons
by which it might appear how Inconsistent PRESBYTERIALL GOVERNMENT IS WITH
MONARCHY. In which the Platform of that Government is briefly delineated, with
the tenants and suitable practices thereof. And withal it is demonstrated,
that it is inconsistent with any government whatsoever; is full of Faction,
Sedition and Treason; an enemy to all Peace, Domestical, Neighbourly,
Brotherly, etc. against Sovereign authority, authority of all Judges, and
Iudicatories, entrenching upon all so far, as there can be no liberty of
Person, Trade, Commerce or Propriety, but at their pleasure who bear sway
therein.

Printed, Anno 1644.

Sir,
YEsterday you desired me to give you some proofs, by which it may appear how
inconsistent Presbyteriall Government is with Monarchy. You were pleased to
tell me that some good and worthy men do desire to be satisfied in this point.

It seems these men do not think that Presbyteriall Government is
destructive of the true necessary and perpetual Government of the Church,
which is Episcopacie: instituted by Christ, propagated by his Apostles, and
continued by uninterrupted Practice above 1500 years in the Church, and to
this day retained in the greatest part of the Christian world. We deceive our
selves, to promise or expect to King or Kingdom, Prince or Subject, Peace and
safety, or deliverance from our troubles and distresses, if we subordinate
Fundamentalls in Religion, necessary truths, of faith, worship and government,
to our public or private civil good. Nor am I able to express how high an
Impiety it is, at this time when God's hand is out against us justly for our
sins, to be so disposed and fixed upon a resolution, that to redeem external
Peace, we will embrace any Government of the Church, provided it be consistent
with Monarchy: and will not scruple, not only to shake off the true and
necessary government instituted by our Lord, but by Law, endeavor by highest
authority to condemn it as Antichristian. If this be not to frame mischief by
a Law, I know not what is. If this provoke not more wrath, more vengeance, make
not the Land spew us all out, I am infinitely deceived. We may promise to our
selves that by such a course we may say like to the man in the Gospel, Soul
take thy rest for many days, but it fears me the success and event shall be
much like to his case. Sir, I pray you consider what Peace has King or
Kingdom enjoyed here or in Ireland, since Episcopacy in Scotland by Law was
damned, and the Presbyterian Anarchie (the Seminary of all fude Faction and
Rebellion as will appear by what ensues) by Law and Supreme authority
established.

I cannot dissemble, but to a man of your worth and Integrity I must unfold my
self: I admire to see too too many amongst us here (where is great plenty of
able Gentlemen of excellent learning, worth, wit, and all other perfections and
endowments, as in any Nation besides) to be so prepared that they are too too
inclinable, if not actually resolved, to admit and authorize in this Kingdom
and Church what they know not: and to forsake that happy Native proper
government of the Church, the sweet fruits of which they have reaped so many
years to the admiration, if not envy, of other Kingdoms, States and Churches.
This is Samaritan-like to worship that we know not. Or Athenian-like to
consecrate an Altar and to sacrifice to an Ioh. ^
unknown God. Act. 17.


Your worth and noble favors oblige me so much to you, that I cannot choose but
obey your command. And for your satisfaction, I present you with a short view
(as in a Map) of Presbyteriall Government: give you a little touch of their
Maxims, and suitable Practices, and that with as much truth and honesty as
your goodness expects from me. By which it will be more then apparent, that
Presbytery, as it is at this day somewhere within His Majesty's Dominions, is
not only inconsistent but also destructive of Monarchy; And where it
obtains, it disturbeth the quiet and peace public and private of King and
Kingdom. This is that you desire, and to satisfy you, to this I confine my
self.

This Presbyteriall government within it is verge has four Iudicatories. 1. A
Parochial Session. 2. A Presbyteriall Consistory. 3. A Provincial Synod. 4.
A General Assembly. The Parochial Session moves in the lowest Sphere. The
General Assembly is the Primum mobile, the highest Orb, which carries all
with it is motion, although the rest have their proper and specific motions.
The other two are in the middle, and interjected Orbs. I shall begin at the
lowest Iudicatorie, and so shall orderly ascend to the Supreams.

Of the Parochial Session.
EVery Parish has one or more Ministers. If more, all 1. Of the Session, how
and of whom constituted.
of them are equal in all honor and jurisdiction, only the Senior has the
precedencie. To the Minister, or Ministers of each Parish, to make up a
Session, in which is fixed the Parochial Jurisdiction, a competent number of
Lay Elders, (whom they call, presbyteri non docentes) and Deacons,
proportionable to the precinct and extent of the Parish, are conjoined: which
associate body thus compacted, is the Spirituall-Parochiall-Sanhedrim.

This Session sits once a week, or oftener, pro re nata: In which all Parochial
cases, which concern external order and censure, are determined and ordered.

If there be but one Minister in the Parish, he is constant The Minister is
Moderator.
Moderator; If there be more, they moderate by turns, either weekly, or
monthly, as they agree.

Whatsoever thing is ordered, determined, or decreed, He has no Negative Voice.
is done by the joynt-consents of the Minister, Lay Elders, and Deacons, or by
the plurality of voices. The Minister, who is the Moderator, has no casting,
no Negative Voice.

The power of all Jurisdiction, is radically, and equally in all: for binding,
for loosing, for all censures Ecclesiastical, The Jurisdiction spiritual is
radically in the Lay Elders.
for orders which concern external order and worship. So the Power of the
Keys is as much in the Lay Elders, and Deacons, as in the Minister or
Ministers. What sacrilegious intrusion upon sacred Orders this is, I need not
inform one of your understanding.

To make this frame good, they maintain that Iure divino there be four orders
of Ecclesiastical offices, (allow Their four sacred Ordes.
me to speak in this Epistle all along their dialect) or persons. 1.
Preaching-Elders, whom they call Ministers. 2. Doctors, these are professors in
the Chair, such as are in Universities. 3. Lay, or ruling-Elders, who now have
vocem deliberativam and decisivam in rebus fidei, Cultus, politiae, and in foro
exteriori Ecclesiae, in censuris Ecclesiasticis are as much interessed and
authorized, as Preaching-Elders. 4. Deacons, who have trust of the means, and
moneys destinated for pious and charitable uses.

This is very considerable too, that although they hold these four orders and
offices necessary for the Government of Christ's Church, de Iure divino, by
divine Right and Institution; yet neither the Parochial Conclave, nor any
Presbyteriall Consistory (except it be where the Presbyteriall seat is in a
City where an University is) have any Doctor or Doctors amongst them. Nay which
is more, nor be any such in their general Assemblies, or if they be, they
appear only in that capacity as Commissioners from, and for the University.

It is worth your notice taking, that their Lay Elders This year they are
saered, the next year profane.
and Deacons are yearly elected. Here is truly verified of them, that, Hodie
Clericus, cras Laicus.

The things within the compass of Session-jurisdiction, are, things merely
Parochial, the ordering of the Parish Church The competent cases of this
Session.
and peculiar Service, the censure of lesser Scandalls (I must speak their
words) as Fornication, Drunkenness, Scolding, Profanation of the Sabbath (they
mean the Lords day) etc. Capital Scandalous crimes, or Scandalls of Highest
strain, are reserved as cases of peculiar jurisdiction for the Presbytery; as
also lesser offenses when they are attended with Obstinacy, and what is
censurable or punishable by the greater Excommunication. If I mistake not, they
know not much, at least use not much the Lesser Excommunication. In the cases
above mentioned the Cognition, Examination, and Judgment of the cause is
proper to the Presbytery, the Minister with his Parochial Conclave, are only
the Executioners. If any parochial difficult case occur, which this
Parochial Sanhedrim cannot determine, the use is to consult with the
Presbytery.

When the Session censureth any delinquent, or Scandalous They enjoin civil
punishments and sines.
person, they order his public and Solemn repentance (if by some superior
judicatorie it be not determined) as they think fit by plurality of voices:
after performance of which order, the penitent is received into the communion
of the Church. But before the delinquent be admitted to do his Repentance, he
is fined in a pecuniary mulct, at their discretion, proportioned to the demerit
of the offense, and the ability of the Person, as he is poorer or richer. It is
true, this money is, for the most part, employed to pious and charitable uses.
As they punish by Pecuniary fines, so corporally too, by imprisoning the
persons of the Delinquents using them disgracefully, carting them through
Cities, making them stand in Iogges, as they call them, Pillaries, (which in
the Country Churches are fixed to the two sides of the main door of the Parish
Church) cutting the half of their Hair, shaving their Beards, etc. and it is
more then ordinary, by their Original and Proper power, to banish them out of
the bounds and limits of the Parish, or Presbytery, as they list to order it.
Is not this potest as utriusque gladii? and would not a good Learned Iurist
say, that this is not only intrusion upon meeriy civil power, but upon the
very Royal Rights themselves? The Imperial Law, if I be not mistaken, makes
banishment so peculiar to the Sovereign Authority, that without it is power and
consent, it cannot be inflicted upon any civis, any Subject.

Their ordinary practice more in this is; that when a They will not baptize the
child, if either of the parents have not paid the fine or satisfied the Church.
pecuniary mulct is inflicted, if the delinquent pay not the defined and
determined sum, or at least give security for the payment of it, although he
should testify all the contrition is requisite, by humble confession, and offer
most willingly to do all penance, to give all satisfaction, he will not be
admitted to satisfy publicly: nay he is proceeded against for Contumacie, and
they will threaten Excommunication.

Nor is that to be passed by, that if a Child be borne in Fornication, and
either of the Parents has not satisfied the Church; they will refuse to
Baptize the poor infant, till the Church get satisfaction. This is consonant
with Scripture, anima quae peccaverit, ipsa moriotur. It is fit now in the next
place to speak of

The Presbytery.
Which is the next Iudicatory, to which the Session is subordinate. It has in
it somewhere more, somewhere fewer Parish-Churches; as some are made up of
Twenty, some of Twelve, some of fewer.

All persons within these Parishes, within the precinct of this Presbytery, of
what quality soever (the King, or His family herein are not exempted; nay nor
from the jurisdiction of His Parochial Session) are under the power and
jurisdiction of this grand Consistory.

The members Constituents of this Presbytery are all The membe^^ constituents
of the Presbytery.
the Parochial Ministers within its compass, and a Lay-Elder for each Parish.
The Lay Elders are in number equal to the Preaching Elders; and in power,
voice, Jurisdiction, in Haeresie, Idolatry, Worship, Censure, etc. are part
consortio honoris and potestatis praediti, are so equal and un^^o^me, that a
Plowman from the Plow, or a Tradesman from his shop, sitting there in the
capacity of a Lay-Elder, his voice is as good as the voice of the most Reverend
and Learned Divine, if any be there. They maintain a parity in all, only a
little difference in this, that a Lay-Elder cannot be Moderator. Yet have they
no Canon for it. And we are able to prove by their books, that men who were
never in Sacred Orders of Priest or Bishop, have been Moderators, not only of
their Presbytery, but of their so much Idolized General Assembly. Mr Robert
Yoole, who was never Priest, nor Deacon, only Reader in St Andrews, was in one
turn, for a year, or half a year, or some lasting time, Moderator of the
Ptesbyterie of Saint Andrews, and Mr George Buchanan, who was never Churchman,
and Mr Andrew Melvil who had never the Order of Deacon, both of them have been
Moderators of their great General Assembly.

The cases proper to this Iudicatory, are first, such as The cases proper to it.
are from every individual Parish within its compass referred, or presented.
2. All crimes and scandalls of highest strain, namely such as are civilly
punishable by death. 3. All crimes which come under the censure of
Excommunication. 4. All appeals from Sessions. 5. All differences which cannot
be composed or determined in the Parochial Conclave. 6. The visitation and
censure of all what is amiss in every Parish, either in Preacher or other. 7.
The appoynting of Readers, and Schoolemasters.

They meet once a week in some places, in other places only once a fort-night.
All the ministers in their several The time of meeting.
turns, at their meeting Exercise, as they call it; that is, there is
appointed by the Presbytery, some one book of old, or new New Testament, which
every one by turns in his own course interprets in the Parish Church, where
the Presbytery does meet. Two always speak, the first from the Readers Desk or
Pew; the other, in some other place distant from him, but convenient for
hearing. The first Analyseth, Interprets, and takes away the doubts of his
Text; and (as they enjoyne) he is bound to the doctorall part. The second, when
the first has done, adds to what is said: has a warrant to supply the
defects, or correct the errors of the first speaker; but especially his charge
is the Pastoral part, to apply the text, and bring it home to the affections.

There be Ingredients in this Exercise, such as God's Church before this late
age never knew, a kind of Creatures Lay Preachers.
whom they call Expectants. These are students in Divinity, or Country
Schoolmasters, or such youths who are bred with some Gamaliel; who after that
they have given their private trialls, by Preaching and dispute, are enrolled
Expectants of such, or such a Presbytery. These must keep their turns in
Exercising, and adding (as they call it) with the actual Ministers, (so they
call them) and once admitted to that Presbytery, may, whenever employed,
Preach in any Parish Church within the bounds of that Presbytery, do all
Ministerial acts, except Baptize, or give the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
(for ought I know, there is no Consecration used by them in that holy action,
but a mere thanksgiving) nay they may be constant helpers, and Copreachers
with a Rabbie, if he, the Parish, and Presbytery agree to it. I pray you show
me where ever you read of such a profanation, that a Layman without Orders,
Imposition of hands, shall be a public Preacher of God's word, and intrude
upon this Sacred Function. These, for the most part, were the Beardlesse Boys
King James, of blessed memory, mentions in the conference at Hampton Court,
Who would brave him to his face. page 4.

Within one County there may be two, or three, more or fewer Presbyteries,
according as there be more or fewer Parish-Churches; and yet all these
Presbyteries are independent one from another: only it is remarkable, that the
Presbytery of Edinburgh, because (as they speak) it is seated on the
Watchtower, has well nigh obtained by custom, and other means, a
Superintending power, over all other Presbyteries; and other Presbyteries many
times send thither to have resolution of their difficult cases. The reason is,
besides the eminency of this City by its wealth, and the residence of all
highest Courts of Justice there; although this Allobrogicall brood maintain
Parity, there be notwithstanding some few Patriarchs, who rule and overruled
all, who Lord it, and Pope it over the Lord's Inheritance, and in this City
ordinarily are some of these Patriarchs: and the Responsa prudentum from
hence, are received as Oracles by remote Presbyteries, and reverenced as
answers by Vrim and Thummim.

There is none who lives within the verge of a Presbytery, but is answerable
to this Classis and Iudicatorie, and must appear whenever, or for whatsoever
cited. The King and His family are not exempted, nor privileged: if He be
cited, and appear not, He may be excommunicated for His disobedience and
contumacy: If He appear, He must submit His earthly Scepter, to that their
Scepter, which they term the Scepter of Christ; He must do what is enjoined.
The Presbytery is independent from the Crown of an earthly King, who is Gods
and Christ's Vicegerent in the general Kingdom of His providence only; But
this Sanhedrim is Christ's vicegerent in His oeconomicall Kingdom as Mediator,
as they speak; and consequently to it He must veil His Crown, submit His
Scepter, and from it receive Christ's Law and Ordinances.

King James of blessed memory knew this well, who therefore in that Conference
at Hampton Court, page 79. says, A Scottish Presbytery, as well agrees with
a Monarchy, as God and the Devil, then Jack and Thom, and Will, and Dick,
shall meet, and at their pleasures censure Me, and my Council, and all My
proceedings. Then Will shall stand up and say, it must be thus: Then Dick shall
reply, and say, nay marry, but we will have it thus. And therefore here I must
once reiterate my former speeches (the King is answering to D. Rainolds, who
seems to beg of His Majesty a Presbytery, or some thing like to it) Le Roy
s' avisera: Stay J pray you for one seven years before you demand that of me:
and if you then find me pursey and fat, and my Wind pipes stuffed, I will
perhaps hearken to you: for let that Government be once up, I am sure I shall
be kept in breath, then shall we all of us have work enough, both our hands
full. But D. Rainolds till you find that I grow Lazy, let that alone.

It is more than notoriously known to many yet living, The Presbytery has
kept state with King James.
and is upon Record in the Presbytery Books of Edinburgh, how King James, not
once, but many times, has sent men of Honor and good quality, demanding, or
rather requesting for some things at their hands; who have heard the
Commissiones propose the King's mind; But they, to keep the power and place
Christ has given them in that dignity, suitable to so high a trust, have
dismissed the Gentlemen sent by the King without answer, and by an Order of
that Spiritual house, have appointed one, or two, as Commissioners of the
Presbytery, to go to the King with their will and pleasure, loosing no thing
of Christ's authority, and carrying themselves with the King almost, as if two
free Estates, or two free Kings had met, and were dealing together. All cases
and crimes are within the censure of the Presbytery,


As no person is exempted from obedience and submission to this power, so no
crime or sin whatsoever committed, or suspected to be committed, within the
Seignorie of this petty Principality. And that sometimes is so extravagantly
and transcendently too looked after, and called in question, (especeially if
indiscreet zeal, or holy Spleen work and move by the Spirit on a holy Brother)
that if there be a fact and fault committed, secret, or known to very few, it
is brought forth to the light of the World: There is no care taken to reconcile
the Lapsed to God in a private way, and to conceal his offense, but disgraced
he is publicly. What sound repentance this may work, judge you. How
consonant this is to the Apostolical Canon, They that sin publicly, rebuke
publicly; and to the common Maxim of the Church, de occultis nonjudicat
Ecclesia; he may easily see, who has not divorced himself from common sense
and reason. To cure these secret sins by the power of the Keys in interiori
foro conscientiae, and to cover them with the mantle of Charity, smells
rankly of auricular Confession, Popish absolution, and Sigillum confessionis.
See the conference at Hampton Court, page 93. It is certain, a foolish man
revealing foolishly his faults to his wife, the zealous wife, upon some
quarrelling betwixt her and her Husband, has gone to a good Minister, revealed
what was told her, and the honest impartial Minister has convented the man,
charged him with his sin, and made him confess, satisfy, and do penance
publicly.

Nay upon a surmise, suggestion, suspicion, or any misinformation, Crimes
suspected, are curiously here inquired after.
if the Minister, or Lay-Elder delate, (that is present) two persons to
converse so familiarly, that it is to be feared that they are guilty of
fornication, if they be unmarried, or of adultery, if both of them, or either
of them be married, they shall be cited, and convented, examined by all
proofs, presumptions, interrogatories, etc. whether or not they have sinned.
If that the presumptions be pregnant, although no proof be, they shall be put
in close prison, fed on bread and water, kept that none may come at them, all
Members Constituents of these Iudicatories, appointed to try what they know
against the next Court day; when no proof can be had, and all the presumptions
do not fasten guiltiness upon the accused, and the Imprisonment and other
hard usages cannot extort a confession, they are dismissed: But an act is
enacted, that if those two persons suspected of fornication, or adultery, shall
be seen to meet, or be in company together, except they meet in Church or
Market, it shall be holden pro confesso, as confessed, that they are guilty of
what they are charged with.

Nay sometimes the parties, although innocent, and no real evidence being
produced against them, are brought on the Lord's day publicly to the middle of
the Church before the Pulpit, to declare, sometimes to confirm their
Declaration by an Oath, that they are innocent and free of that crime wherewith
they are charged. And sometimes they are forced to make their public
Repentance in the Church, upon a Pillarie, for their unchristian behavior:
because that although the parties charged be free, yet their conversation has
been suspicious and scandalous.

A whole Volume might be written of young women by these courses disgraced and
defamed: of many Families divided and scattered, whereas before there was no
jealousy betwixt the man and the wife.

This Iudicatorie of the Presbytery is so high, and of so vast a latitude, that
as the Pope brings in all civil causes to himself as a competent Judge, sub
formalitate peccati, so this Papal Conclave brings any thing, howsoever
merely and purely civil, under it is lash, sub formalitate scandali, as
scandalous to a Christian profession.

It is not forgotten by many yet living, how the Presbytery Presbyteriall
Government inconsistent with the liberty of trade and commerce.
of Edinburgh attempted to censure Ecclesiastically the Merchants there, for
carrying Wheat to Spain in time of a Famine or dearth there, for this was to
feed and maintain God's enemies. But above all, that was a piaculum, an almost
inexpiable sin, to transport wax to Spain, for this was to be accessory to
Idolatry, in respect the greatest part of this wax was employed in making
Tapers and Candles to the Virgin Mary, and other Saints.

In S. Andrews. I. T. was endebted to P. T. a considerable Inconsistent with
the authority of civil Iudicatories.
sum of money, the greatest part of his stock. I. T. delaying, or shuffling,
or not able to pay P. T. at the day of payment designed in the Bond, P. T.
obtained before the Lords of Session a Judgment against I. T. with power to
demand payment in the King's Name, and upon disobedience to be out lawed and
fall into a Praemunire, or escheating of his moveable goods and Chattells. I.
T. bemoanes himself to the Presbytery. The Presbytery convents P. T. before
them, threatens him with Excommunication, if he did persist to put in Execution
the Judgment of the highest Iudicatorie in the Kingdom: and for fear of this
dreadful Court and horrid sentence, he passes from his pursuit, continues the
demanding of repaying of his money. You see here what power this Presbytery
has over all, and the highest of civil Iudicatories.

Infinite instances of this kind may be produced, give The Presbytery at
pleasure repealeth Royal grants by Law confirmed.
me leave to add one of a higher strain. The City of Edinburgh, by the Kings
of Scotland, amongst other favors and privileges, has a Royal grant of a
weekly Market day on Monday. This Grant is confirmed by Letters Patents under
the great Seal, and by the standing Laws of the Kingdom; The Presbytery
here by their transcendent sole authority, discharged any Market to be kept on
Monday, the reason was, because it occasioned the traveling of men and horse
the Lord's day before, which profaned the Sabbath. If the Tradesmen, who found
at home what loss they had by wanting their Market, had not with force and
violence opposed their Sovereignty, and made them forsake it, it was like
enough to have passed, and obtained longer.

The most active in this case were the Shooe-makers, who were most prejudiced
by the discharge of the Monday market. They threatened the Ministry Right
down, that if they persisted in that course, they would thrust them out of the
gates of the City: which threats restored the Monday's market. When King James,
that miracle of piety, learning, and Royal prudence, heard of this, he with
uncovered head, and lifted up hands, said to this, or much about this sense, I
thank God the Shooe-makers have more power to repress the insolency and
violence of the Presbytery, than I and my council both.

It is known to many yet living, that they have cited before The Presbytery
will not suffer Landlords to sue for their Rents.
them Noble men, and Gentlemen of good quality, who had intended civil
actions against their own Tenants before the ordinary Judge, and discharged
them to prosecute them any further, under the pain of Ecclesiastical
censures. This was in re civili, in a civil business, but modus considerandi,
as they took notice of it, it was spiritual. And why? because the holy
Brethren pretended, this did withdraw People from their lawful vocations, bred
strifes and contention amongst Brethren, and did hinder the progress of the
Gospel.

As the particular Ministers of individual Parishes are under Some fevv of the
Presbytery tyrannize over the rest of their poor Brethren, remove and
transplant at pleasure.
them, so they find the tyranny of their Archisynagog^, their prime leading
Ministers, in that measure, that their little finger is heavier then a Bishop's
whole hand and loins. Bishops are like to a paternall Government, chastising
with Rods; but the Presbyterians scourge them with Scorpions; any Lord,
Knight, or Esquire, who is cunning, and can by fair carriage, or otherwise,
gain favor or credit with some few Patriarchall Presbyters, he is able at
pleasure to turn out an honest man (who perhaps is too free in rebuking the
Gentleman for his sins, or cannot, or will not condescend to grant his
unlawful and unjust demands) and to bring in one to his own fancy and humor,
with whom, and by whom, he is able to work and effectuate his own bad
intendments. This holy Sanhedrim, although the Parochial Minister for
Intellectual abilities, be sufficiently enabled, and for moral Integrity be
blameless, yet they will find it fit he be transplanted from that Church,
because the Congregation is not edified by him, at a visitation the Landlord is
able to make all say and witness they are not edified by him: or if a Presbyter
who has more power with the dominus Moderator, and his assistants, being in a
Parish of a small stipend, and espying somewhere a better Parish, and an honest
man in it, but not so much respected by the high Priests of the Sanhedrim, he
will turn him out by the Presbytery, enter the charge, and reap the benefit
of a better Parish, and place the other (it may be, and often proves so, the
better and worthier man) in another Parish of less worth, and deterior his
condition. There needs no other reason for this, but that this sacred
Consistory, directed and assisted with infallibility, do find it e Re
Ecclesiae, that it is for God's glory and the good of the Church.

I might instance a world of these Examples; only let A honest man removed
from his place, and one by them brought in to make away Sacrilegiously the
Church patrimony.
me tell you one of the Presbytery of Cooper in Fife. A noble man there having
one Master Weymis, an honest man, a Preacher and Parson at one of the
Churches, the which whole parish belonged to the Nobleman, used all the
entreaties, all the threatenings he could, to persuade Master Weymis to make
over to him, and his house, the Right of the benefice, which if I mistake not,
was a Parsonage. The good man refused it: the Noble man finding the man
immovable, having prepared the way with the Ringleaders, accuses the honest
man before the Presbytery, obtains sentence of removing Master Weymis from
that Church and benefice, and brings in one M. Scrogie, who with the consent
of the Presbytery, sacrilegiously made over the Right of the Church to the
Noble man and his Family. M. Weymis was transplanted to another Church. The
Right made over by Scrogie was afterward confirmed by Act of Parliament. King
James, when this noble man came to him, spoke to him to this sense. My Lord, I
wonder how you have so much power with the Presbytery to obtain such a thing,
and work so strange a matter, I pray you teach me the way, for I would gladly
know it. The Noble man answered, to this sense or much about it, Sir, you take
not the right way, I prepared my business, by gaining the prime men to my
course, I sent to A. B's house so much Malt, and to C. D's house so much Meal,
to N. a Carcass of Beeffe; this got me the power to put away Weymis, to bring
in Scrogie, and from him, with the consent of the Presbytery, to have the
right of the Parsonage impropriate to me and my house: Sir, this course you
must take, if you would work any thing by, or with these men.

The Testament of a Gentleman of Wit, and more then ordinary worth and esteem,
is to this day extant, (although he dyed many years ago) wherein confessing
his many Sins (he was much guilty of uncleanness, and was of more then
ordinary reach in Political and Subtle ways) abhorring himself for them,
and earnestly begging pardon, professed, and protested, that no sin did wound
his conscience so much, as his deep Hypocrisy, who without the true fear of
God, made great show of Religion where none, or little was, and to cover his
sins from the World, to hide his shame, and the better to effectuate his
private designs, he made much of some few prime leading Ministers: by doing of
which, he was not challenged for his sins; and was enabled to work his other
ends. This has been, and is this day a constant course kept by all of that
cut and coat.

It is known, that no Kingdom of the Kings was so much infested with Feuds, (as
they call them) as that The Presbytery the Seminary and nursery of Feuds.
of Scotland: nor was there any thing more ordinary, then Neighbourly Feuds in
Parishes, to be fought to the effusion of much blood, partly beginning
sometimes within the Church, and ended in the Churchyard, where many times
some were killed. And it was as ordinary to find each Presbytery divided in
their affection and course, according as they affected the one, or the other
party. Nor was Scotland ever free of Feuds, sheathing their Swords in their
Neighbors bowels, murdering one another, till a little before King James
came into England; nor did ever that Kingdom enjoy such Peace and Plenty, as
during the time of Episcopacy.

Sir, by the few instances I have given you of many, you may see clearly, that
Presbyterian Government is not only inconsistent with Monaichie, but
destructive of the Liberty of the Subjects person, and trade; encroaching upon
all Authority, Sovereign, and delegate; restraining at pleasure Causes and
Suits commenced before Judges; forbidding Execution of Judgments obtained
before the ordinary Judges, repealing Grants, Letters Patent, Rights and
Privileges authorized by Law: assuming to it self the Civil power, exacting
Civil fines, pecuniary mulcts, inflicting corporal punishments, painful and
disgraceful; defaming young, disgracing married persons; and in brief, is
against the peace of the Kingdom, of Families and neighbors. And for their
Clergy or fellow Presbyters, they tyrannize over their Conscience, depose, or
transplant them at pleasure, for reasons known to some few of the more active.
It is proper now to speak next of

Provincial Synods.
IN describing of which we need not to insist much: for except that the
Jurisdiction is of greater extent and latitude, yet in its essentialls,
constitution, and power, with the exercise of it, it is the very same.

A Provincial Synod is the apish Imitation of a Provincial What it is.
Council, consisting of a Metropolitan, and the Suffragan Bishops of his
Province. With them, it is an associate body of the Commissioners chosen out of
all the Individual Presbyteries within the precinct of the Province. How many
there be of them in the Kingdom of Scotland at this instant. I know not: but
the Kingdom is divided into so many Provinces, as they in their prudence think
it fittest for the Government of the Church.

If I remember right, by their platform of Discipline, these Provincial
Synods are to meet twice a year, or oftener, pro re nata.

These Synodall Assemblies have a superintending and The extent of their power.
overruling power over all the Presbyteries within the limits of that Province.

The cases proper to these Courts are, 1. All matters which do appertain to
the whole Province. 2. All ^^ferres The cases which fall within their
Jurisdiction.
from all Presbyteries within its verge. 3. All cases of every several
Presbytery, which were difficult, and could not there be determined. 4. The
due censure of all what is thought to be done amiss in any Presbytery within
its lash. 5. What is ordered and decreed in those Provincial Synods, tyeth all
within the particular Presbyteries and Parishes, as well Lay as Clergymen to
obedience. Any Presbytery else, that moves without the sphere of this
Province, is not tied to obey what this decrees, by virtue of any authority
flowing from it.

The same course is holden in all things in the Provincial Sanhedrim, which is
kept in the Presbyteriall Consistory, The politic Stratagem of the great
Gamaliels.
so that I need not trouble you by resuming and repeating the like: only here
is some piece and use of good Policy, which is this; In a Province, there may
be some four or five, or six, or more knowing leading Ministers, who overrule
different and distant Presbyteries, and so cannot formally and fairly join
their wits and power to compass their common and private ends. The meeting of
this Provincial Synod occasioneth the meeting of those leading men in the same
place; who after that they have communicated Counsels, and agreed upon the
course, they are able to draw their brethren, their pupils of their Faction, as
Sorvum pecus, slavishly, yet with much zeal to dispute, debate, and voice for
what they in their wisdom think fit for their own ends: which course laid
down, will be so prevalent, that if it be against King, Country, Preacher, or
Laymen, in that concerns the public, or any private man's interest, to whom
they stand engaged, it is to as little purpose to some good men to oppose, or
moderate this course; as to a man to stop a current of a flood, after a great
inundation of rain, with his foot.

There is another trick of policy too, whereby the Apostles of this province
advance their own credit, that the wisest of the Nobility and Gentry see who
are the active and doing men, and having their particular interest many times,
both in the public, and their own private, they make their address to these
Popes, gain them to their course, and strengthen themselves by the Spiritual
Sword to distu^be the public, or to gain their private ends, whether right or
wrong. When the Commissioners from hence return to their several
Presbyteries, they intimate to them, to command the particular Ministers to
Preach in their parishes Doctrine tending to the advancement of those designs:
and this is so much obeyed, that the Minister of the Kings family, or Parish,
must sing the same song, although it concern the King in His Honor, or in
that is most dear to him, and be to the prejudice of his Person, Sovereignty
and Government.

These (...), these prime men of God, are attended and The great honor which
is given to the Patriarchall Presbyters.
honored so by the subtle and cunning Nobles and Gentlemen, that they are well
nigh deified; in their coming to and fro, to Assemblies, Presbyteries, or upon
other occasions, the most eminent of the Province wait upon them, entreat them
to come to their Houses, set them at the head of the Tables by my Lady, provide
for them the best chambers. And that you may know, howsoever they pretend
Parity, that it is protestatio contra factum, never Bishop in Scotland has
come into Cities with such Convoyes, been attended with such great personages,
as some of this holy Brotherhood. It is to this day remembered, that when Mr
Robert Bruce came from his visitation in the West, or South, returning to
Edinburgh, and entering by the Canon-gate, King James looking out at His Window
in His palace at Halyrude House, with indignation (which extorted from him an
Oath) said, Mr Robert Bruce I am sure intends to be King, and declare himself
heir to King Robert the Bruce.

If you would allow me upon this to digress, I beg to be The presumptuous
carriage of M. R. Bruce tovvard K. James.
bold to tell you a true story, and the most insolent I believe you ever read
or heard. When Q. Elizabeth was waxed old K. James bethinking how to come at
the peaceable possession of that Right God and nature had entitled him to after
her death; and resolving to recall and pardon the Earls of Angus, Huntlie, and
Erroll, (who at that time were banished and beyond Seas) feared, if by
himself, and his Sovereignty, he should do it, because they were professed
Papists, he feared the Church would except against it, and move his Subjects to
Sedition and Rebellion: yet the Noble men were most able to strengthen him, and
do him best service in the Kingdom. To prevent this mischief, he sent one of
his trusted and worthy Courtiers to Mr Robert Bruce, one of the Ministers of
Edinburgh, who at that time had great sway in the Church, desiring him to come
to His Majesty about some business of high concernment. Mr Robert did come.
The good admirable King, welcomed him more then courteously, took him into his
Retiring or Bedchamber. Spoke powerfully to this sense; M. Robert, I have sent
for you to have your advice in a business of great weight concerning the Peace
of Scotland and England, and which concerns me in Right and Honor most
nearly. Q. Elizabeth, my Sister and Cousin, is sick and cannot live long, you
know I have God's and Nature's Right to that Crown; I cannot loose it in
Honor or in Justice, and yet my prayer to God is that I may come at my Right
without any blood. I know there is some Faction in England against me, but my
friends are more prevalent there. It concerns me in the point of Prudence, to
provide that there be no Faction and division in this my Kingdom of Scotland,
for if this Kingdom be all one way for me in hearty obedience and Subjection,
the disaffected party in England will be better advised, then to work me
trouble to their great disadvantage. Now, says the best and wisest of Kings, I
fear nothing, but that these three Noble men beyond Seas, because of their
forfeiture, may be wrought upon by Papists, encouraged and enabled by them
there, and the English Papists, who are most against my coming to the Crown
of England, knowing I am a sound Protestant, to come hither and trouble Me and
the Peace of this Kingdom. Do you not think it fit, that I give them a pardon,
restore them to their Honor and Lands, and by so doing so gain them, that thus
I may save the effusion of Christian blood? To this demand so piously made, the
answer was, Sir, you may pardon Angus and Arroll and recall them, but it is not
fit, nor will you ever obtain my consent to pardon or recall Huntlie. To this
the most gracious King sweetly replied: Mr Robert, it were better for me to
pardon and recall him, and not the other two, then the other two without him.
1. First, because you know he has a greater command, and is more powerful
then both of them. 2. Next you know I am more assured of his affection to me,
for he has married my dear and near Kinswoman, the Duke of Lenox his Sister.
His rejoinder was, Sir, I cannot agree to it. The King out of the great depth
of His wisdom and prudence, and His transcendent goodness, concluded thus; M.
Robert I have imparted my most secret thoughts to you first before any, and to
you only; I am so confident of your zeal and good affection to Me and My
Honor, that I entreat you to think upon this matter a day or two; and after
your better thoughts and Prayers, return to me, and tell me clearly what you
think. Thus was he dismissed with as much respect as the King could give to any
of His highest Subjects. The truth is, at this time this man had more power in
Edinburgh then the King; and his credit there had a mighty influence upon all
His Sect, and many in the Kingdom; within a day or two he Returns to His
Majesty, yet, if I be informed right, not till he was called upon. When he
entered the Kings Presence Chamber, the King took him in to a secret retiring
room as before, made the door be shut, and speaks to this sense: Now M.
Robert, I hope you have thought more seriously upon that weighty business I
proposed to you the last day, and have prayed God to direct you and Me both,
tell me then what you think of my purpose and resolution concerning those three
Noblemen. He returns this answer; Sir, the more I think of it, the more I am
confirmed in the advice I gave to you the last day. I agree with all my heart
that you recall Angus and Arroll, but for Huntlie it cannot be. The King
resumed and repeated his reasons before mentioned, and added some more. He
obstinately opposed and contradicted it. All do know, who knew any thing of
these times, that Angus and Arroll were as bigot Papists, if not more, then
Huntlie; there was no difference in Religion: the truth is, Master Bruce was a
Lover of the Earl of Argyle, who loved not much the Earl of Huntlie. This was
the Spirit inspired him, as it seems. King James desired his reasons: he gave
none, but spoke Majestically. Then the King told him downeright, M. Robert I
have told you my purpose; you see how nearely and highly it concerns me; I
have given you my reasons for my resolution, you give me your opinion, but you
strengthen it not with reason; wherefore I will hold my own resolution, and do
as I first spoke to you. To the which, with Christian and Subject-like
reverence, he returned this reply; well, Sir, you may do as you list, but
choose you, ye shall not have me and the Earl of Huntlie both for you. Sir,
Judge by this in what case Monarchy is, in such a government, for that this is
truth, I am as much assured of, as moral certainty can assure any man of
moral truth, which with his own ears he has not heard. And yet this man was
but Minister of Edinburgh.

To return thither, from whence we digressed, that you may know, that this
great Honor which is done to The Country honor not these Apostles in the
name of a Disciple, as it appears by the disrespect all other Ministers have
from their Parishioners.
those great ones, the Cabinet Council of all Provincial and General
Assemblies, by these cunning and subtle Nobles and others, is not done in the
name of a Disciple, in the name of a Prophet; reflect a little with your eyes,
and consider how the same men respect and entertain their own Parish Minister;
when the Gamaliels sits by my Lady, the Parish Priest, will be below the
Candlestick; and will be forced to come to his Lord, or Lord, and Crouch down
for a morsel of Bread, and small piece of Money. Nay before the Gamaliel be
gone, he must prompt and Catechize the poor stipendiarie how to carry himself
with the Lord and Lord, not to exact too rigorously what is due in his
competent Stipend, nor in Preaching, doctrine or discipline, to offend the Lord
or Lord: such good Christians, such Iehoshua's, Nehemia's, and Esdras's, are
to be much made of for the cause of God. I dare to say, never Bishop or
Archbishop in England or Scotland, has used more authority, nor did ever carry
themselves so arrogantly toward the meanest of their Clergy, as these men do
over their simpler brethren. I come now at last to

The General Assembly.
THis is the Great and High Sanhedrim; the last resolution The prerogative of
this Court.
of faith is almost in this associate body. Here Christ sits in the Highest
glory and Dignity he can upon earth. Here is the ultimate decision of all
controversies. Here you may find really that fancied infallibility of the Pope.
The Jurisdiction in this is universal in all concerns Ecclesiastica,
Ecclesiasticos, and what concerns all Temporalia in ordine ad Spiritualia.

The authority of it is sovereign, independent from any, The independent
Sovereignty of it.
derived to them by trust immediately from Christ, to him alone they are
accountable. Whosoever obeys not this Sovereignty, is to be Excommunicate;
the Magistrate is at their Command, and as they prescribe, to punish in Estate,
in Body, in Life and Death; If the King obey not, He is to be Excommunicated;
and to strengthen this, the Nobility, Gentry, Collective body, nay every
individual person is to concur to compel and censure him to the utmost of
his power, to punish, to dethrone, to un-King, to kill etc. Let us come and see
how this goodly Iudicatorie is made up.

It is composed, 1. First, of the Commissioners sent Of whom, and how it is
composed.
from all the Presbyteries of the Kingdom. Which (as I hear and am informed)
is thus ordered. Every Presbytery sends out two Preaching Elders, and a
Lay-Elder. By this it seems that the Clergy has the advantage. 2. Secondly,
therefore consider, that besides the Commissioners from Presbyteries, there
comes from every Borrow and Corporation one Commissioner, and Edinburgh, for
some spiritual prerogative no doubt, is honored and privileged to send two.
3. Thirdly, the Universities and Colleges send their Commissioners, which for
the most part are not Doctors nor Ministers, but Laymen and Graduates in
Liberal Arts and Sciences. This will go near to equal the number of
Lay-Commissioners to that of Preaching Ministers.

4 The King is a member constituent to, and should be How the King is a member
of it, and of no power above the meanest Ruling Elder.
there either personally by himself, or virtually and representatively, in, or
by his Commissioner. He has one voice too, and that affirmative only. In what
Capacity they admit the King to be a member constituent of this Spiritual
Court, I know not well if they be agreed upon it. Some hold, that he is there
as Princeps membrum. By this I see he is the first gentleman there, and it may
be, has the right hand too. Some say, as a Representative of the Civil body
of the Kingdom, and sits there in that capacity. All of them agree in this,
that he is bound by his own presence, or Commissioners, to see and provide that
no disturbance or violence be offered.

The King, if present, and His Commissioner, if absent, have so much honor
indulged to him, that He or His Commissioner may have four, five, or six
assistants for advice; but these Synodicall Fathers give their indulgences with
such circumspect prudence, that to preserve Christ's honor, and their own
entire, the King, or His Commissioner may debate and advise with His Council,
or Assistants, or desire any of them to speak, while matters are in debating;
But when it comes to the decision and determination by voices, and plurality
of voices makes the decree, the King has only one voice, and that affirmative
only, not Negative.

By this it is certain, that if the greater part of voices determine contrary
to the King's voice, nay to His mind The King must execute their commands
although they be against His Conscience.
and Conscience, He is bound to put it in Execution, for Potestas Iuris is
radically in the whole Assembly, the King has no more but Potestatem Facti, to
be an Executioner Rei Iudicata, of the decrees; otherwise He is censurable; and
if He be obstinately refractory, He is not worthy to hold His Crown.

The King presides too, as they confess; but so, that it is only civilly, and
in His civil capacity.

If I be not mistaken, yet I dare not avouch this confidently, the King has
not Power to propose any thing spiritual, or that concerns the Church; but
if He do it, it must be done by the Right Father of the Assembly, the
Moderator. This I dare to say, that neither the King, nor His Commissioner can
hinder or oppose the proposing of any thing they think concerns the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ. For this were no free general Assembly, and to limit the holy
one of Israel. Nay if the thing proposed conceived by them to be Spiritual,
be so twisted with the things civil, that the ordering or establishing of it
may carry along with it a change and distemper in the State and Government, or
import danger to the King and Crown, The Moderator, or any Commissioner has
power to propose it, determine it, and never to consider or reflect upon the
danger of King, State, or Kingdom, and that for God and Christ's glory.

The proper, natural, and right President of this Seraphicall The proper
Moderator is a Preacher.
Iudicatorie, is one of the Preaching Elders although we observed before, how
Laymen, as Buchanan, Melvil, Bruce, have been Moderators) a Lay-Elder now
cannot be Moderator.

Here is the Legislative power, here is the Sovereignty of Christ's Kingdom,
here is the highest Tribunal and Iudicatory of Christ upon the Earth, from
which no person, no office, no condition of creature is privileged, from it
lies no appeal.

The King has no Power to appoint the time or place They indict the Assembly
by their own power.
of this Assembly, but once a year it must necessarily meet. And at the close
of every Assembly, the Present appoints the day and place for the next. If
any great Exigencie really, or in their fancy intervening, requires the
meeting of a general Assembly before the time determined, the Commissioners
from the Assembly are to make remonstrance of it unto the King.

Whatsoever power the Pope unjustly usurpeth, The The vast power of this Court.
Catholic Church, or her virtuall and Representative, an oecumenicall
council, justly challenges; this general Assembly vindicateth to it self,
only Authoritative, by way of authority, within the Church of the Kingdom and
Nation; yet Consensive, and Charitative, to extend to all Neighbor Churches in
the World; whatever it be that concerns, fidem, cultum, Regimen. etc.
credenda, agenda.

And yet if this infallible Supreme Iudicatorie would reserve to it self that
jurisdiction is due to men in Sacred Orders, and which intrinsecally,
radically, and originally is in them ex vi ordinis, although Presbyters intrude
upon higher callings, and they place all Ecclesiastical power, at least
communicate it to Lay People, the Princes condition were tolerable: Nay if they
did only trench upon what is due to Sovereignty, and with which He is invested
from God Almighty, which is restrained ad Externum hominem, and Externum
Regimen, although Sovereignty by it be brought into straiter and narrower
bounds, a King might be in some poor condition, although Robbed of His Right.
But when they come to this, that in ordine ad spiritualia, in order to
spiritual things they will give the King Laws, repeal His Laws, command and
expect performance and obedience, otherwise excommunicate, and if a King
neglect that Excommunication, incite inferior Magistrates, Nobles, and
Commons, to bring Him in order, to compel and force him; He is in a worse
condition under this Sovereignty, then under the Pope, by how much it is worse
to a King to be subjected to an untamed furious Beast, the multitude, then to
the tyranny of one.

All these Lay Elders, all these Commissioners from Laymen judges in highest
points of faith and worship, etc.
Corporations and Burrowes, are de jure divino as fully Judges in all matters
of faith, worship, government; Judges of haeresie, idolatry, superstition, of
the highest points of Orthodox and Catholic mysteries, of the groslest and
subtillest Haeresies, Arianisme, Arminianisme, Macedonianisme, Montanisme,
Socianisme, Anabaptisme, etc. as any man in sacred Orders there, have vocem
deliberativam, vocem decisivam, have a debating, discussive voice, and concur
as much with the influence of their voice to prescribe and give us Normam
sidei, cultus, politiae, a confession of faith, a prescript for worship, Canons
for government and discipline, as ever Bishops had in lawful Christian
Counsels. Bishops, limbs and members of Antichrist, are no part of it. Now is
forgotten that of the Council of Chalcedon, Concilium Episcoporum est; and
that old Barbarous, but Christian enough verse,

Ite for as Laici, non est vobis locus yci.
I would gladly ask of one of these Rabbis and great Commissioners of
Burrowes are there only in a Lay-capacity.
Masters in Israel, how comes it that the Commissioners of Burrowes sit
there, voice there? are they too de jure divino, by divine right? If they
answer, that such are chosen as are, or have been Lay Elders; I rejoyne; the
Lay Elders come in that capacity only, as Commissioners of the particular
Presbyteries: These are not members constituents of the Presbytery in that
capacity, that they are, or have been Lay Elders, but have right and interest
in this high Court in that capacity merely, as Commissioners of Burrowes. Look
upon their acts of general Assembly, and you will find, that it authorizes
Commissioners from Burrowes to be parts constituent of this Iudicatory, qua
tales, as sent from the Burrowes.

Again I ask, seeing you make Doctors one of your We find Doctors no where.
four holy Functions Ecclesiastical, constituted by Christ, in what
Iudicatorie find we them? In Sessions they are not; In few Presbyteries they
be; and if there, in some other capacity. In general Assemblies, if any be,
they appear as Commissioners from the University, in this capacity only. And
many times it is seen, that Professors of Philosophy have been Commissioners
of Colleges in general Assemblies.

Leaving these absurdities, which are monstrously The power which this
Sanhedrim assumeth to it self,
gross, I come to consider next, what is the Sovereign power of this high
Sanhedrim. If they would in Christian moderation assume no more to themselves,
but only a directive power, and by humble Remonstrances and supplications,
with that reverence is due to Sovereignty and Majesty, Petition the King to
animate their Acts, Canons, and Constitutions with the influence of his
legislative power, this were fair quarter. But by your favor, no sooner have
they enacted it here, and so soon as it is solemnly intimated, which is, by
returning to every Presbytery, with it is Commissioners, a Copy of the Acts,
Orders and Ordinances, and by the Presbyterie's order every Minister has
published them in the Parish Church; all things so done are animated with a
Potestative power, by the influence these orders receive from that Legislative
power Christ has entrusted them with in his oeconomicall Kingdom. All then
are bound to obedience, if it be in the meanest indifferent thing, nay if this
order cross or repeal a standing Law, all disobedients are liable to all
Ecclesiastical censures, and may forth with be proceeded against even till
they be delivered over into the hands of the Devil.

This Assembly is above the King, to them he ought to They are above the King,
and all Sovereignty.
give an account of his faith; to their Confession of faith he must conform
himself; to their orders he must give obedience; otherwise he is
excommunicable, deposable. I fear you scarce believe me: yet truly non
verenda retego, sed inverecunda confuto. I discover not the nakedness of
Father, the shame of Brother, nor friend; would to God the tenets and practices
were buried in hell, and the maintainers regained to God by true repentance,
and forsaking their ways: I discover only things that are past all shame, and
which our Church can never own. Sir, if you will hardly believe me in this,
let me give you their assertions in this case, and their conformable practice.

It is their constant Catholic tenet, that if the King, If they cannot
reform by the King, they may by any other means else.
Queen, Regent or Protector, or whosoever he or she is, in whose Person
Sovereignty is fixed, or in whose Person it is representatively fixed, only by
a fiduciary trust, during the nonage of the Prince or Princess; will not
submit himself to this holy Scepter, will not according to it is prescript,
reform Religion, preserve it in it is integrity, any man or men are bound to
do it at their direction. I spare Martin. Junior's faith in this, that there
is no authority above the Brotherhood. No Magistrate (says he, These: 17. 18.
22.) may lawfully may me or deforme the body of Christ, which is the Church; no
lawful Church Government is changeable, at the pleasure of the Magistrate; of
necessity all Christian Magistrates are bound to receive this government.Nor
will I insist upon Vigginton's assertion; That what the Holy Brotherhood cannot
obtain by suite and dispute, the People must bring it to pass. You desire the
tenets and practices of the Church of Scotland only.

The Scot's maintain, that if the King, or Queen, will Religion may be
reformed or preserved by violence.
not reform Religion, they may take upon them by violence and power to reform
it. This they have learned of their grandfather Knox, as you may read in an
Epistle of his written from Deep. Anno. 1557. and in Knox Histor. page 213.
what is lawful for Reformation, is lawful for preservation of Religion.

1. And here they begin with the Nobles: and determine right down, If the King
will not, the Nobles may.
Noble men ought to Reform Religion, if the King will not. Knox, app. 25.
again, that God has appointed the Nobility to bridle the inordinate appetites
of Princes, and in so doing, they cannot be accused, as resisters of authority.
Knox, Hist. 343. and, that it is their duty to repress the rage and insolency
of Princes. Knox, app. 33.

2. In the second place, if the Nobles will not do, the If neither King nor
Nobles, the people may.
People and Commonaltie may reform Religion, at the order and direction of the
Brotherhood. Knox, to the Commonalty. fol. 49. 50. The Commonaltie, by their
power, may bridle the cruel beasts; (They mean Priests and Prelates) Knox to
the Commonalty. fol. 55. The Commonalty may lawfully require of their
Sovereign to have true Preachers, and if he be negligent, they may themselves
provide them, maintain them, defend them, against all that do persecute them,
and may detain the profits of the Church livings from the other sort; That is
to say, Priests, Papists, Prelates, and Malignants. Knox to the Commonalty.
fol. 55.

3. In the third place, if they come to the happiness to If Nobles and Commons
join, there is hope of some greater success.
have Nobles and Commons obedient to their commandments, for reformation, or
preservation of true Religion (which must be so as they fancy) I am deceived,
if they allow not more violence, and esteem it more piety, zeal, and justice.
Their tenets are. The Commonalty concurring with the Nobles, may compel the
Bishops to cease from their tyranny. Knox to the Commonalty. fol. 47. again,
The Nobility and Comminalty, ought to reform Religion, and in that case may
remove from honors, and may punish such as God has condemned, Deuteronomy. 13. Of
what estate, condition, or honor soever. Knox, app. fol. 28. 30.

4. In the fourth place, if the Nobles will not join Inferior Magistrates and
people may join.
with the People or Commonalty in the reformation, or preservation of true
Religion, at the direction of the Ministry, the inferior Magistrates may, and
should do it. Knox, Hist. p. 217.

5. In the fifth place, before so good a work be not Every individual in this
good work, may, and ought to the utmost of his power, to intend and endeavor
reformation.
done, if Nobles, or the whole, or greatest part of the Commonalty will not be
obedient, assisting, and ayding to so good a work; Every individual man and
person is bound to advance this good work, to kill Papist, Priest, Prelate,
Malignant, nay a King, if He stand out an Enemy to God, and Christ, and cannot
otherwise be reclaimed, or removed, nor by suite, or dispute gained to the
right way, (I dare say their doctrine leads to this) see Knox app. fol. 30.
where roundly he says, The punishment of such crimes as touch the Majesty of
God, does not appertain to Kings and chief Rulers only, but also to the
whole body of the People, and to every member of the same, to revenge the
injury done against God. Again see him fol. 35. The People are bound by oath
to God, to revenge, to the utmost of their power, the injury done against God's
Majesty. To this purpose they allege the examples of Phineas, who in his
zeal killed the adulterers: of Ehud, who in the same zeal killed Eglon in his
private Chamber, (remember he was a King.) Of Iael, who killed Sisera: of
Matathias, who in zeal killed a Jew for committing of Idolatry; and who in the
same zeal at the same time killed the King's Commissioner. Sir, put these
things together, and see where this Sovereign supreme Ecclesiastical
Iudicatory has such dominion and power over men's consciences, that being
directed by their Ministry, they are bound to do to the utmost of their
power for reformation and preservation of Religion, what sacred Person of any
King can be secured? what man offending against the Majesty of God (which is as
they fancy many times) may not be taken away by one like to a Ravilliack? what
Commissioner or Counselor of the King but in doing his best service to his
Master, he may be stoned like to Adoram, and all this go in popular esteem
current for good service and extraordinary zeal to God and his cause.

6. In the sixth place upon those grounds Covenants All, or as many as are well
affected, may covenant and combine for doing this work.
and Confederacies come in to strengthen all, to join purses, persons, wit,
and strength, contra omnes mortales, Regia Majestate non excepta, against King
and Bishop, Prince and Prelate, to the defense of the good cause; with a
combination, every one to be ayding, assisting and maintaining one another in
so good a cause.

7. In the last place comes their Orders for reformation The Confederats may
by themselves give Orders.
or preservation, and that by themselves and the collective body, or any
associates whatsoever, without respect, reverence or obedience to the Sovereign
authority of the Prince.

The practice is clearly seen in Mr Knox his proceedings, for after that by his
Letter, which we mentioned Practices upon the tenets.
before written to Scotland Anno, 1557. from Deep, and otherwise he had
infused the above named principles into many, an oath of confederacy was taken
amongst them, and subscription under their hands to some agreement. This gave
life to that tumultuary reformation, much strength being added to it, by the
concurrence of the Sacrilegious, hoping thus to swallow up the Church revenews.
which is more then certain was against Knox his mind, and the first reformers.
As we deplore great losses the Church had by this reformation, and do thank
God heartily for his admirable bounty and mercy in the good of truth we got by
it, yet we will never wrong Reformed Religion so much as to account of that as
an orderly reformation, we deny not but it was attended with much Sedition
Faction and Rebellion.

Anno 1558. without the authority of Sovereignty, nay Orders of Reformation
prescribed without the authority of Sovereignty.
without the knowledge of it, these confederates, at the direction of their
Ministry prescribe orders for Reformation of Religion to be observed and
practiced throughout the whole Kingdom. See Knox story page 217. 2^8.

They go farther, they writ an Imperious Letter to the They charge their
adverse party to obey their Orders.
Religious houses, in the name of the Congregation, commanding all of them ^^
remove from thence against such a day, or then they would eject them by force.
Knox ib.

Within very short time after, a Parliament being holden by They protost
against King and Parliament.
the Queen Regent, (Queen Mary's mother, and great Grandmother to our gracious
Sovereign) they make a Protestation, that except they had their desires, they
would go on in their intended course of Reformation, that neither they, nor
any that joined with them, should incur therefore any danger in life, or
lands, or other Civil Penalties, and that if any violence happened in pursuit of
those matters, they should thank themselves. It is very observable they were
all bound in that confederacy to assist and strengthen each other in that
course. See Knox Hist. page 256. First, here you have the direction of the
Ministry. Next, you have a confederacy and bond of mutual defense. Thirdly,
you have Orders and Decrees agreed upon in common. Fourthly, you have warrants
issued out to make or force all to be put in execution. Fifthly, you have a
Protestation, and that a threatening one too, against the Queen Regent and whole
Parliament. Sir, are those things consistent with Monarchy? what Scripture?
what Father? what practice of the Church does warrant such a reformation? They
contemn Sovereign authority.


Come on, and you shall have them anon in open contemning Sovereign Authority.
The Queen Regent to suppress these beginnings, and to nip them in the bud,
cites them to appear at Stirling. They appear not. They are outlawed: all men
under pain of Treason are inhibited to assist them. There is no obedience, but
all in the confederacy adhere to them. I cannot, for my part, justify this
divinity.

From disobedience and contempt, they are guilty of They usurp Royal power.
usurping the Royal power, for v^ry shortly after, anno 1559. Immediately after
a Sermon Preached by Knox in Saint-Iohnstowne, at his exhortation and
direction, they fall to the pulling down of the Religious Houses, and within
two or three days equal three of them to the ground. Sir, can it appear that
by Holy Writ or Reason such Popular tumultuary reformations are warrantable? Is
it not intrinsecally inherent in the Crown or wheresoever sovereignty is fixed?
And so they proceeded in Fife, Angus, Mornis, Stirling, Lowthian etc. and
through the whole Kingdom. See Knox Hist. p. 263. Here were many goodly and
Rich Churches Spoiled, Robbed, and cast down.

After this they disclaim Sovereign authority, except it be as they please, and
have their desires. The Queen Regent They renounce their lavvfull Sovereign.
threatened S. Iohnstowne where this disorder first was acted. They of the
confederacy writ to her in plain terms, that except She stayed from that
cruelty, they should be compelled to take the Sword of Just defense, and
protested, that without the reformation which they desired, they would never be
Subject to any mortal man. See Knox page 265.

More followed. By a Letter they cite all their Brethren They command all the
Brotherhood to be assistants.
to repair unto them, and that you may know that their Letters were
authoritative commands, and that all the authority is from the independent
Sovereignty of the Church, consider how they write to the Nobility upon pain
of Excommunication to join with them. Knox ibid. page 268, 269, 272.

How much this Ecclesiastical Sovereignty did exalt They are obeyed, the
Queens Herald is abused.
it self above the civil, is more then apparent in this, that when an Herald
in his coat of arms, commanded all men under pain of Treason to return to
their houses, by public sound of Trumpet in Glasgow no man obeyed that
charge, but went forward to their associates, Habes confitentem reum, Knox.
page 274.

They denounce War too, which was ever judged to They denounce war against
their adversaries.
be the peculiar specific prerogative of Sovereignty, for they writ to the
Bishops and Clergy, that except they desisted from dealing against them, They
would, with all force and power, execute just vengeance and punishment upon
them: and that they would begin the same war, which God commanded Israel to
execute against the Cananites. Which manner of proceeding, they termed a
resisting of the Enemy. Knox. Hist. 275, 276.

The poor Queen Regent was brought to an Accommodation, They will hear of no
Peace, but enter into a Combination for mutual defense.
and the Assembly at St- Iohnstowne was dismissed. But there parting they
entered into a League by Oath, that if any one Member of their Congregation
(this in the Scottish is Equivalent to Ecclesia) should be troubled, they
should all concur, assist and convene again together, for the defense of the
same. Knox. page 283.

The Queen Regent finding this Sovereignty overbeare Here Is, and the Peace of
the Kingdom shaken, by a Declaration published and proclaimed, testified her
desire of Peace, and descended so much, that really it was only a request.
They scorned it, would none of it, confuted it by another, did exhort those of
their Faction to encourage themselves in the Lord, to stand upon their guard
like to the re-builders of Jerusalem and the Temple, with the Sword in one
hand and the Bible in another, wherein they gave the Queen many times the Lie,
and abused her with reproachful and contumelious speeches. The Subjects that
continue their obedience are honored with no better term then to be called
the Queens Faction. You may read this at leisure and pleasure in Knox History.
page 330, 333, 362, 364. Nay, they renounce their obedience unto Her, protested
that whosoever should take Her part, should be punished as Traitors, whenever
God should put the Sword of Justice into their hands. Knox Hist. p. 364.

At last they rise to the highest pitch of Rebellion, and They depose the
Queen Regent.
Anno. 1560. they depose the Queen Regent, the predetermination being given,
that it was lawful for them to do so, by Mr Knox and Mr Wilcockes. This is
upon record yet in that Kingdom, and is set down by M. Knox himself. Hist.
page 372. 378. and it is observable, that the Queen, if I remember right, lived
but a month, or little more, after this pious act.

Sir, you will now say, that I speak too hardly of our first The Author's
modest opinion of that is called the first reformation of Scotland.
Reformers and Reformation, and would know what is my opinion of them and it.
To deal clearly, God is my witness I am no Papist, but do abhor Popery as
much as any, and that I am no Puritan the other party will witness for me. I
am bound to speak the truth in my heart, and to give some satisfaction, I say
1. First, as I am able, I bless and praise God most heartily that we were
delivered from the Popes Tyranny, and that gross Egyptian darkness we were
under: which I ascribe to the admirable wisdom and infinitely transcendent
goodness of God. 2. Next I leave the men to God's mercy, but for the manner of
proceeding, the way they took, I dare not, I will not approve it: but will say
with Jacob, in consilium eorum ne veniat anima mea. 3. Thirdly, I daily
heartily bewail that that too too much Idolized reformation in an excessive
hatred against Popery, did runn too much to the other extreme, that the goodly
order and government necessary of the Church was shouldered out; the public
service and worship of God with it is decency, reverence and comeliness was much
defaced, disgraced; That goodly, stately and rich Churches, were abused, robbed
and equalled to the ground; and that the Church Patrimony was dilapidated: and
yet this was not so much done by the first called Reformers, as by their
Disciples, Aetas parentum pejor avis.

It fears me, besides that God is punishing our present sins, that by this
scourge, which is gilded with the specious, but spurious compellation of a
glorious through, second Reformation, he is in the same justice punishing the
sins of that first Reformation. For my part I judge verily that Church had
never an orderly and warrantable Reformation, till it was happily begun and
advanced by King James when he took the government in his own hands, and was
like to come to a great perfection under the government of our most gracious
Sovereign King Charles. Although I deny not but the seeds of truth were sown
by Hamilton, Wiseheart, Mylne and others, who before Knox his time did Preach
truth, cast down the errors of Rome in the Peoples hearts, were far from
sturring up the Subjects against lawful authority, and like the ancient
Martyrs, did suffer patiently and seal the truth of the Gospel with their
blood. If Knox and his Accomplices had kept in this way I am certain that Church
had been more happy: nor had we seen such Robbery and deformity in the Church.
Sure I am, great, many, and more then ordinary sins in them and us and our
forefathers have brought us to be plunged in those almost inextricable
miseries: And till we proportionably repent, we cannot look to see better
days, what is disjoynted in state set aright, and the beauty of God's house
restored; which God of his mercy grant to us for his only Son Jesus Christ.

By what is said, it appears sufficiently that this spiritual Sovereignty is
far above the King's Crown, and what we undertook, to make their practices
prove their tenets, is more then evident, only one thing rests to be proved,
that this Sovereignty may authorize any and every private man to do to the
utmost of their power for the Reformation of Religion, to plunder, kill, etc.

Sir, I refer you to Mr Knox history of the Church of Scotland, page 143,
144, 145. where relating how Cardinal Practice of mischief done by private men,
and commended by them.
Beaton Archbishop of Saint Andrew's, (a man whom I justify not neither
commend much) was killed by Norman Lesley, John Lesley, Peter Carmichael and
James Melvil in his own house the Castle of Saint Andrew's, who were all only
private Gentlemen, and if you will trust Buchanan, the cause was a jarre
betwixt Norman Lesley and the Cardinal; upon Knox faith, the quarrel was the
killing of M. George Wiseheart (a good man undoubtedly.) The Cardinal could
have no mercy, although he cried pitifully for it, saying, I am a Priest ye
will not slay me; Knox I say relating this history commends the fact of James
Melvil killing him with grave and pious words in his mouth as a godly fact. The
sum of the story is, when they entered the Cardinall's chamber with some
sixteen or seventeen more, John Lesly and Peter Carmichaell fell violently and
passionatly on him, but James Melvill with gravity and piety withdrew them, and
said: This work and judgment of God (although it be secret) ought to be done
with great gravitie. And presenting unto him the point of the Sword, said,
Repent thee of thy former wicked life, but especially of thy shedding of the
blood of that notable instrument of God M. George Wiseheart, which albeit the
flame of sire consumed before men, yet cries it a vengeance upon thee, and we
from God are sent to revenge it. For here before my God I protest, that neither
the hatred of thy person, the love of thy Riches, nor the fear of any trouble,
thou could have done to me in particular, moved, or moves me to strike
thee: but only because thou have been and remainest an obstinate enemy against
Christ Jesus and his holy Gospel. And the meek man of God, as he is there
termed, stroke him twice or thrice through with a stog-sword; and he fell. I
give all this that James Melvill did this in revenge of M. George Wiseheart
being slain by the Cardinal. what Divinity will warrant this fact of James
Melvil's to be a good and Godly fact (for so it is noted in the Margent) to a
private man to murder or kill thus a Priest an Archbishop of so high dignity?
The result of all is, he did it gravely, in coldblood, told him so much, that
he was sent from God, he had no private end, the motive sturred him up to this
Godly fact, was, that he had been and remained at that time an enemy to Jesus
Christ and his holy Gospel; he exhorted him to repentance and for all his
great sins, as Knox writes the story, he allowed him no more time, but so
much as was spent in his Godly Harang: for immediately after he was twice thrust
through. But those Seraphicall Doctors know, Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus
Sanctus; and the spirit can work suddenly, Inter os and offam; Inter Pontem and
Fontem, especially where and when they are sent of God to do such great good
works. But this is protestatio contra factum. what ever M. Melvil said in his
Protestation, Knox does witness that the Cardinal being murdered, they
seized upon the Artillery and Ammunition, wherewith that fortress was
plentifully furnished, and likewise upon the rich hangings, household stuff of
all sorts, apparel, Copes, Jewels, ornaments of Churches, great store of Gold
and Silver Plate, besides no small quantity of treasure in ready coin.

I could instance some practices about the time of the Parliament in anno 1621.
commonly called the Marquess of Hamilton's Parliament, but because that will
only reflect upon some particular persons, I pass it willingly and wittingly.

It is most certain when the pious and learned Doctors of Aberdene, did demand
of the Patriarchs of this late Covenant, why they did not by Preaching,
Printing, Censuring, or some real deed express their detestation of that
horrid fact done by the Rascally-rout of Edinburgh the 23. of July 1637. where
at the first reading of the service there, a great many Bishops being in the
Cathedral Church, the Serving-women rose barbarously within the Church, did
throw their stools at the Bishop of the place, and the Deane who was
officiating, did cry out most horribly, that the Major, Aldermen, and others
within could hardly compose it for a long time, and the worst and basest of the
People, who were without, did throw in great stones at the glass windows, the
doors being shut. After the arising of the commotion, to prevent more tumult
and danger, and when Service and Sermon were done, the Bishops, Major and
Aldermen going home with the Lord Chancellor and some BB. attending his Grace,
the Bishop, and Deane of Edinburgh with others were well nigh stoned in the
streets: when I say it was demanded of these Apostles, why they did not
condemn this unchristian Barbarous outrage, void of Piety and Reason, and
without any example in the Christian Church, the sum of their answer was, and
to this day is, that such a zealous people were to be left to their own
warrant, they knew not by what Spirit they were governed, God works great
works many times by basest means: and yet those Nobles, those zealous, those
intelligent and knowing Christians (whereof many of them in Edinburgh were
known Coale-stealers and Whores) were the first active instruments in this
glorious reformation. I confess this Divinity is so transcendent and
Metaphysicall, that it exceeds my capacity, and is so fruitful upon any
occasion to work all or the greatest of mischiefs, that I do not see how it
can consist with peace or safety of King, Kingdom, Church, or of any entrusted
with greatest trust in Church or State. Sir, I believe any rational man may
see by this, how superlatively this spiritual Signorie is above King and
Royal Sovereignty. I leave it to your own judgment and memory to recollect
it, and to bring home the conclusion, that this government Ecclesiastical is
inconsistent with Monarchy, with the Peace of a Kingdom, and is or may be in
time a Mother and Nurse of as much Rebellion and Treason as any Iesuitisme of
the Highest dye, if not more. Certainly Rome, although a Whore, and has a cup
of abomination in her hand, is not so bad nor so abominable; I pray God to keep
all good Christians clean of both.

Let us go on; In Faith, Worship, and all spiritual things they vindicate to
themselves such a Sovereignty, that King, Council, Parliament, nay all
together, must not touch the Scepter of Christ, they are to determine, define,
take cognizance, accuse, sentence, punish; neither King, nor King and Council,
nor King and Parliament, all must assume power here, for otherwise it is to
intrude upon Christ and his Right.

This Sovereignty is of so high a strain, so large an extent, that when they
have decreed any thing in this supreme When they demand the Royal conformation
of their decrees it is only an act of courtesy.
infallible Iudicatorie, that they may have the better obedience to demand the
King and Parliament's approbation; This is not demanded as a thing arbitrary
which the King and Parliament may do or not do; or leaving it to His Royal
judgment with the advice of His Parliament to qualify or rectify their
decrees, and orders: No, no truly; that is to betray the trust Christ has
given them, they need not supplicate or Petition for it, it is in them but an
act of courtesy to show dutiful obedience. And if the King and Parliament
will not grant it, they are armed with as much power from Heaven as to force
them to do it, by Excommunication, and making all good Christians join with
them in God's cause.

Sir, I fear you think I speak Liberally. God forbid I should do it. I doubt
not but you have read the Scottish Pope's Sermon Preached at Westminster, and
Printed by Order of the House, since you have it I will not spend time and
Paper to cite his Words which gives to the King no more. But to make this
appear, I give you some unanswerable reasons. 1. It is certain in Scotland M.
Knox and his accomplices set on their reformation without the Queen, or Queen
Regents authority, or the authority of Parliament. For anno 1558. they made
their confederacy: gave out their Orders for Reformation throughout the whole
Kingdom. anno 1559. they acted their Reformation, An instance. anno. 1559.
by casting down Churches, Abbyes, etc. casting out Priests, Friars, etc. and
all this by their own radical and original power. Queen Mary their true and
lawful Sovereign did authorize them in nothing, she was then in France. The
Queen Dowager, Queen Regent, King James the fifth's Widow, having the
Sovereignty by fiduciary trust, in regard of the absence of the Queen her
daughter, did not authorize it, nay she did by her authority oppose it,
contradict it, came in Arms against it. The Parliament was not till the year
1560. (how holden for the present I cannot tell) but in that Parliament they
set out a confession of faith, reformed Religion: but when they sent to King
and Queen beyond Seas (Queen Mary was then Married to Francis the second in
France) to confirm or ratify the acts thereof, they denied. When intelligence
was given to the Confederates, they professed they little regarded the denial
of King and Queen, for say they (Knox Hist. page 500.) all we did was rather
to show our dutiful obedience, then to beg of them any strength to our
Religion.

Another in this kind you have; In Anno 1571. King Another instance, anno. 1571.
James then being King, and the Earl of Mar being Regent, an Assembly was
holden at Leith, where by the Order of the Assembly, and Ordinance of the
Regent and Council, some Commissioners were appointed from the Regent and
Council, and some from the general Assembly to condescend upon a platform of
discipline, which was agreed to on both sides. The platform is that the
Government of the Church shall be by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes and Chapters,
etc. the order and course of all their Nomination, Election, etc. is just
conform to this in England at this day, and as it was in Scotland before this
new happy Reformation. This was enrolled in the Council Books of that Kingdom,
and stands there to this day, this I know certainly, and if I be not deceived,
and almost I dare say it, except they have wronged their most famous and their
most ancient Counsels, the platform is upon Record in the General Assembly
Books.

Give me leave to tell you by the way one thing, that the Negative Faith, which
is sine ruga, sine macula, was framed, anno 1580. and it is believed, that in
that Negative faith Episcopacy is abjured as Antichristian; yet anno 1581. this
same Government is renewed, ratified and ordained to continue constant, and not
to be changed till His Majesty come to perfect age, and to be kept or changed
then only in what He and His great Council, the Parliament, shall think fit,
and not otherwise. Before this the King His Household and Council had
subscribed the Negative Faith; can any man, not void of judgment and
discretion, think, that the King, His Household and Council in subscribing it
did judge Episcopacy Popish and Antichristian.

Next it is worth your notice taking, that as I honor the good parts which
were in Knox and his fellow laborers, I never accounted them as Apostles men
secured from error; yet I will say so much for their justification, that they
were greater Enemies to Sacrilege than their after-disciples; and were not
against the Order of Episcopacy as Popish and Antichristian, as M. Andrew
Melvil and his disciples afterward maintained. Nor were they so foolish to
seclude all Churchmen from voice in Parliament, only their desire was, that
seeing the Popish Bishops were allowed to enjoy their Benefices and Rents
during their life time (this was more then our charitable glorious Reformers
allowed to their Protestant Bishops now) with all other Privileges except
spiritual jurisdiction, that they should not sit in Parliament as the
representative of the Church, but in their places should sit the
Superintendents and Commissioners of the Church. Which indeed were somewhat
like to Bishops, but resembled more Arch-Presbyters then Bishops.

To return again thither from whence we digressed; They set on their
Discipline by themselves.
after that this platform of discipline was so agreed and established, as we
told before, M. Andrew Melvil comes to Scotland about the year 1574, or 75.
ultra citra. This man a good Hebrecian and Linguist, and full of the Geneva
Talmud which was now more refined, begins to set Presbyterian discipline
higher, to make a second book of Policy, or devout Imaginations, acknowledges
no more Orders in the Church, then the four above named. A Bishop was no more
in Scripture but the same identically with Presbyter; and where Abbots and
Priors to his time were nominated and admitted to the Abbeys and Priories as
Churchmen, gave their trialls and were collated (as they speak) by the
superintendents: This great Doctor found out another Divinity, that there was
no Bishop but a Parish Priest; Scripture, for Abbots and Priors there were none
such in God's book. At this time, and from that they call Reformation to this
time, there was no Bishopric nor Abbie annexed to the Crown, and consequently
not impropriate to any Subject. It is true Laymen held them in commendam by
the King's gift, but as men able to do the King and Church good service; and
before their right could be completed or perfected, they were to return to the
King from the Superintendent a collation or certificate, that he was of that
ability to do good service to the King and Church. Men sacrilegiously disposed
grasped greedily this doctrine, and thanked God that their names as Abbots and
Priors were not in the book of God. And to have these Church livings and
dignities with Bishoprics annexed to the Crown, and from thence to
impropriate them to them and their heirs, they deified M. Melvil, and
contributed their best wits and uttermost power to raise Presbyteriall
government higher. And by the sole authority of that they call the Church, they
began, without the King, Council or Parliament's consent or authority, to
distribute the whole Kingdom into so many Presbyteries, as they thought fit in
their discretion and by the direction of the holy Spirit: and did procure
private subscriptions to their new Book of Policy, and put it in practice.
Sir, I hope you are the more apt to believe this, because you know in England
the disciplinarians in London meetings debated and established their orders in
secret and not warrantable Conventicles, and much about the same time; and
great correspondence was entertained betwixt the Scots and the English at that
time. How that book of Discipline was practiced without any authority in Surrey
and Northamptonshire, and other places you know well enough.

Now I pray you, when without Authority, by their own inherent radical Right,
they make Orders, reform, establish a Discipline, do these men imagine, that
the concurrence of Christian authority Sovereign is absolutely necessary, or
that their demand is any thing else but an act of courtesy, when by themselves
and assistants they may establish and practice it?

This Second book of Policy, Master Melvils reformation is the Epoch of our
second Reformation. The fruits of which I will tell you were, the Annexation of
all Bishoprics, Abbyes, Priories etc. to the Crown, which was effectuated anno
1587.

If you will cast your eyes upon the third glorious reformation, that makes the
Popes knees shake like Belshazzars when he did see the handwriting on the Wall,
(that is if we will speak truly, this deformation which is the disgrace of
reformed Catholic Religion, and which threatens Church and Religion, King and
Kingdom with ruin) you will find these men have sung a note above Ela, have
ordered and practiced more then all that went before them. Hanc movere nolo
Camarinam. I hope a better wit and more elegant and eloquent pen, shall some
time Anatomise this Monster, and so lay it open to the view of the world, that
it shall appear to be no true brood of the Reformed Catholic Protestant
Religion.

2. Secondly, another argument to prove that this Superlative Sovereignty in
spiritualibus, has all its most natural All must Preach as they direct.
Subjects at its devotion and obedience, is this, that what they command to be
Preached, must sound alike in all their Synagogues. And whosoever he be that is
the Minister of the Kings family he must Preach the same. There is no coequall,
corrivall, or coordinate power that can do so much as intercedere make the
least sort of crossing, opposing or interposing. Is it not known that the Kings
Minister in Scotland, at the direction of this Conclave, when his Council have
been to meet frequently for Treaty with Ambassadors from foreign Kings; upon
the Lord's day or Week-daies Sermon before the meeting, (...), in great freedom
of the Spirit, has told him all the Counsel of God from Heaven, with a
denunciation of Judgments if he swerve from it. And if the King had gone to
the Church of Edinburgh, a Beardlesse boy had told him more sound wisdom from
Heaven, how to article and conclude in matters of Highest concernment betwixt
him and Spain, or him and France, then all the wisest Counselors and greatest
Nobles in the Land: and this forsooth must be the King and Councell's rule.

3. Thirdly, do they not challenge to themselves the They appoint public
Fasts.
sole power to appoint public fasts, to give the reasons of it, which
ordinarily are, that Gods judgments are incumbent and imminent upon Church and
Kingdom, for the sins of the Governor and Governors, and that the
Government is amiss. And the consequent or effect of these fasts is too too
frequently and ordinarily some Commotion, Sedition, Rebellion, or at least,
some change of Court, Council, or Session.

I cannot here pass by a story as true as strange. While King James was in
Scotland, two French Ambassadors A strange affront offered to King James.
had remained some months there with Him: being ready to depart and take their
leave of the King, the King for His own and the French Kings greater Honor,
sent on a Satterday for the Major and Aldermen of Edinburgh, commanding them
the very next Monday to Feast the French Ambassadors. The Ministers of
Edinburgh to affront the King, and the King of France too, on Sunday
intervening indict a solemn fast to be kept to morrow on Monday, the day
appointed the Saturday before by His Majesty for the entertainment of the
Ambassodors. The Magistrates of Edinburgh proudly contemn the command of the
supreme spiritual powers, and out of carnal affection, feast the King and the
French Ambassadors Royally and Nobly on Monday; when the Ministers and the good
Christians of Edinburgh fast, the King, the Ambassadors, and Magistrates of
Edinburgh feast. o facinus horrendum. But to avert Gods judgment from the
Land, the Major and Aldermen were cited and convented (here was some favor
that the King and Ambassadors were not, but I will tell you it was partiality
and corruption, for some of the Ministers were the Kings Pensioners, and this
kept the King free) to be censured for their high Scandal in contemning so
solemn a Fast. There was much work: but the King who was the chief and almost
sole transgressor, with interposed delays, and much solicitation and
prudence, took off the edge of their zeal, and the pursuit ceased.

4. That this Assembly is Sovereign in all Spiritualls, None Preaching Treason
is censurable by any but by them.
admits no Coordinate or Coequall power, far less a superior, is clear in
this; That if any Preacher be charged before King or Council for any offense
to be punished, if they in any case can cloth it with a spiritual respect or
circumstantiate it so, that it may be qualified for the Spirltuall High
Sanhedrim, the party cited and convented, may and ought to appeal to the
General Assembly, as to the Judge competent. Mr Andrew Melvil, if I be not
deceived, was the first Spiritual Councellor of Law, that taught this way. It
is certain that what they Preach in Pulpit is not censurable by King,
Parliament, nor Council, or any Judge or Iudicatory else. There be two reasons
for it, one is that, Spiritus Prophetarum subjecti prophetis, the spirit of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets only, 1. Cor. 14. the the other is, whilst
men are there in that infallible pulpit, they are ruled by some superior good
spirit and they dare not blame or condemn them, least they should offend and
sin against the Spirit, and so although a man Preach downright Treason, if it
be in this place he is privileged. It is known and, I hope, yet remembered that
after King James of blessed memory anno 1584. made many good Laws to curb the
Insolency of Ministers, did by Statute and Act of Parliament declare His
Supremacy over Ecclesiastical Persons and causes; condemn all Iudicatories in
use which were not by his own authority established; (He meaned the
Presbyteriall.) That the Ministers then did importune the King to repeal them:
and when that would not do, did they not fall at last into open railing
against him in pulpit, as an enemy to Christ and his Kingdom; they dispersed
through the Kingdom infamous libells against his Person and Royal Honor: they
branded him as an Apostate from the truth, and reviled him as an offspring of
the cruel and bloody house of Guise. This forced the King to put out a
Declaration anno 1585. in Print yet extant to vindicate himself and his Honor
from that unchristian and more then disloyal calumnies. At or about the very
same time some fugitive Ministers out of Scotland, pretending they were
persecuted, did in the Pulpits of London, with their foul mouths, rail
against His Majesty, the wisest and learned of Kings: so that the Scottish
Ambassador was forced to complain to Queen Elizabeth of it; Her Majesty gave
present order to the Lord Bishop of London then, to silence all the Scottish
Preachersthere.

Now that this Sanhedrim is only competent Judge in Spiritualibus, and that one
convented before King and Council, may decline his and the Councel's
authority, although he has Preached Treason, appears clearly. 1. First, if
this had not been an ordinary practice before this time, what needs the
making of that Act of Parliament, anno 1584. declaring it Treason in all time
to come to decline the Power and Jurisdiction of the King and His Council. 2.
Secondly, has not James Gibsonne Minister at Pencaitland witnessed for or
against himself rather in this case in Print: who publicly in his Preachings
compared His Majesty unto Jeroboam, told him He should be the last of His Race,
reproached him as a Persecutor; and much more of this zealous stuff: who being
convented before the King and Council, and accused of those pious crimes, He
with that boldness becomes His Order, justified all, saying to His Majesty,
As long as you maintain these cursed acts of 1584. the tyranny of Bishops, you
are a Persecutor. And adds, that as Jeroboam for the leading of the people of
Israel from the Laws of the house of Judah, and from the true worship of God,
was rooted out, he and all his posterity: so should the King (if He continued
in that wicked course, maintaining those wicked acts against God) be rooted out
and conclude the race. much more to the like purpose was said, and if any look
upon the Privy. Council Books of the Kingdom of Scotland, he will find this a
truth. He was convented 27. December, anno 1585. This man was an Oracle
consulted, and gave his answer in Coppinger, Arthington, and Hacket's
extraordinary motion, which story you know better then I.

Mr Black, Minister of St Andrew's, was convented too before the King and
Council about the same time, who appealed from King and Council to the
Presbytery or General Assembly; this last had spoken against both King and
Queen. There was a great business for the two men's appeals, their brethren
sided so much with them that the King had too much to do. At last out of more
then warrantable indulgence His Majesty was content to insist no farther
against them before His Council, but to remit their censure to the General
Assembly it self: before which it was clearly proved, that in pulpit they had
spoken reproachful and Treasonable speeches, yet could the King by no power or
entreaty obtain of them to inflict any punishment upon them, because said they,
They knew not with what Spirit they were overruled.

I will shut up this point with one instance more then sufficient to make the
truth of what I say to appear. Before King James came to the Crown of
England, it was ordinary in Scotland to have a General Assembly once a year,
and oftener pro re nata, upon any great exigent. The last which was kept during
His Majesty's abode there was Anno 1602. in the close of which the next ensuing
was appointed to be at Aberdine, Anno 1603. in the interim the King succeeding
to Q. Elizabeth, and being in England, He was so much taken up with the
affairs of the Kingdom, that He was necessitated to lay aside those concerned
Scotland; and for this reason His Majesty thought it fit to adjourne the
Assembly (unto which he had a special eye, knowing their turbulent
disposition, and experienced in it whilst he was present amongst them) to the
next Summer in Anno 1604. When the time appointed was come His Majesty's more
weighty affairs not suffering him to think upon the Assemblies business, He
gave order to Prorogate it to another and longer day; which was accordingly
done by public Proclamation, authorized by His Honorable Privy Council of
that Kingdom. Notwithstanding all which, some Thirteen or Fourteen Godly
zealous brethren must needs meet at Aberdine at the day appointed for the
Assembly. They established and formalized the Iudicatorie, by constituting a
Moderator, a Clerk, and other essential Members of the Court. The Lords of
Council understanding this contempt, sent a Gentleman of good quality and
place, with an Herault at Arms, to discharge and dissolve the Holy meeting.
The Commissioner and Herault were entertained with as much respect, as before
they had given reverence to the Proclamation issued out by the Sovereign
authority of the King with the advice of His Honorable Privy-Councell. The
Holy Fathers in the great Sanhedrim protested and professed, that in Conscience
and Duty to Almighty God, they were bound to preserve the Churches right, and
could not, would not, give way to that power the King Sacrilegiously usurped,
which properly and natively belonged to the Church virtuall, the Assembly. They
kept and continued the Assembly some days, and finding that no more of the
holy Brotherhood came to join with them, they dissolved, and to preserve the
holy right of the Church appointed the time and place of meeting for the next
Assembly. The King hearing this, gave order to His Privy-Councell to cite and
convent them before them, and to punish this High contempt. The more zealous
Champions of the Lord of Hosts appeared, and with an undaunted courage gave in
to the Lords of Council a Protestation, a Declinator from the Kings Council,
and appealed to the next General Assembly, as the sole and competent judge in
this case and cause. The Kings Attorney or Advocate, by order from the
Councell-Table, was ordained to pursue them criminally before the Lord Justice
General, and that upon the Act of Parliament mentioned before Anno 1584. upon
which Order, the one half confessed their fault and easily made their Peace,
and obtained pardon. The zelots were convicted of Treason, ad Terrorem and
exemplum, more then for any other end or respect: and only banished the
Kingdom. Of whom the most part thereafter upon their confession and submission
were pardoned, came home, lived and enjoyed their own, or at least as good, if
not better Benefices. Sir, are these things consistent with Monarchy, or the
obedience is due to Sovereignty and its Highest Courts?

So absolute and uncontroleable is this High Celestial Court, that it
commands, Conscience and Soul, disposes The Sovereignty Ecclesiastical
Tyrannizeth over conscience body and Estate.
of body and estate in the point of Religion, that if you conform not in all,
neither Soul, nor Body, nor Estate can be in Peace, nay no toleration can be
allowed where this sovereignty domineereth. And to make this power of the
larger extent, it is certain, their faith and things necessary to Salvation are
of greater latitude then that of the Council of Trent.

If any does not, after a little time granted for information, conform and
subscribe to their confession of Faith, (which is more in negatives and
destructives, then affirmatives and positives) their rule of government, their
manner of Worship, and what else in their opinion is necessary to Salvation,
(and in this I am sure they are more rigorous then ever God or Catholic Church
was, for if you dissent but from them in a Theological tenet, it is Heresy)
you are forthwith excommunicated, and given over to the Devil: after which
upon the remonstrance of a Commissioner from the Presbytery to the Civil
Judge, there is a warrant from Supreme authority given out to command you to
conform (this is different from the Writ De excommunicato capiendo) or then
within few days to be put to the horn (that is outlawed.) Upon disobedience
the tender conscience not conforming, the outlawed's estate moveable (Chattells
we call it) become proper to the King. God knows, little of this benefit
comes to the King's Thesaurer, but a Donater to the escheit, which ordinarily
is the Convicted's mortal Enemy for a little composition has the right made
over, and has the benefit of the escheit. If within year and day he give not
obedience and conformity, His whole Revenues and Rents of immovable goods
forfeit to the King during his life time. Some Enemy of His, or Favorite of
the Thesaurer's, obtains the King's Right, and the King has little or
nothing of it. Here you have him stripped of all his Estate moveable, immovable.
Yet here is not an end: but still upon Remonstrance of the Presbyteries or
Church's Commissioner, another writ goes out, which they call Letters of
Caption (that is, if I mistake not, the tant'amount of the writ de
Excommunicato capiendo) which is directed to all Sheriffs, Stuards, Provosts,
Bailies, etc. to seize and secure his Person wheresoever it may be apprehended,
and to commit him to close Prison as a Rebel. If he skulk and hide himself,
then upon the same Remonstrance goes out a writ, which there they call Letters
of Intercommuning (I know no thing in the Law like this) the intent is that
none of the Kings Subjects commune or confer with him coram or personally, or
by Letter or interposed Person keep intelligence or correspondence with him;
otherwise the intercommuner is to be judged and reputed to be a Rebel of the
same guiltiness. You will be pleased to remember this, when the Church
requires all these of the civil Magistrate (so they are pleased to term
Sovereignty) he is bound to grant them. Now, Sir, I pray you consider if this
is not in many respects worse then the Inquisition; when an opinion in a
Theological tenet different from the assured faith of those Gamaliels may
bring a man unto all those troubles. Only to make amends for this, remember
this authoritative way preserves a Church from Haeresie, Error, Superstition
and Schism.

There is another practice of the power of this Court, This Court is Judge of
Treason in relation to Religion, and of fit and worthy Counselors for a King.
that for the glory of God, the honor of the King, the good and preservation
of Church and Religion, it may assume to it self to be Judge of what is
Treason, what is not: who are fit Counselors for a King, who not.

Practice is the most sure infallible and clear proof and demonstration of
power. I will give you one in the case of Treason, that none dare to say it is
a Lie, and which can be made good by the authentic and public Records of
Parliament and Council of Scotland, and their own Noble acts of general
Assembly.

When King James, about the age of Josias, (when in holy writ it is recorded of
him that he began to seek the Lord with all his heart) had taken the
Government of the Kingdom in his own hand; and did Reign and Rule with such
prudence incomparable, admirable, that none could justly except against Him or
His Government: yet such was the restless ambition of some, who could not with
patience endure the trust of others, especially of that Noble worthy Esme Duke
of Lennox, His Majesty's nearest Kinsman and highest Favorite, and that justly
for His most eminent Noble endowments. These discontented Gentlemen laid down
a resolution to get the King into their hands and power, and to thrust out that
Noble Prince. They watched an opportunity, when the King came to His sport of
hunting near to Saint-Iohnstowne, with an ordinary attendance, (the Noble
Peer staying with others at Edinburgh for the King and Kingdoms better
service) surprised him fearing no ill, seized his Person, carried him along to
the Castle of Ruthen, kept him so that none could have access to him, till he
was forced to command the Duke of Lennox to depart the Kingdom (which out of
zeal and love to the King he did in Winter embarking at Dunbrittane, came to
France and dyed shortly after) and to change all his servants they disliked,
and to surround him with themselves and their own. They kept their King in
captivity the space of nine months, suffering none to come at him, but such
as they pleased. The wise King put a good face upon a foul business, seemed
to like well of them and their courses. Nevertheless the best and most knowing
of Subjects grumbled exceedingly to see their Prince so abused. The
Conspirators understanding it, did advise upon the best course to satisfy the
people and to bring them to approve their way. They wrought with the chief
Rulers of the Synagogue, and prevailed. At the next general Assembly they give
in a Remonstrance to them then sitting in Edinburgh, declaring the
Extraordinary reasons that moved them to secure His Majesty's Person in the
Castle of Ruthen: their zeal to the Reformed Religion, which was in imminent
and apparent danger by the practices of the Duke, who was sent from France to
Scotland of purpose to corrupt the young King: their care to secure the King's
Royal Person, whom the Duke intended to conveigh privately to France: their
desire to free the Subjects from the bloody tyranny and oppression both of
their lives and goods by the malicious disposition, and insatiable avarice of
those who were about him and overruled him; and a great many more specious
pretenses, (which are not much different from these of this time;) upon this
Narrative the humble Petition to this Superlative Sovereignty was that the holy
Brotherhood would be pleased to give an approbation to this their Heroic and
Christian fact, and whatsoever was their judgment they would obey it with this
proviso, that it should be made known to all good Christians within the
Realm. The demand was pious and just, the holy Assembly secured from erring
and error, and not encroaching upon any thing merely civil, but in a case of
so high concernment in ordine ad spiritualia, as competent Judges do take the
case into their consideration, and after mature deliberation, being assisted
with a fansied infallible direction give out their verdict, authorize and
approve all in substance or circumstance to be holily and justly with much
zeal and discretion done. In all this they exceeded not their power, and that
because what was done, was for the advancement of God's glory, the honor and
personal safety of the King, and public good of the Kingdom: That all good
People may rest content and be fully satisfied, it was further ordained, that
all Ministers shall upon their return to their Parishes intimate so much to
all their flocks; and withal exhort all People to esteem the actors as good
Christians and Patriots, that for the causes above mentioned were necessitated
to take this course, to preserve Religion, to rectify the errors of Court,
which were brought and wrought to that height that both Religion and Policy
were in the greatest imaginable danger. The Ordinance was accordingly performed
to no small grief of honest Subjects and Christians. Sir, if there were no
more instances what do you think of this?

It is worth your notice taking, that this Noble Duke dying in France, who
before His coming to Scotland had been bred in Popery, became a Protestant
when He came thither, and was King James his Convert. While he was a dying,
Romish Priests were most earnest for access to reconcile him to that Church;
but he adhering to truth, and protesting withal his Promise to his Cousine
King James, would admit none and dyed in the Communion of the Protestant
reformed Church.

This high Court, the general Assembly, in ordine ad The Sovereignty of the
Assembly is above all Laws, and may repeal them.
spiritualia, challenges and practices a Sovereign power above all civil
Laws and Statutes and Acts of Parliament. And that with that power that of it
self it may repeal and condemn standing Laws, and Acts of Parliament, which
are in practice and observed within the Kingdom.

To give you a recent example and instance of this; Since this Assembly of late
in this distemper has recovered it is place and power, the general Assemblies
of Glasgow and Edinburgh have damned Bishops as Antichristian and against
their Reformation. I wave this. More, they have secluded Bishops or any
Churchman from having any voice in Parliament, Conventions, or Council. Thus
by their own most proper Ecclesiastical authority they have made void many
Acts of Parliament there, which before were in force and practice. As that in
anno 1584. declaring it Treason to call in question the power and authority of
any of the three Estates (that is Bishops, Lords and Commons) or any one of
them. This act was made only to preserve the privileges of the
Ecclesiastical estate inviolable. This is evident by the King's Declaration
put forth the year following 1585. Again they have made void another Act of
Parliament in anno 1597. Ordaining Ministers that should be provided by His
Majesty to Prelacies to have Vote in Parliament, as being the third Estate.
Another in anno 1606.

The same Assemblies, did declare the Acts of the Assemblies of Glasgow, Perth,
etc. null, void and unlawful: which notwithstanding were enacted as Municipall
Laws, obedience commanded, and practiced in the greatest part of the Kingdom.
How much King James his happy memory is blasted, by these supercilious new
Orders of those Assemblies, my Pen blusheth to express.

The same Assemblies have condemned the high Commission Court, declared by Act
of Parliament. And this is done upon this ground which proves their
Sovereignty in spiritualibus, because it was not consented to by the Church:
That is, the vertuall Church, the general Assembly.

When I consider these things, I cannot sufficiently wonder how the high Court
of Parliament of England, has swallowed and sworn their Covenant, which in
it is right sense does establish a Court above King and Parliament. Judge you,
Sir, if this Oath be in Iudicio, veritate and justitia.

If King and Parliament be subordinate to this Court in All Iudicatories are
subordinate to this Sanhedrim.
spiritualibus, or in temporalibus in ordine ad Ecclesiastica, all the reason
in the World will plead, that it is most just, that all Iudicatories
whatsoever, even the Supreamest from whom lies no appeal, submit and subject
themselves to it.

The holy Fathers of this Court have showen their Right in this point too. To
confirm this, fearing I have wearied you, I will bring but one instance, and
spare to trouble you with more.

This Story can be made good by Records which I am to tell you. And first, give
me leave to inform you, That the Lords of Session (who by Act of Parliament
are so) are in all Civil causes the Supreme Iudicatorie of the Kingdom under
the King. No Judgment passed there can be rectified or reduced by any
Iudicatorie, under the King and Parliament, but by themselves, which is only
by suspension of Execution, of that is judged and decreed, or by action of
Reduction: This is nothing but provocatio a Philippo male edocto ad Philippum
rectius edoctum. This thus premised I come home.

Mr John Graham, one of the Judges of that associate body, had commenced an
ordinary and proper suit before the Lords of Session, obtained Decree and
Judgment according to his Libell. After which, a rumor was noysed abroad,
that the Writs and Evidences, upon which his suit and the judgment upon it
were founded, were forged and false. The general Assembly took notice of this
injust decree, as they to whom the inspection of Religion and Justice
belongs, and who were bound not to suffer such an unjust judgment to take
place and be executed. They send for M. John Graham commanding him by their
authority to pass from his decree, to make no use of it against the Party
against whom it was obtained, and that because it was purchased upon false
grounds, and it gave occasion of great scandal, that he being a Judge should
make use of such writs. His answer was, if any would challenge his Decree or
Judgment upon any just ground, he might have his recourse to the ordinary
Judge, and take it away by way of reduction, but so long as it was not reduced,
it concerned him to take the benefit of it. Then seeing that they could not
prevail by admonition, they threatened him with Excommunication, if he did not
what they enjoined. He appeals from them to the Lords of Session, as the only
Competent Judges in such cases: notwithstanding they resolve to proceed against
him. The Lords of Session finding themselves interessed, and the Assembly
usurping upon them and their power, in this proceeding against one of their
own number, who had appealed to them in a civil cause already judged by them,
directed some of their number to the Assembly, and desired them not to meddle
any more in that business, as being merely civil, and no ways belonging to
their jurisdiction. This produced no other effect, but incensed the holy
Fathers to rail against the Judges as wicked and corrupt men, who sided one
with another whether it were right or wrong. The business at last came to this
height, that the Lords of Session, (who would not suffer them to encroach upon
their Privileges) by virtue of that delegate power and authority they were
invested with from the King, threatened to outlaw them, and to proclaim them
Rebels to the King, if they proceeded any further, and would not admit of the
appeal. The Assembly finding themselves too weak and not able to make their
part good by power (in which case only they will be Martyrs) fell from the
pursuit and all was quieted.

Sir, I pray you to consider in what condition are they that live under such a
government that is boundless and universal, will give Laws to King, Council
and Parliament; Repeal theirs at pleasures; reduce and make void Decrees and
judgment of Highest Iudicatories etc. What Peace or Tranquillity can there be
in such a State or Kingdom? Give me leave to tell you a true story. It is known
and lamented by all good men this day, how King James His Soul was vexed with
them, that many times they have made Him fall out in tears. A Noble man, a
most wise man, then Chancellor, seeing the King extremely troubled at the
miscarriage of the Ministry, said to Him: Sir, no man is to be blamed, that
you are so much troubled with the Ministers, as yourselfe; for when they do
any thing amiss, you never cease till by Your Royal prudence and authority
you set it aright again: but would you leave them to themselves, the very body
of the People would rise up against them, and stone them out of the Kingdom.
His Majesty returned a most pious answer, worthy to be written in letters of
Gold in Marble, that all Kings may learn it: My Lord, says He, your advice is
shrewd Policy, but your Counsel is not good piety; If I had no more to do
but to serve my self of them for a Politic end, your advice is good, and I
know it would prove so. But God has appointed me a Nurse or Father of his
Church, it is my charge from my Lord and Master to preserve his Church, and not
to ruinate it. Which if I do, God will ruinate me and my posterity.

King James in the Conference at Hampton Court has well observed, that this
Ecclesiastical Government prepares way, and ushereth in a Democraticall
government. And he tells also, that in His Mother Queen Mary's absence, and
in his own Minority and nonage, it was much thought upon and intended. Their
Maxims of Divinity lead to it, for they say, Respublica est in Ecclesia: The
Church and her Policy are the House, the Civil government is but the Hangings,
which necessarily for decency and good order must be made conformable to the
House. Monarchy is enmity against the Church. Catherwood in his book entitled
Altar Damascenum, gives you it in down right terms, Natura insitum est
omnibus Regibus in Christum odium; and in his Preface, or Epistle (I have not
the book by me) he calls K. James, Infens^ssimum and infestissimum purioris
Religionis hostem. And that they may now exercise all their power, and bring
the Kingdom to a Popular State, which was not so feisable before, it is more
then probable, and much to be feared, and with great prudence to be prevented;
because the General Assembly has in it now the prime Noble men of the
Kingdom, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Lords; the most active and knowing Knights
of Counties and Esquires; the wisest Citizens and Corporations, and this in the
Capacity of Ruling-Elders, who discontented are able here to make a Faction,
call King, Session, Council, or whom they please before them, because of their
supreme, universal and independent jurisdiction. And this Iudicatorie cannot
*err in its determinations, for it is undoubtedly secured from error, and
assisted with infallibility.

This divine policy has another sacred trick to preserve its A Holy trick
which hatcheth all Sedition and Treason.
Sovereignty and to continue it, which is this. The General Assembly
ordinarily meets but once a year, yet at the end and close of every General
Assembly, there is a choice made of some Commissioners, (a Committee) who are
to reside, or at least upon any necessary occasion to be at Edinburgh. These
are the virtuall Assembly, and their power continues till the next General
Assembly. They are in the first place, to intimate to the King the desire and
demands of the Assembly, and to see all due civil Sanction and confirmation
given to it. the King, His Council, His Parliament can change nothing of their
sacred decrees without their consent. What ever new occurrence is in Church or
State pro re nata, these Commissioners are to give order and to see, ne quid
detrimenti Ecolesia capiat. It is true their orders bind only in the interim
betwixt the two Assemblies, and the next plenarie General Assembly may
derogare, abrogare, obrogare etc, yet give me leave to tell you truth, these
great Delegates with their power have so much influence upon the next General
Assembly, that their (...) precognitions and predeterminations, are formally
and Legally enacted. Nor is this to be wondered at, for the Achitophels and
Ioabs of Church and Kingdom, the best head pieces of greatest depth, Preaching
and Ruling Elders are in this Iunto.

Here are all disturbing Seditions, and treasonable courses hatched and
conceived; whether it be Treason against the King, Sedition in State or
Kingdom, the change of Court, the removing of Courtiers from the King, the
surrounding of him with others etc. The next Assembly ownes all their courses,
decrees them under pretense of Piety, Reformation of abuses, removing of
Malignants from the King and from His Counsel, from being Judges in the
supreamest Iudicatories of the Kingdom, etc. By this means at pleasure, when
and where they will, they procure Parliaments to work for their own private
ends. To facilitate the work, order is given to all Presbyteries, to command
all the Ministers to Preach to their flocks, to make and keep Fasts, for the
danger the Church is in, that the King is inclinable, nay inclining to Popery,
that there are none in trust or power by Him, in Court, Council, Exchequer or
Session, but such as are Popish or Popishly affected: and such they must be, if
they once determine it. And woeful experience has confirmed it, that worthy,
Innocent and deserving men have suffered, and the King has been forced to
abandon His best servants.

This close Committee has all these prerogatives: 1. During the interim
betwixt two Assemblies, they had trust to see that all the Orders and Decrees
of the grand Consistory should be put in execution. 2. Next upon any exigent
intervening, they have the power by their influence upon all the Presbyteriesin
the Kingdom, to make them go which way they thought fit for their own ends,
both to make the Ministers Preach their sense, and to work with all the people
to believe the posture of affairs in Church and State were as they informed
and represented them. 3. Thirdly, here were all things prepared for the next
great meeting of the General Assembly.

By these means things projected were effected. This way the Queen Regent was
put from Her Regencie. This way Queen Mary was expulsed Scotland. This way King
James His captivity at Ruthen was found to be good service. This way that Noble
Duke of Lennox Esme was made a Papist, and the King forced to abandon him, and
he to depart the Kingdom in Winter being sick, and shortly after dyed in
France. By this means, if I be not deceived, was that infamous day the 17. of
December, anno 1596. atro signanda lapillo, renowned for a most horrid
insurrection in Edinburgh against King James and His prime Counselors. I beg
leave to give you a short account of it.

King James whilst He was King of Scotland, by all foreign Kings, Princes
and States, was admired for His The Story of 17. December 1596.
extraordinary Royal endowments. Ambassadors from many beyond Seas at the same
time, and almost constantly were with Him. The smallness of the Patrimony of
that Crown, was not able to maintain that Royal deportment He kept. Besides
being too too Royally liberal and magnificent, His coffers were empty, and at
this time scarce was His Majesty able to maintain the necessary charge of His
house in that measure which was suitable to so Royal a King. To rectify this,
the King with the advice of his Counsel, entrusted with all his Rents,
Revenues and casualties, Eight prime men of good worth and integrity, Officers
of State, Counselors and Judges. This was done that all might be rightly
regulated, and before all things His Tables at Court kept like a Kings, that
foreign Ambassadors might not espy any want which might derogate from the
Honor of King and Kingdom. The ordinary Tables of the Court were regulated;
the Courtiers daily allowance was retrenched; which they could not away with.
They and other discontented persons did reproachfully call these men, The
Octavians. They who grumbled at this, and would right themselves, to gain their
intendment, hit upon the ordinary and safest way, that was to begin with the
Church. They inform, the foreign Ambassadors did work upon the King to turn
Papist: it was like they would prevail, for these Octavians were all such in
their hearts, and dissembled only in professing to keep a communion with the
Protestant Church; if those were not removed from the King, and good men put
about him, Religion, Kingdom, and all were undone. When this had been often
informed and suggested, early in the morning on the 17th day of December, three
of the Kings Domestic Servants came to M. Walter Balcanqual's house; The
Ministry of Edinburgh, and others Commissioners of the general Assembly, with
some of the best Christians of Edinburgh are sent for, they meet there. The
Kings Servants inform that all was undone, if they did not in time and
speedily prevent; for the Marquess of Huntlie, (this was the late Marquess
who came occasionally the night before to Court, and it is true he was Popish,
but God knows he was free of what he was charged with) say they was with the
King till twelve a clock at night in his Bedchamber yester-night; it is
resolved upon to re-erect Popery, and so many of your best Citizens and
Christians are to be seized upon; some to be sent to Blacknes, some to
Innernes, some to Dunbritton, etc. The case was apprehended in that zeal which
became the cause. The resolution taken, was, that M. Walter Baelcanquall being
to Preach that very day in the Chancell of Saint Giles Church, which they call
the little Church, after Sermon and Prayer done, he should desire all good
Brethren and Christians to meet immediately forthwith there for the good of
Church and Religion. Noblemen, Gentlemen, Preachers, Burgesses, all who
affected the good cause did meet. M. Robert Bruce was appointed by common
consent Moderator. It is laid open in what case Church and Religion, State and
Kingdom are: the urgent instant necessity is made to appear. The result of
the determination was, that presently they go to Arms, and by holy force, to
pull from the King's side those Popish Octavians: That a Letter be written to
John L^^d Marquess of Hamilton to come to Edinburgh, to be Captain of the
Congregation; and in regard the King had made defection from the true Religion,
He being the nearest of the blood should come and take the Government upon him.
I know the just Copy of this Letter is extant to this day. They run to Arms,
the word is, The Sword of the Lord and Gideon. The good King was in the place
of Justice; the prime of the Octavians with him; hearing something of the
uproare and tumult, by a secret passage, he and some other go up to the
Exchequer house overhead. A great Lord was head of the Congregation, he and
some others came Commissioners to the King, were admitted, demanded those
^^tavians to justice. The King asks this Lord, how durst he against His
authority, His Laws, His Proclamation keep unlawful meetings at Edinburgh
(for the King before had discharged the meeting of those Commissioners of
Assembly, or any other meeting whatsoever without his Royal warrant.) The
Lord, with courage in zeal to a good cause, told the King that he should see
ere long they durst to do more. The Lord, or some other, takes hold of one of
the Octavians Gown, who was President of Session; but he pulls his Gown out
of his hand, and conveyeth himself down to the house where the Lords did sit
in judgment. In fine, the King and Lords were forced, to shun the danger of
this tumultuarie insurrection, to close up the doors, and some to stand with
their swords drawn if any should offer violence to break up the doors. Some
good Subjects especially Alexander Home of Northborvick for the time Provost of
Edinburgh, and Roger Mackmath (whom King James ordinarily called His Bailie)
with others well disposed and Loyally affected Subjects, and namely the
Hammer-men rise up in Arms for the King, who partly by smooth words, and
partly by threats, hushed and housed the Factious and Seditious. The King came
out of the place of Iudicatorie, and on foot, attended with many Nobles,
Gentlemen, and other good Subjects, came to His Palace at Halyrude-house in
Peace: where immediately in the afternoon, he convened his Privy-Councell, and
by his Wisdom and Authority so repressed and punished that insolency, that
all the time of His Reign, the like Barbarous treacherous course was never
attempted. I hope you are the more apt to believe this, when you remember what
a Petition or Declaration was presented to Queen Elizabeth at Green^^ch anno
1582. to remove from her Service and Trust such as they know were not well
affected to the Religion and Church.

Sir, I could make it appear how all Seditions almost and Rebellions in that
Kingdom, have been set a foot or fomented by this Government Presbyterian: How
neighbourly Feudes have been increased and entertained: How Moneys collected
for the relief and support of Geneva, were by the chief Gamaliels and
Presbyters interverted, employed to raise and pay Soldiers to aid and assist
the Earl of Bothvell and his accomplices in Rebellion against the King. I fear
I have wearied you already, the Subject is everlasting and I am weary of it.

If I should give account of the late practices and tenets of this late
Covenant, it were possible to let you see that it has far exceeded all the
mischief ever their forefathers did, although they tread in the same
footsteps. The reason why I have spared it is not I feared it, I hope to
discover it sometime to the World by anatomising it fully. Next, I hope, you
have espied the Noble passages of it, and are sufficiently confirmed, that
nothing can be more destructive of Monarchy, and the Peace of any government.
To shut up all, give me leave, in the close, to give the Articles of their
Apostaticall Creed inconsistent with Monarchy, which they hold as the twelve
Articles of the Apostolical Symbol. I will touch only the prime of those;
for for their other Articles, they are so many and of so vast an extent
abounding in Negatives, that as King James says well, he that would keep them
is not able to keep them in his Brain, but must keep them in a Table Book.

The Articles of the Dogmaticall Presbyterian Faith inconsistent with Monarchy.
1. AS I have said before; They Preach and maintain that the Church is the
house of God, the Their Dogmaticall Creed.
civil Policy and Government are only the hangings.

2. Next they believe, all Ministers are pari consortio honoris and potestatis
praediti, that there must be a parity in the Church. Join these two together,
and you have a fair way for Democracie.

3. They vindicate to themselves and their Consistory, a sovereign, complete,
universal, independent power in all things spiritual that concern Salvation,
they have not only the directive power but the Legislative also; and all
temporal things in order to Salvation and Religion come within the verge of
their Scepter. All sovereign Power, (wheresoever you fix it, (whether in one,
as in a Monarchy; or in few, as in an Aristocracie; or in many or all by
vicissitudinarie turns) have only the Executive power to do as they command;
and is bound to preserve by it is Power, Laws and Arms, their sacred and
celestial Privileges and Sovereignty.

4. Whatsoever Laws civilly enacted by King or Parliament they conceive to be
against the Laws of the Kingdom of Christ, by their native proper
intrinsecall right immediately derived from Christ, they may repeal and make
void, discharge the Subject to obey them. They may decree not only different
Laws of their own from the standing Laws of the Kingdom, but contrary,
contradictory and destructive of them. And have withal so much coactive power,
that if obedience be denied to the Laws of this Sovereignty, they can destroy
the Souls of the Subjects, by delivering them over to Satan.

5. No Minister Preaching in Pulpit, Sedition or Treason, or railing at King,
Council, the prime Judges, is accountable, or punishable by King, Parliament,
Council, or any Iudicatory whatsoever; But from all he may appeal to the
Sanhedrim and Consistory as the sole and proper competent Judge.

6. What Corroboration or civil Confirmation, or Sanction they demand of the
King, which he is able to do civilly (for they will give him no formal
interest in any sacred or religious thing) He is bound to Grant it, and to obey
them as Christ's immediate Vicegerents: otherwise they may Excommunicate him.

7. Reformation and preservation of Religion, especially to prescribe the way
and Orders for Reformation is solely theirs.

8. The King is bound to put their Orders in Execution; but if neither He, nor
His Council, nor His Parliament will do it, the Inferior Judges, the Nobles,
the Commons, nay every individual man to his utmost power, at their direction,
are bound to do it.

9. That they may without warrant of supreme Authority, Assemble where and
when they will, for God and Christ's cause, and for the Liberty and Peace of
Subject and Kingdom in ordine ad spiritualia; and there they may Covenant
together, swear and subscribe for the glory of God, the advancement of
Religion, and conspire and combine in a mutual defense one of another in this
holy Cause and League.

10. They teach and maintain, that all Sovereignty and Majesty in a King is
originally, immediately and properly derived from the Community, and that
only by way of a fiduciary trust, so that it is habitually and radically still
in the People, and the King has no greater portion or proportion then He has
by the first popular fundamental Constitution. And in case of deficiency, the
collective body may supply in Church or State the defects of His Government.
For mal-administration the King is censurable; For enormous errors He is
deposable, and they may disinherite His Posterity.

11. That a defensive War is lawful against a bad King, or a weak King
seduced by Malignant Council.

12. They may oppose and resist all His Officers and Commissioners by force and
violence, if they come to execute His illegal commands. And if He will be so
obstinate that He will come in Arms against these good Christians, they resist
not His Authority, but His Will: nor His Office, but His Person.

Besides their practice, upon these grounds, is to bring all cases all causes
under their cognition and Judgment, sub formalitate scandali, by which the
King is robbed of His Sacred Prerogative; The Judges of their authority; and
all Subjects of their Right and quiet. The rest of their Extravagant Maxims
inconsistent with Monarchy and the Peace of Government are reduceable to those
heads. More then this you desired not.

Sir, being infinitely obliged to you, and honoring you much for your worth
and Excellent parts, cursorily and hastily, I have written this answer to you.
Not intending thereby to reproach any person particularly whatsoever, but to
lay open to the World how dangerous a Government this is, not only for
Monarchy, but for all Governments whatsoever: and that our eyes being opened we
may choose rather to endure any torment temporary, then to enter into this
treacherous and damnable Covenant, destructive of Religion, King, Church, Peace
of all, and the Liberty of the Subject. To swear to these things as
established de jure divino, and to put on poor People to act Treason and
Rebellion, making them believe they are Confessors and Martyrs. If this give
you any satisfaction, I have what I desire: If you doubt of the truth of any
thing, I hope I am able to make all here good by faithful and authentic
Records, or Testimony of such as are worthy of trust. I pray you keep it for
your own use only, for I should be loath any but a Friend see it, it is so
rudely done, but I dare say truly and faithfully.

God save his Church from this Scourge, and give us Peace and Truth, which
shall be the daily Prayer of

Your poor Friend and obliged Servant.


