A COPY OF COLLNEL MASSEYS LETTER: Of all the particulars of the great Fight
between him, and Prince RVPERT, at Ledbury on Wednesday the 22.th of April,
1645.

With the number and Names of the Chief of those that were Killed, and taken
on both sides. AS ALSO The taking of to Piece of Ordnance by Colonel MASSEY at
Lydney.

Die Jovis Maii, 1. 1645.
Commanded to be Printed, and is published according to Order.



LONDON, Printed by THO: FORCET, 1645.

A Copy of Colonel MASSEY'S Letter.
SIR:
ON Tuesday last the 21th. of this instant April, an Dom. 1645. Prince Rupert
marching all that Night came the next Morning, Wednesday the 22th. before
Ludbury; where J then was, but the Enemy intercepting 8. Scouts, we had no
Intelligence, till they were near at hand. The Enemy advanced, and charged
into the Town upon us; and my self (with diverse Gentlemen. viz. Major Harlow,
Lieutenant Colonel Kerle, Major Bacchus, Captain Gifford, Captain Mo^e, and
Captain Baily, with some others and some common Soldiers, with the assistance
of 200 Musketeers out of the County forces received them; And so soon as we
received the Alarm, we drew out upon them, and marching close up to them, fell
on them, beat them to a retreat, and made it good against them, so long till my
Foot might retreat a secure way to Gloucester. After the foot we marched off,
and out of the town we had two or three hot Charges upon them, where we slew
near 40 of the Enemies men, and the most of them that were killed were
Officers, at which Charge (as it seems) the Lord Hastings with some others of
quality were slain. On our part we had very few killed not above 6 or 7. But
J was enforced my self still to Charge in the head of all my troops to
encourage all the Warwick and Northampton horse; J and my Officers berring the
heat of the day.

At length, intending to retreat to our place of advantage (some horse of those
fent to me not standing to it, as they should have done) the Eneme got in
amongst our Foot; but we redeemed that again, and marched off into the field.

The Enemy have sent us a list of the Prisoners which they took from us: the
number by their own list is 110 Prisoners, but above 80 of those were none of
my men, only such Country people as they swept away with them in their
retreats, that did never bear Arms, only they carried them away to cause them
by money, or making friends for exchange to redeem themselves: my Major,
Sergeant major Bacchus is desperately wounded in the head, and was carried away
Prisoner by the Enemy to Hereford. Major. Harlow had a slight wound in the
head, and another in the arm, but came bravely off; Captain Baily and Captain
Foster, with some other common men of ours are taken Prisoners by them. J have
sent for their freedom by exchange of some of those Prisoners J took from
them, many of them being of quality, enough to redeem them all if they were
thrice as many.

Prince Rupert sent me word by my Trumpetter that J sent, that in the fight he
sought me out, but knew not till after, no more then J knew him. But it seems
we charged each other, and he shot my horse under me, and J did as much for
him. At that Charge many Commanders of theirs fell.

Prince Rupert is (J hear) very much enraged to undertake so great and
toilesome a march, and so much to miss his end. J had by Gods blessing my
intentment, and stopped his present march Northward, to God be the glory.

Prince Ruperts Army by the report of the Country, is noised about to be 6 or
7000 Horse and Foot: who are now upon their march again toward Ludlow, and
so, as J hear, intend for Salop, if they be not prevented again, which must
be by a more considerable strength then J have.

The forces that were with me, were in all about 5000 Foot, and 350 Horse, nor
were these all with me at Lydbury, for my Guards were not come up.

The Enemy brag little of their getting, but lament much; the Names of the
Commanders and Officers that were slain by us, J shall send you by the next.

April the 25. 1645. Your humble Servant, E. MASSEY.
Postscript.
MY last letter told you that Lydney house was stred and Sir John Winter ran
away by the light of the flames, and for have overran 2 of his great Gunnes,
one demi Culverin one Sakre, and three brases of Iron murderers, which he left
behind at Lydney to do a curtesy. Sir John fired all the way he went, till our
forces drove them to Chester pursuing him over the bridge.




Whereas some Malignants have noysed abroad that a great defeat has been
given to Colonel Massey; and have been so bold as to report it to have come
from Colonel Masseyes own mouth, and that he having lost 150 Prisoners
retreated to Gloucester, that himself was wounded; flying away with (...) horse
which is so false; and full of poison and Malignancy, to desparage the
proceedings of that g^lant Gentleman that I dare warrant you it has been
drawn out from Oxford, only to lesson the honorable Victories Colonel
Massey has obtained with but, an handful of men. It is therefore thought fit
that this letter (coming from Colonel Massey himself the same being also
confirmed by diverse other letters) should be Printed and published to make
those Malignants ashamed, who have formented such abominable, and filthy lies;
which however those viners seek to poison us by being permitted in the bosom
of the City, yet a sudden course will be taken with them.

The Malignants have not only done so in this business of Colonel Massey but
in diverse other things, and when we have notice of some Victory obtained by any
of the Parliaments forces, then presently they raise some lie or other of a
second charge or something they will have to lesson or extennate the former.

I wonder how any impudent Malignant that has stood so stiff in charging so
great a loss (as has been reported upon Colonel Massey,) can for shame show
their faces to those they reported it.

But hereafter other manner of course wi^^ be ^a^en with the broachers and
fomenters of such Malignant lies.

FINIS.

