THE PICKLOCK OF THE Old Fenne Project: OR, Heads of Sir JOHN MAYNARD his
several SPEECHES, TAKEN In Shorthand, at the Committee for LINCOLNESHIRE
FENS, in the Exchequer Chamber. Consisting of Matter of Fact. Matter of Law.
Presidents Quaeres and Answers.


LONDON, Printed by J. B. 1650.

The Picklock of the Old-Fenne-Project.
Mr. Goodwin,
I Shall observe this Method in answering the Council on the other side:

First, I shall speak to the matter of Fact. Secondly, to the matter of Law.
And thirdly, I shall cite some Presidents in the point.

Sir William Killagrew has mis-stated the matter of Fact in his Printed Case,
for therein he alleadges that the Commissioners first invited the King to
recommend to them an Undertaker; whereas it appears otherwise in the Kings
Letters, and in three of his Letters the King varies. The Undertakers, which no
question was by Sir Robert Killagrew, Sir William Killagrew, and Master Robert
Longs procurement. The Kings first Letter is most observable, therein are
couched all the fallacies of the Undertakers, and the foundation of the
project: They informed and persuaded the King, that he might appoint and
command a Tax to be laid of a Mark the Acre, without any respect to the
interest of particular persons, or consult the owners: And further, That the
Tax should be made by the Commissioners on you, without Verdict; and that their
judgment must be the rule of proceedings in this case, and not the consent of
the Owners, whose averseness must not prejudice the Public good. In the
Kings second Letter, the Earl of Lindsey, Sir Rob. Killagrew, Sir William
Killagrew, are recommended by way of Mandamus to be Undertakers, As we expect,
and we do command all manner of persons to forbear to make any particular
bargains or works, etc.

In the third Letter it is still by way of Mandamus, We have made choice of him
(meaning the Earl of Lindsey) to be the Undertaker. And in the Kings last
Letter, the King offers to give his Royal Assent. The Commissioners began
legally, for they impannel'd a Jury of the Neighborhood, of twenty five, who
found that the Level was not hurtfully surrounded. When Mr. Robert Long saw
how the Country was bent, he wisely sold his share for 1500l. to Mr. Herne,
Mr. Nicholas Love, and one Mr. Hoyden, and they were to be at the charge of
draining. Likewise Mr. Long persuaded Mr. Thomas Killagrew, and Mr. Henry, to
sell their shares, but Sir William Killagrew would not be advised, but built a
fair House on another folks Lands, and fortified it, and furnished it with
men, Ammunition, and Artillery.

Muskets, Horsemen, and Pistols, in a Warlike manner, and entertained French
and Dutch.

Yet the Country would never yield possession, but always opposed Sir
William, and the rest of the Undertakers, the Countrymen were Pursuivanted,
imprisoned by Councell-Table-Warrants; some we hear were wounded and
affrighted with Mastiffe-Dogs.

Many men were utterly undone and wearied out, and forced to subscribe and
enter into Bonds.

As Soon as the Courtiers saw the Commissioners joined with the Country, they
procured worthy Patriots to be put out of Commission, and Courtiers, Servants
to the Undertakers, and many of themselves were Jndges and Parties; After the
Jury found the Level not hurtfully surrounded, they were laid aside.

And the Commissioners, many being Undertakers (and consequently Judges and
Parties) got upon Boston Steeple, and adjudged all they saw was hurtfully
surrounded. They might, as well have got upon Paul's Steeple, and adjudged all
the rich Meadows and Marshes on both sides the Thames to be hurtfully
surrounded, when they are overflowne by Land-floods.

If you will see to the end, you must observe the means, The Undertakers gave
the King 3000. Acres by way of bribe; and the King gave them 14000. Acres, for
being Judges and Parties; they might be their own carvers.

Likewise the Undertakers gave some thousands of Acres to diverse Lords of the
Council, and both the Secretaries.

I pray Observe some material circumstances: First the time when this project
was set on foot.

It was in the Intervals of Parliaments, the only harvest for Projectors, then
Parliaments were damned at Court. And observe the persons that were the Patrons
of those Projectors; they were inveterate enemies to Parliaments. The Lord
Treasurer Weston, who was accused by Sir John Elliot in 3 Car. and most
isntrumental to imprison those worthy Members, and Sir John Elliot died a
Martyr for the Parliament in the Tower: The Earl of Lindsey, father and son,
and all the Undertakers, have been against the Parliament. Alas there is a
bed-roule of other grievances, and 200. witnesses were examined when Mr. Ellis
had the chair. So much in brief to the matter of Fact.

For the Matter of Law, we conceive these Undertakers are higher offenders then
the Earl of Strafford, for they have not only endeavored, but traitorously,
maliciously, and premeditately, against the light of their own consciences and
knowledges, have actually subverted the fundamental Laws of the Land, and
introduced an Arbitrary and Tirannicall Government: For contrary to the 29.
Chap. of Magna Charta (which is confirmed by thirty two Sessions of Parliament,
whereof the Petition of Right, and the Act for the abolishing the Star Chamber
are two; they have imprisoned our persons, and destroyed Juries, and put out
the two eyes of the Law, Liberty, and Property. Likewise contrary to the 15 and
16 chap. of the great Charter, wherein it is expressed, That no man shall be
compelled and distrained to make new ban^^ or bridges, but as formerly; the
same is confirmed in the 25. Ed. the 3. chapter 2. the 1. of H. 4. chap. 12. the 6.
of H. 6. chap. 5. the 8. of H. 6. chap. 2. the 12. Ed. 4. chapter 7. the 6. of H.
8. chap. 10. All which are knit up in the 23. of H. 8. chap. the 5. yet the
Undertakers, many being Commissioners, have acted point blank against these
known Laws.

For the Commissioners could do nothing without the Jury, which are Judges of
the matter of Fact, and they are to find the defaulters according to the 12.
of Edw. 4. and the 23. of H. 8. and to amerce individuals, and not a general
level; and the Commissioners are to approve of such Amerciaments.

Object. But say they the undertakers, by the 23. of Hen. 8. the Commissioners
may proceed without Juries by view, according to their discretion.

Answ. Sir Edward Cook explains discretion, which is Secundum consuetudines and
leges Angliae, otherwise their proceedings are irrational and illegal;
Besides the Commissioners could not lay a Tax, because they were new molded of
Courtiers which were Judges and Parties, and the Country Gentlemen contrary to
Usance, Custom, and Law, were put out and Strangers put in, some not worth
forty Marks per Annum, which by the Law they ought to have been; so they were
not legal Commissioners, because they were Undertakers, and consequently
Judges and Parties, and could not contract with themselves: Had they been
legal Commissioners they could not do it without Juries, and they laid it
likewise upon no body, for generals signifies nothing, but as I said formerly,
it must be done by the Jury upon individuals. All the Kings Letters, which are
supposed to be indicted by Master Role ^ Long, were diametrially contrary to
Law; The King could lay no Tax, nor give the Commissioners leave to proceed
without Juries, nor to appoint Undertakers, which is contrary to the 43. of
Eliz and the 4. and 7. of King James: In the 43. of Elizabeth there is the
first mention of an Undertaker, and therein he is limited and directed, what,
how, ^^d with whom he must contract: A Commissioner likewise has no authority
to contract, but the Contract must be by the direction and approbation of the
Lords, Owners, and Commoners, under their hands and seals in writing indented:
Here was no such matter, they followed their own lights, which were Ignes
fatui, and so fell into those pits they dug for others.

They made a Contract with the King, which was an evil bargain, and they had
the Kings Royal Assent, which signifies nothing out of Parliament, who ought
by Law to speak only by his Writs; For Det Lex Regi quod Rex Legi, quae Rex
jure potest, Rex ea sola potest; but my fellow Courtiers, thought they were
above and beyond the Arm of the Law, though they were both reached and
overreached at the last.

The Judges for Ship money were accused for Treason, by reason it was
destructive to Propriety, yet that was not three in the pound; but the
Fenne-Project cuts our estates asunder at a blow.

In Ship Money the King had a Judgment by the sworn, or rather forsworn
Judges, but the Undertakers were the old Levelling Courtiers, destroyers of
Propriety, and got the Kings hand to Letters of their own inditing; and just as
the Earl of Strafford produced blanks for all his horrid illegal Acts, as
disarming the Protestants and arming the Papists, so did the Undertakers
produce the Kings Letters upon all occasions, especially to destroy Jucies, and
to take away our real estates, without consulting the Owners.

It is the same with the Forest business, for the Judges some of them would
have made all England a Forest; So this generation of Undertakers would have
incorporated, and got a standing Commission in all Counties, and so made
England the Level, and England to be surrounded, and in short time would have
taken all we had; This was as bad as their Levying War against the Parliament:
And we conceive Sir William Killagrew did actually Levy War against the Nation,
and had his project succeeded we had been no more a People: Alas the Law of the
Land was used by the Undertakers as a Murderer in Frame, whose joints are
broken on the Wheel, whilst he is yet alive, and in good health. I should
Answer the Counselors prolix Argument, but I know not how to find the
beginning, nor end of his ravelled discourse; He has played the part of a
flourishing Writer, who usually buries the Capital Letter in a curious knot,
and instead of enucleating the business, I can see no kernel but husks and
shells.

In my apprehension the Gentleman that spoke last has gleaned his Argument
from my Lord Finch, and some of the Ship Money Judges; All he has spoken, is
for the Kings Prerogative against the Law, that is not now Ala mode. But Master
Goodwin, I beseech you observe, this Honorable Committee has spent one
quarter of a year on the point of possession, and I hope we have beaten the
Undertakers from that Post.

Then they pressed to state their case in Law, and show their title, so that we
hope now we have gained that Post likewise, and not only got possession, which
is eleven points in Law, but the twelfth likewise.

Now the Undertakers are building Castles in the Air, or rather upon a
Quicksandy foundation of the old Arbitrary Government of convenience and
inconveniency, if that point crack, then they will fly to necessity, the old
Court Retreat: Let, them traverse their ground and sense as well as they can,
we shall hit them still, and beat them at their own weapon.

The Presidents.
IN Queen Elizabeth's days this project was set on foot by the then Earl of
Lincoln, who procured a Patent from the Queen to drain some of these Fens: when
he was making his Works and new Drains, contrary to Law, the Country rose, and
the Lord Willoughby of Erby, then Governor of Berwick, raised the Trained
Bands and assisted the Country in beating the workmen off: the Earl of
Lincoln, complained to the Queen of the Riot committed by the Lord Willoughby,
who was sent for to the Council Table: The Lord Willoughby proved the Earl of
Lincoln had not the Countries consent, but some few Tenants and others of his
own faction, that it was for private ends and lucre, not only to drayne
himself and drown his Neighbors, but to take great propoitions of Land, which
were never drowned for melioration; and the means my Lord of Lincoln used was
bribes to Courtiers to procure such an illegal Commission that himself and his
friends might be Judges and Parties; and that it was against the 23. of H. 8.
The Queen upon full hearing of the business in great passion resumed her
Commission, and was wroth with the Earl of Lincoln, who had been committed to
prison, but that his Lordship made great friends at Court, and the Queen
thanked the Lord Willoughby of Erby for assisting her good people in so honest
and just a cause.

In the first of King James the same project was set on foot and a Petition was
delivered unto his Majesty as though it had proceeded from the Country, just
such a Petition as Sir William Killagrew procured by two Alehouse keepers: For
it was only a few of the Undertakers faction, like to the Agreement of the
People: Sir, Miles Sands had made many friends at Court, and the King was
prepossessed it was a glorious work, and for the Public good, and the King
was made believe the Isle of Ely, and the Southside the River Grant was
hurtfully surrounded; but when the King was hunting, the Lord Garret of
Chippenbam, Sir John Cotton of Chenely, Sir John Paytan of Iselham, and Sir
Thomas Gee acquainted the King with all the cheats of the Undertakers, that
they being Judges and Parties had made many thousand Acres, that were never
drowned, and the most part of the Land which was the better by overflowing in
the nature of River Meadows, to be Land hurtfully surrounded.

That they dreyned and meliorated a little hurtfully surrounded Lands of their
own, and pejorated ten times as much Lands; which were never hurtfully drowned
before, and that which was most gross and palpable, they must not only have a
third part of that Land so pejorated, but a third of such Lands as were never
drowned, for melioration: When the King was fully instructed, he enjoined
secrecy, and went up to the Parliament and discovered all the Undertakers
sallacies, and concluded wittily.

It is just the same case, my Lords, at though a pack of thieves should give me
20000 l to give them a Pat^^ under my Broad Seal to rob my Loyal Subjects of
200000 l. by the which I should perjure my self, and become a Theif and Tyrant:
Thereupon the Parliament ^ung it out for a base cheating Monopoly; some of Sir
Miles Sands friends moved he might have satisfaction for the vast sums he had
expended; Sir Edward Cook answered, Let those pay him that set him a work, and
further added, that it was fit Sir Miles should give compensation to the
oppressed Country; for trying experiments against the Owners consents.

The Maxim is, Plura potest interrogare Asmus, quam respondere Aristotele.

But let the Undertakers ask as many and what questions they please, we hope to
give full satisfaction to this Honorable Committee; but I will state the most
difficult Quaeres, I ever heard of from the Undertakers, and give them
satisfactory Answers.

The Quaeries.
1. Quaere. Why did not the Country pay the Tax of a Mark the Acre?

Answ. Because it was illegal in many respects.

First the Commissioners were illegal that laid it on the Country, for the
Nobility and Gentry were put out of Commission, and there was a new Commission
where the Earl of Lindsey, Sir Robert Killagrew, Sir William Killagrew, Master
Robert Long, and diverse Privy Counselors who were bribed, and Courtiers were
put in their rooms contrary to usance, prescription and custom, which is the
Law of the Land; and many of them had not a foot of Land in the Country,
whereas by Law they ought to have forty Marks per Annum.

Had the Commissioners been legal they could not lay a Tax without a Jury, and
had the Commissions and Juries been legal they could neither lay a Tax to make
new works, which is cleared by the 15. and 16. Chap. of the Great Charter:
Likewise neither the Kings Commissioners nor Jurors have any thing to do with
the matter of Undertaking, that belongs only to the major part of Lords,
Owners and Commoners; For they may Contract under hand and Seal with whom they
please, so that Commissioners cannot be Undertakers, for then they should be
Judges and Parties: Likewise it is against sense and reason that Commissioners
and Undertakers (as they were) should Contract with themselves, and give the
Countries Lands one to another, as my Lord of Lindsey gave a Warrant to the
Commissioners to Judge 14000. Acres dreyned, his Lordship being the chief
Undertaker himself: Besides the Tax was laid on no body, because it was laid on
the Level in general, whereas by Law it ought to be laid on particular Towns
and Individuals, so it could not be paid legally by any body.

2. Quaere. Whether is not dreyning good for the Common wealth?

Answ. There are two kinds of dreyning, the one is by the Ancient Commissions
of Sewers.

The other by the more recent way of Undertaking; both these are legal and
illegal.

Legal dreyning ( viz.) by Commissioners of Sewers of the Nobility, and
well-affected Gentry of their own Country, and honest goodmen of the
Neighborhood, who are to be Jurors, and consequently Judges of the matter of
Fact, who return Defaultors according to the 12. of Edw. the 4. and thereupon,
the Commissioners confirm their Amerciaments: were the old dreyns thus legally
scowred twice or thrice the year, there would little Land lie hurtfully
surrounded, this is good for the Commonwealth. But illegal dreyning, that is,
to put in Courtiers, sharers, sharks and strangers to be Commissioners, and by
the Kings Prerogative to make them Judges and Parties, and to empower them to
take away the Free Peoples Estates against their consents by view only,
without Juries, and to make new Works for private ends, contrary to the great
Charter, which is confirmed by 32 Sessions of Parliament: This is destructive
to Propriety, and the bane of the Commonwealth: Undertaking is a distinct
thing from the Commissions of Sewers, neither has the Kings Commissioners of
Sewers nor Jurors any thing to do with the matter or manner of undertaking:
This is likewise two fold, legal or illegal; Legal undertaking, according to
43 Eliz. is when the major part of the Lords, Owners, and Commoners, do agree
with any person or persons, or Corporations, for a certain sum of money under
their hands and Seals, for the draining such Lands as they find hurtfully
surrounded. This is good for the Commonwealth, because it is with their free
consents, so Volenti non sit injuria.

Illegal undertaking is when the Kings Commissioners of Sewers, or others by
virtue of the Kings Authority, by violence, oppression, or
Councell-Table-Warrants, will Act as Undertakers against the Owners consents;
this is the height of Arbitrary Government, and Tyranny it self, which is a
speedy destruction to a Nation, and the Pest of the Commonwealth.

3 Quaere. Whether drayning Land hurtfully surrounded, is good for the
Commonwealth?

Answ. If the Drayners be legal, and do more good then hurt, it may be good
for the Commonwealth; but if they do more hurt then good, it must of necessity
be bad for the Commonwealth. The Undertaker is like the Tinker, he stops one
hole, and makes two; he draynes one Acre for himself, and drownes two of his
neighbors; nay sometimes twenty: certainly this is bad for the Commonwealth.

Yet he has drained Lands hurtfully surrounded, and drowned Lands not
hurtfully surrounded, and must have a third part of those Lands that were never
hurtfully drowned for Melioration, so the same former distinction still holds
good, Legal is good, illegal is bad for the Commonwealth.

4 Quaere. Whether is this Level of the Earl of Lindsey hurtfully surrounded?

Answ. There are two Verdicts, and forty Witnesses, that have proved it is not
hurtfully surrounded; But if draining Lands hurtfully surrounded were good,
then draining Lands not hurtfully surrounded certainly is bad for the
Commonwealth.

For to draine dry Land, it is to take away the Humidum Radicale, and so
consequently to spoil it: Besides to drain the Lands floods from our
fodder-Fens, and to divert the Rivers from overflowing, we should not have half
so much Fodder for our Cattle in winter.

This Level is of this condition in both respects, and the Earls new Draines
do much more hurt then good, by draining dry grounds, which the Undertakers
keep for themselves, and leaves the worst to the Country, and so contrives
their new Draines, that they hurtfully surround those Lands which were not
hurtfully surrounded before; so they drown us to drain us, but the remedy is
worse then the disease.

There are several Witnesses that have proved this, and we can demonstrate it
mathematically.

That by opening the old Draines, it would be far more beneficial to the
Commonwealth, and it would not stand the Country in the tenth part of the
charge: All which can and will be done by a legal Commission of Sewers, of the
well-affected Gentry of the Country, and honest Jurors of the Neighborhood.

5. Quaere. Why has not the Country drained themselves all this while, will
they be like the Dog in the Manger, neither do their selves good, nor suffer
others to help them?

Ans. The Country are, and have been ever willing, but they have been
obstructed these sixty years by powerful Courtiers, as Lord Keepers,
Attorneys-Generall, and the dissolution and Intervals of Parliaments have
impeded us; but when we are rid of the Undertakers, the work will quickly be
done, both for the Honor and profit of the Nation, without fraud or coven.

6 Quaere, But had not the Earl of Lindsey the Major part of the Lords,
Owners, and Commoners consents, his Lordship had a Petition signed with many
hands.

Answ. Ten for one of the Lords, Owners, and Commoners, are against the Earls
undertaking; Those hands for the Earl were procured by two Alehouse-keepers,
and most of them were Cottagers, no Lords, and but very few Owners and
Commoners.

7 Quaere. Would it not be a brave improvement to have Rape and Cole-seed,
Hemp, Flax, and likewise Corn?

Answ. They calculate and reckon without their Host, that the Customs will
amount to 10000 l. 1 s. 8 d. ob. per annum.

This is Ala Mountebanco, or Sharlaton like: Our Fens as they are, produce
great store of Wool and Lamb, and large fat Mutton, besides infinite
quantities of Butter and Cheese, and do breed great store of Cattle, and are
stockt with Horses, Mares, and Colts, and we send fat Beef to the Markets,
which affords Hides and Tallow, and for Corn, the Fodder we mow off the Fens
in summer, feeds our Cattle in the winter: By which means we gather such
quantities of Dung, that it inriches our upland, and Corne-ground, (which are
contiguous half in half. Besides, our Fennes relieves our neighbors, the
Uplanders, in a dry summer, and many adjacent Counties: So thousands of Cattle
besides our own are preserved, which otherwise would perish. So take away a
third of our Fens, you extinguish our Rents in our Commoning Houses, and our
Pastures, and Corne-ground, proportionably; besides thousands of Cottagers
which have no right of commoning, must go a begging, which the Owners connive
at, because they cannot prevent it, being so numerous. So that Rape, Cole-seed,
and Hemp, is a Dutch Commodity, and but trash and trumpery, and pills Land in
respect of the before recited Commodities, which are the Oar of the
Commonwealth.

8 Quaere. Is it not pity, when Sir William Killagrew having done so much good
by his drayning, and has spent 30000 l. but that the Country should
re-imburse his moneys, there is all the conscience and reason in the world for
this?

Answ. First, it has been proved, he has done a great deal more hurt then
good by his new Dreyners, and when the Country shall make use of the
Undertakers Dreynes, we will give satisfaction for them, but they are useless,
nay pernicious and broken Cisternes to the Commoners in Summer, both by
dreyning our dry grounds, so we are constreyned to buy water, and to drive our
Cattle very far in Summer to water them; whereas our old Dreynes have ever
furnished us with water enough. Then on the other extreme, their new Works
have so hurtfully surrounded us, that our Upland and Corne-grounds have been
spoiled by them; this is fully proved by many uninteressed Witnesses, the
Country is daminified at the least 60000 l. by these Undertakers.

9 Quaere. Whether are the old Draynes or the new, most useful for dreyning?

Answ. The old Dreynes are as the natural sinks, or rather Vent of the Body of
the Fens; Suppose a man's fundament were stopped, and that a hundred Issues were
made in the body, the whole mass of blood would quickly be corrupted, and the
body would break out in botches and biles.

So stop the old Sewers, you will quickly perceive the sores or Quagmires will
increase; and whereas there is but one Acre now hurtfully surrounded were the
old Draines duly scowred, if they be stopped there will be ten.

This is proved by Master Thorpe Mathematician, and he gives his reason, which
is Mathematical and necessary. Because the old Dreynes have far greater
descents then the new, so that the old Dreynes were never without water in
summer, which now they want exceedingly, by reason of these Undertakers
Dreynes; which was proved before Master Ellis, when he had the Chair, by
twenty Witnesses.

Likewise the new Dreynes, wanting that descent the old had, the least floods
in Summer or Winter overflow those Lands sooner and longer, which is the cause
that these Fennes are ten times more hurtfully surrounded then before. This is
not my bare information, but Mathematical, or necessary, and proved by many
Witnesses: For I say what Master Walpoole has alleged is not Mathematical
at all, but pragmaticall and fantastical.

It is a strange Chymaera and Phrenzie in the Undertakers to expect
satisfaction of the Parliament for the money they have expended; It were just
the same, as though the old Ship Money Judges should be preferred to be Judges,
and that their Fines should be restored, and they rewarded over and above, and
the present Reverend Judges who have adhered to the Parliament should be
displaced and Fined.

O Monstrum horrendum in form ingens.
Quodcunque ostendas, mihi, sie incredulus odi.
We hope the Parliament will either Fine them, as they did the Ship Money
Judges, or the old Farmers of the Custom-house; and that this Fine shall be
employed by Lawful Commissioners of Sewers, toward the doing of the Work, or
relieving the poor; or that we shall be left to the Common Law, as the
Parliament left Sir Robert Barkham, Captain Hall, and Master Waldrum.

If Sir William Killagrew find himself agrieved, he may then appeal to the
Parliament.

The Rule in Divinity is, Deus non vult contradictoria, Sic Parliamentum non
vult contradictoria; In the first Grand Remonstrance, this individual business
is declared to be an Injustice, Oppression, Violence, Project and Grievance,
and they particularize it, For this horrid Project furnished the Parliament
with those choice Materials, which builded their Grand Remonstrance.

These are their express words:

Large Quantities of Commons and severalls have been taken away by the color
of the Statute of Improvement, that is, by falsifying and adulterating it,
which is meant by the 43. of Eliz. and by abuse of the Commission of Sewers
(which dissolves that excellent Law of the 23. of H. the 8. without their
consent, and against it) which is the destruction of the Great Charter,
Petition of Right, the Act for abolishing the Star Chamber, and all the
fundamental Laws of the Land.

And against twenty of the Parliaments Declarations, which are in Print to the
view of all the world; yet the Undertakers are so impudent that they are
confident to pass a Law, and to inslave us, who have conquered them; but we so
Confide in our Trustees, that we know it is impossible, being contrary to the
principles of a Republique, who acknowledge the Supreme Power resides in the
People, and the Supreme Authority is derived from them, and the Soul and heart
of the Commonwealth is Liberty and Property.

These Undertakers were formidable Monsters to the Country, and had they
continued a little longer, probably they would not only have torn in pieces,
but devoured and swallowed up the whole Nation; For they were Legislators out
of Parliament, and Anti-Legislators, Parliamentarians, and
Anti-Parliamentarians, Bribers, Judges, Juries and Parties. They were
Legislators, for they have made several Laws, and they bribed the King with
3000. Acres to purchase his Royal Assent, though I believe they might have had
it for nothing. This was the Root of all our Miseries; For could the Parliament
by their humble Petitions have obtained the Kings Royal Assent, as these
Courtiers could do with ease by their importunity, opportunity and flattery,
this War had probably been prevented: Certainly the Undertakers were the only
Impeders and partition walls betwixt King and People; and they had closed and
been reconciled, had it not been for such Imposters as they, who cared not for
God, King, nor Country, but sought themselves and preferred their own gain
before the Public.

That Prince is unhappy that prefers Persons or Individuals, before the
Representative of so numerous a People and great Nation. They were
Anti-Legislators, for all their Laws were point blank against the great
Charter, Petition of Right, and all the Fundamental Laws of the Land; they
were Parliamentarians to call a Parliament, to sell Ship Money for twelve
Subsidies, and to raise money to make Wars against the Scots, who wrestled for
their Liberties, and were not such tame slaves, as they expected: When the
Parliament would give no Subsidies to inslave themselves, then the Courtiers
dissolved that Parliament. That the Undertakers were Bribers is upon Record,
and likewise that they were Judges, Juries, and Parties: Sir Edward Cook was
wont to say, that it never failed, that those which brake Parliaments were
always broken by them; yet these Undertakers hope to be repaired for their
project, which was only to keep off Parliaments; And this one Project (had it
succeeded) would have commanded all the Land in England to have been at the
Kings disposing; Then all had been their own; for the King was little the
better by such Projects, the Courtiers gained all.

FINIS.

