Upon the Joyful and Welcome RETURN OF HIS SACRED MAJESTY, Charles the Second,
OF England, Scotland, France and Ireland KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. To
his due and indubitate Right of Government, over these His Majesty's Kingdoms
and Dominions. A PANEGYRIC.

Flebile Principium melior Fortuna sequunta est.

Ovid. Met. By THO. MAYHEW, Gent.

London, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Sun in Fleet Street over against St.
Dunstans Church. 1660.

Upon the Joyful and Welcome RETURN Of his Sacred Majesty, CHARLES the Second,
etc. To His Due and Indubitate Right of Government over these his Majesty's
Kingdoms and Dominions.
A PANEGYRIC.
REach me a Quill from some bright Angel's Wing,
To write the Welcomes of our dearest King;
Whilst Vulgar Pens, in modest silence, say,
This lofty Work exceeds their Systema.
And first like those, whom mighty Joys surprise,
Let me weep dry the fountains of min^ Eyes;
Quitt head and heart of Grief, that All may be
The spacious Organ of a Jubilee:
For difficult it is to apprehend,
Much more to express the Joys that thus transcend.
If Peace be welcome to a Nation, rent
With twenty years intestine Discord, spent
And oppressed with armed Rapine, and unjust,
Exactions, made a sacrifice to Lust
And Tyranny, and deluged with a Flood
Of Vulgar, mixed with choice and sacred Blood:
When Persecution stains the reverend Gown,
And Priests before insulting Rage fall down:
When God's Anointed, and our Nostrill's Breath,
By Treason never Paralleled, is quenched in death.
Hence, hence those Tears: Go read Illustrious Men,
Recorded by some Venerable Pen.
Extract from each his Virtues, and you will find
Th'Elixir formed in that Hero's mind.
There was King David and his wiser Son,
Without their great Crimes, modelled in One.
Would you know Adam, or like what a Man
God once in Eden walked; no likeness can
Better inform you than the Soul he wore:
Never was King so like to God before.
This was that Prince, whom we did late behold
Unto his Grave in horrid murder rolled:
Those, Brutus-like, embrued in his gore,
Whom he, as sons, had bred, and blessed before.
Hold, Muse, thou will retrive our ancient cries,
Thou Panegyricks mean, not Elegies.
If Plenty with the Poor may welcome find,
Where welcomer, than to a Land designed
To ruin, and the Monster, War, a prey?
Whose greedy throat has swallowed up, in pay,
And pillage, quarter, plunder, and in prize,
By force and fraud, gifts and gratuities:
The Bounty of his Saints, the Spoils oth' Loyal,
The Lands oth' Crown, and all The Issue Royal,
The Sacrifice from off the Altar took,
(But Oh! the Coal that to that Morsel stook!)
All these, with Contributions, and Excise,
And Customs, not his Gluttony suffice,
But fifty Subsidies he snaps, in short;
And lest his stretched Maw shrinck, there is ready for it
Fifths, Twentieths, Tenths, All, Treason could contrive,
To keep the ravenous Prodigy alive.
On all our pleasant things, and every good,
His hand he spread, like an o're-whelming flood.
If Liberty restored may welcome have
From freeborn men, enthralled, and made a slave
By their own Slaves, who must not only pay
The Lording Janizary, but obey;
Not yield up their Revenues, but the Right
Of their Inheritance to armed Might;
Whose Laws and Charters, like the Gordian-knot,
Are not disputed, but assunder cut.
Whose Heritage by strangers are possessed,
And in whose Habitations Aliens rest;
Whose necks to grievious Persecution bow,
Nor may their Labors intermission know.
If Settlement in State may joy a Land,
Dissolved and broken by the boystrous hand
Of Civil Wars, from its harmonious Chime
Of Monarchy untuned, by th^sawcy crime
Of potent Faction; from its form and frame
Shook into novell Chaos, and a name
Of State unknown, whilst its old Church and State
Stand on their head, the feet predominate.
If Discipline and Doctrine welcome be
Unto a Chri^^ian Church's Hierarchy;
A Church, late excellent for both, but now
Confusion written on her mournful Brow;
Whose Gold is pallid grown, whose pure, refined,
And radiant gold, its splendour has declined;
Whose polished Stones, of late her Ornament,
Are now not only cast by, with contempt,
But Hewn in pieces, that, the Pillars thrown,
The Catholic Building might at once fall down;
And in its stead, as many Sects arise,
As Jesuits and Fanatics could devise.
Its Liturgy with wicked scandal stained,
Its reverend Orders Superstition feigned.
The Holy place to use profane employed
For Beasts; at best, by men unqualifi'd,
Ill-principl'd, worse taught, or not at all,
But mocked and blowed, made even by these a Stall.
Vain foolish Things her Junior Priests have told,
Not touched the sins, which did her Cure withold;
But these cried up, for blessed Reformation,
(The ready way to gain a Sequestration)
False lying burdens brought, and hence extrude
As well her Fractions as her Servitude:
These have not waged with God spiritual force,
Like Jacob, for a Blessing, but a Curse:
Whose ignorance has only made them hold,
To censure every Principle that is old:
Who, for pretense, can tedious prayers extend,
And Nonsense preach, and Treason without end.
And in one Sermon damn (would God agree)
More souls, then that choice vessel saved in three.
Hence our Defections, hence it is we run
Into bypath of Separation.
This way's not right, and the old Standard's down,
And each Enthusiast sets up his own;
From which unpaled platt, more Sects have sprung,
Then if the Dregs of Amsterdam were wrung.
But see a glorious Sun arising, bright
As morning Titan crowned with radiant light!
Who long, in an injurious Cloud concealed,
Exerted has his Luster, and revealed
His all-refreshing beams, and with him brings,
To our blessed Hemisphear, these welcome things:
Thy King, O England, that best Name, which wears
Thy Glory-in it, stamps the Characters
Of Honor and Renown upon thy brow,
Whilst foreign Nations to thy Triumphs bow;
Thy Prince, O England, whom thy rebel Crime
Forced into civil arms, in early time.
And next, (to say no more) to Banishment;
Schools too severe and strict, but that he spent
His time so well, that he has brought from thence,
The Endowments of a most accomplished Prince;
Which acquired Gemms, set in his native Gold,
Heavens eye naught more illustrious can behold.
Old Poets, hush, be still; your Pages swell
With weak and poor Romances, when ye tell
Your story's of the Grecian Traveller,
Or Him, that wandered from the Trojan war.
They never proved such angry Fates as he,
Nor such Encounters met by Land or Sea;
Over which his Valor, like an high Tide run,
And vanquished what so e're it could not shun:
Nor to their Countries, when at length they came,
So much of virtue brought, nor so much fame:
Witness, That for his Crown he would not foil,
With aid of foreign arms, his native soil;
And that he brings his old Rengion home,
Maugre the Circean charms and arts of Rome.
This, England, This is He, that brings thee now
After thy flood of woes the Olive-bough.
To make thee know, that Deluge could not cease,
Till this thy Dove were home returned in peace:
To let thee know, that Heaven would not agree
To grant thy Peace, till made 'twixt Him and Thee.
His are those Feet which welcome claim by right,
Bringing those Tidings, which none other might;
Tidings of peace on Earth, which the most High
Committed only to his Embassy:
For Heaven decreed no Mercy to dispense,
But through the Conduct of his Influence?
Nor any but his sacred presence should,
Stop the long-running Issue of thy blood.
This, England, This is He, who brings thee back
That Amalthean-horn, thou long did lack.
Each now may sit beneath his Vine in peace,
And eat the plenty of his Field's increase:
Not labor still, and still the poorer wax,
Nor sell his bread to pay his monthly Tax.
This is your Oedipus, that does explain
The riddle of your Cheat, and Sphinx is slain:
Your Theseus this, that has the Monster sped,
Who on your Noble sons so long has fed.
Your Hercules, that has destroyed the Boar,
Which did your rich Arcadian fields devour.
Yet your Injustice thus just Heaven controlled,
Who would enjoy your Birthrights, His withold;
And set Oppressors your own rights to invade,
Till his Prerogative and Rights were paid;
Your Honors and Estates by vassail hands
Usurped, whilst you usurped his Crown and Lands;
Servants suborned over you to reign,
Whilst you the Scepter of your Prince disdain.
This, This is He, that breaks those Iron-bands
And Gyves, that fettered thy gaull'd feet and hands:
Who, like St. Peter's Angel, whilst thou sleep'st
Betwixt thy Soldiers, a true Vigill keeps.
And takes thy fetters off, sets open thy doors,
And thy excluded Liberty restores.
And how does blushing Anarchy decline,
And droop, now Monarchy begins to shine?
How do the Circles of false greatness fall
Into their first simple Original?
Those blazing Stars, which late aloft did climb,
How feign, noug^t else appear but froth and slime?
How do those aerie Pageants melt away,
Before the glorious beams of this bright day?
They, who but now, with strength of Arms and Laws,
Did fortify their greatness, and their Cause;
And made our Lands, our Lives, our Liberties,
At best, their Vassail, often, their Sacrifice;
How, like a morning mist, are they dispersed,
Our Rights asserted, and their State reversed?
So true it is; Earth's glories once must fall,
But laid in blood, they cannot stand at all.
This, This is He, that all thy Breaches bounds,
And binds up all thy State and Churches-wounds;
That to thy Brusses brings restoring Balm,
And lays thy tedious Tempest in a Calm:
That sets in Tune thy long disordered spears,
And with composed notes delights thine ears;
Repairs the ruins of thy battered frame,
And re-impresses thy old stamp and name:
Enstyles thee Kingdom, such as Heaven thinks fit
To be, and makes thy Government like it;
Rears up the broken Pillars of thy Peers,
And fixes thy secluded Commoners;
Refines thy Temple's Gold, files off its rust,
Elects her precious stones from heaps of Dust.
And sets them in her Tire, discharging thence
Those Cheats of Ignorance and Impudence.
And now, O Land, with blushes dye thy cheek,
Sink on thy lowly knee, and humbly seek
Thy God's and Prince's pardon: Ah! too long
Have thou thy self undone, in doing wrong
Unto thy Sov'raign's right: thy Treason has
Kept off these blessings, and drawn down the wrath
Of vengefull Justice: but Light now breaks in,
And undeceives thee, and unmasques thy Sin.
Great Providence, whose ways are too profound
And intricate, for human skill to sound,
In this its time, in Men and Devil's despite,
Has brought at once thy Crime and Cure to light.
It Is true; Thou in thy Judgments might have read
Thy sin, but that, like Egypt, hardened.
What meant the Elements? Why all emag'd,
As if in Wars against the World engaged?
The Fire? what flames have in thy Land appeared,
And turned to Dust the Piles thy Grandsires reared.
What ancient Town has escaped its rage? And has
Not this expressed, how fierce thy Maker's wrath?
The Air? What Tempests have the Fabric shook,
As if the Poles from under Heaven were took,
And earth in pieces rending? What from hence
But thy confusion shown, and Heavens offense?
The Earth? How sparingly of late it yields,
Unto the Ploughman's toil; as if the fields,
By some divine instinct were taught, that they
Ought not the Disobedient to obey?
The Seas besides their rude Invasions made
Upon this Island, how have they conveyed
Prodigious creatures to thy frighted shore,
Such as the Nymphs of Thames never saw before?
To show, thy Continent, at that time, held
No less a Prodigy, so paralleled?
But these were Heaven's Hieroglyphics, since
Interpreted to thy Intelligence;
Revealed in season. And thy Prince's Grace
Extends his Mercy, free as thy Embrace;
Who, with thy other blessings, Pardon brings,
The freest and the clementest of Kings;
Who from advantage of his power defies
The vengeance of his private injuries;
Whose Sword, for want of use, may neither rust,
Nor surfett with the blood of the unjust;
Who punishes the Ill, the Good rewards,
Protecteth Peace, and Truth and Justice guards;
Who for Obedience on his Subjects lays
No Rules, but those by which himself obeys
His Sovereign Lord; in Arms no less expert
Then in the Peaceful Gown sage and disert;
Who as a Tutor to his Church appears,
His Country with a Father's love endears,
What less then God inn'd in an human breast
Is such a King, of Men and Kings the Best?
O! with what welcome can thou entertain
This lost Palladium, now retriv'd again?
What Joys can thou express, what Io's sing,
To usher in this rare and Phoenix King?
Unfold obedient arms, and clasp him round,
But with your hearts more than your bodies crowned:
Unfold those doors, and lodge him there, above
The reach of Envy, in those Towers of Love.
Thy Bells must cease, but let thy Tongue still ring
That Peal of Loyalty, God bless the King.
Thy Bonefires must in livelesse dust expire,
But let Allegiance live, like Vestall fire:
Thy Conduits will grow dry of Healthing-wine,
Let Duty be an unexhausted Mine:
These Accidents of Love and Joy must end,
But may the Substance without bounds extend:
And by experience warned, resolve again
No more to quarrel with thy Sovereign;
But make it all thy Practice to obey,
And to thy Caesar, what is Caesar's pay.
And here, though Heaven amazed Earth may tell,
That it has wrought, even now, a Miracle;
Brought mighty things to pass, to puzzle sense,
And human reason for Intelligence;
That the entranced world does yet scarce know,
Whether it be Reality, or no:
And, when the Arm of flesh was tired and spent,
Took up the work, and gav't accomplishment;
To tell the Royalist, there was no need
Of him, to bring to pass, what it decreed:
And Rebels, they should fall without a Name,
And not three Kingdoms have, for fun'rall flame:
Yet Heaven did means and Instruments employ,
Whose merits may not in Oblivion dye.
With Bays no more, the bloody Victour crown,
Nor Conquests, gained with thousands slain, renown:
Let Him, in Triumph, through the City ride,
That conquers with his Weapon by his side;
That can an Army, without battle, beat,
And every Troop, without a Charge, defeat:
That Gideon-like, with his small handful, frights
To nothing the distracted Midianites;
That without blows, makes angry War surcease,
And lays his Country in the arms of peace.
Who those advantages improves aright,
Which others lost, ensnared by Appetite;
From forth whose Loyal and Heroic breast,
His Countrey's love drives his own Interest;
Who knows Obedience better than a Crown,
Which Usurpation cannot make his own:
And such is He, whose Name I need not give,
But as a soul, to make this Poem live;
George Monck, the truly Noble: whose great Name
Shall ever shine 'ith. Firmament of Fame:
We need not Garlands make, nor Statues raise,
For Him, whose worth is Imag'ry and Bays;
Nor do his virtues any Herald need,
Which have their Proclamation from the deed:
What Honor can, or Industry invent,
Is but a perishable Monument;
But never in Ruins, shall that Name be hid,
Who makes his Country's peace, his Pyramid.
And next to him, there is Honor due to those,
Who, Phoenix-like, from the old ashes rose;
This Legal Parliament: who do not do
Their own work only, but the Nation's too.
To those our Peers, who sprung from high Descent
Now shine, their King's and Kingdom's Ornament;
And to those Loyal Commons, whose blessed Lots
Have fallen, to be their Country's Patriots;
Whose words have earnest been, like Judah-men,
To bring their Sovereign David home again:
O! May this three-fold-Cord for ever hold,
And in a lasting Peace these Realms enfold!
Haec ara tuebitur omnes.
FINIS.

