A Modest and Brotherly ANSWER To Mr. CHARLES HERLE his Book, against the
Independency of Churches.

Wherein his four Arguments for the Government of Synods over particular
Congregations, are friendly Examined, and clearly Answered.

Together, with Christian and Loving Animadversions upon sundry other
observable passages in the said BOOK.

All tending to declare the true use of Synods, and the power of
Congregationall Churches in the points of electing and ordaining their own
Officers, and censuring their Offenders.

By RICHARD MATHER Teacher of the Church at Dorchester; And WILLIAM TOMPSON
Pastor of the Church at Braintree in NEW ENGLAND.

Sent from thence after the Assembly of Elders were dissolved that last met at
Cambridg to debate matters about Church Government.

London, Printed for Henry Overton in Pope's Head alley, 1644.

Reverend and Dear Sir,
THe right form of Church Government being more searched into of late time
then formerly, and your self amongst others having written for the governing
power, or jurisdiction of Synods, over particular Churches: We therefore knowing
our selves bound as well as others, to try all things, and hold fast that which
is good, have considered as the Lord has helped us; those Arguments of yours
which are contained in your Book, against the Indepency of Churches; and not
being satisfied therewith, your Book being published in Print; we have therefore
thought meet, in like fort to publish our Answer, and in that way to show unto
your self and others, what yet hinders us, that we do not think your Arguments
to be convincing. In which attempt we have bin the more encouraged by your
profession (which we dare not but believe) that in what you have written, you
have aimed at verity, and not at victory; whereof we are the rather persuaded,
because we do perceive your whole discourse to be carried along without passion
and bitterness, in a spirit of meekness and love, which also we are willing
to acknowledge before all men, to your just commendation, and the glory of that
grace of God that gives you such an heart. And it is our hope, that since you
profess to aim at the truth, and do dispute with such a spirit, as if you
meant so indeed; that therefore it will not be unacceptable to you, if any
weakness be discovered in those grounds whereon you build this persuasion, that
in the present Question, the truth does stand on your side. And as your Book
does breathe forth a spirit of meekness, ingenuity and love; so we hope you
will find, that we have aimed at the like in our Answer; which as we have
written and now published it for the truths sake; and for the help of those
that cannot attain unto larger, and more learned Treatises about this Subject;
So in special manner in love to your self, and our dear Country men and
friends, as in other places of Lancashire, so in your Parish of Winwick, wherein
one of us was born, and the other was for sundry Years together an unworthy
Minister of the Gospel of Christ. Accept therefore we do beseech you, this
brotherly labor of ours, which here we send you, divided into these few
Chapters. We are also willing upon this occasion, to testify our thankfullnes
for that loving respect which we found from you, when we lived together in that
Country; when you were pleased to own us in our sad times. The Father of
mercies be with you, and with all those that love the truth in sincerity; and
bless that Reverend and Grave Assembly, whereof we hear your self are a Member,
that by their wise and holy endeavors, the truth may be cleared, and all
corruptions removed in the Doctrine, Worship, and Church Government in ENGLAND,
to his praise and glory; and the comfort of all those who unfainedly desire
that the Crown of Christ Jesus, and the Scepter of the Son of God, may be
gloriously advanced over all; which is the prayer of

Your Loving Brethren, RICHARD MATHER, and WILLIAM TOMPSON.

A Modest and Brotherly ANSWER TO Mr. CHARLES HERLE His BOOK against the
Independency of CHURCHES.
CHAPT. I.
Containing Observations upon sundry passages in your stating the Question.
THE Independants (say you) deny to a Synod as the name of a Church, so all
manner of power of jurisdiction, either to determine, --, or any way oblige
such as they shall any way represent. page 2.

Unless it could be proved that in Scripture the name of a Church is given to
a Synod, we are not to blamed, though we give not a Synod that name, since we
are commanded to hold fast the pattern of the wholesome words of Scripture, as
sufficient, 2 Timothy 1. 13. though for this we will not contend. But for power to
determine, viz. dogmatically, or by way of doctrine, this we deny not to a
Synod: For that Synod, Act. 15. did put forth such power, and we acknowledge
other Synods may do the like upon like occasion, and their determinations
being according to the Scripture, ought to bind all those whom they represent.

They acknowledge that neighbor Churches may meet and consult, and advise each
other, -- and withdraw all fellowship from any one that shall grow
pertinaciously scandalous. page 2.

And you may add further, that by their messengers being met in a Synod they
may determine by the Scriptures any matter of controversy that may arise.

But for matter of jurisdiction or power of the Keys in excommunication,
ordination, or whatever Censure, they hold it is entirely and only in every
single Congregation, though but of 2 or 3 believers. p. 2.

If any hold so small a number as 2 or 3 to be a Church so complete, as to have
power of excommunication, ordination and whatever Censure, they may if they see
cause declare their grounds for so holding. But for our parts for ought we yet
see, a Church that has such power as is here spoken of, had need to be a
greater number then two or three, even so many as shall be necessary and
requisite for the carrying on of Church-worke, in admonition and reprehension
of one another, as there shall be cause, and therefore they had need to be
seven or more. For a Brother that sins must so be dealt withal for his
recovery, that if he remain impenitent, the proceeding against him is still to
go on by degrees, till at last the matter be brought unto the Church, Mat. 18.
15, 16 17. But in all the degrees of proceeding against him, the persons before
whom he is called, are in every latter step and degree more in number, then
they were in the former, and so the Church being the last is the greatest
number of all. And yet there are three at the least that must be acquainted
with the matter, before it must be brought unto the Church, viz. the brother
offending, the brother offended, and one witness at the least; so that the
Church consisting of those three or four that deal in the matter before it
come into the Church, and of another number greater then they, and distinct
from them to whom the matter is brought in the last place must needs consist of
seven persons, or more. As for that speech of our Savior, where he speaks of
2 or 3 gathered together in his Name, Mat. 18. 20. He does not thereby
acknowledge such a small number to be a Church; but fetches an argument from
thence as from the lesser or less probable, to prove the firm and inviolable
authority of the Church* and her Censures, of which he had spoken before v. 18.
As if he should say, if two agreeing together upon earth shall be heard in
whatsoever they shall ask, and if I be present with two or three gathered in
my name, then much more shall the whole Church, who is a greater number, and a
more solemn assembly be heard in their prayers, and have Christ's presence in
the midst of them, to bind and loose in heaven what they shall bind or loose in
earth. But the former is true, verse. 19. 20* Therefore the latter is true also
verse. 18.

And for excommunication, ordination and censures, there is nothing in
Scripture nor proved in this discourse of yours, that these matters belong
only to a Synod, and not to a particular congreation; yea we conceive it will
not be easy for any man whatsoever to prove, that Synods, and they only have
power to ordain officers, and to excommunicate offenders; and till this be
proved, the Independants (as you call them) need not to relinquish their
judgment and practice in these particulars. Sure it is, that Synod in Acts 15.
did neither meddle with ordination nor excommunication, but only determined
the controversy about circumcision, and gave rules for practice to be observed
of the believing Gentiles, for avoiding of offense among the Jews.

We acknowledge that where there is no consociation or neighborhood of
congregations or single Churches whereby they may with convenience be aiding to
each other -- and whereto the particulars may have recourse -- there a single
congregation must not be denied entirenesse of jurisdiction.

If you acknowledge thus much, (which yet is no more then truth requires to be
acknowledged, and wherein we for our parts, fully concur with you) then we
suppose a man may improve this grant of yours to a confirmation of that
independencie of Churches which you plead against and to a disproving of a good
part of that authority of Synods which you would establish. For if a Church
that has no neighborhood of other Churches; have power of jurisdiction
entirely within it self (as here you do acknowledge) then first let it be
considered whence such a Church has such power, and see if that ground will
not reach to prove the like power in other Churches also. Now we suppose none
will deny, but such a Church has this authority or power by the gift of
Christ, and the liberty which he has granted to every Church as it is a
Church, which we had rather express in Doctor Ames his words, then in our own.
The power it self (namely, in reproving scandals, and purging out the wicked)
of right, or in respect of the first act, cannot be separated from a true
Church: Because it flows immediately and necessarily from its very essence; For
it is contained in that Covenant, whereby believers are gathered into a Church.
Cas. Cons. lib. 4. cap. 24. Q. 4. Now if this be so, that power of Jurisdiction
does immediately and necessarily flow from the very essence of a Church, and so
belongs to a Church, as it is a Church, then it will follow that this power
must not be granted to be in such a Church as has no neighbor Churches, and
be denied unto one that has: because a Church that has neighbors is a
Church, and has the essence of a Church, as truly as that which has none.
Power of Jurisdiction flowing immediately from the essence of a Church belongs
indifferently to all Churches, to one as much as to another, without respect of
what neighbors they have, whether many, or few, whether any or none. Secondly,
let it be considered also what is the end and use of the consociation and
neighborhood of Churches, and the same truth will thence appear also; which
neighborhood where it is affoorded is from the benefit of Churches, but not
for their hindrance and loss; And therefore it may be helpful by casting in
more light, but cannot abridge them of any power which they had before. When
Doctor Ames (Medul. Theol. l. 1. c. 39. Sect. 27.) had said that the
combination of Churches into Classes and Synods, does neither constitute a new
form of the Church, nor ought by any means to take away or impair that
liberty and power, which Christ has left unto his Churches, since it serves
only for the directing and furthering of the same, what says Mr. Paget
hereunto? This, says he, we willingly grant ( Paget. Defense. pa. 107.) Now if
this must be granted, then that dependencie of Churches, and that power of
Synods which you plead for must not be granted; For let a Church have
entirenesse of Jurisdiction before she have any neighboring Churches, and be
deprived of the power when God sends such neighbors, and by this means she
sustaines loss by having neighbors, and comes to be in this respect in worse
condition, then when she had none; which is against the true intent and use of
the consociation of Churches.

Moreover, if this grant of yours stand good, then what shall become of that
which is intimated, page 6. and pa. 10. as a reason against the Independency of
Congregations? where, you say, that it is against the very light of nature,
that the adverse party be the sole Judge, and party too in the cause; and that
it is against all equity that the offended party (meaning the Congregation)
should be the sole and final Judge of the offense? Sure we cannot think that
there can be such a case imagined wherein you would grant it lawful for a
single Congregation to do that which is against all equity and the very light
of nature. And yet you grant that the case may be such that a single
Congregation may have entirenesse of jurisdiction within it self; which seems
to us plainly to prove, that for a Congregation to be so independent, as to be
the final Judge of offenses within it self, is not against all equity, nor
against the light of nature, as is intimated by you in the pages
aforementioned. But since in one place you grant that in some case a
Congregation may have entirenesse of Jurisdiction within it self, and in
another place do seem to imply that it is against all equity, and the light of
nature, that they should be granted, we for our parts are not able to discern
how these things do stand together.

But that too much may not be made of the grant of yours, you do qualify it in
your subsequent words; wherein you say, that this is a case extraordinary, and
falls not within the compass of the Question, which is about the ordinary
rule of Church Government; Whereunto we answer two things. 1 That for a
Christian Congregation to want neighbor Congregations, to whom they may with
convenience have recourse, is not so unusual, as some may imagine: specially
if the state of things, in times and places of general persecution, of
general profaneness, and of new plantations in heathen Countries be
considered. For at those times, and in those places, it is well, if there be
any such Congregations at all to be found (as there was one in London, in the
days of Queen Mary) but it is not like there should be so many of them, that
any one may have many neighbor ones, to have recourse unto. And your self do
intimate in page 43 of your book, that in the remoter part of Wales, and of the
North, such Congregations even at this day, would be so rare, that in all
probability, scarce one could be made up in twenty or thirty miles compass. 2
Suppose the case were extraordinary and rare, would you say that therefore
they may violate the ordinary rules appointed by Christ for Church
administrations, and now lawfully exercise Jurisdiction entirely within
themselves, which if they had neighbors were unlawful for them to do? We
suppose it is good to take heed how far we yield it lawful in such
extraordinary cases, to transgress and violate ordinary rules; left some
body do thereupon infer that though according to ordinary rules Baptism and
the Lords Supper must be dispensed only by men, and by Ministers, yet in the
want of these, the one may be dispensed by a woman, (suppose the Midwife or
some other) and both of them by such as are no Ministers. For as you excuse the
lawfulness of entirenesse of Jurisdiction in a single Congregation, even so
may they excuse these dispensations here mentioned, by saying that the case is
extraordinary, and falls not within the compass of the Question, which is,
what persons by ordinary rule may dispense Sacraments; Wherefore for ought we
yet see it is more safe to hold, that since the dispensation of Baptism and the
Lords Supper, by ordinary rules belongs only to Ministers, therefore there
can be no such extraordinary case, in these days, wherein the dispensing of
them may lawfully be performed by others whether women or men: And since
entirenesse of Jurisdiction must not be denied to a Congregation that wants
neighbors, therefore the thing is agreeable unto ordinary rules; and so may be
allowed in other cases also. Because the administration of Sacraments,
forementioned, is not allowable by ordinary rules, therefore the
extraordinarinesse of the case will not make it lawful; And because the
independent Jurisdiction of a Congregation is lawful in the case
aforementioned, which you call extraordinary; Therefore the same is allowable
by ordinary rule.

There ought to be Synods or Assemblies -- with larger power of the keys to
make Decrees, ordain Pastors, excommunicate members, or Congregations, page 2.

Answ. That there ought to be Synods when occasion requires, we freely grant;
but the Question is not about their being, but about their power; Wherein, that
they have power to ordain and excommunicate any, we do not yet see it proved.
But that they should excommunicate whole Congregations, as here is affirmed,
seems to us to be altogether impossible; For a Congregation being a Church,
it has communion within it self, out of which it cannot be cast, no more then
cast out it self. Ames. Cas. Consc. lib. 4. cap. 29. and 11.

Yet so as in every single Congregation, there be left a power, of public
reprehension, and if need be, of suspension of its own members from the Lords
table; And in case upon such appeal to the Synod, there appear no difficulty in
the matter, or partiality in the carriage of it, it is (if between Members of
one Congregation) rather to be remitted to the Congregation it self, to be
there censured and ended. pa. 2. and 3.

This is not much less, then a clear granting of the whole Cause, for here is
expressly left to the Congregation not only power of public reprehension, but
also power of suspension from the Lords table, yea, and in some case power of
censuring and ending matters within themselves, having first consulted and
advised with the Synod: which course in matters of difficulty and weight, we
for our parts acknowledge very meet to be taken when Synods can be had, and
when they cannot, yet in such cases of weight, it is fit to consult with
neighbor Churches.

Church government ministerial Independents say is equally and fully in every
Congregation. pa. 3.

Answ. That it is equally in one, as much as in another, your self do often
grant, though not equally in one as much as in all: And for fullness, when a
Church is furnished with a Presbytery within it self, by whom the Church should
be governed, then we know no reason, but yours may be owned also.

Above and besides which (namely, the single Congregation) there is no
ministerially governing Church, by any means they say to be admitted. page 3.

Answ. If the Presbytery of a Congregation may be called a Church, then since
they do admit the governing power of the Presbytery, they do admit a governing
Church, beside the Congregation, if by Congregation you mean the whole
multitude of the Members; And if a Synod may be called a Church, and if power
by disputation and disquisition to clear up the rule, and then to command
obedience thereto, may be called government, then they also admit a Synod to be
a governing Church: For the power here mentioned they do allow unto Synods. But
it seems to us that the power is not properly a power and exercise of
government and Jurisdiction, but a power of Doctrine, and so a Synod is rather
a teaching then a governing Church. But that any other Church, be it Synod, or
any other besides the Congregation and its Presbytery, should have such a
governing power above the Congregation and the Presbytery thereof, as that
neither the Congregation nor its Presbytery may ordain their own Officers, nor
excommunicate their own offenders, but both must be done by that other
governing Church; This we do not admit indeed, because hitherto, we have seen
no convincing proofs for the same.

All and every member has (say they) a governing power, as of ordaining their
Pastors and Officers, so of deposing and excommunicating --. pa. 3.

Governing properly so called, we acknowledge not in any, but in the Elders
alone. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Romans 12. 8. Hebr. 13. 17. If that word be ascribed to the
people, it must be understood in a more improper sense, for that which in
propriety of speech were more fitly called Liberty or Privilege. And yet the
liberty when it is exercised about Ordination, Deposition, Excommunication, is
of the whole body Communiter, or in general, but not of all and every member
in particular, as you conceive us to hold; for women and children are members,
and yet are not to act in such matters, the one being debarred by their sex,
and the other for want of understanding and discretion.

We acknowledge that Pastors and other Officers were anciently, and it is to be
wished, thoy still were chosen (at least consented to) by the members of each
respective Congregation. p. 3.

By [ anciently] we suppose you mean, in the Primitive, and Apostolic times;
And if in these times they were chosen by the Congregation, what warrant can
there be to take another course in these days; since the ancient pattern of
Scripture in matters of this nature is a commandment that ought to be kept till
the appearing of Jesus Christ. 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14. etc.

But they are to be ordoined in a Synod only --.

That a Synod has the power, we would gladly see it proved by the Word. But if
these things may be done by a Synod only and not elsewhere, then how will that
stand which you granted in the page before, that in some case a single
Congregation may have entirenesse of Jurisdiction within it self? To be done by
a Synod only, and to be done by a single Congregation entirely within it self,
are not easy for us to reconcile. Further, if Synods consist, as you say, of
Presbyteries and other Commissioners, then there must be Presbyters before there
can be Synods; and thence it must follow that all Presbyters are not ordained
by Synods, but some by other men. If it be said though the Presbyters, whereof
the particular Synod consists, were not ordained by the Synod, but were
Presbyters before this Synod had any being, yet they might be ordained by a
former Synod; The answer is that this does not remove the difficulty. For
still it would be enquired how the Presbyters of that former Synod, and so of
the first Synod that ever was, how they came to be Presbyters: Sure if the
first Synod consisted of Presbyters, then there were Presbyters before there
was any Synod, and so Presbyters have been lawfully ordained, and not by a
Synod.

In a Synod where all the ultimate power of Decrees and Censures resides --.

Answ. By power of Decrees, we understand Power to clear up the truth
dogmatically, for the word translated decrees is dogmata in the original, Act.
16. 4. And this power we confess is in a Synod, though not all in the Synod
alone, but also in the Presbytery of a single Congregation. But for power of
Censures, this we do not see to be in the Synod at all; much less, that it
does all reside in the Synod, and not elsewhere. But when you say, all the
ultimate power of these things does reside in a Synod (though you do imply by
the word ultimate that matters ought not to be perpetually depending, but in
some Judicatory or other be brought unto their ultimate or last period, and
conclusion, wherein we concur with you, yet nevertheless) your meaning is
not sufficiently expressed, what Synod this should be that should have this
ultimate power. For you know there are diverse sorts of Synods, some particular
which are called Classes, some Provincial, some National, and some general,
or Oecumenicall Synods; And we should be glad to know, which of all these it is
in whom the ultimate power of these things does reside, and why it may not
reside in any of the rest; yea and why the ultimate power of censures may not
reside in the Congregation, as well as in any of them.

Whether it be necessary to the well being of a single Church or Congregation,
that where it stands in neighborhood with other Churches, it be equally and
mutually coordinated with the rest, in a dependence on the ministerial
government of a Synod? This they deny, and we affirm. pa. 4.

Ans. By ministerial government of a Synod; you mean, a Governing power of
ordaining Pastors for Congregations, and of excommunicating offenders; for so
you describe the power of Synods, page 3. and page 2. where you say that
Pastors are to be ordained, deposed, excommunicated by a Synod only; And that
Synods have a larger power of the keys to make Decrees, ordain Pastors, and
excommunicate Members, or Congregations; So that the Question is: Whether it be
necessary to the well-being of a single Congregation that has neighbors, so
to depend, on the government of Synods, as that a Synod only and not the
Congregation, must ordain their Pastors, and excommunicate offenders: Which
being the state of the Question, we are content to join issue with you, upon
the same; And to hear your Arguments for the affirmative part.

CHAP. II.
Containing an Answer to your first Argument taken from the manner of
Government, in the Jewish Church, laid down. Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 10. 2 Chronicles. 19.
8. 10, 11. Psalm. 122. 4, 5.
THat the Government of the Jewish Church was by Gods institution national,
and dependent, as it clearly appears by the above mentioned Texts, so it is
fully confessed by Mr. Aynsworth, Mr. Davenport, Mr. Can, Mr. Robinson, and
generally all Judgments. page 4.

Answ. In some of the places of these Authors which you direct us unto in your
Margent, which we have looked upon, we can find no such Confession as here you
do report of them. It may be the pages are mis-printed. But what they do
confess or not confess, we will not stand long to enquire, such of them as
are yet alive, may answer for themselves, if they see cause: But it shall
suffice us, to consider the weight of the Argument it self, which we suppose
being put into form must run thus, or to the like purpose.

As the Congregations in Israel were dependent, so must congregations be in
these days.

But Congregations in Israel were dependent on the Ministerial government of a
Synod:

Therefore Congregations in these days must be dependent on the Ministerial
government of a Synod.

Indeed in your prosecution of the Argument, you do not expressly mention any
Ministerial government of a Synod in Israel, upon which their congregations
did depend: Yet we conceive that must needs be your meaning; because otherwise
the Argument which you bring, does not reach to conclude the thing in question,
even as the question is stated by your self. For in the words immediately
preceding this first Argument, you thus sum up and conclude your stating the
question, viz. Whether it be necessary -- that a single Congregation, where it
stands in neighborhood with other Churches, should be co-ordinated with the
rest in a dependency on the Ministerial government of a Synod. And having
answered affirmatively, you then bring in this for your first Argument, taken
from the manner of government in the Jewish Church, laid down in the Texts
above mentioned. Now if that be the question, as you lay it down, and this the
Argument for the affirmative part, then since the question is about dependence
on the government of a Synod, the Argument must needs be of the same, or else
nothing in question is concluded. And if the Argument must conclude the
question, then it must be laid down to the like purpose as we have done; and
being so formed, our answer is by denying both parts thereof. For neither is it
clear from those texts, that the congregations in Israel did depend on the
ministerial government of a Synod; nor will it follow that ours must be
dependant as theirs were.

Touching the former of these, (to speak first of the minor proposition)
suppose it were true that the Congregations in Israel did depend upon the
government of the Judicatories or Assemblies mentioned in those texts, yet that
does not prove they depended upon a Synod: And the reason is, because the
Judicatories there mentioned, were not any Synods at all, but Assemblies of
another nature. For first, Synods (as your selves describe them page, 2.) are
Assemblies, consisting of the several Pastors, whom together with such other
members as should be thought fit, the several congregations are respectively to
choose and send thereto. But those Judicatories in Deuteronomy. 17. and the other
Scriptures, did not consist of any Pastors or members, whom the several
congregations did choose, and send thereto; but of the Priests and Levites, of
the Judges and chief of the Fathers of Israel, which were constantly resident
at Jerusalem, the place which the Lord had chosen. And the several
congregations had nothing to do either to choose them, or send them. Secondly,
these Jndicatories at Jerusalem were standing Courts, and were constantly to
continue, and therefore they were not Synods; for Synods are not wont to stand
and continue, but only till they have ended the business which was the
occasion of calling them, and then to be dissolved and ended. Thirdly, Mr. Page
(out of whom it seems this argument, and much of the discourse about it, is
taken) does confess, page 3. that the authority of Classes and Synods, is not
civil, neither have they power to inflict civil pnnishments, they only judge
of Ecclesiastical causes, and that in Ecclesiastical manner, using no other
then spiritual censures, in page 29. of his Defense. But the Judicatories in
these texts (as Mr. Paget also confesses page 34. 35.) were for civil causes
as well as Ecclesiastical; and so it is said, Deuteronomy. 21. 5. that by the word of
the Priests and Levites every controversy and every stroke mast be tried even
in civil causes, as that of trying out an uncertain murder, which is the
cause spoken of in that place. By all which it plainly appears, that those
superior Judicatories in Israel were not Synods; and then suppose their
congregations did depend upou those Judicatories, and that ours must depend as
theirs did, yet it will not follow that ours must depend upon Synods.

And thus your Minor failing, this might be enough to take away the whole
strength of your Argument. Nevertheless, for further answer, we may also deny
the consequence of your Major proposition: For though it were yielded, that the
congregations in Israel did depend upon a superior Judicatory, it will not
follow that it must be so in these days: And our reason is, because the
particular congregations in Israel (viz. their Synagogues) were not complete
Churches, as the Congregations in the New Testament are. That they were not
entire and complete Churches, may appear by this, because the people could not
lawfully in them have the use of the most solemn ordinances of God, and par^s
of his worship, though such as were of ordinary and continual use, but they
must go upto Jerusalem for the performing and enjoyment thereof; and therefore
they wete strightly commanded, as not to keep the Passover, so not to offer any
Offerings or Sacrifices (which yet were of very frequent use) in any place
within any of their gates, but only in Jerusalem, the place which God did
choose to put his name there, as we read at large Deuteronomy. 12. and 16. 5, 6.
Neither was it lawful for the chief Ministers of the Church to execute the
chief parts of their office in those Synagognes, but only at Jerusalem. But
now with congregations in these days it is far otherwise; there is none of
the solemn Ordinances of God, which are of ordinary and continual use, but
in these Congregations, they may be enjoyed, nor any ordinary duties of the
Ministry, but in them they may be performed, as preaching, prayer, Sacraments,
Discipline, etc. which shows they are entire Churches within themselves. Dr.
Ames has the saying. The Synagogues were not complete Churches, because the
whole worship of God, and all the sacred communion prescribed at that time,
could not be exercised in them. Med. Theol. lib. 1. ca. 38. These. 37. And
again, There is nothing read in all the New Testament, of the institution of
any greater Church, on which the lesser should depend: Nor any worship or
sacred ordinance prescribed, which is not to be observed in every Congregation:
Nor any ordinary Minister appointed who is not given to some one Assembly of
this kind. Lib. 1. cap. 39. These. 26. Now if their Congregations could not
enjoy all the Ordinances, as not being complete Churches, there might be reason
why they should be dependent upon Jerusalem, and the Synedrion and Temple
there, where the Ordinances might be enjoyed; and yet ours being complete, and
enjoying all the Ordinances within themselves need not to be so dependent.

And another reason why their Congregations might be dependent, and ours not
so, may be this. They had a superior Judicatory to appeal unto which had the
supremum of Church power within it self, and from whose sentence there was no
appeal to any further Judge upon earth; for so it is said of that Synedrion at
Jerusalem. Deuteronomy. 17. And Reason requires that some such supreme Judicatory
there should be; for controversies and cases of doubt must not be drawn out in
Infinitum, but of necessity standum est in aliquo supremo, we must rest in some
supreme, and proceed no further. But now in the New Testament, if we once
depart from a particular Congregation or Church, where or when shall we find
such a Supremum? Surely not before we come to an Oecumenicall or General
Council: For as for Classical, Provincial, and National Synods there is
none of these, but those Cases which you put of deficiency, and possibility of
partiality may befall the best of them* and therefore if for these causes the
single Congregations, must not be Independent, but there must be appeals from
them, the Synods being subject to the like, there must be liberty of appeals
from them also. For like as you do allege that Congregations may be partial,
and err, so we suppose it will not be denied but the Classis may err, the
Provincial Synod may err, the National may err: And therefore by this
Reason entirenesse of Jurisdiction must be granted to none of these. And then
whither shall we go but to a General Council, which as it has not been seen
for many by past generations, so God knows whether ever there shall be any so
long as this world shall endure. But how if the General Council do err also?
Sure learned Doctor Reynolds does abundantly clear it, that such a thing is not
impossible. These. 2. Sect. 15. And so by this reason entirenesse of
Jurisdiction must not be granted to General Councils, but there must be
liberty of appeals from them also. Such consequences do inevitably follow upon
that which you suggest as a ground of appealing from particular Congregations.
And by all this it appears, that particular Congregations, have no such
superior Judicatory above them, but according to your grounds, there may be
liberty of appeals from the same; And thence it follows that there is not the
like Reason, against their Independency, as against the Independency of the
Synagogues in Israel: because those Synagogues had a Judicatorie above them,
from which there was no appeal. Those may be Dependent which have others above
them, which are supreme; Whereas they which have no such above them may be
supreme themselves, and consequently be independent.

Obj. If any shall here ask whether we think it not possible for particular
Congregations to err in their judgment of causes?

We answer, That we confess they may; But in our Judgment that needs not to
hinder, but they may have entirenesse of Jurisdiction within themselves, and
not be under the power of any other. For that supreme Synedrion at Jerusalem
did many times err, and gave corrupt Judgment in causes, and yet was not
under the power of any other Judicatory. When we are enquiring in what
Judicatory, the supremum of Church Power does lie, it is not our best course to
look for such an one as cannot err: for such an one we shall never find, but
to look out where God has appointed it to lie, and therewith to rest
contented: Now in the old Testament this supremum by Gods appointment, was in
that Synedrion at Jerusalem. But in the new Testament we know of no appointment
of God, that the like supremum must be in a Synod; but for ought we know a
particular Congregation may be answerable to that Synedrion, as well as any
Classis or Synod; and so much the rather, because the power in a particular
congregation, is constant, and always ready to be had, as it was in that
Synedrion; whereas Classes and Synods are more seldom and rare, and cannot be
gathered so often as there may be need of the use of Church power, in regard of
ordaining of Officers, or censuring of offenders, and the like.

Therefore briefly to wind up all, since Congregations in the New Testament, are
complete Churches, which the Jewish Synagogues were not; and since the
Synagogues had a supreme judicatory above them, from which there was no
appeal, which our congregations have not: Therefore we conclude, That the
dependencie of the Synagogues upon that superior Judicatory, does not prove
that our congregations must depend upon the government of a Synod, especially
this being considered withal, that the Judicatory upon which the Synagogues
did depend, was not any Synod, but an Assembly of another nature: And though
the Supremacy must be some where, even where God has appointed it to be, yet
the particular congregations may show as much for that appointment, as the
Synod.

And this shall suffice for answer to this first Argument: Only we will add
some observations upon some few passages in that which you write for removal
of three exceptions which you say are given by some against this argument of
yours.

1. That that government was ccremoniall and typical. 2. That Papists allege
it against us for their Hierarchy and appeals to -- the Pope. 3. That the
Priests and Levites were then Judges in civil causes, wherein it was that the
government was then appealative and dependent, page 5.

If any do make such exceptions, we leave it to them that make them, to
undertake the defense of them, or to clear them as they shall see cause. But
for us, the answer we have given to the Argument, is that wherein we do rest.

That there ought to be one High Priest, in whom all appeals and judgments
were to determine. page 6.

Though there was to be one High Priest among the Jews, yet that all appeals
and judgments were to determine in him, we suppose is more then can be proved.
Sure Mr. Paget page 35, 36. (whom you seem in your discourse much to follow)
does say, that the judgment spoken of, Deuteronomy. 17. was not given by the
High Priest alone, but by a College or Senate of Priests, noted in the text,
and approves the judgment of Doctor Reynolds and Doctor Whitaker, giving this
answer as a just refutation of the Papists, arguing from this Text to prove
there should be one supreme Judge of Ecclesiastical causes.

That there ought to be graduall Judicatories wherein the aggrieved party may
appeal from the lesser to the higher -- There can be no ceremony or type in
this -- This was taught by the light of nature to Jethro -- Appeals (says
Doctor Whitaker) are of divine and natural right. page 6.

If this be meant in civil causes, where more is left to the light of nature
and civil prudence, according to the general rules of the Word, the Word not
determining all particulars so fully, as it does in Ecclesiastical matters;
then we for our parts do fully consent thereto. And though it were extended to
Ecclesiastical causes also, yet this we suppose is clear likewise by the same
light of nature, that both for civil causes and Ecclesiastical, there must be
some final and supreme judgment, that controversies may not by appeals
after appeals be spun out in infinitum. Now unless it be determined where that
supremacy does lie (which is the very thing in question) the usefulness and
necessity of appeals may be granted, and yet we shall be still at uncertainty
about the thing in question, and as much to seek as before. That there ought to
be appeals till you come to the highest, is one thing, and that a Synod (and
not a particular congregation) is the highest, is another; and they are so
far different, that though the first were granted, yet the latter is not
thereby proved.

That renowned Martyr Cranmer, the form of his appeal to a Council, three
times by him urged -- we have recorded by Mr Fox at large page 6.

But how this example does suit the present question, we do not understand:
for his appeal was not from a particular congregation, but from the Pope; nor
was it to a Synod, but to the next general Council, which from that day to
this, has not yet assembled, nor been called. If we must hold a necessity of
appeals to such a Judicatory as Cranmer appealed unto, then the supremacy of
Synods, Provincial or National, is utterly taken away.

Generally all that write against appeals to the Pope, acknowledge yet their
necessary usefulness to a Synod; So did that reverend Martyr Cranmer, -- So
(besides the whole stream of Antiquity) Ursin, Zepperus, and to come nearer,
Cartwright, Fenner, nay Barrow, Ainsworth, Johnson, page 6.

We doubt it is a speech a good deal too large, to say, That all these do
acknowledge the necessary usefulness of appeals to a Synod, especially if*
you mean of such appeals as you must needs mean, or else you speak not to the
question in hand; viz. of appeals from a particular congregation. We have
looked upon some of the places, and do persuade our selves that if you do
look upon them also, you will find this speech of yours to be too excessive.
As for Mr. Paget, who (page 39. 40.) alleges all these very places that you
do allege, he does not say that those Authors do all acknowledge such
necessary usefulness of appeals to a Synod, as you do report them to
acknowledge; nor does allege them for that end, but for another purpose, viz.
to show, that in these days we may allege and argue from texts out of the Law
of Moses, and other places of the old Testament, which if it be rightly done,
we for our parts see no reason to disallow. But that all these Authors, even
Barrow and Ainsworth do acknowledge the necessary usefulness of appeals from
particular congregations to the government of Synods, is so large an
expression, as we know not upon what grounds to think it credible; since it is
well known to them that have read their writings, that they acknowledge no
Ecclesiastical Judicatory superior to that of a particular congregation.

If the benefit of appeals and consociation of Churches, to their mutual help
in government, should not be as free to us as to the Jews, how much more
defective and improvident were the Gospel, then the Law? page 7.

Consociation of Churches for mutual help, we willingly acknowledge, so that
this consociation may neither constitute a new form of a Church, nor take away
or impair the liberty and power which Christ has given to Churches; but serve
only according to the true use thereof, for the directing and guiding of the
same: which proviso (as we said before) Mr. Paget does willingly grant.

And for appeals, we do willingly acknowledge any benefit that may come
thereby: But for making the Gospel more defective then the Law; we conceive if
things be well considered, it is not our way, but yours, that will be found
justly culpable, in this respect. For first, as the Jews had a supreme
Judicatory for the final ending of Causes, so we hold the same in a particular
Congregation. Whereas according to your opinion and grounds, we know not where
or when to find such a Judicatory, but there must be appeals upon appeals, from
the Congregation to the Classis, from a Classis to a Provincial Synod, and
from them to a National, and from that to an Oecumenicall; and by this means
causes may be so protracted, as not to receive any determination for many
generations, yea it may be never while this world does endure. Secondly, as
with them there was a standing Judicatorie always in readiness for the
hearing of causes, so we hold the like in the particular Congregation: Whereas
Synods are not always in readiness, but so seldom, that if they had supreme
power to determine, yet causes man be long depending, before a Synod can be
called for the determining of them. Thirdly, whereas the supreme Judicatorie
at Jerusalem, being but one in all the world, was very far remote from all
proselites, that lived in other countries (as the Eunuch of Ethiopia, Act. 8.)
yea far remote from those Jews, that dwelt in the furthest parts of the Holy
Land; God has provided better for us in regard that Congregations wherein we
place the supreme Church power being many in number, a Christian may have the
use of that power with much more conveniencie, then was affoarded to most Jews
and Proselites in those days; But as for Synods, as they are for time more
seldom, then that Synedrion, so they are to many persons no lesser remote in
place. By all which it does appear, that the doctrine of the Independents (as
you call them) does in some things make us equal to the Jews, and in other
things, does make our condition more excellent then theirs; Whereas according
to your way, that are against Independencie, in many things our condition is
made more defective then theirs.

How were our Savior King of peace and righteousness, should he have ordained
now under the Gospel, such a government as -- were neither righteous nor
peaceable? pa. 7.

That our blessed Savior is King of righteousness and peace, and the Church
government which he has ordained both righteous and peaceable, is such a
certain and divine truth, that it were blasphemous wickedness to doubt of it;
But when the Question is, what government Christ has ordained, it is better
arguing to say, This government the Scripture does witness to be ordained of
Christ, and therefore it is righteous and peaceable, then to say, this
government is not righteous nor peaceable, and therefore not ordained of
Christ. We mean plainly thus, that it is more agreeable to religious sobriety
and humility, to search out by Scripture-grounds, what government Christ has
ordained, and when that is once found, then to conclude from thence, the
righteousness and peaceablenesse of the same; rather then on the other side,
to think with our selves what government to natural reason seems righteous and
peaceable, and thence to gather what is ordained or not ordained of Christ,
your self have a saying p. 9. that laws merely positive are therefore Laws
because commanded. And why may not we say in like sort, this or that form of
Church government, is therefore peaceable and righteous, because ordained, since
this or that form is by the positive law of Christ.

But (say you) how can that government be peaceable and righteous, where
parties are made sole Judges? Suppose the greater number of members in a
Congregation be against the Pastor and Elders. page 7.

Answ. It is not unrighteous nor unpeaceable in it self that they should be
Judges, whom the God of all righteousness and peace has appointed so to be.
Nor is it reasonable, that they should be thrust out of the office, whereto God
has appointed them, under this pretense, that they are parties; For if good
care be not taken how far we give way to such alledgements, we may lay a
foundation for weakening, if not utterly evacuating, the authority of all
supreme Judicatories whatsoever. For as you allege against the Congregation,
that they may be divided amongst themselves, and then if matters be ended
there, parties are made Judges, ( viz. the major part against the minor) so the
very same may be said of a Synod, where controversies may arise, as well as in
a Congregation: And if Congregations must not determine matters arising within
themselves, because parties must not be Judges; then by the same reason matters
arising in a Synod, must not be determined by a Synod; and so the Synod unto
whom, you would have matters carried from the Congregation, must be no more
Independent, then the Congregation it self, from whom they are carried. Yea, by
this Reason, that supreme Synedrion among the Jews, must have been dependent
also. For it is plain, that sometimes that Synedrion was divided into parts
among themselves, as in that famous instance, Act. 23. where the division of
the Council was the means of Paul's escape.

Finally, there is not any supreme Judicatory upon earth, neither Civil nor
Ecclesiastical, but if they consist of many persons, and be not absolute and
mere Monarchies consisting of one alone, the members thereof may be divided
among themselves, and yet they must be the final Judges to determine matters
within themselves, if the matters must be determined at all: so that this which
you seem to reject as an absurdity, that parties should be Judges, is in some
cases (and namely when the supreme Judicatory is divided into parts about
matters arising among themselves) a matter of unavoidable necessity, and cannot
be otherwise.

This communion and mutual assistance in government, -- God as by his Word, so
by the very light of Nature, teaches all societies whatever, whether
Commonwealths, or Armies, Universities or Navies, page 7.

Answ. Either this passage means that all Commonwealths, etc. are taught such
communion and assistance in government with other Commonwealths, etc. as that
none of them have entirenesse and supremacy of jurisdiction within themselves,
but are dependant on other the like societies for the same; or else that the
members and parts of a Commonwealth, etc. are taught such communion and
assistance in government, as not to be entire of themselves, but to depend upon
the whole society of which they are members and parts. If it be taken in the
latter sense, then the thing is most true, but no prejudice to our cause at
all, for we grant the same of the parts and members of a Congregationall
Church, etc. But it must be taken in the former sense, if it make any thing
against us; and in this sense it will not hold true: for it is well known, that
Commonwealths and Universities, as the Commonwealth of England for example,
and the University of Oxford, have no such communion and assistance in
government, with other Commonwealths and other Universities, but that they
have entirenesse of jurisdiction within themselves; and the same may be said of
Armies and Navies. The members of all these societies do depend on the
society of which they are members: But that is nothing against us. If the
Societies did depend upon other the like Societies, this indeed were against
us. But this cannot be proved so to be.

Not that therefore this government of Churches should as those end in a
Monarchy on earth.

Answ. We suppose it is a clear mistake, to say that the government in all
those societies, does end in a Monarchy: For whatever may be said of the rest,
Commonwealths you know there are sundry, whose government is either
Democraticall or Aristocraticall, and does not end in any Monarchy at all;
witness for example the Low Countries.

But if Churches must be dependent upon the government of Synods, because the
very light of Nature teaches a communion and assistance in government to all
Societies whatever; then we see not how it will be avoided, but by the same
reason Churches must end in a Monarchy upon earth, if it were once proved, that
the light of Nature does teach all societies whatever so to end: For there is
as good reason for this as for the other. And the old plea for Bishops and
Popes, ut capite constituto schismatis occasio tolleretur, will not be easily
avoided. If we yield thus much that what the light of nature teaches other
Societies, the same must be observed in the government of Churches.

You say indeed that this will not follow, Because the Churches Monarch or Head
is in Heaven, and such an one, as though in Heaven, yet still present by his
Word and Spirit here on earth too, to all the offices of a Monarch. page 7.

But this we conceive does not remove the difficulty, partly, because the
objection is for a visible Head, and not an invisible; and partly because the
time has been when there was one High Priest upon earth, in whom you say (page
6.) that all appeals and judgments were to determine: And yet at that time the
Monarch or Head of the Church was in Heaven, and present on earth too by his
Word and Spirit, to all the offices of a Monarch, as truly then as now.

Whereby we may see, that if you will go by the light of Nature, it is not the
presence of Christ in Heaven, and his spiritual and invisible presence with
his Church on earth, that will take away the necessity of a visible Head upon
earth. A surer answer to this plea, is to fly to the institution and
appointment of God, whose wisdom and will it was to appoint one High Priest
upon earth in former times, but has not done the like in these days.

CHAP. III.
Containing an answer to the second Argument taken from Matthew 18. Tell the
Church.
THat this is spoken by our Savior in reference to the Jewish
Church Government, -- is the joint judgment of Ambrose, Theodoret, -- among
the ancient: Melanchton, Strigetius, Peretius, Aretius, -- and even Mr. Johnson
himself. -- And if so, then our Savior here sufficiently confirms to us as
lawful, and conveyes to us as useful so much of the Jewish Church Government
as includes an Independencie and liberty of Appe des therein. page 9, 10.

Answ. By dependencie here spoken of, must be meant dependencie upon the
government of a Synod; and by Appeal must be meant Appeal from a particular
Congregation unto that Synod, or otherwise the Argument concludes besides the
Question: And the words being thus understood, the form of the Argument must
be to this purpose, viz.

If that which is here spoken by our Savior, be spoken in reference to the
Jewish Church Government, then particular congregations must depend upon the
government of Synods.

But the first is true: Therefore the second is true also.

But for confirmation of this Minor Proposition, you bring no other proof but
only the testimonies of a number of Authors, all cited before by Mr. Paget in
his Defense, page 46, 47, etc. And for the consequence of your Major you bring
no proof at all. Nevertheless we are willing to consider what strength there
may be in the Argument, and to that purpose we must enquire into your meaning
in this phrase of Reference to the Jewish Church Government, whereby we
conceive you intend one of these two, either that the word Church in our
Saviors rule, Tell the Church, does signify the Elders and Governors alone,
as sometimes the like word is used in the old Testament; or else that no new
rule is prescribed hereby our Savior, but the very same that was formerly
given to the Jews. Mr. Paget, who also takes his second argument from this
place of Mat. 18. does understand our Saviors words in this later sense. But
whether way soever you intend, our answer is briefly thus: First, that though
we will not now deny the minor Proposition, yet this we may say, That it is not
so evident of it self, but that it needs some better proof then by you is given
for the confirmation of it; for of it self it is not clear, that by Church is
meant only the Elders of the Church, nor that all the steps of such graduall
proceeding as our Savior does prescribe, were formerly commanded to the Jews.
And your self professing in your Epistle to the Gentlemen, prefixed before your
book, that you like D. Moulins resolution, rather to bring one Argument then
ten Authors, if accordingly you had confirmed this minor proposition with some
further proof then only the names of Authors, it could have given better
satisfaction.

But what ever become of the minor, the consequence of the major may justly be
denied. For though it were granted that our Saviors words, Tell the Church,
were spoken with reference to the Jewish Church Government in this sense, that
this graduall proceeding in all the steps of it was formerly commanded to the
Jews, yet this is nothing to prove the necessity of the dependence of
Congregations upon the government of Synods, (which is our question) because
there may be such graduall proceedings to the fulfilling of our Saviors rule,
without any use of a Synod at all. If it were not so, Synods had need to be
more frequent then they are, or ever were, or are ever like to be, for this
rule of our Savior is of very frequent use.

And though it were granted also, that by Church, our Savior meant the Elders
(which is the other sense of your words of reference to the Jewish
Church Government) yet neither would this prove the dependence of Congregations
upon the Government of Synods, because there may be and ought to be Elders, and
an Eldership or Presbytery in every particular Congregation, and by telling
those Elders that rule may be observed, if our Saviors words were taken in
that sense. And indeed it seems your self do so understand them, as appears in
page 17. of your book, and likewise in this place now in hand, because one of
those Authors whom you allege for the meaning of our Saviors words, is Mr.
Johnson, who in his latter times, did so understand them, of whom you say, Even
Mr. Johnson himself though a Pastor of Separatists in a peculiar Treatise
reduces himself from his former error in the contrary opinion, to this
judgment too. Whereby it seems, that for the meaning of this text, you concur
in opinion or judgment with Mr. Johnson. And if so, then though you may by
Church understand the Elders as he did, yet then you must also acknowledge the
Independency of particular Congregations and the Pastors thereof; for it is
certain and plain that Mr. Johnson was of that opinion and judgment too,
notwithstanding that his Exposition of Matthew. 18. and did never reduce himself
to this opinion, that Congregations must be dependent upon the Government of
Synods, which is your plea. For which purpose you may consider what is to be
seen in his Christian Plea, which was one of the last books that ever he wrote.
Now in page 250, 251. of that book are these words, viz. Seeing now every
particular constituted Church has right and power within it self to celebrate
the Lords Supper, which is answerable to the Passover that was kept at
Jerusalem, this shows that now every particular Church is to be esteemed as
Jerusalem, and so to stand immediately under Jesus Christ the Arch-Pastor of
his sheep, and high Priest of our profession. And again, All particular
Churches with their Pastors do stand immediately under Jesus Christ the
Arch-Pastor without any strange Ecclesiastical power and authority interposed
between, whether it be of the Prelates, or of their unlawful usurping Synods,
or any such like --. And in the words following, speaking how all Churches, and
the Ministers of them, should be ready and willing to help and advise one
another, he adds thus: viz. And so to this end, and in this manner, may be
had a lawful and profitable use of Synods, Classes, etc. for mutual help and
advise, so as always it be provided that they do not challenge or usurp any
unlawful Jurisdiction or power over the particular Churches, or their Pastors
and Governors. By which words it plainly appears, that though Mr. Johnson by
Church in Matthew. 18. did understand the Elders, yet he never held that
particular Churches, and the Elders thereof, should depend upon the government
of Synods, but be immediately under the government and authority of Jesus
Christ, and depend no other way upon Synods but only for their advise and
counsel: and therefore his Exposition of Matthew. 18. will stand you in no stead
to prove the dependence of particular Churches upon Synods.

Wherefore to wind up our Answer to this Argument. Though it were granted that
when our Savior says, Tell the Church, he means tell the Elders, and though
it were granted also that enjoying such a graduall proceeding, he prescribes
no new rule, but the same that had been given before unto the Jews, yet neither
of these do prove that Congregations must depend upon the Authority of Synods;
and the reason is, because both these may be performed in a particular
Congregation; for therein a man may proceed by such steps and degrees as our
Savior enjoyneth, and may also tell his matter to the Elders of that
particular Church. And so the consequence of your major proposition failing,
the whole Argument must fail also, though the minor were never so strongly
proved: and how much more when the minor is left so weak, neither of these
particulars being sufficiently cleared and made good by you, that by Church is
meant the Elders, nor that all that our Savior in that place prescribes, was
before commanded to the Jews.

But inasmuch as your words are, that this of Matthew. 18. is spoken by our
Savior Christ in reference to the Jewish Church Government before urged,
therefore we may give a further Answer to this Argument, out of that which
before has been answered when the Argument from the Jewish Church Government
was urged. For though it were granted that Christ speaks in reference to that
government, yea though it were granted (which we suppose none will affirm) that
all that was used among the Jews is here prescribed by Christ, yet all this
were too short to prove that our Congregations must depend upon the government
of Synods, unless it could be proved that the Jewish Congregations did so
depend, which we have formerly showed to be otherwise, the great Synedrion at
Jerusalem upon which their lesser Congregations did depend, if they were
dependent at all, being not any Synod, but an Assembly of another nature.

But you will improve this Text further; and therefore after some speech of an
Indefinite proposition in Logic, and an Indefinite command in Divinity, and
of five graduall Iffs in our Saviors words, If he shall offend, etc. you come
thus to argue, viz. The remedy of complaint or Appeal must be as large as the
malady offense, otherwise Christ's salve were not equal to the sore: but
offenses may arise as well between diverse Congregations in the same Church, as
between diverse members in the same Congregation, and therefore particular
Congregations as well as members have hereby liberty to complain and appeal to
a more general Judgment for redress. And a little after: That such offenses
may arise between Churches as well as members, appears by that between the
Graecians and Hebrews about the neglect of their widows, Act. 6. 1. and that in
such cases they may complain and implead each other, appears by that of the
Prophet Hosea 2. 2. even the daughter Church with the mother. page 10. To all
which we thus answer.

First, though we deny not but offenses may arise between Churches as well as
members, yet we do not see that those instances alleged by you from Act. 6.
and Hos. 2. do sufficiently prove the same; because those Graecians and
Hebrews, Act. 6. might be all of one and the same Church and Congregation which
was at Jerusalem, and not two Congregations or Churches, the Graecians one and
the Hebrews another, as it seems you do conceive of them. For when the Apostles
upon occasion of this murmuring of the Graecians for the neglect of their
widows, did take course for the appointing of Deacons for the remedying
thereof, the whole managing of the business was transacted and done in one
Congregation alone; for so it is said, they called the multitude of Disciples
together, verse. 2. they appointed them to look out seven men duly qualified
whom they might appoint over that business, v. 3. and the saying pleased the
whole multitude, who thereupon did choose seven whom they presented unto the
Apostles, ver. 5, 6. and the Apostles imposed hands on them, ver. 6. In all
this there is no hint of two congregations, one of Graecians and another of
Hebrews, but the Text seems plain enough, that the whole multitude of
Disciples whether Graecians or Hebrews were all gathered together into one
Congregation about the choice and ordaining of these Deacons.

And as for Hos. 2. 2. Plead with your mother, plead, since there is no mention
in that Scripture of any daughter Church, nor of any two Churches at all; and
since at that time there was only one Church upon the face of the earth, even
the National Church of the Jews, therefore we cannot see how this Text can be
any proof of Churches complaining and impleading one another. If any man think
otherwise, and that the daughter-Churches did plead against the Mother Church
of Israel that is here spoken of, then we would demand what or where was that
superior Judicatory, be it Synod or any other, before which they did plead,
and before whom the Mother Church of Israel must answer for herself, when the
daughter-Churches did complain against her. We suppose none will affirm there
was any such: and therefore this text can be no ground for Churches impleading
one another. But the true meaning of the place is thus much, not that one
Church must plead against another, but that the godly members of the Church of
Israel must plead against the corruptions of that very Church, though in
respect of them she were as a mother, and they as children. And before whom
must they plead? Not before any other Judge upon earth, but before the Lord of
heaven, and unto her own face, laying open her abominations, and showing unto
her, her sins: And we acknowledge the members of any other Church may do the
like, if there be the like occasion, so that they keep themselves within the
bounds of sobriety, and their own calling.

But if it were granted (though these allegations do not prove it) that
offenses may arise between Congregations, how does this prove the thing in
question, viz. That Congregations must depend upon the government of Synods?
Yes, say you; Because the remedy must be as large as the malady; and otherwise
Christ's salve were not equal to the sore. But if this reason be sufficient
against the Independency of Churches; then by the like reason a man may prove,
that the Church of a Nation must not be Independent neither: For as you
allege, that offenses may arise as well between diverse congregations, as
between diverse members in the same congregation; so a man may allege, that
offenses may arise between diverse National Churches. And as you demand, What
if a brother offend not a particular brother, but the whole Congregation? What
if ten brethren offend the whole, or part; shall we think the offense falls not
within our Saviors remedy? So in like sort a man may demand, What if the
Congregation offend not a particular Congregation, but the whole Church of a
Nation? What if ten, twenty, forty congregations, offend the whole Nation, or
part? Yea, we may add, What if the National Church offend the Church of
another Nation? Would you now say, that all these offenses must fall within our
Saviors rule of telling the Church; and that this were a sufficient reason
against the independencie of National Churches and National Synods? We
suppose you would not say so: And yet we do not see how it can be avoided by
your reason and ground, since that ground is appliable to the one case as well
as to the other. If the reason do overthrow the Independencie of particular
Congregations, then of a National Church also. If not of a National Church,
then how does it make any more against the other? Of necessity for ought we
can discern, you must own the reason as strong in both cases, or else refuse
it as weak in both. Yea, and further, by the like reason a man might prove that
Indians and Turks must be complained of unto the Church, and that the offenses
of them, or of other Heathen, must fall within the compass of our Saviors
remedy. For as offenses may arise between members and members, between Churches
and Churches: so it is apparent that offenses may arise between Christians and
Pagans; and if this ground that you lay be sound, that the remedy complaint, or
oppeale must be as large as the malady offense: and consequently there must be
a Church above Congregations; then if an Indian or other Pagan shall commit an
offense, the remedy must be to complain of the Indian to the Church. And since
(as you say, page 11.) There must be power of judgment to redress there where
the complaint is to be made; would it not thence follow, that there must be
power of judgment in the Church to redress the offenses of Indians? Which
were directly contrary to the plain words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. 12. What
have I to do to judge them that are without? But this inconvenience of the
Churches judging them that are without, does unavoidably follow upon this which
you lay as a ground against the independencie of Congregations, viz. that where
an offense may be committed, there Christ's rule, Tell the Church, may be
applied for redress thereof.

But what shall we say then? If Indians and other Heathens, if Congregationall
and National Churches of Christians, be not under the power of that rule of
Christ, shall we say then there is no salve for all their sores, but so many
sinners must be left lawless, and their offenses remediless? God forbid! The
Lord has provided good store of help for all these: but every salve is not for
every sore. Such persons as are in the Church, all they are subject to the
discipline of the Church, and to the power of Christ administered therein, so
that if need so require, they may be excommunicated and cast out. Whole
Churches are subject to the wholesome advice and counsel of other Churches; and
so far as the same shall be according to God, they ought to hearken
thereunto: And if they do not, they may lawfully be renounced by other
Churches, from all Church Communion with them. And as for Indians, or others,
that are no Churches, nor members of Churches, though our Saviors Rule of
Telling the Church, was not intended for them, yet both they and Christian
Churches likewise, and the members of them, are all of them to be subject to
the Magistrates, and the authority of the higher Powers, whose duty it is to be
keepers of both Tables of the Law of God, and to do their endeavor that all
the Subjects may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. Romans 13. 1. 1 Timothy 2. 2.

But, say you, an offense may be so general as to defile and make guilty a
whole Land, and why not then the remedy as large as it, Tell the Church? page
11.

Ans. In such case of general and national defilements, the remedy is
general and National repentance, whereto all the people must be provoked, and
exhorted by the Ministers of the Word in their several Congregations. And when
the higher powers do give example thereof in their own persons, and by some act
of their Authority do call upon all the people for the same, this is a notable
remedy, through the mercy of God, against the defilement of National sins,
and the danger that may come thereby. Which as it was the practice of Asa,
Hezekiah, Josiah, and the States of Judah in their times, so we have cause with
all humble thankfulness to bless the Lord that put the like care into the
hearts of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament in our dear native
Country, who by an Ordinance of both Houses thought it meet to exhort all the
Subjects of England and Wales to the duty of Repentance, both for personal and
National sins.

But suppose the Magistrate be an Enemy to Religion, and the Land or whole
Church therein have occasion to make a solemn renewall of their Covenant with
God, shall not this whole Church or number in their collective body have power
to enjoin it?

Ans. If the supreme Magistrate be an enemy to Religion, it is not like but
most or many of the people will be of the same mind; Regis ad exemplum totus --
as it is at this day in France and Spain, and was in England in the days of
Queen Mary, and other Popish Princes; and then the believers in the Land will
not be so many as to bear the name of the Land or Nation, but of a small part
thereof, and so at that time it will not be required of them to make any
National Covenant, or to enjoin the same. Nor can it well be conceived how
they should assemble in a National Synod for that or any other purpose, when
the Magistrate is a professed enemy to their Religion. At such times it is
more like their meetings in small congregations will be full of danger, rather
then that they should have liberty safely and freely to meet in such great
Assemblies as National Synods. And though for lack of such a National
Covenant, the remedy be not equal to the offense or need, yet at such time
that remedy being not in the power of such believers as are in the Land, it is
not required at their hands.

If a whole Congregation, great or small, play the Foxes, and spoil the
vineyard, why may it not be taken and restrained? pa. 11.

Ans. No doubt but it may, but ever in the way, and by the means which Christ
has appointed. If those Foxes be particular members of the Church, they may be
restrained by doctrine, by discipline, and by the Magistrates Authority. If
they be whole Churches, they may be restrained by Doctrine, and by the advice
and counsel of other Churches, and also by the Magistrates. But if they be not
members of the Church, they can not be restrained by Church discipline, but
only by the Authority of the Magistrate, and by the preaching of the Word.

To this Argument the Independent party reply or rather labor to obtain out of
the Text three things.

First, that our Savior speaks here of a single Church or Congregation --
Secondly, to this single Church, and to all this Church entirely, not
distinguishing between Elders and Members, he gives the keys of
Excommunication and Absolution -- Thirdly, over this Church to assume a Church
power of Judicature is a Lording it over Christ's heritage --

To the first of these exceptions we answer, that it no way appears that our
Savior in this place or that, the Scripture elsewhere, usually means a single
congregation by the word Church, but that the contrary rather is easily
evincible.

First, that he here spoke in reference to the Jewish Church, which way no
single congregation has above sufficiently appeared. page 11.

Ans. But how in reference? If you mean in this sense, that what ever was used
in that Church must be used in the Christian, or that as that Church was
National, so Christian Churches must be the like, then we may say, no such
things has appeared at all, nor has been so much as undertaken to be proved.
If you mean only thus, that there were such graduall proceedings in that
Church as Christ in this place requires, or that the word Church may signify
the Elders or Rulers, then we may say neither of these have sufficiently
appeared by any proof that you have brought; and if they were both granted,
they are nothing to the matter now in question viz. that the word Church does
not signify one single Congregation; for both these particulars may be found
and made use of in such a Church as is of no larger extent.

Next, that he has reference herein to that of Deuteronomy. 19. 15. appears by his
citation of the very words of that text, that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word may be established: Now there the witnesses and offenders
were by way of further Appeal to stand before the Lord, before the Priests for
judgment, verse. 17. page 12.

Answ. The words are not as you cite them, before the Priests for judgment;
but before the Priests and Judges which shall be in those days. And it
appears by the punishment which these Judges must inflict upon the guilty
person there spoken of, life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, etc. v.
21. that if our Savior refer his Church to do like unto that Judicatory which
you say he has reference unto, then the Church must have power to inflict
corporal punishment, even to the taking away of life it self, because that
Judicatory had such power.

Lastly, no other place can be showed, where our Savior used the word Church
for a single congregation.

Ans. Nor can any other place be showed where he used the word Church for a
Synod, nor that he ever used the word at all, but only here, and in Matthew. 16.
Upon this rock will I build my Church: in which place he means a Synod no more
then a single congregation.

But for the Scripture language, nothing is more manifest, then as it never any
where uses the word Church for a single congregation, unless happily in 1
Cor. 14. -- so nothing is more frequent therein then to call many congregations
in a Province or City, by the name of a Church. page 12.

Ans. We are willing to consider of both these particulars; and first of the
former, wherein you do acknowledge (though a perhaps, or happily) that in 1
Cor. 14. the word Church is taken for a single congregation: but you may
acknowledge it undoubtedly, and without any perhaps at all, because it is said,
ver. 23. of that Chapter, that the whole Church comes together in one place.
And in other verses of the same Chapter he speaks, how he that prophecieth
edifieth the Church, how interpreting is that the Church may receive edifying,
how it is a shame for women to speak in the Church, ver. 4, 5, 35. Yea in ver.
26, 27, 28. he gives them this direction, that when they come together, and
every one has a Psalm, a Doctrine, etc. that he that speaks in a strange
tongue, if there be no Interpreter, must keep silence in the Church. By all
which he plainly shows, that the name Church is given to the company that did
assemble and come together, for performance of spiritual duties, and for the
exercise of spiritual gifts. Now a company coming together is a congregation,
and therefore the name of Church is here given to a congregation. But besides
this Chapter, there are many other places where the word Church is also used in
the same sense: for instance, take these amongst many: Act. 14. 27. and 11. 26.
and 15. 4, 22, 30. 1 Cor. 11. 18, 20, 22, 33. 3 John 6. in which places there
is mention of assembling with the Church, of gathering the Church together, of
being received by the Church, of bearing witness before the Church, of coming
together in the Church, of coming together into one place, of gathering the
multitude together, and the like. Which places do abundantly show, that a
company that are gathered together into one place (which is nothing else but a
congregation) are called by the name of a Church. And the Christians of
Cenchrea which was but a little village, and therefore not like to be many
congregations, yet they are styled by the name of a Church. Romans 16. 1. And
though Cenchrea were but the port of Corinth, and not far from it, like
Radcliffe or Lymehouse to London, as some have observed, yet being a
congregation of it self, it is a distinct Church of it self, as well as Corinth
was.

Much more might be said to make it manifest, that a single congregation is
called by the name of a Church in many places of Scripture; and how then can
that stand which is here affirmed by you, that the word is never so used,
unless happily in 1 Cor. 14. and that nothing is more manifest.

But whereas you say, That nothing is more frequent then to call many
congregations in a Province or City, by the name of a Church; we may rather
say, that this is so far from being so frequent, as nothing more, that on the
contrary it is very questionable, whether it be ever so used at all in all the
New Testament: Sure it is more frequent to call many Congregations in a
Province or Nation, by the name of Churches in the plural number, and not by
the name of Church in the singular; which does strongly imply, that if they be
many congregations, then they are not one Church, but many. For this purpose it
is to be considered, how the Scripture mentions not the Church, but the
Churches of Galatia, Gal. 1. 1. 1 Cor. 16. 1. of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8. 1. of
Judea, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14. Gal. 1. 21. of Galilee and of Samaria, Acts 9. 31. of
Syria and Cilitia, Acts 15. 41. and of Asia, 1 Cor. 16. 19. In which one
Province there were seven famous Churches at once, mentioned Revel. 1. 4.
besides others that are mentioned elsewhere. Now as all these instances do
sufficiently show, that something is more frequent in Scripture, then to call
many Congregations by the name of a Church, so it is worth our consideration,
what should be the reason of this diffrent speech in Scripture, that when it
speaks of the Christians of one Congregation, it should frequently give them
the name of a Church, as we heard before; and when it speaks of the Christians
in a Province or Country, where were many congregations, it should call them
so usually by the name of Churches in the plural number. Sure it seems to us
to be strongly employed thereby, that one Congregation of Christians may be a
Church; but if they be many Congregations, then they are many Churches, and not
one only.

But you will give four instances, where the name of a Church is given to many
congregations, Jerusalem, Rome, Corinth, and Ephesus. And concerning Jerusalem,
the number of Disciples that were there, being 8120, Acts 1. 15. with 2. 41.
and 4. 4. and afterward abundantly larger, it was impossible all the members
should meet but by way of distribution into several congregations. page 12.

Answ. How large soever that Church was in those places you allege, yet if the
Scripture say they did meet together in one place, then we must believe it was
possible for them so to do; and that as they were but one Church, so they were
but one Congregation. Now the text is plain, first of all, that when they were
but 120. they all met together in one place; for otherwise how could Peter
stand up in the midst of them, and make a speech to them all, about the
election of another Apostle in the room of Judas, as he is recorded to have
done, Acts 115. Next of all, when 3000 were added to them, Acts 2. yet all that
multitude before they were converted, did all come together in one place, verse.
6. and Peter standing up, lift up his voice and spoke unto them all, verse. 14.
And when they were converted, both they and the rest of the believers were not
yet so many, but the multitude of them were all together, verse. 44. and
continued daily with one accord in the Temple, verse. 46. And when after this,
(the Lord adding daily to the Church such as should be saved) the number of the
men was about 5000. Acts 4. 4. yet all this company did still meet together in
one place: for it is said, that when the Apostles were dismissed from the
Council with threatenings, they went unto their own company and reported what
the chief Priests and Elders had said unto them, verse. 23. And when they heard
that, they lifted up their voice in prayer to God with one accord, verse. 24.
And when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were assembled
together, verse. 31. By which it is plain, that all this company, whether they
were in all 5000. or (if you will have it so) 5000. besides the former number,
and so in all 8120. yet still they were all assembled in one place.

And when after this, believers were more added to the Lord, multitudes both of
men and women, Acts 5. 14. yet all that time they were all with one accord in
Salomons Porch, verse. 12. which shows they were not yet so many, but all did
meet together in one Congregation.

Furthermore, when after this, the number of Disciples in Jerusalem was more
multiplied, Acts 6. 1. yet the Apostle called the multitude of them together,
to propose unto them the choice of Deacons, verse. 2. and the matter being
commended to them by the Apostles, it is said, the saying pleased the whole
multitude, and they chose seven who are there named, verse. 5. which shows that
the whole multitude was not so many, but they might assemble and come together
in one place, to hear matters proposed, and to make election of Officers.

After this indeed, this Church at Jerusalem were all scattered by persecution,
except the Apostles, Acts 8. 1. But when a Church was gathered again by the
Apostles Ministry, that Church, even all the multitude of them, as well as the
Apostles and Elders, did all assemble and meet together with one accord in one
congregation, about the business of the controversy that arose at Antioch; so
it is plainly said, Acts 15. That Paul and Barnabas coming from Antioch, were
received of the Church at Jerusalem, and of the Apostles and Elders, verse. 4.
And it pleased the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, to send
messengers to Antioch, verse. 22. and to that Church letters are written from
the Apostles and Elders, and Brethren, verse. 23. being all assembled with one
accord, verse 25. which plainly shows that the Church at Jerusalem at this
time, did not consist of Apostles and Elders alone, as a representative Church,
but of others also, who are expressly distinguished from those officers: and yet
all this Church did assemble with one accord in one place. Lastly, for that
place, 21. where you say;

It is plain, that when the Church met collectively, it was in the Presbyters
and Elders. And that in this Church at Jerusalem the collective meetings were
representative in their Elders.

The answer is, That we deny not but Elders may meet apart from the multitude
if there be occasion, and so much may be proved from verse 18. where it is
said, Paul went in unto James, and all the Elders were present; but this is
nothing to the point in hand, That the Church at Jerusalem was so numerous,
that all the members could not meet in one, but in several congregations: Nay,
that very place (though it speak of many thousand Jews that did believe, verse
20.) yet as it does not say, that all these were of that one Church at
Jerusalem; so there are good Divines that do think they were not: but if they
were, it nothing prejudiceth our cause in this matter; for when James and the
Elders speaking to Paul of the Jews, do tell him, the multitude must needs
come together, for they will hear that thou art come, verse 22. It appears
thereby, that their multitude was not such, but they might all assemble and
come together.

If any say, How can these things be, that so many thousands as were members of
the Church at Jerusalem, should all yet be but one Congregation, besides what
has been said to show that thus it was; such an one may consider further, that
many thousands, yea Miriads, were gathered together, Luke 12. 12. and Christ
spoke unto them all, though unto his Disciples first, verse 1, 14, 15, 54. and
that Parishes in England in or about London, and elsewhere, as Stepney, Giles,
Sepulchers, and others, have many thousand inhabitants in them, all members of
one Parishionall Church, and yet all but one Congregation. And that of
Chrysostom on Matthew. 24. who as Mr. Bayn reports, Dioe. Trial, page 16. did
esteem the company that heard his voice in one congregation, to be about 5000.
persons, and that by means of Scaffolds and Galleries, a man lifting up his
voice, may so speak, as to be heard of thousands at a time.

All which being considered, do make it less incredible, that the Church at
Jerusalem, consisting of such a great multitude, yet for all that might be no
more but one ordinary Congregation.

Next, for the Church at Rome in the Apostles time, styled every where in that
Epistle, by the name of Church, not Churches. page 13.

Answ. We suppose it is a plain mistake, that the Church at Rome is every where
in that Epistle styled by the name of a Church. For ought we remember in that
Epistle, it is never so styled at all; and yet we deny not but it was a Church,
and one Church.

But (say you) can it be thought that the faith and obedience of a Church in
such a city, could be famous throughout all the world, as the Apostle speaks,
Romans 1. 8. and 16. 19. and yet but one single independent congregation?

Answ. We know nothing to the contrary but it might be so: For the Church at
Thessalonica was but one congregation, and yet from them sounded out the word
of the Lord, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place, their
faith to Godward was spread abroad, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 8. And there might be other
means to make their faith famous, as well as plurality of congregations; as the
resort and confluence of people of all sorts and nations to the place where
this Church dwelt, Rome being the Seat of the Empire, and the Lady of Kingdoms
at that time: Also the good will of the godly, the malice of the wicked, the
newfanglednesse of most, would open the mouths of many to talk of the faith
and profession of the Christian Romans, though they were no more but one
congregation.

Those very persons and families named in the Apostles salutations of that
Church, even those choycer families were able to fill several congregations.

Answ. We dare not say so: for there is not named above 30. in all. Sure if 30.
families fill several congregations, then those congregations must be very
small ones.

Tertullian tells us, that in his time the city was at least half Christian:
And Cornelius tells us, that besides himself, there were in that Church 45.
Presbyters.

Answ. But the question being, whether many Congregations be frequently called
in Scripture by the name of a Church, these testimonies being not from
Scripture do not suit the question, therefore we will not insist upon them,
but only say this much; that as they are both alleged by Doctor Downam, and
them of the Hierarchy that plead for Diocesan Churches against Congregational,
so they are both sufficiently answered by Mr. Bain, in his Diocesan trial, p.
19, 20. and by the refuter of D. Downams Sermon at Lambeth. p. 65.

Next, the Church at Corinth every where styled a Church, not Churches.

Answ. This we grant: But why might it not be one Congregation, as well as one
Church; The only reason you bring to the contrary is, because They had so many
Instructers, 1 Cor. 4. 15. and Builders, 1 Cor. 3. 12. So many Prophets (say
you) and Teachers, speakers with Tongues, -- could not questionless have their
ordinary local meetings, but by way of distribution into several
congregations.

Answ. This arguing about the Church of Corinth, does not very well agree with
that which went before, p. 12. where you seemed to grant, that though no other
place in Scripture, yet that place, 1 Corinthians. 14. does give the name of Church
to one single Congregation; whereas now you give Corinth also as one instance
where many congregations are called a Church. It is strange to us, how Corinth
should be an example of both these, viz. of the name of Church given to one
single congregation, as you do acknowledge, page 12. and of many congregations
called by the name of one Church, as now you would have it. But the place, 1.
Cor. 14. 23. that speaks of the whole Church commiug together into one place,
does unavoidably prove (for ought we can discern) that Corinth had their
meetings, and not by way of distribution into several Congregations, but
altogether in one congregation: and does also answer your reason drawn from the
variety of Teachers and Prophets in that Church: For it is plain from that very
Chapter, that the Church of Corinth had many Prophets; Let the Prophets speak
two or three, and let the rest judge, verse. 39. and many that spoke with
Tongues, who must speak by course two or three* and one interpret, verse 27.
yea every one generally had a Psalm, or a Doctrine, or a Revelation, or an
Interpretation, verse 26. as indeed they came behind in no gift, 1 Cor. 1. and
yet for all their variety of gifts, and gifted men, Prophets, Interpreters,
speakers with Tongues, and the like, both they and the whole Church also, even
women and all, used to come together into one place.

But it is with much instance urged generally by all the Separatists, that
those among whom the Corinthian fornicatou^ was -- they were all to be gathered
together, and all to deliver him to Satan; therefore the power of the keye is
alike in all the members, -- and not in the Elders alone. page 14.

Answ. This and all that follows for two whole pages may be something
pertaining to the second of your three exceptions forementioned; but nothing
concerns the Question now in hand. For whether the Church of Corinth, that must
excommunicate the incestuous man, were the Elders alone, as you hold; or all
the people also, as others: This is nothing to the present point of the sense
of the word Church, which is, whether is be taken in Scripture, for many
Congregations or one only: and therefore we marvel why you would here bring
it in. Neither indeed is it any thing to the maine Question, of the Dependencie
of Congregations upon the government of Synods; For if all were granted, that
here is argued for, viz. that the Church that must excommunicate the delinquent
Corinthian was not the common people, but the Elders alone, yet the authority
of Synods is not a whit helped thereby; unless it could be proved that the
Church of Corinth had no Elders of their own; which we are persuaded you will
not affirm, because you grant page 13. that they had many Instructors, many
builders, many leaders, many Prophets and Teachers. Wherefore this Dispute
being besides the Question, we will not spend time in answering of it, because
we would hasten to go forward with the rest, that pertains to the Question, as
you have stated it.

Your last instance of many Congregations, called by the name of Church, is
Ephesus, where you argue, There must needs be many congregations, because there
was a great door, and effectual opened unto Paul, so mightily there grew the
Word of God and prevailed, the greatness of the price of the conjuring books
burnt publicly, and God himself testifies, he had many people in that City.

Answ. When the Lord says to Paul, I have much people in the City, it is a
plain mistake to understand this of Ephesus, for it was spoken of Corinth, and
not of Ephesus. Act. 18. 10. But if it had been spoken of Ephesus, as we deny
not, but that there were many Christians there, how does this prove the point,
that they were not one Congregation, but many? We do not think they were more
in number, then in Corinth and Jerusalem, where the Christians, as we have
showed, did usually meet in one place; and therefore at Ephesus, they might do
the like, though there were a great number of Christians there.

As for that which you say, that as this Church could not possibly ordinarily
in all its members meet but distributively; so that it did meet collectively in
its Presbytery and Eldership; that which ordained Timothy (there by the
Apostles own testimony) appears in the 17. 28. and 26. verses of the 20.
Chapter, beyond all exception.

We answer thereto, it is not beyond all exception, that at Ephesus was one
Church consisting of many Congregations, which is our Question. It may be
granted that the Elders of that Church upon Paul's sending for them did meet at
Miletum apart from the people, as was noted before out of Act. 21. Of the
Elders of Jerusalem; but this is nothing to our Question, whether a Church be
many Congregations, or one only.

As much might he said of the other of the seven Churches of Asia, with that at
Antioch, Philippi and Thessalonica.

Ans. And if as much were said of these as of the other, as much might also be
answered. And though Philippi and Thessalonica had many Bishops, Deacons,
Overseers, yet all this is too short to prove they were many Congregations; for
what should hinder but one Congregation may have many Officers?

That which follows in this sixteenth page, and so forward to the middle of
page 19. is spent in answering the other two exceptions which you formerly
proposed page 11. Concerning which we need not to spend much time; the one of
them, as we said before, is altogether besides the purpose, and on which side
soever the truth does lie in that matter, the present Question is nothing at
all cleared thereby; and for the other, we leave it to them that make it to
undertake the defense of it. For us it is sufficient to have showed that all
that you have said from Matthew. 18. Tell the Church, does not prove that
Congregations must depend upon the government of Synods, nor that many
Congregations are in Scripture usually called by the name of a Church; and this
being already performed in that which we have answered, we therefore now
proceed to consider of your third Argument.

CHAP. IIII.
Containing an Answer to your third Argument from Acts 15.
IF that all ancient and modern Writers, of all sorts, (excepting only some
few of these last fifty years, engaged by their own tenet of independency)
have with one voice concluded this Chapter, a formal president for Synods,
would weigh any thing herein, the matter would soon be at an end; but however
the ^ext it self is so pregnant of this truth, that it has of it self strength
enough to deliver it self of it.

Here Is all that goes to the making up of a complete Synod, First, here is the
occasion -- Secondly, here is a designation both of the Commissioners and place,
-- Thirdly, here is the matter of a Synod, -- Fourthly, here is the form of a
Synod, -- Fifthly, here is the end of a Synod, -- Lastly, here is the proper
effect of a Synod, -- page 19.

If all this were granted, yet the thing in difference, as your self have
stated the Question, in pa. 2, 3, 4. of your book, is not concluded thereby.
For all this that is here said, goes no further, but only to show that there
ought to be Synods; whereas the question is about the power of Synods, and how
far the same does reach, whether so far as that a Synod only (and not a
particular congregation) ought to ordain officers, and excommunicate offenders:
and between these two is a wide difference; so that many a man may acknowledge
the former, which is all that is here concluded, and yet not acknowledge the
latter, which is the maine point, which should have been cleared. For our parts
we deny not but there ought to be Synods, and your Argument concludes no more:
yea your self do testify, page 2. that those whom you deal against, do
acknowledge as much in effect as here by you is concluded; for there you say
that they acknowledge, that neighbor Churches may meet, consult and advise,
etc. and if they acknowledge all this, then they acknowledge a use of Synods,
because these things we suppose, cannot be done by many Churches at once,
unless it be by their messengers, and Deputies assembled together, which
Assembly is no other then a Synod. Wherefore since no more is here concluded,
then is by the Independents parties (as you call them) acknowledged, we need
not insist long, in giving answer to this Argument. We will therefore only
briefly mention some grounds, that incline us to think that this Assembly in
Act. 15. was a Synod, and then give some annotations upon some few passages in
your Discourse about this place, and so proceed to the next Argument. Touching
the former, when we say this meeting in Act. 15. was a Synod, we mean at least
such an one as Mr. Parker Pol. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 23. Sect. 1. understands it to
be, viz. a consociation or combination of more Churches then one, even of two
at least. Or as Doctor Whitakar who counts it neither a general Council, nor
yet a National, or Provincial, but a particular Council, as he calls it,
less then either of the other. de Council. Q. 1. c. 2. And that matters were
carried in it, in way of an ordinary Synod, may appear by two things. 1 The
persons employed in it, which were not only the Apostles, those extraordinary
Officers, but also the ordinary Elders and brethren of Jerusalem. Ver. 6, 22,
23. And besides Paul and Barnabas, certain others that were sent with them from
Antioch, v. 2. Secondly, the means used for clearing the controversy, then in
hand, was not the Apostolical Authority, nor any extra ordinary revelation,
vouchsafed to the Apostles and such extra ordinary persons: there is not a
word mentioned of any such thing; but the means they used, was the same, that
is common to ordinary Synods, viz. much disputation, v. 7. Peter's experience
of Gods blessing upon his Ministry, to Cornelius, and his company, v. 7. And
the like is done by Paul and Barnabas, for their part, ver. 12. And as for
James, he alleges the testimony of the Prophet Amos, v. 15, 16. and the Law
of Moses, read and preached in the Synagogues, every Sabbath day, v. 21. Now
all these means being no other, but such as may be used, in ordinary Synods,
therefore we see no other, but this meeting might be such an one.

Here is a designation (say you) of the Commissioners and place. p. 19.

Answ. But these Commissioners, and this place, were designed only by them of
Antioch, v. 2. which shows that this meeting, was not of any more, but two
Churches, Antioch and Jerusalem: For if there had been more, how came it to
pass, that only they of Antioch determine the place? Reason would have
required, that if there had been others, they also should have had a voice in
determining the place of meeting.

Here is the matter of a Synod, not only Apostles but Elders, and of several
Churches. page 20.

Answ. True: but these Churches are not mentioned, to be any other, but only
Antioch and Jerusalem.

Both thus meeting, to determine so great a matter, consequently all matter of
jurisdiction, is not confined to one single Congregation. page 20.

Answ. The matter determined, was a matter of doctrine, viz. whether
Circumcision was necessary to salvation: v. 1. and there fore no matter of
jurisdiction, unless jurisdiction, and Doctrine be the same. And though they
that taught this Doctrine, (if they perfisted pertinaciously therein,) deserved
to be censured, as you do truly allege, from Tit. 3. 10. Reject an heretic,
the dispencing of which censure, is a matter of jurisdiction. Yet (for ought
that does appear to the contrary) both these Churches might concur, to clear up
the doctrine, and yet one only, even that congregation (whereof the offenders
were properly members) might dispense the censure, that was due for their
pertinacious defense of such Doctrine. The concurrence of both, to clear up the
Doctrine, does argue want of light in the one; but nevertheless there might be
entirenesse, of jurisdiction in each.

But if Churches had then been independent, Antioch had undertaken and been
able her self sufficiently, and finally to have judged the cause, and
prevented the danger.

Answ. Antioch did undertake to have ended the matter among themselves, and
spent much time about it, before there was any speech of seeking out for help
elsewhere, as appears, verse. 2. and this does sufficiently declare it, that
they were not necessarily dependant upon any other Church, or Churches, but had
right to have ended the matter within themselves, if ability had served
thereto, or else this undertaking of theirs had been sinful, as being an
attempting to do that whereto they had no right. And though by reason of much
dissension among themselves, they were forced to seek for help for ending the
cause, this may argue want of ability and light, but argues not any want at all
of authority or right: In which respect they might be independent,
notwithstanding their imperfection in the other regard. Suppose a father of
children, or master of a family, through want of wisdom, or courage, be not
able to rule his own children, and household, as Eli, or suppose a King that is
a child, as Solomon speaks, ( Eccles. 10.) or Princes that are babes, (as the
Prophet terms them, Isai. 3.) be not able to govern their own subjects, as
Rehoboam, 2 King. 12. would you think this want of sufficient ability, a
sufficient argument to prove, that such a Father or Master, had no authority or
right to rule his own children, or household; nor such a Prince any right to
rule his subjects; but that the families of the one must depend upon other
families; and the commonwealth of the other upon other commonwealths? We
suppose you would not say so? And yet you may as well say it, as say as here
you do, that if Churches had been independent, Antioch had been able her self
sufficiently to have ended the cause. Antioch finding her self not able, may
send to Jerulem for help; and yet this sending neither proves right of
jurisdiction in them of Jerusalem, who are sent unto, nor want of jurisdiction
in them of Antioch, who so do send. Yes, say you.

An obliging the Churches by decrees, laid on them, as a burden, is a use of
the keys, in which use of them, Ephesus is commended, Pergamus and Thyatyra
reproved, page 25.

Answ. But if this be a use of the Keys, may it not be of the Key of Doctrine,
as well as the Key of Discipline, since the burdens laid on them, were not
burdens of penalty, but burdens of duty; not punishments to be suffered for
offense given; but rules of practice to be observed, lest offense should be
taken; as is plain, if the particulars be considered, page 29. And therefore
it seems the imposing these burdens, was not so properly an act of
jurisdiction, and discipline, as an act of Doctrine. As for Ephesus, the use of
the Keys (for which they are commended) is not (as you affirm) for imposing
decrees as burdens upon one another; nor is Pergamus or Thyatyra reproved, for
neglect of so doing, but trying and detecting counterfeit Apostles, which was a
matter of doctrine, and not bearing with them that were evil, which was matter
of discipline, are the things for which Ephesus is commended; and suffering them
which were evil (which was a neglect of Discipline) is that for which the
other are reproved, Rev. 2. 2. 14. 20. But neither is the one commended for
imposing decrees, nor the other reproved for neglecting so to do. But you will
prove that the Synod had jurisdiction and power of the Keys of discipline;
because, say you,

This Decree is it self a Rule given, wherein and whereby to use the keys,
upon such as shall prove stubborn, in defending the contrary of what is here
decreed --, and that authority which can give the rule, can ( a fortiori) back
and punish its breach. p. 25.

Ans. But is this certain and clear, that whoever has authority by way of
doctrine, to impose a rule, has also authority, by way of discipline, to
punish its breach? we propose to consideration, these instances for the
contrary. First of all the Prophets in Israel, Isaiah, Joel, Amos, and the
rest, had authority by way of doctrine, (as being sent of God for that
purpose) to deliver the will of God, as a rule to be observed, not only by all
the Princes, and people, but even by the Priests and Levits also; for so we
read they many times did, and yet not being Priests themselves, nor Levites,
they had not authority to punish, by way of Discipline, such as disobeyed their
doctrine, and those holy rules which they delivered from the Lord.

Nextly, any one Minister, who is truly sent of God, may in his doctrine,
deliver the rules of Gods word, to the people he is sent unto, and impose those
rules as burdens, and necessary things to be observed; and yet one Minister
alone cannot punish the breach of those rules, in a way of discipline, because
Church Discipline is to be dispensed by a Church, Matthew. 18. 17. and one man
alone (we are persuaded) you will not say, can be a Church.

Further, any Minister or Ministers of one Church (be it Congregationall or
National) may upon occasion being desired thereto, preach the word of God in
another the like Church, and so impose burdens of Christian duties to be
observed by them, that they thus occasionally preach unto; yet it would not
follow they might by discipline punish such as should walk contrary to those
rules, because the power of jurisdiction which they have when they are at home
in their own Church, does not reach so far as unto that other Church where
now they are called to preach the doctrine of the word. Lastly, there is no
doubt but any Minister, or Ministers of the Gospel (if occasion served
thereunto) might by way of Doctrine deliver rules of faith and obedience, unto
Pagans, and such as are no members of any Christian Church at all, and might
command them in the name of the Lord, to observe those rules; and yet it would
not therefore follow, that they might punish those Pagans in a way of
discipline, for the breach of those rules; because the Apostle says plainly,
What have I to do to judge them that are without? 1 Cor. 5. 12. Yea, there are
sundry good Writers in reformed Churches, who do hold, that Doctors in the
Church have authority by their office, to deliver sound wholesome doctrine, from
the Scriptures, and yet may not meddle, with dispensation of Sacraments, nor
Discipline; See among others for this, Calvines Instit. lib. 4. Chapter 3. Sect. 4.
And if this be so, this may be another instance for the same purpose as the
rest, and by all this, we suppose it is clear, that some men may have
authority, by way of doctrine, to impose rules, that must be observed, as
necessary things, and yet not have authority, by way of discipline, to punish
those that shall disobey those rules. And therefore though the first of these
were granted, to be within the power of a Synod, yet that they have power to do
the other also, is not proved thereby.

CHAP. V.
Containing an Answer to your fourth Argument, taken from 1 Timothy 4. 14. laying
on of the hands of the Presbytery.
HEnce I argue thus. Such as are for independency, admit of no other rule in
Church Government, but the Scripture practice or institution, but where in all
the Scripture, read we of any ordination, of Pastors, but by Presbyters? --
Timothy was ordained by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery: Titus was
for this very cause, left at Creet that he should ordain Elders in every City.
page 26, 27.

Answ. All that is here said is only about ordination of Officers, which (at
the most) is but one part of the Ecclesiastical government, or jurisdiction.
And therefore if it were granted, that this ordination belongs only to a
Synod, yet the Question (being not of one part, but of the whole jurisdiction)
is not concluded thereby. Nevertheless we are willing to consider what is said
about this particular, and therefore our Answer is distinctly thus. 1 That if a
Congregation have Elders of it own, then when other Officers are to be
ordained, in that Church, such ordination is to be performed, by the imposition
of the hands of those Elders. This we never denied, and a good deal of your
proofs, do conclude no more. For what if the Presbytery at Ephesus, did lay
hands upon Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 14. and the Presbytery, at Antioch upon Paul,
and Barnabas, Act. 13. 1, 2. which are two of your proofs? this may evince,
that in Churches furnished with a Presbytery, (as Ephesus and Antioch were)
that that Presbytery is to perform imposition of hands, which is nothing
against us, neither do willingly acknowledge the same.

But it may be in this Argument you intend a further matter, viz. that
ordination cannot be performed lawfully, by any, but only by Elders.

For where (say you) in all the Scripture do we read of any ordination of
Pastors but by Presbyters?

Whereto we answer three things. 1 That we do read of such a matter in the
Scripture. 2 That if we did not, yet we read so much as b^ good consequence
does infer the lawfulness of the practice. 3 That which we do read, that may
seem, to make against this practice, is not because the thing, is in every
case, unlawful, but for other reasons. 1 For the first of these, we allege
Numb. 8. 10. which place shows, that though the Levites were Church Officers,
and the Children of Israel were none, yet the Children of Israel did lay their
hands upon the Levites; by which Scripture, thus much is manifest, that when a
Church has no Elders, but the first Elders themselves are to be ordained, and
this at such times, and in such places, where Elders can not conveniently be
borrowed from any other Church, in such case imposition of hands may lawfully
be performed, by some principal men of the Congregation, although they be not
Elders by office; for since it was so in the Church of Israel as this text does
witness, what should hinder but in the like case, the like may be lawfully
done in these days? If any shall ask how was it possible, that the Children of
Israel, being 600000 should all lay hands upon the Levites at once? Answer. It
is not like that all did it, but some instead of the rest: and so when some do
impose hands, in stead of all the Congregation, that may be sufficient.

If it shall be said, these Children of Israel, might be Elders, and so their
example will be no warrant for imposition of hands by non-elders: The answer
is, it is like they were Elders, as being the chief and principal members, of
the Congregation; but yet their example proves the point if two things be
considered. First, that they did not this as a work peculiar to them as Elders.
Secondly, that they did it not for themselves only, but for all the
Congregation; the former of which may be thus manifested; If they did it as
Elders, then either as Elders and Governors Ecclesiastical, or as Civil
governors but not the first, for that charge was only belonging to Aaron and
his sons, Levit. 8. and these Levites now ordained, If the second be said, then
it will follow, that Civil Magistrates though no Church officers, may impose
hands in ordination of Church officers, and so the point is gained. For if
Magistrates may do it, then it will follow that a Church wanting Magistrates
may perform this action by other the fittest Instruments she has. For this is
not a work properly tied to the Magistrates office; because then the Church in
the Apostles time, wanting Magistrates, could not have had Officers; the
contrary whereof is manifest in the Scripture, Act. 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5.
Secondly, as these Children of Israel (suppose they were the chief Fathers of
families) imposed hands on the Levites, not as Elders and governors
Ecclesiastical, or Civil but as principal members of the Church, so what was
herein performed by them, was not done by themselves only, but for all the
Congregation. And this appears, first because these Levites now to be ordained
by imposition of hands, were taken in stead of all the firstborn of Israel,
and not in stead of the first born of Elders only: Numb. 3. 40, 41. Secondly,
they were presented to the Lord, as an offering of the Children of Israel,
Numb. 8. 11. and not of the Elders only; and inasmuch as all offerings were to
be presented at the door of the Tabernacle, with the imposition of his hands
whose the offering was, Levit. 1. 3. 4. it is therefore evident, that they that
imposed hands on the Levites, did it in the name of all the people, whose
offering these Levites were. Thirdly, it was usual, that when all the
multitude brought an oblation, the Elders put their hands on the head of the
sacrifice. Levit. 4. 14, 15. viz. in stead of all the multitude, whose the
sacrifice was. And thus you see, we read in Scriptures of the imposition of
hands, performed by them that were no Elders, by office, and so this demand of
yours, where in Scripture do we read of such a practice, is answered. But if we
did not read of any such thing, yet it may suffice (which was our second
particular to be proved) that we do read so much as by good consequence,
infers the lawfulness of the practice. And for this purpose, first, we
propound Act. 1. Act. 6. and Act. 14. where we read of the peoples electing,
and choosing officers, of which places, more may be spoken afterward; Now if the
people may elect Officers, then in some cases, they may ordain them also,
because ordination is less then election, and depends upon it as a necessary
antecedent; by virtue whereof it is justly administered. Yea it is not only
less then election, but less in the same kind, being nothing else, but the
accomplishment of election, or the admission of a person into the possession of
that office, whereto he had right before by election. And hence it follows by
good consequence, that if a single congregation, may elect officers, which is
the greater, they may also in some case ordain them, which is the lesser. For
your self do grant that to argue affirmatively, from the greater, to the lesser
in the same kind is good consequence, and such is this; Which kind of arguing
is also used by Doctor Whitaker concerning this very particular.

Besides, we read, Heb. 6. 2. that imposition of hands is amongst the
principles of religion, and joined by the Apostle with baptism, resurrection,
and the eternal judgment; and therefore an institution of ordinary and
perpetual use, as all principles are, and so not to be omitted in the
ordination of Officers. And if so, it will therefore follow, that in some case
it may be performed by such as are not in office; because the case may so be,
that otherwise it cannot be performed at all, so that either no Officers must
be ordained, nor any imposition of hands used at all; or else imposition of
hands in some case may be performed by them that are not in office. Now that it
cannot always be performed by Officers, three instances make it manifest:
First, when there are no Officers of any other Church to be had, as at the
first rise of the first Christian Church in a Pagan Country, far remote from
all Churches, as here in America by the English; and in the case which you put
of a company of Christians by shipwreck cast upon an Island where no Pastors
were. Secondly, when those that may be had, are so exceedingly corrupt, and the
Churches to whom they do belong, that it could not be convenient to make use of
them, but very dangerous to fetch ordination only from them, as at the first
reformation after the times of Popery, when there were none to be had, but from
the Popish Bishops and Priests; from whom to receive ordination, were as much
as to say, either that the Ministers of Antichrist may ordain Ministers to the
Church of Christ, or else that Popish Bishops are true Ministers of Christ: And
sure if Christians might not have any Ministers, unless ordained by the Popish
Bishops, the case were as pitiful as if sheep might have no Shepherds, but
such are appointed to them by the Wolves. Thirdly, when those that are more
desirable, have no sufficient calling to dispense ordination in another Church
which is the case when they are not requested thereto; For since ordinary Elders
are not like Apostles, to feed all flocks, but that flock of God, which
depends upon them, 1 Pet. 5. 2. that flock over which the holy Ghost has
made them overseers, Acts 20. 28. Therefore we do not understand, how they
can assume authority and power unto themselves, to ordain Elders to other
Churches, whereof themselves are neither Elders nor members, unless they had a
calling thereto, by the request of that Church where the Elders are to be
ordained. So that by these instances it appears, that sometimes officers of
other Churches are not to be had, sometimes those that may be had, are as ill
as none, and not to be depended on, or desired; and sometimes those that are
more desirable, have no sufficient calling to ordain Ministers in any other
Church; and therefore in such cases as these, since Officers must not be
admitted without imposition of hands, imposition of hands must be performed by
non-Officers.

But you will say, we read in sundry places, where imposition of hands, was
performed by Elders, and not one place in all the new Testament, where it was
performed by others. Whereto we answer, That all this is true, but nothing
against what we have said; because (which was our third particular to be
cleared) the true reason of this, that is here alleged, was not, as if
ordination by non-Elders were in every case unlawful: But because in those
times Elders were not wanting; for there were the Apostles and Apostolic men,
who were Elders in all Churches. And we do willingly grant, that where a Church
is furnished with Elders, imposition of hands is to be performed by the Elders,
and so much the examples in the New Testament do evince. But we have also
showed from Numb. 8. that if there be no Elders, as at the first, nor any that
can conveniently be gotten from other Churches, then imposition of hands may
lawfully be performed by others.

But you will prove, that it does not belong to the congregation with or
without a Pastor, to ordain Elders; because the rules of direction, how to
proceed in ordination, and the Epistles wherein those rules are, are not
written or directed to the whole Churches of Ephesus or Creet, but to Timothy
and Titus only, as their inscriptions speaks.

Answ. If this be a sufficient reason, to prove that the people may not in any
case, meddle with ordination, then by as good a reason, a man may prove that
ordination belongs not to the Presbytery, nor to the Synods, but only to one
man, as the Prelates would have it: for a man may turn the reason against your
self, and say, The rules of direction how to proceed in ordination, and the
Epistles wherein those rules are, are not directed to any Presbytery or Synod
at Ephesus or Creet, or any where else, but only to Timothy and Titus, who
were each of them but only one man. But look how you would answer this plea
for Episcopal ordination, the same answer may be given to yours. And for us,
we cannot but approve the answer given to this kind of reasoning, by the
refuter of Doctor Downhams Sermon at Lambeth, who in his Reply, part. 2. page
107. does show, that the laws of Church Government prescribed in the Epistles
of Timothy and Titus, were not provided for Bishops alone, nor Elders alone,
but for a mixed state, wherein many Presbyters under the guidance of one Pastor
or President, do administer and execute all matters with the peoples consent
and approbation. In which affirmation he alleges the consent of most and best
Divines of later times, instancing in Calvin and Beza, and especially the
Apostles own warrant in the close of thoses Epistles, with these words, Grace
be with you, or with you all, 2 Timothy 4. 22. Tit. 3. 15. And by this, says he,
it appears, that what was written specially by name to Timothy and Titus, was
intended to be of common use, not only for other ministers, but also in some
sort to all the Saints that then conversed in those places. Now if what was
written by name to Timothy and Titus, was intended to be of common use to all
the Saints, then there is no reason that you should appropriate those rules
only to the use of Presbyteries and Synods, no more then others only to the
use of Prelates; especially this being considered withal, that if once the
Saints be excluded from being at all concerned in those rules, they that would
appropriate them to one man, have a fairer color for their plea, then they
that would appropriate them to a Presbytery, or Synod, consisting of many;
because Timothy or Titus to whom those Epistles are by name directed, are not
many persons, but either of them one only.

But it appears, say you, that we read in Scripture, that this part of
Jurisdiction was dispensed by the Eldership only, and that a consociated
Eldership. page 27.

Answ. That it was dispensed by the Eldership, we willingly grant; but that it
was dispensed by the Eldership only, and that the Eldership by which it was
dispensed, was a consociated Eldership (that is to say, a Synod) neither of
these do appear at all: Nay, we suppose the contrary to both these may
appear. For as for the former, we have showed the contrary already; and for
the latter, we will only instance in that Eldership at Antioch, Acts 13. that
laid hands on Paul and Barnabas, which Eldership was not any Synod, but an
Eldership of one Congregation: for it is plain out of Acts 14. 27. that the
Church of Antioch was no more then might be gathered together in one place;
yea, the whole multitude of them were gathered together at the return of Paul
and Barnabas from the Synod at Jerusalem, to hear the Epistle read which was
sent from that Synod, Acts 15. 30. 31. And therefore this Church being but one
Congregation, that Eldership therein by whom Paul and Barnabas were ordained,
could not be any Synod.

But, say you, there must be trial of parties to be ordained, and hands must
not be laid on suddenly on any, and it is laid down what kind of men they ought
to be, before they be ordained. And that this trial and approbation of the
parties to be ordained, is in the hands of the Presbytery, and consociated
Eldership, not the whole. pa. 27.

Answ. That they ought to be tried, before they be ordained, yea and before they
be chosen, we freely grant; but that this trial is in the Synod alone, has
not appeared, by the former texts, nor by any of them. We cannot perceive how
any of them, do in any sort, look toward such a thing. And as for this which
is here alleged of the impossibility of discharging it by a single
congregation, with or without a Pastor; We answer thereto; First, that if a
Congregation that is without a Pastor could not discharge it, yet if they be
furnished with an able and faithful Pastor, we know not what should hinder but
they might be able thereto. An able and faithful Pastor, one would think
should be able to try others, that are to be ordained Pastors; And therefore we
marvel that you should deny this ability to this Congregation, as well as to
the other. Secondly, suppose they be without a Pastor, yet if they be
believers, they are not altogether without ability of spiritual discerning,
to discern whether that which is taught be wholesome doctrine, or otherwise.
Witness the words of our Savior, who says, that his sheep know his voice,
but a stranger they will not follow, but will flee from him, for they know not
the voice of strangers: and though there had been many thieves and robbers, yet
the sheep did not hear them. Joh. 10. Which plainly shows, that the sheep of
Christ, have some ability, to try and discern, whether the doctrine that men
teach, be the wholesome Doctrine of truth, or otherwise. Which may be the more
confirmed, by the promise, they shall be all taught of God, Isa. 54. 13. and by
that of Joh. 7. that if any man will do Gods will, he shall know the doctrine,
whether it be of God, or men speak it of themselves. There must be some
ability to discern, whether men be qualified according to the rule, before they
ought to be elected, and chosen into office; and the people of God have so much
ability, to discern this fitness, as that they may lawfully, make this
election; and what then should hinder, but they may have so much ability, as
is of necessity required, before there be proceedings unto Ordination.

As for that instance which you give about the union of the two natures in the
person of Christ, whether the nature assumed the nature, or the person the
person; or the nature the person, or the person the nature. And again, whether
this assumption was by way of composition, or conjunction, or conversion, or
vision (we suppose it should be union) wherein you think it would be hard for
these examiners in a congregation, to hit upon the right judgment, and of four
Preachers to ordain him that were orthodox in this matter.

We say no more to this instance, but only thus much, That as he is the best
Preacher who most teaches the people knowledge, Eccles. 12. and who had rather
speak five words to the understanding, so as he may teach others, and the
hearers be edisied, rather then ten thousand words in a strange tongue, and
uncoth terms, that himself might be admired, 1 Cor. 14. 19. So we know
nothing but the people of God in a Congregation: these terms being explained
unto them, might be able to discern which were the orthodox tenent of the four
particulars, and accordingly pitch upon him that holds it.

Lastly, you speak, page 29. of four things that are opposed about this matter
of Ordination.

Where, though we will not take upon us to justify all those reasons, but
leave them to the authors of them, to undertake the defense of them, if so be
there be any that do so argue; yet we may speak a word or two to some passages
in your answer to these four particulars.

First of all, to the case of a Company of Believers cast by shipwreck upon an
Island, where are no Pastors, your answer is, that the question is about the
ordinary way of Scripture-institution in this matter of ordination, not what
may be done in extraordinary cases.

Whereby it seems that in the case proposed, you grant ordination may be
performed by non-Elders. And if so, what then becomes of all you have said
before of Timothy and Titus, and of the rules about Ordination in the Epistles
to these two Evangelists, of the Presbytery at Antioch, that laid hands upon
Paul and Barnabas, of the inability of people to examine and try who were fit
for office, and the rest? For granting what here you do, you plainly declare,
that all your former reasoning amounts but to this much, That when Pastors can
be had, then imposition of hands is best performed by those Pastors, otherwise
it may be done without them; wherein we for our parts consent with you. But by
this means the necessary dependence upon Synods for ordination of officers, is
utterly overthrown.

But, say you, Indepencie of every single congregation, to be the ordinary
way, herein is the claim of the independent party.

Answ. What others claim, they may declare their grounds for the same as they
see cause; for our selves, that which we hold, with the grounds thereof, is
briefly this, in four Propositions; two of them concerning what is to be done
in case a Chhurch have Elders of its own: and two concerning what is to be done
in case it have not. In respect of the former.

Proposition 1. If a Church have Elders of its own, imposition of hands in
ordination is to be performed by those Elders, and not by the people.

Proposition 2. A Church that has Elders of its own, needs not to depend upon
a Synod, or the Presbyteries of other Churches, consociat or single, for the
the ordaining of its Officers; but the same may be performed lawfully and
sufficiently by its own Elders.

In respect of the latter: 1. In a Church that has no Elders, imposition of
hands in ordaining of officers, may lawfully be performed by some principal
members in the congregation.

2. If the Church have Elders of its own, it may do well to crave the
approbation of the Ministers of neighboring congregations if there be any such.

The grounds of the first and third of these Propositions has been declared
already; and for the second we thus argue:

Arg. 1. If such a Church may elect and choose Officers to it self, without any
necessary dependence upon Synods; then they may ordain them also, having so fit
instruments as Elders of their own to do it by. But the first is true, as we
have elsewhere showed in this Answer of ours: Therefore the second is true also.
The consequence of the Major is clear by this reason, That they which can do
the greater, can do the lesser also, if it be of the same kind.

Arg. 2. If such a Church as we here speak of, may not ordain their Officers
without dependence on a Synod, or a Classis; then neither may they administer
Seals without such dependence: For the word makes such dependence, no more
requisite in the one case, then in the other.

Arg. 3. If it were not thus, it were not possible, there should be any Synod
or Classis upon the face of the earth; for what is a Classis or a Synod? but a
company of Ministers or Elders, of several Congregations, assembled together
to consider of things concerning themselves, and the Churches of Christ,
specially such Churches, whereto they do peculiarly belong; Now this assembling
of Elders into a Classis or Synod, does imply that there were Elders before
there was any Classis, or Synod; and if so, then certainly there was no
concurrence, of the Classis or Synod in the ordination of those Elders; since
they were Elders before that Synod had any being; Which does sufficiently show,
that the concurrence of a Synod, is not always required in the ordaining of
Elders.

Obj. If it be said the Synod did ordain Timothy, an Evangelist, an Officer of
many Churches, 1 Timothy 4. 14. and therefore much more must ordain Officers of
one particular Church.

The Answer is, first, that the consequence is not strong, because a particular
Church might have authority sufficient, to ordain by their Eldership the
Officers of their particular Church only; and not sufficient to ordain such as
must be Officers in all Churches, whatsoever. The help of a Classis or Synod,
where is a combination or consociation of Elders, of many Churches, might be
requisite for ordaining an Officer of many Churches, and yet the eldership of
our particular Church, might be sufficient for ordaining such a one, as is to
be officer, to no more but only to that particular Church.

Secondly, the ground hence is not certain. For though Timothy was an
Evangelist, and so to travel from one Church to another, yet the Presbytery 1 Timothy 4. 14. that laid hands on him, might be the Presbytery of one particular
Church, and not any Synod or Classis. For Paul and Barnabas were Apostles, Act.
14. 4. and 14. Gal. 2. 9. and yet they were ordained, not by any Classis or
Presbytery of many Churches, but by the Presbytery of one Church, the Church
at Antioch. Act. 13. 1, 2, 3.

Those (say they) that can do the greater (that is to say) make a Church, can
do the less, make Pastors of that Church.

Ans. We would rather argue thus; those that have power of electing Officers,
they have power of ordaining Officers; But the people that have no Officers,
have the former. Therefore they have power to do the latter. The consequence is
proved, because electing is greater then ordaining, and greater not in another
kind, but in the same; viz. about the placing of a Minister, or the designing
of a person to the office, of Ministry. Now an Argument from the greater to
the less, in the same kind, you confess will hold.

Which visible Ministry where it is, this property or proper power of
ordaining Officers, is a necessary and immediate ordinary concomitant
thereof. page 31.

Answ. If this be so, then there may be Officers ordained, and not by a Synod,
even in a particular congregation; because in such a one there may be a visible
Ministry.

Although that which you have said in this Argument, be not expressly against
the Congregations, electing their Officers; but only against their ordaining
of them, by imposition of hands; yet in as much as sundry passages in your
book, and in this Argument especially, do seem to make as much against the one,
as the other. Therefore as we have already spoken, to the point of ordination,
so we will also, for the Readers further direction, give some grounds for
confirmation of this position, about election, viz. Election of ordinary
officers belongs to the Church, whereof the party is to be an officer, so
that they proceed in this election, according to the rules of the Word; both
choosing a man fitted by God for the office, unto which they choose him, and
carrying their choice, in an orderly manner. Reason 1 It was thus in the
Apostles times, and therefore it ought to be so now. The antecedent is clear
from Act. 1. where in the very choice of an Apostle, the Church are not wholly
excluded; for though the office of an Apostle being extraordinary, the
express designing of the particular person, is determined by God by lot, yet
the Church appoints two that one of them may be singled out, v. 23. and when
the lot had fallen upon Matthias, it is said he was numbered with the eleven
Apostles, v. 26. that is, he was by common suffrage of the Churchchosen to be
of that number; for so does the word signify, that is used, (...) and
therefore it is translated by Scapula, Omnium calculis allectus. And it is
observable, that though the office was extraordinary, and though the Apostles
(who were extraordinary officers, and had received their calling and
extraordinary authority from Christ himself, immediately) were now present,
yet for all this, the Church has a stroke in this matter, both first
appointing two, and then approving by their common suffrage or consent him of
the two, on whom the lot had fallen; to be for instruction unto us in after
times, that in the choice of ordinary officers, it should be far from any of
the sons of men, to exclude the people of God, from their right and interest
therein; For if they had a stroke in the choice of an Apostle; how much more
should they have the like, in the choice of ordinary officers? And if the
Apostles themselves being present, would not abridge the people of this
liberty, much less may others do it; doubtless they that engrosse the
authority of choosing Ministers into their own hands, excluding the people,
they arrogate more unto themselves then the Apostles ever did. So likewise in
Act. 6. when Deacons were to be appointed, the Apostles do not take all the
business into their own hands, as if election of such officers appertained
only to themselves, and not at all unto the people: but they call the whole
multitude unto them, ver. 2. and bid them choose out seven men, fitly qualified
for the office, ver. 3. and accordingly the saying pleased the whole multitude;
and they chose seven that are there named, ver. 5. and having so done, they set
them before the Apostles that they might ordain them by laying their hands on
them, ver. 6. And in Act. 14. 23. it is said that the Apostles ordained Elders,
by election, or lifting up of hands, (for so does (...) signify) in every
Church.

Obj. The word signifies nothing else, but laying on of hands, which was the
act of the Apostles alone, and not of the people.

Ans. The word is never used for laying on of hands in all the Scripture, but
the word used for that is (...), betwixt which and this word (...), there is as
much difference as between holding up and laying down. If Luke the writer of
the Acts had intended the laying on of hands, it had been easy for him to have
used the other word, which is proper to express such an action, and frequently
used by himself in that sense in this book. Act. 6. 6. and 8. 17. and 9. 17.

Object. But be it laying on, or lifting up, that was not the act of the
people, but of the Apostle alone.

Answ. Of the Apostles it is confessed: For who doubts, but as they moderated
the whole action, and laid on their hands in ordination; so they might also
concur in the election, by lifting up their hands? But it will not follow,
that therefore that lifting up of hands was performed by the Apostles only;
for elsewhere the word is used to express the act of the whole Church, and is
translated ( was chosen, 2 Cor. 8. 19. (...); was chosen of the Churches: Even
as one place mentions a gift that was in Timothy, by the laying on of Paul's
hands, 2 Timothy 1. 6. which must not be understood of Paul's hands alone, because
another Scripture mentions the hands of the Presbytery, 1. Tim. 4. 14. By all
which it appears, that in the Apostles times, the people had one hand in the
election of their Officers. And if so, then it ought to be so also in these
days: for the practice of the Apostles recorded in the Acts is presidentiall
for all Churches in all ages, in those things that were not of particular
reason and respect; which for the peoples choosing their Ministers, cannot be
said. Besides, when the Apostles were alive, the Churches were in the greatest
purity, and therefore we may more safely tread in their steps. And further, if
this practice had not been according to the mind of Christ, we may be sure the
Apostles would not have countenanced it, nor have directed the Churches to have
used it, but would have left and prescribed some other course to be observed in
the choice of Ministers, which we see they have not done.

Secondly, if Ministers must not be chosen by the Church, then either they must
be called of God immediately, or Ministers without any calling at all, or be
chosen and appointed by some other men: But not the first, because such
immediate calling is now ceased (as being peculiar to the extraordinary
function of Apostles, Prophets, etc.) which in these times are not to be
expected; Nor the second, because that is expressly against the Scripture, which
says, No man must take this honor to himself, but he that is called of God,
as was Aaron, Heb. 5. 4. And therefore they that ran when God sent them not,
are many times, and very sharply reproved in the Prophets, Jer. 23. 21. Nor the
third: For 1. God has not given any such authority to other men that are not
of the Church, to appoint Officers to the Church: Nor 2. may some of the Church
arrogate this power only to themselves, excluding the rest; because that which
concerns all (as this matter does) ought to have approbation of all, unless
it might appear, that God had committed the thing only to some, which for the
choosing of Officers cannot be said. 3. It is suitable to right reason, that it
should be thus: For 1. by this means the liberty of the Church is not infringed
by thrusting officers upon them without their consent, and whom they never
chose. Also 2. this is a strong engagement to the people, to yield due
reverence, subjection and obedience to their Ministers, because they are the
men whom themselves have chosen; whereas one thrust upon them against their
wills, is not like to be much beloved, but rather contemned and hated; and how
then shall they profit by his doctrine? Finally, the people have a right
originally to choose their civil officers, as is also practiced at this day in
many places: And when the Lord brings a sword upon a land, the Scripture says
expressly, that the people of the land may take a man of their coasts, and set
him for their watchman, Ezekiel. 33. 2. And if so, then they may well have liberty
to choose such as must be watchmen for their souls: for it is much more
unreasonable, that there should be thrust upon them such watchmen and officers,
upon whom the salvation or damnation of their souls does depend, then such as
upon whom depends no more but their wealth, or commodity of this life. And
this shall suffice for answer to your fourth and last Argument.

There are in your book two other general heads which are something insisted on,
the one about clearing such objections as are not reducible to your former
arguments; the other of appealing to the judgment of the adverse party: In
both which, thopugh we might observe sundry things which were worth your second
review, yet in as much as our intentions were chiefly to consider the weight of
your arguments, but not to undertake the defense of every objection which you
propose; and considering withal, that those considerations from the order,
unity, peace, and strength of government with the rest, are not intended by you
(as we suppose) as convincing, but only as probable grounds against that way
which you deal against; therefore for these and some other reasons, having
spoken to that which we conceive to be the main substance of your book, we will
here for this time surcease, praying the Father of mercies for Christ Jesus his
sake, to pour out his rich blessings of truth and peace upon our dear native
country, and to guide all his servants there and here by a Spirit of truth,
into all truth. And to give us such hearts and grace, that we may follow the
truth in love, till Antichristianisme be utterly rooted out, and Sion be
restored, (especially in England) to her former beiuty, and new Jerusalem come
down from heaven, as a Bride adorned for her Husband, the Lord Jesus Christ. To
whom be all glory and praise for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

