Church Government AND Church Covenant DISCVSSED, In an Answer of the Elders of
the several Churches in NEW ENGLAND To two and thirty Questions, sent over to
them by diverse Ministers in England, to declare their judgments therein.
Together with an Apology of the said Elders in New England for
Church Covenant, sent over in Answer to Master Bernard in the year 1639. As
also in an Answer to nine Positions about Church Government.

And now published for the satisfaction of all who desire resolution in those
points.

LONDON, Printed by R. O. and G. D. for Benjamin Allen and are to be sold at
his Shop in Popes head-Ally, 1643.

To the READER.
IT is not hard to believe that such discourses as this will meet with diverse
censures, the profane and ignorant loathing Christ, and any thing concerning
him; the Formalist accounting such truths troublesome that may engage him in the
change of his opinions and practices, and some of the wisest will be apt to
question the tyming such light as this: yea doubtless this pamphlet-glut^ed age
will so look upon it, and lay it by.

But because I do conceive that this sword will not be sheathed which is now
drawn, till Church-work be better known, and more countenanced, and since
safety is laid up in the Temple, Psa. 27. 3, 4, 5. I could not but help on
this, which attended and practiced may prove our security next to Christ. These
were either sudden answers to our doubting and inquiring Brethren, or some
satisfaction rendered about our so much slighted Church Covenant, which we
could not but think might come to view, for the present stay to some faithful
souls, that call for light, and intend to use it well: for others, of what
kind soever, we must bear their harder thoughts, among th^se usual loads of
scandals, that men of our judgment must carry, especially if zeal for the
Truth draw them forth to public observation; nor do we purpose (God helping
us.) to succumbe under calumny, being the livery of quieter times then these,
let us be viler still, so God and his Arc may be more glorious. Yet this I
do profess for my self and Brethren that as we have not bin dealt with, nor
convinced of any offense, so we shall ever be ready to give an account of that
hope which is in us, being called thereunto; in the mean time we over look
these barkings of black mouths, and wish a good Comment be made upon the text
of our plain meaning.

The only way I know to reach Gods mind in Worship will be to love the truth
for it is own sake: yea to love it when it shall condemn our practices and
persons also: Who has not observed that the first step to error is the
declining the truth in love to it?

*

Hence Popery begat her first brat, and has nursed it up with the same milk; we
would earnestly desire that none would call that unsensonable or unreasonable,
which God seems even now to call for, at the calling of this Synod, and will
carry so much Reason with it, as God and his truth will own; more tenderness
and respect to our Brethren we know not how to show, who sent us these 32.
Questions, no other dealing would we have from our brethren not consenting with
us. Some Rivers have bin noted to differ in the colors of the water, yet
running in the same Channel: let Jesus Christ be lifted up by us all; let us
love him whilst we dispute about him.

Presbytery and Independency (as it is called) are the ways of Worship and
Church fellowship, now looked at, since (we hope) Episcop (...) out, and will
be buried without expectation of another resurrection. We are much charged with
what we own not, viz: Independency, when as we know not any Churches Reformed,
more looking at sister Churches for help then ours do only we cannot have
rule yet discovered from any friend or enemy, that we should be under Canon, or
power of any other Church; under their Council we are. We need not tell the
wise whence Tyranny grew in Churches, and how common wealths got their pressure
in the like kind.

These be our sighs and hearty wishes, that self may be conquered in this
poor Nation, which shuts the door against these truths. Know (good Reader) we
do not hereby go about to whistle thee out of any known good way of God.
Commonly Questions and Answers clear up the way, when other Treatises leave us
to darkness. Read them, and what we say for a Church Covenant, it may save
charge and time in reading other Books, remember we strive not here for
masteryes, but give an account of our practice wherein if thou know we fail
Candidus imperti; if we agree let us work by our plat-forme; and may thy soul
flourish as a green heath or watered garden. So prays

Thine heartily

THE XXXII QUESTIONS STATED.
_1. WHether the greatest part of the English there (by estimation) be not as
yet unadmitted to any Congregation among you, and the Reasons thereof? 2. What
things do you hold to be Essential and absolutely necessary to the being of a
true Visible Church of Christ? 3. Whether do you not hold all Visible
Believers to be within the Visible Church as Members thereof, and not without
in the Apostles sense; 1 Cor. 5. and therefore ought so to be acknowledged, and
accepted in all Congregations wheresoever they shall come, and are so known:
and ought (if they desire and be not otherwise unfit) of right to be permitted
to partake in all Gods ordinances and Church privileges there, so far as
they personally concern themselves, although they be not as yet fixed Members
in particul^r Covenant, either with that Congregation where for the present
they reside, nor with any other? 4. Whether you do not hold that Baptism
rightly (for substance) partaked does make them that are so Baptized, Members
of the Visible Church: and so to have right (at least quoad nos) to all the
privileges thereof (so far as they are otherwise fit) until they be cast
out (if they so deserve) by Excommunication. 5. Whether do you not admit
Children under age as Members of the Church, together with, and in the
Admission of their Parent or Parents: So as thenceforth they may partake of all
Church privileges being otherwise fit) without any other personal profession
of Faith, or entering into Church Covenant, when they shall come to years? and
how long do you count them under age? 6. Whether do not you admit Orphants
under age, with and in their Guardians? 7. Whether do you admit or refuse
Children under age only acco^ding to the present estate of their nearest
Parents? Or do you not admit them if any of their next Ancestors before their
parents were believers? 8. Whether do you require of all persons of age, whom
you admit Members of any Church? 1. A public vocal declaration of the manner
and soundness of their conversion? 2. A public profession of their faith
concerning the Articles of Religion. 3. An express verbal covenanting to
walk with the said Church in particular, in Church fellowship. 4. And not to
depart from the said Church afterward without the consent thereof: or how do
you hold and practice in these things?
9. Whether do you hold all, or the most of our Parish assemblies in
Old-England to be true Visible Churches of Christ; with which you may lawfully
join in every part of Gods true worship (if occasion served thereto:) or if
not all or the most, then what ones are those of which you so account, and with
which you durst so partake or join; and in what respects? And why be not the
rest such as well as they? 10. If you hold that any of our parishionall
Assemblies are true Visible Churches, and that the Members thereof are all, or
some of them (at least) members of true visible Churches, then whether will you
permit such members (at least) as are either famously known to your selves to
be godly, or do bring sufficient Testimonial thereof from others that are so
known, or from the Congregation it self whereof they were members here, to
partake with you in all the same Ordinances, and parts of Gods true worship in
any of your Congregations (as by occasion they may be there) in the same
manner, and with the like liberty, as you would permit any that might happily
come unto you from any of the Churches of Geneva, France, the Low-Countreyes,
or yet from any one Church to another among your selves: Suppose from some
Church about Connecticut, or that of Plymouth, etc. Unto the Church at Boston,
New-Towne, Dorchester, etc. Or if not, what may be the Reason thereof? 11.
Whether do you hold our present standing in our Parish Assemblies here in Old
ENGLAND, to be lawful and safe to be continued in, or how f^rre it may be so?
12. Whether do you hold that every Believer is always bound to join himself
as a fixed Member to some one particular Congregation, so as if he do not, and
so often and so long as he does it not, so often and so long he is without the
Church in the Apostles sense, 1 Cor. 5. as an Heathen or Publican, out of the
Kingdom of Christ, and possibility of salvation, according to that maxim in
divinity, Extra Ecclesiam non est salus. 13. Whether do you think it lawful
and convenient that a company of private and illitterate persons (into a Church
body combined) should themselves ordinarily examine, elect, ordain, and depose
their own Ministers of the word, without the asistance of any other Ministers
of other Churches, where the same may be had? 14. Whether do you hold that
every small Company of seven, or nine, or twenty, or forty persons, combined
into a Church body, be such a Church (as by the ordinance of Christ) has, and
ought to have all power, and exercise of Church Government: So as they may
transact all Ecclesiastical businesses independently amongst themselves? 15.
Whether do you give the exercise of all Church power of Government to the whole
Church, or to the Presbiters thereof alone? and if to those, then we desire to
know what act of Government, and Superior authority (properly so called) may
the Presbiters do, more then any other member may do, or without the
particular consent of the rest, we crave to have those particular Acts
mentioned: and how, and over whom in those Acts the Presbiters do rule (in
propriety of speaking) more then the rest of the Congregation do? 16. Whether
do you not permit Women to Vote in Church matters? 17. Whether in Voting do
the Major part always, or at any time, carry Ecclisiasticall matters with you,
or in what things does it, in what not? 18. What means have you to preserve
your Churches in Unity and Verity, or to correct or reduce any Church erring in
Doctrine or practice. As, 1. Whether you have any platform of Doctrine and
Discipline agreed upon; or if you have not, whether mean you to have one, and
when; and think you it lawful and expedient so to have? 2. Whether have you
combined your selves together into Classes, or purpose so to do, so as to do
no weighty matter without their counsel and consent? 3. Or give you any power
to Synods and Counsels to determine and order things that cannot otherwise be
ended, so as that their determination shall bind the particular Churches so
assembled to due obedience, in case they decree nothing but according to Truth
and right, and to peaceable suffering, in case they should do otherwise? Or
what other course you have, or intend to have for that end aforesaid?
19. Whether hold you, that each particular Church may lawfully make such Laws
or Orders Ecclesiastical, for the Government of it self, and the Members
thereof; for decency, order, and Edification, as shall oblige all her Members,
and may not be omitted without sin? 20. Wherein hold you that the whole
Essence of a Ministers calling does consist: As 1, whether is Election by the
People it, yea or no? Or 2. is it so Essential, as that without it, the
Ministers calling is a mere nullity? Or 3. is Ordination as Essential a part
thereof, as the Peoples Election? Or 4. is it but a mere formality and
solemnity of their calling? 21. Whether do you hold it lawful for mere lay or
private men to ordain Ministers in any case? 22. What Essential difference
put you between the Office of Pastor and Teacher, and do you obser^^e the same
difference inviolably; and do not your Teachers by virtue of that Office give
themselves usually to application of doctrine as, well as your Pastors? and do
they not also usually apply the Seals? 23. What authority or Eminency have
your Preaching Elders, above your sole Ruling Elders, or are they both equals?
24. Whether may a Minister of one congregation (being thereto requested) do as
a Minister any act of his Ministry (as Preach, Baptize, Administer the Lords
Supper, Ordain, etc. in and unto other Congregations besides his own? 25.
Whether hold you that a Minister of a Congregation, leaving or loosing his
place (suppose without his fault) do withal lose both Nomen and Esse of his
ministry, and do become a mere Lay, or private man, until he be a new
elected, and ordained? 26. Whether do you allow, or think it lawful to allow
and settle any certain and stinted maintenance upon your Ministers? 27. Whether
do you permit and call upon mere Lay and private men (neither being in the
ministry nor intended to it) ordinarily to preach or Prophecy publicly,
in, and before the Congregation? and whether think you that prophesying
mentioned, 1 Cor. 14. be to be understood of such, and be an ordinary and
standing order of God in the Church? 28. Whether do you allow and call upon
your people publicly before all the Congregation to propound Questions, move
doubts, and argue with their ministers of matters delivered either by them or
others, either at the same, or some other time? 29. Whether hold you that the
conversion of sinners to God is ordinarily the proper fruit and effect of the
word Preached, by a Minister alone, and that by virtue of his Office alone, or
that it is alike common to ministers, and Lay persons, so they be gifted to
preach? 30. Whether all and every of your Churches (including Plymouth, etc.)
do precisely observe the same course both in Constitution and Government of
themselves? 31. Whether would you permit any Company of Ministers and People
(being otherwise in some measure approvable) to sit down by you, and set up
and practice another form of Discipline, enjoying like liberty with your
selves in the Commonwealth, and accepted as a sister Church by the rest of your
Churches? 32. Whether hold you it lawful to use any set forms of Prayer in
public or private, as the Lords prayer and others, either made by himself
that uses the same, or else by some other man?
THE ANSWERS TO THE Aforegoing QUESTIONS.
The first Question Answered.
ALL the English and others also are freely admitted to be present in our
Congregations, at the reading of the Scriptures, and exposition thereof (which
is wont always to go along therewith) at the preaching of the word, singing
of Psalms, Prayers, Admitting of Members, and dispencing of Censures; And many
also are admitted to Church Communion, and so to partake in Church Ordinances
and privileges, as Sacraments, power of Election, Censures, etc. though many
also there are who are not yet admitted to this Church Communion. But whether
is the greater number, those that are admitted hereunto, or those that are not
we cannot certainly tell? But in the Churches in the Bay, where most of us are
best acquainted, we may truly say, that for the heads of Families, those that
are admitted are far more in number then the other: besides whom there are
likewise sundry children and Servants that are Admitted also. And for the
Reason^ why many are not yet received to Church Communion, they are sundry. 1.
Many are not admitted because they are not yet known. Every year hitherto God
has replenished the Country with many new comers, and these at the first are
not suddenly taken in, as Members of Churches, till by time there have been
some trial of them, and better occasion to know them what they are. Sometimes
once a year there are in the Land many hundreds, and some thousands of this
sort. 2. When by time they come to be known, many do appear to be carnal,
and give no Testimony of being Members of Christ, and therefore if they should
offer themselves to be Members of Churches the Churches would not see Warrant
to receive them, because the Church is the body of Christ. 3. Some that are
Godly do of their own accord for a time forbear to offer themselves, till they
be better acquainted with the Church and Ministry where they intend to join,
and with the ways in which the Churches walk in this Country, and and till
they be better informed what are the duties of Church Members. 4. Those that
are known to be Godly, are all admitted in some Church or other presently,
upon their own desire, when they offer themselves thereto: except any have
given offense by walking (in any particular, in their Conversation) otherwise
then becomes the Gospel; and then such are to give satisfaction to them to
whom they have given offense, by acknowledgeing their offense, and showing
repentance for it, and then they are Admitted.

It is one thing what Churches ought to be by the appointment To. 2.
of Jesus Christ, another, what weakness and swerving^ from his appointment,
he may bear withal for a time, before he renounce and cast off a People from
being his Church. In respect of the former our Answer is, That when a Visible
Church is to be e^rected planted or constituted, by the Appointment of Christ,
it is necessary that the matter of it in regard of quality, should be Saints by
calling, Visible Christians and Believers, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Ephesians. 1. 1. And in
respect of Quantity no more in number in the days of the New Testament, but so
many as may meet in one Congregation. 1 Cor. 11. 20 and 14. 23. Acts 14. 27.
and 15. 22 30. And the form, a gathering together of these visible Christians,
a combining and uniting of them into one body, by the bond of an holy Covenant,
for which we refer you to the Apolgie of the Churches in N. E. sent the last
year in way of Answer to Mr. Bernard. For the latter we deny not, but visible
Churches rightly constituted at the first, may degenerate, and great
corruptions may grow therein, both in respect of matter and form, and likewise
in respect of their walking and Administrations, and yet the Lord in his
patience may bear long with them, before he give them a Bill of Divorce, and
make them Lo-ammi, not a People; as the example of the Church of Israel in the
old Testament. Of the Church of Corinth, the Churches of Galatia, the 7
Churches of Asia, and others in the New Testament, do abundantly manifest. But
what degrees of corruption may be, before the soul as it were, and life, and
being of a Church be destroyed, is hard for us precisely and punctually to
determine; or to say thus far a Church may err, and yet remain a Church;
but if it proceed any further, then it cease to be a Church any more; only
in the general this we observe, the Lord does not presently cast off a Church
or give them a Bill of Divorce, no not for fundamental errors in Doctrine, or
Idolatry in Worship, or Tyranny in Government, till after obstinate and
rebellious rejection of Reformation, and the means thereof: for all these were
found in the Church of Israel, when they crucified Christ, yet the Apostles
rejected them not, till after the light of Grace offered, and blasphemously
rejected, Acts 13. 45, 46. But if your selves have so Studied this point, as to
have ripened and formed thoughts therein, we should gladly receive light from
you.

We do not know any visible Church of the N. T. properly To: 3.
so called, but only a particular Congregation; and therefore when this
Question in the first and last clause of it speaks of Believers within the
visible Church, as Members thereof, although they be not Members of that
particular Congregation, where for the present they reside, nor of any other:
this speech seems to us according to our apprehension to imply a
contradiction. They that are within the visible Church as Members thereof, must
needs be Members of some particular Congregation, because all visible Churches
are Congregationall, as Mr. Baine shows at large from the Church of Antioch,
Act. 14. 27. the Church at Corinth, 1 Cor. 11. and 14. and other examples and
Reasons with Answers to the objections to the contrary in his Dioces. Trial
Quest. 1. Whereto we refer you in this Point; neither is he alone in this
Tenent, for Mr. Parker, and many other teach the same. Those silenced and
deprived Ministers that wrote the Book called, The Christian and modest offer
of Disputation, laying down 16. Propositions which they offer to maintain
against the Prelates, give this for the fourth of them viz. There is no true
visible Church of Christ, but a particular ordinary Congregation only.

Doubtless every true visible Church has power from Christ to exercise
Excommunication and other Ordinances of Christ, so that they proceed therein
according to the Rules of the word, 1 Cor. 5. 4. 5. Mat. 18. 17. Now Dr.
Whitakers shows against Bellarmine, that Excommunication belongs not to the
universal Church, but only to a particular Congregation. Qui just
excommunicantur, says he, co satanae traditos esse concedimu^, non t^men posse
pr^priem, D^^i eject^s ex Ecclesia Catholica, Quia Excommunicatio non
Catholica, sed particularis Ecclesiae censura est. De Eccles. Qu. 1. c. 6.
Wherefore if Excommunication which belongs to the visible Church, belongs to
a particular Congregation, it follows, that there is no visible Church, but
only a particular Congregation. Secondly, As all visible Believers are not
without Christ, but in Christ, according as they are believers, so we easily
grant; that those without, of whom the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 5. were
unbelievers, Pagans, and Heathens, both without Christ, and also without the
visible Church. For those that were in Christ, and believers in Him, were not
wont to abstain from joining to some particular Congregation or other; and so
it come to pass, that as they were in Christ by their Faith, so by such
joining they became also to be within the visible Church. 3. But this we
conceive is clear also, that unless Believers, be Members of this or that
particular Congregation, to whose inspection and Government they have commended
themselves in the Lord, they also in some respect may be said to be without,
that is without the jurisdiction and power of the visible Church, and without
right to the privileges of it, as long as they continue in that State: for the
Church has nothing to do, either to dispense censures and Church privileges
to Pagans, who are without all Churches, and without Christ also; or to such
Christians, who though they are not without Christ, yet are not within any
particular Church: for neither the Church, nor the Ministers thereof may be
(...). And though those without of whom the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 5. were
Pagans and Heathens, both without Christ, and without the visible Church also,
yet when he speaks of Judgeing, and says they might judge them that are
within, and not judge them that are without, he must not be understood as if
he meant it simply of being in Christ or without Christ, and no more then so,
but also of being in that particular Congregation, and without it: for it is
plain, that those that were in Christ, if they were not also within their
particular Congregation, they had nothing to do to judge them; and those that
were within their particular Congregation, them they might judge, though they
were not in Christ. 4. And that Church privileges do not belong to Believers,
as such, but only to such as withal are Members of some particular Church:
the Grounds and Reasons in the Answer to the third and fourth Proposition sent
the last year, do seem to us to make manifest, whereto we do refer you, for
further Answer to this Question.

It is an opinion of the Anabaptists, that the Church is To: 4.
made by Baptism, and therefore when they constitute or erect a Church, they
do it by being all of them Baptized, which was the manner of Mr. Smith, Mr.
Helwis, and the rest of that company when they set up their Church: The Papists
also do imagine, that men enter into the Church by Baptism, and it is said,
that their Founts were set near the doors of their Temples, to signify men's
entering into the Church by Baptism, and they thought themselves to be
christened, or made christian souls by being Baptized. But we do not believe
that Baptism does make men Members of the Church, nor that it is to be
Administered to them that are without the Church, as the way and means to bring
them in, but to them that are within the Church, as a seal to confirm the
Covenant of God unto them. For

1. This is one point of the dignity and privilege of the Church, that
Baptism and all Church Ordinances are given and committed to it, as
Circumcision, and Church Ordinances were given and concredited to the Church of
the Jews, Ioh. 7. 22. Now if Baptism in its first being and institution be
given as a benefit and privilege to the Church, then Baptism is not that
which makes the Church; but the Church is presupposed, and must be before it,
for the dones, or persons to whom a thing is given, must needs be before the
gift that is given to them.

2. The nature and use of Baptism is to be a seal to confirm the Covenant of
Grace between God and his Church, and the Members thereof, as circumcision also
was, Romans 4. 11. Now a seal is not to make a thing that was not, but to
confirm something that was before; and so Baptism is not that which gives
being to the Church, nor to the Covenant, but is for confirmation thereof. To
bring in Baptism before the Covenant, and before the Church, with whom God
makes the Covenant and then to bring in the Church afterward, is to make
Baptism a seal unto a Blanke, or to a falsehood. When the Jesuits of Rhemes
had said that Christ sent 12 Apostles to the Jews to move them to penance, and
so by Baptism to make them of his Church. And that Paul was sent to the
Gentiles to move them also to faith and penance, and by Baptism to make them
of his Church. This saying of making men of the Church by Baptism, though
uttered by them, as it were by the way, and not being the chief scope of their
discourse, yet seemed to Mr. Cartwright so erroneous and unsound, that he
would not let it pass without bearing special witness against the same. And
therefore in opposition thereunto he has these words, and in another Character
for more conspicuousnesse, viz. That Baptism makes not men of the Church, but
seals their incorporation into it, has been declared before. Argument of Acts
6. 1. And that Catechism which is commonly said to be penned by our Reverend
Brother Mr. Ball, or Mr. Nicholas, now with God, giving this for the definition
of Baptism, that it is a Sacrament of our ingrafting into Christ, communion
with him, and entrance into the Church, does in the Exposition plainly
declare, that when they called Baptism a Sacrament of our entrance into the
Church, they did not mean that Baptism made men Members of the Church, but
signified and sealed that they were Members before: The seed of Abraham say
they, Page 144. Gal. 3. 7. or children of Christian Parents are within the
Covenant, are Christians and Members of the Church, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Romans 11. 16.
Baptism therefore does not make them Christian souls, but does solemnly
signify and Seal their ingrafting into Christ, and that communion which the
Members of Christ have with him their head, and does confirm, that they are
acknowledged Members of the Church, and entered into it, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

3. The Lord has had his Church when there was neither Baptism nor
circumcision, and therefore Baptism or circumcision cannot be that which
constitutes the Church. The Church is one and the same in essence from the
beginning of the world to the end thereof, viz. A company of People combined
together by holy Covenant with God, and one with another, and this has been
before Baptism, and likewise before Circumcision in the days of the Patriarks
before Abraham. Yea if Baptism now, or Circumcision in former time did make men
Members of the Church, then for forty years together there was no making
Members of the Church, for so long circumcision was discontinued, when Baptism
was not yet instituted, Ioss. 5. 2, 3. etc. And so by this means all that
Generation of the Israelites that were not circumcised till their coming over
Jordan unto Gilgall, should have bin no Members of the Church before that time
of their circumcision, which is contrary to the Scripture, which as it gives
the name and title of a Church to the body of this people, when they were in
the Wilderness, Act. 7. ^8. (and they were in the Wilderness 40. years, in
the latter parts of which time there were few left remaining that had been
circumcised) so it witnesses that before this time of their circumcision they
were in covenant with God and his Church, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12. For that
covenant was not made with their Fathers that came out of Egypt, and were
circumcised there, because that generation was consumed in the Wilderness for
their murmuring before this time: but this covenant was made with the children,
that as yet were uncircumcised, and therefore it was not circumcision that made
men Members of the Church.

4. Baptism has been Administered, and no Church nor Members made thereby, and
men have been made Members of Churches and not then Baptized, but before. And
therefore it is not Baptism that makes men Members of the Church, Jerusalem and
all Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan were Baptized of John
confessing their sins, Mat. 3. 6. And Christ made and Baptized more Disciples
then John, Ioh. 4. 1. And yet neither Christ nor John did make new Churches,
nor gather men into them themselves, both the one and the other living and
dying Members of the Jewish Church, which was not yet dissolved, until upon
their rejecting of Christ (not only of his person upon the cross, but of his
Gospel in blaspheming and persecuting Grace offered them) the two staves of
beauty and bands were broken and cut assunder, whereby God did break the
Covenant that he had made with that People, and the Brotherhood between Juda
and Israel, that is, he did un church them, Zach. 11. 10, 11. etc. to 15. So
that here is Baptism Administered by John and Christ, and yet men not received
thereby into the Church as Members, for they were Members long before.

Again, when any of those of Jerusalem, Judea, and the Region round about
Jordan, that were Baptized of John, or any of those, many more that were
Baptized of Christ, were afterward joined as Members to those christian
Churches in Judea, Samaria, and Galile, Act. 9. 31. (As no doubt many of them
were) they were not made Members of those Christian Churches by being Baptized,
for they were Baptized long before by John and Christ, so that those men were
Members of the Jewish Church, which was not yet dissolved, and were Baptized
afterward. And therefore it was not Baptism that made them members, either of
the one Church or of the other.

5. There are sundry inconveniences, which for ought we see will unavoidably
follow, if we shall say that Baptism makes men members of the Church; For
first, if Baptism be that which constituts the Church, then Baptism may be
dispensed by them that are no Ministers, for extraordinary Ministers, as
Apostles, and such like are now ceased; and ordinary Ministers have no power to
dispense Baptism to any, but only to them that are already members of the
Church, seeing their Commission and power is limited to the Church, and the
flock of God over which the Holy Ghost has made them overseers, Acts 20. 28.
Besides, the Church is before the Ministers, seeing the power of choosing
Ministers is given by Christ unto the Church; and therefore if Baptism be that
which makes the Church, then men must be Baptized before there be Ministers to
Baptize them, and consequently without Ministers.

Secondly, if Baptism rightly for substance partaked, does make men members of
the visible Church, then it will follow that Papists are members of the Church:
for they have Baptism so far right for substance, as that it needs not be
repeated. But Mr. Perkins teaches that this Baptism proves not the Church of
Rome, of which all Papists are members, to be any true Church of God, and gives
sundry Reasons for the same, in Answer to them, that from Baptism rightly for
substance Administered in Popish Assemblies, would prove those Assemblies to be
true Churches: Exposit. of Creed, in the Article, I believe the holy
Catholic Church.

And surely for our parts, we do not see how it will be avoided, but if
Baptism made men members of the visible Church, either Papists are members of
the visible Church, and the Church of Rome, of which they are Members, a true
visible Church, or else we must renounce their Baptism as corrupt and false,
even for the substance of it; and so all such as shall be converted from
amongst them, must be Baptized again, as not having had the substance of
Baptism before: such dangerous consequences do follow from saying, that
Baptism, rightly for substance partaked, does make them that are so Baptized
Members of the visible Church.

If any shall say, Though Baptism do not make men Members of Object.
the Church, yet it proves them to be Members as a cause, is proved by the
effect, or an Antecedent by a consequent: and therefore all Baptized Persons
should be admitted to all Church privileges as Members, wherever they become.

We Answer, that this will not hold neither, but suppose Answ.
a man have received Baptism as a Member of some visible Church, which ought
not to have been Administered to him, had he not been a member, yet this does
not prove him to be a member still and so give him right to all Church
Privileges, though he do remain always as a Baptized person; and the Reason
is, because his Baptism may remain, when his Church fellowship may be
dissolved, as that he can have no right to Sacraments thereby: the Church
member-ship of a Baptized Person may be thus dissolved by sundry means. 1. By
some sentence of Excommunication justly passed against him for his sin; for
that censure puts him away from the Communion of the Church, 1 Cor. 5. 2. 13.
and makes him as an Heathen or Publican, Mat. 18. 17. So that in that case he
can have no right to Sacraments by his Member-ship, though he still continue a
Baptized Person. 2. By his voluntary departing from the Church and the
communion of the same when it is unjustly done, 1 Ioh. 2. 19. Jude 19. Heb. 10.
25. In which case Dr. Ames resolves such Schismatics to be no Members of the
visible Church, Cas. Cons. Lib. 5. c. 12 Q. 4. Resp. 3. 3. By the dissolution
of the Church of which he was a Member; for Church Member-ship is in relation
to a Church, and therefore if the Church cease, the Membership must cease also;
Relatum and correlatum Qua ^alia sunt simul, adeoquese mutuoponunt et tollunt.
Now a Church may be dissolved, 1. By Apostacy and Gods giving them a bill of
Divorce thereupon, Ier. 3. 8. When yet there may be in such a Church some
particular person or persons dear to God, who in such a case are bid to come
out from such an Apostate Church, Rev. 18. 4. Hose. 2. 1, 2. and 4, 15, 17. 2.
By death, as by some grievous Pestilence or Masacre, etc. in which case one
particular person surviving, cannot be counted a Member of a Church, when that
Church is extinct of which he was, and yet he remains a person Baptized if he
were Baptized before. 3. If that be true which is taught by Dr. Ames Cas. Cons.
Lib. 5. c. 12. Q. 3. Resp. 2. that in some cases it is lawful and necessary to
withdraw from the communion of a true Church (which seems to be agreeable to
grounds of Scripture, Ephesians. 5. 11. 2 Chr^. 11. 14.) then that will be another
case wherein Church Membership is disanulled; for how a man can be counted in
that state a Member of a Church, when he has lawfully and necessarily
withdrawn himself from the communion of the Church, we do not understand. And
this shall suffice for Answer unto this Point, whether Baptism make men
Members of a visible Church, which as we conceive, is the scope and drift of
this Question. Yet before we proceed to make Answer to the next, something also
may be said concerning some passages in your Amplification of this fourth
Question. As first concerning those words wherein you ask, Whether they that
are Baptized have not right, quoad nos, to all the privileges of the visible
Church (so far as they are otherwise fit:) concerning which words we may say,
1. That those words of your Parenthesis ( so far as they are otherwise fit:)
do plainly imply, that in your judgment, though one has received Baptism,
yet this does not give him right to the privileges of the visible Church,
unless other things do concur to make him fit, wherein we consent with you.
Now if this be so, then this seems to be an Answer to that which (as we
conceive) is the maine intent of the Question. For how can it be, that Baptism
alone should give men right to the privileges of the Church (as Members
thereof, as the Question seems to import) when in the Amplification of it, it
is granted, that Persons Baptized have no such right, except other things do
concur to make them fit: we do not see how these things do stand together.

Secondly, those words as far as they are otherwise fit:) as they seem to
imply that which contradicts the maine scope of the Question; so they are so
general and of such a latitude, as that when the Question is Answered the
Reader is still left at uncertainty: For if such a Parenthesis may be annexed (
so far as men are otherwise fit:) then the like Question may be applied to
many other things besides Baptism, and would receive the very same Answer, as
in case of Baptism it would receive. As for example, if one should ask
whether Moral honesty or litterall knowledge in the Scriptures, or
Historical Faith, or the use of Reason, whether any of these do not give men
right to Church privileges, so far as they are otherwise fit? You know the
Answer would be, Yea. For though none of these be sufficient alone, to give men
right to the privileges of the Church, yet they are such as they that have
them, have right so far as they are otherwise fit, and so if it were granted
that they that have received Baptism have right, as you say, to all the
privileges of the Church, so far as they are otherwise fit: yet as this does
not prove that Baptism alone does give men such a right, so still it remains
to be considered, and more particularly declared, what those other things are
that besides Baptism must concur to make one fit; and unless those things
be expressed in particular, the Question with such a general Qualification as
is here set down, may be Answered affirmatively, and yet the Reader will be
still in the dark, and as much to seek as before.

Lastly, those words in the latter end of this Question had need to be further
cleared, wherein you ask, Whether Baptized persons have not right to all the
privileges of the Church, quoad nos, until they be cast out by
Excommunication? For suppose an open Blasphemer, a Sabath-breaker, an
Adulterer, a Drunkard, etc. that deserves to be Excommunicated, be not
proceeded against according to rule, but be suffered to continue in the Church
through bribery or other corruption of the times, would you say that such a
person had right either before God, or quoad nos to all the privileges of the
Church, only because he is Baptized? Surely your words do import so much,
unless that Parenthesis ( so far as they are otherwise fit) may be any help
in this case. And yet we hope you doubt not but such Dogs and Swine have no
right either quoad nos, or otherwise, to the privileges of the Church as long
as they continue in that State, although they have received Baptism, and
although through the sinful neglect of men they be not cast out by
Excommunication, as they do deserve; For if gross sinners have such right to
Church privileges, only because they are Baptized, then by what right can the
Church cast them out by Excommunication, as you seem to confess that she may:
for can she castimen out from such privileges whereunto they have right?
doubtless such proceedings were not right, unless the Church have such a
Transcendent power as the Apostles never had, for they could do nothing against
the truth but for the truth, nor had they any power for destruction, but for
Edification, 2 Cor. 13. 8. 10. Wherefore we dare not say such men have right to
Church privileges ( quoad nos) until they be actually cast out, because
before they be cast out, it must be clear to the Church, that they have no
such right, or else she can have no lawful Right to cast them out.

1. Infants with us are Admitted Members in and with To 5. and 6.
their Parents, so as to be Admitted to all Church privileges of which Infants
are capable, as namely to Baptism; and therefore when Parents are once
Admitted, their Children are thereupon Baptized, if they were not Baptized
before, as sometimes it falls out. 2. But whether they should thereupon be
admitted to all other privileges when they come to age, without any personal
profession of Faith, or entering into Church Covenant, is another Question, of
which by Reason of the Infancy of these Churches, we have had no occasion yet
to determine what to judge or practice one way or other. 3. But for the present
this we would say; It seems by those words of your Parenthesis ( being
otherwise fit) you do acknowledge, that Children of Church Members are not to
be admitted to Church privileges, unless they be fit, wherein we consent with
you as counting it altogether unsafe, that Idiots, Franticks, or persons openly
ungracious and profane, should be admitted to the Lords Table, though they
were the Children of Church Members, and thence we may infer the necessity of
their personal profession of their faith, when they come to years, and taking
hold of Church Covenant, whereby we mean only a Renewing of Covenant, or a
new professing of their Interest in Gods Covenant, and walking according to it,
when they shall be Adulti: for otherwise we do confess, Children that are
borne when their Parents are Church Members, are in Covenant with God even from
their birth, Genesis 17. 7. 12. and their Baptism did seal it to them. But
notwithstanding their Birthright, we conceive there is a necessity of their
personal profession of Faith, and taking hold of Church Covenant when they
come to years (though you seem to think it not needful:) for without this
it cannot so well be discerned; what fitness is in them for the Lords Table
and other Church privileges, as by this means it might? And inasmuch as
entering into Church Covenant is nothing else but a solemn promise to the Lord,
before him and the Church, to walk in all such ways as the Gospel requires
of Church Members, if they shall refuse to make any such promise, and shall be
unable, or unwilling to make any profession of their Faith, when it is required
of them, this would be an evidence against them, of their unfitness for Church
privileges, inasmuch as they openly break that Rule, 1 Pet. 3. 15. Be ready
to give a Reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear. What hope
is there that they will examine themselves when they eat of that Bread and
drink of that Cup, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Who when others do examine them they are
unable or unwilling to give Answer? Or how shall we think that they will
receive the Lords Supper worthily, or walk as becomes the Gospel if they do
refuse to profess or promise any such matter? Wherefore in this Point we
cannot but fully approve the practice of the Reformed Churches, among whom it
is the manner as Zepporus writes, to admit Children that were Baptized in
their Infancy unto the Lords Table, by public profession of their Faith, and
entering into Covenant, consuetum est, says he ut qui per aetatem, neque
Doctrina Catechetica perfectum ad sacram Coenam primum admittuntur, fidei
confessionem coram tota Ecclesia public edant, etc. Polit. Ecles. l. 1. c. 14.
p. 158. that is, The manner is, that they who by reason of age and perficiency
in the Doctrine of Catechism are first Admitted to the Lords Supper, should
publicly before the whole Church, make confession of their Faith, being
brought forth into the sight of the Church by their Parents, or them that are
instead of Parents, at the appointment of the Minister: and likewise should
promise and Covenant by the Grace of God to continue in that faith which they
have confessed, and to lead their lives according to it: yea and moreover, to
subject themselves freely and willingly to the Discipline of the Church; these
words we see are full and plain, that Children are not in those Churches
received to the Lords Table without personal confession of Faith, and entering
into Covenant before.

4. But how long Children should be counted under age, and whether Orphans are
not to be admitted with their Guardians (which is your sixth Quaery) we should
be willing to hear your judgment therein, as having of our selves hitherto
had no occasion to search into those Questions; only this we think, that one
certain rule cannot be given for all, whereby to determine how long they are
under age, but according as God gives experience and maturity of natural
understanding, and Spiritual; which he gives sooner to some then unto others.

Such Children whose Father and Mother were neither To 7.
of them Believers, and sanctified, are counted by the Apostle (as it seems to
us) not faederally holy, but unclean, what ever their other Ancestors have
been, 1 Cor. 7. 14. And therefore we Baptize them not. If you can give us a
sufficient Answer, to take us off from that Scripture, 1 Cor. 7. which seems
to limit this faederall sanctity or holiness to the Children whose next
Parents one or both were Believers, we should gladly hearken to you therein;
but for the present, as we believe we speak, and practice according to our
light. And if we should go one degree beyond the next Parents, we see not but
we may go two, and if two, why not 3. 4 20, 100, or 1000? For where will you
stop? And if we shall admit all Children to Baptism, whose Ancestors within a
thousand Generations have been Believers, as some would have us, we might by
this Reason Baptize the Children of Turks, and of all the Indians, and
Barbarians in the Country; for there is none of them but they have had some
Believing Ancestors within less then a 1000. Generations, it being far from
so much since Noah and his Sons came forth out of the Arc.

We do believe that all Members of Churches ought to be To 8.
Saints, and faithful in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Col. 1. 2.
Phil. 1. 1. and thereupon we count it our duty to use all lawful and
convenient means, whereby God may help us to discern, whether those that
offer themselves for Church Members, be persons so qualified or no: and
therefore first we hear them speak concerning the Gift and Grace of
Justifying Faith in their souls, and the manner of Gods dealing with them in
working it in their hearts: which seems to be your first particular in this
Quaery. Secondly, we hear them speak what they do believe concerning the
Doctrine of Faith, so taking a trial what measure they have of the good
knowledge of the Lord, as knowing that without knowledge men cannot well
Examine themselves and discern the Lords body, as Church Members ought to do
when they come to the Lords Table. And hereby also we would prevent (as the
Lord shall help us) the creeping in of any into the Church that may be
infected with corrupt opinions of Arminianisme Familisme, etc. or any other
dangerous error against that faith which was once delivered to the Saints, as
knowing how easily such men if they were admitted, might infect others, and
perhaps destroy the Faith of some. And this seems to be intended in your
second particular. For both these we have our warrant as in General, from
those places which show how Church Members ought to be qualified, that they
ought to be Saints, faithful in Christ Jesus, etc. So in special from that,
Math. 3. 6. Acts 19 18, and Acts 8. 37. 38. Where men before they were
admitted, made profession of Repentance toward God, and faith toward the Lord
Jesus Christ; for it is expressly said, that they confessed their sins, they
confessed and showed their deeds, they professed their faith in Jesus Christ
the Son of God. Thirdly, when this is done, those that by manifestation of
Repentance and Faith are approved; as fit Members for a Church do openly
profess their subjection to the Gospel of Christ, and to all the Ordinances of
God in that Church, where now they join as Members, which seems to be your
third particular in this Quaerie. The Distinction of particular Churches one
from another, as several and distinct Societies, seems to us a necessary
ground for this practice; for without this kind of Covenanting, we know not
how it would be avoided, but all Churches would be confounded into one,
inasmuch as it is neither Faith, nor entire affection, nor Towne-dwelling, nor
frequenting the Assemblies that can make a man a Member, or distinguish Church
Members from other men: See the Apology.

4. Your fourth particular in this Quaerie is Answered in the Answer to the
sixth Position sent the last year: Besides all these, we hear the testimony of
others, if there be any that can speak of the conversion and Godly
conversation of such persons: which we judge to be a warrantable course from
Acts 9. 26, 27.

It is the second of your Quaeries, what things we hold necessary To 9.
to the Being of a true visible Church in General: which being Answere^; this
of the Parish Assemblies in England in particular, whether we hold all or the
most of them to be Churches, we conceive might well have been spared. They that
now the state of those Assemblies may make application of the General to the
particulars, if they have a calling thereunto. Yet because you are pleased to
put us to this also, we thus Answer. 1. That we doubt not but of Ancient time
there have been many true Churches in England consisting of right matter, and
compacted and united together by the right form of an holy Covenant. For Mr.
Fox shows at large, that the Gospel was brought into England in the Apostles
times, or within a little while after, Acts and Mo^. lib. 2. beginning p. 137.
Where he reports out of Gildas, that England received the Gospel in the time
of Tiberius the Emperor, under whom Christ suffered; and that Joseph of Arin.
athea was sent of Philip the Apostle from France to England, about the year of
Christ 63. and remained in England all his time, and so he with his fellows
laid the first foundation of Christian Faith among the Britain people, and
other Preachers and Teachers coming afterward, confirmed the same and
increased it. Also the said Mr. Fox reports out of T^rtullian, that the
Gospel was disperced abroad by the sound of the Apostles into many Nations, and
amongst the rest into Britain, yea into the wildest places of Britain,
which the Romans could never attain unto, and alleges also out of
Necephorus, that Simon Zelotes did spread the Gospel to the West Ocean, and
brought the same into the Isles of Brittanie, and sundry other proofs he there
has for the same Point. Now if the Gospel and Christian Religion were brought
into England in the Apostles times, and by their means, it is like there were
Churches planted there of Saints by calling (which is the right matter of
Churches) and by way of holy Covenant, as the right form: for that was the
manner of Constituting Churches in the Apostles times, as also in the times
before Christ, as has been showed from the Scripture in the Apology. And the
footsteps hereof (though mixed with manifold corruptions that have grown in
aftertimes) are remaining in many places of the Land to this day, as appears
by those 3 Questions and Answers at Baptism. Abrenuntias? Abrenuntio; Credis?
Credo: Spondes? Spondeo: Do thou renounce the Devil and all his works? I
renounce them all. do thou believe in God the Father etc? I do believe. Do
thou promise to walk according to this Faith etc? I do promise. For though it
may be they conceived, that men entered into the Church by Baptism, yet hereby
it appears that their judgment was that, when men entered into the Church there
ought to be a renouncing of sin, and believing on Christ, and an open
professing of these things, with a promise to walk accordingly.

Secondly, Though Popish Apostasy did afterward for many ages overspread all
the Churches in England (as in other Countries) yet we believe God still
reserved a remnant according to the Election of Grace amongst them, for whose
sake he reserved the Holy Scriptures amongst them, and Baptism in the name of
the Trinity only. And when God of his rich Grace was pleased to stir up the
Spirit of King Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth to cast off the Pope and
all fundamental errors in Doctrine and Worship, and a great part of the
Tyranny of Popish Church Government though at first some Shires and sundry
Parishes stood out against that Reformation for a time, yet afterward they
generally received the Articles of Religion agreed upon Anno 1562. which are
published and consented to by all the Ministers endowed in every Congregation,
with the silent consent also of the people, and subscription of the hands of
the chief of them; wherein they do acknowledge no rule of Faith or manners,
but the holy Scriptures; no divine Worship but to God only; no mediation nor
salvation but in Christ only: no conversion by man's free will, but by Gods
free Grace: no Justification but by Faith: no perfection nor merit of works,
with sundry other necessary and saving truths; all which containing the Marrow
and Sum of the Oracles of God which are the (...), the eloquia Des,
concredited only to the Church. Romans 3. 1. 2. and which are that saving
Doctrine of truth, which is fruitful in all the world where it comes, ^olo. 1.
5, 6. and upon which the Church is grounded and built, and which also it
holds forth and maintains, 1 Timothy 3. 15.) we do therefore acknowledge, that
where the people do with common and mutual consent gather into settled
Congregations ordinarily every Lords day, as in England they do, to hear and
teach this Doctrine, and do profess their subjection thereunto, and do bind
themselves and their Children (as in Baptism they do) to continue therein,
that such Congregations are true Churches, notwithstanding sundry defects and
dangerous corruptions found in them, wherein we follow the judgment of Calvin
Instit. 4. 1. 9. 10. etc. W^itaker, de notis ^cclesiae cap. 17. and many other
Divines of chief note: nor can we judge or speak harshly of the Wombes that
bare us, nor of the paps which gave us suck.

Thirdly, But inasmuch as grievous corruptions of latter years have greatly
increased in some of those Assemblies (as we hear) both in Doctrine, in
Worship, and in the Government thereof, besides those that were when some of us
were there, and in former Years: Therefore we are not without fear (and with
grief we speak it) what things may come unto at length. If Corruptions should
still increase and grow' they might come in time (if the Lord be not more
merciful) unto such an height as unto obstinacy in evil, and to wilifull
rejection of Reformation, and the means thereof; and then you know it might be
just with God to cast off such utterly, out of the account and number of his
Churches; so as never to walk among them any more: which we heartily pray the
Father of mercies to prevent that such a day may never be: But if Ephesus
repent not of her declinings, the Lord has threatened that he will come unto
her quickly, and remove her Candlestick; that is, he will un-Church them, Rev.
2. 4, 5. and Lukewarm Laodicea shall be spewed out of his Mouth, Rev. 3. 16.
And therefore it behooves such of them to Repent, and Reform themselves betime,
lest the Lord deal with them as he ha^h done with others.

And it much concerns your selves (in hearty love and faithfulness we speak
i^, and so we desire you wou^d accept of it) it very much concerns you (dear
Brethren) whilst you live amongst them, to bear faithful witness against
the corruptions that are remaining in any of them, in respect of their
Constitution, Worship, D^scipline and Ministry, l^st by any sinful silence
or slacknesse of yours that should blow the Trumpet and stand in the gap, the
breach should be made wider, and the iniquity increase; and lest men should
flatter themselves in their sins, under the Name and Title of the true
Church, as the Jews thought themselves secure because of the Temple of the
Lord, Jer. 7. 4.

4. Because you would know not only whether we count those Assemblies to b^
Churches, but what we would do for joining in Gods Worship in them, if
occasion served thereunto: We Answer, that if we were in England, we should
willingly join in* some parts of Gods true Worship, and namely in hearing the
Word, where it is truly Preached in sundry Assemblies there; Yea though we do
not know them to be Churches, or knew not what they were, whether true
Churches or no? For some Worship, as Prayer, and Preaching, and Hearing the
Word, is not peculiar to Church Assemblies, but may be performed in other
meetings. Mars-hill at Athens was no Church, nor the Prison at Philippi, and
yet the Word of GOD was Preached and heard lawfully with good success in th^se
places, Act. 17. and Act. 16. How much more might it be lawful to hear the
w^rd in many Parish assemblies in England, in when gener^lly there is a
professing of Christ; and in many of them: M^n, Soul^s that are sincere and
upright hearted Christians, as any are this day upon the face of the Earth; and
many Congregations indeed that are the true Churches of Jesus Christ, See Mr.
Robinsons Treatise of the lawfullnesse of hearing the Ministers in the Church
of ENGLAND.

5. But why we durst not partake in their prescript Lyturgie, and such
Ordinances though true, as are administered therein; We gave you account the
last Year, in Answer to the first and second Position: As al^o in an Answer to
a Discourse of that Subject, Penned by our Reverend Brother Mr. Ball. What we
have done in our ignorance whilst we lived amongst you, we have seen cause
rather to bewail it in our selves here, then to it in others there.

Our Answer to this Question is this, 1. That we never yet To 10.
knew any to come from England in such a manner as you do here describe (^ the
things you mention may be taken conjunctim, and not severally) viz: to be Men
famously known to be godly, and to bring sufficient Testimonial thereof from
others that are so known, and from the Congregation it self, whereof they
were Members: We say we never yet knew any to come to us from thence in such a
manner, but one or other of the things here mentioned are wanting: and
generally this is wanting in all of them, that they bring no Testimonial from
the Congregation it self: And therefore no marvel if they have not been
admitted (further then before has been expressed in Answer to Quest. 1.) to
Church Ordinances with us, before they have joined to one or other of our
Churches; for though some that come over be famously known to our selves to
be Godly, or bring sufficient Testimonial with them from private Christians,
yet neither is our knowledge of them, nor Testimonal from p^ivate Christians
sufficient to give us Church Power over them, which we had need to have, if we
must dispense the Ordinances of Church communion to them? though it be
sufficient to procure all due Reverent respect, and hearty love to them in the
Lord.

2. If the things mentioned were all to be found, yet it w^u^d be also
requisite (if they would partake of Church Ordinances with us, and yet not
join to any of our Churches) that w^^ should know the Congregation it self,
from which they come, not only to be a true Church, but also what manner of
one it is: For such persons cannot communicate with us in Church Ordinances in
their own right; because they join not as Members in any of our Churches; but
it must be in right of the Congregation in England, to which they do belong,
and by virtue of the communion of Churches, and so our admitting of them to
communion with us in such a manner, and upon such terms, is not only an Act of
Communion with the persons themselves, but also with the Congregation of which
they are: Now as we cannot of Faith admit men to Church Ordinances, which we
believe belong only to Church Members; unles we know the Congregation of which
they are Members to be a true Church. So sometimes a Congregation may be so
corrupt, that though it do remain a true Church, yet for the corruption and
impurities of it, it may be lawful and necessary to withdraw communion from
the same (for which Dr. Ames gives sundry grounds and Reasons, Cas. Cons. lib.
c. 12. Q. 3. Resp. 2.) or at least to protest against some gross corruptions
therein. In regard whereof we had need to have some knowledge and information
what that Congregation is, with whom now we have Church communion; when in heir
right we admit m^n into communion, that we may know how to admit such M^n,
and what to require from them more or l^sse. And this together with that want
of testimonial from the congregation is one main^ Reason, why some few godly
men that have come from England upon occasion, not with purpose of continuance
here, but of returning again^; have not been received to Church Ordinances
during their abode in the Country (though this we may say also, that we know
not of any such that have requested to be received) whereas ^uch as have come
in l^ke manner from one C^u^ch to another m^ngst our selves, upon their requ^st
have been r^ceived: the Reason ne say is, because these Churc^es are better
known then the Parish Assemblies are.

3. But if men come from one Church in this Country to another with purpose
there to stay, and not to return to the Church from whence they came, (which
is the manner of all, or the most that come from England) they are not rec^ived
into our Churches; but upon the very same terms, and in the same manner, as
men are received that come from England; viz: upon personal profession of
their faith, and entering into Church Covenant, in that Church to which they now
come (And the same we say of such as come from any of the Churches in other
Countries) and wherefore are they not received otherwise, because we renounce
the Church of which they were Members as no true Church? Not so, but because
we believe in matter of Faith, (such as is the admitting of Members) any true
Church may err: and there may now be seen some unworthiness in the man
which did not appear when he was admitted in the other Church: and therefore
no reason that the Act of one Church in the admitting of Members or the like,
should be a binding Rule unto another; for all Churches are left to their
liberty to admit and receive such into their Church; as they shall find to be
fit according to the Rule of the word, and to refuse others, without respect of
what they have bin before, whether Members of this Church, or that Church, or
of any Church, or none: and therefore in this, our walking and practice, is
alike toward one another, and toward others as it is toward yours. In which
practice we are not alone, for the very same as Mr. Parker reports, is the
manner of the Reformed Churches, amongst whom, no man is admitted for a Member;
but upon personal profession of faith, and entering into Church covenant,
though it may be he have formally been admitted in the very same manner in the
Church where he lived before, Polit. Eccles. l. 3. c. 16. 3. 4. p. 171.

If the ground of this Qu. were any doubt in your own consciences To 11.
concerning your own way, there were no fault in propounding such a Qu. for
further light and satisfaction, if we were able to give it. Or if it did ari^e
from any unnecessary intermedling of ours in your matters, so as to take on us
to condemn or judge your present standing, when we have no calling thereunto,
there were then Reason why we should give account of our own doings or
sayings. But if it came from some men we should look at it as a tempting
Question, tending only to make matter, and pick quarrels; and then we should
leave it to them that framed it, to consider the ground of it; and to fr^me
their own Answer to it. As for us, we have always been slow and loath to judge
or condemn your present standing; remembering the saying of the Apostle, Who
art thou that judge another Man's Servant, he stands or falls to his own
Master, Romans 14. 4. But now knowing you well (Reverend and Dear Brethren) and
your integrity, we think we may lawfully and safely Answer, and that we
would do by promising a few distinctions, for explaining the Terms of the
Question.

1. Concerning the persons in the Parish Assemblies, which may be meant of such
as the providence of God has so dispos^d that they are free and at liberty: or
of such as are bound, and it may be not sui juris, as Wives, Children under the
government of Parents, Servants, Apprentices, Prisoners, Sickefolkes, etc.

2. Concerning the Parish Assemblies, which may be meant either of such as
want the Preaching of the Word or Sacraments, or Discipline, or any other holy
Ordinance of Christ, or have many Ordinances in them which are not of God, but
of Men: or else it may be meant of some others, which in both respects are
Reformed and pure, if there be any such.

3. Concerning standing in them, which may be meant only of habitation, and
dwelling upon House or Land within the Precincts of the Parish; or else in
conforming in judgment or practice to the corrupt Ecc^esiasticall Ordinances
used in those Assemblies; and contenting themselves therewith.

4. Concerning lawful and safe; where safety may be meant either of safety
from sin, or from danger by persecution, these Distinctions we judge
necessary to be premised, because your Question is, whether we count your
standing in the Parish Assemblies lawful and safe; or how far it may be so?
And so our Answer is in 3. Propositions.

1. Some Persons, and namely those that are not sui juris, may lawfully and
without sin; though it may be not safely without danger of persecution,
continue such standing in the Parish Assemblies, as do dwell within the
Pr^c^^cts of them, so long as they neither conform themselves to the
corruptions of men by such continuing of their standing, nor live in the
neglect or want of any Ordinance of CHRIST through their own default.

2. Such standing in the Parish Assemblies, where a man shall, and must
conform to the corruptions of men, in Doctrine or Worship; or the Government
of the Church, is not lawful for any to be continued in.

3. To continue such standing in the Parish Assemblies, as to live in the want
of any Ordinance of Christ is not lawful, nor can be done safely without sin
of them, to whom the providence of God does open a door of further enlargement.

The first of these Propositions we suppose you doubt not of.

The second is confirmed by many places of Scripture; and namely by such as
these. Though Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Judah offend, and come not
ye to Gilgall, nor go up to Bethaven, nor swear the Lord lives: Ephraim is
joined to Idols, let him alone, Hos, 4. 15. 17. Come out from among them, and
be ye separate says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive
you, 2 Cor. 6. 17. Be not partaker of other Men's sins, keep thy self pure, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Come out of her my People, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues, Rev. 18. 4. Have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them rather, Ephesians. 5. 11.
Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment; because he willingly walked after
the Commandment, Hos. 5. 11. We ought to obey God rather then Men, Act. 4 19.
and 5. 29. Jeroboam made Priests of the lowest of the People, which were not of
the sons of Levi, and ordained a Feast in the fifteenth day of the Eigth
Month, in the Month which he had devised of his ^w^e heart, etc. and then the
Levites left their Suburbs and their posessions, and came to Judah and
Jerusalem, for Jeroboam and his Sons had cast them off from executing the
Priests Office unto the Lord; and after them out of all the Tribes of Israel,
such as set their hearts to seek the Lord God of Israel, came to Jerusalem to
Sacrifice to the Lord God of their Fathers, 1 King. 12. 31 32 33. with 2 Chronicles.
11. 14. 16. Upon these and such like grounds of holy Scripture we are persuaded
that such standing in the Parish Assemblies, as this second Proposition
mentions, is not lawful for any to be continued in. And we hope, you doubt not
of the truth of this second Proposition neither, though we are afraid that many
Christians, when it comes to practice, do sinfully pollute themselves by
partaking in the Ceremonies, and other corruptions in the prayers, in the
Doctrine, and in the Ministry remaining in sundry of those Assemblies, whom it
will be your part whilst you live among them faithfully and by all good means
to instruct and teach, and exhort, to save themselves from the corruptions and
pollutions of the times and places wherein they live; as well in this particular
of Church matters, and Gods Worship as in other things: Wherein we wish with
all our hearts that our selves when time was, had been more watchful and
faithful to God and the souls of his People, then the best of us were: The
Lord lay not our Ignorance to our charge.

The third Proposition may be made good sundry ways, 1. By precepts, wherein
we are commanded to observe all things whatsoever Christ has commanded, Mat.
28. 20. to seek the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, Mat. 6. 33. to
yield our selves unto the Lord, and to enter into his Sanctuary, 2 Chr. 30. 8.
And therefore we may not please our selves to live in the neglect of any
Ordinance which he has instituted and appointed. 2. By examples, for the
Spouse of Christ will not rest seeking her beloved until she find him in the
fullest manner, Cant. 1. 7, 8. and 3. 1, 2. etc. and the same mind was in
David; as appears by his heavy Lamentation, when he wanted the full fruition
of Gods Ordinances, and his longings, and prayer to be restored thereto, Psalm.
63. and Psalm. 42. and 84. although he enjoyed Abiathar the High Priest, and the
Ephod with him; and likewise Gad the Prophet, 1 Samuel 23. 6, 9, 10. etc. 1 Samuel
22. 5. when good Ezra in his journey from Babylon to Jerusalem, viewing the
People at the River Ahava found none of the Sons of Levi there, before he
would go any further, he sent unto Iddo a the place Ca^iphia for Ministers for
the House of God, Ezra 8. 15. 16. etc. And when being come to Jerusalem they
found by the law, that it was an Ordinance of God to dwell in Boothes, and
keep the Feast of Tabernacles in the seventh Month, they presently set upon
the practice thereof, in the appointed season; when the like had not been done
in Israel, from the days o^ Joshua the son of Nun unto that day, Neh. 8. 14.
etc. Yea, and our Lord Jesus himself, though ^ee had no need of Sacraments, to
be to him any scale of Remission or forgiveness of sins, yet in conscience
to the Ordinance of GOD, (that he might fulfill all righteousness, Mat. 3.
15*) and for our example, did both observe the Passover, and likewise was
Baptized, and did eat with his Disciples at his last Supper. All which examples
being written for our learning, do show us how far we should be from
contenting our selves to live in the Voluntary want of any Ordinance and
appointment of GOD.

3. There is none of the Ordinances of Christ, but they are needful and very
profitable in the right use of them to the souls of his Servants: And
therefore they should not be neglected. To think of any of them, as things
that may well be spared; and therefore to content our selves to be without
them, is to call in question the wisdom of him that did appoint them, and to
make our selves wiser then God.

4. Our own infirmities and Spiritual w^nts are such, as that we have
continual need of all the holy means which the Lord has appointed, for
supplying what is wanting in us; for correcting what is amiss; and for our
continuance and growth in grace. He is a proud man, and knows not his own
heart in any measure, who thinks he may well be without any spiritual
Institution and Ordinance of Jesus Christ. Upon these and such like ground, we
hold i^ not lawful nor safe, for any Christian that is free, to continue such
standing in the Parish Assemblies where he cannot enjoy all the spiritual and
holy Ordinances of Christ. And hereupon we do exhort you lovingly in the Lord,
to take heed that this be not the sin of any of you, nor of any other, whom
your example may embolden thereunto: For necessity is laid upon you, and upon
all Christians, by th^se and such like grounds of the holy word of the Lord;
That neither you, nor others do live in the voluntary want of any holy
Ordinance of Christ Jesus, but either ^et them up, and observe them in the
places where you are; or else (if you be free) to remove for the enjoyment of
them, to some place where they may be had; and it may be of the two, rather
this latter. For sometimes i^ Israel Sacrifice to their God in the Land, they
shall Sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the Lord: And ^o say they,
shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and
will they not stone us? It is better therefore in such a case to go into the
Wilderness, and to do it there, Exo. 8. 25. 26, 27. Hos. 2. 14. Mat. 10. 23.

As for that opinion that may be in the minds of some, that if any Obj:
Ordinance of Goa be wanting, it is the sin of them that are in Authority,
and they must answer for it? But the people of God may without sin, live in
the want of such Ordinances as Superiors provide not for them.

The Answer hereuntois, that indeed the Ordinances of God Answ:
may more peaceably and quietly be observed where the Commandment and
countenance of Magistrates is afforded; for then is fullfilled the saying that
is written, Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing
Mothers, Esa. 49. 23. and doubtless it is a great blessing, when God (that
has the hearts of Kings and Princes in his hands, Prove. 21. 1.) does incline
them to favor, and further the service of the House of GOD, as sometimes he
does, even when themselves are Alients and Strangers. Cyrus, Darius, and
Artaxerxes, gave great countenance and encouragement to the Jews to build the
House of God, that they might offer sacrifices of sweet savor to the God of
Heaven, and pray for the life of the King and of his Sons, Ezra 6. 8 9, 10.
I^ which case good Ezra blesses the Lord, that had put such a thing into the
Kings heart, to beautify the House of the God of Heaven, Ezra 7. 27. And
therefore Kings and all in Authority, should be prayed for, that we may lead a
godly and peaceable life, in Godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
Nevertheless, the things that are ordained and commanded of GOD, the observing
of them in a peaceable way (yiedling out reverence to all that are in
Authority, and praying for them) this observing of the Ordinances of God cannot
be unlawful, for lack of the Commandment of Man, as appears by the doctrine
and pract^ce of the Apostles, Act. 4. 19. and 5. 29. and the approved practice
of Believers in their times, if they had neglected the Ordinances of God and
namely Church Ordinances, till they had had the commandment of Magistrate
therein, such neglect would have been their grievous sin, and for ought we
know they might have lived and died without them, the Magistrates at that time
being all either Heathens or Jews, yet enemies; and if Church Communion and
the exercise of such Ordinances, as Christ has appointed for his Churches, was
lawful, and needful, and profitable, when Magistrates were enemies to the
Gospel; and be not so when Magistrates do profess the Gospel, we do not
see but Christians may sometimes be losers by having Christian Magistrates, and
in worse condition, then if they had none but professed E^emies. Besides this,
if* Superiors should neglect to provide bodily sustenance for them that are
under their charge; we do not think that any Man's Conscience would be so
scrupulous, but he would think it lawful b^y all good means to provide for
himself in such case, rather then to sit* still and say, if I perish for
hunger, it is the sin of them that have Authority over me, and they must
answer for It: Neither can we tell how the Conscience of any Christian can
excuse himself, if he thinks no^ the Ordinances of Christ, as necessary for the
good of his soul, as food is necessary for his temporal life; or do not
willingly in this spiritual hunger break through stone Walls as the Proverb
i^, and run from Sea to Sea to seek God in his own way, rather then to
perish without spiritual food, because others provide not for him.

And this is our Answer to this eleventh Quere, concerning your standing in the
Parish Assemblies: which Answer of ours, and the exhortation therein, as we
pray the Father of mercies to make effectual by his blessing for those good
ends, which we intend therein, so we cannot in the same, but reflect upon our
selves and our own ways in times past; as seeing not a little cause to judge
our selves before the Lord, as long as we live, for our sinful ignorance and
negligence, when we were in England, ^o observe and walk according to those
Rules of the Word, which now upon occasion given by this Qu. we do commend to
your selves and other Christians. The Lord in mercy pardon our offenses, and
direct your selves and his servants in ^ur dear Native Country, both in
remaining and removing to do that which is pleasing in his sight.

Whereas this Qu. in the first clause and last but one compared To 12.
together speaks of Believers out of the Kingdom of GOD, and possibility of
salvation, we conceive it is a contradiction, for those that are true
Believers, cannot be out of possibility of salva^on, but possibly may, yea most
undoubtedly shall be saved, Joh. 3. 16. and 5. 24. the contrary whereof is to
overthrow all the promises of the Gospel, and with the Papists and Arminians
to establish falling from grace.

2. For that saying, Extra Ecclesiam non est salus, we conceive it cannot be
universally true, if it be meant of the visible Church, which in the
New Testament is a particular Congregation; but only being taken for the
Church invisible, or the Universal Church, which is the whole company of the
elect in Heaven, in Earth, and not yet borne, Ioh. 10. 16. and 17. 20. out of
which elected Company there is not one that shall be saved, nor any of the
elect neither, but in the way of Regeneration, Ioh 3. 3. but as for the
Visible, we believe the old saying is true, there are many Wolves within, and
many Sheep without, Joh. 10. 16. and therefore it cannot be universally true,
that out of the Visible Church there is no salvation: Inasmuch as all Christ's
Sheep shall be saved, Ioh. 10. 28. of whom yet notwithstanding there are some
not joined to the Visible Church: If the Thief that repented on the Cross was
a Gentile, as it was possible he was; then he was uncircumcised, and then it
will trouble a Man to tell of what Visible Church he was: and yet there is no
doubt but he was saved. The like may be said of Job and of his friends, of
whose salvation we make no question, and yet it is a great question whether
they were of any Visible Church or no, inasmuch as the Visible Church in those
times seemed to be appropriated to the House and posterity of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, of which line and race it cannot easily be proved that all these men
did come, nor that they joined themselves in Visible fellowship with that
Church. The Centurion, Mat. 8. 10. and the Woman of Canaan, Mat. 15. were both
of them believers and saved, and yet it does not appear that they were members
of the Visible Church of the Jews, which was the only visible Church of God in
those times.

Men of years ought to be believers, and so in the state of Salvation before
they be joined to the Visible Church, and therefore there may be salvation out
of that Church: For it is possible that such an one as being a Believer is fit
to be joined to the Church may di^ and depart this life before he can be
joined, as that good Emperor Valenti^ian 2. died before he could be
baptize^. And for your selves if you should think that Baptism makes men
members of the Visible Church; as is intimated in your fourth Question: you may
not then deny but there may be salvation out of the visible Church: unless you
will say that there is no salvation without Baptism, which we believe is far
from you to imagine.

3. We do hold that so; often and so long as a believer does not join himself
as a Member to some particular Congregation or other, so often and so long: he is
without the Church in the Apostles sense, 1 Cor. 5. for the Church in the
Apostles sense, is a particular Congregation; for he writes to, and of the
Church at Corinth, which Church was a particular Congregation, 1 Cor. 5, 4, and
14. 23. and 11. 17. 20. and having power of judgeing her own Members (as all
visible Churches have) yet had no power of Judgeing any, but such as were
within that particular Congregation, as all them they had power to judge,
whether they were believers in Christ or no. Mr. B^i^^ (as we said before) is
very large and clear in proving this Position, that the Churches instituted by
Christ and the Apostles, were only such as might meet in one Congregation
ordinarily, and answers many objections to the contrary, Di^ces. trial. Q. 1.

4. For the Question it self, we hold that every believer (if possibly he can)
is always bound to join himself as a Member to some particular Congregation
or other; and yet not because, else he is a Heathen and Publican, or out of
possibility of salvation, as this Question suggests, but upon other grounds.

1. Because of the Commandment of God, Cant. 1. 8. Math. 6. 10. 33.

2. Because willingly not to do this is a secret disparagement to the wisdom
of God that has ordained* Churches with giving power and privilegdes thereunto
Mat. 18. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 4. and promises of his gracions presence to be with them
and amongst them, Mat. 18. 20. Rev. 2. 1. Exodus 20. 24. Now to what end were
all these, if believers should live and no^ join themselves to some Church?
These privileges and promises would in such case be all in vain, and the mercy
of God offered therein, unthankfully neglected.

Thirdly, voluntarily abstaining from joining to the Church is noted and
condemned as a sin, Heb. 10. 25. and a sign of fearful unbelievers, Act.
5. 13. of the rest durst no man join unto them.

Fourthly, good men in Scripture have been forward in practice this way, Isay
2. 2, 3. Zach. 8. 23. Act. 2. 41, 42. and 9. 26. and have mourned with much
bitterness when they have been deprived of Liberty so to do, Isay 56. 3. and
Ps. 42. and 63. and 84.

Fifthly, this joining is a part of that Order, and orderly walking which is
required of believers, Col. 2. 5. 1 Cor. 14. 40.

Sixthly, If Believers do neglect this joining, it is not only a wrong to
themselves, but also a great unkindnesse to God: for if one believer may do
this, why not another, and if two why not three, four etc. and* if all
believers should do thus, God should have no visible Churches upon Earth,
unles he will acknowledge the Assemblies to be of unbelievers Churches: for as
stones in the Mountains are not an house until they be joined together, though
they be dug up out of the Quarry, and squared and hewn, and hereby are made
fit to be joined together, and so to become an house: so believers are not a
Church till they be joined in holy Covenant in some Congregation, though the
work, of Grace and Faith in their souls have made them fit, and meet to be a
Church of God, which is the House of the living God: or as the humane soul and
body are not a man unless they be united; so Christian or believers are not a
visible Church without visible union into some particular. Congregation. Mr.
Perkins having said that forth of the militant Church: there are no means of
salvation, no preaching of Gods word, no invocation of Gods Name, no
Sacraments, and therefore no Salvation; concludes with these words; For this
cause every man must be admonished evermore to join himself to some particular
Church, being a sound Member of the Catholic Church, Expos. of Creed in the
Article of the Church; and Doctor Ames gives 6. Reasons, why every Christian
should join himself to some particular Church or other Cas. Cons^. L. 4. c.
24. Q. 1. and in another place he has these words. Illi igitur qui* occasion^^
habent adjungendi sese Ecclesiae, and ^am negligunt, gravissime peccant, non
tantum in Deum ratione Institutionis, sed etiam in suas proprias animas ratione
benedictionis adjunctae, etsi obstinate persistant in ipsa incu^ia, quicquid
alias profitentur, vix possunt haberi pro fidelibus Regnum Dei vere
quaerentibus. Medul. Theol. l. 1. c. 32. Sect. 28.

First, whereas this 13th. Question speaks of private To 13.
and illiterate persons into a Church Body combined, we look at this as an
incongruous expression, if not a contradiction. For a company so combined as to
make a Church, are not fitly called private, (though they be illiterate in
respect of humane learning) in as much as a Church or a Church-body, especially
in times and places of peace and liberty, is a public Congregation and
society: and the acts of Communion which they have among themselves (such as is
the election and deposing of Ministers, whereof the Question makes mention) are
not private acts but public or people-like. Neither are literate or learned
men therefore public, because they are endued with humane learning, unless
withal they be called to public office or employment in Church or
Commonwealth: and therefore if illiterate be an exegesis of private, we
conceive that exegesis is not good.

Secondly, whereas this Question asks Whether it be lawful and convenient
that such a company should themselves ordinarily examine elect, ordain and
depose their own Ministers? if ordinarily be as much as frequently, we answer
three things. First, that if one Church do frequently come to such actions,
that is, to take in and put out the same men, this is not without suspicion of
much levity and rashness in the people, or unfaithfulness or unworthy walking
in the Ministers, or both; and therefore ordinar^ly, that is, frequent taking
in and putting out again in this manner, is as much as may be to be avoided.
Secondly, when such things do often and frequently fall out, it is doubtless
a Judgment of God upon such a people to have so many changes in their
Ministers; as was that of which it was said, three shepherds have I cut off in
one month, Zach. 11. 8. that People should be so often as sheep having no
Shepherd; for the transgression of a land many are the Princes thereof, Pro.
28. 2. So in like sort for the transgressions of a Church many are the
Ministers thereof; we mean, when they have many Ministers, by the coming in
and going out of the same men, or the removing of some and the taking in of
others in their room: for otherwise, it is a blessing of God, when a Church is
furnished with variety of Ministers at the same time, Acts 13. 1. and 21. 18.
Phil. 1. 1. Thirdly, yet this word ( ordinarily) does seem to imply, that in
your judgment sometimes this may be lawful and convenient to be done; Now
upon the same ground on which it may be done sometimes, upon the same it may be
done at other times, if there be just occasion.

Thirdly, for the assistance of the Ministers of other Churches, of which this
Question makes mention, if this be only by way of counsel or advice, we know
nothing unlawful or inconvenient in such assistance, because Churches are as
Sisters one to another, Cant. 8. 8. And therefore it is our practice in
ordination of Ministers, as also in removal of them, to have such assistance.
But for authority and power, we know none that Ministers have properly so
called in any Congregation or Church, save that one, over which the Holy Ghost
has made them overseers: and therefore we think it not lawful nor
convenient, when a Church is to ordain Officers, to call in such assistance (
viz. by way of authority or power) of the Ministers of other Churches.

Fourthly, we judge it lawful and convenient that every Church of Christ (what
ever their humane learning be, whether much or less) should elect and choose
their Ministers: God does not (for ought we know) give this power of calling
their own Ministers unto such Churches as have many learned men in them, and
deny it unto others; but gives it indifferently to every Church, as they are a
Church, and so to one Church as much as to another. If we thought you doubted
whether the power of calling Ministers were given by Christ unto the Church, we
might here allege many Reasons for it; but this being the constant judgment
of the eminent Lights of this age, and the former who have been studious of
Reformation, we must hope (till we hear to the contrary) that your selves do
not differ from them in this point. As for us, those grounds and reasons from
the holy Scripture which are alleged by 1 Calvin, 2 Zanchius, 3 Mr Cartwright,
4 Dr Ames, and (5) others do satisfy us in this particular. (1) Institut 4.
3. 14. 15. (2) De redemp. in 4. praecep. p. 1015. 1016. etc. who alleges
Bucer and Musculus. (3) 1. Reply p. 44. etc. (4) M^dul. Theol. l. 1. c. 21.
Sect. 30 and cas. consc. lib. 4. c. 25. Q. 5. (5) Demonist. of disc. c. 4.

Fifthly as for that objection which seems to be employed in the word
illiterate, that it should not be lawful or convenient for a body to choose
their own Ministers, because they are illiterate, or want men of humane
learning among them, we further answer thereto; first, that among us when a
company are to be combined into a Church-body, (as you speak) there is usually
one or other among them who do not want all humane learning but have been
trained up in Universities and usually have been Ministers and Preachers of the
Word in our native Country, and approved by the godly there; and are here by
the company that do so combine intended to be chosen afterward for Pastors or
Teachers: and accordingly, after the Church is gathered, are in due time
elected and ordained into their places. Secondly, but yet if there were none
such among them at their first combining and uniting, we do not see how this
could hinder them of liberty to choose Ministers to themselves afterward, when
God shall send any to them that may be fit for the work; because this is a
liberty that Christ has purchased for them by his precious blood, and they
that are fit matter to be combined into a Churchbody, are not so illiterate
but they have learned the Doctrine of the holy Scripture in the fundamental
points thereof; they have learned to know the Lord and their own hearts, they
have learned Christ, the need they have of him, and of all the means of
enjoying him, the worth that is in him, and the happiness laid up for them in
him: and therefore they may not be reproached as illiterate or unworthy to
choose their own Ministers: nay, they have the best learning, without which
all other learning is but madness and folly, and science falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6. 20. and indeed of none account with God, nor available for direction
and guidance in the affairs of the house of God, such as is this election of
Ministers, nor for the salvation of the soul in another world, 1 Cor. 1. 19.
20. and 2. 14* Job 32. 8. 9. though it may be, and is very useful therewith.
Thirdly, you know and (we doubt not) do abhor as much as we the spirit of
those men that are proud of their own learning, and vilified Believers in
Christ for want thereof, saying, Do any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees
believe in him? but this people which know not the Law are cursed, John 7. 47.
48. 49.

First, a company of forty persons, or twenty, or less, is To 14.
not such a small company, but they may be a Church properly and truly so
called, if there be nothing against them but this, that such a number may seem
not sufficient: We do not find that God does any where say, they must be above
forty, or else they cannot be a Church; and therefore no mortal man can
justly say it: Nay, rather that speech of Christ, of two or three gathered
together in his name, Matthew. 18. 20. does plainly imply that if there be a
greater number then two or three, whom they being not satisfied in the answer
of an offender may appeal unto, and in so doing tell the Church, such a small
number may be a Church, and may have the blessing of his presence to be among
them. Besides, the time has been, in the days of Adam and Noah, when there
was not forty persons in the world, and yet Adams family in his time, and
Noah^ in his, was in those days a Church, if there was any Church on earth.
And if Christ and his twelve Disciples were the first Christian Church, it is
too much for any man to say, that twenty or forty is such a small company that
they cannot be a Church.

Secondly, for the matter of Government, there is a difference between ability
and right: In respect of the former, in as much as some cases are more
difficult then others, and some Churches of less spiritual abilities then
others, and God does not afford assistance and direction at some times so much
as at others; therefore in such cases it is requisite that Churches should
seek for light, and counsel, and advice, from other Churches: as the Church
at Antioch did send unto the Church at Jerusalem in a Question, which could not
be determined among themselves, Act. 15. 2. But this is not because they have
no right, but when they are not able.

Thirdly, as for right let it be considered how the Church at Antioch did long
endeavor to have ended that matter amongst themselves, before they determined
to send to Jerusalem, verse. 2. which shows that they had power or right to
have transacted that business among themselves, if ability had served; or
otherwise, that endeavor had been sinful, as being a presuming to do that,
whereunto they had no right. We conceive then that every Church, properly so
called, though they be not above forty, or twenty persons, or ten, or the
least number that you mention, have right and power from Christ to transact all
their own Ecclesiastical businesses among themselves, if so be they be able,
and carry matters justly, and according to the Rules of the Word. The power of
the Keys, Matthew. 16. 19. among other things notes Ministerial or delegated
power of Government; and this power is committed by Christ unto the Church, as
may appear, if we consider, first, to whom Christ directed his Speech in that
place of Scripture; not to Peter alone, but to all the Disciples also, for to
them all the Question was propounded by Christ, verse. 15. And ^eter answered in
all their names.

Secondly, that he and they were not then looked upon as Apostles, or general
officers of all Churches (for that Commission was not yet given them) but as
Disciples and Believers, believing with the heart, and confessing with the
mouth Jesus Christ, the rock upon whom the Church is built; wherein as they
did represent all Believers, so in Peter and the rest, the Keys are committed
to all Believers that shall join together in the same confession, according to
the order and ordinance of Christ. And therefore afterward this power of
Government is expressly given to the Church, Matthew. 18. 17. according hereunto
in that description of the visible Church, as it is instituted by Christ in the
new Testament, Rev. 4. The members of the Church are seen by John in a vision
sitting on thrones, clothed with white raiment, having on their heads Crowns
of Gold, verse. 14. Now Thrones and Crowns are ensigns of authority and power,
to note unto us that authority and governing power, which is committed by
Christ unto the Church. Doctor Fulke has this saying; The Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven (whatsoever they are) be committed to the whole Church, and
not to one person only, as Cyprian, Augustine, Chrysostom, Jerome, and all
the ancient Doctors (agreeably to the Scriptures) do confess, against the
Popes pardons chap. 3. P. 381. And elsewhere he says; The authority of
Excommunication pertains to the whole Church, although the judgment and
execution thereof is to be referred to the Governors of the Church; which
exercise that authority, as in the name of Christ, so in the name of the who^e
Church whereof they are appointed Governors, to avoid confusion: against the
Rhemists on 1 Cor. 5. Sect. 3.

And Doctor Whitaker has these words: Hoc est quod nos dicimus Petrum gessisse
personam omnium Apostolorum; quare hanc promissionem non uni Petro, sed toti
Ecclesiae factam esse, and totam Ecclesiam in illo claves accepisse. De pontif.
Roman. Q. 2. c. 4. Sect. 17. And in that Book he is pregnant and plain in
this, that by the Keys is meant all Ecclesiastical power and Jurisdiction,
and that these Keys are given in Peter to the whole Church: The same is also
taught by Master Parker Polit. Eccles. l. 3. c. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5, 6. where he
proves by many Arguments, that every visible Church (which he acknowledges to
be no other but a particular congregation) has the power of all
Ecclesiastical Government and Jurisdiction committed to it by Christ Jesus; and
answers many Objections to the contrary: And page 2 of that third Book,
making mention of four Opinions concerning those words of the Keys, and power
of binding and loosing Matthew. 16. 19. the first of them that understand the
Pope only to be meant thereby as Peter's successor: the second of them that
understand it of the Diocesan Bishop: The third of them that understand those
words as meant of the Ministers but the Ministers alone: The fourth of them
that understand Peter to represent the Church in that place, and therefore that
that promise is made unto the Church: Of these he refuses the three first as
unsound, and maintains the fourth as only agreeing to the truth. And Master
Baine says, Every Church by Christ's institution has power of Government,
Dioces. Trial Quest. 1. p. 8. And he tells us page 11. what he meant by
Church: The word Church (says he) we understand here not figuratively tataken
Metonymically for the place, Syn^cdochecally for Ministers administering
ordinances; but properly, for a body politic standing of People to be taught
and governed, and of Teachers and Governors: So that in his judgment every
Church (properly so called) has power of Government within it self: and by
these words of his it may also be concluded, that all power of Government is
not in the Elders alone for the power of Government by Church institution is in
every Church properly so called; But Ministers are not a Church in propriety of
speech, but only figuratively by a synecdoche; And therefore all power of
Government is not in the Ministers alone, but a Church properly so called is
the Body politic, consisting of people and Ministers: But of this more may
be said in the next Question.

Fourthly, for the matters of Independency, whereof this Question also makes
mention: We do confess the Church is not so independent but that it ought to
dep^nd on Christ both for direction from the rules of his holy Word, Ioh. 10.
27. Act. 3. 23. and for the assistance of his holy Spirit, to discern those
rules, and to walk according to them when they shall be discerned, Ioh. ^5. 5.
and 16. 13. but for dependency upon men, or other Churches, or other
subordination unto them in regard of Church Government or power, We know not
of any such appointed by Christ in his Word. Our Saviors words are plain, If
a man hear not the Church, let him beto thee as an Heathen or Publican. And
his promise unto his Church is plain also, that whatsoever they shall bind on
earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc. Mat. 18. 17. etc. And the Apostle bids
the Church deliver the impenitent sinner unto Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 4. 5, 6. Now
when the man upon the Churches censure comes to be in case as an Heathen or
Publican, yea becomes bound in Heaven as well as bound in earth, and also
delivered unto Satan, this seems to us to be such a firm ratification of the
Churches censure, as leaves no room for any other Ecclesiastical power on
earth to reverse or disanull the same, and so takes away that kind of
dependency and subordination of Churches. Nos plane dicimus ^cclesias initio
regi solitas esse a suis pastoribus, sic quidem ut nullis essent externis, aut
Ecclesi^s, aut Episcopis subditae, non Colossensis, Ephaesi^ae, non
Philippensis, Thessaloniensi, non h^ Romanae, non Romanae cuiquam, se^ paris
omnes inter se juris essent, id est, sui omnes juris et mancipij Whitak de
Pontif. Roman. Question 1. Chapter 1. Section 3. That is in sum. The Churches
were not dependent and subordinate to others, but all of them absolutely free,
and independent. We affirm says Master Baine, that all Churches were
singular Congregations equal in dependent each of other in regard of
subjection, Diocese trial. Q 1. page 13. The twentieth Chapter of Mr. Parker
his third Book of Eccles. Polity, has this Title De summitate Ecclesiae
particularis. And the Title of the 21. is, De paritate Ecclesiarum, where he
opens and explaineth, and by many Arguments and Testimonies confirms what
we hold of the independency and paritie of Churches, to which learned discourse
of his, we refer you for further satisfaction in this point.

We do believe that Christ has ordained that there To 15.
should be a Presbytery or Eldership, 1 Timothy 4. 14. And that in every Church,
^it. 1 5. Acts 14. 23. 1 Cor. 12. 28. whose work is to teach and rule the
Church by the Word and laws of Christ, 1 Timothy 5. ^7 and unto whom so teaching
and ruling all the people ought to be obedient and submit themselves, Heb. 13.
17. And therefore a Government merely Popular or Democraticall (which Divines
and Orthodox Writers do so much condemn in Morillius, and such like) is far
from the practice of these Churches, and we believe far from the mind of
Christ.

Secondly, nevertheless a Government merely Aristocratical, wherein the
Church government is so in the hands of some Elders, as that the rest of the
body are wholly excluded from entermedling by way of power therein, such a
government we conceive also to be without Warrant of the Word, and likewise to
be injurious to the people, as infringing that liberty which Christ has given
to them in choosing their own Officers, in admitting of Members, and censuring
of offenders, even Ministers themselves when they be such; as the Church of
Colosse must admonish Archippus of his duty, Col. 4. 17. Master Parker you
know has 22. Arguments to prove the superiority of the Churches over and above
her officers, Polit. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 12. And Master Baine says, If the
Church have power by election to choose a Minister, and so power of instituting
him, then of destituting also: Instituere and destituere ejusdem est
potestatis, Dioces. Trial P. 88. And again, no reason evinceth the Pope,
though a general Pastors subject to the censure of a Church oecumenicall, but
the same proves a Diocesan Bishop (and we may add, and a Congregationall
Minister) subject to the censure of the particular Church, page 89. And whereas
it might be objected, then may Sheep censure the Shepherd, Children their
fathers, which were absurd. To this he answers, that similitudes hold not in
all things, natural Parents are no ways Children, nor in state of subjection
to their Children: but spiritual fathers are so fathers, that in some respects
they are children to the whole Church. So Shepherds are no ways Sheep, but
Ministers are in regard of the whole Church. 2. Parents and Shepherds are
absolutely Parents and Shepherds, be they good or evil, but spiritual
Parents and Pastors are no longer so, then they do accordingly behave
themselves p. 89. (To the same purpose and more a^ large is this Objection
answered by Master Parker, Polit. Eccles. l. 3. c. 12. p. 78. 79. And again,
if their own Churches have no power over them, it will be hard to show wherein
others have such power of Jurisdiction over persons who belong not to their
own Churches, p. 89. So that all power is not in the Officers alone, seeing
the Officers themselves, if they offend, are under the power of the Church.
Even Paul himself though an extraordinary Officer, yet would not take upon him
to excommunicate the incestuous person, without the Church, but sends to them
exhorting them to do it; and blames them because they had not done it sooner,
1 Cor. 5. which shows that the exercise of all Church power of government, is
not in the Officers alone: And therefore the Lord Jesus reproving Pergamus and
Thyatira for suffering Balaamites, Nicholaitans, and the woman Iezebel among
them, and calling on them for reformation herein, Rev. 2. sends his Epistle,
not only to the Angels of those Churches, but also to the Churches, or whole
Congregations, as appears Rev. 1. 11. And also in the conclusion of those
Epistle, where the words are, let him that has an ear hear what the spirit
says, (not only to the Angels) but unto the Churches; whereby it appears,
that the suffering of these corrupt persons and practices, was the sin of the
whole Church, and the reforming of them, a duty required of them all* Now the
reforming of abuses in the Church, argues some exercise of Church government,
as the suffering of them argues some remissness therein; and therefore it
follows, that some exercise of Church government was required of the whole
Church and not all of the Angels alone. Sure it is the whole Congregation of
Israel thought it their duty to see to the reforming of abuses, when they
appeared to spring up amongst them, as appears by their behavior and
practice when the two Tribes and an half had set up the Altar upon the banks
of Jordan, Ios. 22. for it is said, that the whole Congregation of the Children
of Israel gathered themselves together at Shilo, to go up to war against
them, v. 12. And when Phineas and ten Princes with him, were sent to
expostulate with them about the matter, it was the whole Congregation that sent
them, v. 13, 14. And when they delivered their Message they spoke in the name
of the whole Congregation, saying, Thus says the whole congregation of the
Lord, what trespass is this? etc. v. 16. which plainly declares, that the
whole congregation (and not the Elders or Rulers alone) thought it their duty
to see abuses reformed and redressed, which could not be without some exercise
of government. And when Achan the Son of Ca^mi had committed a trespass in
the accursed thing, ^is. 7. it is counted the sin of the whole congregation
and such a sin as brought a Plague upon them all: for it is said the children
of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed thing, v. 1. And God says to
Joshua (not the El^ers have sinned, but) Israel has sinned, and they have
transgressed my Covenant, and they have stolen of the accursed thing, and put
it among their own stuff. v. 11. And for this, wrath fell on all the
congregation of Israel, and that man perished not alone in his iniquity, Josh.
22. 20. Now why should not he have perished alone, but wrath must fall upon
them all? and why should his sin, be the sin of all the congregation, if
the care of preventing it, and timely suppressing the same, (which could not be
without some exercise of Church government) had not bin a duty lying upon all
the whole congregation, but upon the Elders and Officers alone? doubtless the
just Lord, who says, every man shall bear his own burden, Gal. 6. 5. would
not have brought wrath upon all the congregation for Achans sin, if such
government as might have prevented, or timely reformed the same, had not
belonged to the whole congregation, but to the Elders alone. And before this
time all the children of Israel (and not the Elders alone) are commanded to put
Lepers and unclean persons out of the Camp, Numb. 5. 1, 2. By all which it
appears, that all exercise of Church Government is not in the Elders alone,
but some power is in the people.

And elsewhere he counts it no Sacrilege for Members of the Church, though
not in office, to handle those keys, Mat. 16. but rather a frivolous thing to
think otherwise; Quasi absque sacrilegio, says he, tractare claves priva^i
nequeant, qui e^^s privatim tractare jubeatur. Quoties fratres suos admonere,
consolari, et aedificare. Imo ve^o est and publica clavium tractatio quam plebs
Christiana in unum coacta sine ullo sacrilegio ministrat, 1 Cor. 5. Polit.
Eccles. l. 3. c. 2. p. 8. And yet this is not a singular conceit of his or
ours, but the concurrent judgment of many worthy witnesses of the truth in
these latter days, who do with great consent hold the Ecclesiastical
government to be of a mixed form compounded of all three Estates, and that the
people are not to be wholly excluded from having any thing to do therein. Si
velimus Christum ipsum respicere, fuit semper Ecclesiae Regimen monarchicum: Si
Ecclesiae presbyter^s, qui in Doctrina et disciplina suas parts agebant,
Aristocraticum: si totum corpus Ecclesiae quatenus in Electione Episcoporum et
presbyterorum suffragia ferebat, it a tamen ut (...) semper a presbyteris
servaretur, Democraticum: Sic partim Aristocritum partim Democraticum, partim
etiam Monarchicum est, semper que fuit Ecclesiae Regimen, Whita. de pontif.
Romans Qu. 1. c. 1. sect. 2. The Church (says Mr. Cartwright) is governed with
that kind of Government, which the Philosophers that write of the best
Commonwealths affirm to be the best. For in respect of Christ the head it is
a Monarchy, and in respect of the Ancients and Pastors that Govern in Common
and with like Authority among themselves, it is an Aristocraty, or rule of the
best men; and in respect that the people are not secluded, but have their
interest in Church matters, it is a Democraty, or popular State, 1 Reply p. 51.
And when Dr. Whitegift, from the Doctrine of the Authors of the Admonition
would infer this consequence, viz. that then the more that ruled the better
estate it should be, and so the popular state should be the best: In Answer
hereunto he says, I have spoken of this before, where I declared that the
mixed estate is best, both by the example of the Kingdom of Christ, and also
of this our Realm, page 181. 182. And again, whereas Mr. Dr. says, that
Excommunication, and consequently Absolution or restoring to the Church again
pertains only to the Minister: it remains that I show that the Presbytery
or Eldership, and the whole Church also, has interest in the excommunication,
and consequently in the absolution or restoring unto the Church again, p. 183.
And again, it is certain Saint Paul did both understand and observe the rule
of our Savior Christ ( viz. that rule, Mat. 18. Tell the Church) but he
communicates this power of Excommunication with the Church: and therefore it
must needs be the meaning of our Savior Christ, that the Excommunication
should be by many, and not by one, and by the Church, and not by the Minister
of the Church alone, for he bids the Church of Corinth twice in the first
Epistle, once by a Metaphor, another time in plain words, that they should
Excommunicate the Incestuous person. And in the 2d. Epistle, understanding of
the Repentance of the man, he entreats them that they would receive him
again: And therefore considering that the Absolution of the Excommunication does
pertain unto the Churches, it follows that the excommunication does in like
manner appertainunto it, p. 184. And again that the Ancients had the ordering
of these things, and that the peoples consent was required, and that the
Ministers did not take upon them of their own Authority to Excommunicate, etc.
It may appear almost in every page of Cyprians Epistles. In Augustines time it
appears also, that that consent of the Church was required, p. 187.

To these may be added, Mr. Fenner, who speaking of the Ecclesiastical
Presbytery, and of the business which the Presbytery is to deal in, which he
distinguishes into judiciarie, as deciding of doubts, and dispencing of
Censures. and extrajudiciary, as Election, Ordination etc. has these words,
Atque haec sunt negotia quae praestari debent: In quibus per omnes Ecclesias
summa Ecclesiastica potestas presbyterio demandata est, ita tamen ut in his
quae maximi sunt momenti, et ad ecclesiae totius bonum velruinam maxim
spectant, post (...) suam de his captum consilia Ecclesiae denunciantur, ut si
quid habeant quod consulant vel objiciant in ^^edium proferant: postea, autem
auditis et assentien ibus (nisi ad majorem Senatum negotium deferri fuerit,
necesse ad turbas vita^das sive componendas, quod tum cum Major pars Ecclesiae
dissentit, faciendum est) decervenda et pro decretis Ecclesiis pro^onenda sunt,
and then he declares what he means by those matters maxim momenti, viz.
excommunication, absolution, elections, and deposings of Ministers and such
like, Sacrae The. lib. 7. c 7. wherein he plainly shows, that though the power
of the Presbytery be very great yet in things of greatest moment, as Censures
and Elections, the people if they have any thing to counsel or object, have
liberty to bring it in; and afterward matters are to be concluded when they
have bin heard speak, and have given their consent, for which liberty and
power of the people, he brings these Scriptures, 2 Chro. 30. 23. Acts 1. 15.
23. 26. 1 Cor. 5. 4. and 2 Cor. 1. 6. 7. Zanchius speaking of that Question,
per quos exerceri debet excommunicatio, answers thus, nempe per Ecclesia^, seu
per ministros Ecclesiae nomine, eoque et cum consensu totius Ecclesiae
Promissio illa, Quaecunque ligaveritis, ad totam Ecclesiam est facta, Ergo etc.
Praeterea Apostolus hoc expressius declaravit, 1 Cor. 5. congregatis vobis,
etc. alloquebatur autem totam Ecclesiam. Patres idem docent: Cyprianus ad
Cornelium Romans Episcopum seribit se multum laborasse apud plebem, ut par
daretur lapsis p^enitentibus: Si ergo non erat unius Episcopi cum suo
Presbyterio solvere quempiam, sed requirebatur plebis eoque totius Ecclesiae
consensus: Ergo neque ligari quispiam poterat, id est Excommunicari, sine
totius Ecclesiae consensu. Augustinus etiam contra Donatistas ait,
supersedendum esse excommunicatione Quando tota plebs laborant eodem merbo,
Quid ita? causam adfert, Quia inquit, non assentientur excommunicationi. etc.
Satis aperte docet tunc temporis non solitum fuisse excommunicationem ferri in
Quempiam sine totius Ecclesiae consensu; et ratio est in promptu, Quae enim
adomnes pertinent eum consensu omnium fieri debent: Ergo sine totius Ecclesiae
consensu excommunicari nemo debet. And then comparing the Government of the
Church, to the Roman Commonwealth which had the Dictators, the Senate and the
Quirites, and showing that the Church government in respect of Christ is a
Monarchy, in respect of the Presbyters an Aristocratie, and in respect of the
people a Democratie, he concludes thus, In rebus igitur gravissimis, quae ad
totum corpus pertinent, uti est Excommunicatio, sine consensu et authoritate
totius Ecclesiae nihil fieri debet, de Redempt, in prae c. 4. page 983. etc.
Calvin's words are these, Cyprianus cum meminit per quos suo tempore exerceretur
(viz. potestas jurisdictionis) adjungere solet totum Clerum Episcopo, sed. libi
quoque demonstrat, sic praefuisse clerum ipsum, ut plebs inter^m a cognitione
non excluderetur, sic enim scribit; Ab initio Episcopatus mei statui sine Cleri
consilio and plebis consensu nihil agere, Instit. 1. 4. c. 11. Sect. 6. And
again, Hoc addo, illam esse legitimam in excommunicando homine progressionem
quam demonstrat Paulus, si non soli Seniores seorsim id faciant, sed conscia
and approbante Ecclesia, in eum scilicet modum, ut plebis multitudo non regat
actionem, sed observet, ut testis and custos, ne quid per libidinem a paucis
geratur, Instit. l. 4. c. 12. Sect. 7. Those Ministers that penned the
Christian and modest offer of disputation, do say, That the Pastor and Elders
that exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, ought not to perform any maine and
material Ecclesiastical act, without the free consent of the congregation, in
Propos. 8.

The Refuter of Doctor Downams Sermon for the superiority of Diocesan Bishops,
is plain and full also in this point, in Part 2. of his reply p. 104 105, 106.
where answering Doctor Downam, that counted it schismatic novelty, that the
form of the Church Government should be holden in part to be Democrattcall,
and that his Refuter for so holding was a Brownist or Anabaptist; he not only
proves the power of the people from the Scripture, and delivers his own
judgment, that the Ecclesiastical Government is of a mixed form, compounded
of all three Estates; but for the same tenent, and that the Church government
is in part Democraticall or popular, he alleges the testimonies of the
Centuries, of Illyricus, of Doctor Fulke. Doctor Willet, Cyprian, Augustine, P.
Martyr, Dr Whitaker, and others: Master Baines his judgment we heard before in
the former Question. Vrsinus speaking of that Question. Quibus commissa est
potestas clavium* has these words: Quibus denunciatio verbi divini delegata
est, iisdem and potestas illa clavium; quae vero denunciatio fit in
Ecclesiastica disciplina est totius Ecclesie, ad totam enim Ecclesiam pertinet
disciplina and jurisdictio spiritualis, sed alio modo fit illa denunciatio in
verbi divini ministerio, quam in Ecclesiae judicio. And then telling how this
denunciation is done in the Ministry, and by the Ministers of the Word, he
comes to declare how it is done in Church censures: In Ecclesiastico judicio
(says he) gratiae and irae Dei non fit denunciati. ab uno aliquo privatim* sed
a tota Ecclesia aut nomine totius Ecclesiae' ab its qui ad hoc delecti sunt
communi omnium consensu. And a little after answering objections brought
against the use of Excommunication, he has these words: Potest concedi quod
Christus non intelligat Presbyterium (viz. in that place Matthew. 18. Tell the
Church) sed proprie sumat vocabulum Ecclesiae ante Christum Jdaicae^, post
Christum Christianae: Sed in Ecclesiae jurisdictione oportet aliquem esse
ordinem, aliquos oportet esse constitutos ab Ecclesia, alioquin esset (...).
And speaking of that Question, Quis ordo servari debeat in exercenda clavium
potestate (he says) principalis pars in excommunicatione est denunciatio, qua
etc. atque haec denunciatio qua quis excommunicatur non est penes Ministrum
Ecclesiae, sed penes ipsam Ecclesiam, and ejus nomine fit, quia mandatum hoc a
Christo datum est Ecclesiae; nam ipse ait express, Dic Ecclesiae. And finally,
speaking of abuses to be avoided, and cautions to be observed in
Excommunication, he has such words in the fourth Proposition, or Rule there
annexed, as do declare it to be his judgment* that if Excommunication should
be passed by a few, without the consent of the whole Church, such proceedings
would be both Oligarchy and Tyranny: Attentem expendatum (says he) a toto
Presbyterio, probetur ab Ecclesia, non suscipiatur private a authoritate, ne
ministerium Ecclesiae convertatur in (...) and Tyrannidem, in his Comment upon
the Catechism, in the place De clavibus regni coelorum.

Pareus delivering certain porismata or, conclusions concerning
Excommunication, has this for the fifth of them, Quod excommunicandi potestas
non fit penes unum Episcopum, vel paucos pastores, sed penes Ecclesiam;
proindelicet pastores and presbyteri ordinis cau* a primas habeant parts circa
censuras Ecclesiasticas, and per eos h^ administrentur; quod tamen citra
consensum Ecclesiae pastores ad exclusionem proced^re non debeant, alibi
demonstravimus in 1 Cor. 5. And a little after, answering Stapletons objections
that would have the power of Excommunication to be in the Bishop alone* he
brings in the case of Cyprian, who could not absolve the Lapsi without the
people: Cyprianus (says he) ad Cornelium Romanum Episcopum scribit s^ multum
apua plebem laborasse ut pax daretur lapsis, quam si per se dare potuisset, non
erat cur adeo in persuadenda plebe se fatigasset. So that in the judgment of
Pareus and Cyprian all power of Church government was not in the Presbyters,
but some power was in the people.

Musculus, although he think there be little use of Excommunication and Church
discipline, where there is a Christian Magistrate, yet when it is to be used,
he would not have the people excluded from having any hand therein, as may
appear by those words of his, where he speaks De disciplina Ecclesiastica:
Hisce de rebus non constituet Minister suo proprio arbitratu, sed erit ad
institutionem earum director, and adhibebit suffragia and consensum sue plebis,
ne quicquam invitae Ecclesie imponatur. Denique curabit ut plebs ipsa viros
graves, timentes Dei, ac boni testimonii deligat, quorum cura and vigilantia
disciplina Ecclesiastica administratur, and si quid gravioris momenti accidat,
ad ipsam Ecclesiam referatur: Loc. com. de Ministris verbi Dei, in tit. de
potestate Ministrorum p. 377. And afterward, in the latter end of that place,
coming to speak of the deposing of unworthy Ministers, he has these words:
Quaeritur hic per quos disciplina ista administrari debeat? Respondeo, primum
Ecclesiae populus potestatem habens elegendi dignum Ministrum, habet etiam
(test Cypriano) potestatem indignum recusandi: deinde qui Judices sunt
Censoresque morum in Ecclesia ex officio tenentur redargnere peccantem
Ministrum, si duobus aut tribus testibus fide dignis coram Ecclesia Dei
convictus fuerit. Tertio, iidem cum consensu and suffragiis plebis deponent
Ministrum, vel ad ltempus, vel in universum, vel excommunicabunt tandem juxta
quaitatem peccati vel defectus illius, p. 429. Doctor Ames says, Potestas
hujus disciplinae (viz. of Excommunication) quoad jus ipsum pertinet ad
Ecclesiam illam in communi, cujus membrum est peccator: ad illos enim pertinet
ejicere, ad quos pertinet primo admittere, and corporis totius interest ex
aequo membrorum conservatio vel amputatio, cum Ecclesi^ idcirco consensu (eoque
Magistratu non permittente tantum, sed and approbante and constituente) est
executioni mandanda. Medul. Theol. l. 1. c. 37. Sect. 26.

Lastly, Master Parker observing a distinction between power, and the
dispencing of power; that the one is in the Church and the other in the
Presbyters, has these words: Neque tamen dispensatio omnis, omneque exercitum
est penes rectores solos, sed juxta temperamentum formae partim Aristocratice,
partim Democraticae de manda^ae Rectoribus suis Ecclesi^, que ipsa per se obire
satis commode nequit, retinente vero dispensationem illam illudque exercitium
quod and ipsi convenit, and pertinet ad ejus lignitatem, authoritatem, and
libertatem a Christo donatam. Posit. Eccles. l. 3. c. 7. And elsewhere he
says, Imo vero est and publica clavium tractatio, quam plebes Christiana in
unum coacta, sine ullo acrilegio administrat. Polit. Eccles. l. 3 c. 2 p. 8.

These testimonies we thought good to produce in this Question, lest any should
think that to give any Church power of Government to the people, were some
singular opinion of ours, swerving from the truth, and disallowed by Orthodox
Writers of the Reformed Churches; and no doubt but besides these here cited,
the same is taught by others also, whom now we spare to allege, intending
only ^hese few for a taste instead of many.

2. And therefore when this Question demands whether we give the exercise of
all Church power of government to the whole Congregation, or to the Presbyters
thereof alone? Our Answer is, neither thus nor so, neither all to ^he people
excluding the Presbytery, nor all to the Presbytery excluding the People. For
this were to make the government of the Church either merely Democraticall, or
merely Aristocraticall, neither of which we believe it ought to be.

3. Whereas this Question demands to know what acts of Government the
Presbyters may do more then any other may do, and to have those particular
acts mentioned: this seems to us to be a very large demand, for who is able
to mention all the particular acts of government, which any one Governor may
perform in his time, especially if he continue long in his place? But if your
meaning in this Point be not of the Individualls, but of the species or kinds,
yet even there also it is much to require the particular mentioning of all; yet
to give you a taste take these. The calling of Assemblies and dismissing of the
same again; The ordinary preaching of the Word, which is done by way of
Office; and being the peoples mouth unto God in Prayer; The dispensing of
Baptism, and the Lords Supper: The permitting of any to speak in an orderly
way; and again enjoining silence: The putting of matters to Vote, and
pronouncing of sentence in the censure of offenders, or receiving in of
Penitents after their fall, and blessing of the people in the name of the Lord;
These are Acts of Church Government, which the Presbyters may do according to
the Word and another member may not do without breach of Order and presuming
above his place.

4. It is also here demanded, what the Presbyters may do without the particular
consent of the rest? To which we answer, that when they do what the Lord
Christ (whose Stewards they are) by his word requires of them in their places,
this should not be without the consent of the rest, ^or the rest of the Church
ought to consent thereto: Christ's Sheep ought to hear his voice, John 10. 27.
and to obey them that speak unto them in his name, Heb. 13. 17. And if any man
should in such case wilfully dissent, the Church ought to deal with such an
one, for not consenting to the will and ways of Christ, or else they shall all
be guilty of the sinful dissent of such an one. So that this Passage (if it be
meant of Presbyters doing their duty) without the consent of the people, goes
upon a supposall (in respect of the people) of that which never ought to be,
neither are we to suppose but that there may be rule when the Elders and
Brethren do not dissent nor are divided one from another: The multitude of
them that believed in the first Christian Church at Jerusalem, were of one
heart and of one soul, A l. 4. 32. Yet none needs to doubt, but there was rule
and Government amongst them, when yet their agreement was such, that the
Apostles and Flders did nothing without the full consent of the rest. It is a
miserable mistake either to think that in the Church of Christ the Elders and
Brethren must needs dissent one from another, or if they all consent, that then
there can be no ruling but against the peoples mind. They were none of the
best Shepherds to their flocks unto whom the Lord says, with force and rigor
have you ruled them. Ezech. 34. 4. As for doing any thing in their places*
which the word of Christ, the Lord and Master of the Church, commands not,
nor allows such things* they neither ought to do nor ought the Church to
consent unto them if they should; for that were to make themselves partakers of
their Rulers sins, and so to bring Judgment upon them all, as when the
Priests did wickedly bear rule, and the people loved to have it so, Jeremiah
5. 31.

5. Lastly, this Question demands how, and over whom in those Acts of
Government, which are done by the Elders more then by other Members, or without
the consent of the rest, the Presbyters do rule in propriety of speaking more
then the rest of the Congregation? wherein are sundry particulars.

1. How they rule? Whereunto we answer, that neither the Elders nor the people
do rule with Lordly and Princely rule, and Sovereign authority and power; for
that is proper to Christ over his Church: who is the only Lord, 1 Cor. 12. 5.
And King and Lawgiver that is able to save and to destroy, Isa. 33. 23. Psalm.
2. Luke 19. 27. Jam. 4. 12. The Elders are forbidden to be Lords over Gods
heritage, 1 Pet. 5. 3. Or to exercise authority as the Kings and Princes of the
earth do, Matthew. 20. 25, 26. Luke 22. 25, 26. They are not so to rule, as to
do what themselves please, but they must do whatsoever Christ has commanded,
Mat. 28. 20. Mr. Baine shows from these words there are diversities of
Ministeries, but one Lord, 1 Cor. 12. 5. That it is contrary to the Scripture
that there should be in the Church more Lords then one: (and says he) look as
great Lords have in their Houses Ministers of more and less honor, from the
Steward to the Scullery, but no Lord-like or Masterlike power in any besides
themselves: So is it with Christ and his Church, which is the House of God,
wherein he is the Lord, Apostles and others having more or less honorable
services, but no Masterlike power over the meanest of their fellow servants: On
Ephesians. 1. 22. p. 395. and elsewhere he says, no Minister of the Word has any
power but Ministerial in the Church, the power of the Apostles themselves and
Evangelists is called (...), Acts 20. 2 Timothy 4. Yea such a service as does make
the Ministers having it so servants, that they are no way Lords; many
Ministers, one Lord; we preach Christ Jesus the Lord; our selves your servants
for Jesus sake, Dioces. Trial. Q. 2. p. 74. The Elders are to rule as
Stewards, Mat. 24. 45. Luke 12. 42. As Shepherds, Act. 20. 28. As Captains,
guides, leaders or overseers, by going before the People, and showing them the
word and way of the Lord, 1 Timothy 3. 1. 5. and 5. 17. 1 These. 5. 12. H^b. 13. 17.

2. How they rule more then the rest of the Congregation do? Whereto the Answer
is, that this is more then the rest of the Congregation do in these acts, even
as acting is more then consenting, and as it is more to be a Steward over of
the House then one of the household, or to be a guide or leader, then to be
guided or led.

3. Over whom they do rule? even over the whole Church in general, and every
Member in particular, even all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made
them overseers, Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 3. 2.

The rule is express and plain that women ought not to To 16.
speak in the Church, but to be in silence, 1 Cor. 14. 34. 1 Timothy 2 11, 12.
And therefore they ought not to vote in Church matters; besides voting imports
some kind of government, and authority and power: now it is not government and
authority, but subjection and obedience which belongs unto women, by the rule,
and so is the practice of women amongst us.

Church matters ought not to be determined merely by To 17.
multitude or plurality of Votes, but by rules from the word of Christ, whose
will* (and not the will either of the Major, or Minor part of men,) is the
only rule and Law for Churches, Iam. 4. 12. Isa. 33. 22. Mat. 23. 8, 9. Exodus
23. 2. 21. 22. For our practice among us, the Major part of the Church, yea
usually the whole Church does consent and agree in one mind, and one
judgment, and so gives a joint unanimus Vote; and the rule requires it should
be so Romans 15. 6. and the example of the Primitive Apostolic Churches, where
things were carried (nor merely by the Major or Minor part, the rest
dissenting, but) (...), or with one accord. Act. 1. 14. and ^. 46 and 4. 24.
and ^. 12. and 15. 25. So that in this sense, matters with us are carried
according to the Vote of the Major part, that is, with the joint consent of the
whole Church, but yet because it is the mind of Christ. But it may be your
meaning is in this Question to take it for granted that the Churches will be
divided in their Votes, and to know what course we take at such times: But if
Churches lay aside their own affections, and give attendance to the rule, and
be (as all Churches ought to be) men of humble spirits, and sincere, and
withal depend on Christ their head and King for guidance, in their work, we
know no necessity of such a supposall, that they must needs be divided in their
votes, especially considering what promises he has made unto his Church, of
godly concord and agreement among themselves, and of his own gracious presence
in the midst of them, Ier. 32. 39. Zeph. 3. 9. Mat. 18. 20. which promifes we
believe are not in vain. Nevertheless, we deny not but through the
corruptions and distempers of men, some dissension may arise for a time in a
true Church, as it was in the Church at Corinth: and if any such thing fall out
among us (which we bless God is not often) then before matters be put to the
vote, our course of proceeding is after this manner. If the Elders and Major
part of the Church consent in one conclusion, yet if any brother dissent, he is
patiently heard, and his alledgements of Scripture or good reasons are duly
weighed: If it appear that his judgment is according to the rule, the whole
Church will readily yield, though before they were otherwise minded. But if it
appear they who dissent from the Major part, are factiously or partially
carried, the rest labor to convince them of their error by the rule, if they
yield, the consent of all comfortably concurreth in the matter; if they still
continue obstinate, they are admonished, and so standing under censure, their
vote is nullified. If they without obstinate opposition of the rest, do
dissent still, yet refer the matter to the judgment of the Major part of the
body they are not wont to proceed to sentence (if the matter be weighty as in
Excommunication) till the reasons on both sides have bin duly pondered, and all
brotherly means have been used for mutual information and conviction. If the
difference still continue the sentence (if the matter be weighty) is still
demurred, even till other Churches have been consulted with, who in such a case
will send their Elders to communicate their apprehensions and light, which they
do not pro imperio, binding the Church to rest in their dictates but by
propounding their grounds from the Scripture. These courses with Gods presence
and blessing (which usually accompanies his Ordinance) faithfully taken and
followed, will prevail either to settle one unanimous consent in the thing* or
at least to preserve peace in the Church by the dissentors submission to the
judgment of the Major part, though they see not light sufficient to warrant
them to act in the business: Such subjection is according to the rule, Ephesians.
5. 21. 1 Pet. 5. 5. If the Church or the Elders should refuse the testimony of
other Churches according to God, they will (after brotherly admonition and due
patient waiting) deny them the right hand of fellowship, till they shall give
better evidence of their subjection to the Gospel of Christ. But thanks be to
God we never had occasion of such withdrawing communion of one Church from
another, though now and then (as need requires) Churches send to other
Churches for their counsel and advice.

Means to preserve the Churches in unity and verity, To 18.
and to reform any that may err, thanks be to God we have sundry. First,
the holy Scriptures, which are a perfect rule for Doctrine and practice, 2 Timothy
3. 15 16. 2 Pet. 1. 19. Psalm. 19. 7, 8. Secondly, the Ministry appointed by
Christ, viz. of Pastors, Teachers, Elders, and Deacons, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 1 Cor
12. 28. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1. Tim. 3. 1, 2. etc and verse. 8. and in both these we
have frequently holden forth unto us the Commandment of God, wherein he
requires Churches to be of one mind and one judgment in the truth, 1 Cor. 1.
10. and 2. 13. 11. Ephesians. 4. 3. and Phil. 1. 27. and 2. 1. 2. and his promise
to lead his people into all truth, and holy agreement therein, Jer. 32. 29. Isa
11 6, 7 etc. Zeph. 3. 9. Ioh. 16. 13. with many motives and Rules from
Scripture for continuing in the said truth and love. Now Faith makes use of
these promises and submits to these precepts and exhortations, and so both
these being mixed with Faith are profitable means by the blessing of God for
that end aforesaid, Heb. 4. 2. as these Churches have found by experience, for
these years since our coming into this Country: And any other means
sanctified of God for the aforesaid end, we hope we should be glad with
thankful hearts to improve and make use of as the Lord shall help.

As for a Platform of Doctrine and Discipline which you mention, as one means
hereunto, if thereby you mean no more but a confession of Faith of the holy
doctrine which is according to godliness, we know nothing but it may be
lawful and expedient in some cases for any particular person that has
received the gift to do it; or any Church, or a^l the Churches in any
Christian Commonwealth, to compile and set forth such a platform. The
practice of those Churches, whose Confessions are contained in that book
called The harmony of Confessions, as also of Master Robinson at Leiden, and
others of our Nation in other parts in the Low Countries, who have published
such platformes, we see no reason to condemn or disallow: neither count we it
unlawful or inexpedient for any Church or Churches, or person or persons in
the country, upon just occasion to do the like.

But if your meaning be of a platform to be imposed by authority upon others,
or our selves, as a binding Rule of Faith and practice, so that all men must
believe and walk according to that platform, without adding, altering, or
omitting* then we are doubtful whether such platformes be lawful or
expedient. For if the Doctrine contained therein do in any particular swerve
from the Doctrine contained in Scripture then the imposing of them is so far
forth unlawful; and if they be according to it, then they may seem needless,
in as much as the form of wholesome words contained in Scripture is
sufficient. Which reason against such Platformes, makes nothing against Sermons
or Preaching, though Sermons must be according to the Doctrine contained in
Scripture, because Preaching is an ordinance of God and therefore not
needless; which we cannot say of such Platformes. Besides, as they are not
necessary, so they may be a snare unto men, and a dangerous temptation of
attending more to the form of Doctrine delivered from the authority of the
Church, and the imposers, then to the examining thereof according to the Rule
of Scripture; and so their faith may by this means stand in the wisdom or
will of man, rather then in the power of God, as if men had dominion over their
faith; which things ought not so to be, 1 Cor. 2. 5. and 2. 1. ver. Christians
have liberty from God to search the Scriptures, and try all things, and hold
fast that which is good, Act. 17. 11. Ioh. 5. 39. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. but the
foresaid imposing of platformes and confessions compiled by men, does seem to
abridge them of that liberty; and if it be any means of unity, yet it may be a
dangerous hinderance of some verity and degree of truth as binding men to rest
in their former apprehensions and knowledge, without liberty, to better their
judgment in those points, and shutting the door against any further light
which God may give to his best servants, and most discerning, beyond what they
saw at first: And therefore we doubt such imposed platformes are not lawful,
or at least wise not expedient.

The consociation of Churches into Classes and Synods we hold to be lawful and
in some cases necessary; as namely in things that are not peculiar to one
Church, but common to them all: And likewise when a Church is not able to end
any matter that concerns only themselves, then they are to seek for counsel
and advice from neighbor Churches; as the Church at Antioch did send unto the
Church at Jerusalem, Acts 15. 2. the ground and use of Classes and Synods, with
the limitations therein to be observed, is summarily laid down by Doctor Ames,
Medul. Theol. l 1. c. 39. Sect. 27. unto whom we do wholly consent in this
matter.

But when you speak of doing no weighty matter without the consent and
counsel of a Classes, we dare not so far restrain the particular Churches as
fearing this would be to give the C^asses an undue power and more then belongs
unto them by the Word; as being also an abridgment of that power which Christ
has given to every particular Church, to transact their own matters (whether
more or less weighty) among themselves (if so be they be able) without such
necessary dependence upon Classes, as we have showed before in answer to Q. 14.
Sect. 3. and 4. of that Answer. And Master Parker testifies, that in Genevah,
and in the Low Countries, where they have some use of Classes, yet it cannot
be said that their particular Congregations are absque potestate omni in rebus
grandtoribus, ut in excommunicatione; the particular Churches are not without
power in the more weighty matters, as in Excommunication, Polit. Eccles. li. 2.
c. 36. Sect. 11. p. 310. And Master Baine shows the same, saying, They have
power of governing themselves, but for greater edification voluntarily
confederate, not to use or exercise their power but with mutual communion, one
asking the counsel and consent of the other, Dioces. Trial Q. 1. p. 21. And a
little after Geneva made his consociation, not as if the prime Churches were
imperfect, and to make one Church by this union; but because though they were
entire Churches, and had the power of Churches, yet they needed support in
exercising of it, etc. which is the very same that we said before in Q. 14
viz. That all Churches have right of Government within themselves, but some had
need of counsel and advice of others, because they are of less ability to
transact their own matters of themselves. And Master Parker in the same place
before alleged in the page immediately precedent, clearly shows against
Doctor Downham, Doctor Sutcliffe, and others, that those particular
Congregations which have Presbyters of their own, with power within
themselves, are the most perfect, and are precisely formed juxta formam illam
quae in verbo patefacta est, according to that form which is revealed in the
Word; whereas others which have not the like are more defective and imperfect.
And if this be so, then to bind Churches to do no weighty matters without the
counsel and consent of Classes, were to blind them to be imperfect. And for
Synods, if they have such power that their determination shall bind the
Churches to obedience (as you speak) it is more then we yet understand. Indeed
Bellarmine makes Bishops in a Council or Synod to be Judges; and that standum
sit little sententiae, quia ipsi sic statuerunt, quomodo statur sententia
Praetoris in causis politicis; that is, either to obey or suffer: de Council.
and Eccles. l. 1. c. 18. But the Orthodoxe Writers do not consent to him
therein; for in their judgment the sentence of a Council or Synod is only
inquisitio quaedam and dictio sententiae ministrato^ia and limitata, ita ut
tantum valeat decretum Concilii quantum valeat ejus ratio, as Doctor Ames has
it in his Bellarminus enervatus, upon that place of Bellarmine: that is, The
sentence of a Synod is only a certain enquiring and giving of sentence by way
of Ministry, and with limitation; so that the decree of the Council has so
much force as there is force in the reason of it. And Junius expresses it
thus; Sententia Concilii per se ipsam suasionis non coactionis est judicium
ministeriale, non authoritatem, per se necessitatemque adferens, Animadvers.
upon Bellarmine in that place: that is, The sentence of a Council is of it
self only of advice, not of compulsion or constraint, and brings with it a
judgment ministerial, not authority of it self nor necessity; whereunto we
do wholly consent. As for that clause in this Question, That the determination
of a Synod should bind if not to obedience, yet to peaceable suffering, we
know not what sufferings those should be: for punishments in Purse or Person,
in respect of the body or outward man, are not to be inflicted by Synods, but
by civil Magistrates; and Church Censures of Excommunication, or the like,
belong to the particular Church of which an offender is a member, out of the
communion whereof a man cannot be cast, but only by his own Church.

Only Christ has Authority to make Laws for the government To 19
of each particular Church, and the Members thereof, and h^s laws do oblige
all the Members, and may not be omitted without sin, Jam. 4. 12. Jsa. 33. 22.
^ Mat. 23. 8, 9 10. ^ct. 3. 23. But for particular Churches, they have no power
to make Laws for themselves or their Members, but to observe and see all their
Members observe those Laws which Christ has given and commanded Mat. 28. 20.
Deu^. 33. 3. John 10. 27. If any Church shall presume further, they go beyond
their Commission, and in such case their Ecclesiastical Laws may be omitted
without sin, nay it would be sin to be subject to them Col. 2. 20. To walk
after them, Hos. 5. 11. to be such servants of men as not to stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, 1. or. 7. 23. Gal. 5. 1.

The outward calling of a Minister consists properly To 20.
and essentially in election by the people, as Doctor ^mes shows, Cas. Cons.
l. 4. c. 25. Q. 6. And this election is so essential, that without it the
Ministers calling (if you speak of an ordinary Church officer) is a nullity;
And therefore Mornay, that learned noble man of France, approves that saying
of Chrysostom, election by the people is so necessary, as that without it
there is neither Altar, nor Church, nor Priesthood, where (omitting other
things) it appears to be their judgment, that without election by the people,
the Ministry is void; And Mornay adds of his own, concerning the Bishops
amongst the Papists, that they were nulla plane (...), nulla proinde, (...),
for the one presupposed the other, no Imposition seeing without election, in
his book of the Church, c. 11. p. 375. Yet sometimes the peoples acceptance
and approbation afterward may supply the want of election at the first, as
Jacobs after consent and acceptance of Lea, made her to be his wife, though he
chose her not at the first. And by this we hold the calling of many Ministers
in England may be excused, who at first came into their places without the
consent of the people.

If ordination by imposition of hands, were of the essence of a Ministers
calling then in those Churches, where such ordination is not used, their
Ministers should want a lawful calling, which were an hard sentence against
many Ministers in Scotland, where (as is reported) this ordination is not
thought necessary, and therefore used or omitted indifferently. We look at
Ordination by Imposition of hands, as a solemn investing of men into their
places, whereto they have right and calling by election, like to the
inauguration of a Magistrate in the Commonwealth, yet necessary by divine
Institution. 1 Timothy 4. 14. But not so necessary as if the Ministers calling
were a nullity without it. Essentia ipsa vocationis, in electione legitima
consistit; Ordinatio pendet ab electione, sicut Coronatio Principi^, aut
Magistratus inauguratio, ab electione, successione, aut aequivalente aliqua
constitutione. Ames Bellarm. enervat. Lib. 3. de clericis, c. 2. Sect. 3. That
is, the essence of a Ministers calling consists in lawful election, Ordination
depends upon Election, as the Coronation of a Prince, or the Inauguration of a
Magistrate, depends upon Election, Succession, or some other Constitution
aequivalent. And again, Ritus impositionis manuum non est absolute necessarius
ad esse Pastoris, non magis quam Coronatio ad esse Regis, aut celebratio
nuptiarum ad earum esse. sect. 10. That is, the right of Imposition of hands is
not absolutely necessary to the essence of a Pastor, no more then the
Coronation to the essence of a King, or the Celebration of Marriage to the
essence thereof.

Ordination of Ministers is not a private action but public, To 21.
and ought to be done publicly in the Assembly of the Church, and therefore
the persons that perform it, (whether they be ordinary Church Officers or no)
cannot in any congruity of speech be called mere private persons in that
Action.

2. The Church that has no Officers, may elect Officers or Ministers unto
themselves, therefore it may also ordain them; which Argument Dr. Whitaker
uses as we shall see anon. If it have Commission and power from Christ for
the one, and that the greater, it has it also for the other which is the
lesser: Now ordination is less then election, and depends upon it as a
necessary Antecedent by divine Institution, by virtue of which it is justly
administered, being indeed nothing else but the admission of a person lawfully
elected into his Office, or a putting of him into possession thereof, whereunto
he had right before by election, as was said before in answer to the precedent
Question.

3. If a Church have Ministers or Elders before, then this ordination is to be
performed by the Elders of the Church, and in their Assembly. 1 Timothy 4. 14. as
also many other acts are to be performed by them.

4. This Ordination thus performed by the Elders for the Church, may fitly be
called the Act of the whole Church, as it is the whole man that sees, that
hears, that speaks, when these acts are instrumentally performed by the
eye, the ear, and the tongue, in which sense Master Parker says, Ecclesia per
alios docet, baptisa^que, Polit. Eccles. l. 3. c. 7. p. 26.

5. But when a Church has no Officers, but the first Officers themselves are
to be ordained, then this Ordination by the Rite of imposing of hands may be
performed for the Church by the most prime grave and able men from among
themselves, as the Church shall depute hereunto, as the children of Israel did
lay their hands upon the Levites, Numb. 8. 10. Now all the Congregation could
not impose all their hands upon them together, all their hands could not
possibly reach them together, and therefore it must needs be that some of the
Congregation in the name of the whole body performed this Rite: And as this
Scripture shows, that the people may in some cases lay their hands upon
Church Officers, (for the Levites were such, upon whom the children of Israel
did lay their hands) so let it be considered, whether these reasons do not
further make it manifest.

1. Men that are in no Office may elect, therefore they may ordain, because
ordination is nothing else but the execution of Election.

2. If it were not so then one of these would follow, either that the Officers
must minister without any Ordination at all, or else by virtue of some former
Ordination received in some other Church or else they must be ordained by some
other Minister or Ministers of some other Church, that were ordained before
them, and so the Ministry to be by succession. But the first of these is
against the Scripture, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Heb. 6. 2. And the second were to
establish the Popish opinion of the indeleble Character, imprinted as they
imagine in their Sacrament of holy Orders. Whereas for ought we can discern.
If when they are called to Office in any Church, they have need of a new
Election, notwithstanding their former election into another Church then they
have by the same ground need of a new Ordination, for Ordination depends upon
Election: If their former Election be ceased, their former Ordination is ceased
also; and they can no more minister by virtue of a former Ordination unto
another Church, then by virtue of a former Election. And for the third, we do
not understand what authority ordinary Officers can have to ordain Ministers
to such a Church, of which themselves are not so much as Members Besides at
some times, namely at the first Reformation after the times of Popery, there
were no others to be had but from the Pope, and his Bishops and Priests. Now it
were a pitiful case, if the Sheep must have no Shepherd but such as are
appointed to them by the wolves, That is, if Gods people might not have
Ministers, but only from the popish Bishops. This were to say, either that the
Ministers of Antichrist, must, or may ordain Ministers to the Church of
Christ, or else that the popish Bishops are true Ministers of Christ. And if
Protestants think it necessary, that their first Ministers should be ordained
by the popish Bishops, it is no marvel if the Papists do thereupon believe
that their Church is the true Church, and their Bishops true Ministers. Such a
scandal is it unto them to maintain this personal succession of the
Ministry. But God does so much abhor Antichrist, that he would not have his
people to seek to him, nor his Priests to ordain Christ's Ministers, as he
would not take of Babylon a stone for a Corner, nor a stone for a foundation,
Ier. 51. 26.

3. It is thus in civil Corporations and Cities, the Major, Bayliffe, or other
chief Officer elect, is at his entrance and inauguration to receive at the
hands of his Predecessors the Sword or Keys of the City, or to have some other
solemn Ceremony by him performed unto him yet if either there be no former as
at the first or that the former be dead or upon necessity absent, when his
Successor enters, then is this Ceremony and work performed by some other, the
fittest Instrument; neither need that City borrow any Officer of another City,
neither could he entermeddle there without usurpation, though both the
Corporations have the same Charter under the same King. And so it is in this
spiritual Corporation or City, the Church of God.

4. That this point may seem the less strange to you, we pray you consider
with us a little further the nature of this Ordination, and then we will add
the Testimonies of some eminent Protestant Writers in this case, that you may
see this is not any singular opinion of ours. For the former, some indeed have
so highly advanced this Ordination, that they have preferred it far above
preaching the Word, ministering the Sacraments, and Prayer, making it and the
power of Excommunication, the two incommunicable Prerogatives of a Bishop above
an ordinary Minister; yet the Scripture teaches no such thing, but rather the
contrary, for when the Apostles were sent out by Christ, there was no mention
of Ordination in that Commission of theirs, but only of teaching and preaching
and baptising Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mark. 16. 15, 16. If Ordination of Ministers had
bin such a special work, there would belike have bin some mention of it in
their Commission. And certain it is, the Apostles counted preaching the Word
their principal work, and after it Prayer, and the ministering of the
Sacraments, Act. 6. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 17. If ordaining of Ministers had bin in their
account so prime a work, it may seem Paul would rather have tarried in Creete
to have ordained Elders there then have gone himself about preaching, seaving
Titus for the other, Tit. 1 5. By all which it appears, that ordaining of
Ministers is not such an eminent work as that it is to be preferred above
preaching the Word, and ministering the Sacraments, and therefore to be
performed by them that are superiors unto ordinary Ministers; preaching and
ministering the Sacraments, being left as inferior works unto Ministers, of an
inferior rank, as they would have it, that stand for the superiority of
Docesan Bishops; neither is it equal unto those other works before mentioned,
that only he that does those, may perform this other also, as some others
think; but being nothing else in the true nature and use of it but the
execution and accomplishment and confirmation of election, it may be performed
by the people of God, that yet have no Officers, even as Election may upon
which it does depend.

5. Lastly, let these sayings of some Protestant Writers of singular note,
either for holiness, or learning, or both, be well considered of. Master
Perkins says, Succession of Doctrine alone is sufficient; for this Rule must
be remembered, that the power of the Keys (that is, of order and jurisdiction)
is tied by God and annexed in the New Testament to Doctrine. If in Turkey, or
America, or elsewhere, the Gospel should be received by the counsel and
persuasion of private persons, they need not send into Europe for consecrated
Ministers, but they have power to choose their own Ministers from within
themselves; because where God gives the Word he gives the power also; upon Gal.
1. 11. Doctor Willet says, Whereas Bellarmine objecteth that as in the old Law
the Priesthood went by carnal generation and lineall descent from Aaron, so in
the New it must be derived by succession from the Apostles; we answer, first,
that our Savior Christ and his Apostles could show no lineall descent from
Aaron, neither had their ordination from his Successors, and yet were the true
Pastors of the Church. And a little after, This we say further, that both
before Christ there were true Pastors and Prophets, which were not ordained by
the Priests of Aaron; and since Christ, that received not their ordination
successively from the Apostles. First, in the old Law, when the ordinary
Priesthood was corrupted, God raised up Prophets from other Tribes that
received not from the Priests their ordination and allowance: such an one was
Amos, who was among Heardsmen, and was made a Prophet as he was gathering wild
black-berries. After the same manner in the corrupt times of the Gospel, the
Lord has raised up faithful Ministers to his Church, that could show no
succession from the degenerate Clergy. And a little after, If Paul were made an
Apostle without the ordination of the lawful Apostles much more may the Lord
raise up new Pastors to his Church without ordination from the usurpers of the
Apostles: Synops. Papism. contr. 2. Q. 3. of Succession Error 20. p. 81. Mor^^y
his words are full and plain to the same purpose. viz Although some of our men
in such a corrupt state of the Church, as we have seen in our time, without
waiting for calling or allowance of them who under the title of Pastors
oppressed the Lords Flock, did at first preach without this formal calling,
and afterward were chosen and called to the holy Ministey by the Churches which
they had taught; yet this ought to seem no more strange, then if in a free
commonwealth the people without waiting either for the consent, or for the
voices of those that tyrannize over them, should (according to the Laws) make
choice of good and wise Magistrates, such (happily) as God would serve his
turn of for their deliverance, and for the public restitution. And hereof we
have examples, first, in the Acts, where we read that Philip, who was but a
Deacon, preaches in Samaria without the calling of the Apostles, yea without
their privity, who for all that gave their allowance to his work. In
Frumentius, carried upon another occasion into the Indies, a mere Layman, who
yet there preaches the Gospel, and a good while after is there made Bishop. In
those of whom Origin speaks, that shall come by chance into a City where
never any Christian was borne, shall there begin to teach, and labor to
instruct the people in the Faith, whom the People shall afterward make their
Pastors and Bishops: and besides, in all the Scriptures there is not one place
that binds the Ministry of the Gospel to a certain succession; but
contrariwise the Scripture shows, that God would send two special witnesses
to prophecy against Antichrist: Of the Church chap. 11. p. 371. Doctor
Whitaker answering Bellarmine, that would prove Protestants to have no Church,
because their Ministers had no Ordination by Bishops, says, That as sometimes
Bishops were chosen by the Clergy and sometimes by the People, so the same may
be said of Ordination, viz. that it was sometimes by the Clergy and sometimes
by the People; and then adds, Quod si vocationem little Episcoporum legitimam
fuisse concedat Bellarminus, De ordinatione minus laboramus. Qui enim habent
authoritatem vocandi, iidem etiam authoritatem ordinandi habent, si legitima
ordinatio non possit impetrari: nam ordinatio sequitur vocationem; qui vocatur,
i^ quasi in sui muneris possessionem mittitur: de Eccles. Q. 5. cap. 6 p. 510.
Finally, Doctor Ames does also witness the same in many places of his works:
for a taste take these few sayings of his in this case, viz. Ad totam Ecclesiam
semper pertinet ordinatio, quoad jus, vim, virtutem illam quam habet in
Ministro Ecclesiae constituendo; sicut celebratio matrimonii vim aut virtutem
omnem acceptam refert legitimo consensui conjugum: Ecclesie statu (ministerio
and ordine deficiente) collapso vel corrupto, a plebe etiam actus iste
ordinationis, quatenus necessarius est ad Ministri constitutionem in tali casu,
potest legitime exerceri, Bellarm. enervat. lib. 3. de clericis, cap. 2 de
ordinatione. And again, a little after; Episcopos veros a veris Episcopis
ordinary dicimus ordinand^s esse, sed nomine Ecclesiae cui ordinantur. And
again, a little after, Potestas ordinandi est aliqu^ modo originaliter in tota
Ecclesia, sicut potestas videndi originaliter est in toto animali, quamvis
formaliter and subjective sit in oculo tantum; tum etiam ordinationis
exercitium pendet a tota Ecclesia, sicut actus videndi hoc vel illud
determinate pendet non ab oculo sed a toto. And again, Quamvis in Ecclesia
been constituta non debeat aliis quam presbyteris ordinandi manus mandari; in
defectu tamen idoneorum presbyterorum potest non presbyteris mandari. And yet
again in the next place, Si concedatur hoc, quod ex ordine nemo possit esse
legitimus pastor, nisi sit a legitimo Pastore and Episcopo ordinatus: In
ordinis tamen defectu, cum jam primo instaurari debet ordo, non potest^tam
accurate observari, atque adeo extraordinarium aliquid tum potest intervenire
sine ullo vitio. These words you see are punctual and plain, that the power
of ordaining Ministers is originally in the Church; and that though when a
Church has Presbyters, the act of ordaining is to be done by those Presbyters;
yet in defect of such it may be performed by them that are no Presbyters,
lawfully, and without fault; which is the case of our Churches that are in
their beginnings, and may be the case of any Church when they come to be
without Officers, as by war, pestilence, etc. it may come to pass.

There are some things common to Pastors with Teachers; T^ 22.
as, that they are both Officers of the Church appointed by Christ; both Elders
or Bishops to rule and feed the Church, by laboring in the Word and Doctrine,
Act. 20 28 1 Timothy 3. 1. Tit. 1. 5, 7. and therefore the name of Pastor, in a
general sense may be given to them both, Ier. 3. 15. as also the name of
Teacher, Isa. 30. 20. as those names may also be given to Apostles, in as much
as they also are Elders, Pastors, Teachers, to rule, to feed, to teach the
Church of God, 1 Pet. 5. 1. Ioh. 21. 15. 16. 1 Timothy 2. 7. and 2. 1. 11. And if
Pastors and Teachers be both of them Church officers, to feed and rule the
Church* by laboring in the Word and Doctrine, they must not do this without
application of it to the consciences and states of the hearers, as God shall
help them: for this application is one part of his work, that is by his
office to preach the Word, without which the Word is not handled in such a
manner as it ought to be, 2 Timothy 2. 15. 1 Cor. 14. 25. Luke 12. 42. and many
hearers need this, the Word delivered in general without application of it
being to them as bread set before children in the whole loaf. And if both of
them must labor in the Word and Doctrine, and not only in a general way, but
with application, we see not but they may both of them administer the Seals or
Sacraments, wherein there is a special application of the promises of the
Gospel, and the grace of Christ therein, unto the faithful and believing
receivers. 2. And yet for all this community between them, they are not in
propriety of speech the same Officers, but distinct, and so the Scripture
speaks of them Ephesians. 4. 11. For if a man would say their Offices are
confounded, because the same general work of preaching the Word, and applying
the same, belongs unto them both: By the same reason a man might say the
offices of Apostles and Evangelists were confounded; for both of them were to
preach the Word, with application of the same by doctrine, and Seals; and also
that the ordinary Pastors were the same office with them both, because he also
is to do the same work of preaching and applying: But an Apostle is to feed,
and rule, and teach, by way of Doctrine and Application, as an Apostle; an
Evangelist as an Evangelist, and an ordinary Pastor as an ordinary Pastor, and
therein lies the difference: and we may add, a Teacher as a Teacher; and
therein is he distinguished both from the Pastor, and from all other Church
Officers, even as by the same they all are distinguished one from another, the
same general work of Doctrine and Application being common to them all.

3. And for the Teacher and Pastor, the difference between them lies in this,
that the one is principally to attend upon points of Knowledge and Doctrine,
though not without Application; and the other to points of Practice, though not
without Doctrine: and therefore the one of them is called* He that teaches,
and his work is thus expressed, let him attend on teaching; and the other, He
that exhorts, and his work, to attend on exhortation, Romans 12. 7, 8. and the
gift of the one is called a word of knowledge, and the gift of the other, a
word of wisdom, 1 Cor. 12. 8. as experience also shows, that one man's gift
is more doctrinall, and for points of knowledge; and another more exhortatory,
and for points of practice.

It is not the manner of Elders among us, whether Ruling To 23.
only, or Ruling and Teaching also, to strive for authority or pre-eminence
one above another; as remembering what lesson our Savior taught his Disciples,
when they were at strife among them, which of them should be the greatest, Luke
22. 24, 25. etc. If Diotrephes strive for pre-eminence 3 Ioh. 9, 10. verily we
abhor such striving, and by the grace of God respect one another as Brethren.
As for the peoples duty toward their Elders, it is taught them plainly in that
place, 1 These. 5. 12, 13. as also in that of 1 Timothy 5. 17 Let the Elders that
rule well be counted worthy of double honor, specially they that labor in
the Word and Doctrine; and this Word ( specially) shows them, that as they are
to account all their Elders worthy of double honor, so in special manner
their Teaching or Preaching Elders.

These are answered in that which was sent the last To 24. and 25.
year.

We do believe that every Minister of the Gospel ought To 26.
to be maintained with sufficient and honorable maintenance, according to his
need and occasions, in regard of his person, calling, charge of children and
hospitality, so as he that preaches the Gospel may in all these respects live
of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 14. Gal 6. 6. 1 Timothy 5. 17. And this maintenance is
not to be allowed as alms and courtesy, but as debt and duty, to be paid
according to the rule of Justice; the Labourer is worthy of his wages, Luke 10.
17. which the Apostle shows to be according to all Laws of nature, nations,
Moses and Christ, 1 Cor. 9. But for settled and stinted maintenance, there is
nothing done that way amongst us, except from year to year, because the
conditions of Ministers may vary, and of the Church to which they do belong:
Neither do we know any such thing to be appointed by Christ our Lord, for the
maintenance of the Ministry in these days; but this we know that the great
mountain burning with fire, cast into the sea upon the sounding of the second
Trumpet Rev. 8. 8, 9. is applied by some good Writers to those times, when
Constantine brought settled endowments into the Church, with ampla praedia (as
they are called) are counted by some to be no better then poison to the
Church; as the Stories say that upon the fact of the good Emperor a voice was
heard, which said, Hodie seminatum est virus in Ecclesiam. And if those Writers
be not deceived which so expound that Scripture (as for our parts we know not
but they expound it truly) then in as much as upon the casting of that
mountain into the sea, a third part of it became blood and a third part of
living creatures dyed, and a third part of ships were destroyed, it may be
truly gathered thence that the bringing in of settled endowments and eminent
preferments into the Church, has been the corruption, and to some the
destruction of such as lived by them, both Church Officers and Church Members.

We do not permit, and call upon (such whom you call) To 27.
mere Lay men, and private persons, neither being in the Ministry nor
intended to it, ordinarily to preach or prophecy publicly, in or before the
Congregation, if by ordinarily, you mean frequently and usually. For where
ordinary Officers are not wanting to a Church, and neither detained from their
work by sickness, nor just absence, we think it most meet to offer our
Sacrifice to God and to the Church of our best gifts. But yet if you oppose
ordinary to extraordinary, we do confess that some private members (to wit
such as are eminently fitted with knowledge and utterance, being also men of
humble spirits, and holy lives, all which qualifications we find but in a few)
may without an extraordinary calling from God be called forth by by the Church
upon some occasion (and namely in the absence or bodily weakness of Ministers,
or for trial of gifts when a man intends the Ministry) to speak to
edification, exhortation and comfort. Iehosaphat sent Princes (who neither were
Ministers, nor intended so to be) to teach with the Priests and Levites, to
wit, at least to encourage the people, to hearken to the Priests and Levites
come amongst them, 2 Chronicles. 17. 7, 8, 9. As Jehosaphat himself also did the
like, 2 Chronicles. 20. 20. Yea, and was their mouth also to God in prayer, v. 2. 5.
to 13. As for that prophesying 1 Cor. 14. We conceive as some things in it be
extraordinary, so some things ordinary. Extraordinary, that private men, and
new converts should be so soon and so suddenly, and so much enlightened and
enlarged, as to be able to prophecy publicly to the edification of a whole
Church: But yet this we conceive to be ordinary, that some private men may be
found (at least in some Churches) grown Christians, of able gifts, who may have
received a gift of Prophecy, and for such we do not think it requires any
more an extraordinary calling for them to prophecy in our Churches, then for
Iehosaphat and his Princes to prophecy in the Church of Israel.

Our Answer to this Question is that we never knew any To 28.
Ministers that did call upon the people thus to do: and as for us, such
calling upon them is far from us. All that we know to be holden in this case
is this, that some think the people have a liberty to ask a Question
publicly for their better satisfaction upon very urgent and weighty cause,
though even this is doubted of by others, and all judge the ordinary practice
of it, not necessary: but (if it be not meekly and wisely carried) to be
inconvenient if not utterly unlawful, and therefore such asking of Questions
is seldom used in any Church among us, and in most Churches never. True it is,
in the times a little before the Synod diverse that were infected with corrupt
opinions were very bold, and forward in this kind of asking Questions, after
Sermons, especially when they had heard something delivered publicly that did
make against their Tenants; by which kind of asking Questions, they plainly
discovered of what spirit they were, but for being called upon by us thus to
do, (as it seems to your Question that you have been informed) the truth is,
there was no such matter. But now these men are long since, (the greatest part
of them) to an Island (called Aquedneck) departed from amongst us, some of them
being excommunicated or banished, or both, and others departing voluntarily, or
for fear of the like censure, by means of which departure of these
troublesome spirits from amongst us, and the blessing of God upon the Synod and
Sermons that have laid open and reproved this disorderly asking of Questions, a
man may now live from one end of the year unto another in these Congregations,
and not hear any man open his mouth in such kind of asking Questions.

1. The conversion of sinners unto God does not always To 29.
follow the preaching of every one, that is in a lawful office of ministry,
as experience and Scripture do abundantly witness, Isay. 49. 4, 5. and 53.
1. Ezech. 3. 7. 2 King. 17. 13 14. Mat. 11. 20, 21. etc. John 12. 37.

2. And when it does follow, it is not by virtue of him, or of his office, but
by virtue of Gods blessing, and the mighty operation of his spirit as he
pleases, without which the Minister and his office could have had no virtue at
all to convert sinners unto God, 1 Cor. 3. 6. no more then Peter and John could
heal the lame man, by virtue of any power or holiness that was in them, Act.
3. 12. For otherwise faithful Ministers should not have their labors blessed
for conversion some more and some less* but all in the same measure, inasmuch
as one of them is no more a Minister then another, nor no more in Office then
another, their office being the same, the effect in conversion would be the
same if conversion were by the virtue of their office. The truth it is, the Law
of the Lord, (the whole Word of God) that converts the soul, Psalm. 19. 7. And
the Gospel that is the power of God unto Salvation. Romans 1. 16. And therefore
the conversion of a man to God is to be ascribed to God, and to the Word of his
Grace; and not to the Minister, nor any virtue of his office.

3. But this we do acknowledge, that the sound conversion of sinners,
whenever such a thing comes to pass, does argue that the Instruments of such
conversion are sent of God: God would not so have blessed them, as to convert
any by them, if himself had not sent them at all, Romans 10. 14, 15. Ier. 23. 32.

4. And yet we dare not say, that Gods Word is not made effectual to
conversion, unless the man that speaks it be a Minister, that is to say, a
Church Officer, for the contrary is evident from the Scripture, John 4. 39.
Act. 8. 4. with 11. 19, 20, 21. 1 Cor. 7. 16. They that were scattered abroad
upon the persecution that arose about Steven, were not Church Officers, at
least all of them (for the Apostles who were their chief, if not their only
preaching Officers, were not scattered abroad upon that persecution, but
remained still at Jerusalem, Acts 8. 1.) and yet these men did so preach the
Word of the Lord Jesus to the Jews and the Grecians, that through the good
hand of the Lord that was with them, a great number believed and turned to the
Lord; And the same we say of the woman of Samaria, by whose Testimony of
Christ many of the Samaritans believed on him. To restrain the efficacy of
Gods Word in such sort as to say that none can be converted by it, unless he
that speaks it be a Minister, is to limit the spirit of the Lord, where he
has not limited himself, who is free in working by whom he pleases, and as he
will, 1 Cor. 12. 11. Even as the wind blows where it lists, John 3. 8. and
sometimes does bring to pass great things by weak means, that his own glory
may be the more, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29. If any say, how can these things stand
together, that a man that is no Minister may be an Instrument of conversion,
and yet conversion of sinners argues that the man is sent of God? We answer,
that we must distinguish of sending according to the diverse degrees thereof.
For sometimes it imports no more but such an Act of Gods disposing providence,
whereby men are gifted and enabled for such or such a work, and permitted
thereunto, though they have no command from him for the doing thereof, nor do
it not with a sincere mind in any obedience to God, but for corrupt and
sinister ends of their own. Thus God sent the King of Assyria against the
Jews, Isa. 10. 6. And bands of the Caldees, and bands of other Nations against
Jehojakim, and against Judah, to destroy it, 2 King. 24. 2. And yet they had no
command from him to do this, but sinned grievously in so doing. Thus they that
preached Christ not sincerely, but of envy and strife, to add affliction to
Paul's bands, yet inasmuch as they preached Christ, might be said to be sent of
God, and therefore the Apostle joyed at their preaching, Phil. 1. 15, 16. Thus
Baalam in his Prophecies against the enemies of Israel and for the happy state
of Gods people, might be said to be sent of God, though his heart and ends were
corrupt and sinful. But if men be not only enabled with gifts for such or
such a work, but besides this, have a sincere mind and desire in the using
thereof, to seek the glory of God, and the good of souls, such men may much
more be said to be sent of God, John 7. 18. For these men have not only
abilities and gifts from God, and permission to employ them as the former had
but also his spirit within them, which does set their hearts on right and holy
ends, which the other wanted. And yet if men do want a lawful office of
Ministry, wherein to exercise those gifts or a lawful calling to that office
or exercise, they may in that respect be said not to be sent of God, or not to
be called of him though sent of him, in the first or second respect. Thus in
the Scriptures it is said of some they ran and I sent them not, Ier. 23. 21. I
perceived that God had not sent him, but he pronounced his Prophecies, because
Sanballat and Tobiah had hired him, Neh. 6. 12. And yet doubtless in respect
of Gods disposing providence, he had sent them, as the Scripture witnesses,
that God sends strong delusions and lying Prophets, and unfaithful Shepherds,
2 These. 2. 11. 1 King. 22. 22, 23. Zech. 11. 16. to be a plague unto the Sons
of men, and for trial to his servants, Deuteronomy. 13. 3. 1 Cor. 11. 19. Now let
these distinctions be applied to the case in hand, and we may perceive how, if
a man convert sinners, certainly God sends him; and yet some that are not
called to any office in the Ministry, may through his blessing convert
sinners: A man converts none unless God send him in the first or second sense
and yet he may convert, and not be sent, if sending be taken in the third
sense, that is for a lawful calling into some office in the Church. And we
may add, further a man may be sent in this third sense and yet convert none if
he be not also sent in the first and second respect; that is a man may have a
lawful calling outwardly unto a lawful office in the Church, and yet not
convert sinners, if he want gifts or sincerity of heart, which might be the
case of Judas, and of many wicked Priests in the old Testament: Yea, happily
convert none though he be truly sent in all three respects, as was said before
in the beginning of the Answer to this Quaere. But if comparison be made, we
doubt not, but whilst the Ministry remains incorrupt, God is wont to follow
with a greater blessing the labors of those who have gifts and an office of
Ministry also, then of those who have gifts alone without office. He is
willing, and wonted to honor himself most, where most of his ways are
observed.

Master Parker Polit. Eccles. l. 2. c. 39. etc. 41. observes a difference To 30.
between the Substantialls in Church Polity, and the accessaries or
accidentalls* and circumstantialls: And again, that of circumstances some are
general, and some particular and individual; and so shows that the Church
Polity in regard of the substantialls thereof is prescribed in the Word, and
therefore immutable. According to which distinction we Answer, that if those
words (precisely the same course) mentioned in this Question, be not meant of
particular and individual circumstances, but only of the substantialls or
general circumstances, then for ought we know there is no material point,
either in constitution, or government, wherein the Churches in N. E. (viz. In
the bay, in the jurisdiction of Plymouth, at Connectacute, and Quilipiake) do
not observe the same course. (And sure it is if they do not they ought,
because Christ has left but one way for all Churches, and the same to be
observed to the Worlds end, 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14.) Only, that conformity to the
Lyturgie and Ceremonies in some places, to the Northward, that Anabaptisme at
Providence, and Familisme at Aquidneck* hinders that we cannot say the same of
them, nor of any other in N. E. that concur with them in their unwarrantable
ways* if there be any such, though thanks be to God there is none within this
Jurisdiction.

Who must have liberty to sit down in this Commonwealth To 31.
and enjoy the liberties thereof is not our place to determine, but the
Magistrates who are the rulers and governors of the Commonwealth, and of all
persons within the same. And as for acknowledging a company to be a sister
Church, that shall set up, and practice another form of Church Discipline,
being otherwise in some measure, as you say, approveable, we conceive the
company that shall so do, shall not be approveable therein. For the
Discipline appointed by Jesus Christ for his Churches is not arbitrary, that
one Church may set up and practice one form, and another another form, as
each one shall please, but is one and the same for all Churches, and in all the
Essentialls and Substantialls of it unchangable, and to be kept, till the
appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14. from which place Master Cartwright
observes the perpetuity of Church Government taught by the Apostles, unto the
end of the World, and is plain and large in this point, 1 Rep. p. 177. as is
likewise Mr. Parker Polit. Eccles. l. 2. c. 42. and so forward to the end of
that Book, unto whom we refer you herein. And if that Discipline which we here
practice, be (as we are persuaded of it) the same which Christ has appointed,
and therefore unalterable, we see not how another can be lawful; and therefore
if a company of people shall come hither, and here set up and practice another,
we pray you think not much, if we cannot promise to approve of them in so
doing, especially until we see how approvable the men may be, and what
Discipline it is that they would set up. For should we in such general words
as is there expressed, promise to accept of a company as a Sister Church* that
shall set up and practice another Discipline, and then should be taken at the
utmost extent of our words, we might by this means be bound to accept of a
company of Papists, or Arminians, or Familists, or Anabaptists, as a sister
Church, for there is none of these but something may be found in them, and in
their Discipline, that is in some measure approveable. And yet we pray you
heartily in the Lord, so conceive of us in this passage, that we are far from
making any such comparison, as if your selves were not approved in our
consciences far above the best of such men, yea and above our selves in many
respects.

We have said before in that which we sent you the last year, and upon this
occasion we say it now again, that you are in our hearts (if the Lord would
suffer) to live and dye together: and therefore if this Question were meant of
your selves, or any of you, and a company of godly people joining with you (as
it may be it is, though we cannot certainly say it, because you do not
express so much) we think if you were here, we should gladly accept of you
and your people as a sister-Church, and that you would do the like to ours;
and yet not when you should set up and practice one form of Church Discipline,
and we another, but because we are persuaded if you were here, you would set up
and practice the very same that we do, and not any other: or else if we be
swerving from the rule in any particular (as God knows we are but weak men,
and far from dreaming of perfection in this life) God would by you send in more
light unto us then yet we see, and make you instruments in his hand for
perfecting what is here begun according to his will, for strengthening what is
weak, and reforming what may be found to be amiss: For we trust in the Lord,
that as we are desirous that you might join with us in the ways wherein we
now walk, (which we do not see but they are according to the Rule) so we
should be as willing to receive light from you, and to redress (as God shall
help us) whatsoever by you or any other he may discover to us to stand in need
of Reformation. For which cause among others we do the more earnestly desire,
if it were the Lords will that he might send you hither, nothing doubting but
if you were here, there would be such agreement between you and us, that either
you would approve of the things which we believe and practice, or that we
should approve of what you may show us to be more agreeable to the mind of
Christ: and then there would be no occasion of such a Question, Whether we may
set up and practice another discipline, and yet be accepted as a sister-Church:
but rather of blessing the Lord, when that shall be accomplished in you and us
which is written in the Prophets, I will give them one heart and one way: I
will turn unto the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the
Name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent, Jer. 32. 39. Zeph. 3. 9. We
have confidence in you through the Lord, that you will be none otherwise
minded; but if in any thing ye be otherwise minded God shall reveal even this
unto you, Gal. 5. 10. Phil. 3. 15.

This was answered in the answer to Posit. 1. and 2. sent unto you To 32.
the last year.

FINIS.
AN APOLOGY OF THE CHVRCHES IN NEW ENGLAND FOR CHVRCH-COVENANT. OR, A
Discourse touching the Covenant between God and men, and especially concerning
Church Covenant, that is to say, The Covenant which a Company do enter into
when they become a Church; and which a particular person enters into when he
becomes a member of a Church.

Sent over in Answer to Master BERNARD, in the Year 1639.

And now published for the satisfaction of all who desire resolution in this
point.

LONDON, Printed by T. P. and M. S. for Benjamin Allen.

1643.

A DISCOVRSE TOUCHING THE Covenant between God and Men, and especially
concerning Church Covenant, that is to say, the Covenant which a Company do
enter into when they become a Church, and which a particular person enters into
when he becomes a member of a Church. 1639.
JER. 50. 5. Come let us join our selves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant
that shall not be forgotten.
ALthough that which is foretold in these two Chapters; and namely in the
fourth and fifth verses of this Chapter, was in part fulfilled when the people
of God returned from Captivity in Babylon at the end of seventie years: yet
we must not limit the place to that time only, but may extend it further to
the days of the Gospel, and the spiritual return, not of the Jews only, but
of the Gentiles also, when men shall be converted from Pagan, Antichristian,
Babylonish, or Jewish bondage and captivity, or from slavery to sin, and
self-righteousnesse, and shall be joined to God in the fellowship of his
Church, in the days of the New Testament. For as some passages in this
Scripture were never fully accomplished at the return from the captivity of
the seventie years, and namely this, that the children of Israel and Judah
should return both together: (for the ten tribes returned not at all:) so many
things that literally concerned the Jews were types and figures, signifying
the like things concerning the people of God in these latter days: In which
respect sincere converts are called Jews, Rom 2. 29. and Israelites, Gal. 6.
16. Joh. 1. 47. and our Sacraments are made Antitypes of theirs, 1 Cor. 10. 1,
2, 3. and Rome is called Babylon, Rev. 17. 5. and Papists are called Gentiles,
Rev. 11. 2. and therefore the captivity of Babylon might well be a Type of the
spiritual captivity of Gods people to Antichristian bondage, and their
return from Babylon to Sion, a type of the return of Christians from Romish
slavery to the true Sion, the Christian Church. And this may be added further,
that this place seems not only to be meant of the private or personal
conversion of this or that particular Christian, but also further, of the open
and joint calling of a company, because it is said, they shall come, the
children of Israel and the children of Judah together, and that their saying
shall not be, Let me join, etc. but in the Plural number, Let us join our
selves unto the Lord, so noting the joining of a company together in holy
Covenant with God.

Concerning which Covenant with God, it will not be amiss for the better
understanding of that which follows; first, briefly to show how diversely
Covenant is taken in the Scripture, which sometimes imports generally any firm
appointment or promise of God, when man does not promise unto God any thing
back again: Thus the preserving of Noah in the Arc, and of the world from
being drowned any more by a flood; the interchangeable succession of day and
night; the giving of the Priesthood unto Phineas; the setting forth of the
Shewbread every Sabbath before the Lord, and the giving of the heave offering
unto the Priests, are said to be done by a Covenant, or an everlasting Covenant
of God, Genesis 6. 18. and 9. 9, 10, 11. Jer. 33. 20. Number. 25. 12, 13. Levit. 24.
8. Number. 18. 19. But sometimes Covenant is taken more strictly and properly, for
an agreement which God does make with men, when he promises some blessing unto
men, and binds them to perform some duty back again to him. Taken thus it
has two parts: first, a promise or stipulation of some blessing on Gods part:
secondly, Restipulation or promise, or binding of man unto duty back again on
his part: both these are in those words of the Covenant, I will be to thee a
God, thou shall be to me a people: and so Genesis 17. 1. and v. 7, 8, 9, 10. The
Covenant taken thus is either the Covenant of works, or the Covenant of grace:
And again the Covenant may be considered; first as it is personal, private
and particular, between God and one particular soul, making Covenant with God,
and God with him, either at his first conversion; or at other times; of which
we read 2 Samuel 23. 5. and Psalm. 119, 106. and 66. 13, 14. and 27 8. and Psalm.
119. 7, 8 Secondly, it is general and public of a company jointly together,
of which this Text Jer. 50. 5. seems most properly to speak: as also that
Deuteronomy. 29. 9, 10, etc. and that Exodus 19. 5, 6, and many others: A Covenant
taken thus generally when it respects spiritual blessings, and spiritual
duties, in the Communion of Saints, is that which is called Church Covenant,
which Church Covenant differs not in substance of the things promised from that
which is between the Lord and every particular soul, but only in some other
respects; as first, the one is of one Christian in particular, the other of a
company jointly together. Secondly, if right Order be observed, a man ought not
to enter into Church Covenant, till he be in Covenant with God before, in
respect of his personal estate. Thirdly, The one is usually done in private,
as in a man's Closet between the Lord and his soul, and the other in some
public assembly. Fourthly, The one in these days is of such duties as the
Gospel requires of every Christian as a Christian, the other of such duties as
the Gospel requires of every Church and the members thereof.

Now concerning Church Covenant, two things are to be noted for the better
understanding thereof: first, the description of it: secondly, the use of it,
and the benefit and fruit thereof. For the former it may be thus described,
viz. A solemn and public promise before the Lord, whereby a company of
Christians, called by the power and mercy of God to fellowship with Christ, and
by his providence to live together, and by his grace to cleave together in the
unity of faith, and brotherly love, and desirous to partake together in all
the holy Ordinances of God, do in confidence of his gracious acceptance in
Christ, bind themselves to the Lord, and one to another, to walk together by
the assistance of his Spirit, in all such ways of holy worship in him, and of
edification one toward another, as the Gospel of Christ requires of every
Christian Church, and the members thereof.

In this description, there are comprised six things: First, the general name
of the thing: [ a solemn and public promise] a promise it is, and therefore
it is called, a joining in Covenant here: an entering into Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.
10. Solemn and public, and therefore it is by the children of Israel and the
children of Judah together: and they say, let us join. Secondly, The object
[the Lord, and one another] join our selves to the Lord it is not a promise
only to man, but to the Lord himself, and likewise to one another; for, come
let us join, implies mutual consent together. Thirdly, The Agents or the
qualification of the persons: [ Christians] not Turks, Indians, etc. Saints,
Psalm. 50. 5. 16, 17. [ called to fellowship with Christ] so 1 Cor. 1. 9 else if
they be not united to Christ by faith, they are not fit materials for such a
building as a Church of God, which is the house of the living God, Ephesians. 1. 1.
1 Cor. 1. 2. Phil. 1. 1. Rev. 21. 27. [ By his providence to live together]
else they cannot partake in the Lords Ordinances together as Churches ought to
do, 1 Cor. 14. 23. Act. 14 27. the whole Church comes together in one place [
cleaving together in faith and love] so Act. 4 32. If they differ, namely, in
opinion, or in their affection, and should join in this Covenant, breaches,
factions, rents, and schisms, would be like to be the issue of such joining:
things so unlike would not close nor long hold together, Dan. 2. 43 [ Desirous
to partake in all Ordinances] this should be the ground of their joining in
Covenant together, Psalm. 110. 3. willing: and not pride, nor gain, nor the
like: Fourthly, The Act [ bind themselves] that now they are bound by their
own word and promise, that they may say now, as Psalm. 56. 12. Thy vows are
upon me, or as Number. 30. 2. if he bind his soul with a vow. Fifthly, The matter
promised; [ To walk together in all such ways of worship and mutual
edification, as the Gospel requires of Churches and Church-members] they bind
not themselves to observe any devises of their own, nor inventions of men, but
such things as the word of God requires; neither is it perfect obedience to
the Law, for that were impossible to perform, and presumption to promise; nor
is it only in general the duties of the Gospel, but specially such duties of
worship to God, and edification of one another as concern Church State, which
now they enter into. Sixthly, The manner of performing [ Confidence of Gods
gracious acceptance and assistance through Christ] for in all our ways God
must be acknowledged, Pro. 3. 6. and much more in such special matters of
weight: If men in entering into this Covenant look for acceptance, through any
worth of their own, or promise duty in their own strength, they show
themselves like to the Pharisees, Luke 18. 10, 11. and turn the
Church Covenant into a Covenant of works: and as many as are of the works of
the Law, are under the curse, Gal. 3. 10.

The use and benefit of this Church Covenant, and the fruit thereof, may be
seen in two particulars; first, That this is that whereby a company of
Christians do become a Church: It is the Constituting form of a Church.
Secondly, This is that by taking hold whereof a particular person becomes a
member of a Church, which was constituted before. For the former of these; every
Christian Church must have in it both matter and form, and as the matter by
Gods appointment are visible Saints, or visible believers, Ephesians. 1. 1. 1 Cor.
1. 2. and in the New Testament, only so many as may meet together in one
Congregation: So the form is a uniting, or combining, or knitting of those
Saints together into one visible body, by the band of this holy Covenant. Some
union or band there must be amongst them, whereby they come to stand in a new
relation to God, and one toward another, other then they were in before: or
else they are not yet a Church, though they be fit materials for a Church; even
as soul and body are not a man, unless they be united; nor stones and timber
an house, till they be compacted and conjoined.

Now that a company becomes a Church, by joining in Covenant, may be made good
sundry ways; first, By plain Texts of Scripture; as from Deuteronomy. 29. 1, 10, 11,
12, 13. Ye stand this day all you before the Lord your God, your Captains of
your Tribes, your Elders, your Officers, with all the men of Israel, ver. 10.
That thou should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, ver. 12. and he
may establish thee for a people unto himself, ver. 13. So that here is plain^y
showed, that here was a company, ver. 10. and this company were to be
established to be a people unto the Lord, that is to say, a Church, ver. 13.
And this is done by the peoples entering into solemn Covenant with God, ver.
12. And therefore a company of people do become a Church by entering into
Covenant with God.

This Covenant was not like our Church-Covenants, for it was of all Object. 1
the Nation together; whereas the Church Covenant with us, is of some select
persons, leaving out others.

1. This Objection concerns the matter of a Church, but the Answer.
Covenant is not the material cause of a Church, but the formal cause
thereof: and for this the Text is* plain and express, that by entering into
Covenant with God, a people come to be the Lords people, that is to say, his
Church.

2. If it was of all the people together, the reason was because that Church
was a national Church: now if a national Church becomes a Church by entering
into solemn Covenant with God, then a Congregationall Church becomes a Church
by the same means; for there is no difference between them in this point.

3. Though it was of all the people, we may not say it proves that when we
look at the material cause of a Church, there may be a promiscuous taking in
of all Comers without distinction or separation of the precious from the vile;
for, first, when God took in this Nation to be his people, he separated them
from all the Nations of the earth besides: so that there was a distinction and
separation of some from others. Secondly, this generation was generally a
generation of believers; for it was they that were to enter into the land
within a while after; for they were forty years in the Wilderness* and this
Covenant was made in the last month save one of the last of those forty
years, Deuteronomy. 1. 3. And their carcasses fell not in the Wilderness through
unbelief, as their Fathers did, Number 14. Heb. 3. but entered by faith, and when
they were entered, subdued Kingdoms by their faith, Heb. 11. 33. and served the
Lord all the days of Joshua, and of the Elders that out lived Joshua, Josh. 24
31. As for that which is said of them, ver. 4, 5. of this Chap. that the Lord
had not given them eyes to see, etc. that proves not that they were wholly
hardened in a carnal estate, but only that they were dull and slow of heart to
consider of sundry dispensations of God toward them; for as much is said of
the disciples of Christ, Mar. 8. 17, 18. when doubtless they were not mere
carnal or natural persons.

This people Deuteronomy. 29. could not become the Lords people by entering Object. 2
into solemn Covenant with God, for they were the Lords Church and people
already before this.

1. If they were, yet that was by entering into solemn Covenant Answer.
with God on Mount Sinai, when the Lord had brought them up out of the Land of
Egypt; for then they entered into solemn Covenant with God, and God with them,
and so they bec^me the Lords peculiar people, Exodus 19* 4, 5, 6, 8. etc. If
they were his people before that, yet that also was by Covenant made with them
in the loins of Abraham, when God took him and his seed to be his Church and
people, yet separating Ishmael from Isaac and Es^^ from Jacob, that the
inheritance of the Covenant of God, and of being the Church of God, might rest
in the house of Jacob.

2. Yet it was not without great reason that the Lord should now establish them
by solemn Covenant to be a people to himself, because the Nation had been
much degenerated from the spirit and ways of Abraham in Egypt, and had broken
that Covenant by their Idolatries there, Ezekiel. 20. 7, 8. And the Covenant made
in Sinai or Hore^ when they were come out of Egypt, they had also broken by
their Idolatries in the Wilderness, Ezekiel 20. 13, 16. for which causes, and the
like, the Lord consumed that generation, that they never entered into the Land,
Josh. 5. 4, 6. And therefore now when their posterity and children were ready
to enter in, the Lord entered into Covenant with them, and thereby established
them to be his people, their Fathers being cut off for breaking the Covenant.
But still it was by Covenant that both Fathers first, and children afterward
became a Church and people unto God; and when this generation were entered into
the Land, their Covenant made before between God and them, was confirmed by
Circumcision, Josh. 5. 3. 7. they being not Circumcised before.

But this Covenant was of the whole Church with God, and therefore Object. 3
not like our Church-Covenants, which are between the Church and the members,
concerning watchfulness over one another, and the like.

Our Church-Covenants are with the Lord himself, as was Answer.
showed before in the description thereof. For watchfulness and duties of
edification one toward another, are but branches of the Lords Covenant, being
duties commanded by the Law: and so it was with that people of Israel, who when
they promised and Covenanted to walk in all the ways of God; in all his
statutes and commandments and judgments, they promised these duties of love
and watchfulness and edification one toward another, because these were
duties commanded and required of God, Lev. 19: 17. Deuteronomy. 29 8. the neglect
whereof in the matter of Achan was the sin of all the Congregation* and
brought judgment upon them all, Josh. 7. 11, 12. Yea by this Covenant they
were bound to duties toward them that were not then present, but children
afterward to be borne, and proselytes, that afterward should be added to them,
ver. 14, 15. Like as our Church-Covenants are with them that now are, and that
hereafter shall become members of the same Church. When Jehojada made a
Covenant between the King and the people, 2 King. 11. 17. that Covenant was but
a branch of the Lords Covenant with them all, both King and people: for the
King promised but to Rule the people righteously, according to the will of God:
and the people to be subject to the King so Ruling. Now these duties of the
King to them, and of them to the King, were such as God required in his
Covenant, both of him and them: and so it is in Church Covenant, the duties of
the Church to the members, and the members to the Church, and one another, are
no other but such as the Gospel and the Covenant of grace requires both of the
Church and the members of it in their several places.

But this place of Deuteronomy. 29. is not sufficient to prove a Church Covenant
Object. 4
in these days: because it is in the Scriptures of the old Testament, for what
soever must be used in the days of the New Testament, must be proved from the
Scriptures of the New Testament, or else it is to be laid aside.

1. The Church Covenant may be proved from the New Testament Answer.
also* as will afterward appear.

2. But suppose there were not pregnant places for it in the New Testament, yet
it is not enough to prove the same unlawful: for whatsoever Ordinance of the
old Testament is not repealed in the New Testament, as peculiar to the Jewish
Paedagogie, but was of moral and perpetual equity, the same binds us in
these days* and is to be accounted the revealed will of God in all ages,
though it be not particularly and expressly mentioned in the writings of the
New Testament, else how shall we prove it unlawful for a man to marry his
Sister, or his Aunt? How shall we prove it warrantable and necessary for
Magistrates to punish Sabbath-breaking, blasphemy, and Idolatry? How shall we
prove it lawful to apply the seal of Gods Covenant unto Infants? or to admit
women to eat of the holy things; for the Scriptures of the New Testament do
speak little in these cases; only the Scriptures of the Old Testament do
give direction, and light about them, Lev* 18. and 19. Neh. 13. 15. etc. 2 Chronicles. 15. 16. and 2 King. 23. Genesis 17. 2. and Exodus 12. 4. 6. And the New
Testament has nothing to the contrary, and they are all according to moral
equity and reason, and therefore they are to be observed from the Scriptures
of the Old Testament, as the revealed will of God, though there were nothing
expressly for them in the New. And the same we say of the particular in hand.
For, that a company should be combined together into one body, in way of
Government and subjection, by way of mutual free Covenant; as men do when
they enter into Church Estate, nothing is more natural or agreeable to moral
equity; nay, it implies a contradiction in the very name of liberty or
freedom, that freemen should take upon them authority or power over free men
without their free consent, and voluntary and mutual Covenant or Engagement.
And therefore seeing this Covenant is not repealed in the Scriptures of the New
Testament, the Scriptures of the Old are sufficient warrant for it.

Another Scripture to prove the same, is Deuteronomy. 26. 16, 17, 18. with Deuteronomy. 27.
9. This day the Lord has commanded thee to do these Statutes and Judgments*
thou shall therefore keep and do them, etc. Thou have avouched the Lord this
day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his Statutes, etc.
And the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people; Take heed
and hearken, O Israel, this day thou art become the people of the Lord thy God.
This Scripture plainly shows these things: 1. That here was the making of a
Covenant between God and man; for that avouching of God to them, and them to
God, was the making of Covenant, ver. 17, 18. 2. This was not of one person,
but of a company together, the whole people of Israel, 26. 18. and 27. 9. 3
Here is the effect of this Covenant, that thereby they become the Lords people,
ver. 9. So that when a company do enter into holy Covenant with God, they
become thereby the Lords people, that is to say, his Church. So Ezech. 16. 8.
proves the same likewise: I entered into Covenant with thee, says the Lord, and
thou becam^st mine. Here also is the making of Covenant between the Lord and
men; and this Covenant was not personal, but of a company; for it was with
Jerusalem, ver. 2. which was a whole City; it was with them that were
multiplied as the bud of the field, ver. 7. and it was with them that did
prosper into a kingdom, ver. 13. and therefore not meant only of any one
particular person: And by this Covenant they became the Lords; that is, the
Lords Church and people; for it is expressly said, I entered into Covenant with
thee, and thou becamest mine. So that when a company enter into Covenant with
God, and God with them, they become thereby the Lords Church and people.
Likewise Ezekiel. 20. 37. I will cause you to pass under the rod; and I will
bring you into the bond of the Covenant. In which place, there is first mention
of an holy Covenant. Secondly, This was not of one person, but of a company,
the whole house of Israel, ver. 30. 39. Thirdly, And this Covenant is called a
Bond, because it is by Covenant that a people are bound, and tied, and knit
together, as one Church, all of them unto the Lord, and one unto another; So
that the Covenant is the bond of union, by which a company are so combined and
united, as that they become a Church. It is also observable, how the Lord
before he would bring them into this bond of the Covenant, he would cause them
to pass under the rod; by which phrase, as Junius upon the place well
observes, is meant trial and probation; drawn from the manner of Shepherds
or owners of Cattle, who went among their sheep, or other cattle with a rod,
and therewith pointed out such as were for the Lords holy use, as Lev. 27. 32.
And so hereby is noted that God would not in the days of the Gospel have men
to be brought into his Church hand over head, but he would first cause them to
pass under the rod of due trial and probation; and then such as upon trial
were found to be holy for God, or meet matter for his Church, should solemnly
enter into Covenant with God, and that Covenant should be the bond that should
combine them, and knit them together into one, that so they that were many
particular persons, should all become one body, that is to say, a Church.

And so much of the first Argument drawn from plain Texts of Scripture.

A second Argument may be taken from the Titles that are given Argu. 2.
to the Church; as first, that the Church is said to be married or espoused
unto Christ, Jer. 2. 2. and 3. 14. 2 Cor. 11. 2. From whence the Argument may
be formed thus: If every Church becomes a Church by being married or espoused
unto Christ, then a company becomes a Church by way of Covenant: But the former
is true, therefore the latter is true also.

The Assumption, that a Church becomes a Church by being married unto Christ,
is plain from the former Scriptures, where the Church of Israel, and the
Church of Corinth, in regard of their entering into Church Estate, are said to
be espoused and married unto Christ, as a loving and chaste Virgin to one
husband. Which spiritual marriage between Christ and his Church, is also
taught in the type of the marriage between King Solomon and Pharoahs daughter,
Psalm. 45.

The Consequence of the Proposition is plain in reason; for there is no
marriage but by way of Covenant; no woman becomes a man's wife, but by way of
bestowing her self in Covenant upon such a man: neither does a man become an
husband, but by the same means; and therefore the Scripture speaking of the
violation of marriage, calls it a violation of Covenant, Prove. 2. 17.

Christ has but one wife or Spouse, Cant. 6 9. Object. 1.


The Catholic Church indeed is but one; viz* the whole company Answer.
of Gods Elect in heaven, in earth, dead, now living, and not yet borne: But as
there is the Church-Catholique, which is but one; so there are particular and
visible Churches, which are in number many; and therefore the Scripture speaks
of Churches, 2 Cor. 8. 1. 19. Gal. 1. 2. Of the Churches of the Gentiles, Romans
16. 4. Of seven Churches, Rev. 1. 4. Of all Churches, 1 Cor. 14. 33. and 7. 17.
Rev. 2. 23.

But if every particular Church be the wife of Christ, how many hundred Obj. 2.
wives should he have?

1. If the Church of Israel, Jer. 2. 2. the Church of Corinth, 2 Answ.
Cor. 11. 2. The Jewish Church, Rev. 19. 7. be the Spouse and wife of Christ,
there is no reason but others should be the same also, especially seeing there
is no particular Church, but in respect of their Church estate, they may
decline and go a whoring from Christ, and that shows that they were first
espoused to him; for no woman can be said to go a whoring from a man, if she
were never married, nor espoused to him at all.

2. This that seems an absurdity, and were a sinful practice among men, in
respect of Christ, is a certain truth, and no dishonor unto him at all, to
have more Spouses then one upon earth, many spiritual Spouses. Men cannot give
themselves wholly and entirely to many as Christ can. Every faithful soul is
espoused and married unto Christ; and in that respect he has not only many
hundred but many thousand, yea many millions of spiritual Spouses.

But this spiritual marriage is between Christ and the Church, But Obj. 3.
the Church Covenant is between the Church and the members, and therefore this
marriage does not prove the Church Covenant. 1. In some sort there may be said
to be a marriage between the Answer.
Church and the members, viz. in respect of that dear love and affection, that
ought to be between them; and therefore it is said, As a young man marries a
Virgin, so shall the children of the Church be married to the Church, Isa. 62.
5.

2. But properly the marriage is between Christ and the Church, and so is the
Covenant also, so far as therein they give up themselves to Christ as unto an
head and Lord; as a woman in the Covenant of marriage does give up her self
unto her husband; And the performance of such duties as the Church and the
member owe one unto another, is a branch of that marriage-Covenant, wherein
they are tied to Christ; for Christ himself in his Covenant requires, not
only that they should give up themselves to him, but also that they should
perform these duties one unto another. And accordingly it is said of the
Churches in Macedonia, that they gave up themselves first to the Lord, and then
to us by the will of God, 2 Cor. 8. 5. True it is, they do also bind
themselves by Covenant one unto another, but in that respect the Covenant is
properly a brotherly Covenant; like that 1 Samuel 20 8. Amos 1. 9. because there
the engagement is to one another as brethren, fellow members, and
fellow-helpers, and not as to one head or Lord, as it is in respect of Christ,
and therefore in that respect it is not so properly a marriage-Covenant as it
is in respect of Christ: though duties to one another are promised in their
Covenant with one another, and also in their Covenant with Christ. In brief
thus: They promise unto Christ duties to him, and duties to one another
according to him: and so their Covenant is a marriage-Covenant with Christ:
They promise also to one another, duties to one another, and so it is a
brotherly Covenant.

Another Title given to the Church (which also proves that a Church is made by
Covenant) is the Title of a City, or City of God, Psalm. 87. 3. and 48 1. 8.
and 122. 3. Ephesians 2. 19. The Argument lies thus* If a true Church be a City
of God, then a Church becomes a Church by Covenant: But every true Church is a
City of God. Ergo.

The Assumption is proved by the Scriptures forealledged. The Consequence of
the Proposition is plain in reason, for every City is united by some Covenant
among themselves, the Citizens are received into jus Civitatis, or right of
City privileges, by some Covenant or Oath; And therefore it is so likewise in
this City of God the Church; and men become Citizens of the Church by solemn
Covenant.

The third Argument may be drawn from the means of reforming Argu. 3.
and restoring a Church when it is corrupted, which is by entering into Covenant
a new with God, 2 Chronicles. 15 10. and 29. 10. and Neh. 9. 38. and 10. 28, 29.
Jer. 50. 4, 5. The reason may be taken thus: If a Church decayed is to be
restored and reformed by renewing Covenant with God, then it was instituted and
erected at the first by way of Covenant: The reason of which Consequence is,
because abuses and corruptions are to be reformed by bringing things back to
the first Institution: Thus Christ reformes the abuses of marriage, by bringing
them to the first Institution of that Ordinance; From the beginning it was not
so, Mat. 19 8. And thus Paul reformeth the Abuses of the Lords Supper, by
telling them what was the first Institution thereof, 1 Cor. 11. 23, etc. And
thus the Lord Jesus calling on the declining Church of Ephesus for reformation,
bids her remember from whence she is fallen, and repent and do her first
works, Rev. 2. 5.

Now the Assumption is plain from the Texts above alleged, that at the
reforming of a Church, there is to be a renewing of Covenant; and thence it
follows, that at the first erecting of a Church, there was the making of a
Covenant with God, for else this renewing of Covenant would not have been the way
to reform it.

The fourth Argument is taken from that which does dissolve Argu. 4.
a Church, which is the dissolving or breaking of the Covenant, Zach. 11. 9,
10, 14. If dissolving the Covenant be that which does dissolve the Church, then
the making of Covenant is that which constitutes a Church. The reason of the
Consequence is plain, because otherwise the Covenant might be dissolved and
the Church stand still, if it were not the making of the Covenant that did
constitute the Church: But if dissipating stones in a building do dissolve the
house, then the compacting and conjoyning of them is that which makes the
house; If separation of soul and body be that which destroys the man, that
then we say he is not: it must needs be the uniting of them, that did
constitute and make the man: and so it is in this case. And that dissolving the
Covenant is that which dissolves a Church, is plain from the Text alleged,
Zach. 11. where the breaking of the two staves, of beauty and bands, that is,
the unchurching of the Jews, is interpreted to be the breaking of the Covenant
that God had made with that people, and the brotherhood that was between Judah
and Israel.

The fifth Argument is taken from the distinction which God Argu. 5.
has appointed amongst Churches, and the confounding of all Churches into one,
if there be not this Covenant to distinguish them. If Churches be distinct
Societies, and may not be confounded, then Churches are compacted and combined
by Covenant: But the former is true. Ergo.

That Churches are distinct Societies, is plain in the Scripture, where we
have mention of many Churches in one Country or Province, Gal. 1. 1. 1 These.
2. 14. Of seven Churches in Asia, Rev. 1. 4. and of all the Churches, 1 Cor.
14. 33. Rev. 2. 23. Ephesus is not Smyrna, nor Smyrna is not Thyatira, nor
either of them Pergamus, but each one distinct of themselves, having Officers
of their own, which did not belong to others: virtues of their own for which
others are not praised, corruptions of their own, for which others are not
blamed; If it were not thus, then when Lacdicea is condemned for
lukewarmenesse, or Ephesus for declining, all the rest should be reproved also:
And when Philadelfia is praised, all the rest should be praised also, which we
see is otherwise. Now from hence the Consequence is certain, that therefore
they are combined by some Covenant each one amongst themselves; for there is
nothing else without this that will sufficiently distinguish them. The Spirit of
God and Faith in their hearts, is common to all Christians under heaven, and in
heaven also, and therefore this is not the thing that makes distinction. Nor is
it habitation in the same Town together, for that may be common to such
Christians as are not of this Church, and usually is to many that are no
Christians. As it is with Companies in London; as the Company of Goldsmiths,
etc. that many others dwell in the same Town with them, yea it may be in the
same street that are not of their Company: and therefore it is not merely
habitation that does distinguish them from others, but some combination and
agreement amongst themselves; So it is not habitation in the same Town that
distinguishes Churches, and Church Members from other men, but their mutual
agreement and combination and joining themselves together in an holy Covenant
with God.

If the Spirit of God and Faith in their hearts cannot distinguish one Object.
Church from another, because these are common to them all, then how can
Covenant distinguish them, since all Churches are joined by Covenant one as well
as another?

It is not a Covenant simply or a Covenant in general that does Answer.
constitute a Church, or distinguish one Church from another, but a Covenant
with application and appropriation to these persons. Even as it is in marriage,
though all married couples be united by Covenant, and a Covenant wherein one
couple promises the same duties that another couple does, yet a Covenant with
application and appropriation of the duties covenanted to this man and this
woman in particular, such a Covenant is the very thing that make a couple, man
and wife together, and gives them mutual power over each other, as husband and
wife, and puts a distinction between them and all other men and women in the
world. And so it is in this case; a Covenant to perform Church-duties with
application and appropriation to such persons, is the very thing that
constitutes a Church, and distinguishes one Church from another.

And thus much concerning the former of the two particulars, to show the use of
Church Covenant, viz. that it is that whereby a company do become a Church.

The second particular is this, that taking hold of the Covenant, or joining in
it, is that which makes a particular person a member of a Church. And this
follows upon the former, and that may be the first Argument to prove it.

If joining in Covenant be that which makes a company to become Argu. 1.
a Church, then taking hold of that Covenant is requisite to make a particular
person become a member of the Church: But the first is true, as has been
showed before; Therefore the second is true also: If compacting and conjoyning
of stones and pieces of Timber be, that that makes an house, then a particular
stone cannot become a part of that house, till it be compacted and con^oyned to
the rest: But the former is true, even in the Church of God, which is the
spiritual Spouse and City of God, living stones, Christians, believers must
be compacted together, and builded up together, Ephesians. 2. 21. 22. Psalm. 12^ 3.
and therefore the latter is true also, that a particular Christian becomes a
member of the Church, a part of that building by being combined with the rest.

A second Argument may be drawn from the Scripture, Isa. 56. Argu. 2.
3, 6, 7. Let not the son of the stranger, that has joined himself to the
Lord, speak, saying, the Lord has utterly separated me from his people, etc.
The sons of the strangers that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him,
etc. and take hold of my Covenant, even them will I bring to my holy mountain,
and make them joyful in my house of Prayer, etc. Concerning which Scripture,
note three things to the present purpose. First, That these strangers were
members of Christ, true believers, joined to God by Faith; for it is said, they
have joined themselves to the Lord, v. 3 and v. 6. that they loved the name of
the Lord, served him, and kept his Sabbaths, v. 6. and yet for all this they
were not as yet joined as members of the visible Church, for if they had been
joined, there would have been no cause for such a complaint, the Lord has
separated me from his people, v. 3. Besides, bringing them into the Church as
members, and granting them the privilege of members, is promised as a reward
and blessing upon this their joining to the Lord by faith and obedience, v. 7.
And therefore it is not the same, but a distinct thing from it; the one being
promised as a reward and blessing upon the other. Secondly, The Lord promises
that he will make them members of his Church: Them will I bring to my holy
mountain, and make them joyful in my house of Prayer. Thirdly, That among
other things requisite to make them members, this was one, viz. the taking hold
of that Covenant which was between the Church of Israel and God, v. 6. So that
hence we may gather, that men may be members of Christ, joined to the Lord by
faith and love, and yet for the present not be members of the visible Church:
And that when God is so gracious to true believers, as to make them members of
his visible Church, it is requisite that they join in Covenant before.

But might not faith in Christ, believing in heart on the God of Israel, Object.
be all the taking hold of the Covenant that is here meant.

Not so, but over and above that, here is also meant their open Answer.
profession of their Faith in the God of Israel, and open binding of themselves
by Covenant to all such duties of faith and obedience, as God required of the
Church of Israel, and the members thereof. Now distinctly take the Answer to
this Objection in three or four particular Propositions. First, There was a
Covenant between the Church of Israel and God, Exodus 19. 5, 6, 7, 8. Ezekiel 16.
8. Deuteronomy. 29. 10. etc. Secondly, This Covenant was mutual; not only a promise
on Gods part to be their God, and to take them for his people, but also
reciprocally on their part to give up themselves unto God to be his people, and
to do the duty of people to their God; The Covenant is not merely to receive
from God, and promise nothing back again to him; nor does God bind himself
therein, and leave men at liberty, but it is mutual on both parts, as these
Scriptures declare; Genesis 17. 1. Exodus 197. 8. Deuteronomy. 5. 27. and 26. 16, 17. Hos.
2. 23. and Zach. 13. 9. Thirdly, Hereupon it follows, that if men had not
promised, and also performed, in some measure of truth, the duties of Faith and
obedience unto God, they had not taken hold of the Covenant, but had
discovenanted themselves, notwithstanding all the promises of God unto their
Fathers or others. Thus though God promised Abraham to be a God to him, and to
his seed in their generations, Genesis 17. 7. yet the Ishmaelites and Edomites
descending from Abraham, were discovenanted by not promising nor performing
those duties of Faith and obedience, which God required on the peoples part:
when a Covenant contains promises on Gods part, and duties also on man's, he
does not take hold of the Covenant that takes one part, and leaves another.
Fourthly, To believe what God promised in the Covenant for his part, and to
promise in a private way the duties of obedience on man's part, was not
sufficient to make these strangers members of the Church, but they must do it
openly and in the view of the Church, else the Church could have had no warrant
to have admitted such into their Fellowship, if their faith and obedience had
not been visibly professed, Exodus 12. 43. 48 2 Chronicles. 23. 19.

And in as much as the Covenant was mutual, when these strangers did manifest
their taking hold of the Covenant, they manifested and professed both Faith and
obedience, both that they believed what God promised, and that they would be
obedient to what he required; If any should have claimed Church Fellowship,
saying, I believe the promises, but would not bind himself to any duties of
Evangelicall obedience, this had been a taking hold of the Covenant by the
halves, a taking of one part of it in seeming and pretense, and a leaving of
another; but it would not have been sufficient to have brought a man into the
fellowship of the church: Such of the Congregation of Israel as would not come
to Jerusalem to enter into Covenant, were to be separated from the Church in
the days of Ezra, Ezra 10. 8. And therefore such as being strangers should
refuse to enter into it, could not be admitted into the Church; So that the
taking hold of Gods Covenant, which is there required to make these strangers
members of the Church, is a believing in heart on the God of Israel, and an
open profession that they did believe, and likewise a promise of obedience or
subjection unto the God of Israel, and an open professing of such obedience and
subjection; and that is the joining in Covenant which we stand for, before a
man can be a member of a Church, even an open profession of Faith and of
Obedience.

A third Argument is taken from those Scriptures which show Argu. 3.
that men become members by being added to the Church, or being joined to them,
Act. 2. 47. and 5. 13. and 9. 26. If men become members of the Church by being
added or joined, then joining in Covenant (or professing of subjection to the
Gospel or Covenant of God) is that whereby a man becomes a member of a Church:
But the former is true, as appears by the Scriptures forementioned, and
therefore the latter is true also.

But all the doubt in this Argument will be concerning the consequence of the
Major Proposition; but that may be made good by this reason, and the
confirmation of it, viz. that a man cannot be added or joined to the Church by
any other means without this joining in Covenant. The truth of which Assertion
will appear by showing the insufficiency of all other means, without this
joining in Covenant, and that may be done in Answer to the Objections ensuing.

When men were added to the Church, it may be, no more is meant Object. 1.
but that God did convert them and work Faith in their hearts, and that
converting of them was the adding of them to the Church.

This cannot be all; for, first, Saul was converted and had faith Answer.
wrought in his heart, and yet he was not at the first received for a member of
the Church at Jerusalem (though he assayed to be joined unto them,) till they
were better satisfied in his spiritual estate by the testimony of Barnabas,
Act. 9. 26, 27, 28. And those strangers, Isa. 56. (as was said before) were
joined to the Lord by being converted, and having Faith wrought in their
hearts, and yet they do lament it with grief, that they were not joined as
members to the visible Church: The Lord has separated me from his people, say
they, ver. 3. The old saying is true concerning the visible Church, There are
many wolves within, and many sheep without. Secondly, Those that were joined
were believers before they joined; for it is said, diverse were added, ver. 14.
Thirdly, Those that were added to the Church, were added and joined to them by
such an act as others durst not put forth, Act. 5. 13. Of the rest durst no man
join unto them, and therefore it was not by the irresistible act of God in
converting of them, but by some voluntary act of their own choice and consent;
for Gods converting grace depends not upon man's daring, or not daring to
receive it. If to be joined be no more but to be converted, then when it is
said, Some durst not be joined, the meaning should be, they durst not be
converted, nor suffer Faith to be wrought in them; which is gross
Arminianisme, suspending the converting grace of God upon the free will of the
creature. Fourthly, And as this joining which others durst not do, cannot be
meant of being converted; So if it be well considered, what the thing was
wherein they durst not join, it may appear that it was nothing else but this,
that they durst not agree, and engage themselves to be of their body and
society; that is, they durst not join in Covenant with them. For it cannot be
meant of dwelling in the Town with them, for this they both durst do and did:
nor is it only of joining to hear the Word in their assembly, for this also
they durst do, and many did it in great multitudes, so that many by hearing
the Word became believers, and were added to the Lord both of men and women,
ver. 14. at this very time when it is said of some they durst not join unto
them: Nor is it of joining to them in affection, or approbation of their way,
for this they also durst do and did express so much in magnifying and
commending them, when yet they durst not join unto them, ver. 13. Which
magnifying of them does imply that they heard their doctrine, and saw their
practice, and approved it, and highly commended them for the same: Wherefore
seeing this joining, which some durst not do, cannot be meant of being
converted, nor of joining in habitation, nor of joining in affection, nor in
hearing the Word in their Assembly, nor of approbation, and expressions that
way, it remains that it must be meant of joining in that near relation of
Church Fellowship amongst them, so as to be engaged by voluntary consent and
agreement to be members of their Church. Fifthly, If joining to the Church, were
no more but to be converted, then he that were converted were joined as a
member of every visible Church throughout the world, which were a great
confusion of that Order, and distinction of Churches, which the Lord has
appointed.

Men may be joined to the Church, in hearty affection and love, and Obj. 2.
yet without any Covenant.

True, but this will not make them members of that Church, Answ.
for then Saul was a member of the Church at Jerusalem, before he was joined a
member, for he was joined to them in hearty affection before, and therefore
assayed to join as a member; and so were they that durst not join, Act. 5.
13. yea then a man should be a member of many Churches, yea of all Christian
Churches in the world; for he is to love them, and bear hearty affection to
them all; The true members of the Churches in England are united in hearty
affection, to the Churches in Scotland, in Holland, in France, in New England,
etc. And yet they are not members of all these Churches, nor subject to their
censures as members are.

But the reason of that is because they do not dwell among them in Obj. 3.
the same Town.

Neither would habitation with them in the same Town, make Answer.
a man a member of the Church there, if there be no more then so. Suppose Saul
to have dwelt in the same house before his conversion in which he dwelt after,
which is not unpossible nor unlikely; yet we see he was no member of the Church
at Jerusalem, before his conversion, no nor of some time after, though he might
have dwelt in an house in the midst of the Christians, and Churchmembers there.
The members of the Dutch and French Churches in London, or other Towns in
England, are not members of the English-Congregations or Churches, no more then
the English are of theirs, and yet they dwell promiscuously together in the
same Street of the same Town. Towne-dwelling would not make a man a freeman
of a Company in London, or some other Corporation; for many others dwell in the
Town with them; yea it may be in the same street, that are not free of their
Company, and so it is in this case.

But the reason why such as dwell in Town with the Church, are Object. 4.
not members thereof, may be, because they frequent not their. Assemblies.

Idiots and Infidells might come into the public meetings among Answ.
the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 14. 23, 24, 25. yet Idiots and Infidells were not
therefore members of the Church. And Saul after his conversion might have come
in among the Church in time of public duties, and have seen and heard all
that they had done: yet this would not have made him of one body with them.
Some Indians, Moors, and other natural persons come into our meetings in
New England, some of their own accord, and others by the Command or Counsel
of their Masters and Governors yet no man can say, that all these are hereby
made Church Members. Wherefore seeing neither conversion, nor loving affection,
nor cohabitation, nor coming into their meetings, does join a man as a member
of the visible Church (for some men have all these, and yet are not members,
and others are sometimes members of the visible Churches, and yet want some of
these, are hypocrites and want sound conversion) it remains therefore that as
sound conversion makes a man fit matter for a Church; So profession of his
Faith, and of his subjection to the Gospel, and the Churches approbation, and
acceptance of him (which is the sum of Church Covenant) is the formal cause
that gives him the being of a member.

But joining does not always signify joining in Covenant; Philip joined Object.
5.
to the Eunnuchs chariote, and dust to men's feet, Act. 8. 29. and Luke 10, 11.
and yet there was no Covenant, and therefore men may join to the Church
without any Covenant.

The word indeed may express any close joining, whether natural, Answ.
(as the branch is joined to the Vine, or an arm or other member to the body)
or artificial, as when two sticks were joined to become one in Ezekiels hand,
Ezekiel. 37. Or when Carpenters or Masons do join pieces of stone or Timber
together, to make one house, Neh. 4. 6. Ezr. 4. 12. but is not only the force
of the word that is stood upon. But when joining is used to express such
joining, wherein a man voluntarily takes on him a new relation, there it
always implies a Covenant, whether the relation be moral and civil, or
religious and Ecclesiastical: We speak of voluntary relation, for there are
natural relations, as between parents and children: and these need no
Covenant, there is no Covenant to make a man a Parent, or a child; There are
also violent relations, as between Conqueror and Captives, and in these there
is no Covenant neither; but others are voluntary, and these always imply a
Covenant, and are founded therein, whether they be moral and civil (as
between husband and wife, Pro. 2. 17. between Master and servants, Luke 15. 15.
between Prince and subject, between Partners in Trade, 2 Chro. 20. 35, 36, 37.
where the Covenant or agreement is, that men shall bare such a share of
charges, and receive such a share of profits:) or religious, as between
Minister and people, between the Church and the members: all these are done by
way of Covenant. A man cannot join himself to a woman as her husband, but by
way of Covenant: A man cannot join himself to another as a servant, or
apprentise, but by way of Covenant; And so may we say of all the rest; nor into
any body corporate, but by the same way and means. If men be united into a body
politic or incorporate, a man cannot be said to be joined to them by mere
hearty affection, unless withal he joins himself unto them by some
Contract or Covenant. Now of this nature is every particular Church, a body
incorporate, 1 Cor. 12. 27. Ye are the body of Christ, etc. and has power to
cast out, 1 Cor. 5. 13. and to forgive and receive in Penitents, 2 Cor. 2. 7. 8
as a body incorporate; and therefore he that will join unto them, must do it
by way of Covenant or Agreement; and so this Answer to this Objection, may be a
fourth Argument to prove the point in hand, that joining in Covenant is that
which makes a man, a member of a Church.

All voluntary relations, all relations which are neither natural Argu. 4.
nor violent, are entered into by way of Covenant.

But he that joins into a Church as a member, or enters into a Church, does
take upon him such a relation; Therefore joining* to a Church as a member, is
by way of Covenant.

A fifth Argument may be drawn from the power which all Argu. 5.
Churches, Officers and members, have over all their members in the Lord. If
all Churches, Officers, and members, have power in the Lord over all their
members, then joining in Covenant is necessary to make a man a member of a
Church, but the former is true, therefore the latter is true also.

The Assumption in this Argument, that all Churches have power over their
members, is proved from 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. 13. where the Apostle reproves the
Corinthians for suffering the Incestuous man amongst them, and commands them to
deliver him to Satan, and cast him out from amongst them. Now this he would not
have done, if they had had no power over him, or if there had been any room
for them to say, we have nothing to do with him, we have no power over him.
And the same is prooved in other Scriptures also; as, Mat. 18. 17. Psalm. 149.
6. 7, 8, 9.

And the Consequence of the Major Proposition, viz. that then members do
engage themselves by Covenant, is proved by this reason; That Churches have no
power over such as have not engaged themselves by Covenant, and committed power
unto them, by professing to be subject to all the Ordinances of Christ amongst
them.

The truth whereof may appear by two Reasons:

First, Because all Christians have power and right, jure divino, to choose
their own Officers to whom they commit their souls, Act. 6. and 1. and 14.
23. where the word (...), imports choosing by Election: and so the word is used
and translated, 2 Cor. 8. 19. he was chosen by the Churches, etc. It is not
ministerial gifts that makes a man a Minister to every Church, nor investeth
him with spiritual power over them, nor though he dwell amongst them, unless
they call him, and he accept of that call: And as they have power to choose
their Officers, so likewise to choose their brethren according to God, Romans 14.
1. Now if they have power to choose their Officers and brethren, then none can
have power over them as Officers and brethren, without their own consent, and
whom they never chose, nor promised by any Covenant or Engagement to be subject
to the Lord.

Secondly, If the Church should exercise any Act of Churchpower over such a man
as never entered into Covenant with them (suppose to Excommunicate him for
whoredom or drunkenness, or the like) the man might protest against their
Act, and their Sentence, as Coram non judice, and they could not justify their
proceedings, if indeed there have passed no Covenant or Engagement between him
and them. If he shall say, you have nothing to do to pass Sentence or Censure
upon me, I am none of your Church, but of another Church; Suppose in Holland,
in France, etc. and I am only here now for Merchandise sake, or upon some
other occasion: what shall they say to stop his mouth, if there never passed
any Covenant between him and them.

But Ministers have power over the people by the word of God, Object.
Heb. 13. 17. 1 These. 5. 12. 1 Timothy 5. 17. and not by men's engaging themselves
by Covenant.

But what is it that makes men Ministers to such a people, Officers Answer.
to such a Church, or makes them sheep of my flock? Is it not those
Scriptures that makes every man a Pastor, or Teacher, or Ruler to a people,
unless they call him to that Office; and then in so doing they Covenant and
Engage themselves to be subject to him in the Lord, and then those Scriptures
take hold on them. One might as well say, it is not the Covenanting of a wife
to her husband that gives him power over her, but the Word of God; For as the
Word of God commands people to obey their Ministers, so it commands wives to be
subject to their husbands, Ephesians. 5. 22. And yet all men know, a man cannot
take this woman for his* wife but by Covenant. So that if she once makes her
self a wife by her own voluntary Covenant, then the word of God takes hold on
her, and binds her to do the duties of a wife: but if she* has made no
Covenant, the man has no power over her as her husband, neither is she his
wife; So if men once make themselves members of such a Church, sheep of such a
man's flock, by their own voluntary Covenant, then the word of God takes hold
of them, and binds them to do the duties of members to their fellow-brethren,
and of people to their Pastors or Ministers. But if they never chose such a
man to be their Minister, nor Covenanted to be subject to him in the Lord, he
then can have no power over them as a Minister unto them, because they have
right to chose their own Ministers.

A sixth Argument may be taken from the distinction that is Argu. 6.
between members, and not members. If there be by the word of God a
distinction, between members of the Church and such as are no members, then
joining in Covenant is necessary to the being of a member; but the former is
true, as appears 1 Cor. 5. 12. Some are within, and may be judged by the
Church, and others are without, and may not* and therefore the latter is true
also. And the reason of the Consequence is because there is nothing else
without this joining in Covenant, that can sufficiently distinguish them; It is
not Faith and Grace in their hearts, for some men are members of the visible
Church, and yet have no Grace, and others may have Grace, and yet be no
members, and therefore this is not the thing that does distinguish them, nor is
it affection, nor cohabitation, nor every approbation of the Word of God, and
the ways of his Church, nor coming into their Assemblies to hear the Word;
But these things were touched before, and therefore may be here the more
briefly passed over.

And so much shall suffice to have spoken of the second particular, concerning
the use of Church Covenant, that it is by joining therein that a particular
person becomes a member of a Church.

But here it will be needful to remove sundry Objections, which may seem to
some to be of great weight against Church Covenant, that so by the removing of
them, the truth may be the more cleared, to fuller satisfaction, if it be the
will of God.

Church Covenant is a Term that is not found in Scripture. Object. 1. Answer.


First, So is Sacrament, Trinity, etc. and yet those terms may be lawfully
used, because the thing meant thereby is found.

Secondly, But seeing the Covenant is between the Lord and his Church, as the
two parties that are confederate, it is all one whether it be called the Lords
Covenant, or the Church Covenant: As when Mamre, Aver, and Eschol were
confederate with Abraham, Genesis 14. 13. might not one truly say, Abraham was
confederate with them? Relatives do mutually put and establish one another.

Thirdly, The Scripture allows both the Lords Covenant with the Church, Eze.
16. 8. and the peoples covenant or Saints covenant, or Churches Covenant with
him, Deuteronomy. 29. 12. Psalm. 50. 5. Jer. 50. 5.

Fourthly, There is good reason for both the words; both the Lords Covenant,
and the Church Covenant, because both are confederate; And for that of
Church Covenant, there is this reason also, viz. to distinguish it from other
Covenants, as a marriage-Covenant, Pro. 2. 17. and a brotherly Covenant, 1 Samuel
20. 8. The Church Covenant being thus called not only because they are a
Church, or members thereof that make it, but also because they enter into it in
reference to Church Estate and Church-duties: The duties which they bind
themselves unto in this Covenant being such especially as concern a Church and
the members thereof.

But this Church Covenant puts some disparagement upon the Covenant Object. 2.
of Grace, which every believer is already entered into with God, and seem to
charge the same with insufficiency; for every second Covenant does argue that
the first was not faultlesse, Heb. 8. 7.

1. A second Covenant does argue that the first was not faultlesse, Answ.
where the Covenants are contrary one to another, as the covenant of Grace, and
the covenant of works are, and so it is most true, that the bringing in of the
free Covenant of Grace did argue that righteousness and life could not be
attained by the Law, or Covenant of works; for if there had been a Law given
which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the Law.
Gal. 3. 21. Romans 8. 3.

2. But if it be the same Covenant that is renewed or made again, though upon
a new occasion, no man can say that entering into the same the second time, or a
third, or a fourth, does disanull the first, or cast disparagement upon the
same. The covenant of works given to Adam was not blamed or faulted, because it
was renewed in Sinai. The Covenant of Grace was first given to Adam in Paradise
after his fall, afterward to Abraham, then to the people of Israel under types
and shadows; And again after the coming of Christ in the flesh; yet none of
these does disanull the former, or argue the same to be faulty; and the reason
is, because it is still the same Covenant though renewed upon new occasions;
and in some particulars in some other manner. And the like we say concerning
Church Covenant, or the Covenant which a man makes when he enters into the
Church, viz. that it is not another Covenant contrary to the Covenant of Grace,
which every believer is brought into at his first conversion, but an open
profession of a man's subjection to that very Covenant, specially in the things
which concern Church estate, into which estate the man is now entering.

It is not lawful to make such a Covenant as the Church Covenant, Obj. 3.
because it is not in our power to keep it, and we do not know whether God will
give us power.

This ground is very true, that no man has power of himself Answ.
to any thing that good is, but all a man's power and ability must come of God
through Christ, 2. Cor. 3. 5. Phil. 2. 13. Joh. 15. 5. But the inference is not
good, that therefore it should be unlawful to ento into Church Covenant: for
1. By the same reason, all promises are unlawful, and all covenants
whatsoever; as the covenant of marriage, the covenant of service, yea and the
personal covenant of Grace, when a particular soul promises faith and new
obedience; for there is none of these, no not the covenant of Marriage, which a
man is able of himself to keep, as the adultery of David and Bathsheba, among
others, does plainly prove.

2. God has promised to give power to them that in self-denial seek it of
him, and trust to his promise for it. Ezekiel. 36. 27. Jer. 31. 33. Romans 6. 14.
Jer. 32. 40. The true inference therefore from this ground, from man's
disabilitie to perform were this, that therefore a man should not enter into
Church Covenant in his own strength, for that was Peter's fault in promising
not to deny Christ, but to die with him rather: but Church Covenant, as also
all other promises, should be entered into, in an humble looking up to Christ
Jesus for help and assistance to perform. Thou therefore my son, be strong
in the grace that is in Christ Jesus, 2. Tim. 2. 1.

God disalloweth covenants of man's making (and so our Church Covenant) Obj. 4.
in those words, But not by thy Covenant. Ezekiel. 16. 61.

God does not reprove them there for making Covenant, for Answ.
then he were contrary to himself, who elsewhere called them to do it, Exodus
29. Deuteronomy. 29. and commended them for it, Psalm. 50. 5. Yea and in that very
place of Ezekiel. 16. acknowledges a Covenant between him and them, ver. 60. 62.
But the meaning is, he would do them good, but not for their good keeping the
Covenant of works, for they had very sinfully broken it, ver. 59 but even as he
says elsewhere, not for their sakes, or for their righteousness, Ezekiel. 36.
32. Deuteronomy. 9. 4, 5, 6. But what force is there in this arguing, viz. If God will
do us good, but not for our good keeping the covenant of works, then it is not
lawful to promise obedience to the covenant of Grace, in such things as
concern Church estate; All men may easily see that here is a plain non
sequitur.

This entering into Covenant may keep out many good men from joining Obj. 5.
to the Churches, because they are not satisfied about it: and therefore it is
better laid aside.

It is not impossible, but good men may for a time be unsatisfied Answ.
about it, till they understand the nature and use of it, and yet the thing be
warrantable enough for all that in the sight of God; the Tribes were troubled
at the Altar set up upon the banks of Jordan by the two Tribes and an half,
till they understood the intent and use of it, and for what purpose it was
erected: and then they were satisfied. Josh. 22. And the same may be said of
Peter's eating with the Gentiles, which at the first was very offensive to them
of the circumcision, till they understood what Peter had to say for his defense
therein, and then they rested well satisfied, Act. 11.

But if men understand what the Church Covenant is, there is no reason that
good men should be troubled at it; it being nothing else but a promise of
obedience unto the Gospel of Christ, or of such duties as the Gospel requires
of all Christians in Churchestate: For, will good men refuse to obey the
Gospel, or submit to the ordinances of Christ? or will they refuse to profess
and promise so much? If a man understand what it is, and what we mean by it,
and yet refuse to enter into it when he has opportunity thereto, such
refusing is no part of his goodness, but is to be reckoned amongst his
corruptions; It is ignorance at the best, and if not so, then it may be
perverseness of will, or some want of will to perform obedience to the
Gospel. And surely there is small hope that such would yield subjection and
obedience to the Gospel, who do refuse to profess or promise it.

But the Scripture, Act. 2. 41. tells of joining to the Church without Obj. 6.
any Covenant. For it was not possible that 3000. should enter into covenant in
one day.

Two things may be said in Answer to this Objection. Answ.


First, that 3000. were not so many, but that joining in Covenant might easily
be done by them all, in one day. For, 1. it was at Penticost, at which time of
the year the days were at the longest: And, 2. the Scripture tells us, that
David made a Covenant with all the Tribes of Israel in one day, 2. Sam. 5 1, 2,
3. The Articles of the covenant between David and the Tribes, and so between
this 3000. and the Lord might be openly declared, and they both the one and the
other might by some sign or other, express their consent thereunto in one day.

Secondly, as joining in Covenant is a thing that might be done, so it is more
then probable that indeed it was done, by those 3000. souls For it is said,
ver. 41. that they gladly received the word, that is, they openly professed
that they did with all their hearts receive it, for this receiving of the Word
is noted as a condition, upon which they were admitted to baptism, and
therefore it was not only an inward receiving of it in their hearts, but also
an open professing that they did receive it; for an inward receiving of it in
their hearts, without an open professing thereof outwardly, would not have been
sufficient for the admitting of them unto Baptism. Now this Word which they
received was an exhortation to Repentance for sin, and to Faith in the
promise, ver. 38 39. and to obedience in severing themselves from others, and
saving themselves from that untoward generation, ver. 40. And therefore when
they openly professed, that they gladly received this word, there was an open
professing of their Repentance for sin, ver. 40. of their Faith in the
promise, and of obedience to the Commandment, which is nothing else, but the
very sum of Church Covenant: yea, and further, their very preparation to this
repentance, faith and obedience, in that true compunction and sorrow of soul,
was also openly made manifest. ver. 37.

But yet there would not be such long narrations, of every one severally Reply.
as now are used, when men do enter into Church Covenant, when each one makes a
good long speech, in the profession of his Faith and Repentance.

When the thing is certain, as was showed before, that they did Answ.
openly profess repentance, faith and obedience, it is not difference in the
length or largeness of their speeches in expressing of themselves, that can
make any difference in the thing: Majus and minus non diversificant speciem.
And we deny not but they might be briefer, because there was not such need
they should be long in regard of some difference between them and us, their
time and ours: First there were the Apostles present to hear their
confessions, and to judge thereof, who were men of very good discerning, and
therefore briefer expressing of men's selves might suffice; whereas the best
Christians, yea the best Ministers amongst us are not to be compared to the
Apostles; and therefore as we need more time for study, and for preparation for
our Sermons then they did: so likewise we need more time to hear, and try the
soundness of men's repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ. Yet this we may add withal, that if the Apostles and those primative
Christians, men of such excellent discerning were sometimes deceived, and could
not always so discern, but that some Hypocrites would creep into the Church:
as the example of Ananias and Saphira does witness; how much more need is
there, that the Churches of God in these days (being far inferior to them)
should be very watchful and circumspect in trying the spiritual estates of
them that offer to come into the Church?

Secondly, their times also differed from ours: for their Christianity was a
matter of reproach and danger of excommunication, Joh. 9. 22. of imprisonment,
Act. 4. 3. and 5. 18. and the like. And therefore to see men now to make open
profession of their faith in Christ Jesus, whose servants and disciples were so
hated, and who himself but a while before was crucified, this was not an
ordinary matter: and therefore in words, men might be the briefer when they
came to be received into the Church: But our times in New England do not
persecute Christ, and Christians, and Christian Churches, but countenance them,
and protect them; and therefore there is more need now to be more studious in
examination of men's estates when they offer themselves for Church members: when
the Jews were in favor, many of the people of the Land became Jews, Esth. 8.
17.

But why is there so little proof of this Church Covenant in the New Obj. 7.
Testament?

1. Suppose the New Testament said nothing of it, yet it might Answ.
have ground sufficient from the Scriptures of the old Testament; for if it was
Gods revealed will in those days, that a company should become a Church, and
particular persons become members of that Church by way of Covenant, we may be
sure it is so now likewise, unless covenanting were peculiar to the Jewish
Paedigogie; indeed if it had never been used in those times, but were some new
ordinance, peculiar to the days of the New Testament, in such cases also a
ground from the Scriptures of the New Testament were necessary, as there is in
all such things wherein there is any change or variation, from what was used in
those times before Christ, as that there should not be National Churches, but
congregationall, and not one visible Church, but many, that there should be
baptism, and the Lords Supper: these are matters that are not found in the old
Testament, nor were appointed to be used in those days, and therefore we must
have warrant for them in the New, and so we have. But for the Covenant it is
otherwise, it is no new ordinance peculiar to the days of the Gospel, nor any
Leviticall ordinance peculiar to the Jewish Pedigogie; and therefore the
Scriptures of the Old Testament that give warrant for it, may be sufficient as
has been showed before.

2. And yet there is not wanting good warrant for it, that it ought to be used,
in the days of the New Testament. For, 1. the Prophets do foretell it, Isa.
56. 6, 7. and 44. 5. and Jer. 50. 5. Ezekiel. 20. 37. and in sundry other places,
to omit the rest at this time, because some of them have been spoken of before;
Only let those words of Isa. 44. 5. be well considered, and see if they do not
plainly hold forth that in the days of the New Testament, men should openly
profess their faith, and solemnly bind themselves by Covenant, to be the Lords
people, one shall say, I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by the
name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand, and surname himself
by the name of Israel. These words are so plain for open professing of faith
in the Lord, and open binding of men's selves by Covenant unto him, as we
conceive nothing need be more.

2. The Apostles do sufficiently testify, that such a thing was practiced in
their days, else how should we understand that fellowship in the Gospel in its
full latitude and breadth, Phil. 1. 5. if this combining into Church Fellowship
be no part thereof; yea when it is said, they continued steadfastly, or as the
word (...), may well be translated, they strongly did cleave together, or hold
together in such a Fellowship, which was not preaching and hearing the doctrine
of the Apostles, nor Sacraments, nor Prayer, but a thing distinct from all
these. If this combining themselves into a spiritual fellowship and society
of Church State be no part thereof, we know not how to understand it, nor what
that fellowship should mean; If Doctrine, and Sacraments, and Prayer had not
been particularly mentioned, in the same place, it might have been thought that
the Fellowship in which they so steadfastly clave together had been no more,
but their coming together to observe these said ordinances, and their communion
therein. But when all these are particularly mentioned, and Fellowship
mentioned among them, as a thing distinct from the rest, we may not confound it
with the rest. We might as well say, that by doctrine is meant Sacraments, and
by Sacraments is meant Prayer; as to say that by Fellowship is meant nothing
else but the exercise of doctrine, and Sacraments, and Prayer. And if these as
they are distinctly named, be distinct ordinances, and may not be confounded,
then Fellowship being named in the same manner imports something distinct from
them all, and may not be confounded with them, nor with any of them, no more
then the other may be confounded one with another. And if so, then as this
Fellowship may import, the communion of their gift and goods one for the help
of another, so it must first of all imply a combining of themselves into
Church State by mutual agreement, consent, or covenant.

Furthermore, when the Apostle writes, that by experience of the Corinthians
liberal contribution to the poor Saints, men glorified God for their
professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, 2. Cor. 9. 13. he plainly
imployes thereby, that the Corinthians had made a profession or promise of such
subjection to the Gospel as did comprehend this particular of distributing to
the necessity of the Saints, among other things. And their liberal
distribution which he there speaks of, was looked at as one point of their
real performance of that subjection to the Gospel, which they had before
professed, and promised. Now the Church Covenant is nothing else, but the
professing or promising of such subjection, and therefore this place is another
proof of Church Covenant. Besides, it has been showed before in Argument 3.
that those places which speak of being added to the Church, of joining, or
assaying to join unto the Church, Act. 2. 47. and 5 13. and 9 26. are not
expounded according to the full meaning of them, when they are understood of
any other joining, if joining in Covenant be left out. And therefore the
Scriptures of the New Testament do bear good witness unto Church Covenant,
though, as we said before, the Scriptures of the Old Testament might have been
sufficient if the New Testament had spoken nothing of it.

But Baptism makes men members of the visible Church, and therefore Obj. 8.
the Covenant is needless.

This is answered in the Answer to the fourth of the 32. Questions, Answ.
where it is showed at large that Baptism ^^ a seal of the Covenant between
God and the Church, but neither makes the Church, nor members of the Church,
nor always so much as proves men to be members.

This Church Covenant is a late devise, and was not known in ancient Obj. 9.
time, and therefore is to be rejected.

First, True Antiquity is that of the Scriptures. Now since Answ.
Church Covenant is warranted by the Scripture, as has been showed before in
this discourse, it cannot be charged to want true Antiquity. When the Papists
are wont to charge the doctrine of Protestants with Novelty, and such as was
never heard of before Luther, the Orthodoxe are wont to answer, that if the
doctrine do not agree with the Scripture, then let it be condemned for
Noveltie; and if it do, it is warranted by the best Antiquity, even the
testimony of God himself who is the Ancient of days: Our Faith, faith Doctor
White, is in all points the same that is contained in the Scripture, and so
consequently of the same Antiquity: and therefore all they that say it came up
but of late, must first prove it contrary to the Word of God, or else hold
their peace. White, Way, 44. 1. And the same we say in this particular of the
Church Covenant.

Secondly, And yet they that search the Stories and Writers of the times and
ages next after the Apostles, may find some testimony of Church Covenant in
those days: For instance, Justine Martyr in his Apol. 2. makes mention of
three things which were required of all that were admitted into the Church as
members, (...), that is regeneration, and soundness in the Faith, and a
promise to walk in obedience to the Gospel. And generally this was the
practice of all those times, that never any man was admitted to Baptism, nor
his children neither, but they put him to answer three questions, Abrenuntios?
whereto he answered, Abrenuntio. Credis? whereto his answer was, Credo: and
Spondes? to which he answered, Spondes. So that here was an open declaration of
his Repentance from dead works, and of the soundness of his Faith, in the two
first particulars, and an open binding himself by covenant or promise to walk
according to the Gospel, in the third. But much needs not to be said in this
point, unto them that do acknowledge Scripture Antiquity to be sufficient,
though after times should be found to swerve from the Rules and Patterns that
are therein contained.

If Church Covenant be so necessary, then all the Reformed Churches Obj. 10.
are to be condemned as no Churches; for they have no such Covenant.

They that have known those Churches, not only by their Answ.
writings, and confessions of their faith, in Synods and otherwise; but also by
living amongst them, and being eyewitnesses of their Order, do report
otherwise of them, viz. that they are combined together by solemn Covenant
with God and one another. Zepperus, speaking of the manner, used in the
reformed Churches, in admitting the children of Church Members to the Lords
Table, when they came to age, and have been sufficiently catechized, and
instructed in the doctrine of Religion* tells us, that such children are
admitted to the Lords table, by public profession of Faith, and entering into
Covenant. Consuetum est, says l^e, ut qui per atatem inque Doctrina
Catechetica profectum ad sacram Coenam primum admittuntur, fidei confessionem
coram tota Ecclesia public edant per parents aut qui parentum loco sunt,
jussu ministri, in Ecclesia conspectum producti: quodque in illa confessione,
per Dei gratiam perstare, ac, juxta illam, vitam instituere, insuper etiam
disciplina Ecclesiasticae ultro ac spoute sua subjicere sese velint, spondeant
atque stipulentur, Polit. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 14. p. 158. that is, The manner
is, that they who by reason of age and proficiencie in the doctrine of
Catechism are first admitted to the Lords Supper, should publicly before the
whole Church make confession of their faith, being brought forth into the sight
of the Church by their parents, or them that are instead of parents, at the
appointment of the Minister; and likewise should promise and covenant by the
grace of God to continue in that Faith which they have confessed, and to lead
their lives according to it; yea, and moreover to subject themselves freely and
willingly to the discipline of the Church. These words we see are full and
plain, that children are not in those Churches received to the Lords Supper,
without personal confession of Faith, and entering into Covenant before; And if
they took this course with children come to age, there is as much reason, or
more, that the same course should be holden with men of years, when they are
admitted members. And so the same Zepperus, speaking of the consociation of
Churches amongst themselves by mutual confederation, has these words, which
as they may be applied to the combining of many Churches, so may they be
combining of many members of the same Church, (...) illa (...), quam in Symbolo
profit nunc Apostolico, nihil aliud hic requirit, and vult, quam obligationem
omnium Ecclesiae membrorum and confoederationem, etc. that is, that communion
of Saints which we profess in the Creed, does require and mean nothing else
but an obligation of all the members of the Church, and a binding of them
together by Covenant. Polit. Eccles. li. 3 c. 8. p 721.

To these testimonies of Z^pp^r^^, those words may be added of Mr. Parker our
own countreyman, a man of singular note for learning and holiness, who also
himself lived sometimes beyond Sea in the reformed Churches, and there ended
his days, so that we may safely give the more credit to his testimony, he
having so good means fully to know the state and order of those Churches. Now
he speaks of a Solennis forma absque qua in Ecclesiae alicujus communionem
nullus rite recipitur: of a solemn form, without which no man is rightly
received into the communion of the Church, has these words. Hic mos ille est
reformatarum Ecclesiarum non solum in lapsis restituendis, sed in extra^eis,
i^o quibuscunque recipiendis qui ad habitandum alicubi consident, etsi forte in
Ecclesia illius loci quo ante common abantur, juxta hanc formam admissi prius
fuerant. Examinat Presbyterium, plebs consentit, quisque testes vita sua secum
adfert, vel testimonia sal^em: publicatur nomen cuiusque competentis pro
con^io^e, admonetur quisque siquid habeat quod excipiat, ut denunciet
presbyteris. Si nihil contra adferatur, admittitur quidem, sed non nisi solerni
pactione cum Deo and cum Ecclesia* Spondet vero Ecclesiae* se ambulaturum prout
sanctam illam communionem decet; Disciplinae illius Ecclesiae subjacere velle,
se fratribus illius communionis invigilaturum juxta Christi praeceptum, Matthew.
18. 17. ut praeveniantur sanentur que scandala, and illi ad studium bonorum
operum provehantur. That is, This is the manner of the reformed Churches, not
only in restoring such as have fallen, but in admitting of strangers, yea of
all whoever they be, who do sit down in any place for habitation, though
perhaps they have been formerly admitted after the same manner in the Church
where they have formerly dwelt; The Presbytery does examine, the people do
consent, every man brings with him witnesses of his life, or at leastwise
testimonies: The name of each one that desires to be a member, is published in
the Assembly, every one is admonished if he have any exception against the
party, to bring it to the Presbytery. If nothing be brought against him, then
indeed he is admitted; but yet no otherwise then by a solemn covenant with God
and the Church; And to the Church he promises that he will walk as becomes
that holy Fellowship, that he will be subject to the discipline of that Church,
that he will watch over the brethren of that Communion, according to the
Command of Christ, Mat. 18. 17. that offenses may be prevented and healed, etc.
Polit. Eccles lib. 3 cap. 16. 4. Page 171, 172. Much more he has to the same
purpose in that place, alleging sundry Canons and Decrees of Synods of
reformed Churches, wherein they have determined that none should be received
into their Churches, but by this way of solemn Covenant. And others that have
lived amongst them may have been eyewitnesses that this is their usual
practice.

But what shall be said of the Congregations in England, if Churches Obj 11.
must be combined by Covenant? Does not this doctrine blot out all those
Congregations out of the Catalogue of Churches? For what ever Covenant may be
found in the reformed Churches in other parts, yet it is plain that the
English have none.

Though we deny not but the Covenant in many of those Congregations Ans^.
is more implicit and not so plain as were to be desired; (and what is amiss
in them, in their materials, or in want of explicit combining of pure matter,
or many of their ways, we will not take upon us to defend) yet we hope we may
say of them with Master Parker, Polit. Eccles. lib 3. cap. 16. 1. page 167. Non
abost ea realis and substantialis (quanquam magis quam par^rat implicita)
coitio in foedus, eaque voluntaria professio fidei substantialis: qua (Deo
gratia) essentiam Ecclesiae idque visibilis hacusque sartam tectam in Anglia
conservavit; That is, there wants not that real and substantial coming
together, (or agreeing in Covenant, though more implica^e then were meet) and
that substantial profession of Faith, which (thanks be to God) has preserved
the essence of visible Churches in England unto this day.

The reasons why we are loath to say, that the Congregations in England are
utterly without a Covenant, are these:

First, Because there were many Christian Churches in England in the Apostles
time, or within a while after, as Master Fox shows at large, Act. and Mon.
lib. 2. beginning page 137. where he reports out of Gildas, that England
received the Gospel in the time of Tiberius the Emperor, under whom Christ
suffered, and that Joseph of Arimathea was sent of Philip the Apostie from
France to England about the year of Christ 63. and remained in England all his
time, and so he with his fellows laid the first foundation of Christian Faith
among the Britain people, and other Preachers and Teachers coming afterward,
confirmed the same and increased it. Also the said Master Fox reports out of
Tertullian, that the Gospel was dispearsed abroad by the sound of the Apostles
into many Nations, and amongst the rest into Britain, yea into the wildest
places of Britain, which the Romans could never attain unto: and alleges
also out of Ni^^phorus, that Simon Zelotes did spread the Gospel to the West
Ocean, and brought the same into the Isles of Britain: and sundry other proofs
he there has for the same point. Now if the Gospel and Christian Religion were
brought into England in the Apostles times, and by their means, it is like that
the English Churches were then constituted by way of Covenant, because that was
the manner of constituting Churches in the Apostles time, as also in the times
asore Christ, as has been showed from the Scripture before in this discourse.
And if Christian Congregations in England were in those times combined by
Covenant, then eternity of Gods Covenant is such, that it is not the
interposition of many corruptions that may arise in after times that can
disanull the same, except when men wilfully break Covenant and reject the
offers of the Gospel through obstinacy, which we persuade our selves they are
not come unto: and consequently the Covenant remains which has preserved the
essence of Churches to this day; though the mixture of manifold corruptions,
have made the Covenant more implicit then were meet.

Secondly, Because there want no good Records (as may be seen in Seldens
History of Tithes) to prove that in former times in England it was free for men
to pay their Tithes and Oblations where themselves pleased: Now this paying of
Tithes was accounted as a duty of people to their Minister, or sheep to their
Pastor: and therefore seeing this was by their own voluntary agreement and
consent, their joining to the Church as members thereof, and to the Ministry
thereof as sheep of such a man's flock, was also by their own voluntary
agreement and consent: and this does imply a Covenant ^^ was not the precincts
of Parishes that did limit men in those days, but their own choice.

Thirdly, Those Questions and Answers ministered at Baptism, spoken of before,
(viz. Do^st thou renounce? I do renounce: do thou believe? I do believe:
do thou promise? I do promise) as they were used in other places, so were
they also in England, and are unto this day, though not without the mixture of
sundry corruptions. Now this does imply a Covenant. And when the children came
to age, they were not to be admitted to the Lords Supper, before they had made
personal Confession of their own Faith, and ratified the Covenant which was
made at their Baptism by their Parents, which course indeed afterward did grow
into a Sacrament of Confirmation, but that was an abuse of a good Order.

If here it be said, that the Members of the Parishionall Assemblies are not
brought in by their own voluntary profession, but by the Authority and
Proclamation of the Prince, and therefore they have no such Covenant.

The Answer is, that the Christian Prince does but his duty when he does not
tolerate within his Dominions any open Idolatry, or the open worship of false
Gods by baptized persons, but suppresseth the same: and likewise when he gives
free liberty to the exercise of all the Ordinances of true Religion, according
to the mind of Christ, with countenance also and encouragement unto all those
whose hearts are willingly bent thereunto, Ezra. 1. 1. 3. and 7. 13. And
therefore this practice of his cannot overthrow the freeness of men's joining
in Church* Communion, because one duty cannot oppose nor contradict another.
And suppose that this course of the Magistrate should seem to be a forcing of
some to come in for members who were unfit, (in which case it were not
justifiable) yet this does not hinder the voluntary subjection of others, who
with all their hearts desired it. When the Israelites departed out of Egypt,
there went a mixed multitude with them, many going with them that were not
Israelites indeed, Exodus 12. And in the days of Mordecay and Hesther, many of
the people of the lands became Jews, when the Jews were in favor and
respect, Est. 8. 17. and so joined to them not of their own voluntary mind,
nor of any sincere heart toward God, but merely for the favor or ^eare of
men; yet this forced or seined joining of some could not hinder those that were
Israelites indeed from being Israelites, nor make the Jews to be no Jews, no
Church Members.

And the same may be said in this case, Suppose the Magistrates Proclamation
should be a cause, or an occasion rather, of bringing some into the Church, who
came not of their own voluntary mind, but for fear, or for obteining favor,
yet this cannot hinder, but others might voluntarily and freely Covenant to be
subject to the Gospel of Christ: Such subjection and the promise of it being
the thing which themselves did heartily desire, though the Magistrate should
have said nothing in it.

If any shall hereupon infer, that if the Parishionall Assemblies be
Churches, then the members of them may be admitted to Church privileges in New
England, before they join to our Churches: Such one may find his Answer in
the Answer to the tenth of the thirty-two Questions; Whereunto we do refer
the Reader for this point. Only adding this, that this were contrary to the
judgment and practice of the Reformed Churches, who do not admit a man for
member without personal profession of his Faith, and joining in Covenant,
though he had formerly been a member of a Church in another place, as was
showed before out of Master Parker.

Lastly, If any say, that if these reasons prove the English Congregations to
have such a Covenant as proves them to be Churches, then why may not Rome, and
the Assemblies of Papists go for true Churches also? For some man may think
that the same things may be said for them that here in Answer to this eleventh
Objection are said for the Parishes in England: Such one must remember two
things: first, that we do not say simply, a Covenant makes a company a true
Church, but (as was said before) a Covenant to walk in such ways of worship
to God and edification of one another, as the Gospel of Christ requires. For
who doubts* but there may be an agreement among thieves, Pro. 1. A
confederation among Gods enemies, Psalm. 83. A conspiracy among the Arabians,
the Ammonites and Ashdodites, to hinder the building of Jerusalem, Neh. 4. 7,
8. And yet none of these are made true Churches by such kind of confederacies
or agreements. And so we may say of the Assemblies of Papists, especially
since the Counsel of Trent. If there be any agreement or confederacy among
them, it is not to walk in the ways of the Gospel, but in ways contrary to
the fundamental truths of the Gospel, as Idolatry in worship, Heresy in
doctrine, and other Antichristian pollutions and corruptions: and therefore if
they combined in these things, such combinations will never prove them true
Churches. The Church is the Pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. But the
Religion of Papists is so far from truth, that whosoever lives and believes
according to it, without repentance, cannot be saved. Witness their doctrine
in the point of vilifying the Scriptures, and in point of free will, and of
Justification by works, of the Popes Supremacy, of the Sacrifice of the Mass,
of worshipping of Images, etc. In regard of which, and such like, the Holy
Ghost says, that their Religion is a Sea, become as the blood of a dead man,
and every soul in that Sea dies, Rev. 16. 3. And therefore agreement in such
a Religion will never prove them to be true Churches; nor any Assemblies of
Arrians, Antitrinitaries, Anabaptists, or Famelists, supposing them also to be
combined by Covenant among themselves.

But now for the Assemblies in England, the case is far otherwise; for the
Doctrine of the Articles of Religion which they profess, and which they
promise to hold and observe (though some things are amiss in some of those
Articles, and though many persons live contrary in their lives) yet the
doctrine is such that whosoever believes, and lives according to it, shall
undoubtedly be saved, and many thousands have been saved therein* and therefore
Assemblies united by Covenant to observe this doctrine may be true Churches,
when the Assemblies of Papists and others may be false, although they also were
combined by Covenant: the reason of the difference rising from the difference
that is in the doctrine and Religion which they severally profess, and by
Covenant bind themselves to observe, the one being fundamentally corrupt, and
consequently pernicious: The other in the fundamental points Orthodoxall and
sound.

Secondly, It must be remembered also (which was intimated before) that if
fundamental corruptions be professed in with impenitency and obstinacy, then
God may disanull the Covenant on his part, and give a Bill of divorce to such a
people, Jere. 3. 8. Now experience and the Scripture also does witness of the
Jesuited and Trent-Papists, that they repented not of the works of their
hands, of worshipping Devils, and Idols of Gold, etc. neither repented they
of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornications, nor of
their thefts, Rev. 9. 20, 21.

But now for the Parish Assemblies in England, we hope that we may safely say,
they do not sin of obstinacy, but of ignorance, having not been convinced
(and many of them never having had means to be convinced) of the corruptions
that are amongst them, in respect of their constitution, and worship, and
Ministry, and so the Covenant remaining among them, may prove them to be
Churches, when it cannot stand the Papists in like stead, they being impenitent
and obstinate: Which we do not speak to justify the Parishes altogether, as
if there were not dangerous corruptions found in them, nay rather (the Lord be
merciful to the sins of his people) we may lament it with tears, that in
respect of their members and Ministry, in respect of their worship and
walkings, in many of those Assemblies there are found such apparent
corruptions, as are justly grievous to a godly soul, that is enlightened to
discern them, and greatly displeasing to the Lord, and indeed had need to be
repented of betime, least otherwise the Lord remove the Candlestick and
unchurch them, Rev. 2. 5. In a word, the corruptions remaining are just causes
of repentance and humiliation: but yet in as much as the Articles of Religion,
which they profess, contain such wholesome doctrine, that whosoever believes
and walks according thereunto, in sincerity, shall undoubtedly be saved, and
in as much as the corruptions are not persisted in with obstinacy, therefore
we deny not but they have the truth of Churches remaining.

But this opinion of Church Covenant, is holden by none but the Obj. 12.
Brownists, or those of the Separation, and therefore it is not to be received.

This ground cannot be made good, that none but they of the Answ.
Separation are for Church Covenant, for all the Reformed Churches generally,
as was showed before in Answer to Objection the tenth, are for it in their
judgment and practice; and shall all they be condemned for By Brownists and
Separatists you are to understa^d those of the riged Separation.
Brownists, or maintaining unlawful Separation from the Church? Also Master
Parker and Doctor Ames, men of our own Nation, famous for holiness and
learning, and moderation, both of them plead for Church Covenant, and yet
neither of them were Brownists, but bare witness against that riged
Separation. For Doctor Ames, his judgment of Church Covenant may be seen in
his Medulla, Theol. lib. 1. cap. 32. 14, 15, 17. Fideles non constitunt
Ecclesiam particularem, quamvis simul forsan plures in eodem loco conveniant
aut vivant, nisi speciali vinculo intersese conjunguntur, etc. That is,
believers do not make a particular Church, though perhaps there be many of
them that meet* together, and live in the same place, unless they be joined
together by some special bond amongst themselves: for so one Church would many
times be dissolved into many, and many Churches confounded into one. Now this
bond is a Covenant, either expressed or implicit, whereby believers do bind
themselves particularly to perform all such duties, both toward God and
mutually to one another, as pertain to the nature of a Church, and their
edification. And thereupon no man is rightly admitted into the Church, but by
confession of his Faith, and stipulation, or promise of obedience.

These words do plainly and fully show his judgment of Church Covenant, to
be the very same that is held and practiced in New England at this day. And
that he was not for that severitie and regiditie of separation, may be cleared
from sundry of his works, wherein he plainly and fully bears witness against
the same, and namely, in his Fresh suite against Ceremonies, page 207. and in
his second Manuduction, wherein he purposely and at large deals in this
Argument of Separation. Sure it is Master Can in his Book, wherein he goes
about to prove the necessity of separation from the Non-Conformists
principles, does professedly and expressly oppose himself against Doctor Ames
in the point of Separation, which shows how far the good Doctor was from
favoring that way, when they most zealously therein do count him to be a
special opposite of theirs, as indeed he was. And for Master Parker, his
judgment of Church Covenant was heard before in part; where he so much
approves the practice of the Reformed Churches in this point. And much more
may be seen of his judgment herein, in the sixteenth Chap. of the third book
of his Polit. Ecclesiastica. And yet in the same place, and likewise lib 1.
cap. 13. 14. of the same Treatise he plentifully and plainly shows his dislike
of the ways of Separation, as is also acknowledged in an Admonition to the
Reader, prefixed before that Book, by I. R. suo, suorumque nomine. So that
this Assertion appears to be untrue, wherein it is said, that none but
Brownists and Separatists do approve of Church Covenant.

As for the Inference from this ground, that therefore Church Covenant should
not be received, because it is pleaded for and practiced by the Separatists. We
Answer, that this will not follow, unless it could be proved, that the
Separatists hold no truth; or if they hold a truth we must not hold it, that
so it may appear we differ from them; Either of which, it were unreasonable
to affirm. If the Papists hold sundry Articles of Faith, as that there is a
unity of the Divine Essence, and Trinity of Persons, that Jesus Christ is God
and man, and that true Messiah that was promised, and the only Savior of the
world, and many such like, must we deny these things because they are holden
by the Papists? This were as unreasonable as to condemn the doctrine of the
Resurrection, because it was maintained by the Pharisees, Act. 23. 8. And so we
say of Church Covenant, holden and practiced by them of the Separation; as also
many other truths are maintained by them: No reason that truth should be
refused, because the Separatists maintain it. When Doctor Bancroft in a Sermon
at Pauls-Crosse, had avouched that the Superiority of Bishops above other
Ministers, is by Gods own Ordinance, and to make the contrary opinion odious,
affirmed that Aerius persisting in it, was condemned for an Heretic by the
general consent of the whole Church, and that Martin and his Companions, do
maintain the same opinion of Aerius; What says learned Doctor Reinolds
hereunto, in a Letter to Sir Francis Knolls, who required him to show his
judgment herein: Touching Martin, says he, if any man behave himself
otherwise then in discretion and charity he ought, let the blame be laid where
the fault is, and defend him not; but if by the way he utter a truth, mingled
with whatsoever else, it is not reason that that which is of GOD should be
condemned for that which is of man: no more then the doctrine of the
Resurrection should be reproved, because it was maintained and held by the
Pharisees: Wherefore removing the odious name of Martin from that which is
sincerity and love, is to be dealt with, etc.

And the very same do we say to them that would make Church Covenant to be
odious, because it is held by those of the Separation, who are commonly called
Brownists: If men behave themselves otherwise then they ought, we defend them
not therein, but if they hold any truth mingled with whatsoever else, we would
not have that which is of God to be condemned, for that which is of man: truth
should not be refused, because of other corruptions that may be found in them
that hold it.

If you with them hold Church Covenant, you justify them in all Reply.
their ways of separation and erroneous opinions.

Not so, for many of them hold that there are no visible Christians Answ.
that stand members of the Parishes in England, and that it is not lawful to
hold any private Religious communion with such persons; and that the
parishionall Assemblies are none of them true Churches, and that it is not
lawful to hear any of those Ministers to preach the Word, none of which are
justified at all by holding Church Covenant, though they do hold the same;
There is no such necessary and inseparable connection between these opinions,
and that of Church Covenant, that he that holds this, must needs hold the other
also.

But the time has been, when your selves did not hold Church Covenant, Obje.
13.
as now you do; when you were in England you were not of this mind, and
therefore no marvel if your change since your coming to New England be
suspected, and offensive. If you change your judgment and practice in this
manner, God knows whether you may come at last, and therefore men may well be
afraid of holding with you in this point, which your selves did not hold when
you lived in your native Country.

Some of us when we were in England, through the mercy of Answ.
God, did see the necessity of Church Covenant; and did also preach it to the
people amongst whom we ministered, though neither so soon nor so fully as were
meet, for which we have cause to be humbled, and to judge our selves before
the Lord.

But suppose we had never known nor practiced the same before our coming into
this country, yet if it be a truth of God, there is no reason why we should
shut our eyes against the light, when God holds it forth unto us, nor that
others should be offended at us for receiving the same. For by the same reason
men might still continue in their sins, and not make any progress in
knowledge and holiness, that so they may not seem unconstant, which were
contrary to the Scripture, wherein we are commanded nor to fashion our selves
according to the former lusts of our ignorance. 1. Pet. 1. 14. But to be
changed, Romans 12. 2. and renewed, Ephesians. 4. 23. and put off the old man, and put
on the new, Ephesians. 4. yea to grow in grace and holiness, 2. Pet. 3. 18. and be
stronger and stronger, Job 17. 9. that our good works may be more at the last,
then at the first, Revel. 2. 19. Sure it is, the Apostle tells the Corinthians
and Ephesians, that the time had been when they were not the same men that now
they are when he wrote unto them; and yet he does not blame them for leaving
their former opinions or practice, but commends them for it, 1. Cor. 6. 11.
Ephesians. 2. 3. etc. And it is said of Apollos an eloquent man, and mighty in the
Scripture, that when he came to Ephesus the way of God was expounded unto him
more perfectly by Aquila and Priscilla, whereas before he was instructed in the
way of the Lord, knowing only the Baptism of John: yet this was no dispraise
at all to him, that now upon better information he would change his judgment
to the better, nor unto them that were the means thereof: Act. 18. 25, 26.
Nullus pudor est ad maliura transire.

The time has been, (and we may be humbled for it) when we lived without God
in the world, and some of us in many sinful courses: and shall any be
offended, because we are not still the same? and when God called us from the
ways of sin and death, to the Fellowship of his grace in Christ; yet some of
us lived a long time in conformity to the ceremonies imposed in our native
Country, and saw not the evil of them. But when God did open our eyes, and
let us see the unlawfulness thereof, we cannot see but it would have been a
withholding the truth in unrighteousness, and a great unthankfulness to God
for light revealed to us, if we should still have continued in that course
through an inordinate desire of seeming constant: and therefore it is not any
just cause of offense that we have changed our judgment and practice in those
things, when we once perceived the Word of God to disallow them.

Indeed it has been sometime objected against Mr. Cartwright, and others, that
desired the reformation of the Churches in England, in regard of Discipline and
Church Order, that they which stood so much for Reformation in Discipline, did
in after times add and alter some things, beyond what they saw at first, and
what themselves had formerly desited; and that therefore being so murable, and
inconstant in their apprehensions, they were not to be regarded, nor hearkened
unto: to which Objection Mr. Pa^k^r makes full Answer in Eccles. lib. 2. ca.
36. p. 307* where he shows from the Scripture, and the testimony of Bishop
Jewel, Doctor Reinolds, and others, that in the Reformation of Religion God
brings not his servants into perfection in knowledge and zeal at the first,
but by degrees, so as they grow and make progress in these things in such
wise, that their good works are more at the last then at the first, as was said
of the Church of Thyatira, even as the man that had been blind, when Christ ^^
stored him to his sight, could at the first but see men like tr^ walking, and
afterward saw every man clearly; and therefore^ is no good arguing to say these
men have altered and correc^ such things from what their apprehensions were at
first, and therefore they are not to be regarded.

Now if this be no good arguing against Mr. Cartwright, and those that in
England have been studious of Reformation (as indeed it is not) then it is no
good Argument against us in this m^^ter of Church Covenant, to say we now hold
and practice otherwise then we have done in former time.

If any shall here reply, that change from conformity to the cerem^nies Reply.
to worship God more purely is warranted by the Word, and therefore not
blameworthy, and that the same may be said of the case of Apollos, of the
Corinthians, and Ephesians forementioned, and of Cartwright, and the rest in
his times.

We answer, that this is true, and thereby it appears, that it is not Answ.
simply the changing a man's opinion or practice that can be counted
blameworthy, or offensive, but changing without warrant of the Word; and
therefore in point of Church Covenant, the iss^^ must not be whether we or
others have formerly known and practiced it, but whether it have ground from
Gods Word; For if it have (as we hope have been proved before in this
discourse) then the observing of it, can be no cause of just offense unto
others, not imputation of inconstancy to our selves, though in time past we had
not had so much light as to discern the necessity and use thereof.

The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, though he
be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary: and grant unto
all his Churches and servants* that their love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge, and in all judgment, that they may discern the things that differ*
and approve the things that are excellent, and by his Spirit of truth be led
forward into all truth, till Antichrist be utterly consumed with the breath of
his mouth, and the brightness of his coming, and the holy City new Jerusalem
come down from God out of heaven, as a Bride adorned for her husband the Lamb,
the Lord Jesus, to whom be all glory of affiance and service for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

