CHRISTIAN LIBERTY VINDICATED From gross Mistakes, occasioning so great
Divisions in ENGLAND.

OR, A Tract, showing what it is, and what it is not, the diversity of Errors,
a General Council to be the means of beating them down, and how far forth
Conscience is to be born with, and the insolency of the late Remonstrants.

Most earnestly recommended to the reading of the Right Honorable Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, and all those that through a mistake stand so
stiffly for the priviviledge of conscience at large, that they stop the course
of Government establishing, thus keeping a gap open to many great enormities to
this day, that taking better notice of the truth, they may make no such stopage
any more.

And whether some of them do or no, those Higher Powers may make a way by
forcing within the Church, which they cannot do by persuasion: Wherein, God
grant that all expedition may be used, and good success follow, for his
Mercies sake in Jesus Christ. Amen.

Whereunto is added An Appendix of 17. Questions, necessary to be discussed and
be determined by the Assembly of Divines without delay, that every one may know
what to hold and rest in, and the unnatural divisions in the same body may
cease.

By JOHN MAYER, D. D. of Divinity.

LONDON: Printed by Eliz. Pu^slow for Matthew Walbancke. 1647.

CHRISTIAN LIBERTY VINDICATED From gross mistakes, occasioning so great
Divisions in England.
GAL. 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us
free.
THere is no comfort to that of our Christian Liberty; yet as out of the
sweetest honey the Spider suckes Poison, so man out of this sweet comfort, by
turning it to an occasion of sinful dissension to the corrupting of the soul.
For as it is now taken by some, we may say of it, as August. said of
Drunkenness, Is not strife and contention by thee? and are not wounds without
cause by thee? and are there not raylings, blasphemies, redness of the eyes,
dropsies, plurisies, and diverse deaths? So, is not the disturbance of the peace
of the Church by thee? the dividing of Christ's seamelesse coat by thee? and by
thee his beautiful Spouse the Church made full of wounds and blood? So these,
as they who look upon her have their affections alienated from her, and their
mouths opened to blaspheme and speak evil of her. To reform this abuse
then, and to prevent the further increase of it, give me leave to show you what
this liberty is: First, affirmatively, and then negatively.

What Christian Liberty is.
from all the burdensome Rites and Ceremonies of the Law, and from the
servitude of our own lusts, and of Satan, and from everlasting death. Here,
first I say, it is a liberty purchased for all true believers by Christ's most
precious blood, for we are redeemed, not with corruptible things of gold and
silver, 1 Pet. 1.18.
but with the precious blood of Christ, by this word (we) here, the faithful
being understood here, and the word (redeemed) a freeing of us, who before were
in servitude and bands.

From all the burdensome Rites and Ceremonies of the Law, Act. 15.1. From
Ceremonies.
for so Peter calls them, saying, Why put ye a yoke upon the disciples neeks,
which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear? our liberty herefrom is
set forth, Gal. 4.3. under the similitude of an heir atteining to full age,
before he was under tutors and governors, but now he is free from this servile
condition: So we, when we were children, were in bondage under the rudiments of
the world: But, When the fullness of time was come, God sent his Son to redeem
them that were under the Law. Now then, we are at liberty from days before
commanded to be kept, whether new Moons, or the Pasch, Pentecoast, or feast of
Tabernacles, or days set apart yearly for Humiliation and Attonement-making,
because they were set up only to shadow out things to come, or as a means of
commemorating things past, which were the greatest blessings imparted to Gods
people under the old Testament. The anniversary atonement was a figure of
Christ's blood shed, whereby we attain forgiveness of our sins, and
reconciliation with God, when he entered with it into Heaven, as the High Priest
with the blood of a Goat into the Sanctum Sanctorum. The Pascall Lamb was both
a figure of the Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world, and a
commemoration of that great benefit of being freed from their Egyptian
bondage. The feast of Pentecoast, of Gods miraculous putting them in possession
of the Land of Canaan, and consequently of the Corn then ready to be reaped
which they sowed not, the feast of Tabernacles, of their miraculous
preservation forty years in the wilderness, when they dwelt in Tents, that of
blowing Trumpets, and those of new Moons, both to figure out the Evangelicall
Trumpet, the preaching of the Gospel, which sounded in all Lands, to the
beating down of strong holds, to commemorate the miraculous overthrow of
Jericho by the sound of Trumpets of Rams-hornes, 2 Cor. 10.4.
and for a sign of God remembering them when they were to fight with their
enemies. Touching the Sabbath of the seven h day from the Creation, it was also
figurative of the rest coming by Christ unto all true Christian souls, and
commemorative of Gods resting from all his works of Creation, and therefore is
no more to be kept under the N. T. he being now come, even Jesus* who is the
Author of spiritual rest and peace; as Joshuah gave rest in Canaan, and a
greater work and benefit being now to be commemorated, viz. of our redemption
and restitution into the state of grace, from which we fell by the sin of
Adam. Wherefore we are at liberty from keeping that day also, yet not so at
liberty, but that we are tied to another, viz. the Lords Day, according to the
example and practice of the Apostles, and of Christians since, because the
commandment of keeping the seventh day is moral and perpetual, and not
Ceremonial, as of other Sabbaths. And Heb. 4, 4.5. the Apostle proving two
rests or Sabbaths at two times, one under the Old Testament, the other under
the new and concluding* ves. 9. There remains therefore a rest unto the
people of God, plainly intimates a Sabbath now to be kept, even the day
wherein Jesus entered into his rest by rising again, from thenceforth never to
suffer or travel about to teach and to work miracles any more, and hitherto
of days. Now for other Ceremonies, and first of meats, from which Gods people
were tied by his precept; as namely, All unclean beasts, fowls and fishes
(for so much as this was done in figure, it being hereby adnumbrated, that
there were two sorts of people in the world clean and unclean, Jews and
Gentiles, which should continue thus distinguished, till God should be pleased,
through Christ, to break down this partition wall, and to sanctify the
Gentiles also through faith) we are now at liberty herefrom; Act. 10.
only some, as not having this knowledge think themselves tied are still tied,
and therefore should sin, Romans 14.
if they eat of things unclean, and the like is taught, of keeping or not
keeping days formerly sanctified: Secondly, of Circumcision and washings, in
case of legal uncleanness, sacrifices, the High Priest and other Priests in
their vestments, etc. we are not only at liberty from them all, Gal. 5.1.
but if we should still use them, we should have no benefit by Christ.

From servitude of sin. Joh. 8.34.
which whosoever commits is the servant thereof, and then whosoever are thus
freed, are free from the danger of death and the power of the Devil; for he
works by our lusts, Jam. 1.14. Ephesians. 2.
unto which therefore our servitude being at an end, there is an end of our
servitude to Satan also, and of our subjection to him, to be by him carried
away into his hellish Kingdom.

And all this liberty we ought to stand for, but especially this last, as
wherein our happiness does consist, freedom from sin by justification through
faith, and by a virtue derived from Christ's death, to whom we are joined by
faith to dye to sin and live to righteousness, and freedom from the Devil
and his snare, 1 Pet. 5.8.
and dominion, and finally from his Lion-like devouring of us.

What Christian liberty is not. 2 Pet. 2.19.
And here I say briefly first, that it is not a liberty to any evil or sin,
because this is no liberty, but servitude to corruption, and is so opposite to
Christian liberty, as that the Apostle faith, How should we that are dead unto
sin yet live any longer therein: Romans 6.2.
against those, that said, If it be of grace that we are saved let us continue
in sin, that grace may abound. As the dead are bound up from doing the
actions of the living, so the true Christian is said to be dead unto sin; to
intimate, that be is not at liberty to act sin any more; as they that live in
sin, and were never mortified unto it, but contrariwise bound, that he
cannot now sin any more; i Joh. 3.9.
as St. John expressly teaches, For what is sin, but a breach of the Law, and
he that breaks the least of those Commandments or Laws, says our Lord,
shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven; Mat. 5.19.
that is, shall be rejected and put from it, as most unworthy, for such are by
the Holy Ghost set forth sometimes by this word least, and sometime by the word
last, as Matthew. 19.30. and chapter 20.

And this makes against all them that will be justified by faith in Christ so,
as to be at liberty to do evil, and yet not to be said to sin in so doing:
These begin in the spirit, but end in the flesh, as those of Isaacks posterity,
and of Isreal's, who degenerated and became no better then Ishmaels: 2 Timothy 2.21.
For whosoever is a vessel Elect, and precious, and so appointed to hovour,
purges himself, and is fit for the masters use, being prepared to every good
work. He that says, to do evil is no sin, what says he else, but as the
cursed Serpent to Evah, touching the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
Although ye eat of it ye shall not dye: so he, although ye do the evil,
which God forbids, it is no sin in you, neither shall death betide you
therefore. The Antinomians then from Zealots are turned Libertines, yea
Serpents, which I wish that all the people of God would take serious notice of,
and take heed of being beguiled by their subtilty to their destruction: For let
this be received, and what Whoremonger, Drunkard, Sweater, what man full of
envy, wrath, strife, etc. shall be shut out of Heaven, seeing he believes
also; and thus too in the number of justified persons: But how may we confute
them, since he that believes is justified, and he that is justified can have
nothing laid to his charge past, present, or to come; whereas, if he does but
sin, it cannot but be laid to his charge.

Answ. It is not laid to his charge, because God imputes it not to him, and not
because it is no sin, if it were otherwise, it would not have been said,
Psalm. 32.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin, but rather, in whom
there is no sin, which whosoever says of himself, is a liar, and has no truth
in him; 1 Ioh. 1 8.
yea, although he be a believer; for it is written, If we confess our sins
he is faithful to forgive them. If it were according to the opinion of these
proud justiciaries, that note of St. John would fall to the ground, whereby he
says, we may know the children of God and of the Devil, He that does not
righteousness, is of the Devil, and P. being a justified person, 1 Ioh. 3.10.
Gal. 3.20. said, He knew not what, when he confessed, saying, Of all sinners I
am the chief, and complained of sin in himself, 1 Timothy 1.1.
Rome. 7.

Hitherto of the first. Secondly, Christian liberty is not to error, although
he who holds it thinks it to be truth, and in walking accordingly, walks
according to his conscience, neither may he therefore be suffered, but
animadverted against as an evil doer, by the higher powers, provided that it
be first determined by a General National Assembly that it is an error. Hence
I say, first, That Christian liberty is not a liberty to error, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
for then it should be against Christ, who is the truth, and Gods Word which is
truth; and a liberty to lying, because errors are lies, and damnable lies, for
they that believe them are damned: and it is an epithet of such errors as men
hold and will not revoke them, which are therefore called (...), 2 Pet. 2.1.
Heresies of damnation, and the Heretics are said to be subverted and
condemned of themselves, Tit. 3.10, 11.

But, Quest.
Whether is any error to damnation or no; because, some erring about meats and
days, are pleaded for, and defended, Romans 14. Act. 16.3.
And Paul is said, to have taken Timothy and circumcised him, which yet he
plainly teaches to be so great an error, that it frustrateth the benefit by
Christ, Gal. 5.1. And after long travel, Act. 21.
coming to Jerusalem, he, by the advice of the Church, purified himself
according to the Ceremonial Law, which was then abolished, and therefore the
practice was erroneous. Yet, Gal. 4.10, 11. the observing of days is censured
as prejudicial to the good coming by the Gospel; for he says, Yet observe
days, etc. I am afraid that I have bestowed labor upon you in vain, whereby
it should seem, that any other legal observance, when there date was out, is
of like dangerous consequence.

To this I answer, Answ.
That errors are to be considered, either in the foundation, or in the other
building; error in the foundation is about Christ, who is the foundation
whereupon his Church is built, 1 Cor. 3, 11.
neither can any man lay any other; yet the Church is said, to be built upon
the Prophets and Apostles Jesus Christ being the chief Stone of the corner,
where, by the Prophets and Apostles, their preaching of the truth, and
Prophesying, and committing the substance of all to writing it meant, but
especially the faith touching Christ, as the principal thing in these writings
set forth, and the Law of the ten Commandments, which he must keep that will
enter into life, and the Sacraments, of which, whosoever partakes not cannot be
saved. Now in the foundation to err is damnable, because this is to raze the
foundation of life to a man's self; and if the foundation be rased, whereupon
the hope of life is built, what can this be but a vain hope, as that building
is vain which is set upon the sands, and shall certainly come to ruin? Thus
the Jews and Turks, because they have no faith in Christ, are in a damnable
error: And likewise Heretics, who hold not the holy Scriptures to be the Word
of God, or Jesus, not to be very God as well as man, or justification, not to
be by faith in Jesus Christ, or deny the resurrection of the dead, or the
distinct beings of souls after death, or the blessed Trinity, or confession
of sins to be necessary for the faithful, or the like monsters amongst
Christians, are all in damnable errors.

Lastly, Papists, who hold not Christ to be our only Mediator, but
sacrilegiously adjoyn to him Saints and Angels in this mediating or
interceding office, and are makers and worshippers of Images, and of the host
or sacrifice, as they falsely call the bread in the Sacrament, and believe in
the Pope as infallible, and justification by works of their own, and that
satisfaction must be made to Gods justice by each one, in suffering the pangs
of Purgatory fire, before he can enter into life, with a rabble of many errors
more, do also err damnably. Yea, if any man hold any such error, although not
all or more, he erreth damnably.

Touching other errors in the building, they again must be distinguished into
errors simple or obstinate. Simple errors, are errors that men fall into for
want of a right understanding of the Scriptures, being ready when they are
showed them to be turned therefrom: Obstinate errors, are errors stifely
adhered to after discussion and determination against them in a lawful
Council. Now, simple error in such things is not damnable, but obstinate is.
For, at Ierus. there was a Council of Priests and Levites assisted with a
Judge, whereunto in case of difficulty all men are required to come, Deuteronomy.
17.^.
and the determination being by them made, in any controversy, all are so
bound unto, that he, who will not stand to it, shall dye therefore. Before
this, Moses, who was a man extraordinarily enlightened lightened by God, advising
with God from time to time, was the supreme Umpire. And the like unto this was
done, Act. 15. when a difficult question, about which diverse were of diverse
opinions, was resolved, by the Council at Jerusalem, for this was sent to all
the Churches to be kept by them. And the Apostles, by taking this course
against diversity of opinions, gave example to us in succeeding ages to do
likewise. Wherefore, at all times, the custom of the Church has been by
Counsels to make Canons and determinations of controversies, and so it ought
to be done at this day, wherein more questions arise then ever in any one age
before, and to the Counsels determinations ought all to stand: And if any will
not, their errors now are obstinate, and presumptuous, and damnable. By this we
may conceive, why they that err about matters not of the foundation are so
sharply censured sometimes? and yet at other times defended, or tolerated.

But what Council is a lawful Council in the power whereof these
determinations are? Quest.
or there being a lawful Council, are we so sure, Of Councels
that the Judges in these days, shall determine nothing but the truth, as the
Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, Act. 15. or the Priests, Levites, and Judges
in elder times; and if not, there is not the like reason of being subject to
their determinations?

To the first of these quaeries, Sol. 1.
I answer, That a lawful Council in these cases, is not a Council consisting
only of secular Judges; for that at Jerusalem of old, consisted of Priests and
Levites principally, and a Judge or two adjoined to them, that is, so ne few in
comparison of them, and the other more lately in the same City, of Apostles
and Elders, that is, Preachers of the Gospel, having certain Brethren also
adjoined unto them. But it is a Council consisting of Preachers, who are by
Prayer and arguing to sist out the Truth, some Brethren also being joined to
them, as there were in the first Council at Jerusalem, that by their joint
consent, their Decrees coming out, all sorts may the more willingly submit to
them; for never did any offer in former ages to take this power from professed
Theologues, I mean the power of judging in matters The ological; and to give it
to secular Judges: Neither do I know, whether the presumption of Saul, to offer
Sacrifice; or of Uzziah, to offer Incence, were more offensive to God then
theirs, to do this Priestly office, the Priest being excluded therefrom. For
any common Priest might offer sacrifice, but to the High Priest, and other
chief Priests and Levites, Fathers of their families, as most choice men from
amongst the rest, this office of judging in difficult cases was committed, and
therefore in some respect an higher Priestly office: Neither did Uzziah so take
upon him to offer incense, as to put Azariah and other Priests from so doing.
It is a known saying, Tractet fabrilia faber, quisque suum callet artem;
neither do men go to any other but Physicians to judge of diseases, to
Lapidaries to judge of precious stones, and to Lawyers to judge of Law-cases;
and shall it then be thought right, leaving the Theologues, whose profession
and study it is, to go to others, who in Theology be but their Scholars, to
judge of matters Theological? But if this moves you not, look at Gods own
express Word, The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, Mal, 2.7.
and they shall enquire the Law at his mouth, that is, not, what is therein
written, for that was obvious to any man by looking into the book, but
according to the Law to judge in this or that difficult case.

Again, ye, says Christ, are the lights of the world, Matthew. 5.
and no man takes a light and puts it under a bushel, etc. which words, what
do they show, but that the Ministers of the Gospel ought to be used as lights,
not only to give light by clearing obscurities in the word, but also by
determining the truth in any dark or difficult question which shall arise? But
it is feared, if this be granted, the power of the Minister will be too great,
over-topping even the highest in some things; and why did not Joshuah then
fearing this, desire the Lord, that he might not have recourse to Eleazar the
High Priest for council and direction, Numb. 27.11.
and likewise other Judges and Kings after him? What King did better then Joash
in the days of Jehoindah, whilst he hearkened unto, and suffered himself to be
informed by him? and that it was a custom in Israel, even till the birth of
our Lord, Mat. 2 4.
to seek information about divine things in difficult cases of the Priests,
appears in that Herod gathered all the chief Priests together, to know in
what place Christ should be borne, and the first most famous Christian Emperor
Constantine, that things might be rightly determined in the Church, did the
like when he called the Council of Nice, that I say nothing of other
Emperors, his Successors calling other Counsels at sundry times to the same
ends. If a transcendent power in the ministry be feared, if it be committed to
them to judge in difficult cases, why is it not likewise feared in their having
power to preach permitted unto them to all estates and degrees? For the
Preacher in the Pulpit is above all his hearers, how great and excellent soever
they be, as being one that personates Christ as his Ambassador, Heb. 13.17.
to whom even Kings and Princes must submit as to an accountant for them,
unless they will have him do it with heaviness, which will be unprofitable
for them. There is no man that knows not, that such as are superior in some
respects to all others, are yet inferior in some to the Higher Powers, and
subject unto them even as others of their Kingdom, and even in that wherein
they are superior, they are subject at their command to assemble together and
to do their office, and to such mulcts and punishments as they shall inflict
upon them, whether justly or unjustly, as Zechariah stoned by Joash, Michaiah
imprisoned by Ahab, Abiathar deposed by Solomon, and the Prophet reproving Asa
put in the Stocks by him; only let the Higher Powers take heed, that they
punish not unjustly, as some of these did, and smarted for it. If then their
Sovereignty in worldly things be kept untoucht notwithstanding the
determinative power in things pertaining to godliness, permitted to chosen men
of the Clergy, why should they sin against their own souls so much, as
debarring them herefrom, to whom it is given of God, and properly belongs, to
ingrosse it to themselves? Is a Kings power any whit the less, if he commits
his Law-businesses to the judgment of his Lawyers, and then follows that
which they prescribe? No more is it, when Ecclesiastical matters, being
committed to Ecclesiastical men, to judge and show the truth therein, their
judgments are followed by all men.

And hitherto of whom a lawful Council does not consist: Now let us see, how
it should be composed, and by what authority called; and to know this, we need
not look further then to the Council assembled at Jerusalem, for of such as
that consisted, ought every Council that resolves doubtful questions, to
consist, and so they ought to be brought together, that is, of Preachers sent
from those places where the questions do arise, to the chief City, to join
with the Elders or Preachers there, all the Brethren that will, being present
to bear and consent: They are not then to be appointed by particular men, of
what power or authority soever, but a certain number to be chosen and sent
from each great Town or City, even so many as they shall think fit, who have
the power to command this to be done, for it is a business concerning all, and
therefore in choosing the men, through whose hands it must go, there is great
reason that both Ministers and people should all have a stroke, the Decrees
concluded upon, being thus in a manner their own, and therefore such as every
good Christian will be regulated by, and ashamed to oppose. If the Councels
called by the Popes of Rome be considered, by this rule, they will be found not
to have been any lawful Counsels, because they appointed each one in his
time, the men that should assemble: Neither were those Councels called by the
Higher Powers, as all the most ancient Councels were, ever since there were any
Higher Powers to call them.

Lastly, the Decrees of those Councels, especially of Trent, were none other
but the Popes, by whom a party was made to carry all things as ^ee would have
them. And even for our own Assembly, I would it might be considered, whether
there were not an error in the calling of it, which happily is the cause why it
succeeds no better, nothing being yet done to the beating down of dissentions
in our Church, but they rather increasing more and more.

But although the Assembly be most lawfully met, they are not infallible as the
Apostles were, who met in the first Council at Jerusalem.

I answer, a lawful Council or Assembly is the most infallible means that we
have given us of God to determine the truth in every particular, and therefore
the Decrees thereof ought to be followed and reverenced by every child of the
Church, none of them being against, but according to the evidence of the Word,
which is the rule whereby we ought to go in all things.

That it is the most infallible means it appears, because here are assembled
the greatest Lights, and most Orthodox, from all parts of the Kingdom, and
that according to our president; and what are a few in corners here or there in
comparison of them, that their opinions should not all give way to the Councels
Decrees? Certainly, if these Decrees be fallible, theirs be much more; for the
promise runs, Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I
in the midst of them, it being said before, What soever two of you shall
consent about on earth, shall be ratified in Heaven. Where he speaks without
all doubt of Preachers rightly assembled, to determine of difficulties; for he
says, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: And not of men
privately meeting some few of them together, because so the Decrees and points
agreed upon by one Assembly, might be contradicted by another, which would be
so far from conducing to unity, where there be differences, that they would
be in danger of increasing more and more. And if Councels consisting of Elders
or Preachers be not the most infallible means, why did the Apostles adjoyn the
Elders to them in that first Council, when as they alone were sufficient to
have determined all that controversy: They did doubtless therefore by so
doing, intimate unto us, that it was the will of God in future times, when they
should be departed hence, that the Elders should from time to time be
assembled, as need required, to determine the controversies that should arise
in the Church, to trouble the peace thereof. And this being done, if the
Decrees should be rejected by any because the Council was not infallibly
guided, such assembling were a vain and frustrate act; which to say, since it
is Gods way, is no less then Blasphemy.

But some happily will say, there must be Heresies in the Church, that the
approved may be known, and therefore no Councels should be called, but all men
permitted to their own opinions; there is a day coming, when every man's works
shall be tried, and then no erroneous opinion shall stand, 1 Cor. 3.
but vanish as stubble burns by the fire; before that day it is vain to
attempt it thus, since Christians of all Congregations in the Kingdom are not
bound to follow the Decrees of any one Council whatsoever, which may err as
well as they.

I answer, because there must be Heresies, it does not follow that the means
most effectual to beat them down should not be used: as it does not follow
there must be diseases in the City, therefore no College of Physicians is
necessary there. Though by all the means that can be used, errors will abide
till that day, and not all be extirped, yet all will not, but many will vanish
before, as they have done by means of General Councels in former times, and
many millions who are fluctuating without Decrees of Councels, whereby they may
know what is to be stood to, shall hereby be established, for the rest it
mattereth not so much, seeing they are not of the number of the approved, as
may now be known by their still adhering to their own errors, For how else
are the approved known in times when there are errors, but because so
adjudged, they are ready to revoke them.

And lastly, as I said before, in all right reason, that which is most fallible
must be regulated by that which is less fallible; and whereof we may say, as
the Prophet sometime said, O Lord if I be deceived, thou have deceived me: And
therefore in submitting to such Decrees there is safety; but in following
private opinions, danger. For here the Lord is to direct according to his
promise, and to approve what is decreed, and his Spirit is by earnest prayer
craved, whom he has promised to give to those that ask him, and they that
meet and ask are their success^urs, who upon praying had visible signs of
Gods Spirit coming amongst them, all which are strong intimations, that a
Council lawfully called and constituted, is not so subject to err, as many
conceive, but so guided as that we may and ought to embrace the Decrees
thereof, being assured, that in so doing God will never call us in question for
ever: whereas if we be led by private opinions, how plausible soever they seem
to be in out shallow brains, we must endure his severe examination and sharp
censure therefore. And hitherto of this, that Christian liberty is not to
error, and of the mean, whereby the truth may be known from error, that it
may be embraced, and all error rejected.

Now if any, notwithstanding the Decrees aforesaid, will still persist in his
error, he is not to be tolerated in a Christian Kingdom: For after the
determination of the Priests and Judges, before spoken of, he that did contrary
was adjudged to dye, as doing presumptuously, that others might hear and
fear; and indeed what fear of running with those that err against such
determinations, but by corporal punishments. Oderunt peccare boni virtutis
amore, oderunt peccare mals formidine poena. It is evidently the cause, why
errors are so greatly multiplied in these times, every one without control
holds what is good in his own eyes, no higher power being feared in so
doing, as wanting a Sword to punish in such cases: For let any man speak
unpartially, and he cannot but say, that men have grown much more audacious to
broach their errors since the Government of Bishops, as bad as it was, went
down, then they were under it, which verifies the saying, That a tyranny is
better then an Anarchy. There must then be a Sword to punish error, as well as
evil doing against the Moral Law, which even Heathen Magistrates used the
Sword against. In the Bishops time there were two Swords, one temporal, and
the other spiritual, as they were called, but improperly, for the only
spiritual Sword is the Word, the Discipline but a Rod, of which S. Paul says,
Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in the spirit of meekness. We are now to
desire only one Sword for punishment both of wickedness and error, but it
must then be drawn against both: For as the Magistrate draws his Sword
against injustice, because if he should not, his Kingdom could not stand: So
if a Christian Magistrate draws not his Sword against error, his Christian
Kingdom will be in dangered, as ours is at this day; but in ascribing to the
Magistrate all power to punish, we ascribe not power also to judge in divine
things, as has bin already showed, lest any should take asserting of the
Civil Magistrates government alone to be sufficient in a Christian Kingdom,
as an intimating of this power in them also; the contrary to which, the Author
thereof does in the same Tract declare.

But now to clear yet a little more that point of Ecclesiastical Government,
if the Higher Powers will have it, as it seems by their Ordinance they will, I
have written nothing to oppose them herein, but to show, that it may be spared
in this Kingdom; yet if this Government be set up, it would be considered,
whether it may according to Gods Word consist of ruling Lay Elders in part or
not, and by those, that hold it may, whether those Elders should have equal
power to censure with preaching Elders; For first, there is no plain place of
Scripture for them; that 1 Timothy 5.17. being manifestly wrested to prove
them, as tending to nothing else, but to show, that preaching Elders, who both
rule well and labor in the Word, are most worthy of all others of double
honor, because some might think, that being employed in the office of
Government, wherein some other Preachers were not, they needed not to labor so
much in preaching; to take them off from this, and to put them upon assiduons
preaching notwithstanding, the Apostle gives that commendation to such teachers
as both execute the office of ruling well, and diminish not their labors in
the Word upon this occasion; for so we know some of them have done, when they
were once come into the ruling Office, thinking it to be a supersedeas to any
great pains taking in preaching for time to come. Let ruling Lay Elders be
here understood, and it will follow by reason of the next words, For it is
written, thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, that treads out the
Corn, that they must have maintenance from the Church as well as Preachers,
which were such a burden as was never yet laid upon the people of God in any
age.

To the next Quaere about their equal power, there is nothing which can be
brought for that, but the mentioning of governments, 1 Cor. 12.28. so that
unless all governments be equal, this cannot hence be inferred. It may hap^y
be inserted, that there are other Governments in the Church besides Teachers;
but let the judicious Reader but mark how S. Paul comes to speak of them, and
he cannot but acknowledge them to be an inferior sort of Governors, and that
Teachers are the chief: For having said, that God has given first Apostles;
secondly, Prophets; thirdly, Teachers, He adds, after that helps,
governments; as man was first made, and after that woman to be an help unto
him, and under him to govern in the Family; and he says not Helps and
Governments as diverse Officers, but helps, governments, by apposition to set
forth one and the same, viz. helping Governors.

All that can be proved then from hence, is, that Teachers are not to govern
alone, it being too much distraction, and a burden too great for them, but
some of the Brethren being joined unto them to help them in this work, by
having an eye to the inordinate, and admonishing them, and in case they shall
not so amend, to proceed against them, as the Teachers upon information shall
judge necessary; neither can any more be inferred from Romans 12.8. where it is
said, He that rules with diligence; that is, the Brother preferred to this
office of ruling under the Teacher; long after whom, to show his inferiority,
he is also there named. And thus it may be granted, 1 Cor. 5.
that Lay men in office may keep from the Communion the unworthy; yea, and
ought to do it, when they are so judged: as 1 Cor. 5.

But what is all this to their suspending of the Teacher, or to any lay
brothers power over him in spiritual cases? This certainly belongs not to him,
but to some Timothy or Timothies convened to make a Presbytery to hear and
judge thereof. Neither have we any ground to prove, that this Office of judging
belongs to every Teacher, but to some most discreet and able. But to return
again to the Argument in hand about punishing the Heretical.

It is objected, Object.
whatsoever the proceedings were under the Old Testament; yet under the New no
punishment is appointed for such as err, although against the Decrees of a
lawful Council; yea, they that hold contrary things, each one according to
his conscience, have a supersedeas granted them from being judged: And in the
Parable of the Tares, it is commanded, that they should be let alone till the
day of General Judgment.

I answer, the same Lord who has forbidden to pluck up the Tares, that is,
Heretics, has also commanded, Sol.
Go out to the hedges and highways, and compel them to come in: Now
compulsion implies punishment; Luke 14.23.
for how else do the Higher Powers compel their Subjects to this or that, but
by punishing the refractary? it can by no means be understood of exhorting, or
persuading, for that is spoken of before, verse. 21. where a company are said to
be brought in, and yet there was room, some remained still in corners, in
hedges and highways, as thinking it best apart by themselves, to serve God
according to their own imagirations, so forsaking the Assemblies, where this
Feast is kept by Preaching the truth, to the nourishing and refreshing of the
soul, but no error to the corrupting and poisoning of it. Augustine says,
that he was sometime of opinion, that none ought to be compelled to the unity
of the faith, but seeing by experience both in Hippo, the City where he taught,
and elsewhere, that many who were for fear of punishment compelled, that were
Donatists, afterward proved true Converts (as appeared by their own
confessions,) one and another saying, I thank God that I was compelled, for by
this means I went from my error, in which I would not now be for the world,
he changed his opinion, and counseled the Emperor to proceed against
Heretics by punishments. And he says, although the Lord does not expressly
command this compulsory way, yet in converting Saul from a persecutor, he set
us a sample teaching the same, for he first struck him to the ground, and in
his eyes, and then converted him.

Chrysostom likewise is for compelling by punishments, but not unto death,
least thus some, who might be turned, be directly sent down to hell: And with
these speak the rest of the Fathers generally. For the objection of the tares,
that parable proves nothing, but that in case that wicked Heretics cannot be
rooted out without indangering the wheat, they must be let alone, but not
because it is unlawful to punish them. Sometimes they so abound, that
execution cannot be done, but the good must fall as well as the bad, and then
we must not go about to pluck them up, but leave them to God to take order
about them in his day, grieving for their bindnesse, and praying to him to open
their eyes, that they may be turned. At other times they are not to be
tolerated, but may and ought to be plucked up, as they that will otherwise
overgrow and mar the Wheat, which God so much tendereth.

And another reason is by Expositors yielded also, why he would not have the
Tares plucked up, because they might in time be converted into Wheat, and of
such of them it may be said, that being pluckr up and destroyed, the Wheat is
in part plucked up in them.

Lastly, although the curting off of Heretics be here forbidden, yet all
punishment in their goods, persons, liberty, or by exile is not forbidden,
whereby Christian Magistrates proceeding against them, do all that in them
lies for their conversion, and so clear themselves from guiltiness in
respect of their errors, which otherwise they cannot do; provided always,
that no Idolaters or Blasphemers be counted in the number of those that are not
to be persecuted to death, nor such as to promote their errors stir up
sedition, or move rebellion in the Kingdom; for all such ought by the Law of
God or of Nations to dye for it, although not for the errors which they hold:
And does it not stand with good reason, if the Magistrate ought to deter by
punishments from lesser evils, that he ought likewise to proceed against
greater? but against theft, and adultery, and fornication, and drunkenness,
he ought to oppose severe punishments; and errors are greater evils then
these: for hereby men are robbed of the heavenly treasure; Col. 2.^8.
spiritual adultery is committed, a man's error being loved more then Gods
truth; and here is drunkenness though not with wine, yet with the spirit of
giddines, by which the Heretic is lead. Whereas they object Christ's not
bidding to punish Heretics by death, or other worldly mulcts, or yet by Church
censures, this last is apparently false, for so much as binding is in
Church-censure; and hereof it is said, Whatsoever ye bind upon earth, etc.
implying, that as they should see cause, they should bind; and upon this ground
S. Paul censured Hy^^^^^s and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.
for denying the Resurrection, delivering them to Satan, and for his not
bidding to inflict worldly punishments, no more did he upon Malefactors; but
contrariwise seemed to be against the punishing of the adulterous woman, Joh. 8.
and spoke kindly to the Thief upon the Cross, etc. if then an Argument may
be drawn from hence in favor of error, much more in favor of Malefaction.

But all men will count him absurd, that shall argue thus, Christ has not
bidden to punish Malefactors under the Gospel, therefore they ought to be
permitted, and not punished. But to put it out of doubt, that such as are
punishable by the Law, are still punishable under the Gospel, he says, I came
not to dissolve the Law, but to fulfill it; but how is it not dissolved, if
punishments set about it, as walls to sense it, be taken away, whether they be
of the Malefactor, or wedded to their own wills against determinations made
according to God?

But shall a man be compelled to any thing against his conscience, Object.
which it is Christ's will, that every one should be permitted to follow, as S.
Paul declares it?

I answer, if this be received as a general rule, it will both follow, Sol.
that whosoever does according to his conscience sins not, neither ought he
therefore to be proceeded against, and then what sinner shall be counted a
sinner, or justly be brought under censure? Not the poor, who steal from the
rich, for he thinks in his conscience, that being in want, and the other man
abounding, he may take a little from him for his succor: Nor the godly, as
they are taken to be, who unreasonably oppress such as they count wicked, for
they think i^ their consciences the wicked are but as the Egyptians whom the
Israelnes robbed without scruple, and that all things are theirs, and that the
wicked are usurpers: Nor the Fornicator, who has no wife of his own, and
therefore thinks it is no sin to lie with a Maid; especially, if he intends
to make her his wife afterward: Nor the Higher Powers exercising tyranny
against those that will not submit to give unto them what they require, for he
thinks in his conscience, for so much as every soul ought to be subject to the
Higher Powers; and Samuel tells the people, that this will be the manner of
the King, he may be thus tyranny all toward those that deny: And so Ahab
might think he did not ill in taking away Naboths life and Vineyard both, who
would not yield unto him his Vineyard.

Lastly, that I be not too tedious in this strain, a justified man may steal,
lie, commit adultery, drink drunken, and what not, because he thinks in his
conscience it is no sin in him; and so a gap shall be opened to all
abominations, and he that seeks to stop it shall be a wicked intrencher upon
the Christian Liberty, and make that punishable which by divine Authority is
commendable.

Seeing then to what exorbitancie such a tenet grows, to stand for the
liberty of every conscience, let us see if we can find out what the liberty of
conscience indeed is: It is nothing else but a liberty in things indifferent,
which are neither commanded in the Word of God, nor forbidden (or if they be,
it is not yet manifest to my conscience that they are so) to do, or not to do
them, till that by a General Council assembled the questions be determined,
and then they are no more indifferent, but a conscience is to be made by every
Christian of submitting thereunto.

For first, that the conscience spoken of, Romans 14. and permitted to each one
to follow, is conversant about indifferent things only appears, because all
his discourse there, is, about meats, eating or not eating, and keeping or not
keeping days, which being formerly commanded, but now that command released,
yet not in the conscience of some, who were not persuaded of it, they refrained
from unclean meats still, and kept still the Sabbaths and new Moons. If
therefore in his conclusion he should make conscience a man's guide in all other
things also, his conclusion should be larger then the premises, which is
against the Law of disputation. It is therefore certainly in indifferent things
only, that a man may and ought to follow his conscience, and not in any of the
cases before spoken of, or the like, for therein we have a more certain rule,
viz. the Word written, according to which every one ought to walk; and if he
does not, he is a transgressour, and ought to be judged therefore, whatsoever
he thinks in his conscience touching the same.

According to this the Papists conscience will not bear him out in his
Idolatry, or exempt him from punishment; nor the troublers of our Church peace
by Sosinianisine, Independencie, Anabaptisme, or Seperatisme, some denying
Christ to be God, the Resurrection of the dead, some the distinct Beings of
souls after death, the Unity of the Godhead without distinction of persons,
and the Holy Scriptures not to be the Word of God: Some again standing for
each particular Congregation to be absolute in it self, and not to take
Ordinances or Decrees about divine things from any Synod or Assembly
whatsoever, and to consist only of holy persons gathered out of diverse
Congregations. Some against the Baptizing of Infants for want of actual faith,
and some denying all Congregations to be Churches wherein the wicked are mixed
with the righteous. For first, the Papist goes against the general Rule of
all consciences in his Idolatry. Secondly, the Sosinian raseth the foundation
of the true Christian Faith. Thirdly, the Independants conscience is not
conversant about indifferent things; And the like may be said of Seperatists
and Antinomians and Anabaptists. For how ill does it follow, they whose
consciences would not permit them to eat of some meats, or told them that the
appointed Feasts were still to be kept, were tolerated to follow their own
consciences, therefore they ought to be tolerated, whose consciences are for
ways of their own, which even themselves are not yet fully resolved upon, or
at the least refuse to declare, which were never commanded, or in the
ancientest times walked in, and which so far forth as they are declared, tend
to the taking away of the means of unity in the Churches of England, and
consequently to endless contentions and confusion, as is the case of the
Independents?

Again, how ill does it follow, therefore they are to be left to their own
consciences, who judge others against the evidence of Scripture, as no true
Churches, and therefore contrary to them, forsake their Assemblies, as the
Separatists? or they are to be left to their own consciences, who call in
question the constant practice of the Universal Church ever since the Primitive
times to this day, as the Antbaptists: O^ lastly, they who by their new
Doctrine lay a foundation of Libertinisme, as the Antinomians? The consequence
indeed is good, therefore they ought in times past to have been left to their
own consciences, who would not submit to the use of Ceremonies introduced by
man into God* public Worship: And I am persuaded that the most religious, who
lived then, but departed before these troublous times, had no further thing in
their desires, then the abolishing of them, and of Lord Bishops their violent
abettours, and of Prayers reading in the Congregation, and a Presbyteriall
Government setting up, and Canons and Constitutions to be made by a General
Assembly, for the regulating of all particular Churches in the Kingdom. Having
therefore by Gods providence attained to all these things, why should we
instead of being thankful to God therefore, mutin and make new stirnes and
troubles, to the eclipsing of the glory of this our happiness? and to the
retarding of a complete blessed Reformation, and Government settling; for want
of which, Schisms and disorders do so much abound in all places? And why
should ye that are the Higher Powers, if such as dissent, will not by any
persuasion be moved to reconcile, through a tender regard to consciences in
these cases not to be regarded, cherish any hopes in them of being tolerated
in their singularities any longer? Consider, I beseech you, what has been
said, and provide that there may speedily be such an Assembly, or yield unto
your own that power which belongs unto them, suffering them to declare their
judgment themselves touching Government, and of all doubtful cases to
determine in things pertaining to their own Profession; and this being done,
by your Authority confirm it, not suffering any impune far, that shall
oppose or contemn the determinations thus made, under any pretense whatsoever.
Thus peace and unity shall soon be restored to our Church, which is so well
pleasing to God, and an end put to hellish dissentions, impossible otherwise to
be quelled; and ye by being a means hereof, under God, as he expects in
regard of your place, that ye should be, shall be blessed and happy for ever.

And hit^erto or sin and error, unto which no liberty is given by Christ.
Now thirdly, I say, that Christian liberty is not to shake off the yoke of the
King and Parliament, a Democracie being advanced above all, according to a late
seditious Pamphlet, going under the name of A Remonstrance of many thousands,
being full of unparalleled insolences: For Christians must be subject to the
Higher Powers, as all men that are but little conversant in the Holy Scriptures
know, and hereby purchase credit to their Religion, which would otherwise
become odious to Principalities, keeping them far enough off from being nursing
Fathers to Gods Church under the New Testament, as it is prophesied, that they
should be: They are the Ordinance of God, and such an Ordinance as that
whosoever resists them shall reap unto himself damnation, as a resister of
God. It is not to be inquired into, what miseries the Kingdom has suffered
by Kings; for so they did in the Kingdom of Judah and Israel, yet nothing by
any man of God intimated, that they should attempt to shake off that yoke. A
King is sometime given by God, by whom he reigns in wrath, and then he must
be endured till he that gave him releaseth the Kingdom of him again; For as
David said even touching Saul, who can lay his hand upon the Lords Anointed,
and be blameless? And for a Nations being under a Monarch, it was Gods own
constitution, when he set up Moses and after that Judges successively to rule
in Israel, until the time that he gave them a King, and when for their sins
after the Reign of many Kings, they were carried away captive into Babylon,
Esa. 1.23.
the Lord promising at their return from thence more pure golden times, he
says that he would restore them Judges, as at the first, and not put them
into a Democraticall estate; and by Princes, as Judges, one succeeding another,
they were ruled until the time of Antiothus Epiphanes, above two hundred
years, which shows Monarchy to be of God, and best for his people, where it
may be had, and that they know not of what spirit they are that cry it down.
And as for the Parliament, which is the great Council of the Land, without
which the King can do nothing it is therefore to be understood also under the
name of the Higher Powers, that is, both Houses, and not one of them, the other
being nullified at the will of the people, and therefore as Higher Powers to be
submitted to, and wherein they do amiss to be sought to by petition, that it
may be reformed, and not taunted and checked as underlings by the multitude;
yet the multitude is not by them to be contemned through pride, but their
grievances duly to be considered, and their just desires satisfied, which is
the end of Parliaments, that it prove not according to the saying, Laesa
patientia furor, and in a mad fit what expectation, that men should be
moderated by reason, and not rather break out to the confusion of all? which
God avert for his Mercies sake.

Amen.
An Appendix of 17. Questions, necessary to be discussed and determined by the
Assembly of Divines without delay, that every one may know what to hold and
rest in, and the unnatural divisions in the same Body may cease.
1. Whether it be not best to have one set Form of Prayer to be publicly used
throughout this Kingdom, instead of the Old Liturgy, as conducing most to
Uniformity and to Unity, and is most agreeable to the practice of other
Reformed Churches, and the judgment of our most judicious Calvin, and others
of great note in the Church of God. The Prayer made by each Preacher in the
Pulpit being short at ordinary times, and only ad appositum, but the Lords
Prayer not left out, but once at the least used every day, as ^s therein
employed, that it ought to be, for fear of cherishing that opinion of some,
that it is no Prayer, but only a pattern for direction.

2. Whether it be not necessary for us all to have one Catechism, to avoid
confusion, by teaching diverse in diverse places, and to be so short, yet full,
that the meanest capacities may be capable of learning it, and to injoyne the
diligent teaching of it in every Congregation, till that all have hereby some
good distinct knowledge to salvation formed in them.

3. Whether the celebration of the Lords Supper may be deferred at any time
without limitation of time, because the Passover might not, although it were
so that some came to it not prepared, according to the preparation of the
Sanctuary, as in Hezekiah his time?

4. Whether all the Communicants ought not to sit about the Table, and not be
left to this disjunction either at it, or near to it? for then in one Church
they may sit still to have it carried to them to other seats about, and in
another sit at the Table, which tends to division in Christ's Churches, that
ought all to go by one Rule.

5. Whether the Minister ought not to forbear giving the Bread to the
Communicants before that be has said all the words of institution touching the
same, because it is in the Directory said after these words, Take, eat, here
he shall give them the bread, and whether his giving it ought to be any other
then moving the vessel wherein it is toward them, that each one after other
may take it himself, and then move it to the next, till it comes to the
nether end, because these things are not sufficiently expressed.

6. Why upon a day of Thanksgiving an afternoones meeting it intimated
contrary to Nehem. 8.10, 12. as though all the rejoicing then must be
spiritual, and none civil, which also has been used commonly, Judge. 21.19,
21. Hosea 2.11. Either 9.19, etc.

7. Whether the keeping of the feast of the Nativity of our Lord, ought to be
altogether slighted as superstitious, since it is of greater Antiquity by far,
then any other holy days entitled from the Saints, and although not commanded
by the Lord in express word; yet it is by consequence, and commended by the
Saints doing the like in former ages; as by Ester and Mordecai appointing the
Feast of Purim to be kept that the remembrance of the Jews deliverance by
Ester might never be forgotten: And by Judas Maccabeus the Feast of Dedication,
graced by Christ's own keeping of it, Joh. 10. And for the Antiquity consult
with Chrysostom, J^r^my, and Augustine, who lived before Gregory the first,
who had this fault, that he was very superstitious; and therefore this day, and
the Resurrection, and Pentecost, being kept before all Popish superstition by
the testimony of the foresaid worthies, cannot be taxable hoc nomine, but for
superfluity and excess of riot only then used, which as chafe let be
winnowed away, but let the Wheat remain.

8. Whether the disorder of some of this or that particular Congregation in
going commonly from that, whereof they are members, upon the Lords day, may be
tolerated, where there is a faithful and painful Pastor, as conducing to
their more edification, because this is pleaded, yet to do so is apparently
evil, the discouraging and quenching of the spirit in one Minister of Christ,
and puffing up of another, a ground of disorder laying in many, who are glad of
such a pretext to go for other ends, etc. Et non faciendum est malum ut inde
proveniat bonum.

9. Whether being uncovered for reverence to God and his Ordinance in men
in^^^me of prophesying, ought not to be commended to the people, because S.
Paul speaks of it as asha^^ and dishonor to a man to do so, as in praying,
so in prophesying.

10. Whether the children of believing Parents ought not to be baptized, and
whether sprinkling suffices without dipping, and what solid reasons of both
these.

11. Whether Sureties are not rather to be accepted then rejected; for so much
as we say. Abundans cautela non nocet, and many poor children have fared the
better for their Godfathers or Godmothers.

12. Whether both in administering this Sacrament and that of the Lords Supper,
it were not better to have a prescribed form of prayer, then to commit it to
each Ministers present conception, because so this service must needs be
unequally performed, and by some very deficiently.

13. Whether private meetings for preaching may be tolerated, where the
public place is open, because Christians met not in corners of old, but being
enforced through persecution; about this Ordinance and this seperating, is a
condemning of our Congregations as impure and Antichristian.

14. Whether persons justified by faith in Christ, thenceforth are not liable
to sin any more.

15. Whether Christ's descent into hell be to be retained as an Article, of our
Faith, because it was out of the Apostles Creed in the Latin Churches for 500.
years.

16. Whether there be not a Catholic Church.

17. Whether the Articles of our Faith and Ten Commandments have not need to
be recited in the Congregation every Lords day.

Touching all these, great satisfaction may be given to thousands by their
determinations and convincing reasons, and so most probably our Church-tempest
will turn into a calm; but otherwise it will probably rage more and more.

FINIS.

