A True RELATION FROM HVLL OF The present state and condition it is in.

AS It was written in a Letter from thence by one of good quality, to a Citizen
in London, being dated the 19th of this instant Month of September. 1643.

Which Letter was brought into London the twenty eight of this Month.

Ordered to be Printed.

LONDON, Printed by G. Dexter, for John Bull. Anno 1643. Sept. 30.

Hull the 19th. of September. 1643.
AS for news from hence, I shall inform you as follows: We found this town
beleagured by the Earl of New castles Forces, to the number of 15 thousand, as
is credibly reported, they lie at Cottingham, and Newland, and those that lie
nearest, are about a mile off from the Town, they have cast up leverall works
against the Town, and planted diverse Pieces of Battteries in them and daily
make many shots against it, but blessed be God have done little hurt, although
they have shot many 36 pound bullets, especially upon the last Lords Day when
we were at Church, they came flying over it and flew into the Market place but
did no hurt but to a Malignants Chimneys. Every Day many shots with the great
Pieces are made from the Town and Blockhouse against the Enemies Works, and
the Town where they are but we cannot hear certainly what execution has vin
done, our musketeers and theirs playing continually at one another in the mid
way, so that they are yet kept at a distance that they cannot shoot their
Grenades into the Town to fire it: They have spoyld all the Country near
Hull, and most miserably plundered Beverly, they have cut off our fresh water,
but (God be blessed) here is no great want of provision for men as yet, bread
is the scarcest, there is Corn enough in the Town, but they cannot get it
grinded fast enough. Newcastle is exceeding mad that he cannot get this Town
for his winter quarters as he did hope, or to be a sanctuary for him from the
Scots: Its reported that he cares not for the loss of ten thousand Men, so
that he could but possess himself of the Town for by the Commission of
Array, the Lord Dunbar^e brings in all the country men to make his number
great. The last week we cut the Banks to let out the water into the grounds,
which overflowes indifferent well, but it is thought they use some means to let
it in again, it will be some hindrance to them as it is. There is no fear of
the Town in probability, if the Lord have not designed to give it into the
enemies hand; and I am persuaded they will return again to York ere long with
loss and shame: Colonel Cromwell is come into Lincolne-shire with 5000. horse
and foot, and has sent some troops to Barton yesterday to meet with our
horse, which are going over to them at every tide, as many as can go in the
boats. There goes away 21 Troops, and 4 troops stay in this town we hear that
Lyn is in the Earl of Manchesters power, they are willing to yield to two
Propositions, as to acknowledge their offense against the Parliament, and to
pay the fine, which he shall impose upon them, but they are unwilling to
deliver up their Delinquents, which the Earl stands most upon, for the
greatest Malignants in the associated Counties are fled thither. Here was an
accident happened on Saturday last at the North blockhouse, which if the Lord had
not prevented might have been the ruin of this Town: there was 40 odd
Carthages of powder blown up, and some Grenades being in the place, fired,
brook down a great part of the Block house both within and without, which is
thought will scarce be repaired with 2000 pound, but the especial providence
of God appeared herein, in that it was blown up on that side that lay next to
the Town, otherwise it would have been very advantageous to the Enemy. But
this is remarkable above the rest, and in it the hand of God was emminent, that
it blew open a door in which Room was 14 barrells of powder, some with the
heads open and yet took not fir, which if it had done it would have blown up
the whole house, and spoiled some of the Town: It was conceived at the first
that there was Treachery, but it appeared to be done by the carelessness of a
Gunner: there were four killed, and as many hurt. We have a report of good news
from the Earl of Essex his Army, I shall be much engaged to you, if you will by
the first give a testimony thereof, and also what other news is stirring with
you in print, and you shall oblige me to answer your expectation in the like
kind. And so at present having not else to enlarge, I commit you unto the
Almighties protection, and ever rest.

Your assured Friend THO. MAY.

FINIS

