XXX. Christian and Politic REASONS Wherefore ENGLAND AND THE LOW COUNTRIES
May not have Wars with each other.

By HENRY MAY, of Amsterdam.

PROVE. 27.12. A prudent man foreseeth the evil and hides himself, but the
simple pass on and are punished.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. and R I. in the Year 1652. June.15.

Diverse CHRISTIAN and POLITIC REASONS Against VVarres betwixt ENGLAND, and
the LOW COUNTRIES.
I Nprimis, Because the glory of God, and the Reformed Protestant Religion,
will be by the said Wars, reproached and evil spoken of.

II. Because we, to God and the World, bear forth one Religion.

III. Because we both as a principal cause of our Wars, have been for one
Religion and liberty of Conscience.

IIII. Because we are Brethren and Neighbors, and so ought to be friends;
therefore ought not to War with each other.

V. Because we both almost at one time, became free States, and that granted by
our greatest Enemies.

VI. Old friends and kindnesses past, ought to be kept in everlasting memory.

VII. Against the common Enemy, we ought to consider times past, present, and
to come.

VIII. We ought to offer up Christian prayers both public and private, in
Church and Commonwealth, for the prosperity and welfare of each other, which
cannot be, in case we have Wars with each other.

IX. Two is better then one, and a threefold cord is not easily broken.

X. This war will be destructive to both; as betwixt Abimeleck, and the men of
Sichem, and Sichem against Abimelech; as Israel against Benjamin, and Benjamin
against Israel; as Abner against Joab, and Joab against Abner; as Rehoboam
against Jeroboam, and Jeroboam against Rehoboam; as Judah against Israel, and
Israel against Judah: as appears in the Wars of Turkey, Spain, Italy,
France, Germany, and in England: the red Rose against the white; and in the
Low Countries, ten Provinces against seven, and seven against ten, weakening
each other, and ruinous to both.

XI. We shall by this War bring upon us the curse of posterity, and our
Children may say, Had our forefathers no other cause to War against their
friends and neighbors, as to bring us to a bloud-bath each with other? It will
occasion laughter and derision, seeing nothing but pride and ambition, has
brought us to this condition.

XII. There will be many in this cause troubled in conscience, and will be
constrained to leave the Countries of their Nativities, for not to give or
allow any thing for the maintenance of the bloodshed, and overthrow of each
other, in such unwarrantable and unnatural Wars.

XIII. Before these times we took up Arms for the maintenance of the true
Protestant Religion. If we should now War against the same, how can God
bless such endeavors; No, rather for our sins he will make us a just
judgment, and a rod of his wrath to chastise each other.

XIIII. Many, worthy and learned, have given forth the fall and destruction of
Antichrist to be about this time, but so doing, if he were fallen, might easily
rise again.

The Spaniard.
Los dos republicos sun buena para mi
So ikse maer in groot oorloogh sid
Ick sches asem, daer toe kryge ik lesat,
Beyde rebellen hebben elk ander int hayn gevat,
'D als sy beyde haer asem syn quyt,
So hoop ikse te hebben tot mine profyt.
XV. Never any Wars so sad and bitter, as these, if they should fall betwixt
us: for it will be most at Sea, where in former times there used to be no
Wars; therefore amongst Christians there ought to be a free Trade, and
Merchants and Merchandise unmolested, ought to peruse the Seas without
molestation.

XVI. God oftentimes visits mankind at Sea, with tempests, and storms, and
other dangers, therefore we ought not to tempt God with needless Wars.

XVII. The dangers at Sea will be sinking and burning, and a destroying of
Ships, and Master and man will sink together, without respect to their
qualities.

XVIII. How sad and comfortless will it be for the brethren of one and the
self-same ship; Church and profession in England, and in Holland, and the News
of unhappy and uncertain Wars and Victories, to the destruction and ruin of
each other, or shall we both sing Te Deum Laudamus?

XIX. Satan was the first inventer of wars, betwixt Cain and Abel, and in these
Wars there is no better Commander.

These two republics both sprung in a night.
I gather strength whiles that they both do fight.
I was King of England, by marriage of the Queen,
And Earl of Holland my Predecessor has been.
I will assist the one, and beat the other by the ears,
I will cry Ha, Ha, fight dogs fight bears.
XX. The profit which shall proceed out of this unnatural wars, shall be
buried in the bottomless Sea; where Malignants may quench their hellish and
warlike design; there shall no bells be rung, nor any need of raising the
Countrymen for burying of the dead.

XXI. The damage will be the loosing of your best men, Ships and Arms; likewise
the welfare of the Countries strength, fishing and trading, and open the
Country for a foreign enemies invasion.

XXII. What profits it England to bear the name of a free State and
Commonwealth, and Holland a free fought Nation granted them, if by wars you
enslave each other? and make your selves slaves to the Commonwealth of each
other, and your enemies? where remains then the glory of God, and the defense
of true Protestant Religion? What profits that noble freedom that has bin
bought and paid for at so dear a rate.

XXIII. Under pretense of wars betwixt you, will the Seas be filled with
Sea-Rovers and Pirates, under show hiding themselves not only to have you in
Wars, but also to keep you in the same, to the utter undoing of trading and
traffic.

XXIIII. By reason of your strife about free Trading, other Seaports and
Havens will have their eyes opened, and think, is there so much benefit to be
had? we will likewise be doing, and have a Trade of our selves, which without
this question and strife betwixt you, would not be thought of.

XXV. Let us be content, the world is great enough for us two Republics to
trade to our content, so we be not like Esops Dog, hoping at the shadow, lost
both shadow and subhance. But we ought to understand each other by one Law, for
both Nations, and one rule at Sea, seeing all a like are interressed therewith;
and thereby to regulate Trading, that all question and dispute may be
destroyed, by wholesome and good Laws, not ^o wrong each other.

XXVI. When then by this war, which God keep us from, your best soldiers are
lost, and your wealth perishes at Sea, and your own hand wrought your own
ruin, consider then whether it bad not been better never to have began this
sport, then too late you may very very well cry, Shall the sword devour for
ever? Know ye not that it will be worser in the latter end?

XXVII. If then there be no other remedy, but we must consume by these
unchristian Wars, then enlarge your Alms houses and hospitals, for
doubtless you will increase in widows and fatherles children, which will bid
their husbands and parents adieu, or farewell, but not welcome their return.

XXVIII. Therefore sad not the heart of the distressed Natives and Inhabitants,
with this dangerous and unnecessary war, who with signs do call and cry for
peace, yea peace in Gods name, but cannot attain to it. Heavy will the account
be of those that are the first occasion of this ruin. Let Mars rather be
transported to those that know not God, that speak you fair, and inwardly hate
your welfare.

XXIX. But being assured, and well knowing the great wisdom, diligence, and
discretion, therefore hope that God will not turn the wisdom of the wise to
foolishnes, but bless the Peacemakers, and unite their hearts and affections
each to other; not only to agree as Brethren, but also to make an everlasting
peace to us and our posterity, and a good enlargement to traffic and trading,
and so by Gods Order to understand each other, and so to keep all Pirates out
of Sea.

XXX. And to escape this damage, not only Ships and Loadings, but also life and
posterity, and to avoid this dark cloud and tempest, then ought we to offer up
strong prayer to God, heartily forsaking our sins, and forthwith to proclaim
days of fasting and praying, and not to give sleep to our eyes, nor slumber to
our eyelids, till we have received mercy and pardon from his most high majesty.

And let them be confounded and back-turned that hate Zion.
Vale.
FINIS.

