M. Deputy Recorders Speech at the Chequer Bar to Baron Trever at the Lord
Majors taking his oath on Thursday the 18. day of August 1642. With the said
Barons reply, with the Lord Majors Oath, and the last Declaration from the
House of Parliament.
Sir,
IN regard that Sir Richard Gurney the late Lord Major of the City of London is
put out of his said office by virtue of a Censure of the Lords in the High
Court of Parliament the Commonalty of the said City have mode choice of this
Noble Gent. Alderman Pennington to be Lord Major of the said City during the
remainder of the time which the other Lord Major had to continue therein. And
that none may question the Lawfulness of this choice we may find in the 16.
year of K. John and the 17. year of Henry the third, two presidents in the
very point, that in this case the City might choose a new Lord Major, which
should be a person of wisdom, courage, trust, and fidelity, for the managing,
and governing of the great and weighty affairos of the said City.

And that this man that they have made choice of, is a person every way
answerable to discharg that trust which shall be reposed in him, for he is a
man well known in the City being Chosen Sheriff about five years since and
has borne many offices in the City being, always approved to be a man of a
singular life and conversation, and of excellent abillities, being a man of
courage, fearing God and hating covetousness, nay he is a person that is
endued with those virtues that the Charter of the City does describe and direct
them to make choice of, being a man of wisdom, discretion, trust, and
Fidelity, and as he is well known to the Lords, so has be been in no less
estimation amongst the commons, being chosen Burgess of this present
Parliament, and has been approved to be a very profitable member thereof, yet
nevertheles that Honorable Assembly as willing to spare him for the good and
safety of the said City of London.

Baron Trevors Reply
I Understand by the occasion of the late Lord Majors being put out of his
place, by the just and deserved censure of the Lords in Parliament, this Noble
gent* is chosen Lord Major of the said City of London and that yesterday he
came to have been sworn but because I was then absent, and the rest of my
Brethren the Barons being out of Town this business could not be done at that
time whereupon the Lords sent to know what Barons were in town, and have given
me order to swear the Lord Major, and there is no question of his integrity,
and wisdom, for the execution of Justice within the said City, neither shall
I need to prescribe unto him any particular directions therein; for the oath
does sufficiently declare how he ought to carry himself during his Majoralty.
Whereupon the Oath was read which was to this effect.

That he shall endeavor to maintain the just rites and Prerogative of the
Kings Majesty, and to inform the Lords of the Council of such profits
belonging to His Majesty as were arrere and due unto His Majesty, That he
shall do equal Justice without respect of favor or reward to all His
Majesty's l^ige Subjects, within the said City, And set good and indifferent
prizes upon fish, and other Commodities within the said City belonging to his
power and Jurisdiction, And shall make due execution of all and singular the
premises according to the Laws of the Land and the Customs and usages of the
said City.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
WHereas the King, seduced by wicked council, does make war against his
Parliament and people; and for the promoting that war, diverse forces both of
horse and foot have been, and are levied and raised by several persons, and
His Majesty's good Subjects are most cruelly robbed, spoiled, and slain. To the
end that no man may be misled through Ignorance, the Lords and Commons in
Parliament declare, that all such persons as shall upon any pretense
whatsoever, assist His Majesty in this war, with Horse, Arms, Plate, or
money, are Traitors to His Majesty, the Parliament, and the Kingdom, and shall
be brought to condign punishment for so high an offense.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That this Declaration be forth
with printed and Published. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London Printed for Daniell Bradley, 1642. August the 20.


