ENGLAND's Champion; or, The just man's Fortitude, manifested In that gallant
resolution of Sir John Maynard Knight of that noble Order of the Bath and a
(late Member of the Honorable house of Commons) etc.
Being the Copy of his Letter and Protest, sent unto the Lords, Febr. 14.
1647. Directed as follows.
To the Right Honorable my singular good Lord, EDWARD Earl of Manchester,
Speaker of the House of Peers. These --
My Lord,
YOur Lordship may please to remember I was before you at your Bar, upon the
5. Febr. last, Where I demeaned my self with all duty and respect to your
Honorable house, and did zealously and Cordially express my self for the
just interest of your House, but being perplexed at the illegality of your
proceedings with me, I was thereby forced and compelled to Protest by word of
mouth against both the matter and manner of your Procceding, but in regard your
Lordships were pleased to Order me anew to appear at Your bar, upon
Saturday next being the 19 of Febr. 1647. I am necessitated with all humility
and respect unto the just Honor of your House, inclosedly to send You my Plea
and Protest under my Hand and Seal which I humbly entreat your Honor to
Communicate unto the House of Peers, this being my Vltimate resolution, with
which I humbly subscribe my self,

My Lord, your Honors devoted Servant, JOHN MAYNARD.
From the Tower of London, this 1^ Febr. 1647.
The humble (...) and Protest of Sir John Maynard, etc. Sent unto the House of
Lords, Febr. 14. 1647.
My Lords:
I Am now aspersed with Treason, but I should really contract the guilt of
Treason against my Countries Liberty, and render my Name infamous amongst the
Commons of England to Posterity, if I should regard your Articles of
Impeachment, as an accusation to which I am bound to answer. If I were justly
to be suspected for Treason, there could be no Legal just proceedings to
bring me to my answer, but by Indictment of good and lawful men, where such
supposed treasonable deeds were See Cooks expos. of the 29. cap. of Magna
Char. 2. part Instit. fol. 45. 46. See the Stat. of 25 Ed. 3 37 Ed. 3. 42 Ed.
3. 3.
done; And although I were Legally indicted, the Case comes not under your
Lordships Cognizance; but seeing I am a Commoner of England, by the established
Laws of the Land, my trial ought to be by a Judge or Justice, and a Jury of
Commoners, and no See Mag Charta.
otherwise; and as the intent of those Laws was, that all Trials might be
equal and impartial, so they are founded upon these impregnable grounds of
Reason and Equity.

First, the Jury are to be of the Neighborhood where any crime is committed,
and some ought to be of the same Hundred; for the Law presumes, that such may
have either some cognizance of the fact, or of some Circumstances thereof, or
of the Party accused whose condition and manner of conversation is much to be
regarded, for the discovering his intention in any fact supposed to be Treason
or Felony, etc. and the Rule of the Law is, See 1. part of Cooks Instit. L. 2.
ca. 12. Sect. 234. See 3 part Instit fol 32, 33.
Actus non facit reum nisi men's sit rea. That a Jury man be according to Magna
Char. Liber and Legales homo. a good and lawful man, he must have three
property.

1. He must be dwelling most near to the place where the fact is done.

2. He must be sufficient for understanding and competency of estate. 3 He
must be indifferent and free from suspicion of partiality.




2. The Jury that passes upon any Commoner one day, may themselves be in a
condition to be tried by him another day, as one of their Jury: and hereby they
are bound to indifferency and impartiality, confidering it may be their own
case.

3. The Party accused may challenge or except against the Jurors; either
against the Sea 1. par. Cooks Just. L. 2. c. 12. sect. 234
Array, if the Sheriff or Bayliffe impanelling the Jury, be not wholly
disingaged and indifferent, as to the Cause: and the Party prosecuting, or
against the Polls; and in case of reason he may challenge 35 peremptorily upon
his dislike, without rendering the least cause, and as many more as he can
render any reason for his just challenge, as in case he can challenge any for
a Baron or Lord of Parliament, or for defect in estate or other abilities, or
for disaffection or partiality, or for any infamous Crime, and hereby the
Judges of the fact for the Party accused, may certainly be indifferent, equal
and impartial.

4 The matter of Fact is only entrusted to the Jury, and the matter of Law to
the Judge, for the preventing all Errors, confederacies, or impartiality

5. The Judge is sworn to do justice to all according to Law, without respect
of Persons, and the Jury are sworn to find according to their Evidence.

Now from every of these, the injustice and illegality of your Lordships
claim, to be both Jury and Judges in the Trial of me, or any Commoner, is
clearly demonstrable.

Your Lordships cannot be of the Neighborhood where the Crimes of all
Commoners are committed, and cannot be presumed to have any cognizance of the
Facts, or Parties offending; neither do you allow your selves to be Tried by
Commoners; so as to be bound to indifferency and impartiality, from the
Knowledge that the Commoners whom you would Try, might possibly be of a Jury
for your Trial in a short time; neither can my self or any other Commoner whom
you would try, challenge in the case of Treason thirty five of your house, for
your whole house amounts very seldom to that number, neither will you allow me
to challenge any one of your Lord ships, though I should allege disaffection,
partiality, or that he is an engaged party, or prosecutor, secretly or openly;
neither at present is there any Lord high Steward, or Lord high Constable,
amongst your Lordships to be Judge in matter of Law, while others should be
Judges in matter of fact: neither are your Lordships sworn to Judge according
to Law, or in matter of fact according to Evidence.

Having therefore such infallible evidence, both from the Statute, and Common
Law, that I ought to be brought to answer, to any supposed crime, only by
indictment or presentment of my equals; good and Lawful men of the
neighborhood where the fact is done, and that my trial ought to be by my
equals, and a Judge of the Law in open Court; and that the cogniz^nce of any
crime whereof I am suspected pertaines not to your Lordships; I am resolved
never to betray my own, and all the Commoners Liberties, nor to consent to the
subverting the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, by submitting to a trial by
your House, or to answer to your Articles of Impeachment; but I do hereby
protest against the form of your accusation as illegal, and your Lordships
Jurisdiction over my self, or any Commonner of England, in criminal cases as
being destructive to our fundamental rights and Liberties: and I do hereby
claim the benefit of Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and all other
established Laws of the Land, which this Honorable house, the house of
Commons and the Army under his Excellencio Sr. Thomas Fairfaxes command, in all
your and their Declarations, remonstrances, protestations, oaths, and
Covenants, have promised, vowed, and declared, you will maintain and preserve,

John Maynard.

Published by a lover of peace, and Justice: and the Liberties of the Commoners
of England, which now the House of Lords, does endeavor to destroy, in the
case of Noble Sr. John Maynard, who without all shadow of Law or justice, they
intend upon Saturday next, being the 19. Feb. 1647. to try, and condemned, in
whom we are all tried, and condemned; and therefore let us as one man go up
with a Petition to the House of Commons, on Friday next, to demand our
Liberties in St. John, and to desire the House, if they ever intend to have us
to stand by them more, or obey them, that they do preserve our lost Liberties,
and not betray them to the Lords.


