Memorandums for London In the choice of their COMMON-COUNCEL-MEN.
Viz. What they are to do 1 Before the election of them. 2 In 3 After

Observations before Election.
PRay (as Christ all the night before he chose his Apostles, Luke 6. 12, 13.
And as the Apostles Acts 1. 24. lest they should choose another Judas,) Or as we
upon and at every Ordination of Ministers, for Number. 10. 31. they are the Cities
eyes; and Math. 6. 22. etc. If the eye be single, thy whole body shall be full
of light, but if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness,
and then, how great is that darkness.

2. Get as good intelligence as you can, who did best of the last years
Common-Councelmen, and who worst; for Nahum 1. 11. There is one come out of
thee that imagines evil against the Lord, a wicked Counselor.

3. To examine if there be any fitter and more to be confided in. For first,
Nothing passes as the Cities motion, but by them. Secondly, This is like to be
the year of Londons Jubilee, or Captivity.

4. See that none that have not taken the Covenants may neither be chosen, nor
suffered to have their Votes in the choice of others, as by an Order of
Parliament December 20. 1643 it was appointed.

5. That none well affected be absent from election.

Observations in the time of choosing.
1. That Malignants cunningly by naming good man do not make them to go out
from the place of election, and so their voices under pretense of modesty be
lost in the choice of others. But let them stay, and not leave Malignants (when
they are sent away) to choose Malignants in their absence.

2. That there be a mere choosing without accusing, or excepting against any
nominated, for people come not to indite, but to elect.

3. That there be no continuance of the former, but a free election of all,
without setting as many new ones against the old (as in a Cockpit) but that of
old and new there be a mere new choice.

Choose not such as these.
1. Those that love not London more then Constantinople, but as it is a place
of gain only.

2. Not a Gallio, Acts 18. 17. careless of Londons honor.

3. Not a Foelix, Chap. 24. that hops for money. Prove. 28. 21. Such an one
will transgress for a morsel of bread, much more for hope of a good Office,
or more.

4. Nor such as be so bashful, that they will suffer impudences to ravish
their understandings; and rather then cry out against them, too easily hold up
their hands, because they cannot else get the other to be quiet, and to hold
their tongues.

5. None that cannot or will not attend the Office. Romans 12. 7, 8.

6. None that gain more by War then by Peace (in Army or Office) for they
will be of Demetrius his mind, Acts 19. 25. Sirs, ye know that by this craft
we have our wealth.

7. No Cowards, for they will not counsel to conquer Canaan: but to make a
Captain and to return into Egypt.

8. No Issachar, no strong Ass, that will couch down between two burdens,
Genesis 49. 14.

9. None proud nor pertinacious, wise only in his own conceit; for there is
more hope of a Fool then of him.

10 None of Rehoboams Young men, nor Old men grown Children again, if ever they
were other.

11 None too great with Malignants; for Nehemiah chased away one of the High
Priests Sons, because he was son in law to Sanballat, Nehem. 13. 28.

Choose such as these.
1. Nehemiahs, such as are godly, wise, and public spirited men.

2. Such as Ioshuah, that was brought up under Moses, and knew the business
which was to be done.

3. Like Matthias, Acts 1. that had been with the Apostles from the beginning,
men of experience.

4. Mordecaies, those that have been discoverers of former dangers.

5. David's, such as have been deliverers from former dangers.

Duties after Election.
1. Pray as Daniel 2. that the secret may be revealed unto them.

2. Praise God when it is. Ibid.

Imprimatur Ja. Cranford.

London printed by G. M.


