AN ELEGY Upon the Death of the Right Honorable, most Noble,
Worthily-Renowned, and truly Valiant Lord, ROBERT, Earl of ESSEX and EVVE,
etc. His Excellency, late Lord General of all the Forces raised by the
Parliament of England in defense of the Protestant Religion. Who departed the
14th. day of September, 1646.
The first Elegy.
CEase great Surveyer of this glorious Ball,
To shine; you twinkling Constellations all,
Stand in your Spheres, as if you all were fixed,
And framed to make all human Mortals vexed;
Restrain your light; do not one glimpse bestow
Fot our delight, sad mourners here below:
You were created in celestial kinds
To glad the mirthfull and solatious minds
Who, rapt as 'twere, and ravished with your glories,
Might therein walk, and shun disastrous stories:
But lo! your comforts useless now, we mourn,
You need not more, your heavenly Tapers burn
But be as we are; all beclouded over
With Sable Mantles; and do not discover
Your Orbs a while, but let us live alone
Dark as the Night-Owles, sadly to bemoane
Our so much loss; and having wept a time,
Give light again; to let us know our crime
Of gu^lt, whereby we greatly did provoke
Your high Creator, thus to strike this stroke
Against the State; whose standing did consist
As much in him, as could in one be wished:
Our admired ESSEX, who still aimed at
The height of Honor; yet Immaculat.
But ah! He Is changed, then let us cast our eyes
To do their duties at his Obsequies:
Alas! what duties can our eyes perform?
Nothing but weep, as 'twere, a Winter storm
Of such continuance, as with watery Floods
The Earth may swell, and swallow up the Clouds.
Could those sad tears, in sorrow we would weep,
And shed, till such an inundation deep
Did flow so far, as till a new deluge
Should threat our ruin, yet we would not grudge
Once to regain so great a good as this,
(Pardon the passion of my partial wish)
Whose worth the virtuous, and the very bad,
Bemoan (now loft) because, they living, had
A Patron to their virtue; and the worst
Were won by his example; thus both lost;
But now O! march you multitude of Mourners,
Seal up this Jewel, wast all your waxen burners
About his Tomb; and take no Trophies hence,
This is the last, and least, due recompense
Can be performed; O! happy then, that Ark
Where lies inshrin'd, such goodness in the dark.
Farewell, brave Lord, in vain our suits we sue,
Soul rest in peace; To thee once more adieu.
The second Elegy by the same AUTHOR.
REeader, the reverend duty which I owe
To this great Haeros, I would have thee know,
Moves me to write, though some more learned hand
Will try this task, and in my room will stand
To state the Case; lest I Eclipse the light
Of his great glory, and impair that right
Due to his worth; yet let me add one Verse
Upon his Doleful, though adorned Hearse;
Whose Boundless virtues, ornaments of Fame,
Befits the Gods to gloss on such a Theme.
Religious Patron, Peerlesse, Pious Peer,
Affections Lodestone lies inshryned here;
Highest in honor, bounty, zeal, and love,
Whose rare Perfections (in a Sphere above
My rural pen) were placed; who did transcend
Nature its limits in Courage; had no end
In all those parts and attributes of grace
Could be conferred from Heaven on Human Race,
Whose loss all Nations ought lament and mourn,
And power out Seas of tears about his Vrn;
By nature Noble, unblemisht, and renownd,
Unparaleld for prudence; most profound;
Religion, Valor, Fortune, Faith and Wit,
All were combined; Here was a pattern fit;
A matchless mind, magnanimous and just,
True, Constant, upright in his highest Trust;
Beloved of all, whole goodness did reflect
Upon the best; and had so strong effect
(By influence infused from above)
Upon the bad, they could not choose but love.
The gods conveyed by their supernall power
All worth to him; yet vanquished in an hour
He was by Fate; though all the force which Mars
Did make, could not subdue him in the Wars.
His acts did add, unto his Nations honor,
His rare exploits did prosper so, he won-her
More steadfast faith, more upright truth and peace,
As never can be canceld in no race.
Time shall expire, and all in it shall rot,
But his brave Name shall never be forgot,
Whose so raised fame and excellencies shall
Survive the world, yea and its Worthies all.
In brief, what Age might speak so proud a word,
So good a Man, and yet so great a Lord?
William Mercer.

London Printed by I. C. 1646.


