A STANDARD SET UP: Whereunto the true Seed and Saints of the most High may be
gathered together into one, out of their several Forms: For the Lamb against
the Beast, and False Prophet in this good and honorable Cause.

OR THE PRINCIPLES and DECLARATION Of the REMNANT, who have waited for the
blessed Appearance and Hope.

Showing, how Saints as Saints, men as men, and the Creation shall have their
blessings herein, as in the Deliverance of the True Church out of Babylon, and
all Confusion; as in the most Righteous and Free-Common-Wealth-State; As in the
Restitution of all things.

Subscribed W. Medley, Scribe.

Genesis 49.9. WHO SHALL ROVSE HIM UP? Deuteronomy. 33.27. The eternal God is thy
Refuge, and underneath are the everlasting Arms: and he shall thrust out the
Enemy from before thee, and shall say Destroy them. Isai. 60.22. A little-one
shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong Nation: I the Lord will
hasten it in his time. Isai. 62.10. Lift up a STANDARD for the People. Rev.
19.2. For True and Righteous are his Judgments, for he has judged the great
Whore which did corrupt the Earth with her Fornication, and has avenged the
Blood of his Servants at her hands. Printed in the Year 1657.

I. Whilst the Lords own People in these Three Nations were in a very Low
Condition, and state of Persecution, continually hunted by Cruel Adversaries,
through the Treasonable Practices, Oppression, and Tyranny of the late King;
and the Cruelty, Rage, and bloody Persecuting Spirit of the Bishops and
Prelates; insomuch that the Land was filled with Blood: See large Petition to
Parliament 11. Sept. 1648.
And the people of these Nations inslaved to the Lust and pleasure of the King
( The freedom of the People being directly Opposite to the Prerogative of
Kings.) in their Estates and Liberties; Robbed, and Spoiled of their
Common-Rights and Privileges; and their Representatives deprived of their
Law-making-Power, and subjected to the Negative-voice of a single Person, and
Dissolved at Will and Pleasure; so that a perfect Yook of Bondage was upon the
Bodies and Consciences of men: The Lord by his wise Providence raised up an
Instrument to work Deliverance and Salvation from the hands of this
Common-Enemy (in which should we note the wonderful passages of Providence
from time to time would be mavelous.) Afterward ( i. e. about the midest of
the War) The Instrument became more refined: See Speech to l. Parliament p. 2,
3.
The Lord winnowing the Forces of this Nation, and putting them into the hands
of men of other Principles, than those engaged at first: So (crossing the
designs of men, and causing his own to take place, which he carried on in all
the late wars, yea to this day; So the thoughts of his heart take place in
all Generations) he raised up a poor and contemptible company, neither versed
in Millitary affairs, nor having much natural Propensity no them; and this
through owning a Principle of Godliness, of Religion. This Army Declared, They
were not mere mercinary men, Declarat. June 14. 1647.
hired to serve an Arbitrary power of State: But took up Arms in Judgment and
Conscience, for the defense of the peoples just Rights and Privileges, and to
vindicate the power of the Nation in Parliaments against all Arbitrary Power,
Violence, and Oppression, Declarat. in Scotl. Anno. 1650.
and all particular parties and interests: And being persuaded in their
consciences that the King and his Monarchy was one of the 10. horns of the
Beast spoken of Rev. 17 etc. And being witnesses to so much of the innocent
Blood of the Saints he had shed in supporting the Beast, and considering the
loud cries of the Souls of the Saints under the Altar, they were
extraordinarily carried forth to desire justice upon the King, that m^n of
blood: Withal desiring to let those of Scotland know That they were not
Soldiers of fortune, nor merely the Servants of men, having not only
PROCLAIMED Jesus Christ King of Saints, to be their King by profession, but
desired to submit to him upon his own Terms, and to admit him to the EXERCISE
of his ROYAL-AVTHORITY in their hearts, and to follow him whithersoever he
went, etc. And the work with this Army was generally owned, and acknowledged,
as the Cause of God: Which, so soon as it came to be owned, The state of
Affairs put upon that foot of Account, the Lord blessed them in all their
undertakings; Insomuch, that after the Army was New-modelled, and the war put
upon an Offensive, and purely Active Account, with Execution upon the Adversary
where ever he was found; they never lost one Field-Battail in any of the three
Nations.

II. The Lord having thus Owned and Blessed this Cause in the hands of this
Army: The King brought to Trial, and Justice Executed upon him, as a Murderer,
a Traitor, and an Oppressor, and Common-Enemy of the Nation: A Statute in
Parliament, made against his posterity, and any other that should now pretend
to be Chief-Magistrate, and so declared of these Nations, condemning them
guilty of high Treason, after these wonderful successes: The great Deliverance,
and mavelous Solvation (to use the words of the General) wrought at Worcester
by a signal hand were it weighed: See Speech to l. Parliament p. 5.
The Old Parliament (notwithstanding God had used them Eminently in the wars
against the King) Dissolved, as (in the Judgments of the Saints, and Churches)
Unfit for the further carrying on the Work and Cause: These poor Nations freed
from their Yoaks and Bands in a great measure, and in a very hopeful, and
blessed way to obtain a very thorough Reformation, and perfect deliverance: The
Lord Jesus Christ unanimously owned in the Army, and in many of the Churches of
the Saints, and in the several parts of the Nation as LORD and KING: The Power
therefore, was now, by the wonderful providence of God, given into the hands
of this professing, victorious, overcoming Army; And thereby an opportunity
given into them to serve the Lord fully, according as they had Declared:
Accordingly, The General and Officers of the Army, to manifest to the world
their singlnesse of heart, and integrity, page 18.
and that they did not grasp after the Power their selves, to keep it in a
Millitary hand, no not for a day: were encouraged, (as in the Dissolving the
old Parliament, The consent and affections of the Officers of the three Nations
at land, page 26.
and their Brethren at Sea (though no Artifice had been used to persuade their
approbations to this work) flowing into them from all parts, beyond their
expectations, besides their approbations and consent unsought for, to the other
work: And above all (which is esteemable) very many Papers from the Churches of
God throughout the Nation, wonderfully approving both what had been done in
removing Obstacles, page 17.
and approving what herein was done.) To the Exercising an extraordinary way
and course, beyond and contrary to the ordinary way of Elections, and
constitutions of Parliaments, in calling together a company of men, page 23.
such as knew the Lord (for they allowed not themselves in the choice of one
Person, in whom they had not this good hope, that there was faith in Christ,
and love unto all his Saints and People) and which had made observations of his
marvelous Dispensations, and might be trusted with this Cause: And therefore,
(as being brought into their hands by Gods owning, blessing, and calling out a
Millitary Power: And coming together through difficulties, through strivings,
page 25.
through blood) The work hitherto on foot; This precious cause, sealed too by
the blood of thousands of Saints, prosecuted with the Millions of Treasure of
this Nation; And the sole Power and Government of these Nations was committed
and given up into their hands, by the General and Officers of this Army, which
was declared by an Instrument in Parchment under Seal: who professed the
Eminent hand and Call of God in bringing them together; page 18.
That they were called to that Work by as wonderful providence as ever past
upon the sons of men in so short a time. That they were called by God to Rule
with him, page 19.
and called to be faithful with the Saints, who had been Isntrumental in
their Call: That God hereby did manifest that day to be a day of the Power of
Jesus Christ, page 22,
Psalm. 110.3. having through so much Blood and trials as have been upon these
Nations, made this one of the great Issues thereof, to have a People called
together to the supreme Authory upon an Avowed account: That they were as like
the forming of God as ever People were: page 22.
That they were called with a high-Call; That their power might be a way and
door to usher in things that God has promised, page 24.
and prophesied of, and to set the hearts of his People to wait for and expect,
not vainly looking on that prophecy in Daniel, page 25.
THE KINGDOM SHALL NOT BE DELIVERED TO OTHER PEOPLE: ( i. e. then Saints) That
therefore they own their Call as mavelous, page 24.
and of God, and being unprojected, unthought of by them, and those then
called: Accordingly the whole number being 140 all save two accepted their
Call: So that now, as the Lord (whose paths are wonderful and unsearchable)
had put the Forces into the hands of Saints, and made them Over-comers, and so
isntrumental herein; He also by his great Providence (which look so directly
like the exalting of his Son and Interest: The giving the Power unto Saints;
and the breaking worldly Constitutions and Powers.) Now gave the Millitary and
so the Civil power of these Nations at Sea and Land into the hands of Saints,
upon this avowed accounted for our Lord Jesus Christ, his People, and the good
of these poor Nations. Wherefore both scripture and providence does call the
Saints to the work of the Kingdom of our Lord and the power of the Nations. So
then, hitherto there was great cause to say EBENEZAR.

III. This Assembly coming together according to the Call and Providence of
God, after much seeking the Lord by prayer; They Voted, and afterward Declared
themselves the Parliament, and supreme Authority of this Commonwealth:
Afterward, according to their Trust, proceeding to redress those great Evils
and grievances, which lay as Burdens upon the neck of Gods people, and the
Nations; As the abolishing the Court of Chancery; page 13.
the regulation of the Law (of which the General complained to them in his
Speech, as much groaned under: But now sworn to Rule according to that
pattern.) The taking away the Power of Patrons to make Presentations: And to
remove that Antichristian way of Ministers maintenance by Tithes etc. (Upon the
passing whereof, The contrary party, notwithstanding that which had been
Declared before the Lord, and to the Nations; consulted the dissolution of that
Power: Whereupon, without either Debate, Vote, Order, Act, or Ordinance, of
that Assembly they pretended to Resign their Power to the General: Who had
for some time designed the setting up of himself, and his party, and had now
for that purpose, prepared in a readiness his Instrument of Government, now
bound upon the neck of this People for whom God had thus appeared. Therefore) A
Collonell with a Leivt. Colonel and their Soldiers, came to the House (the
faithful party sitting) whilst the other party was scarcely got to Whitehall,
and forcebly broke and Dissolved them, turning them out of doors. And only
for proceeding in those things, for neglect whereof the Old Parliament was
pretended to be Dissolved.

IV. That those Members of the House pretending to Resign their power, by
subscribing an Instrument at White Hall, there prepared for that purpose,
coming to the House carly in the morning, and from thence going away before
many of the members came together, without any consent, or hearing of their
fellows then in the House; wat only in a private or single capacity when out
of the House; And their Act at White hall only a personal Act. So that the
Right which Oliver Cromwell pretends to the Government of these Nations, upon
this account is invalid, without face of Authority or power. And the necessity
he pretended thereunto, a Designed and created necessity.

V. That hereupon the said O. C. contrary to the dispensations of Gods glorious
providence which these Nations were under: his own professed, and avowed
Principles: The frequent Declarations of the Army, Against Absolute Power in
the persons of any, as rendering that state where it is no better than Tyranny,
and the people subjected to it, no better than Vassals, and for free Councels
and Parliaments: His own Engagements, Covenant, Promises, and Oath: The Trust
committed to him: The known Laws of the Nation made against Lordship and
Monarehy, after the very wonderful out goings, and appearances of God, and
still in force: against the law of God: The tennor of Scriptures: the
exaltation of the Lord Jesus upon the Throne of these Nations: The Interest,
and Rights of the Saints: the privileges of the people, and the good of the
Creation: Has exalted and lifted up himself, and his own interest: Upon the
glorious Victories and mavelous deliverances, no otherwise wrought, then by
the Lord Arm for these in slaved Nations; upon that blood of Saints and others,
which has been poured out so plentifully, so freely in the late Wars for the
purchase of those things we are once more robbed of: upon the Millions of
Treasure expended in the late Wars. The free will Offerings of Saints, and the
good people of these Nations: Upon the very inheritance, the Rights, the
Mercies of the People: And those fruits of Righteousness and truth, which all
hoped to reap from the blood of their Friends and Brethren, their Treasure,
and these tedious wars, but now robbed and spoiled of them.

VI. Afterward, greatly to the aggravation of his horrible sin, wherein he
has justified the wicked and condemned the Generation of the just, he put a
stop to the work which God had been carrying on with such blessings, such
Victories in the wars against the Dutch at sea: Concluding a peace with that
Nation upon very Low, Unsafe and dishonorable Terms: Whereby the Blood spilt
in that war, and the Treasure spent, seems to be altogether lost as to the good
of the Nation, and the guilt thereof lies at his door.

VII. That the said O. C. has Apostatized from his professions and avowed
principles: Has left the Cause and Work the Lord so eminently owned him in,
whilst he yet seemed to walk with him; has contracted the guilt of Bloodshed
unto himself; has thereby justified the Tyrants and Persecutors in all Ages
which have hunted the true Seed: That his persecution of Gods witnessing
people; his establishing and upholding the corrupt interests of the Clergy and
Lawyers in these Nations; his Oppressing the people by Taxing them to maintain
a constant standing Army to uphold his Interest, and Lordship over them (from
which there is not hopes of Deliverance, for, as in the 29. Article of his
Government, if there shall not be cause to keep up so great a defense at Land
and Sea, but there be an abatement, the money saved thereby is to remain in
banck for public service, as its Termed) does exceed (considering the hand
from whence it comes) the Rage, Oppression and Treason of the late King, for
which he was brought to Justice: That he is guilty of High Treason in the
account of God and Man, in the erecting of his Government, binding his
Iron-Yoak upon the neck of the poor captive daughter of Zion, See Speech to l.
Parliament p. 22.
whi st she had thought Summer had been come, from the voice of the Turtle
heard in our Land, and upon the people of these Nations: And of Tyranny and
Cruelty in the excrcise thereof: Whilst (as himself said) One of the great
issues from the Blood and Trials of late upon these Nations, See Instrument of
Government.
was to have a people called to the Supreme Authority upon an avowed account:
But he, without Call from God or man, has imposed a yoke, has continued our
burdens, swearing to Govern according to the Laws, which are so corrupt, so
degenerate and but thensome, maintaining the Prerogative and unlimitted power
of LORDSHIP, and against which we have contested: That he is a Truce-breaker
and a False-Swearer: And has justified Amaleck that smote and oppressed Israel
in their coming out of Egypt; Exodus 17.8, 14, 15, 16. Deuteronomy. 25.17, 18, 19.
and against whom God will have war to all Generations. So that he has sinned
against the Lord Jesus Christ, against his people, the dispensations of his
power, The cries of the Souls under the Altar, the blood of all Saints, and the
Martyrs of Jesus; has transgressed in the acoursed thing; has dealt
treacherously with the people of these Nations; has not judged the cause of
the Fatherless, nor the right of the Needy; Jer. 5.28, 30.
but has overpassed the deeds of the Wicked, so that a wonderful and horrible
thing is committed in the Land. And we may say as of the sin of Gibeah, There
was no such deed don, Judges 19.30.
nor seen, from the day that the children of Israel came up out of the Land of
Egypt unto this day.

VIII. That since this grievons Apostasy, we have been retired into the clefts
of the Rock, Came. 2.14. Isa 9.6. Jer. 30.5, 6.
and secret places of the Stairs: The Lords people have been in pain, as for
the bringing forth of the man child, every man's hands has been on his loins as
a woman in Travel, and all faces are turned into paleness, because the voice of
Trembling, of Fear, and not of Peace: The Testimony has also been continued by
the Lords people against this wickdnesse ever since the visible turning aside
both in private and public; to which the Lord has also given his Witness and
Seal, by his very mavelous appearances against them from time to time, in
blasting their Designs, Mich. 5.9. Zech. 2.9. Zeph. 3.8.
as in that of Hispaniola (for his works we are not to forget) whereby He has
shaken his hand against them, and seems to be arisen to the Prey: We are
therefore persuaded, that no surther Addresses ought to be made unto him, Prove
29.1
For he that being often reproved hardens his neck, to do yet more weckedly,
shall sud denly be destroyed, and that without Remedy: But that, as Samuel (
Saul Apostatizing, and breaking the Commandment of the Lord, in not destroying
the sinners the Amalekites, and fighting against them until they should be
consumed, 1 Saem. 15.18, 19, 20, 24, 25, 35.
but flying upon the spoil, and doing evil in the sight of the Lord, and yet
withal justifying himself in his evil, as going in the way of the Lord, for
which he was left of God, rejected the Kingdom, and his name blotted out;
though afterward he said I have sinned; and acknowledged his evil in
transgressing the commandment of the Lord, withal praying for pardon of his
sin, and desiring to worship the Lord) for sook Saul in his Apostacy, and came
no more at him, till the day of his death, and took an horn of oil and
anointed David, a man more righteous, with whose seed the Lord has made an
everlasting Covenant, 1 Samuel 16.1. 2 Samuel 23.5, Psalm. 89.3, 4, 34, to 38. Prove.
8.20.
ordered in all things and sure; A Government more pure, more just, wherein is
promised The wisdom, the spirit of God, to lead in the way of Righteousness,
in the midst of the paths of judgment: So the people of God preserved yet
faithful, and unsported, from the defilement and pollutions of this Apostasy
through the grace of God, seeing God had given his people victory over their
enemies, and by his Providence had given the power of these Nations into the
hands of Saints, as had also the General and his Officers, who now we contend
against; May in the Name and Authority of the Lord of hosts, for our Lord and
King Jesus Christ, his Saints and People; for his Cause now buried in this
Apostasy; and for the people of these Nations; RISE UP unto the PREY; unto the
work, as JOSHVA and ZEROBBABEL did, with all the Remnant of the people whose
hearts God had stirred up in their work: May rise up against the evil doers,
Hag. 1.14. Ps. 94.16 See Decla. June 14. 1647.
and stand up against the workers of iniquity: And (according to his own
principles, the principles of the Parliament and Army the Parliament Declared
it no resisting of Magistracy to side with just principles: The safery of the
people being above Law, as in the large Petition 11. Sept. 1648. especially an
unjust and wicked Law: And so the Army, Remonst. Albans 16 November. 1648.
if any Arbitrary power be attempted to be exercised over a people, the people
are not bound thereby but free: And if a Person trusted with a limmitted power
to rule according to Law, shall abuse that power, and fly to the way of force
upon his trusting people he thereby forfeits all his Trust and Power, and
(absolving the people from the bonds of Covenant and Peace betwixt him and
them) does set them free to take their best advantage, and (if he shall fall
within their power) to proceed in judgment against him, even for that alone,
if there were no more) may proceed against the said O. C. by like force and
means as against the late King and his party; and afterward against his Son,
and those of Scotland, to recover the name of God, his righteous Cause, the
Redemption of Saints, Se. Declar. of General and Council of War.
and rights of the people. For as the Army said, What remains to this poor
Kingdom, and all true hearted Englishmen, but to join together as one man
with their Councels, Estates, and Lives, in this way as their last Refuge under
God; so say we to all Saints undefiled, or to any others not guilty of this
Apostasy, that will help the Lord against the mighty.

IX. That the Lords people may be gathered together into one, united, and come
to a consistancie together for, and in this work, as well against the enemies of
our Lord in other Nations as in this; Ps. 60.1, 3, 4, 5.
The BANNER which God has given unto his poor scattered people, unto whom he
has shown hard things, who he has made to drink the wine of astonishment, may
be displayed, and lift up because of the truth* By a handful of Redeemed ones,
such as are the First fruits to God and to the Lamb: That Christ's beloved may
be delivered: That unto him as LORD and KING the gathering of the people may
be: Rev. 14.4
That the Saints may all come to this BANNER: That those which have made a
Covenant with the Lord by Sacrifice, may be gathered together unto him in this
work: Ge. 49.10
That (judgment being returned unto righteousness, the standard set up, and
some beginning had) all the Upright in heart may follow, Ps 50.5. Ps. 94 15 Ps.
149.7.
To Execute Vengeance upon the heathen, and punishment upon the People.

X. Now therefore, that we might not now loose the price of Blood, of Treasure,
of the Prayers, and Tears of Saints, (for therein, though the least in our
Fathers house, we claim an interest and share.) We shall (in order to this
blessed work, and a beginning thereof, so longed, so prayed, so hoped for)
state, under some general heads the Cause we plead for, and the work we desire
to prosecute, wherein we are of one Faith, and one hope: And shall also, to the
end all stumbling blocks may be removed, more particularly (in our poor weak
measure, according to our present light and apprehension of things) give our
judgment in respect of POWER, LAWS, GOVERNOVRS, EXERCISE of CHIEF MAGISTRACY
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES: yet notwithstanding this,
considering our imbecility and darkness, we premise, that we are apt to think,
That when the spirit of discerning of judgment, of truth, bearing fruits of
righteousness unto all Nations, comes forth as the spirit and light of this
kingdom, our present apprehensions compared thereto are but as darkness to
light; Therefore we profess, in the sense of our own unworthiness, and want
of that heavenly skill and understanding, that we are waiting for a clearer
light from the Son of righteousness in his arising upon his poor Spouse, now
in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the stairs: for the wisdom
and revelation of that spirit, the hidden mysteries of that Word: And to be
going out and coming in, Rev. 16.5 6, 7 Ier. 50 28. Ps. 58 10. Isa. 34 8. Jer.
51 11. Is. 35 4. Ps. 149 7, 8, 9. Ps. 45.5 Rev. 18.6, 7. Mat. 23.35. Rev. 6 9,
10. ch 18, 20, 24 c. 17.6, and
in the discerning Authorities, majesty, and grace of that spirit.

1. That the righteous judgment s and vengeance of the Lord may be executed
(according to that which is written) upon the Beast and false Prophet, the
kings of the earth and their Armies, and all the Inhabitants and powers of
Babylon, by the hands of the Saints unto whom God has given that honor: That
she may be rewarded double according to her works: That upon her may come all
the righteous blood shed upon the Earth, from the blood of Abel unto this day:
The blood of the souls under the Altar, slain for the word of God and for the
Testimony which they have held for our Lord and King in their Generations: The
blood of the Saints, the holy Apostles, the Prophers, and Servants, and Martyrs
of Jesus, who have been as sheep for the slaughter, chapter 19.2, to 6, Isa. 26.21
Dan. 2.34, 35, 44, 45. chapter 7.26, 27. Romans 8.17. Joel. 2.28 Psalm. 72.6 2 Samuel
23.4, 5. Mich 5.7. Isa. 28.6. chapter 11.2, 1 Kings 3 9, 11. chapter 4.29.30, 31. Romans
8.15. Zech. 12.10. Ephesians. 1.13 17. Rev. 19.10. Joh. 14.17, 1 Pet. 4.14. Rev. 2,
26 Reev 14 6, 7. comp. Mat. 24, 14 Isa 52.7. Mich 4.2. Ps. 68.13. Psa. 102.14.
Mal. 4.2. Isa 60.1, to 7. Zech. 8.20, 21, 22. Rev. 15.4. Isa. 28.6. Zech. 9.13.
Isa. 45.5 chapter 41.18, 19. chapter 44.3. Gal. 5.22.23.
Their blood powered out like water in the bloody persecutions at Rome; The
Massacres of France; The Murdering Inquisition of Spain; And the blood shed at
the stake in Smithfield. That the stone cut out of the Mountain without hands
may smite the Image upon its feet: And that all earthly Governments, and
worldly constitutions may be broken and removed by the first administration of
the Kingdom of Christ, appointed unto him by the decree of the Father, and is
the inheritance of the Saints, as joyntheirs with him.

2. That the Lord would pour out his blessed Spirit, and the gifts and graces
thereof suitable to the Ministration we are under: And that he would come down
as rain upon the mown grass: By a spirit of Judgment and Council of wisdom
discerning, and understanding To them that shall sit in Judgment: By a spirit
of adoption, a spirit of grace, the holy spirit of promise, of wisdom and
Revelation, in the knowledge of Christ, of Prophecy, of Truth, of Glory, of
Power upon his Messengers: That the glad tidings of the EVERLASTING GOSPEL; And
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem may be borne to them that dwell on the
Earth, to every kindred, tongue, and people, and Nation, especially to those
which shall be saved according to the purpose of his grace; That have been so
long among the Pots, and Rubbish, obscured from the Healing beams of the Sun of
righteousness: That the glory of the Lord may be seen upon Zion: That the
Gentiles may come to her light, and Kings to the brightness of her rising: So
that the abundance of the Sea shall be converted, and the forces of the
Gentiles shall come unto her. And by a spirit of might The spirit of the Lion
of the tribe of Judah, upon those that Turn the bartail to the gate: That the
Arrows of the Almighty may be sharp in the hearts of the Kings Enemies: That
rivers may be opened in high places, and Fountains in the midst of the
Valleys: His spirit poured out upon his seed, and his blessing upon his
Offspring.

3. That the BRANCH of righteousness may grow up unto David to execute
Judgment and righteousness in the Land, upon the Throne of David, Jer. 33.15,
16. chapter 23.5. Isa. 9.6, 7. chapter 1.26. chapter 60.17. chapter 32.1. Deuteronomy. 17.15. chapter
1.13. Jer. 3.15. Isa. 10.27. Exodus 30.23. Isa. 61, 3. chapter 60.18. Zech. 9.8.
Psalm. 72.4.12, 14. Amos 5.24. Isa. 33.5: chapter 32.16. Psalm 94.15. Mat. 12.20.
Psalm. 119.19, 54. Heb. 11.13. John 10.4.5. Zeph. 3.9. Isa. 11.13. Jer. 32.38,
39. Cant. 6.9. Phil. 2.20. Psalm. 102.14. Ephesians. 2.20, 21. Rev. 16.12. compa Isa.
11.11, 15, 16. chapter 27.12, 13. Romans 9.4.
and upon his Kingdom: To order it with judgment and with justice: In whom
there is mercy for Saints as Saints, for men as men, and for the whole
Creation: That we might have Judges as at first, and Councillors as at the
beginning: That our Officers may be Peace, and our Exacters righteousness: And
that we might have Pastors according to Gods heart, to feed the Flock with
knowledge and understanding. And that all yoaks upon the inward and outward
man, may be destroyed because of the Anointing, the holy Spirit, the Myrrh of
Liberty, and Oil of joy poured out into the wounds of the persecuted and
bleeding Flock, and the groaning Creation: That violence be no more heard in
our Land, wasting nor destruction within our borders: But that we may call our
Walls Salvation, and our Gates Praise: And that Judgment run down as waters,
and Righteousness as a mighty stream: Dwelling in the Wilderness, and
remaning in the in the fruitful Field.

4. That Judgment may be returned unto Righteousness, and brought forth unto
victory, That all the upright in heart may follow it: that the Lambs of Christ,
Torn, and scatered by Wolves, and the rage and cruelty of Antichrist, now as
Pilgrims and strangers in the Earth, may be gathered out of their several
forms, and from their holes and corners, at the voice of their great
Shepherd, and may serve the Lord with one consent, and may all call upon his
name: My Dove, my undefiled is but one: That the whole building of the
spiritual Temple (for whom we naturally care, As taking pleasure in her stones,
and favoring the dust thereof.) Upon the foundation of the Apostles, and
Prophets, and Christ the chief-corner stone, may grow up unto an holy Temple in
the Lord. And that (according to the many Prophecies and Promises in the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments.) The way of the Kings of the East
might be prepared: The Jews and Isralites, To whom pertains the Adoption, and
the Glory, Isa. 43, 5, 6. Ezekiel 36.24. chapter 37.14.15, 21. and 34.12, 13 14. Ier.
23 7, 8. chapter 32 37. Ier. 30 18. Isa. 66 12. Dan. 2 35. Is. 2.2 Coll. 1, 15 16,
18 o 1.1, 2 3. Heb. 1.2. Rev. 19 13. 1 Cor. 1.24. Pro. 8.22, 23, 30, 31. Mark
1.11. John 1 14. Rev. 1.5. Heb. 1.2. Ephesians. 4.8. Coll. 2.15. Heb. 1 4, 8. Ps.
45.6 Joh. 5.27. Rev 19.16. c. 17.14. Phil. 2.9, 10. Isa. 45 33. Matt. 28.18.
Genesis 22.17. compa. Gall. 3.16. Luke 1, 32 33. Dan. 7.27. Ps. 2.7, 8. Isa.
53.12. Rev. 11.15. Isa. 9.6, 7.
and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the
promises, may be Redeemed from their long Captivities, and gathered from the
Isles of the Sea, and from the four corners of the Earth, and so all Israel may
be saved, and restored to the possession of their own Land: And with the
fullness of the Gentiles being add^d to them as a ^^owing stream, They may
together become a great Mountain, filling the whole Earth, with their power and
glory, And may be established in top of the Mountains, and exalted above the
Hills.

5. That as all things that are in Heaven and in Earth, visible and invisible,
whether Thrones, Dominions, Principallities or Powers were created by our Lord
Jesus As he is the Word, the Power and the Wisdom of God; and for him as He is
the only begotten Son of God, the first born from cry Creature, the image of
the invisible God, the head of the Church, the Beginning, the first born of the
Dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence, the head of
Principallities and Powers: That, as he is by the wise purpose of the Father,
appointed heir of all things: And, having triumphed over Satan, Hell, Death and
Sin; And having spoiled Principallities and Powers, has by inheritance
obtained a more excellent name than that of the Angels: whose Throne is for
ever and ever, a Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of his Kingdom: Unto
whom also is given Authority to execute jugement, because he is the Son of man:
On whose Vesture and Thigh is a name written, KING OF KINGS and LORD OF LORDS:
Unto whom is given all power both in Heaven and in Earth: And unto him is also
promised The Gate of his Enemies: The THRONE of his Father David: The Kingdoms
of this world: A portion with the great, and the spoil with the strong:
Therefore, That all the Kingdoms of this world should become the Kingdoms of
our Lord Christ: The Government put upon his shoulders, who is called
Wonderful, Councellor, mighty God, everlasting Father, Prince of Peace: 2
Kings 19 31. Isa. 37 32. Ephesians. 6.10. Mic. 5.4. Psa. 72.1, 8. Zech. 9, 10. Ps.
72, 9, 11. Luke 19.27. 1 Timothy 6.15. Jer. 23.6. chapter 33.16.
That his THRONE may be established with Judgment and Justice, by the Zeal of
the Lord of Hosts, and the power of his might: That he might be great unto the
ends of the earth: That the Lords righteous judgments might be given to the
king, and his righteousness unto the kings son: That he may have his Dominion
from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the Earth: That they that
dwell in the wilderness may bow before him, and his enemies may lick the dust:
And that all kings may fall down before him, and all Nations may serve him, who
is the only and blessed Potentate, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.

6. That the supreme absolute LEGISLATIVE POWER and AVTHORITY to make Laws for
the governing of the Nations, and the good and well-being of mankind, Isa. 9
6. c. 32.1. and 33.22. Jer. 10.7. Ps. 2.7, 8. Acts 2.30 c. 3.22, 23 Iam. 4.12
Mat. 29.18.
is originally and essentially in the Lord Jesus Christ, by Right, Conquest,
Gift, Election, and Inheritance, who is the only absolute single person, whom
the father has loved, decreed, sworn to, anointed, and given all power unto in
heaven and in earth.

7. That the scriptures (being given by inspiration of God, with his holy
spirit) are the revealed Will and Rule of this LEGISLATOR, to be constantly
owned, and submitted unto in ^imes of War and Peace, as a constant standing
Rule, for the inward and outward man (wherein are Laws, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17
Isa. 42.4. chapter 8.20 Deuteronomy. 4.7 8. Gal. 6 16. Luke 16.29, 31. Mal. 4.4. Isa.
42.21 Mat. 15.13. 2 Timothy 1.13.
Statutes, Precepts and Judgments for all cases, conditions, and actions, of
civil, millitary, and spiritual concerns, either in particular or more
general terms.) For so they were to the COMMONWEALTH of Israel, the only
type of the LAMBS GOVERNMENT: Though doubtless in the Antitype, light and
perfection, will more exceedingly abound. So that now the bowels of the poor,
the needy, the afflicted, the languishing, the thirsty souls; the oppressed and
almost devoured People, shall all be refreshed, revived, by the constant
administration of Justice, the sweet current of judgment, and streams of
righteousness, that shall flow down ever into their bosoms and wounds, from this
fountain, and spirit of this Law.

8. That a SANHEDRIM, or SVPREAM-COVNCELL, (this Interest now up once removed)
men of choicest light and spirit; endued with judgment, righteousness, wisdom,
knowledge, understanding; able men, men of truth, and of known integrity, Numb.
11.16, 17 Isa 32.1. c. 33 5.6. c. 9.7. Exo. 18.21, 22. Deu, 1.13 2 Samuel 23.3.
Phil. 1.11. Iam 3 17. Isa. 11 2. chapter 28.6
fearing God, haters of Coveteousnes, being filled with the fruits of
righteousness, full of mercy and good works, without partiality, and without
hypocrisy: In whom may abound the spirit of Council and might: And upon whom
may abound and abide, the Lords spirit, which shall be the wisdom, light, life
and glory of this day: be duly chosen and constituted, upon, and according to
the principles of Right and Freedom.

9. That such a Council so constituted, shall be the REPRESENTATIVE (for our
Lord and King) of the whole Body of the Saints, (whose Day this is,) and people
in the Nations.

10. That the said Representative (as Princes under Christ, from whom (with his
People) their Power is derived, Isa. 32.1.
) shall Rule in judgment; or have the exercise of the chief-magistracy and the
power of Administering the laws residing in them: Shall Consult and provide, for
the safety and welfare of the State and People: shall determine and give
judgment in all supreme matters of civil council (not to prescribe forms of
Worship for their Brethren; Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19, 20. Isa. 11, 4
nor to take the Power upon them given to the Church) according to their
present light: And shall Rule and Govern the People with just judgment; And
that freely without respect of Persons, or taking of gifts or bribes; And the
poor with righteousness and equity; And shall save the children of the needy,
Ps. 72, 2, 4 12, 13.
with him that has no helper. So as that all just and honorable ends (for
which they are entrusted) may be answered.

11. That the power of ordering and disposing the Militia, and forces of Zion
at sea and land (so as the great and glorious ends for which they are raised,
i. e. the glory of God, the enthroning and glorifying of his son, The doing of
his will on earth as it is done in heaven; The carrying on of his work in other
Nations, the lifting up of truth, the redeeming of whole Zion, into one as the
middle wall of partition is broken down, the manifest good of mankind, The
restoration of the whole Creation. Be not obscured or hindered, neither in any
degree Ennervated: But that according to the will of God; unto all these
Interests in their several capacities, degrees and stations, the fruits of
Righteousness, of Truth, of Judgment, of victory be borne) be in this
Representative.

12. That for the most equal and constant administration of Justice, and
execution or Judgment, and ease and benefit of the people, Deuteronomy. 4.^ 7. Deuteronomy.
16 18. Exodus 18.21.
that the blessing of the Lord may be upon this Commonwealth, and God nigh in
all things we call upon him for; there may be a Court of Judicature in each
respective general division of the nation or Counties (so called) to sit once
in every three Months (or oftener if it shall be found necessary) at the chief
City, or other place of such Division. To Determine, and give Judgment in
Capital Crimes and Causes, whether civil or criminal, without respect of
persons. Yet so as all hidden, hard, and high matters, That arises between
Blood and Blood, between Plea and Plea, and between Stroke and Stroke, or other
ways, matters of controversy, be brought before the SVPREAM COUNCEL, who are
to direct, or give Judgment therein, according to the Property, Nature and
Reason of the Case, so as that there be not a Deviating from the Law or the
Testimony. And if any find themselves to be grieved or oppressed, or if there
be any other ways just cause, there is libery of appeal reserved from them to
the SVPREM-COVNCEL.

13. For that Israel in their Commonwealth had not only Rulers of Thousands,
but of Hundreds, Fifties and Tens, Exodus 18.21, 22.
that the people might have justice at all seasons,; therefore there be Judges
Authorized, and appointed for every Market Town or Town of Value, for the said
Towns and the Villages nere unto them; to sit constantly once in every Month
(if need require) to hear and determine Civil Causes, Pleas of less value,
and Crimes not Capital, and which deserve corporal punishment, Fine, or the
like. So that we may have Judges and Officers in all our Gates, which Jehovah
may give unto us, Deuteronomy. 16.18. Yet reserving liberty of appeals from them to
the Court of Justice in the County.

14. For the better current of Justice and Righteousness, and the most speedy
dispatch of all affairs incident to these respective Courts; each Court to make
choice of such Officers and Ministers of Justice from among their Brethren, as
shall be needful and warrantable by the Law and the Testimony.

15. That the power of all subordinate Courts, Judges, Deputies, Assistants,
etc. shall be derived from the Supream-Councel; who are to issue out Warrants
for their Elections, and meet Qualifications. And whether some of their own
Number, with Assistants to be chosen by the Freemen, may be Authorized for the
purposes aforesaid, or otherwise, is left to the judgment and wisdom of the
Council.

16. That every man Plead his own Cause: And that there be no Council Retained
by any: Exodus 23.2. Lam. 3.36 Judge. 19.30. chapter 27 7, 8. Numb. 22.7, 17. Acts
24.5.
But in doubtful matters, and other necessities, the Pleaders be-rewarded by
the State, and employed as Assistants to the Judges, as indifferent persons to
find out the truth of the Cause, and not to obscure and overthrow it, as has
been too often seen.

17. That, (it having been found by experience inconsistent with the good and
welbeing of the governed) the supreme power actualy in the great Council, as
the Representees of the whole Body of the Saints, be not perpetuated upon the
persons of any during life, o^ any Term of years, or longer then they shall be
found fit for, or faithful in, and to their worthy service, and that great
trust reposed in them by Christ, his Followers, People and Subjects. But that
at the end of twelve Months (to be accounted from the first day of their call,
and Assembling together) the said Power in course fall into the Body, at every
one of the said Periods of time.

18. That upon the last day of the said Term successively (or sooner if it
shall be determened) the LORDS-FREEMEN ( i.e. Those that have a right with
Christ in and according to the New Covenant. For whom the Sun makes free, are
free indeed, And the servant abides not in the house for ever, but the Son
abides ever, John. 8.35.36.) shall be assembled together, and shall then make
their new-Election of Members (with respect to the Qualifications aforesaid) to
serve in the Supreme Trust; either of those (with others) formerly chosen (if
excelling others in their measure of Spirit, and light from the holy one) Or
else of others not formerly called, when found meet for so high a service. And
so successively and constantly from time to time. That those so chosen (The
power remaining with the old Magistrate upon the day of Election, who are to
take care that the people be duly Assembled as aforesaid: Or in case of fails
herein, the people (knowing their concernment) do of course come together for
the said Elections) be duly admitted to succeed in the Government, the next day
after their choice or otherwise. So the Law shall go forth of Zion, and the
word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

19. That it be not in the power of the Supreme Cowncel to violate, take away,
give up, or enervate any of the Foundations of Common-Right, and Freedom,
which are, or shall be agreed upon; save in case of a further convincing light:
And such alterations may be according to Law, and the good of the people.

20. That no person of what Rank, Degree, or Quality soever be privileged
from Law, and subjection, but all to own obedience to the righteous rule of the
head of this Government: That so (the Magistrates and Governors, with other
Inferior officers, tasting of subjection, as well as of Rule, and Government) no
particular or private interests of Lordship, Power, and advantage, contrary to
that of Public and common good, be any ways upheld and maintained.

21. That in this blessed interest of our Lord Jesus, men (as they are men)
Shall be Blessed, Preserved, and Protected in their peaceable enjoyment of
their Estates, Psalm. 72.2, 9, 11, 17
Liberties and Privileges under him: Insomuch that they that dwell in the
wilderness shall bow before him, yea all Kings shall fall down before him, all
Nations shall serve him; yea they shall call him blessed. So that when the
Lords Judgments are in the earth, Isa. 26.9.
the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness.

First, (as under the Law of this Commonwealth) they shall be freed from
violence and oppression, and all Tyrannical and Antichristian yoaks upon the
outward man: He shall break in pieces the Oppressor. And,

1. That no man be committed, or det^yned in Prisons, without the cause be
legally expressed and known. Liberty is therefore to be proclaimed to all
those that suffer wrongfully upon the will and pleasure of any man.

2. That there be no impressing; or inforceing of men for Soldiers; neither
shall it be in the power of the Council, to constrain men, or impresse them to
serve in Foreign wars either by Sea or Land.

3. That there be no longer continuance of that wicked, and unlawful
oppression of Excise; neither of Customs upon the native Inhabitants.

4. That there be no Assesments or Taxes levied upon and compelled from the
People in times of peace, neither in time of War, but by their common consent
and according to our law: But that the War (once raised) be principally carried
on at the charge of those that are the occasioners thereof, The Beast and false
Prophet, the wicked, bloody, Antichristian, Magistracy, Ministry, Lawyers, etc.
That have eaten out the bowels of the poor; whose gain shall be consecrated to
the Lord, Mich. 4.13 Rev. 11.18.
and their substance to the Lord of the whole earth: And the Lord shall destroy
them that destroy the earth.

5. That all Oppressions and griev^nces in the tenures of lands, Copyhold, and
Customary, Heriots, Fines, Amerciaments, Perquesites, and profits of Courts,
customs, services, etc. in these or any other respect, be abrogated and clean
removed.

6. That there be no place found for TITHES, being judged as Antichristian, and
altogether inconsistent with the Gospel spirit: And that the glorious Gospel of
the Kingdom be freely held forth, and preached to all: And to that end that
Ministers be sent forth of the Church, according to the Primitive Institution,
and Rule of the Gospel; who are to be maintained as the Gospel will warrant;
either the labor of their hands, or the free-contributions of Saints and
Churches: That grace may abound, Thus says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 34.10.
behold I am against the Shepherds, and I will require my Flock at their hands,
and cause them to cease from seeding the Flock, neither shall the shepherds
seed themselves any more: For I will deliver my flock from their mouth, that
they may not be meat for them. But that respect be had unto those, who with
their own particular esta^es have purchased Tithes, Gleabelands etc. And that
they may have satisfaction, according to that which shall be made appear to
have been paid for them.

Secondly, Man shall be blessed in this Interest (as in that state of
Restitution of all things, Acts 3.21.) In that he shall be restored by God unto
right reason, and wisdom: And that beast like and brutish nature and
principles (from whence has proceeded al^ Murders, Thefts, Rebellion, Violence,
Oppression, Ravenning and Devouring his fellow creatures; One creature
destroying another; whence it is, the Earth is defiled and corrupted, bringing
forth Thorns, Briers, Thistles, weeds, etc. All vermin that increases not by
generation abounds, etc. And the whole world lies in wickedness: Therefore
the Creation groaneth, and travelleth to be delivered from the yoke and bondage
of corruption, Romans 8.21, 22.) he has retained ever since the fall of man,
shall be in a great measure done away. In so much that when the glory of the
Lord shall be revealed, (the old Serpent shall not only be bound) But all flesh
shall see it together. For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. A figure of
this we have in Nebuchad-nezzar -- he was driven from men, and did eat grass
as Oxen, Isa. 40.5. Dan. 4.33* 34.
and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown as
Eagles feathers, and his nails like Birds claws. And at the end of the days I
Nebuchadnezzar lift up mine eyes to heaven, AND MINE UNDERSTANDING RETVRNED UNTO
ME, and I blessed the most high, and I praised and honored him that lives for
ever, whose Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and his kingdom is from
generation to generation. So that, man is loudly called upon to come in, and
with all cheerfulness, and readiness to submit himself unto the Government,
and rule of the Prince of the Kings of the Earth: THE WISDOM OF WHOSE THRONE
SHALL DECIDE ALL CONTROVERSIES: And great will be the Peace of this Day, when
the Beast, and the Fals-Prophet is taken in opposing the Lamb with their
Armies) and cast alive into a lake of Fire. Rev. 19.19, 20.

THE DECLARATION.
AS in the sight of that glorious Majesty, JEHOVAHNISSI, THE LORD OUR
PROTECTOR: being assured by the grace of God, That the kingdoms of this world,
are of right the Inheritance of our Lord Jesus: And being by the workings of
his holy spirit, and the Power of his love, through the quickening of the
new-man, exceedingly stirred up (as called) upon this Bottom and hope (having
for many months waited for the day of the power of Jesus Christ: And for a
willing people, which might take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust
thereof) To follow the Lamb in the Dispensations of his Judgments: Withal
considering, That the stones of the sanctuary are powered out in the head of
every street, and the precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold are
esteemed as earthen pitchers; The blood and lives of Saints poured forth; The
dishonor of the Name and glory of God, so dear unto us: The stop of that
work, and cause so eminently owned by God, and sealed unto by the blood of
thousands of our dear brethren in the High places of the Field: Our bowels are
troubled, and we have waited for his salvation all the day long: And being also
thoroughly convinced of the Apostasy, Hypocrisy, Murders, and Treason of OLIVER
CROMWELL, THE HEAD OF THIS APOSTASY, and those that are with him. We were
encouraged (though but a Worm, yet not without hopes of being raised up, to be
Isntrumental to Thrash the Mountains.) According to our Faith and hope; and
call from the world, from the Earth from among Men; to publish our Principle to
the World; That our Brethren in holes and corners in the several parts of the
Nation; in all the Churches of the Saints, might hold up their heads because of
Redemption that draws nigh: That all men might see their Interest, and
concern as involved, as wrapped up, as comprehended in the Interest and Cause
we Plead, for the only and blessed POTENTATE: That a STANDARD might be set
up, and displayed for all Saints that hunger after the Truth, That wait for
Justice and Righteousness; That it might dwell in the Wilderness, and remain
in the fruitful field: For all men, for every poor heart that desires to stand
up for Equity, for Liberty, for Deliverance from yoaks and Bonds, whether in
the Army, that has kept a good Conscience, that has not shared in the
Apostasy and and wickedness; That has not said a Confederacy with those that
say a Confederacy, that have not sold themselves to work wickedness: Or any
others that may say God speed. And also to ^ppear publicly with Council,
Estates, Lives, Liberties, Families, Relations, and all most Dear to us (in
this way) as a Sacrifice and Offering prepared for the Lord Jesus, who has
Redeemed, Justified and Sanctified us by his blood, has made us unto our God,
Kings and Priests, that we may r^ign with him on the earth, and is made unto us
of the Father, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. And if
he shall give us our Lives for a prey (as those that will loose them, shall
save them; though we are therein with trembling) in this Evil and Adulterous
generation: We shall yet think it our duty (having hear no continuing City, but
as wanderers, as Pilgrims, as strangers, as having nothing, yet possessing all
things) To give them up in the high places of the field, as for his Navy, his
Kingdom, so for his whole flock, that all Saints, weak as well as strong,
poor, needy and foolish; That have received the Adoption, can cry ABA, and are
sealed, with the Holy spirit of promise, may together grow up unto an holy
Temple in the Lord: As naturally caring for the welfare of all the Lambs, of
the whole household of God: and with them for the Creation (as all having a
place in our hearts) That all may be delivered into the glorious liberties of
the Sons of God, for whom, and to whom, we hope the grace of God given to us
will help us to witness a good witness. And we are herein the more bold in
the zeal of the Lord of hosts, in the Power of his might, in the Authority, and
Majesty of the holy and blessed spirit, as knowing That whether w^ sleep or
wake, we shall live with him: Whether we live or die, we shall stand in our
Lot, in the blessed inheritance with the Saints in light, at the end of the
days: If sown in corruption, yet raised in incorruption: If sown in dishonor
yet raised in Glory, If sown in weakness yet raised in Power: If we shall not
taste of death (though the cup be always sweet to us, as we are in Christ and
live the life of faith, and as for him, Waiting upon him in the way of his
Judgments) till our Lord shall appear, yet changed in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, and made like unto his glorious body. Then to us to die
is gain, and to live is gain; so that tribulation, nor distress^, or
persecution, or Famine, or nakedness, or perils, or sword; neither Death nor
Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us, from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus: Nay we are more then
conquerours through him that loved us.

Wherefore, in the Name of that dreadful Majesty (having born our Testimony
and Witness, against the Apostasy of this Army and their General, so long, so
loud, forwarning them of the Vengeance of the Lord, and of his Temple, and the
judgments which God will execute upon Babylon, and them as a part thereof, and
degenerated into that Mystery of Iniquity, that Puddle of finne, that bloody
City.) We do Invite and Call the Lords People, That has laid hold of this
glorious Hope, That are upon their Watch, that keep their Garments, of what
Form, Opinion, or Judgment so ever: Yea in the tender bowels of our Savior,
we beseech you Brethren (laying aside all particular Opinions and matters of
difference, as we have done ours.) To come in, and be united with us in this
Bottom, this blessed Cause and Administrations of the Kingdom of the Son of
man and the Saints: wherein, not only the Father Son, and Spirit are
concerned, withal the Angels; And all Dead and Living Saints of this Faith, of
this hope, That glorious company, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Job,
Daniel, Peter, Paul, all the Patriarcks, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Saints,
Men, the Creation, Heaven and Earth; but also ( as that Rock, the close
Chambers, The City of Refuge, the hiding place in the Day of Indignation and
Vengeance) your Persons, Lives, Estates, Families, Wives and Children will be
herein Blessed Preserved and Delivered: For as in the womb of this cause there
is the Man-child, so in the bowels thereof there is choice mercies for all,
for the inward and outward man, health, strength and peace, in so much that
even whilst we are at wars with the Draggon, Beast and False-Prophet we shall
be at peace among our selves: Besides above all, and in all having the Peace of
God which passes all understanding. There is also under this BANNER, in this
Camp, in this Cause, preservation and protection, for all civil and honest
men, who are also invited to eat the flesh of Kings, Captains and Mighty men:
So those that have simplicity and integrity in the Army, we warn them of the
vengance to come, that they oppose not the Lamb, that they do not yet (like
mercinary men hired to shed blood) stay in this Profane, Apostate and
Backsliding Army, but that they submit unto the Lord Jesus and his BANNER, and
come and List themselves with us, under his command, who is coming forth,
conquering and to conquor.

And forasmuch, as it is the day of the Lords vengance, for the controversy of
Zion, and blood of Saints, and his Portion and Inheritance: And being persuaded
that the Lord has now a controversy, and war with the powers of Babylon in
these Nations, and withal those that are guilty of, or engaged in this
Apostacy, whether in Church, Army, or Commonwealth, as well as with OLIVER
CROMWELL the head of this Apostacy: We do now, in the name and Authority of the
LORD KING-JESVS, call upon all the Lords people, our Brethren, Sisters and
Friends, with every one that professes the name of God, that are yet in
Babylon, in one respect or another, either in Church, Commonwealth (upholders
and supporters of that state) or Army, to come out of her, to come from amongst
them; least (partaking of her sins) you also partake of her plagues: For the
Lord commands now every where to Repentance. Therefore hearken to the Gospel
of the Kingdom, and of repentance, which says fear God, and give glory to
him, for the hour of his Judgment is come.

THE END
ERRATA.
Page 8. line 24 read because of. p. 14. l. 15. r. born of. l. 17. r. born
from. p. 19. l. 6. r. Magistrates. p. 22. l. 18. r. in


