Angliae Speculum: OR ENGLANDS LOOKING-GLASS.

Divided into two pats, By C. VV. MERCER.

Scribimus indocti, doctique poaemata passim. LONDON. Printed by Tho: Pain.
MDCXLVI.

ANGLIAE SPECVLVM. Or ENGLANDS LOOKING-GLASS.
You may perceive, and in this Looking-glass
see Englands worth^'s, either more or less:
And in the same, look, and you likewise shall
see, in the face, Lord ESSEX, General.
depiction of a mirror ENGLAND


The Authors picture usually is put,
and not the Patrons, this they tell me, but,
I pray, who cares to see a piece so bad
as I? but I have seen them running mad
To see my Lord, but here now they may stand
and hear and see, and have him in their hand:
Besides, another of my reasons are
his Excellence ought to be singular.
W. M.

Upon the Dedication of my Book.
I Did intend, but now I come too late,
it was the Printers fault, who did not get
My Glass in time, for this was all my drift,
to give my Lord this, for a new years gift:
But it is never out of time to take;
this I created for your Lordships sake.
And gives you here, what best I may, and can,
My humblest service, whilst I am a man.
W. M.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MOST VALIANT AND THRICE worthily Renowned LORD,
ROBERT Earl of ESSEX, and EVVE, etc. His EXCELLENCY, My most Noble Lord and
Patron.

The continuance of all chief Honors, and true Happiness in highest measure, in
this life, and the fruition of all felicity in the Life to come, Is Wished, By
the most humblest, and unworthyest, of all your Excellencies Servitours,
William Mercer.

Anagr.
I Am real, rec'iv' me.
Verse.
I give my self herewith, I Am real, rec'iv' me,
if I were ten times better, ye might have me,
portrait of Robert Devereux Earl of Essex ROBERTUS ILLUSTRISSIMUS and
EXCELLENTISSIMUS HAEROS COMES ESSEXIAE PROQ TUTAMINE CO^ITIORM ANGLIAE
NUPERRIME DUX SUPREMUS
I once resolved that nothing should be seen,
And so presumed to interpose, a Screen.
Because I thought the Multitude with greed,
Would love to look upon the Piece, not read.
But in the end, determind for to take,
Aside the Curtain, for the Figur's sake.
That seeing first, this Haero's in the face,
They then might read, but in the second place,
Englands brave General, in its just defense,
Yet but the Shaddows of his EXCELLENCE.
W. Marshall sculpsit.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE EARL OF ESSEX, HIS EXCELLENCY:
Anagr. 1.
Earl Robert Deavorex's Anagr.
A real dexterous Orb.
Verse.
A real dexterous Orb, so fixed, agreeing,
by whom we lived, we moved, and had our being.
Earl Robert Deavorex. Anagr. 2.
Our rare exalter robbed,
Verse.
Our rare exalter robbed, brave Essex, he
Is robbed from us, so we must ruined be.
Robert Deavorex, Anagr. 3.
Brave Or'tor ex'eed,
Verse.
Brave Or'tor exceed, why? say exceed,
Your Excellence surpass them all, indeed.
Robert Deavorex. Anagr. 4.
Vex art, or Robbed,
Verse.
Vex art, or Robbed, forloe envious men,
Use art to rob thee, vex and rob them then.
Sonnet Acrostick.
Rare and renowned exalter of our Faith,
Of all our hopes, robbed, as it were by death,
Beloved, above expressions of my pen,
Esteemed by Angels, as much as by men,
Renowned for ever, for thy feits in war,
The times to come shall us exceed as far,
Day after day, to sing thy praises then,
Even as we now, distinguish thee from men:
Unto those Trophies, which we take in hand,
Or to those Bays, which on thy Temples stand,
Return we will, and on these princely brows,
Even place those Trophies, and those Bays with vows,
Xceeding joyful, and surpassing all, to eternize our Noble General.
W. M.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY most Noble Lord General his Excellency, and my
most honorable Patron.
BEhold I come, and humbly on my knee,
present my self in thankfulness, to thee.
Renowned Champion, chosen first in chief,
For Parliament, and Protestants relief:
To thee brave Essex, singular, and such,
Who never can be magnified too much:
To thee, who when fair Englands worthies went,
And weighed thy worth, by votes in Parliament,
And thee compared with all those prudent men,
Whose virtues were laid to the touchstone then,
To thee, I say, who was so well beloved,
The resolutions could not be removed,
Of neither noble, nor the mean degree:
But all did smile, and condescend to thee:
To thee, even thee, who if I dare protest,
Did then accept, when no m^n thought it best
To be beginner, nor to put his hand
To contradict his Sovereigns command,
To thee whose courage, by consent, I say,
Was found the fittest to command the day:
And still to thee, who with a loyal heart,
Did far remove all private thoughts apart:
And whose impartial prudence, did by far
Exceed the usual stratagems of war:
To thee, who ventured when the Royal power,
Appeared in person, and proclaimed the hour,
Wherein he would, with his triumphing band,
(As he did term them) all his foes withstand;
Did sound his Trumps, and caused beat the drum,
Whose noise did seem to say O! dare ye come?
To thee, I say, who then with courage great,
Did Echo back those voices with delight,
And said, O come, let us defend our faith,
We shall prevail, astonish not at death:
To thee, I say, so pregnant, I approach,
And all thy actions, worthily avouch,
To thee, I owe, and really will pay,
Even what I am, what I can do, or say,
Thy far fetched virtues are above my wing,
I cannot soar to such a sacred thing,
Yet to my power, I must present as much
As is, and hopes, thou will accept of such,
I was a witness, of the weaker kind,
To thy undaunted and magnifique mind:
And had the honor for to have command,
By thy Commission, Signed with thy hand:
Was one who first, was entered in the time
When soldiers sins were reckoned for a crime,
And ever since, continued still, for one,
Till thou laid down thy high Commission:
O! at the first, when no man would engage,
Nor go to act upon that Tragic stage:
Nor undertake to meddle with the thing
So thought, for to reflect upon the King:
But thou, whose faith and courage did exceed
The subtle number, saw the present need:
For to oppose those errors then begun,
And did apply thee to it, did not shun
The sentence which thy sovereign did express,
Knowing thou meant his laws not to transgress:
But when all others of the higher sort,
For such a charge, confessed they all came short:
Or if they knew that they could manage it,
There was some secret, which they thought not fit:
Therefore forbore, but standers by did see,
They all determined, thou were only he
Who could, and must, or if thou would not do it,
All must be quiet, no man will go to it.
Some did desire it in their hearts, but that
Was all the thing in secret aimed at,
They fain would rise to have commanded all,
But durst not run the hazard of a fall:
Here was the fault, they had some private aim:
Therefore I cease, and say no more of them.
But Noble Essex thou were all in all,
And must be chosen Englands General:
Thou had no thought of Soveraignity,
Nor searched in things conceived privately:
But undertook it for the Kingdoms good,
And for thy Princes privileges stood:
No private aims importuned thee, but still
The publicks profit was thy practice, till
Thou had trod down the number most of those,
Who did presume to be imployd as foes:
O! how thy spirit did appear abroad,
As only thou established were by God,
And how thy courage in the eyes of all,
Did make the armies cry aloud, and call,
Go on, go on, brave Essex is our guide:
Behold, his presence makes us to confide:
Thou did appear, like Phoebus in his sphaere,
Thy Armies as the stars into the air,
The boundless Ocean of thy noble veins,
Gave influence to many thousand strains:
Nor did thou so diminish yet thy store,
The more thou furnishd, still thy stock was more:
And as it proved, the spirits even of those
Appeard much sharper then the present foes
We now pursue; but policies in war
May often prevail, and give advantage far:
Their former courage makes me more and more
Think, that they are not what they were before:
But now I must impart one passage yet,
I cannot choose, but must remember it:
Like as the Sun sends out his beams of light,
But all of them returns to him at night:
So likewise those who had their power of thee,
When thou forbore, no more abroad would be:
Who having done thy part abroad, thought sit
For to afford thy presence, and to sit
In that assembly of the highest strain,
From whence thou came, and where thou art again.
To thee I come, imploring thou will be
My noble Patron, for to shelter me,
Which if thou will, there is none I will avouch,
That for thy Names sake, dare presume to touch
Those enterprises, humbly I present
Unto my Lord, without a Complement.
W. M.

To the Courteous Reader.
THou sees I stand resolved to defend
What ever cursed malice dare pretend:
But cannot still be present when they vent
And spit the venom of their discontent:
Therefore in absence must appeal to thee,
For to assist if any injures me.
It is a thing so common to deride,
And throw a book disdainfully aside,
Or if they fortune for to see a name,
And hate the author, that's enough for them
They take no notice though the thing be just,
Mislikes the bearer, therefore cannot trust,
But more allowance I presume to take,
They will believe me for my matters sake:
Nor do I strive to elevate my words,
Nor counterfeit, but what the truth affords,
Nor have Is kill, nor knowledge for to skan,
Nor dare I flatter such a faithful man,
Nor have I practice for to put in verse,
Nor wit enough his virtues to rehearse,
As for my learning, to my shame I speak it,
I may begin, and go to school to seek it:
And dare protest for each year of my age,
I never read of verses not a page:
And Poets, whence I challenge no descent,
Though scarce of matter, merely they invent,
But I a stranger to that stock, which sprung
From out Parnassus, and my muse so young,
She never sucked the sisters sacred font,
Nor d d repair the place where they were wont
To walk upon, to imitate those nine:
Such is this ill bred bastard muse of mine:
She knows of nothing, but usurps the name,
Presumes to ryme, since reckoned one of them;
Yet both of us you see are so well bred,
That we have written more then we have read
But famous poets furnished with those parts,
Of Natures gifts, and garnisht with the arts
Of learning fully, they can so indite,
As if it all were real, that they write:
They can bring fictions far above the sky,
And forge inventions, but so cannot I:
I tell of nothing but what you have seen,
Nor prophecy, but tell you what has been:
And here is my comfort, I have such a theme
In entermedling with this Noble Name,
That not a man will murmr if he see
Me do my best, although in small degree,
Because they know I cannot well eclips
Those high conceptions entered in the lips
Of all that lives, exceeding so his sex,
And in the Name of E. S. S. E. X.
That let me labor either more or less,
This very name all nobleness express:
Therefore it is folly for to crave thy aid
To pay this debt, which never can be paid:
For let me speak, and all my spirits spend,
And ever write, and never make an end:
Yet in that boundless Ocean of his worth
I may well enter, cannot set it forth,
And seeking for to satisfy my mind,
I well may wander, but I cannot find
The thing I seek, and therefore will forbear,
Can go no further, I must rest me here.
W. M.

To the Critical Reader.
I Know I stand condemned at the bar
Of thy best judgment, but I know they are
Not yet in print, who can escape the tongue
Of thy detractions, or can shun the wrong
Of thy invectives and the wicked spite,
Which thou pronounces unto such as write:
The froward Curre who nothing can but bark,
Thou do resemble, and the self same mark,
Makes me provide for to prevent the worst,
To save my self, though thou with barking burst,
Thou think to vent thy wisdom if thou prate,
But thou expresses ignorance in that:
Thy Critics carping cracked braind bragging words,
Nothing but poor despightfulnes affords:
And I Am persuaded thou will be so brief,
Thou Wilt censure me, before thou readst a leaf:
It is an easy task for to traduce,
And in my absence for to threat abuse:
It Is also common for to carp by those,
Who scarce have sense of smelling in their nose;
The Actor's always readiest in his rage,
For to be beaten from his acting stage:
The horse who has not eyes for to direct
Him in the way, well rashly break his neck.
And thou who scarcely has a nose to smell,
Or eyes to see, or knowledge for to tell
What now thou readst, or on the stage can say
That was a bad, or this a better play:
Thou will presume thy verdict for to spend
At my expressions, and dare vilipend
My Muses labors, though thou speak in vain,
And spend the issues of thy empty brain.
This is the best, thy idle words may wander,
Thy tongue will never be accounted stander.
But it is a thing ^ not account so small,
Nor love to seem so superficial,
As for to pass it for thy partial word,
But dare and will maintain it with my sword.
Nor do I speak because I love or hate,
Nor spend my time at any such like rate:
But merely venture with indifferent eye,
And from a heart full of sincerity*
Does know my fault, much better it may be,
Then thou who art so bold to censure me,
I err in nothing that I do intend,
But that my knowledge cannot comprehend
The height of his deservings* when I strive
For to recount his virtues* and contrive
Within the compass of my Muses skill,
His actions, surely herein do I*ill:
But this it is* in witness of my love,
And I affection more then fashion move:
Therefore forbear, and touch not on the quick,
There are Commanders numerous, and thick,
And thousands more of Soldiers are abroad,
Of dispositions desparate, and odd,
Who bears about them wears it as a badge,
The name of Essex, O! do not inrage
The multitude; for they were ever all
So much ad^^ted to their General,
And He was always as the fixed star,
About the which all others placed are:
For to attend, of whom they took delight,
And followed all courageously to sight:
To have a Leader so beloved, an Earl,
Whose virtues were more glorious then a Pearl
Of rich esteem, or such a noble Lord,
To sing whose praise all Christendom accord:
It is a fault in me, I do confess,
To undertake it surely I transgress,
And do deserve to be condemnd but then,
Let me entreat thee for to take the pen,
And where into thou sees I do offend,
Do but so much my errors to amend:
Which if thou do, I can no more require:
My Patrons praise is all I do desire.
Ad Eundem.
I See I once more must be censured yet,
But I am armed for to answer it:
I know thou think the entry of the piece
Is almost bigger then the Edifice.
To this, I say, rich jew'ls, though they be small,
Must have strong gates, be compast with a wall.
William Mercer. Anagr.
I Am real receiv' me.
Verse.
I Am real, receiv' me* or else, if not,
I will not be received by such a sot.
W. M.

In commendation of the Author, and his work. To Himself.
Sonnet.
FRom that representation, which in this
Your mirror of the worth of others, is
Unto our view exposed, does reflect
The Image of your self, in an aspect
More semblable, then ever Looking-glass
Did show the beauty of a Ladies face.
Then seeing that the picture of your merit,
Can by the pensil of no other spirit
Be drawn so to the life, for that these lines
Set forth your splendor, even as your name shines
In their contexture, making you, and your
Poaems be either the others portraiture,
It shall suffice me only to avow,
That you renown the book, and the book you.
T. F.

The Author to his work, and in relation to the former lines.
Sonnet.
IHave created, made, and christened thee,
Thou have thy being, all thou art, of me:
I best know what is enclosed in thy contents,
And to beholders, what thou represents,
Yet is the least part of the praise but due
To me, the honor wholly does accrue
Unto the substance whereof thou art made,
So purely fine, because had I not had
Such quintessences, rarified, and fine,
For to compose rhee of, no skill was mine,
To make thee so, in luster, pure, and rare,
So absolute, so curious, singular:
Then as mine own I freely speak to thee,
But thy perfections challenge more of me.
VV. M.

The Prologue to this ensuing Discourse.
THe Author first does invocate the Nine
To aid him with intelligence divine:
Then enters in a Civil threefold War,
And fights through all the forces which there are
Presents diverse Actors, though not all,
Fomenters of this Story Tragical:
Promotes the City, parlies for a peace:
And puts the Kingdom in a better case,
Which done, to raise this Islands endless glory,
He shows some worthies, and breaks of the story.
ANGLIAE PECVLVM. OR ENGLANDS LOOKING-GLASS.
O Come and aid me, teach me to indite,
Inspire my Muse, instruct me for to write,
Come all you sisters of the sacred nine,
Infuse in me, your virtues most divine;
Bow down the branches of Parnassus bow's,
And give me thereby strength to tell my vows
Afford me favor (that I may go on)
To taste the waters of sweet Haelicon.
I undertake to tell of civil wars,
Of such disasters, and distracted jarrs,
I tell a story Tragi Comicall:
And sing the praises of my General.
I do presume a little, now and then
To tell the acts of Englands worthy men
Although in weakness, willing am to show,
How much affection, England I do owe,
What great regard my inclination bears
Unto its noble and renowned Peers:
With what respect I labor to present
My duty to the House of Parliament:
And these Committees, set for to attend
All grievances: I also recommend
(Without deceit, of my impartial pen)
The endless virtues of some martial men.
I show the sufferings of a glorious City,
Their vast expenses, and their endless pity:
I tell the travells of those deep divines,
Too high a task, for my unlearned lines:
I do invent a second way, and set
A Glass before thee, wherein I do let
Thee see such things, though by ^econd fight,
As cannot well be represented right,
I do report the praises of the day,
When Mars set meetings, and I truly say,
I undertake to tell thee with my pen:
The actions of ten hundred thousand men.
Nor is this all, my running pen denotes
The famous Lords, commissioners for the Scots
With their assistants, moral, and divine:
A glance of each, within this glass of mine,
My travels do extend themselves, as far
From hence, as to the fixed North pole star,
A triple travel do I also take,
And in that Irish Island Journey make,
This is a labor for a larger wit,
Excuse me therefore, if I fail in it.
It was the year six hundred thirty nine,
When first we saw these evils to incline:
This angry storm arose first in the North,
And thence its force in violence sent forth,
Till it infected Englands banks about,
From East, to West, the South, and North throughout,
That Irish Island which I treat upon
Was likewise bent in this combustion,
A threefold cord in such a cursed cause,
So strongly linkt to overthrow the laws,
Subjects of one united Diadem,
As if their Sovereign had invited them,
All were combined, and in this base design,
As is apparent in this glass of mine.
Two mighty great incendiaries meet
In this rebellion, each another greet,
A skillful, cunning, cursed Machiavil.
Joynd with the wisdom of Achitophel:
The one a Depute, merely set aside,
To ruin all, by Diabolick pride.
The other was, chief Metropolitan,
Within whose breast this business began*
These were the men who undertook the thing,
Pretending all in honor of the King:
Did lay aside the loyal bond of peace:
And privileges of the present place;
Forgot the glory of the great Creator,
This Prelat who should proved a Mediator,
Joynd with this Judas, in his Masters case
For to betrayed him, in his very face,
But yet behold, these Machiavilians were
For all the wicked ways they could prepare,
Found out, and forced for to embrace the end
They did for others treacherously intend,
They sought to curb the honor of that God,
Who did prevent them by his angry rod:
Strove to destroy Religion, in pretense
That all was for Religions defense:
This is the work I undertake to write,
O! give me knowledge, and a perfect sight*
Of such assistance, as I shall desire,
In flame my Muse with that Celestial fire,
Which shall afford me, what I stand in need,
And what shall serve them, who desire to read,
According to the nature of the thing:
O! add some strength unto my feeble wing.
That I may fly, before my feathers tire,
To tell the truth, where only I aspire:
And for to speak in order, let me enter:
First, at those worthies, who did give adventure,
In legal manner, with a mighty hand,
Those Potentates, and plots for to withstand:
See how the God of order did them bless,
Who sought by order, and prevented this:
They called a counsel of the highest kind,
There to assisted, by their Sovereigns mind,
And by consent of the imperial power,
Committed these Confederates to the Tower,
But they had done the worst that they could do,
According to the bad intents of two:
Had turned the just intentions of the State,
To be conceived, cause of their Sovereigns hate:
Had set the Nations all three, by the ears,
Sweld up their hearts with jealousies, and fears,
Till in the end, they were arraignd, derided,
Accused, condemnd, and both of them beheaded
Yet did that seed, which they had sown about,
Spring in such plenty, and did take such root:
That like those trees, whence are the branches lopt,
Or as those weeds, the oftener they are cropped,
Increase the more, so did those rebels rise,
Like moats into the Sun, before our eyes,
But here is their craft, their Sovereign they incense,
He must suspect his Parliament, go hence,
They do persuade him, if he will deny,
The royal presence of his Majesty:
Their was no Law to authorize their actions,
But that they would dissolve in sudden factions,
This was the doctrine that they taught the King
Although there was no warrant for such thing,
For notwithstanding statutes do ordain
Kings to confirm, yet are they not in vain:
Although their Sovereign contrair to that trust
The Laws allow him, shun them through his lust
But as the members without a head must fall,
The King and Subjects, are reciprocal.
Yet Kingdoms can be ruled, by a thing
Called Civil Laws, albe't there be no King;
But will you tell me? can a King do so,
Without a Law? or rule aright, or no)
No, no, a Law without a King can be,
But Kings without a Law, you cannot see,
It is much safer to enjoy a Law
Without a Sovereign, if he will withdraw,
Then if a Land be subject to that cruel
Command of Kings, where is no Law to rule:
But as the body's joined with the mind,
And as the tree is coupled to the rind*
So should the Sovereign, and the Subject too,
Agree in one, do what each other do.
But this was that, which they tell him, he must
Or do, or else he nothing has to trust:
Upon such bad instructions, he retires,
Forsakes the Counsels, and the just desires
Of his ingenuous Court of Parliament:
Which did provoke, a fearful detriment
Unto his Highness, and that dignity
Which does belong unto his Majesty*
For his great Counsel, by his high command,
Kept constant meetings, with a mighty hand,
And by his Law, did issue out their orders
In every corner of the Kingdoms borders:
Requiring thereby, subjects to submit,
And render due obedience unto it:
And to give strength unto their just intents,
They raised Armies by commandments:
For to regain their gracious royal prince,
To vindicate their honors, and convince
Those errors, which were in their King inspired
And this was that they constantly desired:
But yet one passage must I not forget,
Into its highest nature to relate.
They do incense, to make the breach the more,
Their Sovereign, for to approach the door
Of Parliament, and there would take the embers,
Destroy the body, cutting off the members:
Accompanied with proud pernicious foes,
Called Cavaliers, from whence their name arose:
This was their plot: more hateful to be held,
Then was that powder treason paraleld:
For that was by our enemies abroad,
But this by those confessed the self same God:
That was by powder, to dispatch with speed,
All in an instant: hereby might they bleed
Above an Ocean, issuing every day
Forth from their sides, who I dare truly say,
Sought by all means for to maintain the sense
Of ancient statutes, and their Kings defense:
O! highest, horrid, massacre of hell,
It makes me tremble, when I strive to tell:
But am revived, O! how my spirits fill
With joy and gladness, when I saw this ill
So wisely shund: O! but a secret hand
Of power divine, did do it I understand,
But hereupon our Sovereign thought it right
Himself for to sequestrate from the sight
And presence of this highest Parliament;
Inspired with fury of fierce discontent:
Then as the child, who sees an angry Father,
Or like such loyal loving subjects rather,
Or like the chaste embraces of a spouse,
Who prays, persuades, solicites, and she woes,
A wilful husband, when he will divorce,
Or her abandon, or which may be worse,
Accuse her of a breach, and urge upon her
Those insolences of a base dishonor:
She still pursues, importunes, pleads, and speaks,
And on her knees, submissively she seeks
To reconcile her thoughts to his again:
But all her time and tears are spent in vain:
These freeborn subjects, like to those, I say,
They seek their Sovereign, and they humbly pray:
They do petition, and they call on high
Upon the maker of his Majesty:
Into whose hands the hearts of Princes be,
He would be pleased to move him, let him see
Their zealous hearts, with what affection
They would submit unto his sacred throne,
If he would please but condescend to stay,
And ratify those actions, which say they,
Shall be determined, after to the laws
In former times, in every point, and clause:
The privileges of your Majesty
Shall be established in a high degree:
We will contrive as lines of law shall lead,
Your Highness shall corroborate, as head.
But all is nothing, lo, he stops his ear;
Retires himself, and leaves them sitting there:
Conveens huge Armies, on a fair pretense,
That all was for his personal defense.
Then in the wisdom of that Council great,
Which was established in its proper right,
Whence he remoov'd, they sent an army out
For to defend the faith, its foes to rout:
Their banners were bedect with holy phrases,
And in their marches sung their masters praises:
And to prevent more imminent mischief,
They went and waited for the next relief:
Had no commission, if conceived aright,
But to defend, not to enforce a fight:
Else had they often, if not so restraind,
Reduced these sad divisions which remaind.
They were commanded by that famous Lord,
Who by the least neglect, did not debord.
The first, or great encounter which was seen,
Was by Edge hill, so named, or Kenton green:
'T may be some meetings fortuned for to fall
Between two parties, which I do not call
To mind; but here the only place was set,
Where these two Royal armies fiercely met:
It was the year six hundred forty two,
The twenty three October, when they do
Draw up their forces, on the Sabbath day:
I was a witness, therefore dare I say;
I will not seem so partial with my quill,
For feud, nor favor, nor for no man's ill,
But will declare such as I then did see,
Or as my charge sometimes permitted me:
The royal presence once prepared, approached,
Vnmounted from his horse, or else uncoach'd:
Gave orders to his chief Commanders then,
To show themselves courageous, valiant men,
This did I hear by true report, and I
May well avouch, they, herein do notly:
Then with the sound of trumpets, and the noise
Of Drums, and Canons, and a mighty voice
Of Soldiers threatenings, thirsting after blood,
Did cover all the fields, as a cloud;
Came on, gave fire, pursued, and they set
Themselves at work; and were as fiercely met:
For though we had not orders to pursue:
Yet must they not triumph, I tell you true;
Their banners were with wickedness adornd,
Our holy ensigns sinfully they scornd:
Yet once engaged sincerely I protest,
They fought with courage, while the battle last,
But was constrained for to give us ground,
As by their absence in the morning found:
Fled from their pieces, left their dead behind them,
And at such distance as we could not find:
The royal Standard, this day did we gain,
Lord Lindsey General in the field was slain:
Took diverse Ensigns, placed them to fly
As Emblems, Trophies, of our victory:
With certain thousands of the vulgar sort,
Which were destroyed, yet they, for to be short,
Conceived a shadow of a second strength:
As broken reeds, which faild them: in the length
Approacht in presence of fair Londons walls,
Expect relief; but listen what befalls*
For on another Sabbath day they sought
Advantage, but it treacherously was wrought:
Because they had a conference between
Their chiefest men, and ours, and we did mean
Upon the passing of each faithful word,
That none should dare for to unsheath a sword:
Yet notwithstanding that they had engaged
Upon a treaty, and their honor pledged;
On this pretense they did approach, and are
In arms at hand; bad stratagem in War:
To stain their honor, or to violate:
The trust imposed, should be immaculate.
But what advantage gaind they by this act?
Their mighty Army very nigh was sacked:
For had they not in secret of the night,
As formerly, returned while they might:
Their many thousands, both of Horse and Foot;
And in the which they trusted, were so stout,
Were very like to be confounded then,
Such was the minds of our heroic men:
For they confided, first, to find supply
From out the City, else had they not come nigh.
But all their plots were disappointed, so
That they were glad with greedines to go:
For London longed their Sovereign to enjoy,
But shund to let them enter to destroy
Themselves, and shopps, their houses, and their ware:
No, they resolved they should not enter there.
Thus must they march: to make the matter worse,
They press the people; and they plunder horse:
They do pretend they seck the Subjects good,
As innocents, they shun to shed their blood.
The Papists have pre-eminence at Court,
And Jesuits have Jesus, to be short:
They pray unto those Idols, but pretend
The Protestant profession they defend:
Their God is blind, so are they also too;
He cannot help, nor know they what to do:
This God of theirs deceives them, yet will they
Create a new Creator every day;
Such means as those they use to move the people,
And rings Religion out of every steeple:
They make a process in impious actions,
And strive to bring the Common wealth in factions:
The scope of all their carriage abroad;
Has proved but high derision to God:
For whatsoever from the source was sent
Of good Religion, with a strong intent:
They trod it under footsteps, and did fly
The happiness of true divinity:
Thus did they spend the power they did contract
To ruin Gospel, bring the best to wrack:
For let me ask, as one who has an eye
And pen, free of impartiality:
What did they do in all their great proceedings?
Or what perceive you in your by past readings?
It Is true they sought, and manfully did stand;
But it was most because of good command:
And so they rangd in most unruly kind,
With stretched out arms, and irteligious mind:
Till at each meeting, by the sword, or power;
We took them captives, or we did devour*
The chiefest of their Champions, uncontrold;
Which made their armies by their presence bold
Yet notwithstanding that they are so stout*
The Chivalry are ruind, and the foot
Are forced to fly, or in the end must yield,
But for the most part was an equal field:
I attribute, next, to The Almighty's hand
As I have said, all to their wise Command;
For had they not, that high renowned Scot,
Surnamed Ruthen, Earl, a man of note,
Their General; and of that Nation many
As brave Commanders, in the world as any,
Besides, their high determinations cease,
When they perceive their richest spoils decrease:
Their hands did fail them, and their hearts relented*
It was too late, or else they had repented.
They knew the cause wherein they had been bent,
Was contrary to the Laws commandment:
And that they had no warrant from the Word
Of God, nor did it privilege afford,
Unto their persons for to interpose
Between their Sovereign, and the seed of those
Who were elected, in a legal band
As one united body, for to stand.
And now you see, when power is in our hand
By full Commission, absolute command,
How they are vanquished, Towns regained, so
But if you ask me how, I do not know.
Thus from this place of powerful residence
To that, where Phoebus leaves his influence;
Both Towns, and Country, once, which did submit,
Were gaind into obedience of it:
Of it, I say, which should our actions guide,
And from the which, our thoughts should never slide.
Likewise their strength, extended to the North,
Throughout the Kingdom, reached over forth;
But by the way, opposed were by might
With multitudes, and millions in their sight;
That all were as, the stubble to the fire,
Or as the dust which from the wind retire.
Some were confounded, others forced to fly,
Their bodies wounded all were glad to cry,
And beg for pardon, safe it were those Priests
And Jesuits, who counted all but jeasts
Till they were routed, totally, and then
They saw their Gods, were given prays to men.
This did express the providence, and wit
Of prudent Essex, who appointed it,
By virtue of, His Warrant from his hand,
Which gave all others, absolute Command
As high, immediate, only General:
Nor do I seek to derogate at all,
From those, whose actions were approved to be
Heroic, noble, virtuous, yet let me
Without offense, give every one their own,
Nor give my General, but what well is known
To be, and is, and ever shall be due,
His proper power, I will a vouch it true,
Yet this is not the scope of my intent,
My pen importunes, and my Muse is bent
To take her flight fair Albion throughout,
From East to West, its borders round about;
Nor rests she there, but lo my Muse she must
Travers the waters, and in secret thrust
Her self, amongst such as count nothing just;
But what is invented by their wicked lust.
And what by them is acted, and resolved,
Though they themselves, are thereby much involved
In woeful sin; yet they forsake with shame
The noble title, of a I oyall Name.
They do deny the power, and virtue too
Of Covenants, and this they likewayes do
Deny the truth, nor will they entertain
A Triple Crown, but labors to ordain
By private factions, what they think is fit,
According to their diabolick wit:
And this they call a Covenant, because
They covenant, to contradict the Laws:
Lay's truth aside, forsakes the God of peace,
Abandons virtue, wickedness embreace.
They cut the throats of such as are not Rebels,
And will not bow to their pernicious bables.
Thus have they run, and ranged, five falls almost,
Triumphed over poor Protestants, and crossed,
Yea, and tormented, Innocents, and such
As had not knowledge to discern, nor which
Was good, or bad, was right or wrong, nor what
Was to be chosen, or be aimed at.
All were alike in their polluted hearts,
They pierced the sides of Infants with their darts:
Began, go on, and entertains a war;
And those are they, against whom this Nation are
So well engaged, and daily does send over
Supplies of all things, them for to recover;
What vast expenses, in a boundless measure,
Enough to have exhausted Chrysus treasure.
Millions of men, and multitudes in store,
The more is spent, they still employ the more:
And all is furnished, by this famous place,
The Metrapole of England, and the grace,
Yea, and the glory, of the worlds delight,
For sumptuous buildings, wonders to the sight.
To what shall I endeavor to compare
The excellencies of this place so rare?
Whose beauty shines, whose glory is so great,
That I should rob it, of its proper right,
If I should lay it in the Scales to try
If any be of such equality;
But what my Muse, are these the news thou brings?
Can tell us nothing, but such doleful things?
As Kingdoms ruins, nothing but of war,
And what is worse, if any worser are:
O, yes, the waters are abated much,
The evils are not now so bad; but such
As thou may see, the deep deluge is dry,
The Ark is opened, and I can epsy
A peaceful Dove, transporting in her bill
An Olive branch, directed by the will
Of that divine, high wisdom of that God,
To tell them this, who in the Ark abode,
The floods are fled into their former bounds;
We can perceive the waters from the grounds:
The Sun does shine, dispersed are the clouds,
The storms are calmed, abated are the floods.
The Ark of England, does in safety stand,
The Creatures enjoy a peaceful Land.
Now are we fully satisfide, and more
Then ever we could be at all before,
That this destruction was by divine Hand
To wash away the wicked from the Land.
For was not God derided to his face?
His Laws neglected, misregarded grace:
Pride was become superlative, and I
May well avouch, that base hypocrisy
Was placed within the very breasts of all
Both rich, and poor; the greater sort, and small
Were all infected: and the height of sin,
When God forbore a while, increast therein.
That should I reckon, irreligion, lies,
The sin of Murder, and adulterous eyes,
Contempt, deceit, and all the sins of hell
Reigned in this Nation, in the which we dwell.
But now all tokens of a peaceful time,
That we are cleansed from the guilt, or crime
Of those offenses, wherewith we were cloyed;
And for the which, we well nigh were destroyed.
Approach, and do present themselves at hand,
And do proclaim, a quiet peaceful Land:
Our bloody battles have brought better things,
The Subjects thoughts, united to the Kings.
Our former evils, avarice, and greed,
And all those sins which heretofore you read,
Are now so blotted, and abated too,
That what they did before, they no more do;
So are the thoughts now of our Sovereign turned,
For which the Land, and all that's therein mourned;
That what the Subject sought, and much entreated,
And by uncessaut Messengers invited;
Yet were denied, now is it freely sent
To be embraced by the Parliament.
The King and Subject now are almost one,
The way to make the most Magnifique Throne
That ever was, or in this Land has been,
Or heretofore by any has been seen.
O happy time, may I be bold to tell,
Within the which this great discention fell;
Which is so like to gain so great a good,
Though we have bought it dearly, by our blood.
Religion's aimed at, in a truer kind,
If we can get them all but of a mind;
Our errors are removed, all intend
Their former frailties fully to amend;
So that the evils of our bypast age
Shall gain us far more faithful privilege:
And make us further, to forsake the sin
Which heretofore we so were wallowed in:
Shall make us know, whence all of us did come,
Where we shall bend our actions and to whom,
Shall reunite, as formerly you read.
The Members, so, divided from the Head
Shall move our Sovereign for to smile again,
And with his Subjects joyfully remain:
Shall still be thought immediately the cause
Next unto God, that we possess our Laws.
It shall speak peace assuredly, and shall
Cure these diseases Epidemicall;
Shall make these Nations, happy, more and more,
And thrice so fruitful, as they were before.
Shall make them quite forget the evils gone,
When they shall see their Sovereign in his throne.
O what a change then shall our souls perceive,
What greater pleasure, could we wish or crave?
But all our former tears for to be wiped
Away, and we, who were extremly stripped,
Shall be made glad: and all our bypast grief
Be turned from terror, to a full relief!
Then shall we sing the praises of the day,
Wherein we heard the Proclamation say,
So many thousands sacrificed were,
And shall acknowledge, we be happier
By far, then ever we did think to be.
This is my hope, what say you now to me?
Or to my Muse? is this not all you would?
Or what by me, was promised to be told?
Then let me yet, insist a little still,
And pen the praises, with my tyring quill
Of that most famous, glorious City, and
Set forth its fame; so making great the Land
Wherein it lies, fair London which has lent
Its treasure to afford us this content;
They speak of Sparta, for its famous worth,
And write huge volumes for to set it forth:
The pens of Poets and their pains are spent
To praise its glory most magnificent:
Not only for the grandor of its Gates,
Nor for those virtues, which the world relates,
Nor for its pomp, nor for its pleasant walls,
Nor for its Worthies, which within it dwells,
Nor for those riches, which it does contain,
Nor yet these Nobles, it does entertain,
Nor for those Statues, therein which do stand,
Nor yet the Archyes, builded with the hand
Of Curious art, nor for its streets so fine,
Nor for such things as they account divine:
Nor for the pleasures of its breadth, nor length,
Nor for the numbers, which affords it strength;
Nor for its fame, nor for its fair renown,
Nor all the things, that can extol a Town:
But for a Cause, that cannot be expressed,
And that is this, it far exceeds the rest.
Yet all is nothing, if I shall compare
This Sovereign City in its virtues rare;
It far excels my telling, or my tongue,
My enterprises may provoke its wrong.
The pens of Poets, have been all imployd,
And all the Muses, have their skill convoyd
To praise its pomp, its pleasures to express,
And sing the praises of its worthiness.
Its riches, and its Nobles does exceed
Not only Sparta, but all parts I read:
Its statues are established in state,
With brave triumphant Archies on each gate:
Its streets in straightness, stands as a line,
Paved so for pleasure, it does purely shine.
It is so spacious, yet of precious stones,
That every place, appears sumptuous thrones,
It is the Seat of all Divinity,
And in its Learning none can come it nigh.
A place so praist, and spoken of, a far,
In just compare, no places equal are.
Are not the eyes of all the earth abroad
Fixed on its glory, as it were a god?
Do not all Nations labor to reside
Within this City? which can fully feed
Far more in number, with its rairest dainty,
Then it can harbor, so great is its plenty:
A place wherein, all Nations are concerned,
So populous, and yet so well governed.
Besides all these, in mornings of the Spring,
When Echoes answer, Quiristers that sing;
And from the steeples, when they strain the Bells,
Whose melody sweet Music paralels:
When all the airie branches of the trees
Are whistling for the multitudes of Bees:
And at whose walls, the Ocean once a day,
Or twice, or thrice, returns without delay,
To do it honor, and to wash its walls;
Which having done, as surfeted it falls
Abake, for to embrace its former banks,
And then returns, unto its bypast pranks.
That fairest River of Renowned Fame,
Or Crystal Conduict, named by the Them,
Almost surroundeth, this, so sacred City,
That to compare with Sparta were a pity.
And then we speak of Sparta, by report,
So that such contemplations, must come short
Of such a thing as herein I intend,
Although I can the full not comprehend.
Yet in compare, I must express so much
The Lacedemons never dwelt in such;
Not only for all other things, but then
It far exceeds all Cities for the men:
Nor is this all yet, one thing I must tell,
In which fair London, does the world excel,
And which indeed, makes all things to appear
The more delightful, unto all that is here.
And of it self the only joy to men,
Superlative for pleasure now and then:
Those fair Idaeas, of the femall kind,
Such matchless beauties no where ever shined;
The dainty visage fair Venetian Dames,
Are far inferior darkened at our flames
Of admired features; those heart-piercing eyes,
In full resemblance of the Deities.
But I Will forbear, I know their Sex are such
They may wax prouder, if extold too much:
O fair magnifique glorious City thou
Art so exalted and extolled too
That my so shallow superficial brain
Cannot express (with such a fluent strain,
As is required the excellencies and
The manner, method, form, how thou do staud,
Upon the East part, where fair Phoebus rise
There stands a Tower, with Crowns up to the skies
So strong, so stately, each way wal'd about,
Such wealth within it, Lions are without;
The famous Theams, which it does stand upon
So arched over with a Crystal Throne,
That look afar, and it appears there,
The Houses hang, between the earth and air:
And at the west, or other end of it,
Two palaces, where mighty Princes sit,
Thereby the Stately monuments of Kings,
(Bedecked with robes, with Trophies, and such things,
As shall remain for glory of the place
Until the time, that time shall have no race,)
does stand, and with it, is adjoined so nigh
As if it were it self, a Sanctuary,
A place appointed for a solemn seat
Where Orthodox divinity does meet,
Between which two, the Tower and Royal Seat,
Such famous Churches stand in every street,
That if I err not almost does appear,
A several Church, for each day in the year:
There is the place established for a throne
For Englands Sovereign's for to sit upon,
There are the Seats of Justice for the Land,
And there the Scepter swayes in Justice hand,
There sits the Counsel of that Court so high,
Which represents, a Royal Majesty;
That every thing; considered, as you see
It no more City, but a World may be,
But stay my muse, where minds thou for to run?
Hast' not forgot thy self, since thou begun?
Thou may run out in hyperbolick speeches,
But it is much higher then thy knowledge reaches,
Forbear with fairness, labor not too far
Be not too forward running in the war,
Thou may loose thy labor and abuse
The good intentions of thy virtuous Muse:
Thou must not seem too curious, nor too nice,
Let it suffice, that thou have broke the Ice;
It is the mark of any wise Commander
In such a field, not too far to wander,
The times are dangerous, and thou walk'st alone
And have to do with more men then with one*
The number's many, which thou have to please
And thou art object of as many eyes:
Thou have run over in few certain hours
The Compass of three Kingdoms, and their powers,
Have been in all the Armies of the land
With nothing but a pen into thy hand,
Have traveled rashly, and have met with many,
I think it strange thou did not strive with any,
But yet retire, remember I have told thee
A hundred thousand thousands may behold thee,
And of them all, perchance some may commend it,
And it may happen some men be offended.
But send it forth unto the world to view
Crave good men mercy, bid the bad adue.
William Mercer. Anagr.
I arm merci well.
Verse.
I arm merci well, arm's and merci too,
I here express, and leaves the rest to you.
FINIS.
Angliae Speculum: OR ENGLANDS LOOKING-GLASS.

The second Part, Consisting of several Speeches, Anagrams, Epigrams,
Acrosticks, and Sonnets. etc.

By C. VV. MERCER.

Scribimus indocti, doctique poaemata passim. LONDON. Printed by Tho: Pain.
MDCXLVI.

To the Right Honorable LORDS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
SHall dust and ashes dare to utter words
In presence of such high and mighty Lords?
Who are so set, and circled by the throne
Which their dread sovereign use to sit upon:
Dare I lift up my eyes upon that place?
Or shall I have the honor to embrace
Time for to talk? or will they tell me, I
Must stand aside, they are a Majesty;
Made up of many: no, no, not so, they
Are not so proud, their presence every day
They do afford; therefore let me not fail
To enterprise, my purpose will prevail:
Why should I think of such things as forbearing?
The tale is ill that is not worth the hearing.
Those noble Lords are Peers into the Land
Brooks not such pride: I pray you understand,
They are the chief, most eminent, allowed,
For Englands virtues; will you have them proud?
No, I persuade you, will you walk about,
And view the world, even every way throughout:
Scarce shall you find such Worthies as they are,
Or such as can compare with them, by far*
And in pursuance what you hear me speak,
Come but and listen, you shall see me seek.
And crave their patience, and make bold to ask,
And in their presence will present my task.
Most noble Lords, whose constanci's admird*
Whose Virtues ways, and travels are untyrd;
By whose consent, the Scepter bears sway,
And in your great assembly every day.
What constant minds, are seen about your throne;
What noble Spirits do appear thereon,
What joyful smiles, shine in the subjects ey,
To see amongst you, such a Sympathy;
No emulation, nor confounding pride,
Your high attempts, nor actions does divide,
Your enterprises are so prudent still,
You nothing but, the ancient laws fulfill,
You still concur, and with the Commons stand
Their Honors thereby, bear an equal hand,
What high applaus shall be pronounced of you,
When after ages, shall repeat your due?
Declaring how you stayed with the State
When there was striving daily in debate:
Some going hence and others doubting what
Was best to do, yet you not questioned that;
Did not my brave and Noble ESSEX ever
Against all Temptations constantly persever?
What shall be said for all your certain ways?
Your Noble brow's, shall bear a crown of boys:
Thus if I fail in what my muse affords,
I humbly leave it to the House of Lords.
W. M.

To the Honorable House of Commons.
Where am I now? O! let me wisely weigh
Since I presume thus, to approach so high;
As to appear in presence of that place
Which is so stored with stateliness, and grace,
The body which does represent a King,
Admits no title but a Sacred thing,
Each member there, may well be said to be
A perfect part of our chief Sanctuary:
The true extract of Wisdom, and the best
Which by consent, are sifted from the rest,
Whose easlesse labors, with impartial eyes,
Prevents the dangers, daily which arise,
Expires their Spirits, almost to regaine
What cursed catives, labors for in vain,
Are early up, can skarcely go to bed,
Five falls and springs, such troubles have they had,
Must hear the cries, of every one that are
Almost confounded with this cruel war.
The great man coms, petitions in his grief;
And then the poor petitions for relief:
The Widow cries, my husband's slain, and I
Am destitute for want of food may die.
Then comes the Orphan, Loudly cries alas
I most of all am in a fearful case:
As also numbers of the hurt, and lame,
All have recourse, calls for relief at them:
The great and mean, the destitute and poor,
All call for pity at their pious door.
Yet they have patience, and do much prevent
The pressing sorrows of the discontent:
Like to the tender parents, who provide
For such, as on them faithfully confide:
Themselves are robbed of all that was their own,
Yet must maintain such as are overthrown.
Must strive to still the outcries of all those
Who have been ruind by their raging foes:
But wherewith do they what they have to do?
I ask it of thee, and must tell thee too:
Their prudence, and unwearied pains appear,
They do provide it, though it be not here:
Their ardent prayers prevails most of all:
God grants their suits, they so divinely call;
See how they do such certain days allot
For such occasions as requires note:
Each month a solemn public Fast they keep,
Presents their prayers in private, and they weep:
What they forbear, that is collected truly,
And to the poor is dedicated duly:
They put restraint long since to sinful plays,
And have prevented idle holy days:
They have collections constant for the needy:
To act such things, their goodness makes them greedy:
It Is not the heat of Summers scorching Sun,
Makes them desert the business begun:
Nor yet the sharpnes of the winters day,
Prevents their travels, nor provokes delay:
But they go on still, with undaunted fear;
Observes no times, nor seasons of the year.
This is the course continually they keep,
More constant then they either eat, or sleep:
Yet all is counted nothing, since they can
Not please the persons of each private man;
This is the thanks they conquish for their care,
They boldly ask them, wherefore sit they there*
But O! the charge wherein they are engaged,
Calls for our reverence not to be enraged;
But these are they, those Worthies whom I would
If I had knowledge, faithfully unfold;
But since my skill cannot extend so high,
I must desist, and pardon of them cry:
The^^ actions are true witness of their ways,
What ever malice, or Malignants says.
And in the Evening of their wearied day
Their greatest foes, shall be enforced to say,
They have done well; and in the end of all
For their rewards, receive a welcome shall*
So that at last, they shall be called to rise,
And keep their Meeting far above the skies.
W. M.

TO The Right Honorable the LORDS COMMISSIONERS of SCOTLAND.
MY LORDS,
AS you are persons of a High descent,
So do your persons highly represent,
The body of a Kingdoms whole estate,
Whose former freedoms, need I not relate;
You know the case, therefore I will forbear,
Yet let me humbly tell you since you are here,
Scotland has keep its Crown unconquish'd ever,
Foes often invaded, but they had it never;
Nor did they love it for its riches then,
But for the active spirits of the men:
By whose assistance, all the world so wide,
So much triumphs; and in their faith confide.
How great a Glory is it to that place?
They had the honor in so short a space,
Even by their power, to enter and withstand
The sorrows threatened in their Neighbors Land;
By their assistance set the Borders free,
And what they did, the world a witness be?
This is the Land, these are the men, for who,
You all were chosen, and came here to do:
Be not too slow* nor seem not in a fleep,
Lose not the thing, which you so long did keep;
Cast not your burden, on this noble Band,
But know your selves best what you have in hand*
They have affairs so weighty, that they must
Begin at home, according to their Trust;
Think on your selves, and that, for which you came,
It is enough, all is allowed by them:
Nor only must the Public be relieved,
But every private Member that is grieved,
It does belong a little to your charge,
Such to assist; or if you do enlarge
Your warrant there, it cannot do amiss:
You may commit a greater sin then this,
And I conceive it cannot give offense
To further things that suffer in suspense,
Such as were sharers in the self-same thing
For which you say, you did your Army bring,
And Natives too, it cannot be unfit,
For to befriend them, they deserved it,
In Suits so just, what is it you may not do?
They covenanted for to answer you*
And then your actions cannot but must thrive
Such grave Divines, assist you to contrive,
Who constantly invoke with holy words,
For blessings from above, and so affords
Assistance alway's, from the heavenly Throne,
And still obtains the same before they are gone.
Then in a threefold manner may you take,
Concurrence also, and a Linck may make,
Of suchlike strength, as it will ever last
For to prevail, and take it from the rest,
I mean of those judicions Gentlemen,
Whose Aid you have, and I am certain then,
You nothing can desire, not yet demand
But you will surely have it at their hand*
Excuse my boldness, that I speak so much,
But I presume because I know you such
You will but smile, to see a soldiers Pen
Imployd to write, unto such mighty men;
But to be plain, I am so poor in purse
And void of learning; which the greater curse?
That I consider, neither what I say,
Nor what I write, nor have I time to stay:
Yet Noble Lords, the errors that I make
I pray you pardon, for the Countries sake.
W. M.

TO THE HONORABLE COMMITTEES.
Committee Men, so called, no question then;
It were most needful you were honest men:
For by the name Committee, you may find,
All is committed to your honest mind.
Abuse not then what comes into your trust,
Committee Men should constantly be just;
Know you are Members of that Noble place,
Which pleads its power proceeds of Law, and Grace.
You all are sworn to be just, and then,
If ye be so, ye'r right Committee Men*
I do believe ye all are just, but ye,
Must not believe me, not unless ye be
Both just, and honest, and you must examine
Your selves in secret, what concerns the samen;
Stain not that State from whence you do proceed,
Shun long debate, in things concerning need.
You men of honor, think upon your fame
Be not defiled, it is a fearful shame:
And you who are men of a meaner kind
Be not persuaded to a partial mind;
Nor let not love, nor hatred, nor the lust
Of earthly things, move thee to be unjust;
Nor wax too proud, because thou sees thou can,
Sit in the Chair as chief Committee-man:
But now I fear, that thou will shake thy head,
And think me saucy, for the thing ye read,
Yet I have had experience now and then
Of some of those you call Committee Men,
And if you chide or challenge me, in spite,
I will account you, one of whom I write;
Besides, conceive the nature of the time,
And you will give me leave to speak in rhyme:
Or if you quarrel, and will call me to it
And question me, how I durst dare to do it?
I tell you this, the wats have made me bold,
And I am lately, very scarce of gold;
That to be plain, I have no more to say,
But cure this evil,
I shall humbly pray.
W. M.

TO The Right Honorable the Earl of Northumberland: Earl ALGERNOUNE PERCIE.
Anagr.
Areall Princel'e Governer.
Verse.
A real Princely Governor, so be;
Thy royal Name denotes so much to me.
Epig.
TO thee brave Piercy, in thy prime of years,
Who art made choice of amongst the chiefest Peers,
To be great Guardian for the good of them,
The royal Offsprings. of a Diadem.
Those hopeful branches of that highborn Stock,
Those Infant-Anchors, Englands fenced Rock,
The rarest fruit, which heretofore have sprung,
Apparent heyrs to Kingdoms, though they are young:
How great (...) trust then, is reposed in thee,
To have su^^ Treasures in thy custody?
But sure, experience of thy bypast worth,
Has thee promoted, and haste pointed forth
Thee only fit; for such brave, high designs,
The education of such Princely Vines.
Long may they live, and rise to honors high,
Even till each one become a Majesty.
And thou, great Earl, whose Grandor shines in state,
Live still in spite of destiny, and fate.
I know not whether of thy parts to praise;
Thy self, place, fame, thou equal art in these.
W. M.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of PEMBROOK: Earl PHILLIP HERBERT.
Anagr.
Peer help al liberty.
Verse.
Peer help all liberty; Brave Lord, we see
Thy actions, and thy Anagram agree.
REnowned Lord, brave Earl, fair Englands pride,
I style thee so, since England does conside,
And ever did, in thy fidelity,
Both in their triumphs and tranquillity.
First, while this Nation did securely rest,
As thou wast Noble thou were worthiest:
For still the Court, thy carriage did commend
Did not co-act for thy luxurious end:
And now when Mars did muster all at arms,
Thou still art constant upon equal terms.
True to the State, courageous in faith,
Most absolute in mind unto the death.
A rare example in a case so high,
Friend both to subject and His Majesty.
The Tombs of Traitors, where their Hersesare,
Shall all bear witness, how wise Pembrook, far
Surpassed their practice; and his Trophies shall
Survive in honor, when theirs, perish all,
Patron of truth, pattern in Piety,
Two matchless Emblems, of Nobility,
Pembrook for Prudence, Piety, and worth*
These Epethites shall only set thee forth.
W. M.

To the Right Honorable Earl, Lord WILLIAM CECIL of SALISBURY.
Anag.
I Will really accord.
Verse.
Agree in truth, I will really accord,
To nothing else, Will I consent afford.
Epig.
SO high a Task, to undertake or choose,
For my so empty brdin, or shallow Muse,
Does argue Weakness, for it is a thing,
My knowledge cannot; to perfection bring.
Yet in submission, from a loyal heart,
I undertake sincerely to impart,
Those high extended excellencies, rare,
Which with the best; most worthy may compare:
A highborn, Baron, ancient Lord, and Earl,
Of matchless splendour, bright as any Pearl,
True Conqueror of Honor, Valor, fame,
Of virtue, favor, and magnifick name!
So Constant, in, the cause for which we fight,
And spend our blood, maintaining Englands right.
Adds thy assisting Land, unto those Lords,
Whose matchless wisdom, all true worth affords.
Of thee therefore, whose Virtues are so high,
I take my leave; in all humility.
W. M.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Warwick, Lord High-Admirall of England.
Earl ROBERT RICH.
Anag.
Thrice real, or beter.
Verse.
Warwicks Heroic, Thrice real, or better,
Brave Admiral, all England is thy debtor.
Epigr.
THis new: prepared piece, though it be dumb,
Yet represents, as it is Speculum,
The chiefest Actors, in this Great debate,
Between the Sovereign, and this Mighty State.
I am not tied, nor must I, stand content,
Howbe't it be without my Element.
But since your honor had the sole command
By Sea, and guarded us upon the Land;
Where, when your greatness did on Neptune ride,
And notwithstanding of his swelling pride,
Triumphed there; among his frothy floods,
Whose threatenings seemed to swallow up the Clouds.
Yet there you ruled, and forced foreign powers,
For to forbear, these Islands here of ours.
Wherefore while I, those Worthies do proclaim,
I must make bold, to magnify your fame;
Whose admired warfares, and Heroic deeds,
Shall be recorded unto all that reads:
That your affection to your Native Land,
May be perceived, though by the Seas command:
Brave Warwicks* Valor shall be stated still,
Till Neptune no more shall be seen to fiil,
Daign yet the greatness of your dignity,
Accept this sign, of my humility.
W. M.

TO The Right Honorable Bazill Fielding, Earl Denbeigh.
Anagr.
Fli'd il, begin zeal.
Verse.
I fli'd from ill, in zeal I did begin,
In all my acts, continued still therein.
Epigr.
BRave Lord thy Banners in this War were born,
And were by Mars both massacred, and torn,
Thy self bore Arms, when errors thought to rage,
And act'd thy part, upon that Tragic Stage:
Where dead men's sculs, lay strowed on the ground,
A sunder from their bodies being found.
There thou triumphed, against their tyranny,
And raised up Trophies of thy Victory.
Proved active, faithful, valourous and just,
And no less constant, in continual trust.
Exposed thy person, and did spend thy state,
Incurred the danger of thy Sovereigns hate;
Art one in number of the House of Lords,
So all these reasons, matter me affords,
To fall upon this subject, and to pen,
Thy praise; and place thee with those Noble men.
W. M.

To the Right Honorable, Earl Henerie Rich.
Anagr.
Here hence ir' realj*
Verse.
Here hence ire really. Thy Eagle-soring Wings*
Surmounts all envy, Ire, or such like things.
Epig.
WHat high Renown can be returned by me,
Most Noble Lord, as attributes to thee?
Extents of honors, in their rarest kind,
On Hollands head have been increased I find:
Bounty beyond expressions of my Pen,
Thy beauty too, exceeds the Sex of men;
The miracle of Fame, Dame Natures glore,
The life of virtue, graces house of store:
Thy Courtly presence, and thy Princely grace,
Adds to the splendour of thy Royal Race.
Nor Spain, nor France, the Netherlands, nor all,
The Nations, named; on this unmeasured Ball,
Can justly brag of such a one in worth,
For valor, virtue, and what issues forth.
The rarest tongue of Eloquence, and skill,
Which does exceed, brave Cicero his quill.
The minds of Monarchs, and the Courts of Kings,
Are only fit, for such unequald things.
The eyes of England, gloried heretofore,
In thee brave Holland, pray thee keep thy store,
And stand aside, lest any stain thy state,
By private Envy, undeserved hate.
And when thou find'st occasion, then come on,
Thy person fits, for to approach a Throne.
W. M.

To the Right honorable the E. of Manchester, Earl Edward Montigue.
Anagr.
Do not gr'eve me, I ruled al.
Verse.
Do not grieve me, I ruled all; at arms,
Where I commanded, kept you all from harms.
Epigr.
THat privilege which Poets do presume,
To practice by, I shall not need assume;
These are but fictions, for to figure forth
Such counterfeits, as have no real worth.
If I had Tullyes Eloquence of tongues,
And all the Nature to the Nine belongs*
Or rare Apelles knowledge in his Art,
And should employ them all, for to impart,
Those Noble virtues, valourous and wise,
Heroique actions, which do sympathize,
And correspond with these brave Worthies here,
They could not yet so exquisite appear,
For to demonstrate, nor draw to the life,
Thy high deservings, but engender strife;
And there should stay; and not determine truly,
The rich esteem of thy demerits duly.
The Chronicles of Englands true record,
Shall eternize thy Noble name, brave Lord.
Time shall expire, but that extent shall not
Extenuate, nor thy remembrance rot;
Succeeding ages, while the air gives breath,
Shall speak, how thou exposed thy self to death,
In doing service for this famous Land,
Wherein thou art a Prince, Peer, Earl, and
Which yet is more then each of these, or all;
Next to brave Essex, second General.
W. M.

To the Right Honorable Henerie Gray, Earl of STANFORD.
Anagr.
Agree herein, realy.
Verse.
Forsake all Shichems, take consent of me,
Maintain the truth, herein, really agree.
Epigr.
MOst courteous, and right stately Stanford, thou,
To whom I Am bent to pay that real Vow,
Which for thy worth, I solemnly have sworn,
And in my breast, so long a time have born:
Because thy constant countenance, has still
Been opposite, to Actors in this ill.
Have proved pious, pregnant, painful, and
With resolution, for the Faith did stand.
Sent forth the substance of thy self, thy Son,
And freeborn Heyr; what further could be done?
To fight in Battles for thy Native Land,
And for the Subjects freedom, for to stand.
Thus then thy self, still by uncessant pains,
Until this time untyr'd, and true remains,
To serve the State; and as I said, even so
Thy Noble Son, as resolute did go;
And made a twofold tie, to truth and fame,
In lines of Gold to write thy worthy Name.
And yet another reason moves me too,
In humble thanks to do this that I do.
Thou art a lover of that Native Land,
From whence I came; and who for England stand.
All these, and I, shall still be bound to say,
Live still in honor, stately Stanford, Gray.
W. M.

TO The Right Honorable John Maitland, Earl of Laudersdale: Earl John
Maitland.
Anagr.
I aimed at real honer.
Verse.
I aimed at real honor; that, I will afford:
To less then that, I never will accord.
Epigr.
ONe constant Star, still in the North did stand,
A Directory both by Sea, and Land:
But now two lights, more glorious then that one,
Are seen appear, forth from that Horizone.
Thou shinest for one, brave Laudersdale, a Star,
Whose splendor bright surpass all others far:
But being darkened by the Clouds at home,
Thou changed thy Seat, and to the South did come.
To let thy Light, shine constant, clear, and pure,
Though wandering Stars, shall vanish, not endure.
W. M.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN ELPHINGSTOWNE. Lord Balmerinoch.
Anagr.
I own honest helping.
Verse.
I own honest helping, and I did engage,
For honest help, the Covenant in plage.
Epig.
THat other light for which I lent my word,
Thou art; our wise Balmerinoch, brave Lord,
Who changed thy own true proper place in Sphere,
And set thy self to shine in Englands air:
Shine still, but so, that sending beams abroad,
Thy light reflect upon thy old abode.
Seek Englands good, next thy Creators glory
In all thy actions, and thy Oratorie.
But having shined, and showed thy true intent,
Return, and shine in thy own Firmament.
W. M.

TO The Right Honorable William Fiennes, Viscouut SAY and SEAL.
Anagr.
Live man, flee sin.
Use in, live in fam*.
Wise man in life.
Verse.
Live man, flee sin'; Use in, live in fame,
Wise man in life; These are thy very Name.
Epig.
MEcoenas is made famous for his Wit,
Yet thine is not inferior unto it,
Mars by no name but Mars, can be made known,
And Say (thy name) does Say and Seal thine own.
Poets spend time, and speak in praise of Plato,
And show the rare excellencies of Cato:
I, reading find, Remembrances of some
So high extold; grave Senators of Rome.
But though it did, so brag, and boast, I dar'
Avouch, that London, may out-brag it far.
For neither Plato, for his wisest parts,
Nor Mars for valor, Cato for his Arts,
Nor yet Mecoenas, for his worthy praise,
They need not make so much report of these.
Nor yet needs Rome, extol, and tell so much,
As if the world, nor we, could show them such.
Against them all, I do protest, appeal,
To thee brave Fiennes, Lord Viscount Say and Seal.
W. M.

To the Right Honorable William Gray, Lord GRAY.
Anagr.
Aim, I will agr'e.
Verse.
What good I gather in your minds to be,
First, I will speak, then, Aim, I will agr'e.
Epigr.
THose worthy Heroes, thrice Renowned Earls,
Whose luster shines, more bright then Orient Pearls,
Or as those Stars, which glister in the sphere,
When duskie darkness, mantles over the air;
When they brave Lord, in presence of that place
Approach, with prudence, stateliness, and grace,
They do make choice to charge thee, for thy worth,
To contribute those secret thoughts, sent forth;
From their so wise impartial breasts, they aim,
And thou a wise Mecoenas sits with them,
And finding all their actions faithful be,
Thou hear'st them speak, then says, I will agree.
To thee brave Lord, the Loadstone of the State.
Whose worth appears, in intricate debate,
Attractive, and, by understanding too,
Thou first collects, then wisely do thou do.
Dispensing all in such a pious way,
Pure in thy color, constant, real Gray.
The acts of England shall be clad with thee*
And thy rich fame, thereby renowned be.
But worthy Lord, let me partake of this,
Thy Noble word (though in Parenthesis)
And then return, into thy state again,
In endless honor, and I say Amen.
W. M.

TO The Right Honorable LORD JOHN ROBERTS: Lord ROBERTS of Truro.
Anagr.
Try on bold Hero's.
Verse.
Try on bold Hero's, do thou, nothing remove at,
In all attempts, Fortuna audaces juvat.
Epig.
Heroic Roberts, and renowned Lord,
With Martial actions, in abundance stored,
Whose valor has triumphantly trod down,
Brave Englands foes, with thy undaunted frown.
Those feats of War which from thy force, did fly,
And seconded, so by thy piercing eye,
Did crush thy foes, and make them trembling stand,
By Manhood, and thy Method, in command.
Great Mars Field-Marshall, when his Armies met,
Sole sentence-giver, when his Consuls set:
Thy worth, thy virtue, and unequaled fame,
Are Epithites, but only of thy Name;
Thy passive actions, pious, peremptory
Are real Emblems of thy endless glory.
What then although, I often was a witness
Of thy exploits, yet must my Muse's unfitness
Forbear, and cease; nor can she solemnize,
Thy high deservings in their just degrees.
Or why should I, with this my fleeting quill,
Seek for to sound thy praise? I do but ill.
Thy worth is written with those drops of Blood,
Which seals thy Honor for thy Countries good.
W. M.

TO the right Honorable Thomas Bruce, Lord BRUCE.
Anag.
Com, be as tru'.
Verse.
Come, be as true, unto your State as I.
Who shall assist with all fidelity,
Epigr.
I Stand obliged, by a strong relation,
To pay thee tribute; one is from the Nation,
Whereof thou art, an ancient Earl true born,
And I a Native of the same am sworn.
The second cause, by which I find me bound,
Is this; thy actions have been always found
So faithful here; in what thou do afford
For Englands good wherein thou art a Lord,
And have remained certain, bypast years,
In Parliament; in number of the Peers.
The last is this, which makes a threefold tie,
I stand engaged, by affinity;
These three may challenge, since they all are true,
A dutiful remembrance of thy due.
And were it not I partial should be held,
I would express thee searcely Paralleld.
But I forbear, because thy fame does fly,
Beyond the reach of my arrested eye:
Continue still in favor, wealth, and fame,
And honors, increase on thy Noble name.
And if cursed envy, does affirm I flatter,
Yet can my lines, not make thee worse, nor better.
W. M.

TO The Honorable William Lenthall Esquire. Speaker of the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
Anagr.
I hat' all'vill men.
Verse.
I have all evil men, the chair have I,
To sit and plead speak and impartially.
Epig.
THou wast found fittest after long debate,
To be chief Speaker in the Chair of State,
A place so high, so weighty, honorable,
Thou had not had it, had thou not been able.
Nor when thou had it, had thou not been just,
Thou had not had it; so long in thy trust.
But thou have proved so painful, pregnant, wise,
Appeared so upright in brave Englands eyes,
That so long as the greatest Council sit,
By all consents thou may inherit it.
The mouth of those who sits about that throne,
Speaks all their minds, and yet thou art but one.
To thee each grievance must be given out,
Then prudently thou speaks it round about.
And then those worthies what they find is best,
Return't to thee, by thee to be expressed.
Which thou by Order, causest to dispense,
In method, manner, to divulge the sense
Of their design, so that thou still remains,
Full of conceptions, and uncessant pains.
The place belongs most properly to thee,
I wish thou would speak once a word for me.
They fay that Poets still continue poor,
And this makes me so often at the door.
But if thou please, when the House is set,
Think on my service, and declare my debt:
I know I may just courtesy receive,
Amongst such Masters, having much to crave:
I hope you will not let me praise your pay,
And yet my self come craving every day.
You all are gods, your actions ever pure,
And I presume, because your Creature.
Yet I appeal unto that place so high,
Which is established in fidelity.
Where thou do sit, whose virtues I adore,
I kiss thy hand, and so I say no more.
W. M.

TO THE HONORABLE JAMES FIENNES.
Anagr.
1. My fansi'seen.
2. I see sins aim.
Verse.
My fancy seen, I see sinenesse aim;
These are the just Characters of thy Name.
Epig.
I Shall be thought to have some slight intent,
Or that I speak by way of complement;
Nor can I shun, but they will censure me,
Upon the sight of what I say to thee.
But I appeal, unto the minds of those,
If thou have any, who art termed thy foes;
They will bear witness, that I have a Theme,
In venturing to write upon thy Name:
Which neither Poet, Prophet, nor Divine,
Can change the Nature, it is truly fien,
And what is Fien? But only the extract,
Of all things good, which wholly is compact,
In one entire, and formal shape of thing,
Which, if they ask me where it is? Must bring
Thy self in presence, proving it is thine
Or thou art it; that brave and Noble Fien:
Which yet I find, is but a branch that springs,
From such re-fiens; as are renowned things.
Thus of such ancient Worthies art thou sprung,
But wilt exceed them all, thou art but young.
W. M.

To the Right Worshipful Sir JOHN MERRICK, Knight.
Anagr.
1. I kno' merci's hire.
2. I, one, me'ker, rich.
Verse.
To virtue, knowledge, honor, I aspire,
But most to mercy, I know Mercies hire*
Epigr.
What? Richer, and yet meeker? This is much,
One may be meeker, but both, seldom such,
This argues goodness; adds to thy worth,
To have such Emblems made to set thee forth*
Riches is much, but meekness is far more,
That one is earthly, tother's heavenly store,
But now a third thing, in thy name does sit;
It says, I, one, but what a one is it?
Add then these two, unite this I, and one,
And you shall see, it is nothing but John.
Join then the sum, and you shall see a Theme,
Too high for me to write on such a Name.
But one thing yet, lest partial I appear;
If any ask me why thy Name is here?
I must return this answer, let them know,
I have two reasons, which I truly owe
Unto thy virtues, and which ties me to it,
And these are sure, the causes why I do it;
The one is this, thou had a special hand,
In all this Warfare, and a high command,
And were beloved by his Excellence,
A cause to me, of no small consequence.
These two together, with the love I bear,
To thee; makes me, stay and consider here:
That since I have not better things to grant,
Accept of these Sir, and you shall not want.
W. M.

TO THE Right Worshipful Sir Henry Mervyn, Knight; my Father in Law.
Anagr.
Here in my vrne.
Verse.
Here in my urne, when death has paid its debt,
Above this box, or Cabin shall be set,
The abstract of knowledge, Learnings highest parts,
Chief piece of Nature, notable in Arts.
All these combined, which way you please to turn,
Lies here entombed, or rests, Here in my Urn.
Epig.
AMongst those worthies, I were much to blame,
If I should not remember thee, with them,
Whose pregnant parts, appeared so abroad,
Thy skill transcended like a demi God:
Thou could, within thy closet, compass all,
And bring to light the secrets of the Ball,
And truly still, contrive within a span,
What may be travaild in the age of man.
Could dip within the Oceans deep, and yet,
Keep distance, at the self-same time with it,
Prevent the perils therein; which lay hid,
Give notice likewise to the blind, who did,
Not dare to dive, but did forbear to be,
So bold to venture if they wanted thee*
Thy skill could reach unto the Starry sky,
And know the secrets therein, by and by,
Those private periods on the Compass stands,
Did all lie open instant in thy hands.
Nothing lay secret, but by thee was seen,
That is, or shall be, or has ever been,
Thou wast a feather of the Sovereign Wing,
To fly, and serve thy sometime Master, King.
Thou also had the sole command by Sea,
And every one did homage unto thee:
Scarce one, but one, so favored in the Court,
Nor yet had been, had not the time cut short,
Of famous James, thy Royal Master, than,
Whou could distinguish well twixt man and man:
Thou art of those, and it is known most true,
Accounted Noble, by thy birth as due;
Nor are thy high deservings lessened yet,
(But thou forbeareth to be seen in it.)
Stands as the Center where men do resort,
To learn thy knowledge, wherein they come short.
Thou lov's to look, and with indifferent eye,
Behold the changes of the time pass by,
Else had thou doubtless had the sole command.
On either side, within this troubled Land.
For few or none, if I should find it fit,
For to declare, exceeds thy worth, thy wit.
For which respects, I may include thy Name,
As adding so much to the worth of them,
Whom I do choose most chiefly, for my charge,
To play upon their Noble Names at large;
And if my duty challenged not a tie,
Upon my thoughts, I would say more, but I,
Will cease; because thy worth is so well known,
Write what I will, I give thee but thine own.
W. M.

TO THE RJGHT WORSHJPFVLL Sir WILLIAM BELFOURE Knight.
Anagr.
1. Lofam' I will be ever.
2. I will be ru'l of fame.
Verse.
Lo fame I will be ever, I will be rule of fame.
This is no fiction, but thy very Name.
Epig.
WHen England did impartially employ,
The Nations spirits, for them for to fight.
They did desire the honor to enjoy,
Thee, in the fields, for their foes despite;
And with consent, thee to a place did call,
Which was indeed, their second General.
Lo how their high intentions unto thee,
And thy performance did so well agree.
Thou proved so faithful in their Royal Tower,
They almost did idolatrize Belfoure.
But they peceiv'd thy spirit was too high,
To be so private, in extremity.
And thus resolved, to satisfy the eyes,
Of those who longed to see some enterprise
Performed by thee; but with a sad goodnight,
When thou departed, from thy former right,
There, were they sorry, that thou should go hence,
Yet must submit to such a fair pretense,
And then their care, into a terror turned,
The multitude made much ado and mourned,
Suspected, and expressed themselves dismayed,
In jealous doubts, the Tower might be betrayed.
Yet they must part, thy presence must be gone,
Thou must be mounted, thou were called on;
Thy bypast virtues to thy valour-yeilds,
A Saint in private, Lion in the Fields,
It was enough, to hear thy Noble name,
Thy constant courage, did thy worth proclaim;
And with such action, as thou did perform,
Proved dexterous in many dangerous storm,
I did behold thee, when thou had to do,
In public fights, and private counsels too.
I saw thy practice and thy prudence fit,
Renownd for courage, and cride up for wit,
The fierce encounters which did crush thy foes,
Triumphing on them by undaunted blows,
Did move an Echo, made the Mountains shake,
And forced thy foes to call abake, abake,
Belfours abroad, O do not venture then,
To re-encounter, lest ye lose your men:
This was thy practice in the place of War,
Thus did thou then, but now behold you are,
Injoyd in peace, thy presence is at hand,
At home, and hence, thus have thou had command:
And in each place, where ever thou had trust,
None will accuse thee, thou proved wondrous just,
Thou proved a pattern in each place of Note,
An honor to the Nation of the Scote;
From whence thou came, and did thy being take,
But I will cease, it is in vain to make
More Lines, unless I had more Letters too,
That I may know more promptly what to do.
And so resolve to say no more, but rest,
My thoughts are such, they cannot be expressed.
W. M.

TO THE RJGHT WORSHJPFVLL Sir PHILIP STEPLETON, Knight.
Anagr.
1. O thy pleasant lips.
2. Help on, pity still.
Verse.
O thy pleasant lips, far from speaking ill,
Make good thy Anagram; Help on, pity still.
Epig.
I should be much ashamed, to see thee look,
And not perceive thy Name within my Book,
Who having had such favors at thy hand,
May well afford, a room for thee to stand;
Amongst those Worthies where you daily sit,
Thy many virtues well deserves it.
The Romans who were ruled by a seat,
Of worthy Senat's, had none more complete,
Then thou who have a double burden taken,
With heart and hand, have not the Cause forsaken,
Thy valor, and discretion did agree,
In open fight, I often perceived thee,
A sometime second, to that Noble Lord,
To whose decrees thou truly did accord,
Abroad a pattern often did appear,
And for thy wisdom art renowned here,
Thus have thou had a hand in every thing,
To reunite the State, unto the King.
Thy double virtues, does deserve renoune,
And Laurel Boughs, to loyal Stepletone.
W. M.

TO THE RJGHT WORSHJPFVLL Sir JOHN CLATWORTHYE, Knight.
Anag.
Now thy holj care.
Verse.
Now thy holy care, and ayd's required,
Thy knowledge and thy virtues are admired.
Epigr.
What? But a few prove loyal to the State?
When all the Irish Rebels, made debate,
And of those few it is my only aim,
To speak of thee, because I know not them.
I find thy virtues makes thee much renowned,
Thy ways are upright, and thy wits profound*
Thou art a Member of that House so high,
Which is a Touchstone to fidelity.
Of ancient stock, which adds to thy fame:
A Noble Nature, and a Worthy Name:
Who sometimes has showed friendship unto me,
Shall then my Book, not bear the Name of thee?
Yes whilst it lasts, thy Name shall live therein,
And when its lost, thy praises shall begin.
W. M.

TO The Worshipful his most Respected, WILLIAM JEPSONE.
Anagr.
I am one espj evil.
Verse.
I am one ( in all things) espy evil.
I seek the good, but shun, despise the Devil.
AN ACCROSTICK SONNET.
Wise Maro pend, Mecoenas worthy praise,
Instately style, in high, and lofty phrase:
Likewise my lines can give no less to thee,
Less of themselves, though they of nature be;
In civil things, so prudent and so just,
And, one espying evil, shunning lust.
Mirror of virtue, active in the truth,
Jngenuous, gentle, scorning idle sloth;
Evil espying, and one pursuing good;
Prudently pious, one of Noble blood:
Sincere, so wise, and virtuous in thy mind,
One who to me, has proved truly kind:
Nothing shall therefore make me to forbear,
but want of Letters to extol thee here.
W. M.

TO The Worshipful Sir Charles Erskin, Knight.
Anagr.
1. Search, kill Siners.
Shin's liker Caesar*
Epigr.
What praise may my impartial pen express,
And yet thy worth not to the full confess?
Nor need I urge, to make my matter fine,
False flourishings, nor can I reach the line
Of thy profound approved prudence, neither;
Who searches first, then kills the sinners; rather
Then thou will not, shine liker Caesar, and
Though thou be young, gain honor to that Land,
From whence thou came, and for thy worth who chus'd thee,
To send thee here; and for thy faith have used thee:
In state affairs, search and kill sinners; then
Shine liker Caesar, more then other men.
W. M.

To the Worshipful ALEXANDER POPHAM, Esquire.
Anagr.
Read here an 'xample.
Verse.
Of all unconquered worth, Read, here, an 'xample,
Thy Name, and fame, sufficiently is ample.
Epigr.
TO thee, I come, brave Conqueror of fame,
Of valor, virtue, and Heroic Name,
And on this Stage, or new impressed stamp,
Or in this Glass, where Englands Worthies Camp,
About brave Essex, and where each do shine,
I represent that Noble worth of thine:
By Birth in number with the best, and yet,
Thou rests not there, but adds unto it,
By acts of honor in the highest kind,
The parallels of Alexanders mind:
What passive patience has importuned thee?
Thy Edifices ruins witness be:
What vast estate, by tyranny destroid?
Which thy innumered Ancestors injoyd?
Yea what expenses, have thou pleast to spend?
Thy faith and freedom, truly to defend.
Nor did thou, yet, here limit thy delight,
But all thy curious buildings did thou quit,
With great estate; (the Grandor of that glory)
Seemed, but to thee, like Esop in his story.
And Mounted, marched in most Magnifick manner,
When Mars threw out, his sacrifizing Banner;
Bedect with Emblems of pale death, and darts,
To dull the senses of submissive hearts.
Yet all was nothing, when they were combinde,
Nor could they conquer Alexanders mind.
W. M.

For the Worshipful, DENZAL HOLLIS Esquire.
Anagr.
Holds in Zeal.
Epigr.
REader, be reverend all the time thou stands
And has our famous Holles in thy hands,
Who, though the sin Apostacy prevail
Yet changes not, but he still Holds in Zeal.
Religions increase, he has ever aimed,
I mean the true Religion, which is named
The Protestant, and purely does apply,
Himself thereto, with an impartial Eye;
Shun's faithless Factions, Errors, and Pretenses,
Still Holds in Zeal, and pow'rfully convinces
Connivings, sides not, with Schismatic bands,
But for the Tim's opposed Truth, he stands.
Wise, holy Holles, Heavens let thee not fail,
Pattron of Piety, thou who Holds in Zeal,
Long may thou live, renowned for thy worth,
Whose Actions well become thy honored birth.
And thou who run the hazard of thy blood
For thy Religion, and thy Countrey's good;
Nor stood upon, the loss of thy Estate,
Nor greater dangers, nor the highest hate
Thou could incur, but constantly did stand,
To all these things, signed with thy heart and hand.
W: M,

For the Worshipful, JOHN GOODWIN, Esquire,
Anagr. Ho! I winn Good*
HO! I winn Good, Do win it where thou sits?
No, That Is enough to win men from their wits:
The whole Petitions of this plundered Land
Must be presented to thy piou hand:
The bloody, thirsty, starving Soldier, greeves,
Haunts your Committee, every day believes
To have relief: and by Petitions,
Calls in your ears, have pity Sir upon's,
The handsome, and hard-favor'd widows, woo,
They much importune, puts you to it too,
Officers wives, and Waggoners conveen,
At your Committee, and are always seen,
Soliciting, yea threatening you for food,
Is this the way then, that ye Win your Good?
No, it is by granting favor unto them,
Who stand in need, that way ye win your Name.
And were it not, your goodness did appear
In all your pains, you had not had the Chair.
Brave Noble Sir, then since ye are so free,
Loose not the Good ye VVin, prove good to me.
VV. M.

For the Worshipful MICHAEL NOBLE ESQVIRE.
Anagr.
Lo men be Clay,
Call him Noble.
Verse.
In Heaven Archangel, in Earth, we call him Noble.
Lo Men be Clay, a Two fold praise, one trouble.
Epigr.
THy real goodness, and thy noble Name,
Requires me to remember thee with them,
Whose high deservings, and renowned praise
(In such Encomiums as thou see I raise)
Are here inrol'd, as Emblems to remain
And signs of Honor, Trophies in a Train,
To Eternize your Virtues, Names, and Fames,
So long as London stands upon the Thames.
VV. M.

To the truly Honorable Colonel, Colonel Audelay Mervin, my brother in Law.
Anagr.
Adieu al my ru'ne.
Verse.
Adieu al my ru'ne, resolutely I dare,
Withstand, contemn, all frowning Fortunes far*
Sonot.
WHat shall I say, for to extol thy Praise?
Which formerly is not expres't of these
To whom I writ? So that without offense
I think I may, extract the Quintessence
Of most those Virtues, which are here allowed,
And yet may my Hiperboles make good;
It cannot lessen their Esteem, for they
Are truly valued, therefore must I say,
Though thou art young, yet are thy parts so rare,
There Is no disparage, freely to compare
Thy Pregnancie, and thy approved Fame
May well be coupled, and annexed to them:
Thy high Descent, heroic actions too
Makes me take freedom, for the thing I do*
W. M.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir Richard Strode, Knight.
Anagr.
Rid Christ's order.
Verse.
Stop those who strive to stray from Justice border,
Hereby thou shall gal^ Fame, and Rid Christ's order*
Epigr.
STay yet my Muse, for as the case does stand,
Thou art too rash, and take too much in hand,
Do thou intend of active Strode to write?
Though thou indeed wilt prove most imperfit*
To pen his praise, when Plato might come short,
If he were living, and would labor for it.
His noble birth is equal with the best.
His other Virtues cannot be expressed;
Has he not lost, and left his state behind;
And has endeavored, with a faithful mind,
To make this Kingdom, stand engaged, and grant
My skill is scarce; though I no matter want
To write upon, in penning of his praise,
And me approve, to crown his head with Bays.
Who was so forward, for to serve the State
He did not stand, as others to debate,
What place was best, according to his Birth,
Or fit for gain, or equal to his worth,
But put himself, for Devons good to be,
Upon employment, night, nor day was free*
Nor did he cease, thus with his Sword to stand
But with his Pen, has pleaded for this Land;
Nor rests he there, but sets himself at odds,
Against all Persons, wbo by practice plods
As he perceives; by self-conceited skill,
To do the Kingdoms Privileges ill,
Then in a word, let Strode be still renowned,
In whom those virtues so much do abound.
To the Right Honorable, Thomas Adams, Lord Major.
Anagr.
Or I add more alm's as Th'am,
Verse.
Our Londoners Thames, adds much Alms to them:
Yet I do more, Or I add more al'ms as Th'am.
Epigr.
MOst admired, virtuous, Governor supreme,
Whose well-deserving actions* gaind the Name,
As only fit, to sway the Sword, and bear
The Badge of Honor, so renowned here.
In time of War, a token of such state
It were too high for me, for to relate.
Amongst such Members, of admired worth,
By all consents, to choose thee only forth.
And for the trust, they truly put in thee,
They all accounted it absurdity
To strive, or study as they use, or woo it,
But called thee there, a* ber^ thou had bin to it,
And solemnized, thy new elected Name,
With no less new Inventions on the Theme.
What high Attendance to thy Trains allowed?
Enough to move a Monarch to be proud?
Yet such is that unmatched mind of thine,
Thou Values not these outward, but do shine
By those reflects, which from thy Virtues flies,
And so yields comfort to Spectators eyes*
That course which Custom for a Right does claim,
Shall cease, and no more change its Majors Name.
Because it only changed with intent,
To choose a new one for amendment.
Long may thou live, Lord Major and remain
Renownd in London, till the Floods refrain
To flow, or fall and till the Thames return,
And change its Nature in a Fire to burn.
W. M.

The Right Honorable, Lord Major, and Court of Aldermen.
HEre Adam on his Paradizial Throne
Is Circled with his Offspring thereupon;
Or view Him sitting on a Seat so high,
And representing of a Majesty,
With Four and twenty Elders in a Train
Attending on him, while he does remain
Upon the Plane; yea one more yet you see,
But at his right hand, the Recorder be.
And everyone; because I can not bring
Themselves; these letters, signify the thing.


Behold out first Man Adam, Lord Major Chief,
Surrounded with his Offspring, here in brief:
Recorder, Knights, Grave Aldermen, and yet
I Place them all in order* as they sit.
1 Renowned Recorder, pregnant Glinn, in Law,
2 Knight Rainton likewise, for his worth I saw,
3 Brave Pennington, so prudent, wise, and just,
4 Knight Williston, so upright in his trust;
5 Applauded Atkins, famous for his Faith*
6 Knight Cordwell also, honored to the death.
7 Solatious Soums, Knight, be thou also crowned,
8 Grave, pious, Geer, Knight, likewise and renowned*
9 Good Gerret, Knight, in Virtues with the best,
10 And worthy Warner ought to be expressed;
11 Renowned, Reverend, Reinoldson, so wise,
12 And gracious Gerrer, so in each man's eyes.
13 Commended Clerk thy knowledge does excel,
14 Beloved Langham, thy worth I cannot tell;
15 Admired Andrew's modest, free of Pride,
16 Let faithful Ponks, in memory abide*
17 But Bunce thy bounty cannot be forgot,
18 And Gibs, much goodness falls to thy lot;
19 See cheerful Chambers, Cabinet of worth,
20 Firm Foot in friendship, London paints thee forth:
21 Kind Kindrick courteous, constant, active, and
22 Courageous Cullom, fit for high Command;
23 Esteem brave Edmonds, eternize his Name,
24 Acknowledge Evere, admired for his Fame;
25 Behold brave Bide, bedecked with virtues high*
26 Thrice worthy Witham, keeps a simpathie,
And makes a Court of Aldermen, and Knights,
Whose glory shines, even like as many Lights,
And all in one do contribute their skill
To keep this famous City free from ill.
Thus have I played impartially on their Names,
Being ly'd to Terms, and Titles, two extremes,
But briefly thus, I boldly do afford,
And put their Names for ever on Record.
To the Right Worshipful Sir John Northcute Knight.
Anagr,
He cherisht honnour,
Verse.
He cherisht honnour, when he was at war,
And still goes on in this same strain as far.
Epigr.
THy wisdom, valor, and fidelity,
Thy knowledge actions* and thy constancy,
First mov*d the Kingdom call for thee, as fit,
In its High Court, and Council for to sit,
From thence a two fold testimony too
Thou did afford* courageously did do,
In open fields, and there did fight, and stand,
With constant mind, and an heroic hand:
Thy loyal self, sequestrate for a time,
For no offense, nor for a sinful crime,
Yet there* with patience, then thou did submit,
Nor did thou therefore shrink aside at it:
But did continue to the State, so true,
That I come short to solemnize thy due.
W. M.

To the Right worshipful, Sir Samuel Roll.
Anagr.
Rise me real soul.
Verse.
Rise my real soul, henceforth take no rest,
Till thou enjoy the joy, is not expressed.
Epigr.
THy name, thy nature, and thy practice too,
Are all prepared, what they resolve to do.
Thy name says Rise my real soul, no rest,
Till thou enjoy, the joy is not expressed.
Thy nature likewise really is bent,
And to as early rising gives consent:
And then thy real practice every day
Of early rising, makes it good, I say.
The age of time, nor yet the times of year,
Nor loss of gain, nor wearied travels here,
Makes thee omit: but thou prevents the day
By early rising, and makes have to pray.
In public place, and sacred sermons haunts,
Where schisms are not, amongst protestants,
In number art one of that noble band,
Who for the Nations privileges stand.
And in its service sent thy noble Son,
And freeborn heir, what more then could be done?
Thus to the State thy good extends, and I
Am likewise bound unto thy courtesy.
Wherefore in reason I could do no less,
Then represent thy virtues in my Glass.
W. M.

To the worshipful Anthony Nicholls, Esquire.
Anagr. T'schine holy alon.
THough thy name says, T'schine holy alon,
And where you are set, thou do not shine but one
Yet lo thy virtues, like the Eastern star,
Shines with those worthies where thou placed are.
Their splendor adds unto that light of thine,
And they get increase by thy glorious shine,
Be holy also, though not so alone,,
And strive thou to be singular for one.
And as thy name comes nigh to say so much,
Still enterprise to make thy actions such:
Shine holy still, be upright in thy place,
Defer not justice in a needful case.
For holy, just, the humble, meek, and true,
And such as are not, shall receive their due.
VV. M.

To the much honored, Major General Edward Massy.
Anagr.
Made wars's aid.
Verse.
Thy valor, virtue, have thee famous made,
Deservedly thou art made wars's aid.
Sonnet.
MAy not my Muse one sonnet sing, to raise
The famous name of Massies worthy praise?
May not my glass, a glimps give of his glory,
Although deficient of so fine a Story?
Yes, they may both be busied in the same,
And yet scarce add one tittle to his fame:
It Is not the dullness of my Moses wit,
Nor yet a glass, that can discover it.
Yet since he ha^h been active on this stage,
Where most those worthies honors did engage,
My Muses music, shall make melody,
And sing his praise, so shall my glass let see,
Though not himself, yet something of that kind,
Words cannot well express so high a mind.
W. M.

To the worshipful Godfraie Bossezile, Esquire.
Anagr.
If zeal is Gods Robe.
Gods zeal is before.
Verse.
If zeal is Gods Robe, o Covet that store,
Be covered therewith, Gods zeal is before.
Epigram.
IF Virtue, Valor, Honor, and the rest
Thy attributes which cannot be expressed,
Such as is Wisdom, Gravitie, and Wit,
Discretion, knowledge, in abundance fit,
Besides that sacred Excellence of Faith
Which thou have vowed and sealed unto the death.
Joined with that favor, and that free good will
Which thou affords to others in their ill,
Makes me acknowledge that it is my part
Amongst those worthies, fitly to insert
Thy self; and yet the rather since thou 'rt one
Who in this warfare have so freely gone,
And much expoz'd thy person for the State,
To tyranny and irreligious hate;
Those things I say, shall keep alive thy name,
When after ages shall thy praise proclaim:
And Titan shall not undertake to rise,
Nor run his race throughout the spangled skies:
Before the Trumpet of thy Fame forbear
To sound abroad thy high deservings here,
W. M.

To the Worshipful, Mr. Hue Kennedie.
Anagr.
He, even kind.
Verse.
Endowd With diverse virtues of the mind,
Such as is conscience, knowledge, he even kind.
Epigr.
SInce in the wisdom of a twofold state,
(When matters stand at such a high debate)
In their election they did look on thee,
Most proper for employment Kennedie:
It was the good opinion of thy friends,
Who would entrust thee in such public ends,
By which thou art in number one of those,
Whose prudence shall suppres the Nations foes.
Go on therefore, join in that just design,
Give God the glory, and the honors thine.
W. M.

To his worthy friend, Mr. John Cheesly, Secretary to the Commissioners for
Scotland.
Anagr.
Hence is holy.
Verse.
What he records, it is so far from folly,
He pens With prudence, and he hence is holy.
Epigr:
REnowned Cheesly, unto thee I speak,
And for thy worth, unfeigned praise I seek
What perfect practice is performd by thee,
It cannot fully be expressed by me:
But they appoint thee promptest, I aver,
For fittest penman, wisest Secretair.
Ioyn then that judgment which thou do engage
The honor of thy Nation l^es in pledge,
Add thy assistance, intimate thy will,
Require performance prorogate no ill,
And then no doubt thou will be, I believe,
Fit for employment, more superlative.
W. M.

To the Honorable, and Right worshipful, Sir Archibald Iohnstoun, Lord
Warestone.
Anagr.
Sober, and just, holy Shrin.
Verse.
Thy name says Sober, just and holy Shrine:
So that by Nature thou must be divine*
TO be so honored and esteemed so hie,
And so promoted, in a Kingdoms Ey,
And yet be sober in so great a trust,
Declares thee truly Noble, surely just.
But then to be so holy and divine,
Of all these virtues for to be the shrine,
Is somewhat far above my rural pen,
To paraphrase upon such pious men.
Thy prudent practice in affairs of State
Are things beyond my knowledge to relate.
Thy Art in learning is so eminent,
And reaches so above my Element,
That if I strive to walk into that air,
I stand in danger, lest I perish there.
W. M.

To the Right worshipful Sir Oliver Fleming.
Anagr.
Use firm religion.
Verse.
Use firm religion, this imports thy name,
Let then thy practice always be the same.
Sonnet.
THy Name, thy Nature, and thy practice too
Iuvites thee to use firm religion, do
Even as the number of these letters lead
What these Characters spell, let practice road:
But why should I take on me to advise
Thy Noble self, whose constant enterprise
Is to persuade the people to go on
In zeal, and to Use firm Religion.
Nor yet is this the scope of thy design,
Nor full intent, but Morralls with divine,
Thou contributes, so by a twofold Care,
Thou gain'st the name of Act ve, upright, rare,
Therefore I cease to paint thy praises forth:
Thy self, and actions, show thy real worth.
W. M.

To the Right Honorable IchCambell, Earl Lowdon, Lord high Chancelour of
Scotland.
Anagr.
Call him real'e noble.
Verse.
Call him real'e nohle, sound his fame,
Since you do read his actions in his name.
Epigram.
A Hand divine. or some heroic quill,
Imploid with all Parnassus muses skill*
Must contribute their knowledge to contrive,
The excellence, the eminence, and strive,
Yea strain themselves for to extol thy fame,
Thy noble nature, and renowned name.
Thy worth, thy virtue, and admired wit,
Made all thy Nations wisdom, think thee fit,
For to be chosen Chancelour Supreme,
And to support a Monarchs diadem.
Thy birth that burden best became, but then,
Thy education did exceed all men:
As far as Phoebus in his highest sphere,
Excels the smallest meteors in the air.
Most famous Lord, beloved Lowdon Earl,
More beautiful then is the brightest pearl:
Whose price surpass those estimations high,
Within the compass or Capacity
Of my conceptions, surely I may aim
To intimate, but cannot come to them.
All Europs eyes have long time gazd to see
Those enterprises entertaind by thee:
And duly did determine for to stand,
To those intentions thou did take in hand.
When faith fell foul, and noman must appear,
In none of these three kingdoms, thou camst here*
And with a constant courage, and a mind
Most certain, zealous, in undaunted kind,
Thou did declare, with hazard of thy blood,
Thy resolutions for Religions good.
And when confined by Sovereign high consent,
Nor did thy thoughts nor alter, nor relent:
But in a pious and a prudent form:
Past through the power of that tempestuous storm:
Stood steadfast, faithful, as that fixed Star,
Which stands, whereby all others ruled are.
A learned l^ght, a Peer unparaleld:
Whose high expressions in the tongues excelled,
And still excels, the eloquence or skill
Of Cato, Plato, or Apollo's quill:
When time shall cease, when Phoebus shall not shine,
And human nature shall become divine,
When day in darkness shall disolve, and when
A thousand years shall be the age of man:
Yea when the Spring to winter time shall turn:
And when the Ocean in a fire shall burn.
Then shall they cease to sing thy praise, and then
Thy name shall be quite cancelled by men.
But not till then (and that will never be)
Shall after ages cease to honor thee.
VV. M.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Lord Major of the City of LONDON. WITH The
Honorable Aldermen, and the rest of the Common-councell-men.
REnowned worthies; when I weigh your fame,
Your greatness, luster, and your virtuous Name,
Your wisdom, knowledge, providence, and arts,
Your grace, your goodness, and diviner parts,
The Zeal, the love, the charities, and what
Belongs, as proper attributes to that*
Your power, your plenty, with your worth, and wit,
Your faith and forward arguments of it;
The highest honor of your enterprise,
Which from the secret of your hearts arise,
Your noble Natures, not enough admired,
Your real actions, active, and untyred,
Your constant Carriage, and uncessant care,
The vast expenses, daily you prepare;
Your pains and practice, in a pleasant kind,
Proceeding from your piety of mind:
Makes up a model of admyred worth,
To beautify, and set your glory forth,
Before whose feast, in presence of whose table,
And in whose eyes, so high and honorabel,
My mean designs, or infants of my Muse,
Scarce date approach; yet doubting to refuse,
They do draw nigh; submissively to tender*
Those true intentions, which I freely render,
In these few lines, Characters here, insert,
As real Emblems, of a zealous heart,
And do acknowledge I am bound to praise,
Those who may claim, such Epithets as these,
Grave Judges then, admit me as I am,
Though one unworthy; yet with what I came
Contemn the treasure, not a whit for me,
Although I bring it, yet behold, and see,
What I present, and at your vacant how'rs,
Look on his lines, whose life is wholly yours.
I have contrived in a mean degree,
Though not the whole, yet an Epitomie,
Of Englands troubles, and a true relation,
Of all the sufferings, of this famous Nation,
The cause was Gods, the glory is your own,
You have maintained the truth, and made it known,
I need not bid you perseveer, you are,
I do perceive you, what you always were,
I only throw my myte into your store,
To show affection not to make it more,
And do advise you, humbly to eschew,
The bad divisions, of a factious crew,
Go on with courage, as you have done ay,
It is the evening, that does crown the day:
Your Fame is flown' with its wings so far,
You do not know what things reported are,
The eyes of Europe, opened are to view,
If you continue and prove constant true,
Great be the Grander, wherein you may shine,
And heaps of honor from a hand Divine,
Be daily added in your heads, and then,
You will appear the rarest of all men,
This is the sum: I have for to present,
Your servant can afford no complement,
Accept of these, and if you think it fit,
As you are pleased let me hear of it,
Your good acceptance may encourage much,
I hope your Greatness will vouchsafe me such,
So shall my book bear witness at your table,
I am your Servant, Devoted as I am able.
W. M.

To the Renowned, Learned, and Worthy, DIVINES; Mr. ALEXANDER HENDERSON. Mr.
SAMUEL RUTHERFORD. Mr. ROBERT BAILEY. Mr. GEORGE GILESPIE.
Commissioners for the CHURCH of SCOTLAND.
Author. Echo.

I Could not be resolved of my doubt,
Nor could I find Divinity well out:
But asked the Echo, and it answered
Do know four Fathers of Dininity.
I called again, if it knew where they were?
And it replied, I Will tell thee where they are.
I asked the place, or if it knew their names,
And then it said, I know them by their ayms.
What do they aim at? Then I asked aloud,
It answered me, To pay what they allowed.
What do they pay? Preach Peace to all that sins?
Then did it answer, Pardon all that is in's.
I asked if it could name them one by one,
Learned Hindersons.
I called a second, and it Echoed
B. A. I. L. Y.
And then the third, I asked it to afford,
Rutherford.
For one more yet, I prayed it to epsy,
Gil es pie.
These are the four profound Renownd Divines.
The Echo ended, praising their Ingin's.
W. M.

For Apology to these Persons of Honor.
BLame not my Muse nor my impartial eye,
If I mistake your place of Heraldry;
I am not hanted with the same, nor yet,
Have I advised with your selves in it:
I seek not to engender discontent,
Nor meddle with your place in Parliament;
But see how Mars did muster you in War,
As I conceive, so you inserted are:
Or if I place a Member here amiss,
Misconster not my meaning here in this.
You all are Members of one body, be
Not disunited, 'twere bad policy.
You did attend upon his Excellence
At Arms, I pray then take it in that sense.
And if your charge did challenge you the Van;
If I mistake it, yet be you the man.
But you remember often in the Rear,
The best be ranked, think it not a jeer,
Nor that I jest; it was more honor then
To strive for place, so do Heroic men;
Or if I borrow for a friend, a place,
I hope you will excuse me in this case.
Yea, take this New'ars gift gladly, and confess,
Ye joy to shine so in your Generals Glass.
And since your honors I do seek with thirst,
Let him that is first be last, and last be first.
W. M.

To the Right Worshipful and Renowned Physician; Doctor Alexander Ramsey.
Anagr.
Examen all rare aid.
Verse.
Examine all rare aid, yet you shall still,
Reverence the excellency of Ramsay's skill.
Epigr.
HYpocrates, and Galen got the praise,
The rarest of Physicians in their days,
But Ramsay, had those times produced thee,
Thou had been Reckoned rarest of the three,
They were Renowned for Knowledge, but thy Name,
Shall be more famous, far, then both of them,
They practiced most on subjects; by report,
Thy Sovereign skill, was singular, at Court,
I knew no fit preferment for thy worth,
To place thee in; but I have picked thee forth,
For best Physicians; to attend on them,
Whose noble Presence, may promote thy Name,
Preserve them then, in honor strength and health,
From pains displeasure, and in heaps of wealth;
Which if you do, you shall partake of that,
Their happy being; and your self know's what*
But singular Ramsay, by thy admired skill,
Say, can thou cure this Epidemick ill,
Of Iealousies and fears, or this sad grief,
The want of gold, of all diseases chief;
Which if thou do, as is no doubt thou may,
(If men will but, submit unto thy way)
Then we shall be made rich, and thou renoun'd,
Thou shall have patience still: none will be sound,
TO MY BROTHER, Captain John Mercer.
Anagr.
Hence, no more ir.
Verse.
Hence, no more ire; this comes well nigh your name.
Let Anagram and actions; be the same.
Sonnet.
THose courtesies which common are to others,
May very well be used between two Brothers,
You see I have presumed with my pen,
To write my mind to many worthy men.
I shall not therefore think it much amiss,
To visit you with these few lines, in this.
Nor think's unproper, though you have the age,
For to receive, this Sonnet for a pledge
Of my respects; and be advised by me,
To let your outward, and your mind agree.
Nature, in each thing, has performed, and Art,
In you; and Parents also, played their part;
Make good these gifts, curb passion, lose no time,
And though you think me, guilty of the crime;
Which I condemn, yet strive you to be better,
And for so doing, I shall be your debtor.
W. M.

TO THE FAMOUS POET Capt. George Withers.
Anagr.
I go gether Verso.
Verse.
Thy name it self says; I go gether verse.
So that thy storehouse never can be scarce.
The Stock Whence thou, thy lines, and loaves, do gether,
Shall fresh continue, and revive, though Wither.
Epigr.
ALL ye who brag of brave Saint George come hither,
And England, henceforth, boast of thy George Wither,
Lay off your emblems, do no Trophies raise,
Unless for Withers solemnize no days,
Rare Withers, thou whose verses were foretold,
As Prophesies; and secrets to unfold,
Whose young, and yet, undaunted spirit prized,
Thy rare inventions, (well nigh sacrifiz'd)
Before thy freedom; and whose fluent pen,
Makes thee more famous then those mighty men,
Whose mines of gold, and greatest store of such,
Can not be reckoned, near thy worth by much,
To thee, my Muse, though unacquainted must,
Into thy wing of fame; a feather thrust,
To mount thee higher, and to make thee fly,
Above thy own expressions, mortals eye:
The best of wits, the rarest of the Nine,
Whose high inventions, in thy verse divine,
Makes me admire thee far much more, then others,
Renowned Poet; ra^e and worthy Withers.
W. M.

The Pen-mans Apology to the Common Reader.
IF any take me for to be a stranger
That penned this piece, I hope there is no danger,
Or if a Native here his seed has sown,
No doubt, you will excuse him as your own:
And if a Poet you presume I am,
The Muses will excuse me whence I came,
In any thing if I have pleased thee,
Then I am sure thou will not censure me:
But it is a thing impossible, that I
Can please all parties, or the standers by:
'T may be thou hates some one of whom I write,
And therefore thou must rail at me in spite:
Or else you are angry that I did not touch
Thy praises likewise, speak of thee as much:
My freeborn Muse, or mother of my rhyme,
Cannot be ti'de to humor every time:
Yet I am certain that I speak to thee*
If not my self, my Satyr is not free:
But if thou wrongs me with an angry look;
I love not thee, more then thou loves my book.
My mind's my grand Committee, must not seek
Another Chairman, I am charged to speak.
VV. M.

A Satyr.
GO swift wingd Satyr, fly abroad, and spare no earthly thing,
Thou art not to obey a law, nor subject to a King,
Pluck out a feather from thy quill, and fear nothing but write,
And see thou neither* spare thy friend, nor foe, nor men of might.
Fly in the air, where thou may see, through clearnes* of the Sun,
And cease not till thou censures all, when once thou art begun:
Tell every kind of creature who bears the shape of man,
That thou must prove impartial, and with thy feathers fan:
Till thou will take the quintesscence of every thing that's quick,
And with a feather from thy wing wilt freely choose and pick:
Tell first the highest of us all, whose footstool is a throne,
That Kings themselves may catch a fall, if they be left alone:
And tell our Sovereign, spare him not, but ask him, what is he
If he his Subjects once forsake? he cannot answer thee.
Tell tyrannizers in their teeth that they triumph too far.
And tell the proud and mighty men, they know not what they are,
Tell subjects, that they must remember they are subjects still,
And tell the self conce^^^d tool, thou cat'st not for his ill
Tell Divines that the most of them are divelish and that they
Have but a show of Godliness and do not as they say
Tell ludges that they are unjust nor do they judge a^ight
And tell them that their avarice is always in thy sight
Tell Protestants profession is almost dead and gone:
And tell thou knows not where to go to find Religion.
Tell that the City's full of schisms, sects, and herisies,
And that the heinous sins of Sodom lurks, and in it lies:
Ma^k as thou marchest in the streets, take notice, they will cry,
What do you lack? what want you Sir? what is it you will buy?
This is the Scriptures call you know* but in another sense,
For thou must pay for every thing thou getst, ere thou goes hence*
The Scripture bids thee buy for nothing, here is all things good and evil,
Thou may for thy money have, and thou may buy the Devil;
Go tell the bloody thirsty soldier, running inarreer,
And Lawyers craving whole accounts, when they come to appear,
And plead for their oppressions, at that impartial bar,
Arguing pro, and con, and what equivocations are:
There shall the trumpet sound, and tell them* they were paid, and wood;
But Item then, and memorandum, if it be allowed:
When all accounts shall be cast up, and reckonings be made even*
By the high Committee of accounts, for the whole Kingdom of heaven:
O! then how gladly would they wish the most part of their pay
Should be abated* and the rest put to the longest day.
Tell when thou comes in open place, amongst the multitude,
They are become pernicious, impertinent, and rude:
Tell Gentlemen that they are just like unto Apes, and that
The Courtiers are play the knaves, and say they know not what.
Tell tradesmen they mistake themselves, and for their former pride,
Some have shut up their shops at home, and gone abroad to ride
Tell such of them as are become Commanders for the cause,
They will repent them ere it is long, they learned soldiers laws:
Tell such as practice plundering, their pastime will not last:
And tell the idle loyterer, 't were good that he were pressed.
Tell to the City, that their sins, and insolences odd,
Have been the cause that many souls are sacrificed abroad,
Tell to the Preacher in the Pulpit, seeming so precise,
He may deceive the peoples sight, but not his masters eyes:
And tell the hearers of the word, some comes but for the fashion:
Tell all of them, ere it be long, must answer their transgression.
Tell husbands they are bad become, their families profane,
And tell the females in their faces, they are wondrous vain.
Tell every one their part, I pray thee, spare not high, nor low,
And tell them* that thou came of purpose for to tell them so
And having flown both far and nigh* return, and do not fear*
But tell the errors of the time unto them that are here;
Tell in the House of Parliament, but not as persons there,
Tell them that private men may fail* and that is wondrous fair
Tell Englands Looking-glass, it fails, for all its golden case
And that it shows not really, but counterfets the face:
Tell also him that made it too, what ever he pretends,
That Poets often flatter men, and have their private ends.
Thus telling all the truth abroad, return, and do not stay;
For having spoke thy mind so much, thou knows not but they may
Be so incensed against thy self, before thou art aware,
They may make bold to question thee, how thou durst fly so far:
For though the truth be best to hear, thou knows we always would,
That oftentimes you should forbear, the truth must not be told
But thou have done good service sure unto the States, in this,
Thou have dischargd thy conscience too, so that thou can not miss
To be maintaind, and much made of; or else thy pains are lost:
Thou nothing have, but only this, thy labor for thy cost.
To the Right Honorable, the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament: and
the Right Honorable Lord Major of London, The Right worshipful Aldermen, and
the rest of the Common Council.
The humble petition of Captain William Mercer,
Who Is forced to leave of prose, and turn a Verser.
Shows,
THough here I never did my suits prefer,
Yet I have been an old Petitioner;
And after long times wearyed fights abroad,
Am sore tormented; with this angry rod
Of Courting, Crouching, Craving, and my eyes,
Cast down so low, that I Idolatrize*
Must haunt Committees, follow on the Clerk,
Must pray, solicit, and make such a work,
As I have been in several Nations six,
But all my troubles came not nigh to vex*
Your supplicant, in manner like to those,
As I had been one of your greatest foes,
I have been true in standing for the State
And of my friends have therefore had much hate.
I never plundered money, horse nor arms,
Nor did the Country any kind of harms;
But took free quarter, when I had not pay,
And that was often but one meal a day:
Would never let them kill a handsome Hen,
To feed me, if I could not pay it then,
Have borrowed from my boy, who could disburse
Money, when I had nothing in my purse:
Preserved the People from the plundring band
Of Soldiers, and still for their good did stand.
Yea, and with patience suffered for the cause,
According to our Covenant, and Laws,
Not doubting, though I much run in areer,
But I should surely have it some time here.
And if I were to write my final will,
Upon my death, I never did more ill.
But now your true petitioner indeed
Is so confounded, as you here may read,
That I am almost wearied of my life,
Tired and tormented with this cruel strife
The cries of children and an angry woman,
Two heavy Anchors, when their ty'de unto men,
They cry for money, bread, and beer, and beef,
But they may eat their fingers for relief,
Then call they Father; What have we to burn?
Poor children thinks that I can do their turn.
How does your selves content these Infant cares?
Or do you bid them go and say their Prayers?
Perchance ye do, and't may be so do I,
But then they enter in a lachry my,
And tells me this, what have we now to eat?
The grace is said, but we can get no meat,
My creditors have called so often unto me
That now they swear they shortly will undo me.
They say my charge has turned me in a cheat,
And such like things have happened me of late
When I Am abroad, I stand and stare to skan,
Lest I on sudden meet a Marshalls man:
This is most grievous, and a great disgrace,
A Soldier dare not look men in the face:
And I Am already run so in the score
To tell the truth, they will not trust me more.
And now the Printer, and the Stationer,
Threatens to prison your Petitioner.
For I who could before these Wars did enter,
Attain more trust upon one lines debenter,
Then now I can for either word or writ,
They do not care for both, here is the spite:
And if I tell them much to me is 900. l.
owed,
Then say they; Item, if it be alow'd.
Nor can I walk along the street, and look
Upon a Butcher, nor come nigh a Cook
But they step in, between me and their stall,
And there they stand, till I be in the Hall,
Still as I pass, I hear them whispering, So,
And sends a boy to dog me where I go;
They are afraid lest hungry men prove rash
And seize upon their unprepared flesh.
This is my case, but this does me recherish,
So many worthies will not let me perish,
Nor lay my lines aside, (it is not that)
Unless contented, which is aimed at.
Nigh four years now I have been in this war,
Yet I am poorer then I was, by far,
And all this time, a Captain too, to Horse,
But my estate still waxed worse and worse.
How could I choose, you see what was my pay,
And what I took, you likewise hear me say:
In two years time I had not pay almost
For once a day to buy a buttered toast.
I lost my being in that Irish land,
Where by commission I had first Command.
My Fathers heir was therein put to Sword,
His wife was also cruely devoured,
His goods destroyed, his Children sent abroad
To beg; and I was scourged with this rod.
Yet not the less, if prose nor verse prevails,
There Is no more hope, I must ly by the heels:
Nor dare I speak, or if, this is my lot,
They shake their heads, and say, you are a Scot,
Deriding me, as if I were forlorn;
Or to be called a Scots man were a scorn,
The case is altered, for when I came here
The Scots were counted Loving brethren dear:
Nor's that the love the Scripture does commend,
Whom Christ did love, he loved unto the end.
But good my Lords, and noble Gentlemen
Be pleased to hear, and have but patience then,
Yea, pardon me, who is so forced to press
Upon your patience, I can do no less:
Nor let the spleen of any one or two
If there be such; stop what you mind to do,
The best amongst you, have some private foe,
And so may I, for any thing I know.
Virtue's always envide, there is none so witty
To shun the slandrous tongues, the more's the pity.
But let them speak and prove, which if they do,
I Will burn my books, and will be banished too.
The Parliament for freedom needs not sit,
If one will do all that is required in it:
And if that Justice may not claim its place
Where malice sits, that were a fearful case.
I Will take my oath, (all times I were abroad)
And prove it too, though ye may think it odd:
I never went into a Tavern twice
Nor in an Alehouse was I ever thrice
To call for drink: nor drunken in my time,
There Is no man can accuse me of that crime:
Nor do I know, (pray think it not a tale)
The prizes of the Wines, nor beer, nor ale:
So, never drinking for to make me rash,
I Am sure I seldom faulted being fresh.
I scorned to plunder, called it base to rob,
Resolved rather to be just like Job,
Both poor and upright, but I see what falls
In favors of such cursed Animals
As plaug'd the people, Fortune smiles on them,
They rise to honors, and they have no blame.
But this may be, that saying to fulfill
Which is, The wicked flourish in their ill,
I have more comfort of my honest mind,
Though for a time I opposition find,
Then they who gain their riches so with sorrow,
And may be proud to day, but poor to morrow.
My heart shall hold my resolution still,
Endure with patience, if I do no ill,
I have performed that part to me belongs,
And God shall be a witness of my wrongs,
If I must perish, but I do appeal
Unto your honors, hops for to prevail
In this my suit so honest, just and true,
But do submit me, wholly unto you,
Whose greatness will grant pardon to my sin,
For being so presumptuous herein,
How can I choose? For after three years war
I find them striving fully to debarr
Me of my pay, which truly I deserve,
The only way me to constrain to strave,
Or beg my bread, as others daily do:
But more then this I Will tell thee something too:
At six months end, when I my 'compts desired,
To go to Cornhill then I was required,
To that Committee, which of Lawyers be,
Be what they will, they were too hard for me:
For though my debts I did present most true,
Yet they write Item, if the same be due:
Which when I saw, I vexed, and waxed wroth,
And then they told me, they were on their oath:
For what? said I; they answered, to do right,
Or as it should seem good in their own sight:
Well, this they did, but when we came to read,
We found it needful they would come to plead
At that Committee; where they did return us
Who when we came with our accounts, did scorn us:
This grieved my soul, to run so up and down
From him, to him, and through so long a Town
As this, and yet when all is come to all
I cannot get a penny, though I call
My very eyes out of my doleful head,
All Is noe to them, for they will make no speed.
They send me there to hear the money Chink
In Lumberstreet, no question some men think
That that will tempt me, then they will pretend
If I should rob men, I Am for my own end.
Then think not strange although my verse be bad*
For such like things, have made me almost mad.
I borrowed often to pay my men abroad,
And not to pay me that, were very odd:
My poor half 400. l.
part, out of the public purse,
Or less then that, would free me from this curse,
I do not crave you in so high a measure
So small a sum would not exhaust your treasure.
What comes of all Collections and excise?
Malignants money? Flies it in the skies?
Pray if ye will not pay me, make me then
But one full fortnight a Committee-man,
I'e pay my self; nor will I charge the State,
But only take the money I can get:
If I would ask a Groat, you would not grant
It think, although ye saw me strave for want*
Ten thousand pounds to call for or a penny
Is all alike, ye cannot part with any.
To give me nothing were a bad revenge,
And for my pains to let me starve were strange:
It makes me think the thing is true they say,
Ye are resolved never for to pay:
But that were strange, would make me wonder too,
Since for the truth ye make so much ado:
but therein act as you shall think it best,
Give me my pay; I strive not for the rest:
There Is not a man will do so much as speek
Or look, without allowance every week:
Yet I did fight, Fast, watch, had much to do
To save my life, and must have nothing too.
Malignants sees me in so poor a plight,
They laugh, and tellsme I am served right:
Nor hate they me because that it is I,
But I will tell the reason by and by,
They do abhor all of that Northern Nation
Who joins not with them in their Congregation:
For though they did make promise thereunto,
It was when they had greater things to do:
Like people in a strait, but now they are free,
The turns nigh done, they care no more for me.
It Is not our part upon their souls to press,
And for my part I freely must confess:
If they will pay me I will speak and plead
Against my Country men to go with speed.
And let them preach, and use their minds to pray,
Or do even what they please to do or say,
Or where or how, yea be they wives or men,
And so I think they would be pleased then:
For can I force them, where they will not do?
Time is not yet for lew and Gentile too.
I hold me bound of Conscience for to move them,
But I must neither challenge nor reprove them.
Preach in their streets or in their private Hall,
(If not in Church) by my consent they shall.
Nor say I Am wanton, though I write in verse,
I had not done so, had I not been scarce
Of money, Lodging, credit, and the rest:
Nor could I well consider what was best
To do; for I had spent so long a time
I prose, that I was forced to write in rhyme,
Resolving what in me did ly, to do,
And if I perish, lay the fault on you.
I was made come, and go, and come again,
But all I did was labor spent in vain:
From one to the other, to that Committee man,
And then as wise as when I first began.
Some said I Will do it, then said I am but one,
And then they said ye must petition:
They bid me fast and pray, if I be sick,
When I have well nigh fasted all the week,
And if I tell them that my spirit's spent,
They bid me then, be patient, and content,
The Colonels have laid their clothes in paund,
And many Majors have not strength to stand,
The Captains and Commanders all in chief
Are quite confounded, even with very grief,
And many good men fast a month from meat,
And when they have it, then they cannot eat;
Now tell them this, and zealous like they pause,
And says, that we must suffer for the cause:
Those Characters Jobs messengers may spell,
For I alone, am only left to tell:
Is this the dealing with a friend or brother?
Or mutual manner of maintaining other?
Yet if I must go, furnished as I came,
I cannot be made worser then I am,
Nor is this half the burden that I bear,
No flesh, and blood would suffer nor endure
Those great neglects, wherewith I am suppressed,
So that I am ashamed to confes't;
But if it were not for the reverence,
(A matter of so mighty consequence,)
Which I do bear this hopeful Parliament,
And that I likewise look for some content,
I would cry out, though I therefore should die,
And let the World even know my destiny.
Thus craving leave to speak, please you to read,
This is the Subjects freedom which I plead,
As for the issue, I prescribe not what,
The honor of the house will think on that.
But I beleve your greatness will consider
To make my State, as first when I came hither,
So wrestling with you, till I have my will
Then will I think it time for to be still:
You know that Jacob, by his faith abode,
Nor would he leave off wrestling with his God
Till he obtained; so you still with your King
Have wrestled likewise, till ye have the thing.
Even so the woman in the Gospel got
What she desired, yea she departed not
Till she obtained; and Jacob on demand
Obtained the blessing, at good Isaacks hand.
What shall I say? Is not one Isaac then
Amongst so many full five hundred men?
Or if there be: in vain bear not the name,
Let me receive the blessing then from them.
For I Am afraid lest Esau like I sell
My whole debenter for a dish of Kell,
Therefore I do determine still to call,
Till I have some part, I desire not all.
I hate to beg, but being so orethrown
I humbly hope ye'l help me to mine own.
I have petitioned, and I do not doubt
before the question is resolved about.
Amongst those worthies whom I do implore,
But they will take a course to cure my sore:
For if I had but third part of my pay
To free my charges, I would go my way.
I have no more to say,
but I shall ever pray.
William Mercer.
Anagr. I am very ill cu'r me.
Iam very ill cu'r me of my Pain,
Or else my wars and verses are in vain.
I am very ill cu'r me, if I die
Of this disease ye'l spoil my Poetry.
I am very ill cu'r me, but if not,
I never will write more while I Am a Scot.
I am very ill cu'r me, if so long,
My muse may choose to sing another song.
One word more to Momus.
Ba^e wide mouthd Momus rage and rail thy fill
Spue out thy venom words can do no ill,
But to thy self, thy being is thereby,
For having spent thy spirits, thou must die.
The crawling snail the passenger to scorn,
Cannot forbear, extols his feeble horn,
But trod upon, he quickly does withdraw,
Because he knows his weapons have no awe;
Pluck in thy horn, spue out thy venom then,
Thou Miscreant, vile creature of men.
This is the worst I wish to such a snail,
Thy slandrous tongue were st^^king in thy --
To the scornful Passenger.
SLight not my lines, nor lay my labors by,
Laugh not to scorn, because the Author's I:
I know thou'st come, and with disdainful look,
Wilt, passing by, say, what is this Mercers book?
But Mercers book, if thou could take the time,
Or stay from Taverns, to peruse his rhyme:
Will pay thee home, presuming to appear,
Or lay thy hands upon these Persons here.
Without thou stand bareheaded, and a far,
Such one as thou should not come wherethey are.
Forbear therefore, in silence, stand aside,
Or take not notice, Mercer makes a pride*
If he approach, and sples such in the place,
To look amiss: he spits into their face.
VV. M.

Ad Eundem.
MY Crystal glass, clear, spotless, clean, and pure,
Can no infectious filt by breath endure,
To blow upon it so also would my Muse
Be even as rash, if she knew how to choose:
But she is mine, and cares not for the frown
Of any churlish, base, backbiting clown,
As for my glass, in innocence it stands,
If staind by thee, between a knaves two hands.
William Mercer, Anagr.
I am merrili cru'l,
Verse.
I am merrili cru'l to Momus,
For I wish all such fellows were from us.
From my Lodging in King Street Westminster, at the three Pigeons. Ian. 6.
1645.
Upon the title of the Book.
THere are some books which bears the very Name
That mine does own, yet they are not the same,
Thou never heldst a glass before thine eyes,
Wherein thou saw all these Nobilities,
And worthies, wherefore thou must needs confess,
It Is fitly named Englands Looking-glass.
Or if this glass should have been called by me,
The glass of these three Kingdoms 'twere no lie.
Then with a threefold reverence see thou stand
And looking in it, hold thy hat in hand.
VV. M.


