A Pious and Learned SPEECH DELIVERED IN THE HIGH COURT OF Parliament, 1. H. 4.
by THOMAS MERCKS then Bishop of CARLISLE.

WHEREIN HE GRAVELY AND Judiciously Declares his opinion concerning the
Question, What should be done with the Deposed King RICHARD the Second.

VERITAS VIRES^IT VULNERE printer's or publisher's device

London printed for N. V. and J. B. (...)

A Speech wise and Religious, Spoken in the High Court of Parliament in the I.
year of the Reign of H. the 4. by the pious, learned, pillar of the Church,
Thomas Mercks Bishop. of CARLISLE.
THomas Mercks the Bishop of Carlisle, a man that used both liberty and
constancy in a good cause; in his private judgment, having never allowed
these proceedings, but dissembled his dislike, till fit time to declare it,
being in a place to be heard, and by the order of the House, not to be
interrupted of any, rose up, and with a grave countenance, and settled courage,
said; This Question (right Honorable) concerns a matter of great consequence
and weight, the determining whereof will assuredly procure either quiet or
turmoyle, both to the public State, and our particular consciences. Therefore
before any resolution thereof be given, I beseech you to take into your more
serious consideration, these two things: First, whether King Richard be
sufficiently deposed or not: Secondly, whether King Henry be by Instice and
good advisement seated in the Succession: In the first point is to be examined,
whether a King by lineall succession, crowned, anointed, and lawfully
invested, may upon imputation, either of negligence or tyranny, be deposed by
his Subjects? secondly, what Richard had omitted in the one, or committed in
the other, that might deserve that heavy judgment? I will not dispute what
may be done, in a Popular, or Consular estate, in which though one bears the
Title and Honor of a Prince, yet he has no supreme power of a King. But in
the one the Nobility, and chief men of State; in the other, the people have
greatest Prerogative: in neither the Prince. Of the last sort was the Common
wealth of the Lacedaemonians, who by that form of government which Licurgus
framed, oftentimes fined, sometimes fettered their Princes, sometimes put them
to death; such were the petty Kings in France in Caesar's time, who were
oftentimes arraigned and executed: and the Princes of the Leodi^nses, as
Ambiorix confessed, had no greater power over their subjects, than their
subjects had over them. And of the second condition were the Roman Emperors at
the first, being subject to the censure of the Senate; and such are now the
Emperors of Germany; whom the other Princes by their Aristocraticall power,
do not only restrain, but sometimes remove; such are the Kings of Denmark
and Swethland, who are many times by their Nobility dejected, either into
prison or exile: such are the Dukes of Venice, and some other free States of
Italy: And the chiefest cause why Lewis Earl of Flanders, was lately expelled,
was for assuming unto himself the Cognizance of life and death, which
Authority was never incident to his Dignity. In these and such like
Governments, the Prince has not absolute Regality, but is himself subject to
that power, which is more transcendent then his, whether it be in the Nobility
or multitude. But if the Sovereign Majesty be in the Prince, as it was in the
first three Emperors, and in the Kingdoms of Iudaea and Israel, and is now in
the Kingdoms of England, France, Scotland, Spain, Muscovia, Turkey, Tartary,
Persia, Ethiopia, and almost all the Kingdoms of Asia, and Africa; although
for his vices, he be unprofitable to the Subjects, yea hurtful, yea
untollerable; yet can they neither hazard his power, nor harm his person,
either by judicial proceedings, or by force; for neither one, nor all
Magistratec have any Authority over the Prince, from whom all Authority is
derived, and whose only presence does silence and suspend all inferior
Jurisdiction and sorce. And for power, what Subject can assist or counsel, or
conceal violence against his Prince, and not incur the high and heinous
crime of fawsonry or treason; it is a common saying, thought is free, free
indeed from punishment of secular Laws, except by word or deed it break forth
into action; yet the secret thoughts against the sacred Majesty of a Prince,
without attempt, without endeavor, have been adjudged to death. And some, who
in auricular confession, have discovered their treacherous devises against the
King in person, have for the same been executed. All Laws do exempt a mad man
from punishment, because their actions are not governed by their will, and the
will of man being set apart, all his deeds are indifferent, neither can the
body offend without a corrupt or erroneous mind, yet if a mad-m^n but draw his
weapon upon his King, it has been adjudged worthy death. And lest any man
should surmise, that Princes for the maintenance of their own safety, and
sovereignty, are the only authors of these Judgments; Let us examine with
consideration, the patterns and precepts, to this purpose set forth in the
sacred Text. Nebuchadnezzar King of Assyria, wasted all Palestine with fire and
sword, oppugned the whole City a great while, and at the last expugned it;
slaughtered the King, burnt the Temple, carried away the holy Vessels and
Treasure, and permitted the Soldiers with unmercifull cruelty to spoil and
ransack all the people with fire and sword, and whom from thence had escaped,
and the pestilence had spared, he led captive into Chaldea, and there erected
his Golden image; commanding those that refused to worship it, to be cast into
the fiery Furnace: notwithstanding God calls Nebuchadnezzar his servant, and
promises him wages for his service. And the Prophets Jeremiah and Barucke, did
write unto the Jews to pray for the life of him, and of Balthazar his son,
that their days upou earth might be as the days of Heaven: And Ezechiel with
bitter terms upbraideth the disloyalty of Zedechiah, for revolting from
Nebuchadnezzar, after homage done unto him. Did not Saul put all the Priests to
death, because one of them did relieve holy and harmless David? Did he not
prosecute his faithful servant, and dutiful son-in-law, yet was not he
spared, nay, protected by him? And was not David much grieved for but taking
away the lap of his garment, and afterward caused the messenger to be slain,
that upon request, and sor pity did lend his hand (as himself reported) to
hasten the voluntary death of that sacred King? As for the contrary examples of
Iehu, they were done by express Oracle and Revelation from God, and are no
more set down for our imitation, than the robbing of the Egyptians, or any
other particular or privileged commandment, but in the general precept,
which all men must generally follow: not only our actions, but our speeches
also, and our very thoughts are strictly charged, with duty and obedience to
Princes, whether they be good or evil. The Law of God ordains, That he that
does presumptuously against the Prince, shall dye, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. And the
Prophet David forbids both by precept and practice, to touch the Lords
anointed: Thou shall not (says the Lord) Rail upon the Judges, neither speak
evil of the Ruler of the people. And the Apostles do demand further, that
even our thoughts and souls, be obedient to higher powers. And lest any should
imagine, that they meant of good Princ^s only, they speak generally of all.
And further, to take away all doubt, they make express mention of the evil:
For the power and Authority of wicked Princes, is the ordnance of God. And
therefore Christ told Pilate, That the power which he had, was given him from
above. And the Prophet Esaias called Cyrus, being a profane and Heathen Prince,
the Lords anointed: For, God turns the hearts even of wicked Princes to do
his will. And as Iehosaphat said to his Rulers, They execute not the judgment
of man, but of the Lord. In regard whereof David calls them Gods, because
they have the rule and authority even from God, which if they do abuse, they
are not to be adjudged by their Subjects, for no power within their Dominion is
superior to theirs. But God reservcth them to their sorest trial, Horribly
and suddenly (says the Wiseman) will the Lord appear to them, and a hard
judgment shall they have. The Law of God commands, that the child should be
put to death, for any contumely done unto the parents: but what if the Father
be a Robber? if a murderer? if sor excess of villainies, odious and execrable
both to God and man* surely he deserves the greatest degree of punishment, and
yet must not the son lift up his hand against him for no man can be so great
an offender as to be punished by parricide. But our Country is (or ought to
be) more dear to us than our Parents. And the Prince is the Father of the
Country, and therefore more sacred and dear to us, then our Parents by
nature, and must not be violated, how imperious, how impious soever he be? Does
he command or demand our purses or persons? we must not shun the one, nor
shrink from the other; for as Nehemiah says, Kings have dominion over the
Cattle of their Subjects at their pleasure. Does he injoyne those actions,
which are contrary to the Laws of God, we must neither wholly obey, nor
violently resist, but with a constant courage, submit our selves to all manner
of punishment, and show our subjection, by suffering and not performing; yea,
the Church has declared it to be an Heresy, to hold, that a Prince may be
slain, or deposed by his Subjects, for any default or disorder of life, or
default in Government. There will be defaults so long as long as there be men;
and as we endure with patience, a barren year, if it happen, and unseasonable
weather; so must we tolerate the imperfections of Rulers, and quietly expect
either reformation or alteration, But alas! what such cruelty what such
impiety, has King Richard committed? examine the imputations objected, with
the false circumstance of aggravation, and you shall find but little of truth,
or of great moment; it may be many oversights have escaped (as who lives
without offending) yet none so grievous to be termed tyranny, as proceeding
rather from unexperienced ignorance, or corrupt counsel, than from any
natural or wilful malice. Oh! how should the world be pestered with tyrants,
if Subjects might be permitted to rebel, upon pretense of tyranny; how many
good Princes should often be suppressed by those by whom they ought to be
supported? if they but levy a Subsidy, or any other taxation, it shall be
judged oppression; if they put any to death for traitorous attempts against
their persons, it shall be exclaimed at for cruelty; if they shall do any
thing against the good liking of their people, it shall be proclaimed Tyranny.

But let it be that without desert in him, or authority in us, King Richard
must be deposed; yet what right has the Duke of Lancaster to the Crown? or
what reason have we, without right, to give it him? If he make Title as Heir
to King Richard, then must he stay King Richards death; for no man can succeed
as heir to the living; But it is well known to all men, who are not wilfully
blind, or grossly ignorant: that there are some yet alive, lineally descended
from Lionel Duke of Clarence, whose issue by the judgment of the high Court of
Parliament, in the 8. year of K. Richards Reign, was declared heir apparent
to the Crown in case King Richard should dye without issue. The claim from
Edmund Crouchbacke, I pass over the Authors thereof, themselves being ashamed
of so absurd an abuse; And therefore all the pretense now on foot, is by right
of Conquest, and the Kings resignation and grant, and the consent of the many:
it is bad stuff that will take no color; what conquest can a Subject make
against a Sovereign, where the war is insurrection, and the victory high
Treason? King Richards resignation, being in prison, is an act of exaction by
force, and therefore of no force to bind him; And by the Laws of this Realm,
the King by himself cannot alienate, the ancient Jewels and ornaments of the
Crown, much less give away his Crown and Kingdom. And custom we have
none, for the vulgar to elect their King, but they are always tide to accept
of him, whom the right of succession enables to the Crown, much less can they
make good that Title, which is by violence usurped; For nothing can be said to
be freely done, when liberty is restrained by fear; As for the deposing of
Edward the Second, it is no more to be urged, than the poisoning of King John,
or the murdering of a lawful Prince: we must live according to Laws, not
Examples, yet the Kingdom then was not taken from lawful Successors; But if
we look back to times past, we shall find that these Titles were more strong
in King Stephen, than they are now in the Duke of Lancaster, for King Henry the
1. being at liberty, neither restrained, nor constrained, the people assented
to this designement, and thereupon without fear or force he was anointed, and
crowned King. Yet Henry Fitzempresse, having a nearer right to the Crown by
his Mother (notwithstanding his Father was a stranger, and he borne beyond the
Seas) never ceased the prosecution of bloody wars, to the great effusion of
blood, and spoiling the Country, until his lawful inheritance was assured
him. It terrifieth me but to think, how many flourishing Kingdoms have been
by such contentions, either rent by intestine division, or subdued to foreign
Princes, under pretense of assistance and aid. This Kingdom has had too
woeful experience of these several mischiefs, and yet neither examples of
other Countries, or miseries of our own, are sufficient to make us be wary.
Certainly, I fear, it will betide us, as it did to Esops Frogs, who being
desirous to have a King, had a beam given them, the first fall affrighted
them, but when they saw it lie still, they contemptuously insulted thereon, and
desired a King of more active spirit; Then a Storke was sent them, which
stalking amongst them, daily devoured them, King Richards mildness has bred
in us this scorn, interpreting it to be cowardice and dullness of nature; I
dare not say (yet give me leave to suspect) with greater courage, we may find
greater cruelty. And thus have I declared my opinion, with more words, you may
perhaps conjecture than wisdom, yet fewer then the weight of the cause did
require: And I do resolutely conclude, that we have neither power nor policy,
either to depose King Richard, or in his place to Elect Duke Henry; That King
Richard remains still our Sovereign Lord, and therefore it is not lawful
for us to give judgment against him; That the Duke whom you are pleased to
style King, has more transgressed the King and Realm, than Richard has done
either against him or us; For he being banished the Realm for ten years by
the King and Council (amongst whom his own father was chief) and given oath
not to return without special license; He has not only broken his oath, but
disturbed the peace of the Land, dispossessed the King of his Royal estate,
and now demands judgment against his person, without offense proved, or
defense heard; if this injury move not, yet let both our private and public
dangers somewhat withdraw us from these violent proceedings.

FINIS.

