MERCURIUS ANGLICUS: OR, ENGLANDS MERLIN.

Prophetically foretelling, The Admirable Events, and Wonderful Effects, that
shall befall the King of Scots, the States of Holland, and the Parliament of
England, in all their Consultations, Warlike Actions, and Naval Designs, both
by Sea and Land, for the Year of our Lord, 1653.

WITH The most exact Predictions, and Monthly Observations, touching the great
Rising of the European Nations against England; and the success that will
attend them in all their Motions, Enterprises, and Attempts; As also, the
Causes of these strange Re^olutions, Mutations, Inclinations, and Eversions of
Empires, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths.

LIKEWISE, The Astromical Calculations of the Eclipses, Lunations, and
conjunctions; portending a great Change of Government, Religion, and Law, in
England, Scotland, and Ireland; together with the taking off all Taxes,
Assesments, Burdens, and Oppressions; and calling to a severe Account all
Committees and Treasurers; with the executing of many great Ones.

COllected out of the most elaborate Works of Captai- George Wharton, Esquire,
Mr. William Eill^e, Mr. John Booker, Mr. Vincent Wing, and Mr. Nicholas
Culpeper, Students in Astrology and physic.

London, Printed by R. WOOD, 1653.

Merlinus Anglicus, etc.
Januaries Observations.
THe year seems to begin pleasantly; our States promise fairly; and long-look's
for comes at last; for the heavy burden of the people is removing; the honors
of many great Ones are eclipsing; and the soldiery begin to be highly
elevated, whilst the poor Country Farmer (whose condition I pity) complains
and sads his heart, in regard his Cattle are like in many places to p^rish for
want of fodder and meat. A great change threatens the Lawyer: Sadness seems to
possess the spirits of many great Ones. The year initiates fair, but
seasonably cold and frosty; and so continues for the most part, until the 15
day, from whence (especially about the 18, 19, 20, and 21 days) look for
abundance of snow or rain, and dark unwholesome weather.

Observations on Feb.
GReat are the Designs now in Consults, and such as may (by Gods blessing) make
us happy for some succeeding years; Angels of Gold please the saints on earth,
else why are some zealous spirits now calmed? Remiss cold fair weather for the
most part till the 10 day; from whence expect cold winds, Rain or snow, until
the 14. The 15 and 16 days fair and seasonable. About the 17, 18, and 19 days
look for more rain and snow. The latter end of this month (especially the 26
day) will produce impetuous storms of Rain and Hail. Full moon the 2d day. New
moon the 17 day.

Observations on March.
THe Hollander is as busy as a fly in the hony-pot, and great preparations are
making against us; but alas! I could wish Noah's Dove might appear with glad
tidings of peace, after these late, lon^, and terrible wars, which are still
like to be for some years universal. Some small snow the first three days. Much
Rain or snow about the full Moon, and so for the most part till after the 6
day; and thence the Air will be more serene (though very cold and frosty
mornings] until the 15 day. The rest of the month will be fair but windy. The
4 day full Moon, but she is totally eclipsed all England over. The 19 day full
Moon.

A word in season to the Lawyer: Gentlemen, to deal ingeniously, the divine
Aspects of heaven promises fair; balance your Wisdom in the Skales of Equity,
and do justice to all men; for there are a people that will swell with
invectives against Thee near these Times.

The Term commences with the Lawyer's grief
[Curt Fees, and they deserve as Curt relief:]
Lawyers prefer the sharpest Laws, as best
To keep a Commonwealth in peace and rest:
If so; why should the Gown-men frown and puff
To see the Courts of Justice lyn^d with Buff?
No Plea e're moved as a Sword can do;
For that ore-ruleth Judge and Jury too.
Observations on April.
FOur times shall the Inhabitants of the earth behold the Luminaries eclipsed
this year, twice the Sun, and as often the Moon; but we in England, as also
Ireland, France, Spain, and Scotland, shall not see any of them, except one,
and that total of the Moon, which will happen on the 4. of March; it will begin
at one of the clock, 48 min. past, in the morning; the beginning will be at one
min. before 3 of the clock, the greatest obscurity at 53 min. past 3 a clock;
the end of it at 17 min. past 4, and at 57 min. past 5 the Moon will have fully
recovered her borrowed light: the whole duration will be 4 ho: 9 min. the
color of the Eclipse at the greatest darkness will be black, with a greenish
ash color. The effects will operate about the 26 of October. about which time, up
goes some great Ones in Authority Rain, Thunder, and Lightning, most part of
the month. Full Moon the 2d day. New Moon the 16 day.

Observations on May.
O Save all, save all, save all; never more need; for the month seems to begin
with blood; and some eminen: Gentlemen are exposed to the mercy of the
merciless. Heavens defend the City and Country from Oppression and Tyranny; for
violent seavers, the small pox, and a great sickness or pestilence threatens
the people. Violent and bloody sea fights all along our Coasts, and great
preparations in Scotland to invade us. The month begins with storms, but ends
fairly, with a full Moon the 2d day, and a new Moon the 16. day.

Whither an Army now? well! I could say
Who it is will get, or who shall lose the day,
Th^asillus like inform you, who shall prove
Victorioas in's Ambition, who in's Love:
But I am silent, nay, I must be dumb,
It Is Treason, now, to pray, Thy Kingdom come.
Observations on June.
SAd news from several parts; and our Grandees begin to be somewhat amused, by
reason of the vehemence of an extreme p^stilence that threatens to remove them
from their Judicature at Westminster: Gods will be done; but my ardent desire
is, That Divine providence may divert this sore and heavy judgment; and that
hunger and sickness may not afflict the poor: Few Kings and Princes in Exrope
but shall raste of the fury of the Eclipse before cited; and those that
domineer like little Lords ought to look about them: but mum! I dare say no
more.

July's Observations.
A Sad time! All Europe are up in arms, and the people stretch their wits, even
till they break them, to fight against the Decrees of Heaven. The Commonwealth
in general is foreseen to be in a good condition, and the States receive good
news from their servants at sea; Which produces an atonement from the poor
H^gens of Holland, but without a miracle no peace proceeds; so that they swarm
like Locusts in our seas, yet return home handsomely beaten. Here is much
snarling and tugging again about the Laws and Tyth^^ by discontented souls,
whilst our superiors are also amongst themselves divided in their
consultations, how to appease the demands of Thousands wh^^ nothing will serve
or s^e but a new Election. Oh Heavens! the (...) are slighted, and their (...)
(...) (...) to say, England, Scotland, France, Germany, Zealand, Spain,
Portugal, etc. The present King of Spain has the Sun in the 18 degrees. of Aries,
with the Dragons Tail, and the Moon in the 28 of Sagittary, in conjunction with
Saturn, the Sun in the 5th, and the Moon in the 2d house of the Radix; and
therefore let him expect some harm or loss to befall him either in his body,
children, or revenew, if not all. Another King I know (and truly honor) which
Horoscope is within 3 degrees. of the point eclipsed, Mar. 3. 1653. which bod^s him
some infirmity of body, what, I say not: because I suppose the progression of
the Horoscope to the Terms of Jupiter, may frustrate the evil thereby signified.

But I wish we may find it otherwise then is here premonished; I desire peace
and not war; but I fear it much, though I hope the contrary; for I see men's
hearts more obdurate then ever, every man in these iron days looking after his
own by-ends, and not at the common good; but what need I meant on this? Does not
every man that has eyes see how miserably this Nation has already been wrackt
and poled by a company of beggarly cheats? Sub Treasurers and Sequestrators
look about you, and all you, that have unjustly converted the Treasure of the
Commonwealth to your own uses; of what place and condition soever you are of,
you are sore threatened, the time will come, and is near approaching, when you
must render an account of your actions; your riches may prove your ruin, if
you make not a timely account to the Commonweal. I pray God make the
Parliament wise, the Body of this Fabric standing upon a very tottering
foundation: for if this Authority under which we m^u^n, after this Opposition
of Saturn and Jupiter, shall enforce us to some new and illegal assesment, or
by way of raising money upon any pretense whatsoever (except against the Dutch)
I am confident, we of the Commonalty joining with the soldier, shall assume so
much liberty to our selves, as to choose and elect such Members as hereafter
shall be more tender of our purses, and more liberal of their own; and we shall
endeavor so strictly to call unto account each member of this Parl. who has
fingured our Treasure, that we shall leave many of them as naked as when they
came out of their mothers words, or when first to be members of Parliament.

Thus Changes came, thus Changes will ensue
(Till these corrupted Bodies change for new
And put on Incorruption) Men and Things,
Whole Countries, Cities, Beggars, Princes, Kings;
He who but lately were a Crown of Goid,
Crowned now with thorns, exiled, or base^^ s^ld:
He clad in Rags and fed with scraps before,
Now throan'd in's stead and surse^^ing with store:
A glorious Church and Kingdom, but today,
To morrow both the Wolf and Fox^s prey:
All, all to change, and Dissolution tend,
Poor Almanacks, even they! must have
AN END.

