Mercurius Vapulans, OR NAWORTH Stripped and Whipped.

IN ANSWER To a most Base and Scandalous Pamphlet, called
Mercurio-Coelico-Mastix, OR AN ANTI-CAVEAT, etc.

Sent abroad from Oxford, under the Name of G. NAWORTH.

In opposition to MERCURIUS COELICUS, OR A Caveat to all the People of the
Kingdom; Lately penned by Mr. JOHN BOOKER.

By TIMOTHEUS PHILO-BOOKERUS.

Printed according to Order for I.F. March 4. 1644.

NAWORTH Stripped and whipped.
WIth your leave, Mr. Booker I mean to salute an acquaintance of yours whom I
have perceived to walk abroad a pretty while unregarded, or not met with by
you: For I am persuaded had you in all this time seen him, you would not have
let him pass the chastisement of your Pen. George Naworth is come abroad
again in a new suit of Slander, most speciously begirt with lies; but I will
on button him for you to his Principles, and strip his libellous soul stark
naked and lash him through the streets of London back again to Oxford, with
such Whip-cord lines, that all the Wit there shall be hardly able to recover
him. I must put up this Malignant Chaldean in sharp pickle, that he may relish
well, and so powder him with my pennyworth of salt, that his infamous name may
be preserved to the ears of posterity, as fresh in villainy, as it was the
first day he came in Print.

I perceive the Devil will have his Agents in every profession, to cross and
calumniate the proceedings, and favorers of this most excellent and
illustrious Parliament: The Court, the Pulpit, and the Country are all become
Vassals to the designs of Jesuits, and to the desperate sense of forlorn
Incendiaries, every one striving by tongue, or pen, to exercise his venom, and
blast the glory of this hopeful Reformation. Among the rest, Mr. G. N. is not
the least, one of the Egyptian Ptolomies Bastards; for he never was of the true
strain of Astronomy, and were Kepler or Tycho living, they would loath such an
Apostate from their Profession, which should thus disgrace them, leaving
Almanacks to live by slanderous Pamphleting; but this has happened since his
Durham brains were referred to the Latitude of Oxford poor allowance, where
their Almutens dominier for the most part, like their friends the Capuchins, in
Aquarius and Pisces, and if they chance to plunder any better diet, now and
then in Virgo, with full Conjunction; yet a safer and honester way G. N. might
have bin thought upon for maintenance, than in opposition to the bright stars
in our firmament, striving to eclipse their luster with thy malicious
malignancy, or then by calculating treason against the State, to give the world
occasion of Prognosticating what will become of thee in the end, when Gregory
will be predominant, and thou ascendant in the Trine of Tiburne, where thy
Influence will be choked, and thou prove a falling Star.

G. Naworth gives us to understand, that within six days after Mr. Booker had
printed his Mercurius Coelicus, it came to his hands in Oxford, and that in the
space of six hours he wrote the Answer to it. Neither of these G. N. is any
wonder; for had it been never so worthless, weak, and dull, you have so many
fast friends here, which will not let the least parcel pass, but if it be
possible they will cram it into their Intelligence, and send it to you; much
more probable then it is, that so subtle, so well constitutioned a Mercury as
that was, of so much concernment against thee, should come in that space to thy
hands. And as for thy answer to it in six hours, we least of all wonder at
that, for all of your partee are very sufficient Raylers, even Naturallized
into detraction and lying: such stuff flows freely of it self, you need not
strain for it; It is the true temper of your Brains, the very constitution and
complexion of the Court, Camp, and University: Every one of you is as another
Aulicus, a Rakehill, a storehouse of treachery and villainy, full of
mischievous Plots and Machinations. But I would have thee, Naworth, with all
thy Star-gazing, find out another man in the Moon, to manage the next devilish
Conspiracy better, and then I prognosticate unto thee at least a Knighthood:
it were a more acceptable service than Pamphleting, and the ready road to
honor. What a rare sight would it be to see your Worship strut in the streets,
like another Vrsa Major, swear in Taverns there is no Sun but Sack and Spanish
gold, look scornfully upon your old friends the Planets, and bid defiance to
all but Charle-waine. To leave the Zodiac, and all the Celestial Circles, to
swagger about in a Military Belt, from George Naworth to become Sir George, and
as haughty as St. George for England.

You think to climb even as Aulicus does, and I think so too, one day we shall
see it: for thou runnest in the some villainous strain with him, and I
conceive, Justice will not be impartial. Thou say, This is not the first
time it has been thy fortune to encounter with a Rebel. Rebels are your best
friends, and I can calculate the truth hereof from the 23. of October. 1641. at
which time the damnable Rebellion in Ireland first brake forth, that they have
been the greatest friends to your Cause, and the chief pillars whereupon the
maine of your Oxford design rested; and this is more than apparent by this
which follows, that having done their work again in Ireland, they should now
be brought over hither to further the ruin of this Kingdom. But thou talkest
of the incountring, and say, it is not the first time. I hope it is not
fighting you mean, you would not be accounted a Martial trifle: I have
calculated thy Nativity, and must tell thee, that Mars was under the Hatches
when thou were borne, Venus like a dirty slut was predominant, and looked askew
upon thee, so that ever since she bestowed a livery upon thee at thy birth,
thou have worn her Colors, and followed her Camp, and art as I hear an
arrant Craven, fit only to bristle among Hens, in plain English, Dunghill
Iades, and very likely to live and dye in that service, a sworn Votary,
Vassal, and Martyr to the Kerchiefe. There is another kind of incountring, and
that is with the Pen, viz. Pamphleting, and in this thou have been a notable
stickler to hold life and soul together, and to eclipse our brightest stars in
the Firmament; but thou know what I can prognosticate from such an Eclipse,
and Mr. Booker will tell thee, the world cannot be deluded in so evident a
Prognostic, if thou hold on this course.

But G. Naworth will hold on that course still; because he, I perceive, is one
of those deluded wretches that builds his faith upon Mercurius Aulicus, and so
is utterly ignorant of the excellent courses taken here, and says, what many
Silly people among them do absolutely believe, that we are fading here, and
nothing now left to support us but Fears and Iealousies. Yes, you will allow
us a little money too, I hope, and some Victuals, though you make your Oxford
friends believe we have neither, but that we are almost ready to cut our own
throats for want of both. I thought truth might be a little more common among
you, but I see you put out the candle before your friends, and leave them in
the Dark, lest the light should discover your baseness.

Thou say we are here furnished with an Implicit Faith. It is well that we
have some faith, you have not enough to keep you from being Infidels, and
Atheists: your Roman Faith is to break Faith, and to break the necks of them
which trust you; and so Implicit, that it is a mere snare to an honest heart,
and to be abhorred by all that are truly Protestant.

Thou say we mistake grossly, if we think to prevail at Oxford by
entreaties. First, we know you are merciless; Secondly, we have no occasion to
entreat you, and scorn entreating as much as we hate your former treacherous
treating. And thirdly, you will find shortly by experience, that we do not
think to prevail by entreating; for we mean to entreat, and handle you, as our
valiant brethren of Scotland do Newcastle, so that if your selves do prevail at
all, it must be by entreating bag and baggage.

Thou say that thy infamous Chronology is not at all ashamed of its
Descent, not fearful Mr. Booker should calculate its Nativity. Mr. Booker
never intended to calculate either yours, or your Books; Yet I know that
Saturn, or some such Dull Planet had an influence upon your brains in the
hatching, and he took the pains to calculate your death, though not the
Descent of your book, which will be (that I may use my own words) by an Ascent
upon the Trine where Gregory is predominant.

Why do thou undervalue our Calculations for the Meridian of London? We can
Calculate his Excellencies approach to Oxford, and Sir William Wallers
journeying to the West, and his baiting the Devon and Cornish Brutes into a
better sense of Religion, and the Scots conquest in the North, their taking of
New Castle, purging the Marquess with a Pill against Popery, making the Gospel
shine all over the Northern parts, and so dazzle the Newarkers, that they will
not put them to the trouble of Scaling the Works: Many more such exact
Calculations as these are we can boast of, and even triumph before hand, not so
much from sense and reason, as by those most excellent warlike Engines, Faith,
Fasting and Prayer.

Thou bidst us to know that Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft; your Oxford
Rebellion is indeed Witchcraft it self; It were too tedious to number up those
many State-Conjurers there, which continually work with the Devil for the
raising of more, and greater storms to wrack this small Vessel of the
Kingdom, wherein We, our Religion, and fortunes, are embarked. I need not bid
you labor for the Art, because I hear you are in a very fair way already, and
I suppose that shortly your Scholars will be admitted to Degrees in the
profession, it being all the way you have left for the maintenance of your
Protestant Religion.

Thou bidst us also remember what the Earl of Strafford told us at his death.
We remember very well that he said, There was a cloud hanging over this
Kingdom. He saw it, and it is apparent enough he was thoroughly acquainted with
the Designs now in agitation, which if it be true, what an account could he
give before the Celestial Tribunal, for his silence at his death in such a
case! He could never have given greater glory to the Majesty of heaven, nor a
better testimony of his repentance unto the world, then to have Discovered
secrets of so high concernment, to the future happiness of the Religion, and
Kingdom.

Thou confessest thy self to grow Ambitious. Ambition is an Oxford disease, and
why then not thou infected with that as well as the rest?

Thou would have us imitate thee in our extemporary prayers. We have so much
Christianity as to remember thee, and all that are in any desperate estate in
our prayers; And if so be it be possible ever to hear that you begin to pray,
we may chance to imitate you, if your way be tolerable.

But what have we to do with thy Almanac for the year 1639. that thou
should bid us remember, there was something in it which pointed at the
Firebrands which kindled this unnatural and bloody War, and a Memorandum
likewise of the Insurrection, and intended invasion of the Scots. I suppose
those whom thou meanest for the Firebrands, were the Lights of the
Commonwealth, which was then over-clowded with a general Darkness. But I
wonder thou could not be as quick-sighted now upon the second coming in of
our brethren to help to rescue us from our miseries. I know thee of a more
ambitious pretending spirit, than to say thou did not foresee it by the Stars
long before. How came it to pass then that thou and thy companion Aulicus
should be so impudent, that when their advance forward was generally known,
and confirmed, ye did continually deny it in that Rascal Pamphlet, to keep the
knowledge thereof from your own Partee, least they should be disheartened?

But hold, hold good George, be not so hasty to make your self famous, by
scandalously abusing Mr. Booker, as thou do; for I would have you take a
little patience, whilst I court you with your own language in his behalf; I
think thou art already as famous a Rebel, as any I know of thy stamp. I
know it has been thy daily practice, and Profession (otherwise very likely to
starve) for a long time to delude the Ignorant with fopperies, and I suppose
thou art become ridiculous enough to all such as have had any dealing with
thee, or so much as heard of the Name of Naworth.

Do not for pities sake rub an old sore, and lash out Sir John Hotham, and
call him Rebellious, nor say that he traitorously denied his Majesty entrance
into Hull, whereas at last he intended to lay on so fair a plaster,
supposedly to salve up his honor; He has only mistaken the way to Court. I
pray you good G. Naworth be not angry with him, for hee-meant your cause no
harm.

But what is the reason G. N. that one while you commend Mr. Booker, and tell
us, that you are proud of jumping in the same opinion with him in the year 1639
concerning the Eclipse of the Sun: And now in the year 1644. you are as proud
in being of a contrary opinion with him, and very ambitious in taking occasion
to thwart him in the business concerning the grand Eclipse of the Sun in our
Firmament, by reason of so many Malignant bodies conjoined, to hinder the
Royal Influence from us. This is a sign that Mr. Booker is the best
Astronomer of the two, and you now mistaken in your Calculation: We have the
clear Perspective of a true Parliament, by the help whereof we can discern
through all your dark pretenses, and behold those many false destructive
Clouds, which eclipse the Royal Splendor, and shower down a Deluge of
mischiefs, and miseries upon the Kingdom. But thou ask Mr. Booker what all
this is for a Caveat to the whole Kingdom. Yes very pertiment: And it is a
most honest part to give people warning of the miseries like to ensue, and by a
timely Prognostication to anticipate thy vile and abominable Calculation, and
demonstrate unto the world what indeed thou art; A counterfeit, pernicious, and
lying Pamphleter.

Thou say, that we stand more and more in need of the Scots, and that we had
best provide money for them quickly; otherwise, No penny, no Pater noster. What
need they have money, G. N. from us, when the Northern Marquess is like to
bear their charges with his treasure, Jewels, Coin, and Coale-pits? I dare
say, he will pawn all his Popish Trinkets, and leave himself very bare in
Religion to pleasure them. I am persuaded (good kind soul) he will not deny
them their Penny nor their Paternoster, nor the Pater noster row of Diamonds,
over which he rambles himself quite out of breath a mornings to exercise his
devotion into a meritorious posture.

In the next place thou say, thou will come closer to Mr. Booker: yet (not
to^ close I advise you for fear of hanging) And thou would be informed,
upon what grounds Mr. Booker deduced the signification of the putting in
execution the illegal Commission of Array: And also the settling of the Militia
of the Kingdom by the Parliament, from the Conjunction of Mars and Jupiter,
the 15. day of May 1643. A weaker Astronomer than Mr. Booker might have
Prognosticated this long before that time, with sufficient grounds for the
conjecture: for the putting in Execution the illegal Commission of Array, was
the effect of the Conjunction before mentioned, when Mars being surrounded with
Malignant Constellations, and in a warlike posture was cherished with a
favorable Aspect from our Royal Jupiter, and radiated the fatal beams of
Gunpowder to destroy us, And had destroyed us, had not the opposition of some
more benign stars prevented it, by that provident Act of settling the Militia of
the Kingdom.

But thou proceedest, and would maintain, that both these being effects of a
contrary nature, cannot both follow the same Conjunction; and demandest, How
one and the same Position, at one and the same time, should produce two such
contrary effects. I should give thee satisfaction in this, but that thou
puzzelst me with Franciscus Iunctinus, Albohazen Haly, and other Pagan
Malignants of thy acquaintance, such as Jupiter Iunctus cum Malevolo, Planetae
Vincentes (or rather Victae) pretended Parl^ament (with you at Oxford)
dignities Essential and Accidental (all as frivolous as your Great Seal) I
tell thee it is evident enough, that from the same Conjunction abovesaid,
proceeded the Illegal Commission of Array, and the settling of the Militia;
that to offend and destroy, this to defend and preserve the Kingdom.

Thou have another touch at Mr. Bookers Almanac, and denyest that the Sun and
Mars were in Opposition on the same day the Battle was at Keynton field, Where
our Invincible Army received such a wound, which Westminster Physic will
never cure. Is not this a palpable falsehood? Was not our Royal Sun that day in
opposition to Mars, and eclypsed too? If we grant it otherwise, we should belie
our selves, and we need not do it, Mr. G.N. when you are so nimble at it. For
shame mention not Keynton, nor Edgehill any more, where your seduced Comrades
received more wounds in their Bodies, then you could supply with ordinary
Physic; and the festred Malignity of your Cause was so bruised, that ever
since to this day it remains incurable.

Now thou art on thy way as far as Edgehill in lying, thou will needs have us
to be soundly beaten there, and that our truly valiant General was very tame
the next morning. If he was so tame, why then did you not cage him? How happened
it he was not taken and imprisoned, for letting out so much of your noble, and
base, degenerous and wild blood? Let the consideration of this be referred to
any but of indifferent Judgment; But there is little hope of your confessing
truth, till the last Judgment, where your consciences must answer for the
bloodshed.

And here, Mr. G.N. you must give me leave to tell you, that though you say,
You do not live by cheating and lying, yet you do by making of cheating and
lying Pamphlets, and by Calculating of News for the Meridian of Oxford; for the
truth of affairs must not walk abroad there, either naked, or in their own
clothing, but must be translated into such a habit, as will be most pleasing,
and acceptable to the hearers; this you may confess in time, without
equivocating, or mental reservatio^.

And whereas thou say, Mr. Booker dares not go to Oxford, unless it be for
a Spy; I think even as soon as thou dare come to London for a mornings
entertainment at the Exchange, where you may chance to curse your Ascendant
too, and look with such an Aspect, that you never observed a worse upon a
Protestant at Court.

Thou will by no means yield that thou came to Oxford by Sea; but say, It Is
well known thou came by land. Whether by Sea, or by land, is no great matter;
but I fear, your last journey will be by neither. And to fit thy self the
better for this last journey, here thou beginnest the second part of the
Lamentation of Cheap Side Cross, well tuned with Blasphemy: for thou say,
It was the only thing whereby w^ are dis^inguished, and known from Turks,
Iew^, and Infidels. it being the true and only badge of the ^ame (...)
^rofesse. Thus thou make Cheap Side Cross an essential part of
Christianity. Is this the fruit o^ ^^ur Oxford studies? I pray thee Naworth,
tell us for what Meridian this Divinity was cal^^l^t^^, it is of too great a
latitude for London.

Now because of the seasonable demollishing this Idol of yours called
Cheap Side Cross, thou meanest to pay us home with a competent sum of
slander for our pains, and being to act the second part of Aulicus, (whose
younger brother thou art) thou call the honorable Parliament, which will
remain a true Parliament, in spite of all the divellish calumnies you can
vomit up against it, a Pretended Parliament: Our valiant true-hearted Colonels
and Commanders thou reckonest up to be Wood mongers, Fell-mongers, Button
makers, etc. (Thou call them so, because they fell and knock you down so
fast, and teach your Breeches to make Buttons:) O^^ grave and religious
Assembly of Divines, thou call, A Schismatic Assembly of Taylers,
Millers, Cobblers, and Weavers, etc. (so they are to sew up the rent which your
Prelates and their adherents have made in the Church, and cobled it up with
their own superstitious tacklings, and wove into the garments of Christ's
Spouse strange stuff;) And Millers, I hope they are likewise to grind Popery
to powder; and we wish them any thing; so they may hold the Popes Nos^ to the
Grind-stone. Then thou call the Scottish Commissioners, the Incendiaries
between the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland. (We will join with them to
burn down the house o^ Baal to the ground.) The Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Common Council men. Taxe-bearing Mules They are still contented to bear your
slanderous reproaches, and to bear any burden but the Popes: they are
unwilling to be rode on by him, and the Cardinals with a Peter pence bridle.

Thou wonder'st we go not about to alter the Coin, there being so many Crosses
upon it. I t^^^ thee we will keep and embrace any Cross that will cross your
design of Idolizing the Cross*

Thou say the Scholars long to see Mr. Booker, and dispute with him, whether
New Castle Coal be the Element of fire or not. There needs no dispute in the
matter, though the Marquess cannot resolve you, the Coal-pits being out of his
possession, and his power quenched there; yet we can inform you, that he
intended to create a Region of fire there, by setting the pits on fire, and
Phaeton-like to burn asunder the Axell-tree of the Kingdom, that we^ with
himself might all drop into ruin together.

I cannot believe but that thou art Aulicus his bedfellow, his sole Companion,
for thou runnest altogether in the same strain with him every way, and call
the Lord Say, late Lord Say, and his Chaplain a Miller. He has served an
Apprentiship indeed, and has learned to grind^ Popish Trinkets too, et omnia
ejusdem farinae.

Next of all thou art troubled about Mariana his book, which was burnt at Paris
for teachin^ it lawful for Subjects to kill their Kings and Princes quocunquo
modo, etc. And would have i^ reprinted by Order of both Houses. If your
pretended Houses at Oxford will not order the Printing of it, you may have it
done in Ireland: the Doctrine will take there, and I fear at Oxford too. In
the mean time forbear such idle slandering that great Conjunction at
Westminster. The effects of it will last many Februaries, in spite of your
Malignant Opposition, and flourish when you and all your hellish Stratagems do
fade and fail you. Call them not Opacous, dark and unweildy stars, which
reject to be enlightened with the lively and wholesome Rays of the Sun, (ou^
Royal King Charles) For they are bright and shining stars, which disperse
reviving heat light, and comfort through all parts of this dying Kingdom, and
will still continue glorious in that excellent luster, which the Royal sun
was pleased to bestow upon them, though now he^ cannot daigne them a favorable
Aspect, being clouded from them. And yet we hope once to breath in that happy
time, when his Majesty will recollect himself, and call up those ingrafted
Principles of Nobleness, Piety, true Religion, and Reason, which made him
formerly admired and beloved by his People: Nay the very light of nature cannot
but be sufficient to dispell t^a^ d^rknesse wherein you and your friends walk
blind fold to destruction, if you were not wholly besotted and given up to a
spirit of delusion. Hence it is that we have so little hope of your conversion;
and therefore I shall not spend many words, but leave that to God and his
Ministers. Only give me leave to dismiss thee with an Anagram, the English of
thy name, GEORGIUS NAWORTH. IT IS A WHORING ROGVE.

And this English agrees with the Calculation of thy Nativity I formerly gave
thee. I advise you George Naworth, to amend your Calculation and your life in
Oxford, if it be possible; for it (...) supposed the Scots will fright you from
returning to Durham; for if you came thither, the Sentence would be, that you
must not return to the place from whence you came, but to the Gallows, against
which there will be no Anti-caveat. So farewell.

Timotheus Philo Bookerus.

FINIS.

