MERCVRIES MESSAGE Defended, Against the vain, foolish, simple, and absurd
cavils of THOMAS HERBERT a ridiculous Ballad-maker. Wherein, his witless
answers are clearly confuted, himself found guilty of Hypocrisy, caught
broaching of Popery, condemned by his own words, and here and there for his
impudent sauciness jerkt with the Rod of Correction, to teach him more manners
when he writes again. By the Author of the said Mercuries Message.

Here Is your reward

Come up sir

woodcut of a ballad seller (Thomas Herbert) with his head in a noose, being
encouraged to mount a gallows; apparently unaware of his predicament, he is
trying to offer a ballad to a nobleman (the Archbishop of Canterbury)
imprisoned in the Tower of London

London printed (...) 1641.

MERCVRIES MESSAGE DEFENDED. OR A Reply to the Ridiculous Answer, of HERBERT a
Ballad-maker.
IT is a true maxim, verified by daily experience, that the worst of men shall
never want disciples, as bad as themselves to stand up in their defense, and
approve of their wickedness.

Do the Priests of Baal seek to insinuate an opinion in the hearts of the
Israelites, 1 Kings 18.
that their dumb idol is a god? Why, they shall not want for a crew of
credulous spirits, to call upon his name, from morning until noon, O Baal hear
us.

Does idolatrous Jeroboam set up two golden Calves in Dan and Bethel? 1 Kings
12.
there will some of the people easily be drawn to worship.

Did the Popes great favorite William a Canterbury painfully labor to
suppress the true worship of Jesus Christ, and in the place thereof zealously
endeavor to erect a new fardle of superstitious Ceremonies, devised by a pack
of deluding Jesuits, and preferred to his Grace by the Whore of Babylon, with
what facility will a company of indifferent Jack a bothsides, Rev. 3.16.
lukewarm Laodiceans, either for hope of preferment, or fear of imprisonment
embrace and allow these his stinking traditions?

Would you see an example of such an impudent act? Do but look upon the
scurrilous and simple Answer to Mercuries Message, and you shall plainly
perceive it. Joshua 7.25.


Here is the Archbishop (who like Achan with his Baby lonish garments has a
long time troubled all Israel) charged with high treason and imprisoned in the
Tower by the House of Commons now happily assembled in Parliament: and there is
Herbert a poor threedbare ballad-maker writing in his behalf, against the
relation of those crimes for the which at this present he is justly
sequestered, whereby that which at first was only writ and intended as a close
quip to reprove the enormities of the times, and the little great Master of
mis-rule, then and still in coram nobis for his insolent misdemeanors formerly
practiced, is now become a matter of controversy; as though to blow off the
Bishops cap were to undermine the Truth of Religion, or as if the soiling of
his lawne sleeves could not choose but sully the beauty of the Church; and all
this maintained by a Poetical Ballad-maker.

Well, glad I am to see that his Grace has some friends still left in this
decaying time, but sorry their number being so small, their quality should be
no better.

But whither wander I? Is it possible that such a mist of error should darken
mine understanding as to think he wrote this Book out of love to the Mitre, or
conscience to Religion? surely no, he that reads the story shall find no such
business. But there is a thing called Half a Crown, the ordinary price of his
ridiculous Pasquils, and that was the maine motive inducing my moneylesse
youngster to make such a derided and witless Answer, who (I will undertake)
for as much more shall rail more audaciously against the wickedness of the
Bishop, than ever that impious wretch Rabshekah did against the piety of good
Hezekiah. 2 Kings 18.
This I shall clearly demonstrate and prove to his face in the examination of
his ensuing Answer.

But to come orderly to my Reply, and give an answer to every thing in its
proper place, which I shall do with as much brevity as may be, few words being
sufficient to confute such an Animal. When first I saw the title of that pretty
piece of ignorance, An Answer to Mercuries Message, Musing with my self what
manner of person the worthy Author should be, I either took him to be some
hanger on at the Episcopal palace in Lambeth, or else one of the Bishops poor
attendants at his Court royal near Tower Hill. Which by the fortune of fates
is now made a Bower of Grace for my Lords recreation in this delightful time
of the Summer season. But had every chamber such a Tenant as his small esteemed
defender, I believe it would quickly and might justly be called a Cage of
unclean Birds.

Thus I say, at first did I ruminate upon some brave opposer, but O how
mightily was I mistaken therein, for one day being necessitated to pass
through a stinking Alley, in a blind alehouse, I heard a crew of roaring
Ballad-singers trouling out a merry Ballad called, The more knaves the better
company. And one amongst the rest cried out, Well sung Herbert, who as it
seems, bore up the base amongst them, and in that deboist manner consumes his
time, and when his money is all spent, (as for the most part it is six or seven
times a week) writes a new merry book, a good godly Ballad, or some such
excellent piece of stuff even as the droppings of the spigot inliveneth his
muddy muse, to put his feeble purse in fresh stock again: looking in at the
name Herbert, and seeing such a poor ragged companion, I took him rather to
be some dunghill rakers page, than a lackey to the Muses. And so thought to
pass by, until upon better enquiry I was certainly informed that he was the
Author of that much applauded Answer.

And indeed had I took as much pains to have read his lines; as I did to get
acquaintance with his honorable personage; I might easily have conjectured him
to have been such a fellow, for who but he would so shamelesly and
peremptorily (in the very Title of his Book) assert three palpable lies, in two
short lines, unless he had thought no body would have read it but as very
fools as himself. Certainly, the young man had been in Paul's lately, and fell
asleep against one of the yellow pillars, whether it were done willingly or
unwillingly I know not, but sure I am he came out most horribly brazen-faced,
as by the sequel I shall make it evident. Thus he titles his Book, An Answer
to the most envious, scandalous, and libellous Pamphlet entitled Mercuries
Message, etc.

Envious, What Is envious? to tell a wicked man of his faults, A scorner indeed
loves not one that reproves him, Prove. 9.7.8 chapter 10.18. chapter 15.10.31, 32.
Pro. 12.1.
Prove. 15.12. But give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser,
Prove. 9.9. Therefore he that loves instruction loves knowledge, but he that
hates reproof is brutish, Prove. 12.1.

But now methinks I hear you object and say, Object.
it is true indeed, had the Bishop been admonished of his evil courses
privately, it had been something: but to divulge his infamy in print, for every
rural fellow to scoff and jeer at: this must needs spring from an horrible
root of envy and maliciousness. Answ.
But if Sir Thomas Wiseacres can make this his position good by the testimony
of any authenticke Ballad he has in his three half penny Library: we may
safely conclude Paul to be a man of a lofty spirit, and full of malicious
spleen toward Peter, when he blamed him to his face before a great assembly of
people for doing some things amiss, as ye may read, Gal. 2. Gal. 2.11.
Nay we may very well say that Solomon had overshot his judgment when he writ
this among his Sentences, Open rebuke is better than secret love. Pho. 27.5.
And thus has a few boughs cut off from the tree of Gods Word, sweetened these
bitter waters of envy which were so harsh to be swallowed by Herbert the
Ballad-maker.

Let me now inquire what makes it so scandalous. Is it possible to throw any
disgrace upon a man whose actions have been so ungracious that he expects no
other Exit but by an Axe or an Halter? Such an one as by his notorious life
has made himself an hissing and a laughing stock to all England: Can this
man be scandalized? as soon will I believe that a bucket of water will slabber
the sea, because it makes a puddle in a fair hall; as that a man of a corrupt
life can be blemished by ill words, because a man of honest conversation may.
But I would very feign have him answer me this one question, whether it be
possible for a man to be slandered in a matter of truth. Quest.


What I there writ of the Bishop all England will avouch, nay he himself
confesses to be true; Where then is all this mighty scandal you talk of? O
but then it is libellous; libellous, as how I pray? What lies has the piercing
eye of his blockish judgment found in it I wonder? Had he been so kind to
have told me, I Will assure you they should have been mended in the next
Impression, and that is more than he can do to his I am confident, unless he
take it and throw it into the fire, and then cry, Now I hope all faults are
corrected.

But by your favor Master Herbert though you past them by so slightly without
naming, I must a little presume upon your patience, whilst I recapitulate the
sum of my Book, to try if I can discover these falsities you accuse me of.
I will propound the questions, do you answer if you can.

And 1.

Well, Burton, D. Bastwicke, and M. Prin, with diverse others redeemed out of
several prisons by the Parliament; nay, what means such a numerous company of
poor ministers petitions daily presented to the honorable House of Commons
that have most cruelly been thrust out of all their lands and means of
maintenance and so undone, themselves, their wives and children, because their
consciences would not suffer them to submit to such base superstitious
ceremonies as were imposed upon them.

Did not our weekly lectures and sunday afternoon Sermons begin to go down
apace under a pretense of getting infection in the Church of God at Sermons
more than at Service: what is the reason then that Ministers durst not preach
upon week-dayes, nor on the Sabbath in the afternoon in many places for fear of
suspension and displeasing the Bishop; nay, what meant little Wren to flutter
about so monstrously and silence above 80. in his own Diocese for standing
above an hour in a sermon, though they preached but once a week.

Was it not the Bishop of Canterbury his chiefest means to persuade the King
to set out the book of Toleration for Sports and Pastimes on the Lords day,
thereby to betray both such good Pastors of their flock as would not read it,
and deceive the souls of the people that too greedily received it; how comes it
to pass then, it was never moved nor thought on before? Were not altars raised
and adorned with wax-candles, nay some with Images and Crucifixes? Were not men
commanded to bow to them as they went forward and backward, and likewise to
cringe and buckle the knee at the Name of Jesus, though the Minister were but
praying for Jesus College in Cambridge, Jesus the son of Sirach. praemunire, by
making New Canons after the last Parliament was dissolved charging them so
deep with an Oath, and etc. that they recoyled in their faces? Rome: but all
these his projects failing, he being caught napping in his knavery, and
committed to the Black Rod to be whipped for his offenses; did not every man that
could, Canterbury common in all men's mouths; alas this is so evident that it
cannot be denied: and now what is become of all these envious, scandalous and
libellous lines? What, all vanished so quickly before seen? or was it some other
book you thought on, when you were answering mine? sure some such matter, or
else sucking too long at the ale-tap had dimmed your eyes, and so made you
think what you writ your self in your own, you had seen printed in mine;
what ever it was, it is fit you should be wound up for your doltishnesse, but I
am willing to let you part at a distance, for he that closes with a beggar may
expect to part lousie.

In the next place, to fill up the Title, we have the resemblance of an arm
holding a knife fast clencht, as though you had lately made some desperate fray
among the two penny pudding-pies in Fleet-lane, or perhaps you set it there as
a direction to your friends to be in readiness to cut the rope when you were
caught in a twist for your faucy poetry. Thus carping Critic have I done with
the forefront of your book. Give me leave now having stood so long at the
porch, to enter in at the door, and see what ornaments are within worth taking
notice of.

I am persuaded you are no Pharisee; for if the inside of the cup be no cleaner
than the out, it is pity but such slovens should have it knocked about their
coxcombs. I shall now be more brief in my observations: ye see I have at large
maintained the truth of my book against the falsities of your Title, and
whether it be done to the full or no, I appeal to any man of honesty or
understanding, and let him be judge. But to the purpose:

Turn over, behold and wonder, Ha -- what is here? a flat cap, narrow ruff,
and lawne sleeves, On the backeside of his Title is the picture of the Bishop
very ilfavoured drawn, encompassed with a single ring.
sure it stands for the Bishop of Canterbury; but I hope his sorrows have not
so strangely metamorphos'd him; Does he learn to tumble in a hoope tro?
perhaps he intends to show tricks in Bartholmew Fair; I remember there was a
sight last year called, The decollation of John the baptist, wherein a boys
head was cut off through a table; if he study such an art of Legerdemain, he I
have great resort to his booth, I warrant him. But for all that, sure the
Balladmaker was a little too bold to thrust a Bishop on the back side of such a
knavish Title, as if he had no where else to pin his lies but upon father
Williams Canonical Rochet; truly it was very unmannerly done. But I proceed to
the book it self, wherein M. Author you may take notice of your own words,
for they shall be set in a different letter, that so men may understand what
they read. For your part I thank you, you made bold to insert some 13. or 14.
of my lines alogether to credit your book, without giving any answer or putting
distinction between them and your own patcht poetry; so that oftentimes men
looking upon that place without reading any further liked it and bought it, but
after they had more througly perused it, will you hear what their censurs were,
I warrant says one, the author of these hobling verses was some young Gregory
Nonsense, that might have been a scholar had be not run away from Cambridge
when he should have been whipped for his knavery: and came up to London to write
scurrilous pamphlets for half a crown a piece. Another being taken with a
sudden fit of the winde-collicke runs presently and enters this his penny worth
into Sir Ajax his Office as a memorial of a sweet strain derived from
Hellicon. Another buys them by the ream to stop vinegar bottles, and mustard
pots: (brave ware for a pipkin Chandler) so that although the Ballad-maker was
mad to see my book so well accepted, and so free of sale, having nothing to
twit me with, but that men bought it to see my knavery, It appears they had
more wit than to part with their money and spend their time, to read over his
hotch potch of simplicity.

But I must of necessity speak of 'em in their order, and first of your
preamble which thus begins.

How now what is it which I do vainly read, I Will tell thee what, it is that thou
have as vainly answered, whereby thou have made it apparent, thy reading and
thy writing to be all as one, both vain and ridiculous. But lets see what is it
in your judgment.

-- An hypocritick scald,
Which did affront
true Protestantine Heads,
No whit belonging
unto Papal Heads.
Well, I have read of many, and know some hypocrites, but never heard of a
scalded one before; truly sir we should be much beholding to you, in your next
reply to give us the definition of such a creature, and how he came into such
hot service to be scalded, or else like Robin the ex tempore man, tell us 'twas
only to make up rhyme.

Which did affront true Protestantine Heads Why heads? I wrote against none but
the Bishop of Canterbury, unless it be your meaning to parallel him with the
seven headed Beast in the Revelation, that carries the Whore of Babylon a
pick-packe, Re. 17.3.
me thinks that word had an s too much, but that is a small fault among
Ballad-makers, yet nevertheless I must needs tell you your following conclusion
is false and very peremptory; No whit belonging unto Papal heads.
it would better a became you first to have proved your Patron a good
Protestant by his conversation, and if he were no ways addicted to Popery, to
have entered into a defense of all his superstitious ceremonies. But instead
hereof, you like an ignorant caviller confute your self in one and the self
same page, here you write, Which did affront
true Protestantine Heads,
No whit belonging
unto Papal Beads.


A little below, Each railing fine
I do not now intend
To answer, lest
they cry me the Popes friend.


And on the other side of the leaf (speaking of the same person) plainly
confesses him a practiser of Romish idolatrous ceremonies, as bowing to the
Altar, hating Sermons, and abusing pious Ministers, I appeal to all the world
whether or no this be not a ridiculous self confutation and full of simplicity.

But I hope upon a better recollection you will willingly confess your saucy
presumption; otherwise (I pray mark it) I here challenge you to your face to
answer me this question. If the Archbishop of Canterbury never had any
inclination to Popery, for what does he now lie imprisoned in the Tower? And
before your right goose quill go about it, I advise you to look over his
Articles, by which the whole House of Commons have charged him with high
Treason, and make not your self wiser than a Parliament, lest soon after we
hear you thanking God that you escaped an halter, to be whipped in Bridewell.

But what follows? O, the two first verses of my book, and see if this bold
excrement of Poetry thinking my lines to be like his, has not made them both
nonsense; My Lord,
I call you not what long ago you were,
For now those golden days are past I fear.


So in his; but thus in mine, I call you what not long ago you were,
But now those golden days are past I fear.


The difference is so obvious to every man's capacity that I shall not need to
use any words in its explanation, only this, perhaps lying ever in an
Alehouse he was half foxt when he writ it, or wanted a Book when he was
penning an Answer; for indeed that was never printed to be bawled by the
Ballad-singers, had not some stuttering knave workt another Impression. But
what is next.

We have a few
Which have Saint: like beleefs of which they crack,
And such are those which we call Schismatics.
Out of which I propound these Quaeres, answer them if you can, I expect you
should; 1. Whether every true Protestant ought not to be of a Saint-like
belief; 2. whether men of a saintlike belief deserve to be called
Schismatics. It follows.

And such a one was he who lately writ
A Libell to divulge his zealous wit.
It Is something strange sir, you should be so well acquainted with my Religion
before ever you saw my person, which to your knowledge you never did in your
life, yet why not? it is possible you may be a soothsayer, having already as I
am credibly informed by the spirit of prophecy writ an idle Pamphlet, (if not
a ballad or two besides) of the life and death of William Laud Archbishop of
Canterbury; who was executed, etc. leaving a space to put in the day of the
month, which it seems your wisdom could not justly jumpe upon. But now me
thinks like an Herculean sacrificer he vapors as if he were going to whip the
dogs out of the city.

Hence superstition, hence base Romish weeds,
And hence I say all hypocritick deeds.
He might as well have said whilst he looked on his poetry.

Hence limping lines composed b'a brainsick quill,
Men's heads with foolish, witless stuff to fill.
But now he proceeds, Suppose that he bowed vainly to the Altar,
For that must he be hanged with inky halter.


With inky halter, O rare expression, worthy to be translated into hempen, and
wound about the Authors neck as a monument of his eloquence to future ages;
But he at the Name of Jesus still did bow,
Why not, does not the Scripture it allow.


Does it so? it would then have been a great illustration to your argument to
have quoted the place, me thinks I hear you say, Phil. 2.10. But had the
ingenuity of your stupefied capacity been acquainted with the meaning of an
allegorical expression, you would as soon have avouch'd that the Disciples of
Christ at his last Supper drank really his blood, because at the delivery of
the cup he used these words, This is my Blood which is shed for the remission
of sins, Matthew. 26.28. I am sure there is no other place through out the whole
Bible that carries with it so much as a resemblance to countenance this popish
ceremony; and this our great Jesu worshippers the Bishops themselves are
ashamed to produce; every dull Novice in religion being able to confute it. For
who knows not, that there are no knees in heaven to cringe at the Name of
Jesus? now if you will take some part of the words literally, ye must of
necessity acknowledge all to be so; and so consequently at the same time,
whether in the Church or other place, being in the same manner enjoined by the
following words, ye must cry out with your mouths, 2 Phil. 11.
Jesus it the Lord, and who would not condemn this as most absurd and
ridiculous. Further note that the text does not say, Every knee shall bow at
the naming of Jesus, but at the Name, now his Name signifies his Power, and
bowing of the knee subjection to that Power, Acts 4.
and this deny if you can; indeed that thus every man shall be subject to the
Power of Jesus I have often read, and do most faithfully believe; but that we
must bow our knees in outward adoration of his Name, every time we hear it
pronounced, this is a very false and groundless tenent, contrary to the
opinion of all reformed Divines in the Christian world, detested at this
present by every true Protestant, proved by the writings of many orthodoxe
Ministers to be popish and idolatrous, and so consequently protested against by
the whole House of Parliament; nay the greatest part of England, and must it
now be raked up again after such a general opposition, and slily thrust abroad
by an ignorant Skip-Iack, that knows no more what belongs to the true
Protestant Religion than a very innocent? I intend to try his judgment by
these quaeres.

1. Whether the Name Jesus be greater than Jehovah? if not, how we dare be so
bold as to reverence one above another? 2. Whether bowing to the Name Jesus
when it is pronounced, and when we see it painted on a wall be not all one? 3.
Whether this Jesus worship being a humane tradition, devised, prescribed, and
imposed by the will, commandments and doctrines of men be unlawful or no,
seeing Christ condemns it? Matthew. 15.9. In vain says he, ye worship me,
teaching for doctrines the traditions of men. So the Apostle, Beware lest any
man spoil you through philosophy, and vain deceit, after the tradition of men,
after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ, Coloss. 8. In which two
places of Scripture, Herberts vain question; why, seeing God made the knee as
well as the heart, both should not lowly bow to his service, is clearly
answered, the one being required by God, the other a will worship commanded by
man: yet see how confidently the fellow stands upon his pantofles, for says
he, Sure Antigenist to me thou'st subscribe
If thou in hope were of a ten pound bribs.
O, such a gift would make thee for to saulter,
Thou'st buy new shoes, and ske scrape to the alter, etc.
Thou wantedst money when thou writest thy letter,
And by thy Scandal made thy state grow better.


Observe I beseech you, how the poor needy wretch judges of my condition by his
own, who I dare say, should his father or the best friend he has take their
ultimum vale under Tiburnes dominions, would write a Ballad on it for half a
Crown, and this I shall make very probable by and by in that which his own
hands have writ against the Bishop whose cause so stiffly he now maintains.
But I must first take some other lines in the way.

Thou art some Poet to the short haird crew,
Who long since bid to honesty adue.
For the first let all the world be judge whether it be not better and more
credible to be a Poet to a crew of short haird citizens, that live in fame and
estimation among their neighbors, than to a company of louzy Ballad-singers
that neither know what belongs to God nor any goodness. As for your locks I
suppose they are much longer than your honesty, and that is a great sign that
young Derrick must be your barber. I wonder much thy name thou durst not show,
etc.

It was your modesty, I do suppose,
Or else for fear Brandon should get your hose.
As for my name I will still conceal it on purpose to vex thee; and trouble
not your self about my hose, 'twill be more requisite for you to have a care
of your own three half penny breeches, Gregory it seems has certain hopes of
them, having already prepared an oven to bake them in, least otherwise he add
to his store, and increase the number of his six footed cattle.

O what an age is it, which we do live in?
One does offend, another laughs at sin.
See how zealously the young man runs on, but quite beside the bias, it being
not the sin we rejoice at, but the punishment of the sinner, and for this I
think we have good ground in the Word of God, Exodus 15.1. to 20. Pharaoh and
his host being drowned in the red Sea, Then (says the Text) sang Moses and the
children of Israel this song unto the Lord, and spoke, saying, I will sing unto
the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously, the horse and his rider has he
thrown into the sea, etc. Samuel indeed sorrowed for the heavy doom he was
commanded by the Lord to denounce against Saul, but was reproved by God for it,
How long (says he) will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him from
reigning over Israel? 1 Samuel 16.1. But more especially upon the fall of Babylon
is there a command of exultation, Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy
Apostles, and Prophets, for God has avenged you on her, Rev. 18.20. Revel. 21.
1. 2.


Thus you see it is not unlawful nor irreligious to rejoice at the downfall of
Gods and the Kings enemies; only this I say and speak it from my heart
concerning the Bishop, as bad as he has been, God grant that the humbling of
his flesh here, (now he sees what misery he has brought himself to by his
mischievous life) may tend to the salvation of his soul hereafter, in the day
of the Lord Jesus. But now my detractor begins to fall something sharp upon me.

O brawling Libeller which lately writ
Mere blasphemy for to divulge thy wit.
Here now he hopes he has caught me tripping bravely, but sure he is deceived;
yet nevertheless second considerations are not amiss. Let me look again
therefore, and see if I can find out these blasphemous lines, these he
stumbles at.

Blessed were the man could light on such good hap,
To beat out's eyes, with his Babylonian cap.
What, what? thinks he (but wants wit to express it.) Say a man be never so
vile a sinner, is it blessedness therefore to beat his eyes out presently.

I answer, though this were written but as the report of the people, and was
indeed common (almost) in every man's mouth, I must of necessity quote one place
of Scripture to maintain it, and then let Herbert see what godly Ballad he can
make to confute it. Psalm. 137.8, 9. O daughter of Babylon, wasted with misery,
happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou have served us; yea, blessed
shall he be that takes thy children and throws them against the stones. The
place ye see, is a clear confirmation of the point in controversy; and where
is all this great clamor of blasphemy now? But he will have another bout with
the word.

Blessed were the man, if blessedness it were,
Authority of time to stand in fear.
Here I would fain know, Or perhaps my Lord stands in fear of time because
lately he was pictured running to Rome with the Pope on his back,
whether the Bishop of Canterbury (for sure him he means by authority) stand
in fear of time only, or the Parliament, or who has most authority, they or
he? Me thinks it is a saucy expression, and deserves the lash; but who would
be troubled with an impudent Ballad-maker? But here at last he propounds a
question, O sinful man, for if man so thou art;
Where was thy charity, where thy fleshy heart?


To this I answer that it is just with God to repay The Bishop.
him with the very self same measure which he meted to others; and being
without mercy in his prosperity, to make him want mercy in his adversity; that
so that of Solomon might be fulfilled, His own iniquities shall take the
wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his sins, Prove. 5.22.
But the Bishop was charitable; that he was indeed, to cut off men's ears, and
damn them to perpetual imprisonment for speaking two or three angry words
against his lawne sleeves and rochet, but how strangely was the body of his
charity divided, when he hung it up in quarters upon four several gates, and
stuck the head on London Bridge? Was he not a very merciful man think you, to
make such havoc of a poor young fellow, cutting him off on a sudain in the
prime of his years, affording him hardly a complete day to fit himself for his
end; and all this because he was took upon suspicion to be one of the company
that beset his princely palace at Lambeth; this then could be no less than
high Treason: but now the wheel of fortune is turned, and he that a year agone
sat domineering on the top, now lies miserably groaning under the pressure of
a thousand calamities. God grant he may lay this his affliction to heart, that
so when he is bereaved of Grace here, he may receive a crown of glory
hereafter. And now Sir, I suppose I have resolved you what my charity is, I
hate his body, but love his soul, I wish he may die by the hand of justice a
temporal death, but be raised by mercy to an eternal life.

And now having nothing to say, in the last place you would fain accuse me of
hypocrifie, and to that end enter upon a large description of the odiousness
thereof, but because you speak without proof, I weigh not your words, yet
nevertheless intend to prove your self the hypocrite out of your own
writings, In a ballad called, Alas poor scholar. (For no other works of yours
can I allege, unless it be Dicke and Robin, the downfall of the new
Bear-garden, or the like.) This ballad, I say, the best verses being made by
another, you like a bold cobbler undertook to vampe it for half a crown, and
this is one of your verses, I have bowed, See also a book of his making called
Romes ABC consisting altogether of jeeres for the Bishop.
I have bended,
and all in hope
One day to be befriended
I have preached, I have printed,
What ere I hinted
To please our English Pope.
I worshipped toward the East,
but the Sun does now forsake me,
I find that I am falling,
the Northern winds do shake me:
Would I had been upright,
for bowing now will break me.
Alas poor Scholar, whither will thou go?


Now whether this be not more against the Bishop than your poor silly Answer is
for him, let any man be judge; which being so, to what caveat may I better
refer you than to your own Acrosticke, composed altogether of simplicity and
nonsense?

Beware of Hypocrisy, it is the way to Hell. And thus I hope I have given a
full Reply to all and every of your frivolous answers, to the ample
satisfaction of all honest, reasonable, and judicious people. It remains now
that I prove your book to be what most falsely you called mine, Envious,
scandalous, and libellous.

Envious it is because you carpe at that which you know not how to answer, much
less to confute. Scandalous it is, for it tends to the disgrace of Religion,
maintaining a popish Ceremony to be the true worship of God. Lastly, it is very
libellous, it being as formerly has been declared, composed of nothing but
lies and falsities. As for the absurdity of your language, and base words, I
mind them not, because I know they are more familiar with you than any
goodness, else had you never writ so many in a sheet of paper: but it is no
wonder you break out into such foul mouthed speeches, whilst you esteem all
others like your self and your company. Besides nature having ordained the
teeth as a hedge to keep in the tongue, yours being all rotten, no marvel to
see it run so at random.

And thus as briefly as I could I have
Proved my book honest, yours base, and you a knave.
A conclusive Letter.
SIr, finding by the innocent simplicity of your late Answer to Mercuries
Message, what a foggie mist of ignorance has infected the Globe of your small
understanding, and pitying that such a young man should perish in the gulf of
folly, I have spoken to a very learned Physician, an acquaintance of mine, who
has promised me to work a rare experiment for the recovery of your wits, which
he verily believes are gone a wool-gathering to get a better nap for your
sleepy jacket, only this he advised me to premonish you of; you must with much
patience prepare your self to be cut of the simples, that so your Reply to
this second may be a little wiser than your Answer to the first, whilst I
endeavor to remain

Your poor Friend at a pinch MERCURIUS.

Now answer if you can; nay, if you dare,
Id'e gladly see it, but never shall I fear.
No, no, it is better Ballads still to write,
Of which no wise man ever has a sight:
By fools indeed you may applauded be,
Because your wit and theirs so well agree.
But no man else can find in your bald lines
The least conceit, that unto wit inclines.
Farewell, farewell, I scorn my muse should wake her
To write against a silly Ballad maker.
FINIS.

