THE Merry Maid of Shoreditch, Her Resolution and Good Counsel to all her
Fellow Maids; And says, that she will never tie her self to a Crab Tree so long
as she has a whole Wood to Range in.
The Tune is, I have a Mistress of my own: Or, Hold Buckle and Thong together.



YOu young Maids all, where e're you be, I pray you now come hear this Ditty;
And I hope you will all agree, you cannot say but it is pretty:
I Have lived a Maid these twenty Years, and never was no Young-mans Debtor;
Men are so full of Lies and jears, that a single life it is the better.
A Young Man will woo a pretty Maid, and Swear, and Lie, and say he will have her,
Until he has her heart betrayed, to get his will and so to leave her:
But young maids you must be very wise, for young men they will you infetter,
They strive to make of you a prize, but a single life it is the better.
For whilst a maid does keep unwed, young men will give to her great Honor
But if she chance to bring a Knave to her bed, then he will not care what does
come on her:
But get her Children year by year, and cross and vex, and strive to tret her,
For a married VVife's never out of care, a single life it is the better.
While a maid lives a single life, she may sit and talk with any stranger,
But after she is made a wife, if she do the like there is great danger:
So maids, if you can be content, be not drawn in to a young-mans fetter,
Lest afterward you do repent, then to live single it is better.
THere is many a Maid that has been wed, both in Country, Town and City,
To careless Husbands, I am afraid, which grieves their wives, the more's the
pity
Therefore young Maids let us have a care, and believe no lies that young men
flatter,
They spare no words they can devise, but a single life it is the better.
Young Men will show great store of love, and have young maids drink wine and
sherry,
And their hearts within do as rotten prove, to give you drink to overcome you:
The Devil himself is not so false as some men be, I will not Flatter,
To bring a Maiden to their Bow, but a single life it is the better.
So Maidens that do live in the row, you must be careful of this matter,
I Would have you all for to do so, and believe no young men when they Flatter,
Besides they sweeten you up so brave, with sugared kisses that will fetter,
And another thing if you will it have, but a single life it is more better.
There Is scarce a young man that is in ten, that will prove loyal to a maiden,
But will prate and lie, and cogg and feign, as though his heart with Love was
laden:
But will dissemble more or less, for to stand him when he charged,
And so undoes that silly Lass, and then her trouble is enlarged.
Young Maidens all look to it in time, when as you go for to marry,
Besure to choose an honest man, or else you would better longer tarry:
For an honest man will never you wrong, but a Knave will be to you a fretter,
It is quickly done, and long thought on, for to live single you had better.
FINIS.
Printed for J. Deacon, at the Angel in Guilt-Spur-street without Newgate.


