Commons House Monday Febr 21. An. Dom. 1641.
IT is this day Ordered by the Committee for Printing and Publishing of Books,
etc. That Mr Jackson Minister of Saint Michael in Woodstreet London, be desired
to peruse Mr More his Translation of Mr Mede his book on the Revelation, this
day presented to the said Committee to be licenced, and to report to the said
Committee his opinion therein, and concerning the Printing thereof.

John White.

I Have according to the Order of the Committee for Printing, etc. read over
Master More his Translation of Mr Mede his book on the Revelation, and find
it to be exactly Translated, and that the book it self gives much light for
the understanding of many obscure Passages in that sweet and comfortable
Prophecy, and though Master Medes opinion concerning the thousand years of the
seventh Trumpet be singular from that which has been most generally received
by Expositors of best esteem, and I conceive has no just ground, yet he
therein delivers his judgment with such modesty and moderation that I think
the Printing of it will not be perilous: and therefore conceive that the
publishing of this Translation is a good work, and may with Gods blessing yield
much comfort to many.

April 18. 1642. Arth. Iackson.

IT is Ordered by the Committee of the Commons House of Parliament concerning
Printing, this eighteenth day of April 1642. That the book Entitled the Key of
the Revelation, etc. be Printed.

John White.

The Key of the REVELATION, searched and demonstrated out of the Natural and
proper Charecters of the Visions.

WITH A Coment thereupon, according to the Rule of the same Key, published in
Latin by the profoundly Learned Master Joseph Mede B. D. late Fellow of
Christ's College in Cambridge, For their use to whom God has given a love and
desire of knowing and searching into that admirable Prophecy.

Translated into English by Richard More of Linley in the County of Salop.
ESQVIRE, One of the Burgesses in this present Convention of Parliament.

REVEL. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads (that is, interprets) and they that
hear (him that interprets) the words of this propheci^, and keep those
things that are written therein: for the time is at hand (that is, is now
present) wherein the same things shall begin to be fulfilled, and daily more
and more shall be fulfilled. With a Praeface written by Dr Twisse now
Prolocutor in the present Assembly of Divines.

Printed at LONDON by R. B, for Phil. Stephens, at his Shop in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the gilded Lion. 1643.

A PREFACE written by Doctor Twisse, showing the Method and Excellency of Mr
Medes interpretation of this Mysterious book of the REVELATION of Saint JOHN.
MAny shall run (or pass) to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased, Dan.
12. 4. I lighted some times upon a witty interpretation of this passage in a
certain Manuscript; and the interpretation was this. That the opening of the
world by Navigation and Commerce, and the increase of knowledge, should meet
both in one time, or age. The observation is justified by experience, howsoever
Divines may judge as they see cause of the congruitie thereof unto Daniels
text. And this increase of knowledge, which these latter times have brought
forth, appears in nothing more remarkeably, then in the interpretation of this
mysterious book, the Revelation of Saint John. And as the mother of Solomon
says of the virtuous woman, whom she describes, Pro 31.29. Many daughters
have done virtuously, but thou surmountest them all. In like sort may it be
said of Mr Mede in reference to his Expositions of the Revelation. Many
Interpreters have done excellently, but he surmounteth them all. Neithere
should this seem strange, that being advantaged by the labors of those that
went before him, he has added something of his own, wherein he has
surpassed others, yet without disparagement to any; (...), any man may add
something to the labors of others, as Aristotle has it, Ethic. 1. (...); by
these means Arts grow to perfection. Thus we salve the credit of ancient
Writers, though in some things, many of the present age do excel them; for
they have carried us on their shoulders to a great height by their
instructions, and for us to soar a little higher, it is no great advancing of
our abilities; certainly no disparagement at all to them by whom we have
profited in an high degree. Thus a dwarf lifted up on a tall man's shoulders
may easily discover much more then he; thanks be to the tall man for it. Thus
a Wren carried on an Eagles shoulders, to the highest pitch of her soaring
aloft, if, when the Eagle is weary, the Wren springs up somewhat higher; this
is no great glory to the Wren, much less any dishonor to the Eagle.

Yet to confess a truth, Master Mede has many notions of so rare a nature,
that I do not find he is beholding to any other for them, but only to his
own studiousnesse and dexterity, with the blessing of God upon his labors.

And here, First, I do observe Gods direction of

(1.) As First, in his Clavis Apocalyptica, the Key of the Revelation, wherein
he has drawn together the homogeneall parts of it, dispersed here and there,
yet belonging to the same time; the indistinction whereof may expose many to no
small error ere he be aware, conceaving all the Passages in the Revelation to
be ordered in place, according to the order of time wherein they were
fulfilled, which is found to be other wise, as in the Key is manifested,
representing many perticulers mentioned in different places, yet belonging to
the same time.

(2.) Secondly, the Author gave himself to write Specimina Essays; wherein
he goes over every part of this book (excepting the three first Chapters)
taking a general view of each as he goes.

(3.) Thirdly, he proceeds to a more full Comentari^ from the fourth Chapter to
the fourteenth, that which follows from thence to the end, contains only
his former conceptions, which he called Specimina Essays, or first adventures.

Secondly, whereas in performancies of this nature,

(1.) As for the first of these, the whole Body of the Revelation for the most
part, being carried along by Figurative expressions: it is requisite to observe
the Genius of Scripture phrase in this kind; wherein Master Mede excells, and
hereby the sense is cleared in such sort as to give great satisfaction. As in
opening the mystery of the battle in heaven, Revel. 12. and the casting down
of Satan unto the earth, he shows that States and Kingdoms in the world
Political, are indeed much answerable to the condition of the world Natural,
and accordingly represented in Scripture: for as the world Natural consists of
heaven and earth: so in each State a Kingdom is found somewhat answerable
hereunto, and that is the Nobility and the Laity. And as in heaven there are
Sun, Moon, and Stars of lesser and greater magnitude: so in every Kingdom
there is a King and Queen, and Nobles, and that in great variety of degrees
of magnitude. And as in the earth there is great variety of creatures, as of
trees of various sorts, and of herbs and flowers: so in the people of any
Commonwealth, is found great variety of differences. And upon this ground,
and by this course of interpretation which he takes, whereas other Writers
many times give pretty interpretations, which the Reader perhaps could wish to
be true; Mr Mede by his grounds and manner of proceeding convinces the Reader
of the truth of that sense and meaning the Text, which is delivered by him,
even to admiration.

(2) And when this is done, as for the accommodation of the matter of fact in
this prophecy thus interpreted by him, unto its proper time; this requires
great skill in History; and I have found that Master Medes friends, who have
been acquainted with the course of his Studies, would give him the bell for
this, as herein out-stripping all others.

Thirdly, I have observed some notable distinctions in this Comentarie of
Master Mede, which have given me

(1) The distinction between the book-sealed with seven seals, which he
calls the greater book; the contents whereof indeed are very large, containing
an History from the beginning of the preaching of the Gospel, to the end of the
world: and this he says, contains fata imperij, the fortunes o^ destinies of
the Empire, (2) and the little book mentioned, Revel. 10. which he says
contains fata Ecclesiae, the fortunes or destinies of the Church. The first
contains the seven Seals, and the seven Trumpets; for the seventh Seal
produces the seven Trumpets.

(1) The six first Seals contain the Story of the Empires continuance unto
the days of Constantine included; in whose days there being a strange
Metamorphosis of the Empire from Heathen to Christian, this change is
represented in such a manner, as if it were the ending of the world, and the
beginning of a new; which in my conceit seems very judiciously delivered by him.

(2) Then the seven Trumpets (which are the contents and matter of the
seventh Seal) represent the judgments of God upon the world, for standing
out against the Gospel; and shedding the blood of the Saints.

(1) By the heathen Emperors, and for that cause, ruin was brought upon the
Empire by degrees, until it was rent and torn into ten Kingdoms, which is
set forth by the parts thereof in four degrees, and accordingly that ^ills up
the material contents of the four first Trumpets.

(2) The other three Trumpets are called Woe Trumpets, containing the
judgments of God upon the Antichristian world, the degenerate States of
Christendom, (First) by the Saracens, the contents of the first Woe Trumpet.
(2) By the Turks, the contents of the second Woe Trumpet, chap. 9. (3) By the
end of the world, Revel. 11. 15.

(2) Another distinction there is mentioned by him, and which carries great
light with it, of great use for the clearing of the state of Christ's glorious
Kingdom here on earth: and that is, Revel. 21.24. And the Nations that are
saved (...), that is, which escape the fire, or are saved from the fire at
Christ's coming) shall walk in the light of new Jerusalem: by which it appears
clearly that new Jerusalem is one thing, and the Nations that escape and are
saved from the fire, wherewith the earth and all the works thereof shall be
burnt in the day of Christ's coming, 2. Pet. 2. and 1. These. 1. and 2. these I
say are another thing, and must be distinguished from new Jerusalem. For in the
light of this new Jerusalem, those nations shall walk, as is expressly
testified. And the distinction Mr Mede conceaves to be this; By new Jerusalem
is meant Christ and his raised Saints, who are called the Saints whom he shall
bring with him, 1. These. 4. and by the nations are meant, all the faithful
servants of God who shall be found here alive at Christ's coming.

(3) And I find that the want of distinguishing these, the ancient Fathers,
and perticularly Epiphanius, have discoursed very wildely against the glorious
Kingdom of Christ here on earth, yet in just opposition to the Corinthians,
whose guise it was to discourse very carnally of the glorious Kingdom of
Christ; The consideration whereof moved Austin to relinquish the doctrine of
Christ's Kingdom here on earth, which formerly he embraced, as himself
professes in one of his works Decivitate Dei, where he treats thereof.

(4) Yet as Mr Mede has (in my judgment) exceeded in merit all others that
went before him in this Argument; so others after him, may go beyond him in
some perticulars; As to instance in a particular, or two or three.

(1) The discovery of the true meaning of the number of the Beast 666. by Mr
Potter, wherewith Master Mede himself was exceedingly taken even to admiration,
professing it to be the greatest mystery that has been discovered since the
beginning of the world.

(2) The same Master Potter has other strange mysteries to be discovered out
of the same number, and especially out of the fraction thereof, which as yet he
has not made public.

(3) So likewise in explication of the mystery of the two Beasts mentioned,
Revel. 13. he differs from Mr Mede. And I have seen an excellent discourse
thereupon, but as yet he has not communicated it to the world. What cause have
we to bless God for bringing us forth in these days of light: may we not
apply that of Esaias unto these times? when darkness Esaias. 6^. 2.
covered the earth, and gross darkness the people; the Lord has risen upon
us, and his glory has been seen upon us.

(1) Not only in respect of the great Reformation wrought in this Western
part of the world an hundred years ago and more: God awaking as it were out
of a sleep, and like a giant refreshed with wine: and the Lord Christ awaking,
and stirring up his strength for the raising up of Jacob, and restoring the
desolations of Israel, and blessing us with a resurrection of his Gospel, and
discovering the man of sin, and blasting him with the breath of his mouth.

(2) But also opening the mystery of the slaughter of the Witnesses, which we
have just reason to conceive to have been on foot diverse years, not by
judicial proceedings only in the Martyrdom of Gods Saints; but by the sword of
war, First in the Low Countries, then in France, after that in Bohemia, then in
Germany, (which how long it should continue Mr Mede professes to be
uncertain) and now amongst us, First in Ireland, then in England, and that by
the Antichristian generation, with so manifest oppositon unto truth and
holiness under a Protestant Prince, as I think the like was never known since
the beginning of the world.

After this strange war and slaughter of the Witnesses which hasteneth to a
Period, the continuance of it shall be but three years and an half, in which
space of time, they that dwell on the earth shall rejoice over them and make
merry, and send gifts one to another, because these prophets tormented them
that dwelt upon the earth. But after three days and an half when the Spirit
of life from God should enter into them, and they stand upon their feet, great
fear should fall upon them which saw them. And a voice shall be heard from
heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither. And they shall ascend up to heaven in
a cloud, and their enemies shall behold them: But certainly when that comes to
pass, the same hour there shall be an Earthquake, and the tenth part of the
City shall fall. This City undoubtedly is Rome, which Master Mede proves
curiously to be at this day precisely the tenth part of the City of Rome, as
it was in Saint John's days when this prophecy came forth: and in the
Earthquakes shall be slain of men (of names of men) seven thousand; which
Master Mede interprets men of quality.

It follows, The second Woe is past; Now that Woe was the plague of the
Christian world by the Turks: whereby is signified the destruction of the
Turks, which people I take to be all one with Gog and Magog in Ezekiel,
represented there as the great enemies of the Jews invading the land of
Jewrie. And the Hebrew doctors conceave that war of Gog and Magog to be yet
to come.

Here it may be objected, that the Turk is Lord of the land of Canaan already:
I grant it, but when the time shall come for the calling of the Jews, which
Master Mede conceaved should be wrought in a strange manner, by the appearing
of Christ unto them, as he appeared unto Paul at his conversion: Saint Paul
acknowledging that grace to have been showed to him first, implying, that the
like grace should be showed to others after him. Then I say, upon this their
conversion, they shall gather themselves together from all places toward the
land of Canaan, where shall be the place of Christ's throne in his glorious
kingdom here on earth: upon which coming of the Jews into the land of Canaan,
the Grand Seignior will be moved to raise all his power gathered together out
of all Nations under him to oppose them, and at first shall prevail, as we
read, Ezekiel 28. and Zachariah 14. in the beginning: but in the issue the
Jews shall prevail. For Saviors shall come up on Mount SION, and the
Kingdom shall be the Lords, Obadiah 21. Thither shall the Lord cause his
Mighty ones to come down. Let the Heathen be awakened, and come up to the
valley of Iehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judge all the Heath^n round
about, Joel 3. 11, 12. And the Lord shall be King over all the earth, in that
day shall there be one Lord, and his Name One, Zachariah 14. 9. So that this
implies the calling of the Jews a little before. And whereas both Gog and
Magog, shall be destoyed by fire, Ezechiel 39. and the Man of sin by fire, 2.
Thessalonians 2. Master Mede was of opinion that all this is but one and the
same fire, even the fire that shall be at Christ's coming, 2. Thessalonians 1.
8. and 2. 8. Then follows the second Resurrection of the dead, and Christ's
Kingdom, the contents of the seventh Trumpet, Revelation 11. 15. Even so come
Lord Jesus, Come quickly.

William Twisse.

The Translator, to the Reader.
GOD at sundry times, and in diverse manners, Heb. 1. 1, 2
spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets. He has spoken unto us in
these last days by his SON, by whom not only the Gospel of Salvation is
communicated unto us: but also the revelation of future events, to Revel. 1.1.
fall out in this last age of the world, to be showed to his servants,
signified by his Angels unto John one of his Witnesses and Apostles, most
necessary for our knowledge, as appears by the Blessing pronounced to him
that reads, and them that Revel. 1.5
hear the words of the Prophecy, and keep those things which are written
therein: For the time was then at hand, when some of them should fall out, and
all in their several seasons foreset. The obscuritis of this (as of all other
Prophecies) until the event should manifest them, has discouraged many in
bestowing their time to read and meditate therein; not considering that the
Almighty Lord (who having the abundance of Spirit, Matthew. 13. 34.
could have set forth all things easy to the understanding of the simplest)
has so disposed his Treasures, that by prayer and diligence men might be
enabled through the guidance of the Spirit to attain unto them, and so have
them in greater estimation. Many learned men have written Expositions of parts
of this Revelation, some of the whole: amongst them, I fell upon this learned
Commentary of Master Medes, with the Apocalyptique Key before it. The
Exposition and Method so pleased me (though the phrase were something
difficult) that to make the better impression of it in my memory, I undertook
to translate it, and did finish it long since. I communicated it with some
friends, and subjected it to their correction: hence it comes to pass (by
their desire) that it is made public. I humbly crave pardon, if my ill
expression has detracted from the Authors learned labor. I confess I have
followed the Latin phrase so near, that howsoever the true sense may be
expressed, yet there wants the English eleganc^e: and (if I mistake not) the
Author himself has so many Hebraismes and Graecismes, as make the Latin more
crabbed and less intelligible: but in my poor opinion, none has more
accurately and deeply searched and found the sense of those obscure places of
Scripture, which he has handled in this and other his writings. It were to be
wished that his intended larger Commentary, which I am persuaded he has
written, and purposed to put forth, as he promised at the end of the 14th
chapter, had not been hindered, as I find by some of his letters they were.
That opinion (the pretended cause of restraint of his further progress)
concerning the 1000 years R^igne of Christ, grounded upon the 20th chapter of
the Revelation, with the authorities and reasons for the same, howsoever it be
not received by many as Orthodox, yet is delivered with that moderation and
subjection to the censure of the Church, that it can displease no man; nor is
it (for ought I can see) contrary to the Analogy of Faith; and may be useful
for the conversion of the Jews, who though they expected Christ his coming at
that very time, yet were offended at his not taking upon him the Regal
authority; his time for that being not then come. For mine own use also I made
a Compendium of the whole Commentary, and have in the Margent thereof set down
the chapters and verses, out of which the several matters are taken, that by
turning thither the larger Exposition may be seen: this also was thought fit to
be added at the lat^er end of the work.

Whilst this was at the Press, and the plate for the Scheme in the
Apocalyptique Key under the hand of the Sculpter there came thither Master
Haydock a learned Gentleman, who enquiring after me, was pleased to come unto
me, and acquainted me with some passages by Letters betwixt himself and
Master Mede, touching the Seven sealed book and the figure thereof, wishing it
might be expressed in another form: which (considering I was but the
Translator of his book, who no doubt is with God) I could not yield unto: yet
gave way, that what he desired might be added, with distinction betwixt them,
and printing so much of Master Mede his letter as concerned the reason of the
alteration of the form of that book, the matter in substance not differing.
This is the cause why you may discern a difference betwixt the Scheme in
Master Medes Latin, and this Translation of it into English: the extract of
which Letter turned out of Latin into English by Master Haydock himself,
follows in these words, viz.

The observation of your Seal-bearing Sylinder, is most ingenious, and such as
never entered into my thoughts before, although I often beat and hammered upon
it. Nay, I rather doubted, whether any such form of volume might be given,
wherein the opening of each several Seal, might in order represent to the eye
of the Reader a new inscription.

Now as for the matter it self therein comprised, I rest altogether uncertain
what to determine, sometimes I was of opinion, that those visions concerning
the Seals were not written by Characters in letters, but being painted by
certain shapes, lay hid under some covers of the Seals; which being opened,
each of them in its order, appeared not to be read, but to be beheld and
viewed; and according to this apprehension, those words of John (...), Come and
see, seem not unfitly to agree.

Afterward I considered, that this conceit of mine agreed not generally with
all the Apocalypticall narration, insomuch as in the fifth and sixth Seals the
speech is directed to the thing seen. Besides, I observe that in the seventh
Seal, the visions of the Trumpets are not delivered together, and at the same
time, but produced unto the sight in order, and succeffively. Moreover, that
the preparation going before the sound; is so described, that it must be
confessed, that the thing was performed in the naked descriptions of the things
seen in the volume (which way soever described) nay, nor yet in the simple
writing, but altogether in foreign representation.

At the length therefore (because it seemed too unseemly a thing to affirm,
that the thing was performed by a mere outward representation, the book
conferring nothing thereunto; I fell into the opinion, that both were to be
joined together, and that we must say, that indeed the Prophecies were
described and pourtrayed in the Volume, whether by signs and shapes, or
letters; but that these were no otherwise exhibited to John and other beholders
of this celestial Theater, then by a foreign representation, supplying the
room of a reherfall, not much unlike to our Academical^ interludes, where the
prompters stand near the Actors, with their books in their hands, whereas then
neither the Lamb himself could recite any thing out of the book, neither did
the Apostle stand so near (for the Lamb stood near to him that sat on the
Throne) that he might read out of the hand of him who opened the Seals, it
must needs be, that he apprehended all these after the manner as I have said.

Now Sir, it is merely your humanity which has moved me to express these my
cogitations to you. And so I conclude; praying that Almighty God may be
pleased to afford you an happy old age with a longer extent of life, which may
prove the forerunner of that Blessed one.

From Christ's College, Ian. An. 1634. The true esteemer of your self and your
studies, Joseph Mede.


Thus much of this letter I insert here, as it was received from Master
Haydock, whom it has pleased God lately to take out of this life.

He purposed also to have given the motives and reasons of his alteration of
the form of the seven sealed book, which in effect were these. 1. The ancient
form of Books was in several sheets of Parchment, fastened at one end only, and
so rolled up together, as appears by the texts, Heb. 10. 7. In the Volume a
Vol^end^^
volume of thy Book it is written of me, etc. cited out of Psalm. 40. 7. which
in many translations is In the rolls of thy Book: so that we may be confident
that the same kind of Book was meant which was then most, if not wholly in
use. 2ly The form of the seven-sealed Book, ought to be such as might satisfy
the Lambs intention, which had an eye unto Prius and Posterius, in regard of
the sequel of the ensuing History: for that part which belongs to the first
Seal ought to be viewed before the second or the rest be opened: whereas in
the form of the Modern Books, until all the seven Seals be opened, no use can
be made of any part or leaf in the book. But in the form of the roll, when
every leaf has its several labell inserted in its proper distance, with a
Seal and several impression of Emblimaticall signiture, each several leaf
being taken and unsealed in order, the several matter therein contained will
appear, and no more of any of the rest till they be opened in order.

Had Master Haydock lived this had been more exactly performed by his pen. I
have for the satisfaction of the Reader, extracted these things out of his
papers: if this translation (at first purposed only for mine own benefit) shall
be useful to others, let those have the thanks that have called it forth to
the Press, which though the Book it self be of high estimation yet this
translation was never designed to public view by The Translator

RICH. MORE.

To the courteous Reader.
IN the s^^mer part of this Book some sheets fell under the hands of an
unskilful Compositer, and an unfaithful Corr^cter, wherein such faults as do
not pervert the sense, are left to the ingenuitte of the Reader, such as these
[Seale for Seales] [the for they] [glasse for glassie] [what for which]
[Hypocrocy foe Hypocrisie] Also take notice that from Page 33. to 63. these
references, Chap. 4. Chap. 5. Chap. 6. again from Page 96. te 120. Chap. 9.
are confusedly placed: which ought to be only at the top of those Pages, and
where certa^n^ words of Hebrew, Greek^, and Lat^ne, are occasionally cited in
the margin to justify the translation, those words are sometimes above, some
times below their due place, in like manner some quotatiou^ of Scripture in the
Margin are misplaced, as for instance, in Page 35. Ezechias 1. 10. Exodus 24.19.
which refer to the 38. line of that Page. These will be easily manded by an
intelligent Reader.

But these following Errata require amendment, as too much interrupting the
Reader, and obscuring the sense.
Page 11. L^ne 16. Errata for fa^ read further. p. 34. l. 5. blot out the word
[those] p. 41. l. 3. for vanished r. vanquished. p 42. b 9. for sense r.
sentence. p. 44. l. 17. for Tyrus r. T^tus. p. 45. l. 7. for the ^. put out the
Id. 22. r. for what con^equence has. p. 48. l. 31. for nation r. notion p. 49.
l. 27. read Busiris Phalar^. p. 56. l. 19. for But it r. But yet. Id. 33. for
2. Kings 28. r. 2. Kings 18 p. 59. l. 13. r. agree but to that. Id. l. 31. for
which r. what. p 60. l. 2. for throw r. thrown. p. 61. l 26. for soldiers r.
shoulders. p. 64. l. 23. for pull r. puszle. Id. l. 24. for their r. in their.
p. 69. l. 5. for preferred r. preserved. p. 89. l. 32. for bloody r. blood or
bloody. Id. l. 39. r. the meaning is the Roman. p. 99. l. 17. for Glanisme r.
Islamis^e. l. 35. for Natotia read Natolia. l. 37. for when r. whence. p. 101.
l. 3. O horrible p. 102. l. 12. for was not given r. was given l. 27. for
petition r. repetition. l. 34 for propogation r. prepara^ion. p. 105. l. 16.
for noble r. notable. l. 18. for Apaside r. Abasida l. 31. read since before
the principality of the Abasid^. p. 109. l. 4. for sterdion r. direction. l.
11. for vanished r. vanquished. l. 12. in margin r. Argona^ta. l. 22. r.
Sedyduddaulas. l. 34. for the citier. the royal city. p. 112. l. 17. for
breaking of r. breaking in of. p. 113. l. ^. for as in the yec^^ r. as the
y^ere. p. 114. l. 20. for be understood r. But is to be understood. p. 115 l. 4
for di^pose r. disuse. p. 119 l. 32. for Baal^s of all r. Baales of Baal. p.
120. l. 34 for deterred r deferred. p. 121. l. 21 for temporary r.
contemporarie.

Page Line Errata Corrigenda 36 34 (...) (...) 50 26 (...) (...) 73 23 (...)
this word should be the last word, Amos 9 12.
73 26 (...) this word should be the first word 77 29 ^he Hebrew words are
misplaced, rectify them by the Hebrew Text, Esaias 9.1.2. whence they are ^ited.
78 09 (...) begins it should end the sentence: 81 34 35 (...) (...) 99 31
(...) (...) 106 27 (...) (...) 108 16 (...) (...) 108 19 (...) (...) 108 20
(...) (...) 115 34 (...) (...) 115 35 (...) (...) 119 09 (...) (...) 110 11
(...) (...) 120 17 (...) (...)

The Key of the Revelation:
OR The Synchronisme and order of the prophecies of the Revelation according as
the things were to be accomplished, resting on no supposed interpretation, (as
of a ground laid) or fore-judgeing of the falling out of actions; but firmly
demonstrated out of the very characters of the visions inserted by the Spirit
of God of set purpose, and accordingly in a clear Scheme presented to view;
that it may be as a sure guide to those that are conversant in this holy
Labyrinth, and a Touchstone for the ^inding out of the true interpretation,
and disproving of the false.
Things to be fore-knowne.
1. BY a Synchronisme of prophecies I mean, when the things therein designed
run along in the ^ame time; as if thou should call it an agreement in time
or age: because prophecies of things falling out in the same time run on in
time together, or Synchronize. (...)


2. The order of the Seals, and in them of the Trumpets, is certain and
undoubted (to wit) the same which the number to every one ascribed does point
out, I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. The rest therefore of the prophesies being
compared first between themselves, afterward with the Seals by the way of
Synchronisme, the order of the whole Revelation will be clearly manifest: the
(...)
thing which now by Gods help we go about to show.

Thou who sit upon the throne, And thou O Lamb root of David, who wast
only worthy to take and open this book; open the eyes of thy servant, and
direct his hand and mind, that in these thy mysteries he may discern and
produce something, which may tend to the glory of thy Name and profit of the
Church.

The first part.
The first Synchronisme. Of the Woman remaining in the wilderness. Of the
sevenheaded Chap. 1^. Chap. 1^. Chap. 11. Chap 11.
Beast restored. Of the outer court trodden under foot by the Gentiles. Of the
Witnesses in the mean time prophesying in sackcloth
Here I begin, and my first Synchronisme shall be of that noble Quaternion of
Prophecies, which are very remarkable by reason of the equality of their
times; 1. Of the woman remaining in the wilderness for a time, times, and
half a time; or as there it is ^ore manifestly declared, 1260. days. 2. Of
the sevenheaded Beast restored, and ruling 42. months. 3. Of the outer court
(or of the holy City) so many months trodden under foot by the Gentiles. 4.
And last of the witnesses prophesying in sackcloth 1260. days.

The truth of this Synchronisme is almost granted, and seems that both it
may, and also usually is avouched upon this ground, because of the equality it
self of their times: for a time, times, and half a time, that is, three
years and an half (as it appears by comparing the 6. and 14. verses of the
12. chap.) make 42. months, and 42. months 1260. days.

But because it is not necessary (howsoever it be very likely in visions showed
the same time) that aequall times should be also (...)
the same times, since aequality hinders not but that some may be before,
some after others: therefore that character of aequality of times will not be
sufficient to convince one that is perverse. Wherefore I will get me caracters
else where, out of which by ^leare and evident demonstration I thus make good
the point.

The Synchronisme of the Beast and the woman. Chap. 1^.

The times of the Beast and of the woman dwelling in the wilderness begin at
the very same instant of time, to wit, the conquest of the red Dragon, and the
thrusting him down into the earth: therefore, since the said times are of
aequall continuance, it must of necessity follow that they did concur in the
whole in termediate space of time, and likewise at length end their course
together.

That the times of either of them do commence from the same beginning or term,
is manifest out of the 12. chap. for when as the dragon is cast down by
Michael, then the woman escapes from his presence into the wilderness [ver. 6
and 14.] The Dragon being angry, that he had in vain attempted to destroy her
now entering thither [in the 15, 16, and 17. ver.] he went to make war with the
rest of her seed (to wit, those which she should bring forth in the
wilderness, verse. 17. For without doubt it is to be read with all the latin
translations, the greeks of Aldus an. 1518. and the Syriaque Interpreter (who
out of the greek turns it) et ste^tit, and he stood, not as at this day the
greek copies have it, et ste^i, and I stood.
And standing upon the sea sand, [vers. 18.] To the ten horned Beast thence
ascending [chap. 13.1. he gave his power, and his throne, and great authority;
there verse 2.

Chap. 11. The Synchronisme of the Beast, and the prophecy of the witnesses.
The times of the Beast and of the prophecy of the witness being likewise
aequall, are finished together at the end of the sixth trumpet: therefore it is
manifest that they also begun together, and through the whole space between
did Synchronize.

Now that the times both of the Beast, and of the witnesses of God, prophesying
in sackcloth, ended together with the end of the sixth trumpet that also
appears out of the 14. ver. of the 11. Chap. where as well the ascension of
the witnesses into heaven (which is the period of their mourning prophecy, as
that great earthquake (wherewith the Imperial citi^ being overthrown, the
kingdom of the Beast was abolished) is marked out by the moment wherein the
second woe (which is the sixth trumpet) went out, and the third woe (or seventh
trumpet) should forth with ensue for in that moment of time the witnesses (whom
the Beast which had ascended out of the bottomless pit had slain, being even
ready to finish their testimony in sackcloth (for this when they s^all finish.
is meant by (...)) reviving by God ascended up into heaven [verse 7. 11. 12.]
and the tenth part of the city fell by (...)
means of the great earthquake the same hour [ver. 13.] and the matter came
to that pass, that the 7. trumpet sounding, all the Kingdoms of the world
became our Lords and his Christ, verse 15.

The Synch. of the Witnesses and of the Court (or holy city) Chap 11.
possessed by the Gentiles.
That the times of the Witnesses, and of the Court (or holy city) possessed by
the Gentiles do contemporize, it appears as well by the meaning of the text,
Chap. 11. v. 2, 3. as also by the wrath of the Gentiles now cast out, in the
beginning of the seventh Trumpet; that is, from the end of the sixth, when also
the days of the witnesses shall end, as it has already been manifested, for
the Gentiles which in the 18. verse are said to be enraged at the found of the
seventh Trumpet, are the very same which hitherto by the space of forty two
months, had trodden underfoot the court of the outer. Temple (that is, the holy
city) and which now therefore come to be destroyed by the wrath of God. And
surely this Synchronisme is called into question by none, to my knowledge or
remembrance.

The Synch. of the Witnesses, of the Court, of the Beast, Chap. 11, and 12. and
1^.
and of the Woman.
If the treading under foot of the court and holy city did agree ^n time with
the prophecy of the Witnesses; it will agree in time also with the Beast, with
which the Witnesses agreed in time; and therefore also with the Woman in the
wilderness, to which the Beast agreed in time. So the Woman in the wilderness,
the dominion of the Beast, the treading of the holy city under foot, and the
prophecy of the witnesses, do synchronize each with other.

The second Synchronisme. Of the two borned beast (who is also the false
prophet) Chap. 13.
with the ten horned Beast (which is also called the Image of the Beast.
For the two horned Beast is the founder, or erector of that seven headed
Beast, wearing crowns upon his ten horns; which after his deadly wound, to
the great hurt of the Saints he anew restored according to the image of a
certain former estate wherein he was to rule full 42. months, chap. 13. v. 3,
5, 12, 14, 15. which being done, he does exercise all his power in his
presence; and also does show (or work) great wonders in his sight, verse 12,
13. and chap. 19. verse 20. At length this very same two horned Beast (which
John calls elsewhere the false prophet) together with that other Beast, in
whose presence he had done the wonders, as inseparable companions are taken,
and both cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone, Chap. 19. v.
20. when therefore the ten horned Beast (give me leave, for plainness so to
call the seven headed Beast restored) and the two horned false prophet are not
separated one from the other, either in their rising, or in their ruin;
Moreover, whereas the one excrciseth the power of the other (...), that is, in
his presence, who sees not that they necessarily contemporize through their
whole time? But that the whole matter may be rightly perceived, it is to be
understood, that there is no other state of the seven headed Beast described,
cha 13. then that of the instauration, or of the last head, which was ten
horned; that which the whole order of the description does make evident. For
whatsoever evil the Beast is said to have committed, whatsoever worship or
adoration is given unto him by the inhabitants of the earth, all that is said
to be done after his instauration, or healing of his wound. Furthermore, that
the ten horns do belong to the last head or state of the Beast (which is the
state of his ^stauration) is manifest by the interpr^tation of the Angel. Chap.
17. For there when five heads had fallen, that is, had fulfilled their, Verse
10.
courses, and the fixed even then in John's time was in being; yet the time of
the horns is said not to be as yet come. Therefore of necessity it must
belong unto the seventh or last head.

An apendix concerning the mutual interchanging of the names of the Beast and
the fal^e prophet; likewise of the Beast and the image of the Beast.
For of both these the title of the Synchronisme did admonish, and first, that
the two horned Beast, and the false prophet be the same, Iren^us, one amongst
the most ancient interpreters of the Apocalypse has observed. Which by the
comparing of the 13. 14, 15, and 16, verses of the 13. chap. with the 20. verse
of the 19. Chap. is so clear and manifest that it needs no further proof.

But that which the title further seems to intimate, that the ten horned
Beast is wont also to be called by the name of the image of the Beast, that is
not so evident, and which the reader except very attentive, will scarce at all
perceive. But that the same is so, I think that I have observed upon good
ground; and therefore, wheresoever the Beast and the false prophet are
mentioned together (which I find three times) there by the surname of the
Beast, is understood no other then the ten horned beast; when by the false
prophet, it is evident there is meant the two horned. Contrarily, where with
the Beast thou see coupled the image of the Beast [as chap. 14. ver. 9.11.
chap. 15. ver. 2. chap. 16. ver. 2. chap. 19 ver. 20. and chap. 20. ver. 4.]
there by the Beast is to be understood the false prophet; and by his image the
ten horned Beast, or the seven headed restored: for this Beast seeing he
acknowledges the false prophet to be his restorer, and that he suffers
himself to be guided by the will of him, as of his supreme Lord [chap. 13.
verse 12, 14, 15.] he is not without cause called his image; not whose
similitude he represents, the genitive being passively taken (for in that
respect he is the Image of another, happily of the seven headed dragon, or of
the state in in which he flourished before the wound, according to whose
example he does afresh blaspheme God, and make war against the Saints) but
that image which that two horned Beast speaking like the Dragon did restore and
challenges for his own, the genitive, to wit, signifying the Agent or
Posseslor; even as in the self-same places that is not the mark of the Beast,
which is stamped upon the Beast himself, but wherewith that same Beast does
brand those that worship him.

And that it is so, as I have said, concerning the image of the Beast, that
which is said in the 13. chap. Verse 15. is for an argument in the first place,
that that very image of the Beast, which the false prophet did give life unto,
did cause that whosoever shall not worship the image of the Beast should be
slain; likewise else where (that thou may know him to be the Beast) he is
almost ever put after a verb which signifies to adore, as an object of worship:
when as therefore the Apocalypse does pourtray only two and no more Beasts;
this so wicked a majesty with like power either of commanding or compelling,
cannot but agree to either of them. Furthermore, where the Beast is present
together with the false prophet, the image of the Beast in the same
construction of words is not to be found, as if there the appellation of the
Beast should serve the turn.

To conclude, of that self-same is the image of the Beast said to be, of whom
is the name and number, chap. 15.2. But the name and number seem not to be
called the name and number of any other beast chap. 13. then of the two horned,
therefore it is like that he is also called the image of him (as of his
principal founder or chief Lord.) But this image, whether it be, or be not
that ten horned Beast, it nothing hinders our purpose: for the Synchronisme
of the Beasts is not built upon this foundation.

The third Synchronisme. Of the great harlot or mystical Babylon with that
same seven headed Beast ten horned. Chap. ^^.

1 The time of the Beast is the time of the desert [Synch. 1. ^ 1.] and the
harlot is seen of John in the desert, chap. 17. verse 3. 4. but this mark
does not much enforce.

2 The ten horned Beast carries the harlot, or if you had rather so call her
the whore, and the harlot sits upon the beast: Machatricem
therefore they are both of one and the same time, verse 3.7.

3 The ten horns of the Beast (with which his last and newest head is branched
[marke it well] under the courses of which alone (in which likewise it revived
after its deadly wound, the courses of the first heads being now before
fulfilled, the harlot does ride the Beast, and the Beast does bear the
harlot:) these ten horns, I say, are ten Kings, who take their authority as
Kings at one hour with the Beast, to wit, with that Beast which was restored,
and di bear the whore, and now was become ten horned, that is, exercising the
course of the last head. These, the time being fulfilled wherein they should
deliver their authority to the Beast, [ver. 13.17.] that is, when the frame
and body of the Beast came to be dissolved, they hate the harlot, and make her
desolate and naked, and at length burn her with fire, [ver. 16.] So therefore
the Beast, which in the state of ten horns (in which only John did
prophetically consider her) first began with the harlot, that is, with the
whore, and shall not survive the harlot, nor the harlot him: therefore, the
harlot and that Beast do synchronize universally and exactly, which was the
thing to be proved. (...)


The Fourth Synchronisme. Of the 144000. sealed: being virgins, with the Chap.
14 Chap. 17.
who^e of Babylon and the Beast.
1 For first they are called Virgins, and for that commended, that they had not
defiled themselves with harlots, Chap. 14. ver. 4. Therefore they fall into the
adulterous times of the whore of Babylon, with whom the Kings and inhabitants
of the earth commit fornication, Chap. 17. verse 2. and 18. 3.

2 Out of this company of Virgins proceed those which denounce the ruin of
Babylon, [Verse 8. of the same 14. Chap.] and who do deter men from all
communion with the Beast, or his Image, or his Mark: therefore this company of
Virgins does contemporize with Babylon and the Beast.

3 To conclude, these are those called, chosen, and faithful followers of the
Lamb, Verse 4 of the said Chap. with whom being accompanied Chap. 17. v. 14.
he makes war with Kings or the horns of the Babylonian Beast; and who by
conduct of him (as being King of Kings and Lord of Lords) shall at length get
the victory (in the same verse) for those words, Lord of Lords and King of
Kings, I think ought to be read by a parenthesis: where the Angel says, these
shall fight with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them (because he is
Lord of Lords and King of Kings) and they that are with him called Elect, and
faithful: that is the Lamb and who are with him called, elect, and Faithful,
shall overcome the ten Kings supporting Babylon.

4 But these things suffice not to make the contemporation a full and entire
contemporation, for they may all consist even with a contemporation but in
part. I thus therefore demonstrate the company of the sealed of the Lamb
wholly and exactly to contemporize with the Beast, That company of the sealed,
being an opposite with the Beast, or of the whole company of the (...)
followers of the Beast, is of the same time with them: to wit, the bands of
the holy soldiers, even then persevering in their alleagiance to the Lamb,
when other inhabitants of the world as revolters and Apostates had taken the
mark of the Beast.

It is plain out of the text, whence as in times past according to the ancient
custom, servants and soldiers were wont to be branded and marked, with the
name of him to whom they had given their Faith: even so these are showed to
bear the name of the Lamb and of his Father in their foreheads.

Since this is so, it follows, that either holds equal proportion with
other, and altogether answer in a like distance of time. For the state of such
opposition does require, that the company of the Sealed of the Lamb, for as
much as is intended by that vision, be wholly esteemed of an opposite estate of
the Beast: For besides such opposition it has no estate by the meaning of this
vision, and therefore with the same beginning begins, and ending ends.

5 Furthermore concerning the final contemporation, that also may be proved by
that mark out of the 7. Chapter. Because the period of both, as well of the
tyranny of the Beast, as of that company of the sealed, is the multitude of the
palmebearers: of the Beast, because it is there said of the palm-bearers: These
are they which came out of great tribulation, but out of what tribulation,
except of the Beast persecuting the Saints? Therefore they leave the tyranny of
the Beast behind them: of the company of the sealed; because the multitude of
the palm-bearers immediately follow, as by that transition ((...) after Chap.
7. 1.
these things I saw) is manifest.

5. A Consectarie of the general Synchronisme of all hitherto mentioned.
So the Beast restored to life again or the ten horned, has contemporized with
the woman in the wilderness, the treading under foot the holy City, and the
witnesses in the mean time mourning in sackcloth, Synch. 1. The two horned
Beast, with the ten horned Beast, Synch 2. The whore with both, Synch. 3. The
company of the virgins sealed, with the whore and the Beast, Synch. 4.
Therefore all Synchronize with all.

The sixth Synchronisme. Of the inward court measured with the reed of God, of
the lying in wait and the battle of the seven headed Dragon with (...)
Michael concerning the childbirth.
For they are the immediate antecedents of those things which formerly were
showed to be contemporaries: the battle of the Dragon, and the childbirth of
the woman, of the habitation of the woman in the desert, and of the ten horned
Beast; the inner court (for that which is said concerning the temple of God,
the (...).
altar and the priests worshipping there according to custom, is the
Periphrasis thereof) of the outer court or people, where the Gentiles without
right or reason are said to be harbored.

For first both of them, as well the childbirth of the woman, as the battle
of the Dragon with Michael, does altogether pitch upon the same period, that
is, the flight of the woman into the wilderness; which is said immediately to
have followed the design of them both. For the woman, as soon as she had
brought forth flies into the wilderness, there to be nourished 1260 days,
chap. 12. verse 6. Likewise the Dragon being thrown down, the woman flies
into the wilderness, there to be nourished from the presence of the Serpent, or
Dragon for a time, times, and half a time, ver. 13, 14 wherefore the title of
the Synchronisme does cast both these as you see, into one time, as it were
visions of the same time, and altogether of the same thing, and which there was
no such need to sever in this matter.

Furthermore that same duel, wherein Michael overcame the Dragon, did go next
before the seven headed revived or ten horned Beast: for the Dragon forthwith
as soon as he was thrown down unto the earth, standing upon the sea sand
for the time to come, delivers his place, that is, his power, throne, and
great authority, to the Beast rising up thence; and (as the Complutense
edition which Irenaeus has it) one of his heads as it were slain to death;
whose wound being healed, the whole Lib. 5 (...) an^ the text in ^he (...) with
(...) asse^^^h to this reading; as also the Syriaque interpreter which is
lately set forth, yea among the ^a^^e (...). Pri^as^^ does not read that word
(vidi I saw) although he take it so by adding the (...) was.) This deceived ^im
that in latin (one of the heads, etc.) concerning the case is (...) the Greek.
world wondering followed the Beast, chap. 13. verse 1, 2, 3.

And thus far the matter is plain and clear: but the antecession of the inner
court to the outward court (which is the only thing that remains to perfect
this Synchronisme) is a little harder task to prove, because the matter is
otherwise taken, and therefore hindered with prejudice; yet thus I show it. The
inner court, according to the building of the temple, in situation and order is
before the outer court being nearest to the thro^e of God or the temple (which
was the principal part of the whole structure.) (...)
Therefore if the things signified be of diverse times (for it is no new thing,
that the order of situation should express the order of time, as it is to be
seen in the Statua in Nebuchadnezzars dream:) surely it is agreeable to reason,
that the thing signified by the inner court should be in time before the thing
signified by the outer. But that the things meant by the courts are of diverse
times, and so that which is meant by the inner court more ancient and before
the other. I thus far demonstrate, because this vision of the measuring of
the court of the temple and altar, or the inner court, is the beginning to the
prophecy repeated; which (as anon more at large shall be showed) does from the
original and very first beginning rehearse the times of the prophecy of the
seals, the beginning whereof no man doubts to be fetched from the very Epoche
of the time of the Revelation. Thou must (says he) prophecy again (for so he
expounds the mystery of the eaten book) to many people, nations, tongues,
and kings. (...) Again, that is to say, the order of times, concerning which he
had prophesied before being repeated. For he begins from that measuring of
the temple and altar, and them that worshipped therein. If therefore the vision
of the woman bringing forth the child and the war of the Dragon (which is part
of this repeated prophecy) do ascend to the very head of the period, or time
of the Revelation, so that the Revelation has nothing more ancient then it, or
which deriveth its original higher (which will be manifest as well out of the
nature of the thing it self which is a birth, as also out of the Synchronismes
hitherto demonstrated, and hereafter to be demonstrated:) why should not much
rather the beginning of the same prophecy, and the first vision of all the
rest be thought to ascend thither? But the months of the outer court cannot
ascend thither; as which wholly have contemporized with the ten horned Beast.
Therefore to me it is most clear that the times of the * Inner Court (...).
Chap. 11. verse 1. (...) verse 2. of the same chapter.
measured, do not only go before the months of the * outer unmeasured, but
also ought to be derived from the original of the repeated prophecy, together
with the vision of the childbirth, and dragon.

Now that these three, the habitation of the woman in the wildernes^e, the ten
horned be^st, and the treading under foot of the outer court by the Gentiles
are contemporaries, it appears out of the first Synchronisme: therefore the
times of the measuring of the inner court, and the childbirth of the woman,
together with the lying in wait of the dragon, and the battle with Michae^,
are the immediate antecedents of contemporaries, and consequently, they
themselves cannot but contemporize each with other; * the very point I was to
demonstrate. (...).


The 7th Synchronisme. Of the seave^ Phialls, and of the Beast, and of Babyl^n
inclining Chap. 6.
to ruin.
The effusion of the Phialls brings the ruin and destruction of the Beast,
as out of the text it self is manifest, for the conquerours of the Beast sing
the * triumphant song of Moses, chap. 15. (...).
verse 2. 3. And it is moreover specially manifest concerning the first Phiall
[chap. 16. verse 2.] which inflicteth a grievous ^ore upon men, having the m^rk
of the Beast, and those that worship his image: concerning the first Phiall
[verse 10.] which is poured upon the throne of the Beast, and makes his
kingdom dark. And likewise concerning the last, which being poured out;
Babylon is utterly destroyed, verse. 19. Therefore the pourings out of the
Phials does contemporize with the ending of the Beast and Babylon.

The other part.
I Have gone through the first part in seven Synchronismes; the other part of
the seals follows, wherein I shall demonstrate the connection of all the
foresaid prophecies (and if there be any other also) with the seals, in so
many other Synchronismes. Whence it will plainly appear (a thing most worthy
observation, and of no small moment to the interpreter, unless I be deceived)
that the whole Revelation from the fourth chapter: (For I now meddle not with
the seven Churches) is distributed into two principal prophecies, either of
which proceeds from the same time, and ends in the same period. The first
is of the seal, and Apo^ha.
in them of the trumpets; for the seventh seal is the seal of the trumpets,
which I take for granted every where out of the grammatical sense of the
context: neither is the same order of meaning which is held in all the rest of
the seals, to be thought not to agree to the seventh alone: as that that
vision which follows the opening of the seal should be the matter of the
seal. Now (...).
the vision of the seven Angels with the seven trumpets succeeds the opening
of the seventh: the other prophecy (or rather body Syst^ma.
of prophetical visions) is (...) or of the little book opened, which
beginning at the same instant of the Apocalyptique time, ^epeateth the time of
the former prophecy which is of the seals, from the eight verse of the tenth
chapter, unto the end of the book: And that this is a repetition of the
prophecy is showed by that transition verse 11. of the same ch^pter, where the
Angel says to John, thou must again (...). prophecy to many people, and
Nations and tongues, and Kings. Furthermore reader, that also perhaps shall not
be unworthy thy observation, that the several beginnings, as well of both
these, as also of the first vision of all concerning the seven Churches, as of
three entire pr^phecies are proclaimed with a voice as of a trumpet from heaven
speaking with John, as if the holy Ghost by this note would distinguish them
from the rest of the prophecies, which are parts of these maine principles, in
which (partial prophecies) you will see no such thing to be.

Now these are the beginnings of the prophecies; of which I admonish, of the
vision of the seven Churches, chap 1. 10. in these words: And I was in the
spirit upon the Lords day, and I heard a great voice behind me as of a
trumpet, saying, etc. of the prophecy of the seals also, chap. 4. verse 1. on
this wi^e: And the first voice which I heard as of a trumpet speaking to me,
said, etc. of the prophecy of the book opened last of all, chap. 10. verse. 8.
And the voice which I heard from heaven (to wit, as of a trumpet speaking)
spoke again unto me, and said, etc. Hitherto has been the Prologue, and that
as I ho^e not inpertinent to the matter we have in hand. The Synchronismes now
follow.

I. The principal Synchronisme. OR The Synchronisme. Of the seventh seal
which as touching the six first trrmpets, is Chap. ^
of the same time with the ten horned, and two horned Beasts, and the rest
contemporizing.
For first the beginning of the Beast does contemporiz^, with the beginning of
the seventh seal, which is of the trumpets,
For, since the company of the sealed, being as it were opposite to the Beast
reigning, must therefore justly and exactly contemporize with the Beast; and
since the same company of the sealed begins with the beginning of the
seventh seal, or seal of the trumpets: it follows altogether that the Beast
likewise begins with the same seventh seal, or the seal of the trumpets.

Now therefore that the company of the sealed entirely and exactly
contemporizeth with the Beast, it has been showed Synch. 4. the first Part.
That the same company of the sealed begin with the seventh seal, is apparent
out of the seventh chapter, where that sealing is subjoyned immediately to the
sixth seal. For the vision of the sixth seal being over when the seventh which
is Chap. 6. 12
of trumpets was now to be opened, provision is made for the sealing of Gods
elect servants, lest they should be destroyed by the great and bitter
calamities which were to fall upon the world (when the four Angels, being set
over the four quarters of the world, shall at the sound of the trumpets, let
loose the winds which hitherto they had restrayed,) for whom also a caveat is
given at the sound of the fi^t trumpet, chap. 9. verse 4. that thou may at
least by that mark know that sealing to belong to the times of the trumpets.
And that the end and going out of the sixth seal is the beginning of the
seventh, is out of all question; since the order of the seals one after
another, neither can, nor ought ^o be interrupted: Therefore it must needs be
that the company of the 144000. sealed, which follows the seal being over,
do begin with the seventh seal which immediately suc^eedeth the said sixth
seal. And so the holy spirit by the mark of this sealing (as I judge) has in
his mavelous council taken order that we might know the connection of the
beast beginning with the beginning of the seventh seal: since no other reason
can be rendered, why the orderly succession of the seals not otherwise to be
interrupted, should be confounded with the interposition of this vision of the
sealed, Chap. 7.

Secondly, the end of the Beast does contemporize with the going out of the
sixth Trumpet.
For since the 1260 days of the witnesses mourning in sackcloth are ended at
the going out of the sixth trumpet, or the beginning of the seventh; it must
needs be that the 42. months of the beast end there also, and by consequence
that the tyranny of the beast is contained within the compass of the six
first trumpets; which was the very point I was to demonstrate.

But that the 42. months of the beast in like manner as the 1260 days of the
mourning of the witnesses their contemporaries, are to be ended at the going
out of the sixth Trumpet, is already demonstrated in the first part Synch. 1..
3. where out of Verse 9, 10, 11, 12
the eleventh chapter is showed, when the witnesses after they had continued
dead three days, being raised to life again, and carried up into heaven had
fulfilled the days of their mourning prophecy; and a great earthquake being
caused the same hour or time, the Verse 13
great City was fallen, and the Beast the cruel enemy of the witnesses Animam
agere^.
by reason of the destruction then to be suffered was at the last cast that
we may know in what time of the seals and trumpets this should happen, the
Spirit has immediately joined the Verse 14.
second woe (that is the sixth trumpet) even then to be past, and the third woe
(to wit the seventh trumpet) to come anon which character, another guide of
this great Synchronisme, I do believe to be inserted in that place even chiefly
to that end that it should be as it were another of the hinges, upon which
this great and universal frame of the open book and prophecy of seals should
be turned. For otherwise both this warning, and the sound of the seventh
trumpet which follows forthwith in right and natural order should have been
placed at the end of the prophecy of seals chap. 10. But the holy spirit
having in that place foreshewed the mystery of the seventh trumpet after the
manner of a Proclamation, lightly only, yet as much as seemed sufficient, to
wit, (that at the sounding thereof, the mystery declared to the prophets,
should Chap. 10.7.
be consummate) he would a little while withhold and defer the sounding
thereof and the express definition of the mystery (and that no doubt not
without some weighty cause: to wit, until a transition being made to the new
prophecy of the open book Chap. 10. from the eight verse to the end] he had
brought up the first vision thereof (the course of the Revelation being
likewise run over) to the lame period. For that I would the Reader should well
observe: in this one vision of the eleventh chapter (as being the first of the
prophecy repeated over again (the most wise spirit runs through, as the
Weaver the warpe with the woofe, the whole space of the prophecy of the seals:
and knitteth the same by the seventh trumpet, as it were with a curious knott,
to (...)
the order of the seals, for direction of the time. But to what end, but that
the other prophecies of the little book being joined by their characters to the
first vision, so fixed and compared with the seals, the whole body of the
repeated prophecy might be aptly conjoined with the seals.

Furthermore, lest that happily should raise any scruple in any, that those
things which are related in the Text, concerning the overthrow of the Beast,
concerning the Fall of the City, and the slaughter of men caused by the
Earthquake, seem not at all that they ought to be understood of the utter
destruction of the beast: I say, that neither is this requisite to that
Synohronisme whereof we have treated, but that they be meant at least
concerning the finishing of his time of authority and reign, which is
determined in 42. months; and which the Synchronisme of the beast and
witnesses being granted, must needs end together with the days of the
witnesses. But that estate of the Beast which yet a little while shall be
remaining (as hence may be gathered) shall be so unlike the former, as is not
to be accounted the same; but also not long after under the seventh Trumpet
utterly to be destroyed and abolished; the Kingdoms of this world becoming
our Lords and his Christ's.

And so this principal Synchronisme being well ground^d, it will be manifest
that the other Synchronismes may be easily derived thence and knitt together
with the s^ales.

The second Synchorisme. Of the inner Court and of the war of the Dragon and
Michael, Chap. 1^.
concerning the birth o^ the child b^ing con^^mporarie Chap 7.
with the first six Seals.
Because they are the next antecedents of the succeeding contemporancies. For
the six first seals are the next antecedents of the seventh. The inner Court
and the contention of M^chael with the Dragon are the next antecedents of the
Beast and the company of 144000. sealed. But now the seventh seal or (which
is all one) the six first trumpets, the company of the sealed, and the Beast,
are contemporaries; as is showed in the former Synchronisme.

The third Synchronism^ Of the Vialls with the sixth trumpet. Chap. 16.
Chap. 9.

The seven Vialls of the last wrath, since they are so many degrees of the
ruin and fall of the Beast [Synchronisme 7. Part 1*] thereupon necessarily
they are to begin with the beginning of the ruin and fall of the Beast. But
the kingdom of the Beast began so much to decay, the sixth trumpet yet
sounding, and proce^ded to that ruin at length, that at the going forth of
that trumpet, there should be an end of that power of 42. months in which it
was given him to bear rule and to overcome the Saints [Synch. 1. of this part.]
But the Beast could not fall to that ruin and fatal calamities before that
the fifth Vial at least should be poured out; for then at length that his seat
was to be shaken, and his kingdom darkened, appears chap. 16. ver. 10.
Therefore five of the Vialls at the least are powered out, before the sixth
trumpet left sounding, and I believe also the sixth for the seventh Vial,
which is the Vial of con^ummation [there verse 17. 18.] does therefore
concur with the beginning of the seventh trumpet, which likewise is the
trumpet of consummation, chap. 10. ver. 6.

The fourth Synchronisme. Of the thousand years of the Dragons or Satan's being
bound with the seventh trumpet, or space from the destruction of the Beast.
Chap. 20.

That this of the binding of Satan may the better be understood; Chap. 11.
that is to be premised before the demonstration that in the text it is said,
that then thereupon Satan is not only cast into the bottomless pit, but there
shut up; and moreover, chap. 20. 3.
that the Angel had sealed it up upon him, that he should no more seduce the
Nations, until the thousand years were consummate: that is, had surely
enclosed him that at no hand he should come forth. For it was the manner of
the Hebrews and neighboring Nations, when they would surely shut and make
fast a door, they sealed it. So the stone put upon the Lions den whereinto
Daniel was cast, king Darius sealed with his ring, and with the ring of his
Lords. Daniel 6. * In the Apocryphal History the servants of Daniel shut the
doors of (...) and D^ag^n, verse 11.
the temple of Bell, and seal it with the kings ring. Likewise the Jews,
Matthew. 27. 66. did shut the Sepulcher of our Savior, or madeit sure by se^ling
the stone, etc. (...): where is to be observed that (...) do mutually expound
themselves. For it is one th^^g to be cast down from heaven, Chap. 12. (which
so many apply to this place) and quite another to be bound, to be shut up in a
bottomless pit, and to be sealed. The first takes not away the liberty of
wandering abroad and doing hurt; but the other by no means suffers to come
out of his prison: yea I dare affirm that none of those things which are
related in the 20th Chapter, do appear in the 12. neither again concerning
that which is rehearsed in the 12. Chapter, is there any word extant in the 20.
so far it is off, that the same thing should be represented in both. Let us
examine it a little: In the 20. Chap there are four things related of the
Dragon. First, that he was apprehended by the Angel which descended from
heaven. Secondly, bound. Thirdly, cast into a bottoml^ss ^pit. Fourthly, that
he was shut up and sealed. But thou shall find none of these in the 12th chap.
Likewise that one thing which is declared in the 12. Chapter. concerning the
casting down of the Dragon from heaven into the earth, of that there is not one
(...)
syllable in th 20th yea, it may plainly be gathered out of the context that
that was not at all then done; for it is said there, that the Angel which did
come to bind the dragon descended from heaven: therefore the dragon was even
then upon the earth. For otherwise wherefore should the Angel descend from
heaven to apprehend him hereupon cha. 12 Michael descended not from heaven, but
in the very heaven he fights hand to hand with the devil. These things thus
premised, let us come to the (...).
demonstration of the Synchronisme.

1. Arg. Under the first six seals the Dragon or Satan was free

For that Satan or the Dragon was not bound, while the six first seals did yet
run their course, appears by this, that during all that space he brussling
with seven heads, and seven Crown^s, fought in heaven with Michael about the
childbirth of the woman, as lately has been showed Synch. 2.

But neither came it to pass in the six first trumpets of the following seal:
for this is the time of the woman in the wilderness, and of the reigning ten
horned Beast as appears out of the first Synchronisme of this part. Surely,
it was far wide that the Dragon should be thought to be bound, while the woman
lived in the wilderness; who being thrown down by Michael from heaven, did
endeavor to drown her in her ^light with the flood of waters which he cast
out of his mouth: and then when this took none effect according to his mind
(the earth swallowing up the flood, and the woman now received into the
w^ldernesse) being inflamed with wrath and fury, he went to make war with
the remnant of her seed, which kept the Commandments of God, and had the
testimony of Jesus, Chap. 12. verse 13, 15, 17. Are these tokens of Satan
bound?

But let us see also concerning the Beast; and hear, how the Dragon was bound
under his reign, to wit, the Dragon gave his power, and his throne, and great
authority, and all the world wondering followed the Beast, and they worshipped
the Dragon which gave power unto the Beast, chap. 13. verse 2, 3, 4. But
perhaps Satan was able to do all these things from out of his prison:
certainly being shut up and sealed he could not. But that there may be no
shifting place left, and that it may plainly appear how free and loose the
Dragon was yet to commit those same villainies from which being once imprisoned,
he is said to be restrained; behold another Aiu^^^m.
scholar of his, the fal^e prophet being the inseparable companion of the ten
horned Beast, and the administrator of his Bestiall authority, of whom thou
have it expressly written, that he did great wonders, and that he deceived the
Chap 13. 13, 14.
inhabitants of the earth by the signs which were permitted him to do, will
any one now ea^^ly believe, these Beasts carrying things thus, that the (...),
that is, Satan, was bound, that he was cast into a bottoml^ss^^it, and (...)
up, that he might not deceive the people (...)? according to the 20th chap.
ver. 2.3.

Moreover, out of the trumpets themselves (for half the time at least) an
argu^ent is not wanting of the devils liberty and freedom. ^or what is that
king of the locusts of the fifth trumpet, which is called the angel of the
bottomless pit whose name in Hebrew is A^addon, and in Greek Apollyon, and
whom Saint John painteth out to be (...), him who fell from Chap (...)
heaven lately into the earth, that very same Dragon and Satan, whom Michael
before the sound of the trumpets had thrust down from heaven unto the earth?
Neither do I remember that in the whole Revelation there is read of any other
besides him to have fallen upon the earth; neither do I know whether those
elogies of the Angel of the bottomless pit and Abaddon, can agree with any
other besides him. Howsoever it is, certainly Satan was not then bound, the
bottomless pit (as there it is said) was not shut upon him and sealed up: (but
as you may see chap. 9. 2.) open, and that so, that the smoke thereof ascended,
as the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun and the air was darkened by the
smoke of it.

To conclude, but that this liberty of the Dragon or Satan in deceiving the
people, continued even to the very destruction of the Beast, and therefore was
altogether of one time with the six first trumpets, I think no man can doubt
which shall well mark, what is read to be done from the effusion of the sixth
Vial: to wit, that when the seventh, that is, the last by and by was to be
pou^ed out, and therefore the final ruin of the Beast, was even then at ^and,
out of the mouth of the Dragon, and the Beast and false prophet, his Vicars,
three unclean spirits, spirits of devils working miracles, shall go out to
the kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle
of that great day of God Al^ightie. Chap. 16. 13. 14.

So the 1000. years of Satan's being bonnd, that he should not ^eceive the
people any more, can have no place, neither under the six first seals, no^
under the six first trumpets: therefore they are ^o be left in the seven^h
trumpet.

2 Arg. After a thousand years being fulfilled, Satan being let loose cut off
his prison for a short time, he had raised new stirs, the scum of the deceived
people: which he had gathered together, being con^u^ed with fire fallen from
heaven, the deceiver himself being taken and arrested, is said to be sent into
the lake of fire and brimstone Chap. ^^. 10.
(...) where were both the Beast and the false prophet. Mark here reader, the
chronicall caracter; by which is intimated, that this whatsoever it is
concerning Satan, being taken and condemned after his second loosing, it
succedeth the vision of the former Chapter concerning the Beast and the false
prophet being vanquished, taken, and thereupon cast into the lake burning with
fire and brimstone, by him which sat upon the white horse, as in order of
narration, so also in the time of the thing done. For otherwise it should not
have been said, that Satan was sent thither, where both the Beast and the false
prophet were, except both the Beast and the false prophet had been sent thither
first.

Neither can any man of judgment say by way of evasion, that this war after a
thousand years of this 20th chapter, is not differing from that of the former
chapter; when as not only the character already brought, but also all the
circumstances on both sides are repugnant; the parties, the battle, and the
manner of the slaughter, there with the sword, here with fire; yea and the
event of either war unlike, as anon the matter being demonstrated shall be made
plain, there the binding of Satan only for a time, but here a condemnation to
eternal fire.

The war therefore, wherein the Beast and the fals^ prophet being taken are
sent into the lake of fire, seeing that it is different from this last, to
which Satan at length to be cast into the same lake had stirred up the nations
presently after his loosing; either it must needs be waged within the very same
thousand years, or else when they were not yet begun. It could not be waged
within the thousand years, because so long Satan is said to be bound, and shut
up in the bottomless pit, that he should not deceive the people any more,
until the thousand years should be consummate, chap. 20. verse. 3. But in the
war, wherein at length there is triumph over the Be^st and the false prophet
and their companions, if ever at any other time, he was most free and loose to
deceive, as appears by those things which even now we have alleged out of
the sixteenth chapter concerning the preparation of this war: to wit, that from
the effusion of the sixth Phiall, when as now the seventh, wherein the Beast was
utterly made an end of, was ready to be poured out; out of the mo^th of the
Dragon out of the mo^th of the Beast and of the false prophet, Chap. 16. 13. 14
three unclean spirits, the spirits of devils showing wonders, went forth to
the kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them together to the
battle of the great day of God Almighty.

Because therefore the Ra^^^
state of the thousand years does no way admit such Satannicall troubles and
stirs: it must needs be, that this war of the Beast shall in time go before
them, and so at length the 1000. years of Satan's binding, shall contemporize
with the space from the slaughter of the Beast; which was to be demonstrated.

3. Arg. To conclude, since through those thousand years wherein Satan is kept
in prison, Christ is said to have reigned in that Imperial and Magnificent
Kingdom with his, thereupon by the same arguments and marks by which the
Synchronis^e of either is established, the other also will be confirmed.
Therefore that that Imperial Kingdom of Christ does begin with the seventh
trumpet or from the destruction of the Beast, is now for us to show.

The fifth Synchronisme. Of the 1000. years of Christ his Imperial reign,
and of the seventh trump^t or the space from the destruction of the Beast.
(...).

1 The excellent and Imperial Kingdom of Christ, often and again mentioned in
the Revelation and upon the coming whereof the quire of the Beasts and
triumphant elders are wont to sing hymns and thanksgivings to God every where
succeeds in order the conquest of, and the triumph over the Beast and
Babylon. For first, where this reign of a thousand years is pro^erly handled in
chap 20. of the number of those which reign with Christ are (...) 4.
they who had not worshi^ped the Beast nor his image, nor had received his
mark in their foreheads or in their hands; do not these words sufficiently
show that this reign of Christ succeeded the reign of the Beast, his image and
his stigmatized followers? For wherefore should this elogie be given to those
sons of the kingdom, that they had not worshipped the Beast, etc except the
Beast had now gone before? For certainly the desert in time goes before the
retribution and reward. But now this kingdom is given (as the order of the
narration shows) to the Saints, as a reward of their faith and constancy;
and that after their cause was first discussed in open Court; of which Session
as i^ were, there is a description in these words: Ve^^e 4.
And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given to them,
that is to say, to them was given authority of judging, etc. Therefore the
time wherein the Saints approved their faith and constancy to ^od, while the
Beast ruled, went before the judgment, the reward followed the decree then
made.

2 The same does yet further appear out of that hymn of praise ^ung of the
elders and beasts at the overthrow of Babylon, c^ap. 19. 6. (...) Hall^u-j^h
for the Lord God that Almighty one has reigned, ver. 7. Let us be glad and
rejoice, and give glory to him: for the marriage of the Lamb i^ come, and his
wife has made herself ready. For I doubt not but that the kingdom is the same
in both places.

3 But of all most clearly out of the 11. chap. ver. 15 16 etc. where at the
found of the seventh trumpet, the days of the witnesses, and of the Beast, and
the months of the Gentiles being run out there is proclaimed in heaven, the
kingdoms of this world are our Lords, and his Christ's, and he shall reign for
evermore. And the four and twenty Elders fitting before God in their thrones
fell upon their faces, and worshipped God, saying, We give thee thanks Lord God
Almighty, which art, and which wast, and which art to come: for thou have
received thy great might, and have entered thy Kingdom.

This is that finishing of the mystery of God, declared by the Prophets, which
the Angel had foretold before the tenth Chap. ver. 7. should come to pass
about the the time of the sounding of the seventh trumpet: when neither the
months of the Beast, nor the days of the witnesses mourning, nor any thing at
all concerning the period of time, times, and half time, shall be any more
remaining, verse 6. 7. plainly according to that which was foretold to Daniel,
chap. 7. verse. 25, 26, 27. and before concerning the Universal dominion of
Christ, or kingdom of the Saints to come after the same times, and altogether
the same session of judgment. Also that chap. 12 ver. 7. where the same Angel
which is here in John is read with the same behavior, rite, and (which is
chiefly to be noted (almost in the same words, to have sworn that that space
once being ended of a time, times, and half a Are not these (...) 21 2.
time, the dispersion of the holy people; and together with that, that last of
wonders should be consummate.

He which here desi^eth further confimation, let him use the Charecters of the
former Synchronisme: for they afford, as I said, their mutual helps.

The sixth Synchronisme. Of the new Jerusalem the bride of the Lamb with the
seventh Chap. 21.2. Chap. 11 1.
trumpet, or the space from the time of the destruction of the Be^st.
1. The marriage of the Lamb, and that Imperial kingdom of the Almighty Lord
God, both begin after the destruction of Babylon, where the seventh trumpet
begins, this appears out of the h^mne of the Elders and Beasts, which in
the former Synchronisme we have commended out of the nineteenth chap. verse.
6.7. Hallilu^ah, for our Lord God Almighty reigns. Let us be glad and
rejoice, and give honor to him, for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his
wife has made her self ready. But the new Jerusalem is that bride of the
Lamb, adorned and prepared for her husband: chap. 21. verse 2. And I saw (says
he) the holy City, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven as a
bride adorned for her husband: and verse 9. Come and I will show thee the bride
the Lambs wife, etc. Therefore even she shall begin and contemporize with the
seventh trumpet.

2. Now Jerusalem is the beloved city; but that beloved city, forthwith after
the 1000. years are ended, is said to be compassed about by those last troops
of Satan then let loose, chap. 20. ver. 9. And they compassed the tents of the
Saints and the beloved city: therefore it must needs have been extant before,
while Satan was yet bound. I have thought fit to add two other, either for
confirmation, or illustration, and setting forth of these two arguments.

3. The seventh Vial being poured out, wherewith the Beast is dispatched and
abolished, there came a loud voice from the throne, saying, TETONE, It is done;
chap. 16. verse. 17. So also, He that sat upon the throne says to John
(beholding new Jerusalem descending from heaven) chap. 21. verse 5, 6] Behold,
I make all things new TETONE, It is done, I am Alpha ^ Omega.
A, and ^, the beginning and the end: therefore new Jerusalem the bride of the
Lamb begins at the last term of the Vials TETONE the whore being already
dispatched; and so it contemporizeth with the space of time, which insueth the
destruction of the Beast.

4. One of the Angels of the Vials [Chap. 17.] shows unto John the
condemnation of the whore, even while the Vials are in pouring out, and at
least by one of them to be executed. And the same Angel of Vials [chap. 21.
verse. 10.] shows to the same John the bride of the Lamb the great city,
holy Jerusalem, to become glorious even when the Phials are now ended, that is,
the Beast and Babylon being destroyed.

The 7th Synchronisme. Of the palm-bearing multitude of the numberless
triumphants out of all Nations, Tribes, People, and Tongues, chap. 7, verse. 9.
with the seventh trumpet or space of time from the destruction of the Beast,
chap. ^^.^^, etc.
1. The palm-bearing multitude next succeeds, the company of ^44000. sealed:
but that company being to be measured, or judged of by its opposite, both
state, and duration to the Beast with whom it contemporizeth, ended with the
Beast also [Synchronisme 4. Part 1.] Therefore the palm-b^aring multitude
follows both: and consequently will fall out in the time of the seventh
trumpet, which is the space of time from the destruction of the Beast.

2. The palm-bearing multitude, are the citizens of new Jerusalem, for of both
it is said, Chap. 7. 16. 17.
That they shall not hunger nor thirst any more, etc. That the Lamb shall feed
them, and l^^d them to the living fountains of waters: and Chap. 21. 4.
that God shall wipe away every tear from their eyes. Now new Jerusalem
contemporized with the seventh trumpet, therefore the palm-bearing multitude
also.

The Apocalyptique Epoche or computation of the Revelation.
The Epoche or computation of the Apocalypse, as it is a prophecy of things to
come, whether thou shall determine the beginning of it, in the beginning of
Christianisme, or in the overthrow of the Jewish polity and church, or in that
moment of time wherein the Revelation is showed to John, or howsoever it be
fixed (for I will not here play the interpreter, being mindful of my purpose)
I suppose none will doubt, but that thence the beginning of the seals, as
touching things done in them, is to be fetched. But that the beginning of the
second prophecy also, or (...) of the open book, is to be fetched from the
same account; if the very words of the context of the repeated prophecy, and
what we have further formerly declared, at the sixth Synch. Part. 1. and in the
entrance to the second part shall not have sufficiently persuaded any; he shall
be at length enforced thereto by the very necessity of the Synchronisme, if
according to the demonstrations now made, he shall assay to dispose the
several prophecies in their rank and place.

The close of the Synchronismes and of the Apo^alyps.
After the 1000. years reign and condemnation of Satan does ^ollow the
universal resurrection of the dead, and the last judgment, and hell, chap.
20. from verse 11. to the end.

After new Jerusalem described chap. 21. follows Paradise, which having the
tree of life in the middle like Eden, a river does environ on this side and
that side, for so I take the words chap. 22. (...), to wit, (...). In the midst
of the street, and of the river, which was on this side, and on that side (to
wit, of the street) was the tree of life. And this is the end of the world and
of the Revelation.

Moreover, Reader; behold here is the order, and course of all the prophecies
in the Revelation, according to the things therein to be done in this figure
drawn before thine eye, and ^o be viewed at once; which I have framed by the
exact rule of the Synchronismes already demonstrated visual timeline of the
book of revelations EPOCH OR THE BEGINNING OF THE APOCALIPS MEDE his book
sealed

HAYDOCK his book sealed:

The first prophesy begins The latter prophesy begins MEDE his book
opened

HAYDOCK his book opened. How long^ L^^^ (...) thou not (...) book written
within; and, on the backside sealed with 7 seals. Ap.: v.1

the six first seals
1 victory 2 slaugher. 3 ^^^^ances. 4 death 5 the (...) 6 earthquake.
(...) of the (...) and (...).

(...) with Michaell about the child birth.

Trumpet. I hail falls upon ye earth Trumpet. II the burning hill (...) ye
sea Trumpet III the starr falling into ye rivers Trumpet IIII the eclipse of
the lights Trumpet V.I. WOE LOCVSTES Trumpet VI.II. WOE. THE EVPHRATEAN
HORSEMEN The 7 phyalls destroying the East:
1 2 3 4 5 6



The company of 144000 servants of god out of all ye tribes of Israel are
fenced to the seal of the living God.

The outer court (or holy city) (...) (...) for to be (...) of the gentiles
42. (...)

The two witnesses of god, at length to be killed by ye beast do prophesy
clothed in sackcloth 1260 days

The woman in child birth, the dragon being cast out, flies into the desert
there to be nurished 1260 days or for a time (...)

The beast with 7 heads and ten horns, after ye deadly wound cured under ye
course of y^ last (...) blasphemeth and overcomes ye Saints 42 months

The two horned beast or false prophet, the restorer of the ten horned beast,
exercises all his power in his sight

The company of virgins 144000 sealed of the lamb (to whom alone the (...)
song is given to be sunge) warns ye worshipers of the beast of ye Judgment
of God

The (...) city Babylon the (...) upon the seven headed Beast, now in the
course of the last head being ten horned and makes the inhabitants drunken
with ye wine of her fornication.

Trumpet 7 III WOE The mystery of god is fulfilled: As he declares to his
prophets: The palm bearing multitude of innumerable rejoycers out of all
nations kendreds and people THE KINGDOMS OF THE WORLD ARE BECOME OUR LORDS AND
HIS CHRIST'S

The 7 phyalls destroying the East:
7


Satan is bound and the saints reign with Christ a thousand years

The wife of the lamb New Jerusalem (into the light whereof ye gentiles shall
walk) desendeth from heaven.

SATAN IS LOOSED THE GENERAL RESVRECTION

the paradise of the just

the Lake of Fire

THE END



Know thou who voutchsafest to meditate upon this Apocalyptik Type that the
archinge lines meeting in the same beginning and end, show contemporary
prophesies: to wit, of the seals and of the little book, the same things is
demonstrated by the bounds of the lines and circumferences answering each other.

And (to conclude) which of the Visions; goes before or follows after: thou
may behold by the order proceeding from the left hand to ye right: At the:
27. 28 and 29th pages of the key. the reader may find a more full direction
for the use of this scheme

Place this betwixt page 26. and 27

for mine own, and (if thou please) for thy use, Lord open the eyes of the
understanding of either of us, that we may behold his mavelous works. Amen.

A Corollarie concerning the use of the Key.
1. Out of what has been said, I suppose it appears that the Revelation
considered according to the letter only; as if it were a certain bare ^^story
of things done, and not a prophecy involved with mystical allegories, and
types: yet to be furnished by the holy spirit, with such signs and characters
through the whole narration, that thence the right course, order and
Synchronismes of all the visions, according to al^ things done in their time,
may be found out, composed, and demonstrated, and that without the supposition
or help of any interpretation granted.

2. Then furthermore, as is the manner in histories, that many and diverse
things, done by many and diverse together, and at the same time, yet cannot be
declared together, but severally and one after another: so also in these
prophecies and visions of things done (howsoever revealed in the most aptest
and wisest order by far) it falls out, that they labor in vain that so go
about to interpret the Revelation, as if the events every where should succeed
one after another in the same order and course, as the visions are revealed.

3. For truly he that will endeavor with success to find out the meaning of
the Apocalyptique visions, must first of all place the course, and conne^ion of
them one with another according to things done, being thoroughly searched out by
the foresaid characters and notes, and demonstrated, by intrin^icall arguments
as the basis, and foundation of every solid, and true interpretation. Therefore
(which we see to be done amiss by very many) the order it self is not to be
conformed to every aptnes of interpretation, according to the will of the
interpreter; but according to to the Idoea of this chronicall order framed
before hand; by the characters of Synchronismes is every interpretation to be
tried as it were by a square and plumb-rule.

4. For without such foundation, thou shall scarce draw any thing out of the
Revelation, that will soundly assure the interpretation and application
thereof, and which rests upon divine authority, but upon begged principles,
and mere humane conjectures, on the contrary side, this being admitted for a
foundation, when as now the pales of time and order, shall not suffer the
a^plication to rove at random, and according to pleasure; thou will presently
admire the many ways of so many different interpretations, yea, and repugnant,
for the most part taken away; there being but a few differences left, and those
almost of the least moment, in which the mind may as yet rest doubtful,
concerning the general application at the least. So that hereafter as well out
of this book, as out of the rest of the books of the new testament, arguments
may be drawn even in matter of prophecy concerning interpretation certain,
and in which faith may repose it self, as it were in the oracles of the holy
spirit, not the inventions only of humane wit.

5. Such a Key reader, yea if thou had rather an Apocalyptique compass, I
show thee, as far as my ability reaches in these Synchronismes according to
that measure of understanding which the good and bountiful God has vouchsafed
me an unworthy sinner in these mysteries, and do propose unto thy vi^w a Scheme
adjoined, short, easy, and compendious. In which (lest happily thou should
be ignorant of the use of it) if once the sense of any principal vision, and
the times ther^of fulfilled shall appea^e unto thee; thou have then a ready way
showed thee, whereby the line of Synchronismes and of order, thou may find
out, yea and demonstrate the meaning of the other visions. As for example, what
others prophecies shall contemporize to that known prophecy of thine, as I
have said, are without doubt to be applied to the ^ame times* and what go
before, are not to be interpreted but of those events that go before; those
which succeed likewise, of those which do succeed.

6. And lest happily thou may doubt, whether any where in the Revelation out
of all those visions any such may be found, in which in that manner I now
speak, thou may safely pitch thy foot, and from whence, as it were from a
station or watchtower thou may take the scantling of the rest of the
Revelation: behold provision made for this thing also by the holy spirits most
wise counsel, in that famous vision of the great whore which only and alone
of all the visions the Angel, as no where else h^e Chap. ^7. ^, etc.
does, interprets to John; But to what end, except that by that an entrance
be opened, as it were through a door to the rest otherwise ina^^^^able? what
will thou more? therefore by this way enter thou, calling upon the Father of
lights, and being entered use the Key of entry to the opening of the rest. Try,
and having tried thou will confess, that this prophecy is wonderful, with
which, the matter being thoroughly looked into, none of the old Testament, (for
so it beseemed the gospel) no not that of Daniel is to be compared in
certain^ie, either for the singular workmanship of the Revelation, or for the
way and reason of finding out the interpretation.

This last thing I entreat of thee reader who shall meet with these things,
that if thou shall perceive any thing happily revealed unto me 1. Cor. 14.3.
sitting by as a fellow prophet, profitable either to thy self or others
touching these mysteries: that thou wholly ascribe it to the mercy of God
toward me; to whom also I will never cease to give thanks for that little ray
of his wisdom: but if in any thing I have committed an error, that count
wholly mine, a man of small abilities, and no way (which I very well am
conscious of) fit of my self for these things. Praise, honor and glory to him
who fitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

The first Part of the Coment upon the REVELATION, according to the rule of the
Apocalyptique Key upon the first Prophecy, which is contained in Seals and
Trumpets. Something concerning the Apocalyptique Theater premised.
Endeavoring to find out the meaning of the vision^ in the Revelation, I must
first handle that heavenly Theater, whereupon John is called to behold them as
upon a State: afterward the prophecies themselves, severally examined by the
Apocalyptique Key.

O Christ the wisdom of God, to whom the Revel. ^. 1.
Revelation is given of the Father, that thou should declare to thy servants
things to come, enlighten my mind with thy sun beams, cleanse my uncleanness
with thy blood. Grant that by thy favor, and the guide of thy Spirit, I may
diligently consider these hidden mysteries, and declare them to others.

The Apocalyptique Theater, I call that Imperial Session of God and of the
Church described in the fourth Chapter: and exactly framed according to the
form, of Numb. 1.52. and thence to the end of the second Chapter.
that ancient encamping of God with Israel in the wilderness: which will
plainly appear by comparing the order of both between themselves.

For in the midst of the tents of Israel was placed the Tabernacleor throne of
God. Round about the Tabernacle the Levites pitched their tents nearest. Then
after the Levites, the rest of the host of Israel was seated in four
standerds, toward the four climates of the heaven: to wit, three tribes placed
under one standerd, and bearing the name of the chief tribe of their company.
And every standerd did bear an ensign, whereof although Moses does only
generally make mention, nor does at all express what figure was pourtraid to
every standerd: yet the Hebrews out of the ancient tradition of the Elders, (in
this not rashly to be contemned) do describe the matter wholly after this
manner.

At the East the Standerd of Judah, with his fellow Tribes with the sign of a
LION.

At the West the Standerd of Ephraim, with the sign of a BVLLOCK.

At the South the Standerd of Reuben, with the sign of a MAN.

At the North of Dan, with the sign of an EAGLE. Aben Ezra at the 2. of
Numbers (...) our Elders have said, that the figure of a man was in the
standerd of Reuben, because of the Mandrakes found (says he but this is Genesis
30.14, Genesis 49 9.
idle.) In the standerd of Judah the figure of a Lion, because Jacob likened him
hereto. In the standerd of Ephraim the figure of a Bullock; according as it is
said, Deuteronomy. 33. 17.
the firstling of a bullock. And to conclude, in the standerd of Dan the
figure of an Eagle. The same things here has Bar Nachman, and Cha^kuni at the
third Chapter.

If any happily more curiously ask, wherefore the effigies of these living
creatures were born rather then others, besides that reason which is wont to be
taken not unfitly from the blessings of Judah and Ephraim, at the least, the
Talmudists seem to give the reason thus, four things say they, Schindler, p.
266. ^.
are proud (or which excel) in the world; the Lion among the wild beasts,
the bullock amongst cattle, the Eagle amongst birds, and a man whom God has
endued with beauty above all, that he may command all. Howsoever the reason
hold, this tradition of the Jews may be confirmed out of the four fold face
of the Cher^bims (take heed thou do not conceive so many heads) in Ezekiel; by
which is signified that it was the Lord, and king of the four bands or camps
of Israel which was carried on them. For as the Chariots of Princes do glister
with the ensigns of their Lords; so here the Cherubims with the ensigns of
JEHOVA, the King of the Tetrarchies of Israel. Neither will it be very
difficult, to gather out of the position of Ezekiel and the Cherubims in this
vision one against another, which climate of the world each face of the
Cherubims looked toward. For when Ezekiel, his face being turned toward the
north, beheld the Cherubims as it were Ezekiel. 1.4.
coming against him, certainly that which did then present it self directly
over against him, was the former and direct face of the Cherubims, to wit the
face of man; and therefore the face of a man looked toward the south. Whence it
follows that that face of the Lion which is said to be on the right hand of
the same Verse 10.
Ezekiel looked toward the East, and that on the left hand of him, of a
bullock looking toward the West: and last of all the face of an Eagle looking
toward the North.

And surely the same reason persuades, that we may esteem that those
Cherubims also, which did overshadow the Ark of God in the most holy place of
the Temple were alike, that is, of a four fashioned face; especially since
those which were engraven upon the walls of the temple were so, as that which
is read in the same Ezekiel, chap. 41. verse. 19. concerning their half carving
does witness, where, two of their faces being drunk up, (as it must needs be
in such engraving) on the plain of a wall, yet the other two, of a man and of
a lion, are said to appear looking toward the Palme-trees, represented on this
side and on that side, both ways. And wherefore I pray you, should the
Cherubims be engraven in another form then they were of?

Add hereunto that some do take that of Psalm. 68. 11. (...) thy congregation
has dwelt therein, to be meant of those four living creatures, being the
ensigns of so many bands of Israel; which surely Jerome, in that translation
which has its name to be according to the Hebrew truth, has thus translated:
Chap. 4.
animalia tua habitaverunt in ea; thy living creatures dwelt therein; to wit,
as went before, in thy inheritance, that is, in the camp of thy people which
thou leddest through the wilderness. Likewise the Septuagint, and the vulgar
which is translated thereout of has (...), animalia tua, thy living creatures.
And surely that which went before this and the former verse plainly shows,
that here that time is handled: O God when thou wentest forth before thy
people, when thou wentest through the Desert the earth shook, and the heavens
dropped at the presence of God, etc. Likewise that which follows concerning
the plentiful rain, the rain if I be not deceived, of Manna, and therefore
to be translated, a plentiful rain or liberal, thou have sent O God
[wherewith] thou have comforted thine in haeritance, even when it was weary. To
say nothing of that; the beginning of this Psalm is borrowed from that form of
prayer which Mos^s used [Numb. 10.35.] in the setting forward of the camps of
Israel. Arise O Lord and let thine enemies be scattered.

We have beheld the ^ncamping of God among the Israelites: let chap. 4.^.
us now further see, how the Apocalyptique session does in every point answer
the same.

And I was says John, in the spirit, and behold a throne was set in heaven;
and one sa^e on the thr^ne. 3. And he that sat to look upon was like a Jasper
ston^ and a Sardine; and there was a rainebow round about the throne in sight
like to an emrald.

4. And round about the throne 24 scates; and upon the scates 24 Elders
sitting, cl^th^d in white raiment, and they had on their heads crowns of gold.

5. And ^^t of the throne proceeded lightnings, and voice, and thund rings; aad
there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne which are the seven
spirits of God, and before the throne there was a sea of glass like ^^to
cr^stall.

6. And in the midest of the throne and round about the throne four Beasts,
full of eyes before and behind. 7. And the first Beast was like a Lion; an^
the second Beast like a Bullock; and the third Bea^t having a face as a Man;
and the fourth Beast like a flying Eagle.

8. And the four Beasts, had each of them six wings about him, and they were
full of eyes within; and the rested not day and night Chap. 4.
saying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

9. And when those Beasts give gl^ry and honor and thanks to him that sa^e on
the throne who lives for ever and ever: 10 The 24 Elders fall down before him
that sa^e one the throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and
cast their crowns before the throne, saying 11. thou art worthy, O Lord our
God, to rec^ave glory and honor and power: for thou have created all things,
and forthy pleasure they are and were created.

Does not every several things answer other here; for first as concerning the
tabernacl^; the throne here which God sat upon being set in the midst that it
was none other then the temple or taberna^l^ (for the description (here) is
fitted (which is a thing observable) ^o the history of both) as well the seven
lamps burning before it, is also that glassy Sea, like un^o Crystal do show.
whreof those present the candlestick of those s^ven lamps burning before the
Oracl^; this that great lavour in the temple of Solomon called the Sea: but
with this difference, that that of Solomon was of brass but this of ours of a
glass and transparent matter, yet I know not whether we may suppose the
allusion hereto be to that more ancient lavour of Moses Taber^acle; since that
also is said to have binne made of I Know not what matter of looking-glasses;
to wit, of the looking-glasses of the women assembling at the door of the
tabernacle Exodus 38.8. But you may see the temple set fo^th by the name of the
throne of God Esaias. 6. verse. 1. I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne high and
lif^^d up, and his ski^ts filled the Temple. Also ^er. 17. 12. A glorious high
thr^ne from the beginning is the place of our sanctuary. And Ez^^ 43.7. The
place of my throne, and the pla^^ of the stepps of my feet, where I dwell in
the midst of the children of Israel for ever, etc.

And that it was such a throne, which John saw placed in the midst of the
Elders, and Beasts, the Revelation has it every where for g^anted. For where
could he have openly seen the Chap. 4.
Altar, and under it the souls of them that were sla^ne for the word of God,
chap. 6.9. except in the temple; whenc^ (appe^^ed) to him the the golden Altar
of incense be ore the throne, chap. 8. 3. except the t^mple or Tab^rnacle had
binne that throne. Or what other thing will the fouer horn^s of the golden
Altar, which is in the sight o^ God intimate. chap. 9, 13. what the temple, the
courts of the temple and Altar parte^y to be me^su^ed wi^h the Angels reed,
partly, to be cast our, chap. 11. 1. what (...)
the temple of God opened in H^aven; and therein, the Arc of the testimony
exposed to sight, c^ap. 11. 19. what the Angels coming out of the Temple,
chap. 14.15. 17.18. and that also in heaven verse, 18. what the ^arpers
standing upon the brimm^ of the Sea or lavour of glass, and singi^g the
tryumphant Song chap. 15. 2. and that also in heaven, verse 1. what in the
same place verse 5. The Temple of the Tabernacle of the testimony, opened in
heaven, and the same temple ve^se. 8. filled with smoke Verse. 3.
from the majesty of God: But that chap. 16. verse. 17 puts the matter out
of all question. And there came a great voice (...), that is, out of the temple
of heaven from the throne.

Furthermore in this throne or temple, least happily thou should be any
thing doubtful, the place of Gods Session, or (as the Septuagnits 1. king. 10.
19. speak of the throne of Solomon) (...) was the Inner and most holy part of
the temple, wherein was laid up the Arc of the covenant with the
propitiatory. For there God is said to dwell, and to sit between Chap. 4.
the Cherubins of glory. For which cause finally both the seven lamps here, as
also the golden Altar of Incense afterward^s are rightly said to have binne
before the throne, to wit, before the oracle of the temple; as it is found
concerning both plainly in so many and the self same words, 2. Cron. 4.20. and
1. King, 6, 20. in the former of which the septuagints have (...) (so the
Oracle is called in Hebrew) in the other (...), in meaning right with the
Relveation, (...) verse. 4.
(...) So the other parts, either of the temple or of the tabernacle, will be
partly for stays, partly for stepps, partly for a footstool to the throne
peculiarly so called such kind of parts or appurtenances, that imperial
throne of Solomon is said to have had. So much of the throne.

2. The fouer and twenty Elders compass next about the throne, which represent
the Bishops, and pr^lates of the churches; Ver. 6.^
and do answer both in place and order to the Levites and Preests in the camps
of Israel: and their number of 24 to so many courses of Priests and Levits, or
which comes to the same pass to the chief of the courses whereupon, besides
that they are nearest to see Ezech. (...), Exodus, 34, 19 Levit, 8. 17, and else
where 40 times.
God, they also have their thrones; moreover they wear crowns; which are
signs of dignity, and power given from God.

3. Thirdly, a meet distance after the Priests where the lines drawn through
the midst of the throne, do twice divide the sides of the throne, every way to
the fouer corners of the heaven, fouer living creaturs appear: the first in
the shape of a Lion; the second of a Bullock (for (...) with the septuagints is
Bos a bullock) the third in the shape of a man, the fourth of a flying Eagle
representing the christian Churches through the four quaters of the world; and
they answer to the four camps of Israel, bearing in their standerds the same
Beasts. That which in the text of the Revelation is something more obs^urely
said, (...) in the midest of the throne, and round about the When by two words
one things is signified.
throne, ought to be expounded by the fig^re (...) familiar with the Hebrews,
as if indeed it had binne said (...), that is (...), in the midst of the
circuit or compass of the throne; and that in this sense. If to the throne,
for example as being square, thou draw about, a para^ell fo^re square figure,
with a meet distance from the throne and Elders compassing it about, four
Beasts did show themselves in or, at the middle of the sides of every quadrangle
(for (...) is to be taken distributively;) to Chap. 4,
wit in the midest of every side one.

Furthermore those Beasts are describ^d, full of eyes before and behind, having
moreover six wings about, and those full of eyes within. So many ^yes do set
forth the multi^ud of Sharpsighted verse. 8.
me^, and full of knowledge of the mysteries of God; such as are in the Beasts,
that is, the churches, which the (...) do represent. The wings, agili^y and a
lacrity: o put in ex^cution the commandment of God. The wings full of eyes,
z^ale joined with knowledge and faith. To conclude the six wings a^out, do set
them forth flying every way that is, most ready universa^ly and wholly to
fulfill the commandments of God. (...)* 9, 10, 11,


Last of all is added, what the office of both of them should be, as well of the
B^asts as of the elders about the throne, to wit this, that as aften as the
Beasts should give glory and honor and thanksgivi^g to him that sitterh on the
^hrone, that is as often as the Churches should perform their holy se^vic^ so
often the 24 Elders going before the Beasts according to their function, used
to fa^ down before God, saying, Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive glory and
honor and power, because thou have created all things etc. This interpreta^ion
being admitted, the saying of John, which most do accuse here of incongruity,
as abusing the futures (...)
(...), for the praete perfect; will easily maintain it self: since with the
H^brewes (whose notion the Apostle every where uses) the futures are wont to
denote an act accustomed ^rdue: so as John is not at all to be thought here to
relate, Chap. 4.
what then in the vision is done by the Beasts and elders; but what occasion
required should be done, and what he afterward in the progress of visions if
at any time occasion of praising God should happen, he saw done by them.

And so (that at length I may end) I conceive I have plainly showed that the
throne in this ^mperiall session answers to the Tabernacle or Temple; the
elders to the Levites and Priests; the four Beasts to the four camp^ of Israel;
that is the whole session, to be the type of the ancient encamping in the
w^ldernesse, which thing was so much the more largely by me to be handled,
because ^o served the reason of the most type^ ^n the Revelat^on to depend
chiefly upon the knowledge thereof; wherein I dou^t not ^ut any will be of the
same mind with me* who shall thoroughly consider the matter.

The Theater being prepared in th^s manner, ^he which sat upon the throne,
reaches forth in his right hand, a book written Chap. 5.
within and on the backside, closed with ^^aven seals; and therewithal Verse
^^, 2,
an Angel coming forth upon the stage, with al^ud voice proclaim^th; that, ^f
power were given to any to open it, whereby those things might be seen and read
that were therein contained, he should take it i^to h^s hands, and endeavor
it, a thing without doubt if he shall perform, would be very acceptable to all
that are enflam^d with a desire of secret things.

And in truth the book was most worthy, that any one should strive with a^l the
powers ^f his wisdom and industry to o^en it: as a book of prophesies or of the
the counsels of God, wherein is contrived the series and order of things to be
done till that second and glorious c^mming of Christ. For of such sort
certainly that double prophecy following of things to come which that book
did contain, appears for to be which is the cause ^nles I be deceived, why
John going about to set forth his visions, prefixed in the front of ^is
history the description of that gloriou^ coming, as ^t were the bond of the
Apocalyptique race. Behold, Hypotyposi^. Chap. 5.
says he chap. 1.7. he comes with the clouds of heaven, and every eye shall
see him; they also which pierced him, and all tribes of the earth shall wail
over him; as if he should say: this is the scope, his is the the bound of the
visions, which shall declare.

But when no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the Verse 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
earth, was able to open the book, and ^he mat^er seemed now to be past help;
so that John brake forth into weeping for grief: behold a Lamb; seeming as it
had be^n s^in, that is bearing the signs and of his by past death, rose up in
the midst of the throne Skarts
of elders and Beasts, and took the book to unseal and open, as who alone above
all had deserved the power to do it.

Now this being seen, forth with the Quire of Beasts, and elders, Verse 8.
together with the Angels standing round about, and all creatures in general,
being full of joy sing a song of praise to the Lamb and to his father. Wherein
I thought good to observe that alone, that they plainly refer the power of
opening the book to the merit of the passion of the Lamb. Thou art worthy, say
they to open Verse 9.10.11. 12.13, 14.
the book and the sea^s thereof, because thou wast slain^, and have redeemed us
to God with thy blood, out of every tribe and people and tongue and nation. Out
of which perhaps light may come to the saying of our Savior, neither having as
yet suffered, nor entered into his glory: of that day and hour (suppose of his
second Mat. 42. 36.
coming, whether it should b^ sooner, or later:) no man knows, no not the
Angels in heaven, nor the Son, but the father only. For why, as yet the
Revelation was not given to Christ of the father, nor the order of things to be
done un^ill his coming opened. I affirm nothing rashly, let the reader way the
matter well with himself.

The Lamb thus opening the book, at every several seal thereof, Chap. 6.
singular types of things to come are exhibited: the body whereof runs
through the whole Apocalyptique race, and so concludes Systema.
the first universal proph^cie. The interpretation whereof now, by the favor
of him that sits on the throne and of the Lamb, we will undertake. Chap 6.


Concerning the two Apocalyptique prop^eces.
The first prophecy of the seals, comprehends the destinies of the Empire.
The other of the little book, the destinies of the (...)
Church or of christian religion; until at length both shall be united in the
Church reigning; the kingdoms of this world becoming Chap 11. 15.
our Lords and his Christ. For as in the old testament Daniel, did foreshew as
well the coming of Christ, as also did digest the destinies of the Jewish
church, according to the successions of Empires: so it is to be conceived that
the Apocalypse, does measure the state of Christanity by the affairs of the
Roman Empire which should yet remain after Christ. Neither does the event
cross it. For the interpretation of the first prophecy out of this general
supposition thus proc^ed^th.

Of the first prophecy which is of the seals: and first of the things meant by
the first six seals.
The s^ope of the seven seals in sum is, that, there might be showed, by the
distances of ensuing time distinguished by the characters of events, in what
order of the chances of the Roman empire running out, it should come to pass
that Christ should vanquish the Gods of the world, what whom he had begun war:
to wit in the sixth course, or sixth seal, the Gods of the Empire of Rome
heathen; but in the seventh, when the course of the trumpets shall come to the
last trumpet: whatsoever else of the worship of idols and devils did after
there a new, or should as yet any where else in the world arise, should be
utterly destroyed For he must reign until he have put all his enemies under
his feet, that is, shall have abolished all contrary, principality, au^hority,
and power, 1. Cor. 15. 25. Let us in the first place, handle the first period,
as order requires. Chap. ^


The first six seals therefore, by a six fold character of events, (not much
unlike to those, which our Savior also had foreset, for the appointed time of
the overthrow of Jerusalem) do distinguish so many different times of the yet
standing and flourishing Roman Empire; until at length in the sixth, Christ
should utterly overthrow the power of idols, and heathen gods in that region.
Now characters I call the notable chances of the Roman Empire, whereby as by
certain emblems, the different times are disce^ned: and those in this first
period, not brought from without by the barbarous nations, (such as were of the
Empire under the plagues of the seven rumpets afterward falling;) but
intestine chances, and rising in the very Empire it self, which difference
certainly is therefore set by the holy spirit, that by unlike marks the unlike
times of the R^ane estate, here flourishing, there decaying, may be described.

Moreover that comes here to be observed. Since these characters of ch^nces
which I have named, scarce or seldom go through the whole space of the seal:
and therefore, no way by themselves avail, for the limiting of their different
times, by any certain beginning and end: therefore the holy Ghost in the four
first seals (where that should be most requisite, as well for the cause
aforesaid, as for the in equality of the different times) has further used
four Beasts for the same purpose; every of which should Ep^ch^m.
demonstrate the computation of the seal appertaining to its own quarter. How
that is done, we shall see anon. It shall suffice now to have given warning of
it.

Chap. 6. 1. And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard one
of the four Beasts, as it were the voice of thunder, saying, Come and see.

2. And I saw, and behold a white horse, and he that fate upon him had a bow,
and a crown was given unto him; and he went forth conquering, and to conquer.

3. And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second Beast, saying,
Come and see, 4. and there went ^ut another horse that was red; and to him
which sat upon him, there was given, that he should take peace from the earth,
and that they should kill one another; and there was given unto him a great
sword.

5. And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third Beast, saying,
Come and see. And I saw, and behold a black horse; and he that sat on him, had
a pair of balances in his hand. 6 And I heard a voice in the midst of the
four Beasts saying, a measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of
barley for a penny; and hurt not the oil and the wine.

7. And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth
Beast saying, Come and see. 8. And behold a pale horse; and he that sat upon
him, his name was Death, and hell followed him; and power was given to to them
over the fourth part of the earth to kill with the sword, with hunger, and
withdeath, and with the beasts of the earth.

Of the first seal.
The first chance of the Roman Empire, and surely very notable, Chap. 6.
is the original of the victory of Christ; whereby the Roman Gods begin to be
vanished, and their worshippers, being pierced with the arrows of the gospel,
begin every where to fall away and to submit themselves to Christ the
conqueror. (...), says he, (...) (mark it well) (...) that is, he has not yet
fully overcome, but has laid the foundation of the victory, thence forward
more and more to be accomplished.

The discloser of this seal is the first Beast, in shape of a Lion, Verse 1,
2.1.
standing at the east; and shows a horsman coming out of his Chap. 4.7.
quarter, that is, an Emperor, from whose getting on horseback to ride, that
is, coming to his Empire, the distinct space of the first seal is to begin; to
wit from the glorious exaltation of our Chap, 6.
Lord Jesus Christ; by the leading and guidance of which Emperor from the East
this war is waged, and the victor y gotten The beginnings of the following
seals are directed by the Roman Emperors; but where the victory of Christ is
described, regard was to be had of him alone being Emperor.

And now this seal once passed, the oracles of the Gods through the whole
Roman world became silent; and John the last of the twelve Apostles of Christ,
having fulfilled the task of his warefare, passed out of this life, to receive
an immortal crown in the heavens, together with his follow Apostles his
brethren, for their work valiantly and happily accomplished.

And that, to be carried on hors-back is abadg of authority, and of them that
rule and govern, is to be seen out of the greek interpretation Psalm. 45. 5.
wherein prosper thou and ride, is, (...), go on prosperously and reign:
neither does the Chalde differ from this since, which translateth, that thou
may ride upon the throne of the Kingdom. So the woman ryding upon the Beast
Chap. 17. 3. is expounded by the Angel (...), the City which reigns, ver 18.
And the word of ryding is used in the same sense Deuteronomy. 32, 13. Esaias. 58. 14.
Psalm. 66. 12.

Of the second Seal.
The second memorable chance of the Roman Empire, the Verse 4.
emblem of the second seal is (...) Murder or intestine slaughter; the like
to which is scarce in all the Roman history. And there was given, says he, to
him that ^a^e on this horse, that he should take peace from the earth (that is,
that, he ryding, peace should be taken from the earth,) (...) and that men
should kill one another, which last part of the sense, does strengthen the
explication of the former. For in what other sen^e should these words be taken,
that it was given to him ^^ap. ^.
that sits on the horse, that men should kill one another? unless it were
given, or came to pass, that, he indeed riding; men should exercise cruelty
in mutual murders, and slaughters.

The discloser of this seal is the second Beast, in the shape of a Bullock,
placed at the west: and whilst in the vision he ^iddeth look back toward him,
thereby he warns; that this seal begins, when Trajan the Spaniard bare
rule, being an Emperor coming from the west. Dion; Trajan a man of Spain, he
was neither of Italy nor an Italian: before him no man of another nation
obtained the Empire of Rome. But thenceforth from him the same stock reigned
even until Commodus where the space o^ this seal ends.

The beginning therefore being drawn from this Emperor, let us seek that
memorable accident (...) of killing one another. But the thing was done, by the
Gontiles and Iew^s, then dwelling together throughout the Roman Empire, both
where Trajan and his successor Hadr^an guided the stern of the Empire. What
was done under Tra^a^, take not upon mine, but upon the joint words of Dion and
Orosius. The Ie^s, says Orosius, in anincredible commotion at one time, as it
were made wild with ^urie were mightily incensed through the whole world. For
they waged most cruel wars even through all Libia, against the inhabitants:
which then was made so desolate the ^^habitants thereof being slain, that
except Hadrian the Emperor had afterward brought thither Colenies gathered
from other places; it had remained altogether vacant, without inhabitant. They
which dwelt about Cyrene, (says Dion) one Andreas being their Captain, do slay
as well Romans as Greeks, they feed of their flesh, and eat their bowels; they
are besmeared with their blood, and clothed with their skins. Many they sawed
asunder through the midst, from their crown of the head, many they cast to
Beasts. many they constrained to combat between themselves; so that they slew
two hundred Chap. 6.
and twenty thousand men. He goes on furthermore in Egypt the like slaughter
was made, and in Cyprus Artenio being Captain, where also there perished two
hundred and forty thousand. They raced Salamis a city of Cyprus, having slain
all the dwellers therein [Oros. Eusebius.] But in Alexandria in joined battle,
they were overcome and wasted. [Oros.] At length by others, but specially by
Lysius, whom Trajan had sent, they are subdued. In Mesop^tamea also, war is
brought upon the Rebels by the commandment of the Emperor. [Oros. Eusebius.] And
so, many thousands of them did utterly perish by these outragiuos slaughters.

Hitherto those things which happened under Trajan. But thou will say, is there
any thing under Hadrian to be compared with these? whether they were not
equal, let the reader judge. I dare say not much less. For as yet we have
said nothing of that renowned Rebellion Ba^cocheba the counterfeit Messiah
being Captain. Here that therefore also in the words of the same Dion: when,
says he, Hadrian had brought a Colonie into the city of Jerusalem, and in the
place where the temple of God had b^, had procured another to be built to
Jupiter Capitolinus: a great and continued war began to arise there upon, whole
Judea to be in commotion, all the lews every where in ^umult, bringing great
damage secretly, and openly upon the Romans; and very many other nations for
the desire of gain joined with them, and for that cause almost all the world
was in an uproare. He goes on; these Hadrian though too late yet at length
subdued and brake, sending all the best of his Captains against them, but (the
multitude and desper^tenesse of them being known) they durst not charge them
but singlely; there being slam in excursions, and battails, not less then five
hundred and ^ourscore thousand, But the multitude was such, of those that
perished with famine, sickness, and fire, that the number could not be found
out. But was that victory easy to the Romans, and without blood? No verily,
for so many, says he, of the Roma^es also perished in that war, that Hadrian,
when he wrote to the Senate, used not that preface, which the Emperors were
accustomed to use, Sivos, liberique vestri valetis, been ^st, ego quidem et
exercitus valemus. If you, and your children fare well, it is well, I truly
and the army are well. These things Dion relates concerning the commotion of
the Jews under that son of the star, as they called him, or rather, of the
Lysard, of whom Eusebius further writes, that he show with Stellion^s.
all kind of tortures the Christians, being unwilling to aid him against the
Roman army.

If any please to hear the Jews themselves estimating their ownlosse; the
Author of the book Iuchasi^ writes that Hadrian put to death in this war more
then twice so many Jews, as came out of Egypt. Another in the book entitled
(...) which (...) Page 126.
Drusius commends in Prateritis, that neither Nebu^had-nezz ar nor Tyrus had
so afflicted them as Hadrian the Emperor. So that this ruin seems to have
been the most grievous fit of all that incredible tribulation, which our
Savior had foretold should come upon the Jews. And therefore not unworthily
chosen by the holy Ghost, before all other events of that time, for the
exprossing of this second space, since ^t excels as well because of the
nation, as of an accomplishment so renowned.

Of the third seal.
The discl^ser of the third seal is the third Beast, in the shape of a man,
standing at the South: and therefore shows, this seal Verse ^.
Chap. 6.
begins, at the coming of an Emperor from that quarter, to wit Septinius
Severus an Affrican, an Emperor (...) of the South of whom Eutropius says
thus: born in Africa, of the province of Tripolis, the town of Leptis the
only Emperor out of Affric^ both before and after ever mentioned.

And the most would have the matter of this seal to be samine, or dearth of
victuals; their argument being drawn as well from the black color of the
horse, as also from the prizing of come, Verse ^,
A measure of wheat for a penny and three measures of barley for a penny; to
which purpose also they conceive the pair of scales in the hand of the rider
s^rve; to wit not so much for measuring, as for weighing of victuals for the
great scarsity.

And surely I had never called this interpretation into question. (it seems
so apt at the first sight) if the event had answered it. But I find in this
age, and in this course of the seals no extraordinary thing concerning famine
and worthy the honor of a character. For that which is brought out of the
Tertallian to Scapula I suppose is of no great consequence. For if the harvest
f^iled in Africa sometime when Hilarianus was president, which he says it did,
It follows not therefore, that it was either gene^rall through the Roman
Empire, or in the age of Severus. Hence it comes to pass, while I do a
little more nearly look into the reason of the Symbol, I seem to gather and
that by no van demonstrations, that it rather tends to another purpose: For
itseemeth that the pair of balances cannot so fitly be joined with the
measure, as that interpretation requires; when as a pair of balances are for
weighing, but Chaenix is the name of a measure. Furthermore, since that the
condition of the Beast disclosing does nearly agree to the significations of
the other seals; of the Lion, to victory: of the Bullock to slaughter: the
Eagle of the next seal to dead bodies; but here there should be no matter of
agreement. For with congruence both a man wi^h famine? Chap. ^.
And the color black, neither in it own nature, nor in the old prophets use,
is restrained only to famine, but serves as well to express sadness,
mourning, and terror.

Let therefore the matter of this seal be, not famine or dearth of victuals,
but the administration and severity of justice through the Roman Empire, more
glorious and notable then in any past or following times. For as touching the
figure, the color of the horse, does agree to the severity of Justice. That
the weights are a Symbol of justice, is ordinary; and at this day no man is
ignorant that justice is painted with a pair of balances. But that which is
added concerning the prizing, if thou observe, will seem to found thus. Take
not from any one wheat, or barley, except the just price be paid: and keep
also the like law of justice in wine or oil: As if he should provide against
thieves, and had said, steal not. For a penny was the ordinary wages for a
days (...)
work, which appears out of the gospel. And it was also the daily stipend of
soldiers. Chanix signifies a pi^tance for a day, (...), but in a very
uncertain measure. For it ^aried in respect (...) Casp^rns wa^erus an^^ent
measures lib. 2. Chap ^.
of the nations, places, and men. To omit lesser measures of shepherds, of
baylives, of husbandry, and vinedressers: a soldiers Chaenix was ^oure
Sextaries. But in an old Greek and Latin Lexicon (...) is half a bushel,
that is, double a soldiers: yea with the Septuagints Ezeki^l. 45. 10, 11.
(...) is a Bath, the largest measure of the Hobrewes. Out of so uncertain a
measure of the Chaenix, how can any thing be wrested concerning famine, or
dearth of victual^? Therefore I take a Chaenix here, for any pittance for a
day, and penny for any price of a pittance. So the reason of the interpretation
which I gave shall be evident.

Now it is wonderful to see, how the event favors the interpretation, Chap
6.
while Severus and Alexander ruled, being the most renowned riders of the black
horse. Concerning Severus, those things which thou may read here and there
in Aurelius, I will gather together into one sum, keeping the Authors words;
and the same I shall do for La^pridius concerning Alexander. There was no man,
says Aurelius, more renowned in the common wealth then Severus, a maker of
most just laws. One that would at no hand pardon offenses, he advanced every
valiant man with rewards. He suffered honors in his dominion to be sold to
none* He suffered not the least robbery to go unpunished, punishing his own me^
chiefly often for it, which by the fault of the Captains, or of his li^ftenants,
he could scarce upon good proof understand to be done. Spartianus witnesses
with Aurelius, whil^st he calls him both implacable to offenses, and every
where an enemy to thieves.

But these were of no account in respect of these things which Lampridius has
of Alexander the son of Mammea, in both which therefore the sum of the
character of this seal seems to consist. He (says he) ordained moderate and
infinite laws, concerning the right of the people, and treasury, neither did
he make any constitution without twenty lawyers. A most severe Judge against
thieves, pronouncing them guilty of daily wickednesses, condemning them
sharply; and calling them the only foes and enemies to the common wealth,
commanded them (he speaks except I be deceived of theevish judges) never to
be seen in the cities, an^ if they should be seen, to be carried out by the
r^lers of the provinces. Eucolpius (who was his most familiar friend) says he,
reported of him, that if he had seen a theevish Judge at any time, he had his
finger ready, that he might put out his eye. Septinnus adds, who lively
expressed his life, that Alexander was so Chap. 6,
enraged against those judges, that were famed to be thieves, though they were
not condemned, that if by chance he should see them, by reason of the
perturbation of his mind, he would vomit the choler of his stomach, his whole
countenance being enflamed, that he could speak nothing: yea he gave forth an
Edict by the crier, that no man should come into the presence, who knew
himself to be a thief, least sometime being detected he should be put to
death. He goes forward, if any of the soldiers had turned out of the way into
any man's possession; according to the quality of his place, he was either to be
beaten with cudgells in his presence, orroddes, or to be condemned; or, if the
dignity of the man should exceed all these, he was to suffer grievous
contumelies; at which time of punishment he would say, would thou, that that
should be done in thy ground that thou do to another? And he did often
utter with a loud voice, that which he had heard of certain either Jews or
Christians, and he remembered it; and commanded it to be spoken by a crier when
he punish^d any, That which thou would not have done to thy self, do not
to another, which sentence he so much loved, that he commanded it to be
engraven both in his Palace, and in public buildings.

Behold Reader, the ryder of the black horse, royal^y holding up the golden
balance of Justice sent down from heaven, in the theater of the world, which
was so remarkable in a pagan Emperor, that it should be a wonder to no man,
that the Spirit of God had respect thereto in this seal.

Otherwise concerning the prizing of wheat and barl^y.

This prizing of wheat and barley, etc. May also be understood of the famous
provision of grain throughout these time. For it may seem that in those words
there is this meaning also, so to provide for the plenty of corn, that
victuals may be sold for an aequall price, and such a price, as every one may
be a^le to pay. A Chaenix of wheat for a penny; that is, let the daily
pittance of wheat be sold for the price, or wages, or revenew of a days
labor: to wit that none should have need, to spend more a day in victuals then
what is allowed him to be spent for a day. And that also, three Chaenices of
barley for a penny, may seem to belong to the ^qualizing of the price,
according to the quality of the wares: if such interpretation shall please any,
the event here also answers precisely.

Spartianus of Severus. That little corn, says he, which he found, he so
husbanded, that he dying, left seven years revenue of corn to the people of
Rome: so that they should be able to spend daily. 75000. bushells. He, first
gave to the people of Rome a largess of oil every day, yet he left thereof so
much, that for the space of five years it should suffice not only the use of
the city, but even whole Italy, that wanted oil as if inde^d he would have
fulfilled what here is added (...) In oil also and wine be thou not unjust. The
like has Lampridius concerning A^exander: The provision of victuals, says
he, of the people of Rome h^ so helped, that when Heli^gobalus had wasted the
corn, he reduced it to the former course with his own money. The oil also,
says the same Author, that Severus had given to the people, and which
Heliogabalus had dim^i head, ^e wholly restored and also he added oil to the
lights for the Baths.

Of the fourth Seal. Chap. ^*

The discloser of the fourth seal is the fourth Beast, in shape of verse ^*
an Eagle, standing at the North: whereby is shew^d, that the beginning of the
seal is to be fetched from an Emperor thence arising, that is, Maximinus the
Thracean bred and brought up in the North. Julius Capitolinus, Maximinus out of
a town of Thracia neighboring upon the Barbariansbegotten of a Barbarian both
father and mother.

The character of this seal is a meeting together of Sword, Famine, and
Pestilence raging at one time, so as never at any other, whereupon it is said,
that upon him that sits upon the horse is put the name of Death, that is in
the nation of the Hebrews, who use the abstracts for the concretes, (...) or
verse ^.
Mortiferi bringer of death, because he brought so many deaths with him into
the world. For with the same Hebrews especially the prophets, to be called by
the name, sometimes purporteth the same as to be, or to existe, but in a more
excellent or special manner: as Esaias 7* 14. and 9. 6. Jeremiah. 23. 6. and 20.
3. Z^^. 6. 12. and 20.3. Za^. 6.12. and here in the Revelation chap 19.13. so
that to have the name of Death, is no other thing in this place, then
singularly and notoriously to be (...) or Mortiferum the bringer of Death. To
which purpose is that also, that Hell (as a surveyer of funerals (accompanies
the same. Libitindrius.


Now let us look into the event. And surely never since the seals began, did
these three jointly and in so notable a manner rage. I will begin at slaughter,
and I omit the things which this age suffered from a ^orraine enemy, truly
most grievous things; the Of the sword.
Barbarians with rapines and murders wasting almost the whole Empire, under the
Emperors Gallus and Volusianus. But those things come not ^n to this
reckoning; we look after intestine and Domestique. Ten therefore more or less
Emperors and C^sars, Chap. 6.
which are counted lawful, in the compa^^e of this seal, that is, the space of
three and thirty years or few more did the sword, not of their enemies, but
their own Subjects take away. In the same space, under the Empire of Gallienus
alone, those thirty tyrants which Pollio mentions, or perhaps one or two
less, rose up in diverse parts of the Roman Empire: and almost all these slain
either by their own, or by another, or were put to death by the lawful
Emperors So that Orosius said not without cause of this plague that it was
made famous not by the slaughter of the common The sword.
people, but by the wounds and deaths of princes.

To conclude the Emperors themselves, and first Maximinus, and last of all
Gallienus, how cruel were they? Maximinus, Julius Capitolinus being witness,
was so cruel, that some named him Cyclops, others Busicis, others Sciron, some
Platar^. many Typhon or Gyges. The Senate so feared him, that they prayed in
the Temples publicly and privately, even the women with their children, that
he might never see the city of Rome. For they heard that some were cruci^ied,
others enclosed in Beasts newly killed, others cast to wild Beasts, others
bruised with cudgells, and all these without regard of dignity. The same man
goes forward. He slew all that knew his descent, to hide the baseness of his
birth, yea and some of his friends, who for pity and affection had often given
him many things; Neither was there a more cruel Beast upon the Earth. To
conclude, says he, without judgment without accusation, without an accuser,
without defense he ^lew all (of the ^action of some great one, which had been
Consul,) took away the goods of all, and could not satisfy himself with the
slaughter of above four thousand men.

Hear also what Trebellius Pollio in the book of thirty tyrants says of
Gallineus. Inge^us says he, being slain, who was n^med Emperor of the Masian
legions, he bitterly showed his Chap. 6.
cruelty upon all the Moesi^ns, as well soldiers as citizens, neither did any
of them wholly escape his cruelty: and was so sharp and cruel, that he left
most of the cities void of the male sex. The same Author upon the life of
Gallienus. The Seythians says he, ^oing through Capad^cea, the soldiers
thought again of making a new Emperor: all whom Gallienus after his manner
slew. Head^eth in the end: He was t^o ^oo cruel to the soldiers, for he slew
3000. or 4000. every day. Pellio also on the same life of Gallienus re^orteth a
very memorable example of the Bizanti^e slaughter executed, partly by the
soldiers, partly by Gallienus himself. That no evil should be wanting, says
he, in the times of Gallienus, the city of the Birantines renowned for Sea
fights, and the place which barreth in the Euxine Sea, was so wholly C^anstrum
panti ^^m.
destroyed by the soldiers of Ga^^ienus, that there was not a man left. For
revenge of which destruction, Gallienus being again received to Biza^tium, he
slays all the soldiers unarmed, being compassed, round with the armor,
breaking the covenant which he had made.

So much for slaughters. I come to Pestilence: which here according to the
Eastern custom is called (...) Death. So the ^f ^^stilence.
Chalde Paraprast for (...) pestilence likes to pu^ (...) Death, and the
Septuagi^ts for the most part translate it (...) death and in the like notion
it is wont to be called mortality by Eclesiasticall writers which now has
passed into many mother tongues. But concerning the pestilence, it is a thing
so notorious and manifest, that i^ i^ not needfu^l to heap arguments to make
good the truth of the pr^phecie I will dispatch it in a word. Zonaras ^s my
Author, neither have others been si^ent, under the Emperors Gallus and
Volusianus, the pestilence arising from Ethiopia, went through all the
provinces of Rome, and for fifteen years together incredibly Lips^us de
Constant. 2 23. Chap. 6. Of famine.
wasted them. Neither did I ever read of a greater pla^ue, (says an eminent
man in our age) for that space of time or land.

There rem^ineth yet famine of those three calamities, which surely could not
be wanting from this age, although ^one of the ancients had brought it to
light, any man may thence gather that Chap. 6.
almost all the Empire through these times was so polled and consumed by the
rapines and wastes of the Scythians, that no Nation, if credit be given to
Zosi^us, of the Roman dominion remained free, almost all the towns deprived of
walls: and being deprived of them, the greatest part were taken. How could it
come to pass, but that the fields should be forsaken in such wastes, plowing
neglected, and whatsoever provision there was any where for food, spoiled?

And that in truth it came so to pass, is manifest by the Epistle of Dyonisius
Alexandrinus who the^ lived, to his brethren; ^pud E^seb. Hi^^or. lib ^. c^a. 17
wherein he testifies, that that fearefu^^ pestilence, which we mentioned,
succeeded the war and famine. After these things, says he, that is, the
persecution which was under Decius (for he means that which went before the
pestilence, (...), both war and famine followed, which we suffered together
with the Heathen, and a little after. But when, says he, both we and they had
had a little respite, that pestilence came upon us, a thing more terrible to
them then any terror, and more lamentable then any calamity; and to us an
exercise and trial inferior to none of the rest. Cyprian confirms it in his
Apology to Demetrianus. When says he, thou say that very many complain
that it is imputed to us, that wars arise oftener, that the pestilence and
famine do rage, and that it is such stormy and ra^nie weather, we ought not
any longer to be silent, etc.

That which is further added in the text concerning the Beasts; if it be diverse
from the former, and do not rather signify, that the Tyrants were the cause of
these calamities, who like wild beasts raged in these times in the Roman
Empire: it will then point out that evil wherewith the Eastern and Southern
regions were usually p^stered in this case: namely that when the famine and the
pestilence raged, the Beasts would grow strong against men, and slay them, as
may be s^en, Levit. 26.22. Ezekiel. 14.15.21. But Deuteronomy. 7* 22*
the changing of the construction does more favor the former opinion: (...),
if thou render it atque id per Bestias terrae, and that by the Beasts of the
earth.

(...) quartam partem terra the fourth part of the Verse ^.
earth-over which it is said power was given to hell and to death to tyranize,
except any conceive himself able to defend the vulgar interpreter here, with
whom (...), that is' Chap. ^.
a quaternion, or four parts of the earth) I expound it of the chiefest, or by
much the greatest part of the Roman Empire. For since the third part of the
earth (as shall be said in the proper place) does note out the largeness of
the Roman Empire, by consequence the fourth part of the earth is the same
dominion of Rome, less by a fourth part: and so that three or four fold
company of calamities went through three quarters of the Roman Empire, that
is, almost the whole one fourth part thereof only being free. And surely
Or^sius seems to affirm, that the pestilence extended not it self further,
then (to use his words) the Edicts of Decius did run for the overthrow of the
Churches. Of the rest I have nothing to say. And thus much of the 4th Seal.

Of the fifth Seal
The two Seals that follow, have no help from the Beasts, as the former had,
concerning the time of their beginning, and therefore none here any more to be
seen that sit upon horses, whereeupon that signification given by the Beasts
did depend. the space therefore of both, is there to begin, where the chance of
the Seal going before left, which certainly may be very easy where the
chances, as here, shall be such, that the determination of them cannot lie hid,
in respect of remarkable evidence.

Wherefore the fifth Seal shall begin from the Empire of Aurelianus, in the
year 268. at what time the fifteen years pe^tilence is extinguished, which
was the longest of all the calamities of the former Seal.

Now the most notable chance of the Roman estate under this Seal, and which
went beyond all other events of that time, is that Persecution of the
Christians begun by Dioclesian, continued by others, the most bitter by much of
all which ever were. Former ages saw nothing comparable to this. It was longer
and more ^ruell (they are the words of Orosius) then almost any forepassed. For
there was a continual burning of Churches, proscribing of Innocents, slaughter
of Mar^yrs, for ten years space. Forthwith in the beginning of that ten
years, within thirty days about 17000. men are reported to have been
butchered, neither did the fury of the persecuters assuage in the progress of
time. In Egypt alone, (how small a part of the Empire of Rome?) if Chap. 6. De
em^^datione temp^^um lib. 5. de prime anno D^ocletiam and Coptitar.
credit be given to Doctor Ignatius Patriarch of Antioch, as Scaliger has it,
there were butchered 144000. men; and 700. banished, whence the Diocletian Era
took its name, among the Egyptians, and that to this day it should be called
the Martyrs, Era, what now do thou judge was done in the other Provinces
through the Roman Empire? All the world almost was stained with the Sacred
blood of the Martyrs, says Sulpitius Severus. The world was never more
exhausted of blood by any wars, neither did the Church ever conquer with
greater triumph (they are the words of the same Author) then when it could not
be conquered with ten years slaughter.

This slaughter is figured by the vision of the souls of those that were slain
for the word of God, and for the testimony which Verse ^.
they bare, lying under the Altar, that is, upon the ground, at the foot of the
Altar, like Sacrifices newly ^laine. For Martyrdom is a certain kind of
sacrifice, whence that of the Apostle to Timothy, his Martyrdom being at hand,
(...), I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand 2.
Tim. 4.6. To the same purpose also is that of the same Apostle to the
Philippians 2. 17. If I be offered up upon the sacrifice and service of your
faith, etc.

That further they are said to cry to God with alowde voice, requiring
vengeance of their blood, it is a Periphrasis of extreme cruelty and ripe for
judgment, as it were such as for the barbarousnes thereof did solicit the
very patience of God to revenge. How long, say they, Lord, holy and true, do
thou not judge, and revenge our blood upon them which dwell upon the earth.
Verse 10.


In the mean while there are given to every one of them white robes, that is,
they are chosen into the order of the blessed. The Ve^s^ 11.
similitude being taken from the custom^ of the Jews in approving and
admitting priests; to wit, receiving those, whom for their genealogy and
perfection of body, they had judged fit (being clothed with white robes) into
the court of the Priests, and so chosing them into the order of priesthood.
Majemonides in Mischine lib. 8. tit. Biath Hammikdas^, cha. 6.. 11. That which
is clearly expressed, cha. 7.13, 14, 15. whereof those that were clothed with
white robes, it is said, That they are before the throne of God and worship him
(to wit) as priests) day and night in the temple.

But to the cry of blood it is answered, that they should rest yet a little
while, until their fellow servants were fulfilled, and Chap. 6.
their brethren, which were to be slain as they were; that is, that they
should forbear a little while, until some of their brethren should be added
to the number, who, after that Christianisme did now begin to reign, were as
they, likewise to be slain, under Licinius, Julianus, and the Arrians; and
then at the sounding of the trumpets, solemn revenge should be taken of the
Empire guilty of so much blood.

Of the sixth Seal.
The sixth Seal begins where the fifth ends; that is, from the year of
Christ 311. wherein that terrible ten years persecution ceased.

Now the chance is an admirable shaking of the heaven and the earth; Whereby
that wonderful change and subversion of the State of Rome heathen, by
Constantine the great and his Successors, the Standard-bearers of the Lamb,
is figured: whereby suppose all the heathen gods shaken out of their heaven,
the Bishops and priests degraded, dejected, and deprived of their revenewes for
ever; the Temple, Churches, and Shrines of devils through the whole Roman
Empire dashed, beaten down, burned, and demolished. Furthermore the Emperous,
Kings, and Princes, who thought to help their gods so greatly in danger, to
denounce war against Christ's Standerd-bearers, to fight with their forces, and
being even conquered, to renew the battle with all their strength, were slain
with admirable slaughters, discomfited and put to ^light: until at last, the
estate growing desperate, there was none could be found to succor any more the
Roman religion, entering into ruin with so great a crash. So I conceive I have
comprehended in a few words, whatsoever the holy Ghost would set ^ut by those
lofty allegories pertaining to this seal. And this is the first fulfilling of
the victory of Christ, the foundation whereof was laid in the first seal. For
the noting of which, in what age of the Empire it should happen, the seals
which hitherto have gone before do serve, the differences of time which in the
mean space did run on being foreshewed. It remains now, that we apply to the
several parts of the prophetical Chap. 6.
allegory, the interpretation already given, and show the reason thereof:
which we will do, the whole context being first se before our eyes; which is
thu^.

12. And I beheld when he ha^ ope^eath sixth seal, and lo there was a great
earthquake, and the S^n became as black as sackcloth of hair, and ^he [whole]
Moon became like blood.

13. And the stars of heaven fell upon the earth, as a fig^ree ^asteth her
unripe figgs, when it is shaken of a mighty wind^; and the heaven departed as a
book that is roll: together. 14. And every mountain and Island were moved out
of their places.

15. And the Kings of the earth and the great men and the tribunes, and the
rich men and the mighty, and ^very bond ^an and every freeman hide themselves
in dens and the rocks of the moun^ains.

16. And said to the mountains and rock^; fall on us and hi^e us from the face
of him that sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.

17. Because the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?

These representations of terrible slaughters, and as I may say, turning things
upside down are o^dinary, used by the prophets Maje^onides. Mo^e Neb part. 2
cap 29. The A^a^ians, say of him to whom some singular mi^for^^ne has happened
that his heaven i^ tur^ed o earth, or has fallen upon hi^ earth compare it
w^^h ^amen^. ^.1. Chap. 6.
after the custom of the East; as our poets also have their figures, their
ornaments. So Jeremy chap. 4. 24. he des^ribeth the destruction of Judea, as if
all things were to be re^uced to the ancient Chaos. I beheld the earth, says
he, and behold (...) it was without form and void; and the heavens, and there
was no light in them. I saw the mountains and lo they were moved, and all the
hills and they were disordered. See the rest likewise Joel chap. 2. 10. of the
horrible destruction thereof by the army of the Northern Locusts. The earth
trembled says he, before him, the heavens were moved, ^he sun and moon were
darkened, and the stars withdrew their br^ghtnesse. But let us handle every one
of them more distinctly.

Behold, says he, there was a great earthquake in the Greek Verse 1^.
(...), that is, a shaking of heaven and earth, as in the words following is
manifest, For the latin word terrae motus, not does fully express the Greek.
For such a^ earthquake witness the Apostle H^brewes 12. 26. upon the place of
Haggai, yet once more and ^aggai ^ 6.
I will shake the heaven and the earth shows (...), Hag. 2.6.
the change of those things that are shaken. which may be confirmed out of the
same Haggaus Verse 21 22. of the same chapt^r, where he i^terpreteth this
parable of the change and alallteration of the kingdoms of the world by way of
further explication. I will shake the heaven and the earth, and will overthrow
(...).
the throne of kingdoms, and will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the
heathen etc. we therefore as else where in the Apocalypse, so here also, will
understand by the shaking of the earth and heaven, the ruin of things; and as
it were the turning of things vpside down.

And now the object of this change, as of the former chances also under the
Seals, is the Roman Empire; but not the Politic government by the Cesars
for this form is not yet to be dissolved) but as it is subject in a religious
respect to Satan as Prince, and to his angels the devils. This ^ivellish
government of the Roman Empire, the storm of which rests upon this Seal
shallbe overthrown and broken in pieces with a great noise.

And the Same becam^ black as sackcloth of hair and the Moon became as blood,
that is, through defect, of ^he adjective became ellipsim
as redd as blood: now it is a circumlocution, of the eclipse of the ligths,
where in the Sun is wont to appear black, but the Chap. 6.
Moon reddish. To which that of Esaias. chap. 13. 10. concerning the punishment
of Babylon is altogether like. The same shallbe darkened verse 21.
in his rising, and the Moon shall not give forth her light Septuagiat. (...)
as Mattheu. 24. 29. neither is there any other sense to be made in the opinion
of Aben Ezra of that in the same Esaias. c^ap. 24. concerning the dstruction,
wherewith the Lord being about to reign in Jerusalem (all on as in this Seal)
would pu^nish the hoaste of heaven an high, and the Kings of the earth upon the
earth The moon, says he, shall be confounded, and the sunn shall be ashamed
(that is both Verse 23.
of them as if they hid their faces for shame, shallbe covered with da^kenes)
when the Lord of hoasts shall ra^gne i^ mount Sion and in Jerusalem and in the
sight of his ancients gloriously. But what do these things thou will say
belong to the Roman Demonarchie? hearken and I will tell thee In the prophets
(as thou shall hear anon in the following visions) every kingdom and body of
go^ernment resembles the world: as the parts also, the heaven, the earth, the
stars serve for that repre^entation, That it was common with the Easter^e
nations to use the parable of the world to figure things, it may appear by the
chimi call philosophy proceeding from the Arabians and ^gyptians, wherein all
most every wordly body, likned to the world, is said to be compact of heaven,
Earth, and stars.
for proof whereof (to omit others) that on place of Esaias suffizeth chap. 51.
15. I am the Lord thy God, who divided the Sea (it is the Red sea) and the
waves thereof roared, the Lords of ^oasts is his name. 16. And I putt my words
in thy mouth (that is I give thee my law) and covered thee with the shadow of
mine hand; that I may plant the heaven^ and lay the foundation of the earth
(that is, make thee a kingdom or politic world,) and say unto Sion, thou art
my people. The speech is of the deliverance, wherewith God delivered the people
of Isra^l out of Egypt, that of them he might found a kingdom or common wealth
for himself in the land of promise. O^t of which also it will not be hard to
gather, what that new heaven and new earth may be in the same prophet: (chap.
65. 17 and 66.22.) ^o wit, a new world of the ^ame form, According to this
representation therefore, heaven in the Chap. 6.
prophetical notion shall express whatsoever is lofty in the state of any
kingdom or common wealth, contrariwise the Earth, that which is in^eriour: and
he st^r^, those who obtain and bear r^place in that height, by which reason
the S^nne and the Moon the principal light, of heaven: the Sun will point
out the first (...)
and chiefest Majesty and dignity of a k^ngdome, the Moon the next to the
first which c^rteinly it is so true, that the Chalde paraphrast in the prophets
often times for the Sun and Moon does put Kingdom, and glory, as Esaias 90,
20, I^r, 15. 9.

Let therefore the Sun in the Roman kingdom of idols, by right of
principality be ^he D^agon him self, or Satan; especially since the holy Ghost
from him has named the whole Roman Empire in this state that is here han^led
chap. 12. the Red seven Verse. ^.
headed Dargon, as there we shal^see. The Moon, the second light of this
heaven, thou may^st call the high Prist^ood now from the very beginning anuexed
to the Imperial majesty and as it were a part of him: or rather the Emperor
being the high Pri^st of Satan, with the whole college of high Priests, who
made on body with the Emperor their head, and the same were chief both in the
Religious services of the Gods, and the whole Cicero in orat, Pro Domo ad ^
Pontif. Dioni^. lib. 2.
common wealth, not bound to give any account to any power of Senate, or any
above themselves, and therefore not without cause to have the second place in
this kingdom to the Dragon himself. I confess, it is not always needful,
that in such allegories so exact an account of every thing should be requi^ed
but when it may be done, le^t us apply every several pe^^icle. The Sun
therefore, which we have showed, was then made black, and suffered the eclipse
and darkning of hi^ d^refull majesty when the Roman Emperors renouncing by
^ap^i^me him, with Chap. 6.
all his Angels, pompes, and wor^hip, gave them selves over to Christ the ^^^n
of righteousness. The Sunn^ being thus darkened and deprived of its light, how
shall the Moo^^ which ^orrowet^ all her light from the sun be safe; And
surely Constantinus, Constantius, Valentianus, Valeus, straight way as it was
meet, did renounce the thing it self, or the office of the high pr^^^hood,
denying thenceforth to serve the devil: yet the name, which you would wonder
at, they did no^ presently reject, but retained it a little while added ^o the
rest of their titles. Gratianus first (a worthy work.) refused the title as
also the po^^ificial robe offered him by the Pre^stes after the cust^me, as
unworthy a Christian man* which chang surely was of such consequence that the
Holy Ghost thenceforth will account ^he Roman Caesar, so deprived of his
Preisthood for a new as it were head and King of the Roman Beast, as in chap.
17. we shall ^eare. But it that Moon shonne with some light though dim and
weak; until Th^^do^^us the first that Malle of hetheni^me, took away ^ve^
the very col^edge of the po^^ists with all the other r^bble of Preest^s: by on
^dict Empl^ying all their reven^w for his exchequor. Now therefore it was time
for Satan to seek out for him self another high preiste. But I go unto the
rest.

And the ^^a^rs of heaven fell ^^to the earth as a fig tree casts her green
fi^gs, when it is sh^ken of a mighty made: and the ver. 1^.
heaven depart^^ (...) a book that is ^owl^ together.

O^ the heaven vanished, etc. That is, the stars of heaven appeared ver^. 14.
not, even as letters va^ish, in a book rolled up together aft^r the manner of
the auncie^ts. For there is an ^llipsis of the former substantive on both
sides, familiar in the Hebrew, as Deuteronomy. ^0.19. 2 kings. 28. 31. and elsewhere
often. So that this of the Chap. ^.
disapearing of the heaven, and the other of the fa^l of the stars, do
mutually explayne themselves; neither are they to be separated from on another,
as it is amiss distinguished, but they ought to have binne included within the
same point. But the whole pla^e is taken out of E^ay. chap. 34. V. 4. where
plainly in the self ^ame representation, but inverting the order, the holy
Gho^^^ does paint out the destruction ^ond ruin of the Kingdom of Edom, as
hear the kingdom of Idols. The heavens, says he, shall be rolled together as
a book, and all the hoasts of them, (that is the stars) shall fa^l down as
the leaf from the vine tree, and as a fal^i^g green figg from the figgtree.
The meaning whereof the spirit* ^n the Revelation would render something more
cle^re by a double supply, of words; there with the additament of the word
(...) departed, here of (...), shaken of a mighty wind. Furthermore concerning
the same ruin of Edom, with little milder circumstances then Esaias, do
Obadia^, Ieremia 49 from the 7th. Verse. to the 22th. Ezechi^ll 35 through the
whole, and 25 12 handle it, which therefore I mention least any should conceive
the descripsion of Esaias not to agree to that great day of universal judgment.
Now therefore to return to the Revelation. The stars of the Roman heaven of
idol Gods were, both the Gods them selves, being cheiftaynes of this kingdom
under Satan their Prince, and also the Preests being peers though of an
inferior rank: for stars with stars do differ in degree and in height.
These therefore are they who in this wonderful commotion of the Roman state
being shaken from their seats, fell to the earth, as a figgtree casts her
green figgs when it is shaken of a great wind.

Neither will any so much wonder at this interpretation of the Chap. 6.
star^s to be meant of the Gods, and Preistes of the Gods, who shall remember,
both the Gods of the gentiles every where in the holy scripture to be named the
host of heaven, and also in Daniell the Preests and Elders of the pleasant
Land or people of Israel, whom Dan. 8.9.10.
Anti^chus Epiphanes cast down to the ground, to be called by that name. It
waxed great, says he, against the hoaste of heaven, and it cast down upon
the ground of the hoaste and of the stars, and trod upon them. which he did
wickedly against the people of the true God, the very same did the Christian
Emperors religiously against the people of the Dragon; yet with this
differance, that there was only one Prince of the host of heaven, the Lord
I^hovah, who made heaven and earth. Against whom, though Autioc^us might exalt
him self, yet he could not throw him down from heaven, but here in the
Roman heaven there were many Princes or Devils, ^ll which wholly the Emperors
the s^anderd bearers of Christ threw down. Add here unto that this exposition
may be confirmed by the Synchronisme of the dragon throw down from heaven with
his guard chap. 127. The dragon fought and his Angels, eight, but they
prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in heaven, nine, For the
great d^agon was cast down, which is called the devil and Satan, and his
Angels (that is to say, devils worshipped by the names of gods) with him, etc.

It follows, And all hills and Islands were removed out of their places.
Perhaps mountains and Islands may be taken for ^e^se 14.
men of loftier and meaner condition, which are presently in the next verse
reckoned up, but that the name of an Island agreed not to this interpretation.
It seems therefore more probable, if it go thus, that both do signify men of
a lofty estate, because that Chap. ^.
both are eminent; the hills upon the earth, the Islands in the Sea. But what
if we understand here by Islands, not land raised up in the midst o^ waters,
but Churches, as they were called, which being environed with a public or
private enclosure, were separated from the buildings near adjoining? So then
may we not take both, as well the mountains as the Islands to be meant of the
Temple, and shrines of idoks to be thrown down, in this tempest through the
Roman Empire? There is none but sees how fitly the not on of mountains
agrees with such an interpretation as this; who is not ignorant, that it is
the custom of idolaters to build their Altars and shrines for their gods in
such high places, whereupon every where in the old testament the name of high
places is frequent; yea Jeremy. 3. 23. of the mountains and hills themselves
to be understood of the chappells of idolles. Truly, says be, the hills were
liers and the multitude of mountains, etc. Neither now do Islands taken for
Temples refuse such interpretation; since it is a chief property in Temples,
that they be like Islands; that they be profaned neither by communion, or else
by joining to the walls of other houses. But if that happily please not, that
one and the same thing be represented by two names, if thou will and please
take mountains for chapp^ls in the country and fields; and Islands for Temples
of idols in cities. But in such things as these, such small matters seem not
needful to be curiously sought out; as neither happily in general is every
small moment of prophetical allegories so carefully to be examined by the
event. It is enough if the sum of the matter every where agree.

Now this demolishing of shrrines and Temples came to pass, by the same Author
the most godly standard bearer of Chap. 6.
Christ Theodosius: For Constantin: the great only shut up the Temples of the
gods, he did not abolish them, Except at Cons^antinoble, and neighboring
places. Iulianus opened them again. This man at length commanded them to be
utterly defaced. The history is obvious to any, neither is it needful that I
here rehearse, what is recorded of that matte^ in Ecclesiastical writers. Yet
happily ^t will not be unpleasing to hear Zosimus a pagan historian
complaining or chaffing, at this so cruel destiny of his gods. The holy
places, faith he, of the gods, they ^attered down throughout all cities and
countries; and so much they were all endangered who thought them to be gods or
at all looked up to heaven, and did a door those things which are beheld
therein. Surely, after what manner the Lord, when he was about to lead old
Israel out of the Aegyytian bondage, is said to have executed judgment upon
the gods of the Egyptians; (Exodus 12. 12. Number. 33. 4.) after the same manner
here, being about to deliver his Christ an people from the R^mane tyranny, he
executed judgment upon the gods of the Romans.

But thou will say, had the gods no Atlantes when there was such trouble and
the heaven mingled with the earth, who might underpropp their falling heaven
with their soldiers, and enc^unter the standard-bearers of Christ, so throwing
all down? Yes truly they had; but they ran the same fortune with their
devils. For the Kings of the earth faith he, and the great men Verse 15.
and the Tribunes and the rich men and the mighty men and every bondsman and
freeman, that is, Maximianus, Gallerius, Max^ntius, Maximinus, with Martinianus
Caesar, Licinius, ^ulianus, Emperors Chap. 6.
(add also if ^hou wilt Eugenius and ^rbogastes tyrants) with all the
companions of their infidelity, of what order and degree soever, who with might
and maine endeavored to defend their ancient Religion, and to help the state
of their gods now going to destruction, and to restore it now fallen and l^st
at last were brought to such streights, that they hide themselves in the Verse.
16.
dens and Rocks of the mountains. And said to the mountains and to the
rocks, fall upon us and hide us from the ^ace of him that fitteth upon the
throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. For Verse 1^.
the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand. It is a
shameful representation as well of them that fly and hide themselves, as also
of those that are weary of their lives through despair of their estates. The
like unto which thou have concerning the destruction of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, Luke 23.30. Likewise Hos^a 10. 8. of the destruction of Samaria and
of the ^doll^ thereof; but the whole, Esaias 2. 18.

But here the Reader may observe this first, that in these words is contained
the key for the opening of this whole vision; to wit that here is handled some
glorious victory of the Lamb, whereby he subdueth and overth^oweth his enemies
with a deadly destruction. Furthermore since these whose destruction is
described, fly from their enemy the Lamb, and are willing to be hidden from
his wrath; thence it may appear, though it be directed by no Synchronisme,
that that destruction is not to be applied in no hand to Christian Kings, but
strangers from Christ; and thereupon ought not to be interpreted of the
slaughters brought upon the then newly Christian Empire by the Goths and other
barbarous Nations.

That which lastly the Kings, Princes, Tribunes, and the other Gentiles which
were in the same condition with them, do add, Chap. 6.
That the great day of the wrath of the Lamb was come, and that Verse 17.
none could be able to stand: They are the words of men acknowledging the power
of Christ, whom until this time they had contemned in respect of their Gods,
and indeed perceaving all further endeavor of resisting Christians would
become lost labor. And truly upon the matter all did conceave so, but
Galerius, Maximinus, Licinius even with open confession though against their
will^ gave glory to God.

For Eusebius with others is our Author, that Galerius ((...) whom CHRIST began
in this judgment) being taken with a filthy and horrible disease, whereby his
body putrified Worms crawling therein with an intolerable stink; at length
being conscious of his wickednesses which he had committed against the Church,
was smitten, confessed his fault to God, and left of his persecution against
the Christians, and by Laws and Imperial edicts hastened the building up of
their Churches, and commanded to offer accustomed prayers for him; and a little
while after yielded his soul being guilty of as great cruelty as ever any
against Christians. Eus^bius de vita Constantini, lib. 1. cap. 50.

Maximinus a most cruel enemy of Christians, r^lying upon witchcraft,
div^^ations of Idols, and Oracles of Devils, for all things whatsoever he
went about, nevertheless being once or twice overcome by Licinius yet
defending the Christian faith with Constantine his colleague, throwing from him
the ensigns of his Empire fled, lay hidden in the Fields, and little villages
a certain space, in the habit of a servant; and at length being shut up in
Tarsus of Cilicia and kindled with rage, slew many Priests and Prophets, of the
Gods, by whose Oracles being persuaded he had undertaken the War, as
coseners, false deceavers, and to conclude as betrayers of his safety;
afterward giving glory to the God of the Christians, set forth a decree for
their liberty: but being suddenly smitten by God exacting punishment of so
many wickednesses against Christians, with a lamentable and mortal grief, and
his flesh by little and little eaten out and wasted, and at length his eyes
starting out for hea^e, wherewith he burned all over (a just talio of
punishment, which he had devised for Christians) he ended his life,
confessing himsel^e to God, and acknowledging that he worthily suffered those
things for his madness, and rashness against Christ. See the same in Histor.
Eccles. lib. 9. cap. 8. and 10. and lib. 8. cap. 27. Also de vita Constantins
lib. 1. cap. 51. 52.

To conclude Licinius a forsaker of the Christians, to whose part he had
betaken himself a little while with Constantine, and greatly boasting to his
Soldiers of the multitude of his Gods against that one, and that new and
strange God of Constantin^, (for so he termed him:) being overcome in two great
battles (in one whereof out of an Army consisting of 130000. scars^ 30000.
escaped) at length when as yet he would not rest, being together with his
confederates condemned by Constantine according to the Law of Arms, was
deservedly punished. But when these men who had bin Authors of taking up Arms
against God, were brought (together with the Tyrant) to the place of execution,
as before, they had carried themselves insolently, having placed their
confidence in vain Gods; so now they confessed that they understood in very
deed what and how wonderful Constantines God was, and that they did
acknowledge him to be the true and only God. De vita Constan. lib. 2. cap.
4.5, 18.

A^ appendix.
Out of the ancient monuments of the Egyptians, Persians, and Indians (the
Authors whereof were Tarphan, the interpreter of Phar^oh, Baramus, the
interpreter of Saganissa the King of the Persians, (who was of one time with
Dio^letian) and Sy^bachamus the interpreter of the King of the In^ians)
Aposamar, or, according to others, Achmetes, the son of Seirim the Arabian
gathered together (...). or interpretations of Dreams: See Ier. 49. 7. But
especially Baru^^. ^. 23.
as that Nation was, both most studious of such and the like arts, now from
furthest antiquity: and also while their Empire lasted desirous to translate
the writings of all Nations wheresoever into the Arabian tongue. This little
book long since in the Greek tongue, the Author being unknown Johannes
Leunclavius brought to light, being by him turned into Latin in the former age
out of the Liberarie of I^: Sambucus, the same Greek Copy afterward, in the
year 1603. N^colaus Rigal^ius in his Onirocriticis did set forth out of the
Liberary of the most Christian King, supplying what was wanting in Sambuchus
his Copy. In this book is to be seen that very many of those prophetical
representations, which so much pull our men, were familiar to the Eastern
Nations, at least not unusual their di^mations. But Tarphan the Egyptian
seems to be the most ancient of all the Authors, from whom the collection is
made; as who not only calls himself Pharaohs interpreter, but every where
in his interpretations, uses the name of Pharaoh for King; that it may seem
he lived then, when yet Egypt had its Kings, and them called Pharaohs. The
Per^^a^ with his King Saganissa, was of the same age with Di^clesia^ as I have
said. The Indian is of a latter age, as who shows himself a Christian every
where but the consent of them both with the Egyptian is wonderful.

When therefore we willingly learn the use of words, and phrases in holy
writ, from these Nations in time past bordering upon the Hebrews, and more
acquainted with their manners and Chap. 6.
use of speech; why should we disdain the same here in the significations of
prophetical figures and representations? (since according to the Masters of
the Hebrews deciduum prophetiae sit somnium,) Let no man therefore blame me if
I take out of this Author, Maiemonides More Neb. part. 2. cap. 36.
those things which seem to make for the understanding of the Figures of the
Seals now expounded: the same I shall do afterward with the good leave of
the Reader (as occasion shall suffer) in the Trumpets and the rest of the
visions.

These therefore give light to the first Seal, and partly to those following
also.

Chapter 233. By the opinion of the Indians, Persians, and Egyptians a
courageous horse called Pharas (in Hebrew (...) in Arabique (...) a horse) has
reference in interpretations of dreams, to eminency and digniti^. Hackney
horses are taken for a certain inferior nobility and glory.

If any in his dreams shall seem to be mounted upon a nimble and stirring
horse, he shall find before the people renown and ample estimation, and
eminency and worship.

Also if any one armed shall seem to be mounted upon a courageous horse, he
shall attain to authority, with good renown according to his arms.

Chapter 249. According to the interpretations of the Persians and Egyptians.
If any shall seem to have held arrows with bows, he shall with joy insult
over his enemies.

He has more pertaining to the same purpose, as Chap. 152. out of the learning
of the Indians concerning the great and long tail of a horse signifying the
company and train of authority; concerning a curtall, signifying the loss as
well of liberty as of principality; to wit, if he were a Prince that shall
dream that he is mounted upon such a horse. Likewise Chap. ^33. Lighting from
horseback, if it be voluntary, of voluntary diminution of government; but if
unwillingly, it is expounded of surrogating a successor into the dignity.

These things will give light to the third Seal. Chap. 6.

Chap. 15. Out of the learning of the Indians. If any shall see in his dream a
balance or a bell as they call it (it is a kind of balance) Campanum.
to be hanged in any place; let him understand it of the person of a Judge. And
if he have a suite in law, and in weighing he shall see them to be equal one
to another; he shall obtain his right.

If he seem to see the balance equal and clean, let him know the Judge of
the place to be just: but if he shall see the scales naught and broken, let him
think the Judge of the place wherein he had his dream unjust.

Likewise Bushels also with measures have the same interpretation in
proportion, but they are applied to the persons of inferior Judges.

These things to the sixth Seal.
Chap. 167. Out of the Monuments of the Indians, Persians and Egyptians. The
(...) has reference in interpretation to the person of a King, and the Moo^e
to the person of a Prince next to the King. Venus to the person of the Empress
or Queen, likewise other great Stars to honorable personages belonging to
the King.

Whilst I read these things, I am not far from conceiving that glorious
ti^le of Sapor the King of Persia, in his Letters sent to Constantius the
Emperor [Sapor King of Kings, partaker of the Stars, brother of the Sun
and Moon, to Constantius Caesar my brother greeting] which Ammianus
Marcellinus imputes to the Persian pride, to be none other then a style
peculiar to the Nation arising from such representations, which ought to seem
the less strange to any, when we see even our Heralds in blazoning the arms
of Emperors and Kings, to use the name of the Sun, Moon and other Plannets.
Hither also is to be referred that interpretation of Jacob of his son Joseph's
dream, of the Sun, Moon and eleven stars worshipping him, which he
immediately as not ignorant of the parables of the East, applies to his
Family; interpreting the Sun and the Moon to be understood of himself and
his wife, as King and Queen, the Stars, Chap. 6.
of his sons, as it were Princes of the Family, Genes. 37. 10. But let us
return to our Achmetes and he goes on in the same Chapter.

If any shall seem to see the Sun in the Heaven wanting light and rays, the
calamity and dishonor belongs to the person of the King.

If the Son shall seem to any to be eclipsed, that portendeth affliction and
war to the King.

If any shall seem to see the Sun covered with a cloud, the King shall fall
into affliction and diseases, according to the manner of the overclouding.

If any shall seem to see the Sun, the Moon and Stars gathered together
without light; If he be of the number of the Peers, by reason of that
obscurity he shall fall into utter destruction; If he be the King, environed
on all sides he shall be assaulted, and shall fall into great affliction.

Chap. 168. Out of the observation of the Persians and Egyptians. If any shall
seem to see the Stars cast but a very small light, disparkled and scattered
and full of obscurity: this reflecteth upon the calamity of the Nobles and
wealthy and the Kings Presidents.

THis sixth Seal being finished, we should immediately in order proceed to the
seventh bringing forth a seven fold plague; as which is joined immediately with
the sixth. But the holy Ghost of set purpose has thought meet to make a little
stand: until he should set forth the state of a certain company of the same
time with it, as well to be safe, as to overcome, under the plagues thereof. We
will therefore first give what light of interpretation we can to that Vision.
And then we will continue the order of the S^ales begun.

Chap. 7.
THE VISION OF THE COMPANY OF THE SERVANTS OF GOD, Or of the Elect and
faithful Church to be preferred amidst the ruins of the seventh Seal or the
Trumpets, exhibited in a Type
Of an hundred forty and four thousand sealed out of all the Tribes of Israel
at the entrance of the seventh Seal.
THE Vision of the sealed is twice placed, first Upon Chap. 7.
here at the entrance of the Trumpets, in the first Prophecy; again as it
were an opposite of the reigning Beast, in the second Prophecy, Chap. 14. and
that in a double respect. Here for their preservation amidst the destruction of
the Trumpets; there for their praise for keeping their allegiance to God and
the Lamb, when as other the inhabitants of the world as revolters and
Apostates had received the mark of the Beast. Out of which it plainly
appears, that the Prophecy of the Beast Chap. 7.
contemporizeth with the matters of the Trumpets: but how far, is to be
determined else where; to wit, not farther then the going out of the sixth
Trumpet, wherein the months of the Beast are ended with the days of the
mourning Witnesses, Chap. 11. 14. For the present our purpose is to cast the
light of our interpretation to the former vision of the sealed, wherein their
preservation is handled: of their praise afterward, when we come to that.

Afterward, says he (that is the Vision of the sixth Seal being Verse. 1.
past, and the seventh which is of the Trumpets even now beginning) I saw four
Angels standing upon the four corners of the earth holding the four winds of
the earth, that the wind should not blow upon the earth, nor upon the Sea, nor
upon any tree.

The meaning is, he saw Angels which had power to restrain the Winds, that
is, the tempests of wars and calamities, out of what quarter of the world
soever they should proceed, until it pleased God; but at his beck, if he
should at any time give the sign, to give them liberty through the world: not
the same Angels with those of the Trumpets, but which yet at their sounding
should set at liberty those winds, one while out of this, another while out
of that part of the world, for the wasting and overthrow of the Roman estate.
For the parable of Winds with the Prophets does express warlike motions and
hostile invasions and violent assaults: As Ierem. 49.36. I will bring upon Elam
the four winds from the four quarters of Heaven; and will scatter them
toward all those winds; and there shall be no Nation, whither the outcasts of
Elam shall not come. See the rest. Also, Chap. 51.1. Behold, I says the Lord,
will raise up against Babylon, etc. a destroying wind. 2. And I will send into
Babylon fanners, and they shall fan her, and shall empty her land. Add also,
Chap. 18. 17. As an East wind I will scatter them (that is the Jews) before
the enemy; that is, the King of Babylon. Hither also that of Daniel seems to
be referred, Chap. 7.2, 3. Behold, the four winds of the heaven strove upon
the great sea; and four great Beasts came up from the Sea: that is, out of the
conflict of the Nations every where fighting together and striving for the
dominion and Empire, there arose four great Kingdoms. I saw, says he,
another Angel afcending from the Sun rising, Chap. 7.
having the Seal of the living God: (happily therefore it is Verse. 2.
the Lord Christ) and he cried alowd to the four Angels, to whom it was given
(to wit, by setting the winds at liberty, which they had restrained) to hurt
the Earth and the Sea. 3. Saying, hurt not the Earth neither the Sea, nor the
trees, until we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads.

That is, loose not the Winds no^ suffer them to have power of going and
raging upon the world. For he names the Earth, the Sea, and Trees, answerably
to the representation of Winds; as to which the Winds are wont to bring
damage; to the Earth, by the ruin of houses; to the the Sea, by shipwreck; to
the Trees, by a manifold overthrow and rending. Forbear says he, until we
have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads. That is, by imprinting
some mark upon them, we have distinguished as it were the elect company of
God, over whom these destroying Winds (which shall destroy the other company
of men) have no power: but over whom, taking regard to their Seal, the Divine
providence would continually watch, least in this ruin of the Roman state,
which the Trumpets should bring, their sacred Progeny should be extinguished.
For so provision would be made, that neither they who did hurt them could be
free from punishment, as having transgressed the bounds of that power which God
had given them; and moreover the damage, if any were done at length should be
repaired by God. It has allusion p^rhaps to the place of Ezech. Chap. 9. Where
those that sigh, and cry out for the abominations of Jerusalem, are marked by
the Angel, to this end, lest they sustain like destruction with the wicked and
reprobate by the smiters.

And surely as touching the event, if any shall weigh the state of the times
here handled; it will seem almost miraculous how it could come to pass, that
the Roman Empire being scattered and destroyed with so great a destruction of
the Cities and Inhabitants; so that the ancient Inhabitants being well near
extinguished, it was inhabited by barbarous nations and strangers from Christ:
Yet the Church there should continue in the midst of these evils, and the
world as it were conspiring her ruin; Yea also (as we shall hear in the
proper place) the Beast at the same Chap. 7.
time polluting whole Christendom with Idolatrous worship, should
nevertheless cherish in her bosom a company (as this is) uncorrupted, and for
that cause tenderly regarded by God. Of such consequence was it to be fenced
with Gods Seal.

And I heard, says he, the number of the sealed; there were Verse. 4.
sealed an hundred forty four thousand of all the Tribes of the children of
Israel, that is, twelve times twelve thousand, out of every Tribe twelve
thousand.

For even as in the beginning, we have seen the Theater of Visions or the
Apocaliptique session described, after the representation and state of the old
Synagogue; and a great part of the Types of this Book has relation to it; so
that even the counterfeit Christians in the Epistles to the Churches for that
cause bear the name of counterfeit Jews: so here also the Catholic Church
of the Gentiles, to be ^enced with the Seal of God, is figured by the Type of
Israel; the twelve Apostles of that, aptly answering to so many Patriarchs of
this. And it is so done not without good cause, as well for other causes, as
specially because the Church, even from the first rejection of the Jews,
hitherto, is gathered out of the Gentiles, succeeded in the room of Israel, and
is, as I may so call it, surrogated Israel; and in that place for a little
while esteemed by God, until, his old people again obtaining mercy, the
fullness of the Gentiles shall Verse. 9.
come in; that is, that innumerable multitude out of all Nations, Tribes,
People and Tongues, which the sealing of this Israel at length being finished,
John testifies he saw singing praises to God and to the Lamb. For this indeed
is that (I speak of the surrogation) that the Apostle Paul would teach, Romans
Chap. 11. whilst he urges verse. 11. the fall of the Jews to have brought
salvation to the Gentiles, and verse. 15. their casting away to have been the
reconciling of the world. Not that otherwise the Gentiles in their time should
not have been called, (sithence the whole Quire of Prophets proclaim that the
Gentiles should be gathered to the glory of Israel, and turned to the Lord,
which neither the Jews of old nor at this day doubt of) but that not by this
calling which was by anticipation, substitution, and for provocation to
jealousy, except the Jews had first renounced Christ. The discreet Reader may
know what I mean. It was necessary, says Chap. 7.
the Apostle, Acts 13. 46. that the word of God should first have been opened
to you: but after you reject it, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life; lo, we turn to the Gentiles. But concerning the preventive conversion
of the Gentiles (that is, which should go before the restoring of the Jews
(that I may remember that also) that testimony of Amos seems to be taken,
cited by James in the Council of the Apostles, Acts 15. and for that purpose
perhaps, then chosen before other Prophesies, which otherwhere might have been
had concerning the choosing of the Gentiles to be the people of God. For he
means, that not only the name of the Lord should be called upon by the
Gentiles (that is, that Verse. 17.
the Gentiles should become his people) but also that that in part should then
happen, whilst yet the tabernacle of David should lie Verse. 16.
fallen down, that is, the kingdom of Israel should not yet be restored by
Christ: After those things, says he, I will return and build Verse. 16.
again the tabernacle of David fallen down: and I will build again the ruins
thereof, and will set it up: verse. 17. that the residue of men might seek
after the Lord, and all the Gentiles upon whom my name (...) is called, that
is, that the rest of the men, together with those Gentiles upon whom heretofore
my name was called, then at length should seek after, and worship me the true
God. For for that which is now had in the Hebrew Text: (...) that is, (...) that
they may possess the r^nant of Edom. The ancient Copy seems to be read,
(...), that the remnant of men may seek the Lord. Yet not withstanding out of
the Hebrew reading which is now us^d, the same seems may be gathered
concerning the preventive choi^e of the Gentiles to be the people of God; to
wit, in this sense: the restored Jews, then when the Tabe^acle of David that is
fallen down shall be raised up, shall inherit the remnant of Edom, as also the
Gentiles upon whom the name of the Lord heretofore had been called. Therefore
some of the Gentiles shall become the people of God before the raising up of
the Tabe^acle of David. But enough of these things.

As concerning the number of the sealed, the number of twelve is an ensign of
the Apostolic race, which by multiplying the thousands as well of each tribe
in particular, as of all in general Chap. 7.
does express the Apostolic progeny, a progeny indeed, though increased
into more thousands, yet no whit degenerate, but expressing their parents faith
and holiness. For even as to have the number of the Beast (as we shall after
hear) does design the race of the Beast or which follow the Beast: so also to
bear the number of the Apostles, the legitimate offspring of the Apostles.
That this is the most true meaning of that multiplication by twelve, the
Analogy of new Jerusalem she weth; in the frame whereof, and the dimension of
the Gates, Foundations, Court, compass of the walls, longitude, latitude,
altitude, the same number of twelve or multiplication by twelve is used. And
that we should no further doubt to what end that number of twelve tended: lo,
concerning the twelve foundations of the wall it is expressly said, that the
names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb were written in them, Chap. 21.14.

Of the tribe of Judah, of the tribes of Reuben, Gad, Aser, Nephthali, Manasses,
Simeon, Levi, Isacher, Zabulon, Joseph, Verse. 5. etc.
Benjamin, of every of them, are sealed twelve thousand.

No otherwhere in the whole Scripture, are the tribes reckoned up in this
order, though otherwise they be diversely reckoned. For besides, that Dan at all
appears not, nor the name of Eplorai^ is heard of; in the rest there is a
departure from the rule of all reckonings, which are otherwhere found, neither
is either the order of nativitie, or of birthright, or of habitation kept; but
the last mingled with those in the middle, and the younger sons of the hand
maids are once or twice set before the elder borne of the wifes; so that it is
not to be doubted, but that some special mystery of the type lies hid in an
order so new and unaccustomed. This, we seem to have found out in some
measure, by Gods blessing upon our undertakings, to wit thus.

First, from this type Dan is rejected, Ephr^i^ is not spoken of as being
Ringleaders and Captains of the Israelitish Apostasy (Judges Chap. 17. and
18.) and the same in the time of the kingdom, were the receivers of the
public idols at D^^ and Bethel: wherefore they were altogether unfit to
represent the Professors of pure Religion.

But that notwithstanding the number of twelve may be filled, Levi is set for
Dan, the name of Joseph tacitly supplyeth Chap. 7.
Ephraims.

The number thus settled, the sons of the wives and the handmaides are
intermingled without regard of birthright, and the children of the handmaides,
are adopted for children of their Gal. 3.2^.
Dames. For in Christ there is neither bond nor free, but all are of Colos.
3.11.
one account.

Since therefore the sons of Lea, as well natural, as adopted are twice so
many as Rachels; to wit, of the first eight, of the other only four: thereupon
this order is observed in reckoning them up, that by a double account also
four of Lea her sons by course are set together with two of Rachels: but on
both sides those tribes as the better are preferred before the rest, which some
act of theirs memorable in sacred writ had commended, concerning the true
worship of God, and zeal toward him. The offspring of Lea verily leads the
first troop^, in regard of the prorogative of Christ, the Prince of that
company, as springing out of that stock: in this manner.

The first quaternion of the sons of Lea.
1. Judah. 2. Reuben. 3. Gad. 4. Aser.
The first couple of the sons of Rachel.
5. Nephthali. 6. Manasses.
The other quaternion of the sons of Lea.
7. Simeon. 8. Levi. 9. Issachar. 10. Zabulon.
The other couple of the sons of Rachel.
11 Joseph. 12. Benjamin.



The reason of the order of the sons of Lea.
Out of the sons of Lea as thou ^eest, Judah, Reuben, Gad, Aser, make up the
first quaternion, as enobled above the rest with that The name of Christ.
name which the type is to resemble.

Amongst these the first place, as it is meet, is given to Judah for Christ the
King of the faithful issued out of that tribe.

The second to Reube^, whom that famous Protestation concerning the Altar of
Witness built at the bank of Jordan enobled; (...). Joshua 22. 21.
whereby he deserved that he should not submit his birthright (for he was the
first borne) to any other then Judah the kingly tribe. Chap. 7.


Gad obtained the third place, as he was Reubens companion in that famous
Protestation of retaining the true worship of God: and moreover famous for
Eliah the Prophet, and Iehu the King, the destroyers of Baalisme.

To conclude the fourth and last place in this quaternion Aser Verse. 6.
takes, famous for the widow of Sarepta, who fed Elia^ (for Sar^pta belonged
to the lot of Aser) as also noble for Anna the Prophetess an Aserite, who gave
testimony to Christ, when he was presented in the Temple according to the Law;
but not to be compared with the three former because either of them was a woman.

Simeon, Levi, Issacher, Zabulon, are cast into the last quaternion; Verse. 7.
for that they are honored with few or no names, or, if they had any, they are
after blotted out with some wickedness. As the zeal of Levi whereby he
approved himself in the wilderness (to say nothing of the sedition of Korah)
was defaced by his continued fellowship with the Apostate and Idolatrous
Israclites. For Jonathan the Levite the nephew of Moses joined in assistance of
worshipping Idols as well with Micha the Ephraimite, as also with the theevish
Danites, the first Idolaters after the death of Joshua, Judges 17. verse. 10. and
18. 30. It may be also the substitution of Levi in the place of Dan might
occasion his thrusting down into the last quaternion.

Further, since the brethren of this quaternion have nothing, wherein any do
excel others: therefore they keep the order of nativitie unchanged, and in
what rank any is borne, according there to he is reckoned.

The reason of the order of the sons of Rachel.
Among the children of Rachel the couple Nephthalin and Manasses lead the
Family; Joseph and Benjamin close the troop. Verse. ^.
Nephthalin and Manasses are preferred because the first was famous for Barach
who vanquished Sisera the Cananite, so for Hira^ whose father was a
Nephthalite, the maker of the instruments and furniture for the Temple of God
(1 King. 7.14. with 2 Chro^. 2. 14.) but also for a greater reason yet (of
which afterward) Chap. 7.
the second was noble in respect of Gedeon the subverter of Baal, and Elis^us
the Prophet.

Indeed the glory of Christ his habitation extolled Nephthalin, though he were
but the son of a handmaid above Manasses: who likewise beginning his
function, fixed his dwelling and seat of his preaching in Capernaum the most
noble City of Nephthalin, and the Metropolis of all Gallile: from whence as it
were from the Episcopal City he went through all Gallile with his Apostles
over and over, teaching the Gospel of the Kingdom in all Synagogues and
Villages, and being glorious by miracles of healing. For this, Reader, I would
have thee to mark, out of the Evangelicall History (because many observe it
not) that our Savior, all the time that he was conversant upon the Earth,
dwelt in Gallile: but in Judea, the chief seat as well of his Nation, as
Tribe, he was not seen but at times of Feasts. And this is that which Esaias
long agone had foretold, Esaias 9. 1. 2. Matthew. 4. 14. That, that Wonderful
Counselor, the Mighty God, the Author of Eternity (Septuagint. (...). The
Father of the world to come) the Prince of Peace; in one word the Messia,
should be a Gallilean; and as it were in recompense and consolation for the
captivity, which Gallile then lately had suffered by the Assyrian first before
all the Regions of the Holy Land, (2 Kings 15. 29) he would make that coast
especially famous by his presence; in special See Adrich^m. Ta^. Naph^h^l. and
himself, page 115. ^.
that high way, called the Way of the Sea, where coming out of Syria to Jordan,
it passes through the middle of Capernaum and thence going forward along the
Sea of Gallile leads into Egypt. Let us hear himself (...) which the Vulgar
distinction set aside, of it own accord and word for word is thus translated:
As at the first he made base the Land of Zabulon and the Land of Nephthal^n;
(to wit as I said, by Tiglath-peleser) so at the last he shall make it glorious
[and renowned] for the way of the Sea (by which the Assyrian came) at the
passage of Jorden (there is Capernaum seated) Gallile of the Gentiles, the
people which walked in darkness (to wit, of affliction) saw a great light, to
the dwellers in the Region of the shadow of death Chap. 7.
a light is risen etc. Will thou know whence and who is the Author of the
blessedness of Galilee, and in that way by the Sea side where the ^oord of
Jordan is? he presently shows, Because a child is borne to us, a Son is
given to us, and the principality Esaias c. 9. v. 6.
shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty GOD, the Father of Eternity, the Prince of Peace.

But those words (...) (at which ours, almost treading the steps of the Jews,
who never understood this Prophesy, begin this Chapter with great disturbance
of the sense,) with I^rome and the Kings Bibles, I annexe to the sentence of
the Chapter going before; and translate them, Because there is no darkness to
him which is anguish to himself, that is, in that lamentable and afflicted
state of things, into which the Israelitish Commonwealth at that time,
according to the commination of the Law is reported to have fallen, and as it
were evidently set before their eyes; men were brought to indignation and
desperation, in that they did see the enemy by whom they were oppressed, to be
in prosperity, and no evil hap to befall them. Verily it makes much for the
Christian faith, that this Oracle of the Messia of Galilee be clearly
understood, and to be ascertained of the fidelity of Matthew alleging it:
Wherefore I would upon this occasion add this light, such as it is, unto it,
hoping that it will not be unacceptable to the Reader. I return to the
Revelation, and this further I will add before I let pass Nephthali; that
even as Judah gained the first place among the sons of Lea, by reason of the
stock of Christ: so Nephthali among Rachels for his dwelling; that the
prerogative of Christ on both sides might excel, by the name of whom as Lord
and Emperor, this company (as in the proper place we shall hear) is entitled.

Joseph and Benjamin remain being cast back to the last couple Verse 8.
of Rachels children. The former of whom the sin of Ephraim thrust down into
this place: for it is Ephraim, who is hidden in the name of Joseph, unworthy by
his own to be heard in this Catalogue, (as well because he was the leader of
the Idolatry of Israel whereof Micha was the author, as also for the
outrageous Apostsie whereof Jer^boam and Acha^ were authors.) To conclude, the
hatred of S^^l the B^niamit^ against David (considering Chap. 7.
that he was the chief of the stock of Christ and the Type of him) did hinder
Beniami^ (otherwise the youngest) of a higher degree, and the curses of Shimei
against the same.

A sentence for memory compact of the signification of the names, by which the
Tribes are called: wherei^ are declared as well the order of the Tribes sealed,
as also the disposition of the same company, the wrestling, and the reward from
God.
Juda Confitetur Deo Confession is made to God looking upon his Son by the
company of the blessed C^ltus puru^ and rite Christianus.

Pure and truly Christian worship.

Re^ben intuendo filium Gad Coetus Aser benedictus Nephthalin Luctantur cum
they wrestle with those that forget obedience Lucta. Strife or wrestling.
Manasses obliviscentibus Simeon obedientiam. Levi Adhaesio scil. Christo by
cleaving (to wit) to Christ Praemium. The reward. Isacher mercedem a reward
Zabulon habitaculi, sc. aterni of habitation (to wit) eternal life Joseph
adiici^t shall be added Benjamin filio dextr^. to the Son of his right hand

Confesses or praises God, beholding his Son (that is, Christ the only
Mediator) the blessed company (the company of the sealed.) They strive with
those that forget obedience (that is, with Antichristians.) Cleaving to Christ
a reward of habitation (to wit, eternal) he shall add to the Son of his
right hand, (that is, to him whom God accounts great) or otherwise. To them
that cleave to God a reward of habitation (that is, life eternal) shall be
added by the Son of the right hand, that is, Christ.

To this contracted and afflicted estate of the Church in the type of the
sealed of Israel, the state thereof most ample and most happy succeeds, in
the representation of innumerable palmebearers, out of every Nation, People,
Tribe, and Tongue. After these things, says he, I saw, and lo a great
multitude, which n^ man could number, out of every Nation, and People, and
Tribes, Chap. 8.
and Tongues, standing before the Throne, and before the Lamb^, Verse. 9.
clothed with white garments, and Palms in their hands. And they Verse. 10.
cried with a loud voice, saying; salvation to our God who sitt^th upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb, etc. But this vision seeing it belongs to the
seventh Trumpet, neither can be elsewhere fitly and clearly unfolded by reason
of so many things to be fore-knowne, we will defer the exposition thereof
thither. For the present let that suffice which now has been said in
general, and let the Reader remember, that both these Visions certainly do
jointly go through the whole space of the seventh Seal or of the Trumpets;
but that the company of the sealed does severally synchronize with the six
first Trumpets: the Palm bearing multitude with the seventh trumpet. And so
having done with the interpretation of the interposed Vision or Visions, let us
take in hand again the intermitted series of the Seals.

The meaning of the seventh Seal, that is, Of the seven Trumpets.
THe six first Seals have been handled, wherein the state of At Chap. 8.
the Empire as yet standing and flourishing until that the dominion of Idols
should fall, was described by intestine chances: the seventh succeeds, the
matter whereof is Seven Trumpets where in are opened, by accustomed
representations for that purpose, the destinies of the decaying and falling
Empire being to be ruined by a seven fold order of plagues, the Trumpets
sounding the allarum to the battle of its destruction, to wit, God taking
punishment by that destruction for the blood of so many Martyrs shed by the
Roman Emperors.

He which will not spare even the bruit beasts, if at any time Exodus 21.28.
they should slay a man, (his Image) shall not he require the blood of his
servants of the Empire, which for so many years Genesis 9. 6.
has slain the Martyrs? Neither ought the late godliness of Christian
Emperors there governing, to stay Gods justice; any more then the godliness
of Iosia that the Kingdom of I^da being guilty of bloodshed by Manasses,
should escape the destruction Chap. 8.
decreed by God. This revenge the souls of the Martyrs groaning under the
cruel slaughter of the fifth Seal, importunately begged by prayers: this God
promised, so soon as the Roman Tyrant had fulfilled his measure by the adding
of those who yet remained to be slain, Chap. 6. 11. This time was now come.
Wherefore the Angel the Priest of Heaven (as the manner was with the prayers of
the people made in the Temple) sends up those prayers to the Throne of God in
the smoke at the Altar of incense, and puts him in mind. In the mean
space Silence was made in heaven for half an hour; to wit, according to the
custom of the Temple, in performing such a Chap. 8.1, 2, 3.
kind of service. For it is manifest there was silence used in religious
worship in the Temples almost every where; for they said to the people, Be
silent. That was observed by the people of God, then when incense should be
offered. For while the Sacrifices were offered (which was the first part of the
Liturgy) the Temple resounded with Songs, Trumpets, and other Instruments of
music, 2 Chronicles. 29.25. unto the 28. But at the time of the Incense all was
silent, and the people inwardly prayed to themselves, Luke 1.10. To this
therefore is the allusion, while the Angel was offering at the golden Altar,
there was as is said, Silence in Heaven for half an hour, that is, the whole
time of Incense.

Which at length being finished, the Angel filled the Censer Verse. 5.
with fire of the Altar, and cast it into the Earth, to wit, that by this
Ceremony he might show to what end those prayers tended, which ascending up
together to God he had mixed with a sweet savor; to wit, to obtain revenge
upon the inhabitants of the earth, who had hurt the Saints, yea had shed their
blood.

And these prayers immediately have their answer. For there were (says he, to
wit, out of the Throne or most holy place of So also Acts 4. 3^ God granted the
prayers of the Apostles in an Earthquake.
the Temple, as Chap. 4.5.) voices, and thunders and lightnings and an
earthquake. In which words is described the Oracle (...) that is, the daughter
of voice o^ thunder, whereby God in times past to his old people gave answers,
and with the same here he grants the prayers of the Saints. For we must know
in the Hebrew tongue, (...) voices and thunders mean the same thing; for
thunders are called (...) that is, voices. Chap. 8.
Therefore And
(...) is to be taken by way of explication for, that is; or which I had rather
by the figure When by two w^rds one thing is (...).
(...), voices and thunders are voices of thunder, or with thunder.

For God, for the most part did promulgate his decrees with thunder, even as
God gave the Law, Exodus 19. 16. Yea that only Oracle left to the Jews
continued after the Babylonian captivity. An example whereof is with our
Evangelist John, Chap. 12. 28. When the Lord had said (...). Father, glorify
thy name: there came, says he, (...) a voice from heaven, I have both
glorified it, and again I will glorify it: it follows there: And the
multitude that stood by and heard it, said, It thundered* Others said, an Angel
spoke to him, that is, some said, (...) a thunder from Heaven, or joined with a
voice from Heaven, that is to say, the daughter of thunder; but others that an
Angel spoke. And hence it is, that in the Revelation, not in this place only,
but otherwhere often thunder is joined with Oracles and voices from Heaven, as
Chap. 4.5. Chap. 6.1. Chap. 10.3. You may see Aristarch. sacr. claris. Danielis
Heinsii, page 277. and 45^.

The offering thus ended and the prayers of the Saints granted by God in a
voice of thunder, the seven Angels who had the seven Verse. 6.
trumpets prepared themselves to sound.

It is granted among all Divines that the works of Divine providence and
government, are executed by the administration of Angels. The Angels therefore
in those Visions hold their place, over whom they are appointed by God to bring
things to pass; and what is executed by the common means, as well of Angels,
as of men, that is said to be brought to pass, the Angels being Authors, as
it were guides, and Captains. So that they seem to me to err altogether from
the scope, who think some other mystery lies hidden under these names of
Angels. The Angels therefore the Trumpeters, of whom the speech is here, are
they which are appointed to direct the plagues of the Trumpets, using those men
for execution, by whom it pleases God to bring to pass his decrees.

But the four first of these Trumpets are of such plagues as are of less
extent and not so great; to wit, which resting for the most part upon the
Western or Latin world, the Bishop of Rome, which was hereafter to be the
head, at least of that world, was to Chap. 8.
cure. In the right application of which representations here also the Reader
may observe that the Roman Empire with the rest of the Kingdoms of the world
by the holy Ghost are tacitly resembled to the body of the world, the parts
whereof are Earth, Sea, Rivers, Heaven, Stars; in that manner that the body
of every Empire may have also his Earth which may be instead of that Earth, to
wit, a certain bottom and Basis, on which the weight of the whole government
may rest; the Sea likewise, which, by environing its Earth, bears altogether
the likeness of the Sea, (this is the largeness or extent of the Dominion.)
The politic Rivers also, which after the manner of other rivers, have their
beginning from their Sea and thither return: such are Provincial Magistrates,
and other ministers of the dominion, together with the Provinces themselves the
channels of the Rivers. To conclude, the Sun and other Stars, in the heaven
of Sovereigne power, resembling the Sun, the Moon, the Stars in the
worldly heaven. This analogy being observed, the interpretation, as altogether
confirmed with the figures of the old Prophets, will so be easy and altogether
the most convenient to the matter in hand.

Now that there is so often repetition of the third part, as of the third part of
the Trees of the Earth, the third part of the Sea, of the Rivers, of the
Heaven, that I take to be meant of the bounds of the Roman Empire,
comprehending in the compass thereof the third part of the known world in
John's time. The which seems may be proved, out of that that afterward Chap.
12. is Verse. 3, 4.
said, that the Drag^n having seven heads and ten horns (that is to say, the
heathen Roman Empire) drew the third part of the stars of Heaven with his
tail, and cast them into the Sea; that is, the third part of the Princes and
Rulers of the world be subjected to his Empire. These things thus settled let
us come to the interpretation of the severals.

And the first Angel sounded, and there came Hayle and Fire Verse. 7.
mingled with blood, and they were sent upon the Earth: and the third part of
the Earth was burned, and the third part of the Trees was burnt up, and all the
green grass was burnt up. And the second Angel sounded, and as it were a
Great Mountain Chap. 8. 8.
burning with fire was cast into the Sea; and the third part of the Sea became
blood. 9. And the third part of the creatures which were in the Sea and had
life dyed, and the third part of the ships perished.

And the third Angel sounded, and there fell a Great Star from 1^
heaven burning as it were a Lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the
Rivers, and upon the Fountains of waters. 11. And the name of the Star is
called Wormwood; and the third part of the waters became wormwood, and many men
died of the waters, because they were made bitter.

And the fourth Angel sounded, and the third part of the Sun 12.
was smi^ten, and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the
Stars, so as the third part of them was darkened, and the third part of the
day shone not, and the night likewise.

The first Trumpet.
The first Trumpet of the seventh Seal enters at the Roman Idol
government, now at length beaten down and shaken at the going out of the sixth
Seal; and being about to strike the first blow to the Empire now entering into
ruin, it destroys the third part of the Earth with a terrible ^torme of
Hayle with fire and blood: that is, it wastes the territory or people of the
Roman Empire (to wit, the Basis and ground of that ^oliticall Universe) with a
terrible and bloody breaking in of the Northern Nations, it vanquisheth and
consumes the Nobles and common people.

You may see the representation of Hayle tending to the same purpose, I mean
to signify an hostile v^olent assault, Esaias Chap. 28. verse. 2. Behold the Lord
has a mighty and strong one (he points at Salmanassar) as a tempest of
Hayle, and a destroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters overflowing shall
cast down to the Earth with the hand, Verse. 3. the crown of pride, the
drunkerds of Ephraim shall be trodden under foot. Also, Esaias 30.30. Concerning
the slaughter to come upon the Assyrians: And the Lord shall cause his glorious
voice to be heard, and shall show the lighting down of his arm with the
indignation of his anger and flame of devouring fire, with scattering and
tempest and Haile-stones. 31. because Chap. 8.
Assure shall be beaten down through the voice of the Lord, etc. Here is to be
observed, because hail is wont to be with lightening, especially in the hotter
Regions; therefore with the mention of Hail is joined Fire, as well here by
John and Esaias, as also Psalm. 18. 13, 14. yea in the History, Exodus 9. 23. But
John has mi^ed Blood also beyond nature, that he might show by this token the
whole representation to reflect upon Slaughter. Concerning the representation
of Hail let the Reader see also, Esaias 32. 19. and there the Chalde Paraphrast.

Furthermore the same Paraphrast does teach that Trees in Prophetical parables
do signify great Lords and wealthy men; which for Oaks of Basan, Esaias. 2.
13. has put Princes of the Provinces; for Cedars, Esaias. 14. 8. wealthy men;
for Fur trees, sometime Princes, Esaias. 37. 24. sometimes Kings. ^say 14. 8.
by whom also that of Zach. 11. 2. Howleo Fur tree because the Cedar is
fallen, because the magnificent are spoiled: Howl ye Oaks of Basan, because
the fenced wood is fallen; is thus Paraphrased; Howl ye Kings, because the
Princes are broken; who so were rich, are spoiled: Howl ye Rulers of Provinces
because the country of your fortitude is wasted. Whence from the Analogy it
is easily gathered, that green grass is taken for the common people; when, as
here it is joined with trees.

Now that we may pick something out of History concerning the event, I will
derive (until something more certain shall appear) the beginning of this
trumpet from the death of Theodo^ius the first, that is, from the year of
Christ 395; because then Christian Religion seemed plainly to have triumphed
over the Gods of the Heathen, and withal, as it were in a certain common term
of the former Seal ending, and this beginning, the invasions of the Barbarians
something attempted before, but in the years next following the Empire being
again quieted, suppressed, at length began in a horrible manner to be stirred
up and to fall upon almost the whole Roman Empire by fire and sword
continually and cruelly wasting and spoiling it.

For this very year Alaricus first brake in out of Thracia upon Macedonia with
a huge Army of Goths and other Barbarians, sparing neither towns nor men.
Thence marching forward through Thessaly, taking the streights of Thermopilae he
came down into Greece, that is, Achaia, he raced all the Cities except Thebes
Chap. 8.
and Athens. He forcibly entered Peloponnesus, he wastes Corinth, Argos and
Sparta. I hence he brought himself into Epirus, where he goes on to make the
same ransackings and destructions.

The year following leaving Epirus, he invaded Achaia, and the same with
Epirus and the bordering Provinces for full four years space he labors
shamefully to destroy by setting them on fire and razing them.

When thus for five years he had afflicted the East with cruel ransacks, he
set his mind to invade the West, he passes into Dalmatia and Panonia, and
those regions he razed far and near. Hear Jerome who then lived be wayling
the state of this time, the tempest hitherto raging Epist. 3. The Roman blood
is daily shed between Constantinople and the Julian Alps: The Goth, the
Sarmatian, ^^^dus, Alanus, the Hunns, the Vandals, the Marcoman^i do ^orce and
^ake by violence, Scythia, Thracia, Macedonia, Dardania, Dacia, Thessaly,
Achaia, Epirus, Dalmatia, and all the country of Panonia. How many Matrons,
how many godly Virgins, and comely and noble bodies were mocking stocks to
these beasts? The Bishops taken, the Presbyters and diverse Orders of the Clergy
slain. The Churches overthrown, Horses stabuled at the Altars of Christ, the
relics of Martyrs dug up. The Roman Empire goes to ruin; what heart
do thou think have the Corinthians now, the Athenians, Lacedaemonians,
Arcadians, and all Greece, over whom the Barbarians command?

But the year following, being of Christ 401, the same Alaricus, the Goths,
Alanes, and Hunnes following him, about to wage war in Italy also, brake
through Noricum and came through the ^orrest of Trent into Venice, those Cities
in a short time he brought under his power, and besieged the Emperor Honorius
at Hasta; so that almost all in Italy now thought upon removing. But here at
length, Stilicho the Captain of Honorius, having gathered a great Army, stayed
his fury, and constrained him being once or twice overcome and wearied with
battles which ^e^l out against him to retire into Panonia, whence he came. Out
of which a little after, a league being made, and he honored with a Military
government by Honorius, he departed into Illyricum a Province of the East.

Alaricus being quiet a little while, yet least thenceforth the West should be
at any time idle, forthwith in the year 404, another Chap. ^.
memorable violent breaking in of the Barbarians upon Italy is undertaken,
Radagaiso a Scythian being Captain; who with an Army of Goths, Sarmatians and
Germans to the number of two hundred thousand, the fortifications in the Alps
being beaten down, he passes into the Venetian region Aemilia, and Hetruria,
besieges Florence; where being vanquished with a great slaughter by Stilicho
he is taken and beheaded.

This enemy, howsoever terrible, in a short space of time and with less loss,
being taken away, presently in the year 406, the third, and that the most
grievous and deadly inrode of the Vandales and Alanes is made upon the West,
taking with them the Marcomanni, Heruli, Sweves, Alemans, Burgundians with a
rabble of other Barbarians: whereby first France, then Spain, and lastly
Africa are taken, and afflicted with all kind ^^f calamities. Which
destructions Jerome Epist. 11. has thus partly expressed, partly employed.
Innumerable, says he, and most fierce na^^ons have taken whole France.
Whatsoever is between the Alps and Pyrenaean mountains which are enclosed with
the Ocean and the Rone, the Quadus, the Vandale, Sarmatian, Alans, Gipides,
Heruli, Saxons, Burgundians, Alemans and Panonian enemies have destroyed. Mentz
is taken, and plundered, and many thousands slain in the Church. The Vangions
with long siege are destroyed, the strong City of Rhemes, the Ambians,
A^trebates, Morini, Tornacus, Nemete, Argentoratus translated into Germany.
Aquitan and the Provinces of Novem populorum, Lions and Narbon excepting a few
Cities are all razed. I cannot mention Tolosa without tears, which that it is
not yet destroyed, the merits of Exuperius that holy Bishop were the cause. The
very Spaniards even now ready to perish tremble. Rome ransoms her life with
gold.

And this was that terrible storm of Hail mixed with fire and blood; a
representation truly of so easy an application, that there fell so apt a thing
from Niceph. Gregor. lib. 2. cap. 7. never thinking of the Revelation, but yet
treating of the Scythians, that I cannot but set it down: As, says he, terrors
from heaven are oftentimes stricken into men by God, as lightenings, flaming
fires, and sudden storms, etc. So these Northern and Hyperborean terrors are
reserved by God, that they may be sent for punishment, when and upon whom it
shall seem best to his providence. But I will add a Corolary also out of
Achmetes, for the Readers further confirmation. Chap. 8.


A Corolarie out of Achmetes concerning the signification of Hail, Fire, and
Trees, in his interpretation of dreams.
In the ^91 Chapter out of the Rules of the Indians, Persians and Egyptians:
Snow, Hail, Ice; do portend miseries, cares, and torments.

If any shall seem to see Hail any where fallen, let him expect a sudden
hostile assault.

If he shall seem to see Hail, which shall have hurt the stalks of Wheat or
^arley: in that place where the stalks were broken, warlike slaughters shall
happen.

Also Chap. 159. out of the declaration of the Indians, Chap. 160. out of the
explication of the Persians and Egyptians, Fire signifies death, war,
fightings, punishment and affliction, If it shall seem to burn any thing or any
one.

Also chap. 151. The Persians, Indians, Egyptians, interpret trees to signify
men, chiefly Magistrates, Peers, and honorable men: as,

If any shall seem to himself to water trees and to pruy^^ them, he shall be an
Honorable man, and a nursing father of the people.

If a King shall seem to himself to have planted trees, he shall ordain new
Magistrates. Also,

If trees, by continuance of time being corrupted and putrifyed, shall decay,
the Peers of the King shall die of a natural death.

If he shall seem to see young sprouts which are grown to trees, this
appertains to the succession of his Lords.

If one of the common people shall seem to himself to have gathered leaves of
trees into his house, he shall obtain wealth from the Nobility according to the
measure of the leaves, etc.

The second Trumpet.
The second Trumpet being about to subvert the Roman Empire now enough wasted
in the Earth thereof, with a more grievous Chap. 8.
stroke yet assayleth the Sea: the third part whereof by the fall of a great
Mountain anciently threatening it, but now burning turns it all bloody, with
a great destruction as well of living creatures or fishes living therein, as
also of the navy. That is, the destruction of Rome the great City once or
twice taken, spoiled, and burning with hostile flames, brake out to the ruin
of the largeness of the Roman jurisdiction; the Barbarians now at their
pleasure fiercely entering into the Provinces thereof, by reason of the
weakness of the head so afflicted and dividing them into new kingdoms; with an
irreparable slaughter, both of the legions there abiding for defense, as also
with loss of all aids of retaining and upholding, as of traffic, the
authority thereof.

The Sea of the politic world, as I have said, is that fullness of dominion
compassing all the inhabitants in the communion of the same politic right. By
this representation the Dominion of Babylon is expressed, Ier. 51. 36. where
the Lord threatens, that he will dry up the Sea thereof and make the spring
thereof dry, which verse. 44. is expounded holding the same Metaphor, the
nations shall flow no more unto her. The amplitude also of the Assyrian kingdom
is so described, Ezekiel. 31. 4. The waters made her (to wit the Assyrian Cedar)
to grow, the deep or the sea has exalted her. Happily also the dominion of
Pharao^ is the Sea, Esa. 19.5. where concerning the destruction of his kingdom
it is said, the waters shall fail from the Sea thereof, that is, his Dominion
shall be taken away. Whereupon those great Empires in Daniel are beheld to
ascend out of the Sea, that is, to arise out of the largeness of Dominion.

Now that the third part of the Sea, that is, the Roman sea, is said to become
blood; we must know that blood first is take for slaughter, then for Death also
without blood: but that Death in a manner is taken for ruin, even of a thing
wanting life, see Ezec. 14.19. and 3.18.20. ct 18.13. Amo. 2.2. Romans 7.9.
whereupon to become bloody, is a representation of a thing that suffers
ruin, to wit as it were like a living creature slain or butchered bleeding.
That therefore here the Sea is said to become bloody, by the fall of a great
Mountain, it shows nothing else, but that it suffered by that fall a
certain Death, or a violent Ruin. That which in the phyals, where the same
representation is, is a little more plainly said, Chap. 16.3.
that it became as the blood of a dead man, that is, of one slain: the Roman
Dominion or fullness, was overthrown, cut in pieces, rent, destroyed. Chap. 8.


The like mystery of a Mountain signifying a City is found of old Babylon,
Ierem. 51. 25. Behold I come unto thee o plague-bringing (or destroying)
Mountain which destroyest the whole Earth, and I will stretch out mine hand,
etc. and I will make thee a Mountain of burning, where the Septuagint have it
(...), a mountain on fire, in the same sense wherein John here (...) a
mountain burning with fire. Concerning the same, Esaias 13. 2. upon the high
Mountain, lift up a Standard. Targum, upon the City dwelling without fear.
The like Chap. 37. 24. to Senacherib King of Assyria: Thou have railed, says
he, on the Lord, and said, by the multitude of my chariots I have ascended the
height of the mountains. Targum, I have ascended into the defense of their
Cities; but whether rightly I doubt.

Furthermore, that a Mountain is here said to be put or cast into the Sea, it
is the (...).
elegancy of the figure, since a Mountain can no otherwise hurt the Sea, then
by being thrown into it. And remember that this has place in the following
Trumpet also, concerning the falling Star, Verse. 10.

As concerning the History, Rome was first taken in the year 410, and that by
the same Alaricus King of the Goths, who had brought in as it were the
entrance of the destiny in the former Trumpet; but now after the death of
Stilich^ making new stirs, and preparing a new and fatal expedition into
Italy; whereby he brought Honorius into such streights, that the Barbarian
himself could make a new Emperor of Rome, namely, Attalus, with whom he
besieged Houorius Augustus at Ravenna, now, in despair of his estate, thinking
to fly into the East, leaving the West. But the enemy repenting himself,
wholly restored Honorius, Attalus being deposed from the Empire.

The rending of the Roman Dominion immediately followed this destruction of
the City of Rome. I call Sigonius to witness: The miserable destruction,
says he, of Italy, the continued wars of France and Spain, and the new
Empires now at last of the Barbarian Kings in both the Provinces, have
succeeded the Roman overthrow.

For first Honorius that he might recover Rome with the Empire, having made a
league with Alaricus, was constrained to yield the Countries and Kingdom in
France to the Goths.

Two years after, in the year 412, the H^nnes running over Chap. 8.
Panonia which the Goths had left, the same (Honorlus) being destitute of
power to make resistance in so great difficulties, made a league with them
giving and receiving Hostages.

Afterward in the year 413, Constantius Captain of the same Honorius, least
happily he should fall into any streights of war, did willingly receive into
friendship and seated upon the Rhone the Burgundians, who in these former
years, the Estate being so disordered, together with the Vandales had betaken
themselves into France.

To conclude in the year 415 the same Honoriu^ (as Procopius delivers) when
the Goths a little after had passed over into neighboring Spain, he granted
to the Vandales also with their King Gundericus, being lately driven out of
Gallia by the Frankes, the places which they had entered, to be inhabited, upon
condition of making war upon the Goths. He that desires to know more, let
him read the forementioned Sigonius concerning the Western Empire, lib. 10.
and 11. whence we took these things.

And so thence forward the largeness of the Roman Dominion is daily more and
more rent and cut off, until, again in the year 455 Rome being taken and
spoiled by G^nsericus the Vandale, the whole Body of the Empire the next year,
or not much after, appeared to be divided into ten kingdoms: which together
with the names of the People and of the Kings, and the Provinces over which
they reigned, and moreover certain things noted out of the History to give
greater light, the following Table will show.

A type of the rending of the Empire or Roman Dominion in Chap. 8.
the year of Christ 456 and so forward.
The Kingdoms. The Provinces wherein they reigned. The names of the Kings
reigning in the year 456 Certain things to be observed. 1 Of the Brittones. In
Britain. Vortimer. 2 Saxons. Hengist. 3 Frankes. First in Gall. Belg. shortly
in Celt ca also. Childerick. 4 Burgundians. In Gall. Sequan and Lions.
Gunderick. The kingdom of the Bu^gundians was subdued and u^te^ly destroyed by
the Franks in the year 526. But for the making up of the number of ten fitly
the dominion of the Ostrogothes at the same time was parted into two kingdoms;
Panonia which ^itherto had obeyed them, taken by the Longobards, and Italy only
left to the Kings of the Ostrogothes. 5 Wisigothes In Aquitane and part of
Spain. Theodorick. 6 Swedes and Alanes. In that tract of Spain which is
contained in Galaecia and Lusitania. Riciarius. 7 Vandales. In Africa but a
little before in Spain. Gensericus. 8 Allmanes. In that tract of Germany which
was called Rhetia. Sumanus. 9 Ostrogothes. In Panonia the Huns being
vanqu^shed, neither was this age past, but they enlarged their kingdom into
Italy also. Theodomirus The kingdom of the Alemans from the year 475 became one
with the kingdom of the Heruli so long as they reigned in Italy, to wit, 16.
years. 10 Grecians In the residue of the dominion of the Empire. For the Empire
of the ancient Rome being dissolved, the Empire of the Grecians is to be
accounted one of the kingdoms, into which the dominion of the city reigning
sometimes largely was divided. Marcianus. The ^ongobards succeeded the
Ostrogothes also in Italy being called out by Nar^etes after he had destroyed
the kingdom of the Ostrogothes in the year 567 but then delivered their seats
in Pa^onia to the Huns and Avares to be enjoyed afterward.

And at length after this manner these ten Kingdoms, into Chap. 8.
which the holy Ghost had foretold, as well by Daniel, as by John, the Roman
Empire at the last should be divided, seem to be reckoned; and not at all to
be esteemed according to so many bare names (as usually is done) of so many
regions, or tracts of land, but rather Kingdoms, into which the Dominion and
Lordship of the Empire should be rent. Yet notwithstanding let us not think
that the limitation of this number of ten is to be so strictly construed,
that it excludes at any time more Kingdoms, or any manner of governments: but
that the Empire should be severed into ten at the least, or into ten principal
Kingdoms. That which even from that original rending which we have set forth
until our age, under so many fates and alterations, I think to have been
always the truth; although it were sufficient for confirmation of this truth,
if only in the beginning it had been divided into so many Kingdoms, howsoever
happily afterward the number were diminished. But the like prophecy
concerning the rending of the Monarchy of Alexander, may teach us that so as I
have said, and not otherwise, that limitation of the number of ten Kingdoms is
to be understood: in which, although besides these four principal Kingdoms,
of Macedonia, Asia, Syria, and Egypt; a fifth also Thracia was added, Lysimachus
being the founder: yet the holy Ghost bounded that multiplicitie in a number of
four. Reckon them to be so many at the least, or so many principal Kingdoms.
For there was no succession in the Kingdom of Thracia, though it began
together with the rest, and endured forty years, but it ended with the first
King Lysimachus, and therefore not to be brought into the number. The like
hereunto is to be judged of this ten fold Roman division. Wherefore, let it
move no man, if besides the Kingdoms reckoned up in France he shall happily
find there the Kingdom also of the Alanes of Orleance, and also the dynastie
of the Cities of Baitaine, continuing from the Empire of Honorius until these
times. For he shall find the latter to be but of a very mean Dominion, the
other to have from thence endured but a small time, to wit, ten years at the
most. Neither of them therefore to be reckoned with the rest for like place and
order, nor if any be to be found of the same sort otherwhere.

The third Trumpet. Chap. 8.

The third Trumpet did utterly throw down and extinguish Verse. 10.
the shining star, to wit, the Roman Hesperus or the Western Caesar, even
now from the time that Gensericus the King of the Vandals had spoiled Rome
being taken, falling headlong, and as it were, struggling a little while with
death, under these names, of Caesar's of no account, Avitus, Maioranus, Severus,
Anthemius, Olibrius, Glycerius, Nepos, dying with mutual treasons and
slaughter, at length, in the year 476 fetching his last breath under the
fatal name of Augustulus, and pulled from the heaven of his authority by
Odoacer King of the Heruli sent against him; this being the most bitter fate of
the Rivers and Fountains, that is, of the Provincial Cities and Magistracies.

The Hesperian Caesar here I call him, who, after the division of the Empire
into East and West established, even from the death of Theodosius the first,
remained as yet Emperor of ancient Rome and the West, but of a very short
continuance; as who should utterly fall from his heaven at the sound of this
Trumpet after the year 91.

For whereas the Bishop of Rome more then 320. years after that this Hesperian
Caesar had set in Augustulus, did anew surrogate the Kings of France (who were
afterward of Germany) into that name and title: he brought no other thing to
pass, but that, by this coverture of Caesar revived, or of the sixth head of
the Beast yet reigning, he himself might not at length be so apparently
accounted for the last head, that is, Antichrist, by men of ordinary
understanding.

But this papal Caesar pertains not to the heads of the Roman Beast; but to
the horns or Kingdoms, into which, the Empire of the sixth head, now about to
yield his room to the last head was to be rent. Neither indeed after so great
a space of time as is of 325. years, (for so many they are from Augustulus to
Charles the Great) could there be a succession as it were of a continued series
of Hesperian Caesar's.

But go to, let us give further light to the Text of John, that the reason of
the interpretation may be manifest. And there fell, says he, a great Star
from Heaven burning like a Lamp. He seems to desc^ibe a blazing Star or
Comet, amongst the kinds of which reckoned by P^iny, Lampadias is one,
specially so called. And surely not unfitly is Caesar of the West figured by
such a star, Chap. 8.
for short duration. Concerning whom therefore it will be said, Chap. 17. When
he comes he must continue but a small time. But the Star was a great one; as
the fitter to resemble a Supreme Majestly, Verse. 10.
whose excellency the Sun otherwhere in Prophetique parables does represent.
And surely it is known, there have been Comets which have seemed to equal
even the Sun in magnitude; of which sort that this Star was, happily he
shall not err who affirms it.

Now the like parable of a falling Star, least thou doubt of the application,
Esaias uses, Chap. 14.12. of the fall of the King of Babylon. How, says he, art
thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer Sun of the morning, thou art cut down to
the ground, which did weaken the nations? Otherwhere also, as in the place of
Esa. Chap. 34.4. already before cited Stars falling from heaven are
understood of the ruin of Princes or great personages. A star therefore of a
singular and unusual magnitude, does design a Prince, above the common sort
of Princes, that is, a great and excellent one. It follows:

And the name of the Star is called Wormwood. It is a prophetical figure,
wherein by the imposition as it were of a proper name, the quality or
destiny, of the thing or person handled is set forth; since other where also
in the Hebraisme, (...) is (...) the matter (as Luke 1. 37. (...) every thing
is not unpossible with God) and to be called, is all one as to be or to exist,
as Esa. 56.7. My house shall be called an house of prayer, for which Luke 19.
(...) is, shall be, or shall be accounted an house of prayer. And Genesis 21. 12.
In Isaac shall thy seed be called, that is, shall be. You may see also the
Septuagint, Esa. 14. 20. Ruth. 4. 11. And examples of this figure whereof I
spoke are every where obvious. For so in Esa. 7.14. concerning Christ, his name
shall be called Emanuel, that is, he shall be (...), God-man. And Chap. 9*6.
His name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, that is, he shall be all these.
Likewise in Jerem. 23. 6. And this is the name whereby they shall call him: THE
LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. And Zach. 6. 12. Behold the man his name is the
BRANCH, it follows, because he shall spring out of his place, etc. Add
hereunto, Rev. 19. 13. His name is called THE WORD OF GOD, that is, he is that
Word of God. The like to these are found, Ierem. Chap. 8.
20.3. The Lord calls not thy name Pashur, but Magor-Missabib, [that is,
fear round about] for thus says the Lord: Behold, I will put fear into thee,
to thy self and all thy friends. And Ezech. 23.4. The names of them (that is,
of the women of Samaria and Jerusalem) Aholah and Aholibah. Add hereto Esa.
8.3. Hos. 1.6.9.

By the very like figure is this Falling star called Wormwood, that is,
(according to the Hebrews with whom the abstracts are used for the concretes)
Absinthites, to wit, A Prince of bitterness and sorrows Such indeed was that
Hesperian Caesar, if ever any were, exercised with continual calamities from
his first rising unto his end. Who while he reigned the Roman Empire should be
ruined. Yea by the setting up of whom, occasion of the ruin was given, because
by the such division of the Empire brought in, a way was opened to the
Barbarians, and the Roman State was cast into fearful calamities. Is not he
worthily called Wormwood for his lot which fell out to be so bitter to himself
and others? according to that of Naomi, Call me not Naomi, call me Marah,
because the Almighty has afflicted me with bitterness.

But before I depart hence, something must be said of the state of the City,
and Roman State after that fall of their Caesar, that a way may be prepared to
the interpretation of the following Trumpet. Caesar therefore of the West being
so cast down and extinct, the mean while Odoacer the Herulian held Italy 16.
years by name of King: who after two years restored the Consulship to Rome
and to the West and still kept it, which notwithstanding in the beginning upon
displeasure he had taken away. Him did Theodoricus the King of the Ostrogothes
succeed; and that, as Paulus Diaconus reports, Zeno the Emperor of the East
delivering him Italy by pragmaticall sanction, and confirming it by putting
upon his head a sacred veyle. Who, Odoacer being vanquished and slain, added
Sicilia also to his Kingdom, besides Dalmatia and Rhetia, which were Provinces
of Odoacer, he repaired the walls and some buildings of the City of Rome,
having gathered together a great sum of money for that purpose; so that there
seemed nothing could be desired more to the height of her former fortune, the
infamy of a City sacked and burnt being excepted: he ordered the Kingdom very
wisely, he changed no Roman Ordinance, but retained the Senate and Consuls, the
Senators, the Governors of the Praetorium, the Governors of the city, the
Questor, the high Treasurer, the Master Chap. 8.
of the privy purse, and Captain of the Guard, Captains of foot and horse,
and other Magistrates that were in the Empire, and committed them only to
Romans, which was also a while kept by his Successors, Athalaricus,
Theodobatus, Vitiges, Ostrogothian, kings of Italy. See Sigonius de imperio
occidentali lib. 15. An. 479. lib. 16. annis 493. 494. 500.

The fourth Trumpet.
The fourth Trumpet proceeding yet further, did utterly take away the light of
the Roman Majesty in the city of Rome wherewith Verse 12.
it had shined until then, even under the Ostrogothian kings: to wit, after
the Consulship of Rome had failed from the year, 542. in that Ostrog^thian war
waged for the recovery of Italy, first by Belisarius, afterward by Narsetes
Captains of Iustinianus, then it self once and again taken, burned, and the
third part of it demolished by Totila, forsaken moreover, (a memorable mock of
fortune) by all her inhabitants, at length after so many decays and
^laughters, being regained by Narsetes, but a little after overthrowen by
aboisterous storm and lightnings; she that was sometimes the Queen of Cities,
now at length being How does the city sit solitari^ that was full of people!
how is she become as a widow! she^ that was great among the Nations, and
Princess among the Provinces, how is she become tr^tulary. Lament. 1. 1.
bereaved of Consular power, authority of Senate, and other Magistrates,
wherewith as with stars she had enlightened the world, is fallen from so great
glory, into I know not what ignoble d^kedome of Ravenna, over which in times
past she had commanded, after is constrained to serve under the Exarchate (O
miserable darkness) and pay tribute.

And this which is here mentioned was the smiting of the third part of the Sun,
Moon, and stars, whereby it came to pass, that the third part of the day could
not give light, and the third part of the night likewse. Where the light of the
day, which is the sun, is called by the name of the day, and the light of the
night which is the moon and the stars, of the night; according to that, Iere.
31. 35. Which gives the Sun for a light to the day; and the courses of the
moon and of the stars, for a light of the night. The son of Rome shonne,
as long as she enjoyed the Consular diguitie, and her reign over other
cities, and provinces. The moon and stars there gave light, as long as the
Chap. 8.
ancient authority of the Senate and other Magistrates there yet remained. But
these being all taken away (which comes to pass in this Trumpt) what was
there but darkness and a total eclipse of the light, as well of the day as the
of the night? to wit, which appertained to her to whom the third part of the
light of heaven was due.

The representation of the sun, the moon and stars, in this understanding is
most usual with the Prophets, as Esaias. 13 10. also 60. 20. Where for thy Sun
shall set no more, and thy Moon: shall not be in the waine, etc. The Targum
has. Thy kingdom shall never cease (he speaks to Jerusalem) and thy glory
shall not be taken from thee. Also Ier. 15.9. where concerning Jerusalem; The
sun thereof has set whilst it was yet day. The Targum turns. Their glory
departed in their life time. And Ez^k. 32. ^. That concerning Pharaoh, when I
shall put thee out, I will cover the heavens, and make the stars thereof dark.
The same Paraphrast turns it, Tribulation shall cover thee, when I shall put
out the Splendor of the Glory of thy Kingdom, etc.

Let the Reader transfer hither also those things which I have noted before
out of Achmet^s to give light to the sixth Sea^e, which it is admirable to see
how they agree.

Of the thr^e Woe Trumpets.
There remains yet three trumpets the greatest of all, and the most grievous,
and therefore differenced from the former by the title of three Woes. For after
the (...)
explanation of the 4th trumpet. I beheld, and heard, says he, a certain
Angel flying through the midst of heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe,
woe, to the inhabitants upon the earth, by reason of the other voices of the
trumpets of the three Angels, which are yet to sound. Also ^ha 9 12. and 11.14.
Doubtless when the inhabitants of the Christian Roman Empire, in the mean space,
while the former Trumpets sounded, had defiled themselves with the worship of
new idols, the trumpets which remained are increased for the punishing now of a
double sin. For that that sin also of the Roman Empire, came moreover into the
reckning of a crime to be punished with the former of the death of the Martyrs,
it appears in that to the second Woe is conjoined this Elogie, to wit, the
rest of the men that were not killed by these plaguer (that is as I conceive
Chap. 9. ver. ^^
truly by that Woe and the former) repented not of the works of their hands,
that the should not worship Divils, and Idols of gold and silver, and brass,
and stone, and wood, which can neither see nor here to walk.

The first Woe Trumpe^ OR, The Fifth Trumpe^
The first Woe trumpet is long since past. That has sent out to Chap. 9. ver.
1^
destroy the world, horrible bands of Locusts issuing out of the hellish smoke
of the bottomless pit, now by the help of Satan opened, that is, the Sara^ens
or Arabians (a nation populous and innumerable like Locusts) stirred up by the
horrible false prophecy of Muhamed to the ruin of so many nations.

For the smoke ascending out of the infirnall pit, is Muhamadisme, which the
Muhamadan imposters call Gslanis^e, this newly Verse, 20
obscured the world lately enlightened with the Gospel of Christ the son of
righteousness, the darkness of the heathenish errors Chap. 9^
being dispelled.

And surely the type of Locusts is the more apt, because the Egyptian Locusts
also came out of the same Arabia, to wit, bordering upon Egypt eastward. For so
Exodus 10. 13. 14. The Lord brought an Eastwinde upon the land and it brought
the Locusts, and the Locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in
all the coasts of Egypt. Besides, the Arabians are likened to Locusts for the
huge multitude of the nation Judge. 7. 12. The Midianites and the Amalekites,
and all the Sons of Kedem or the ^ast, lay in the valley like grasshoppers for
multitude, etc. Where is to be observed, that the Arabians in holy writ are
peculiarly named Sons of the east, as is Arabia it self (...) or the east; as
in respect of Egypt, where the Israelites learnt so call it you may see Genesis
10. 30. and 25. 6. 1. Kings 4. 30. Esaias. 11. 14. Ier 49 28. perhaps also Mat.
2.1. the same reason plainly, for which Asia, the lesser is called at this day
Natotia, and Arabia faelix seated southward from the rest of the Arabiaes,
Ayaman, that is the south. When the Queen of the south Matthew. 12. 42. But
these things by the way.

The like represeination of Lo^^^^, concerning the A^^yrians and Babilonians
about to destroy Iude^, is to be s^^^e in ^oell, in the two first Chapters:
from whence he will not deny that this type is borrowed, who shall compare the
description of them Chap. 9.
both.

But that the interpretation thereof is to be ^^ferred to hosti^e bands,
Ac^metes shows out of the use of the East, whose words I have thought sit to
be inserted in this place. For so he ^hap. 300 out of the learning of the
Indians, Persians, and Egyptians.

Loc^sts without doubt are referred generally to the multitude of enemies, for
so it is registered in holy writ, that Locusts go forth by divine commandment
for the destruction of Kingdoms like some Army. This of holy writ is meant of
the holy writings of the Indians only; as also whatsoever in this book
rellishet^ of the knowledge of Christian Religion, as will appear to the
Reader. He goes on.

If any either King, or endned with Authority shall seem to see Locusts going
forth against any region: in that place let him expect a multitude of enemies
with great power; and how much damage the Locusts shall do, so much shall they
h^^t.

Now therefore the repres^^ntation being con^ir^^d, we shall see of the rest of
the deseription.

There was given to them says he verse 3 power such as the Scorpions of the
earth have, for they had v^rse. 10. tails like unto Verse. 3.
Scorpions, and in them stings with which they might hort, and (ve. 5) their
torment, is as the torment of a Scorpion, when he strikes a man.

That is, they had not only power proper to Locusts of consuming and wasting
the regions over which they swarmed; but like monsters, tails as scorpions by
the stroke whereof they also diffused their venom. An admirable thing, A
Locust scorpion, but what manner of evil he means, the symbol of a
serpentine kind seems to declare; since ^ scorpion is a kind of serpent.
But by this kind, where with the devil first deceived ma^k^nde, and alienated
it from God, the Spirit of God likes to bring him in who was ^urther to seduce
men, whence that is, (...) the serpent the old one which deceives the world.
Chap. 12.9. ad 20.2. The tail, therefore, of the Scorpion with a stinge, does
set ou^ the propagation of that diabolical Mu^amme^^n, false prophecy, with
its whole surniture, where with the Aralin L^custs did harm where^oever they
came (a horrible thing as Chap. 9.
much as by force of arms, yea the Sara^ens were the first from the cre^tion
of man^inde that drew after them this train of most ^^^thy er^o ^^^ither do I
be^eeve ever any nation before these attained the Monarch^ of the world, by the
like imposture concerning Religion, and pretense of destroying idol worship.

But it is said to them, (...) Verse 4.
(...), That they should not hurt the gra^^e of the earth, Neither any green
thing neither any tree: but those men only, who had not the seal of God ^o
their fore heads.

For the signification of the partic^e (...) the sense is either exceptive that
they should hurt none neither grass (for this is (...) with the 70.) ^^r
green thing nor tree, except those herbs only, trees and gre^ne things which
were not marked with Gods seal (to wit that as men, and grass, trees, and
green things mutually expound themselves: or it may be expounded not
exceptively but adversetively, after the use of the particle (...) in the M^^.
12.4. R^^^. 14.14. and (...) h^^c.
sacred Greek dialect for (...) To wit that it is said to them, they should
not after the manner of common Locusts ^eed upon, either grass, or trees, or
any thing at all thot is green, but that such things passed by, they should
destroy men only: to wit of the number of them, whom the seal of the Angel had
not freed in the beginning of the trumpets from the plagues of them.

Whether way soever it be taken, it were in vain to trouble our selves about
the signfication and disterence of grass, green (...)
thing, and trees; as which are to be referred to thed little of the ^igure,
wherein a mysteri^ is not to be soug^t. For so concerning the Egyptian Locusts
Exodus: 10. 15. They covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was
da^kened, and they did consume every herb (^eptuagint (...).) of the land, and
all the fruit of the trees, and there remained not any green thing ((...)) on
any tree, or in the herbs of the field, through all the land of Egypt. But
that our Locusts should a^^^ct men, i^ appearesh hence, that they are not of
the kind of vermin, to wit na^^rall Locusts, but symbolicall upon o^^asion
whereof it will be worth our labor once to set this rule, when any thing is
attributed to a prophetical type, which by nature cannot complie with the
same, that leads to the understanding of the thing signified in the type, and
teaches that the interpretation is to be made according to the condition
thereof. Which thou may observe to be done four times at the least in this
vision; as when there is attributed to Locusts, not only power to set upon men,
but also the face of a man, the hair of women golden crowns brestplate Verse
7.8.9.
of iron: by all which is meant that not vermin but men are meant; and those
not clergy men, as many gues^e, but altogether war destroying soudiers of
which Locusts it is further said.

It was not given to them that they should not kill men, but they Verse 5.
should torment them five months. To wit in this the Arabian, Locusts differ
from the Euphratern horsemen of whom in the following trumpet. It was given to
the Saracens that they should long and cruelly torment the nations of the
Roman Empire; but it was not at all given to them any way to bereave the very
Roman trientall that I may so call it, of life. For since, in the mean space
while the former trumpets sounded, a new pontificiall Kingdom had grown, up,
out of the ruins of the politic state of old Rome, as it were on the same
pace with the ruin of the other: the Saracens could neither extinguish the
kingdom of this, nor of that new Rome Constantinople. Contrariwise the Turks,
the royal city being taken utterly subverted the Constantinopolitan Kingdom,
as in the following trumpet we shall hear. But of the five months in the
compass whereof that tormenting by the Locusts is limited, we shall more
aptly speak where it comes to the petition of them in the tenth verse.

In those days men shall seek death, and shall not find it: and shall Chap. ^.
desire to die, and death shall fly from the^: that is, the calamity of those
Ver^e 6.
times should be so great, that men should be weary of their lives.

For that thou may nor think^ they dealt by bare persuasions, or wiles of
deceipts; they carried the matter by force of arms, and that by the instruction
of Muhamed himself, whose propagation certainly terrible enough, together
with largeness of ga^ning dominion, and habit of a warlike nation, is set
forth in a most lively manner. The warlike preparation thus: And the shapes of
the ^ocusts, like unto horses (that is horsemen) prepared to bartail. Their
t^eth, as the teeth of Lions (that is they were strong to devour Joel 1. 6.
Dan. 7. V. 7. 23.) And they had brestplates of iron, and the sound of their
wings, as the sound of charets with many horses running to battle. The whole
description is taken out Chap. 9.
Joel, whence is that very representatio^ of locusts as I have said (see cha. 2
4 c^a 1. 6. cha. 2. 5. The success and largenes of seeking dominion, Verse 7.
The crowns as it were like gold set upon their hea^s, do show, and that not
unfitly. Never was the dominion of any nation so far ^pread nor in so short a
space, were there ever so many kingdoms, so many regions brought under the
yoke. It is incredible to be spoken, yet it is most true: In the space of
fouresco^e years or not many more, they subdued and added to the diabolical
kingdom of Muhamed, Palestina, Syria, both Armeniaes, almost all Asia the
less, Persia, India, Egypt, Numidia, all Barbary, even to the river Niger,
Portugal Spain, Neither stayed their fortune or ambition here; till they
added also even a great part of Italy, as far as unto the gates of Rom^, as
also Sicily, Can^y, Cyprus, and the other Islands of the Mediterranian Sea.
Good God what a huge tract of the world is this, how many crowns here, whence
it is worthy of observation also, that there is no mention madeof a third part
as in other trumpets. For this destruction fell no less without the bounds of
the Roman Empire, then within it, extending even to the farthest Indians.

It remains we speak of the habit of the warlike nations. And the faces of
them, says he, were as the faces of men. These locusts were with a humane
face, that is, indeed men (lest any happily should conceive that it was meant
of vermin) having hair as the hair of women, that is, by nation Arabia^s, who
says Pli^ie, use long hair, and (after the manner of women) wear head tiers,
Pliny lib. 6. cha. 28. with whom it is the manner even to this day, as
travelers affirm, that going into battle they make themselves horns and
curled locks of their own hair, Came rar operum sub^is. tom. 1. c. 39. whence it
will be evident, that the place cited by our Brightm in out of Herodotus in
Th^lia, as i^ were for the polling of the Arabian is to be taken, not of
polling the head, but either some custom of cutting the beard used by the
Arabians in imitation of Bacchus; of which Pliny makes some mention, when he
^aith their beard was wont to be shaven, saving on the over lip, or of the
rounding of the ends of their hair, without the whole polling of the head.
Both which, happily because it was an ensign of the worshippers of Bacchus
their neighbou^ idol, God forbade his people, Levit. 19. 27. and 21. 5.
Howsoever it be, I doubt not but Pliny had seen Arabians at Rowf.

It follows of the continuance of the Plague, which surely Chap. 9^
is determined in the compass of five months according to the type of
locusts, which continue so many months: to wit, from Verse 5.
the rising of the seven stars (by the ancient called Abe^^^^^ verg^ttarnm.
the going out of the spring, about one month after the vernall Aequinoctium)
when they are hatched of eggs left i^ the earth all the winter, unto the
beginning of Autumn, when, leaving other eggs upon the earth for an increase
of the next year, they presently die, you may see Pliny lib. 11. chap. 29.

Yet God would have this notation of time agree not only with the type, but
with the antitype also, when as he delivered to be vexed with invasions by the
Saracenicall locusts, Italy the chief of lands, and the most eminent for
sin, which caused the plague, from the year 830. to the year 980. that is,
150. years, or five months of years.

The Plague in truth rested upon other countries longer, but in a certain
course: for several spaces of time, some short^r, some longer; chiefly upon
the Eastern regions, of Syria, Egypt, and Asia the less, which bordering upon
the head of that Empire, which first was Damascus, after Bagdad, became for
many ages as it were the foreparts of the Saracenicall body.

And that I may note this; although what countries soever they possessed, they
tormented the Inhabitants thereof with that venomous stroke of the Scorpions
tail, as I have said; yet the Italians seemed to have felt the stroke of the
tail of the locusts after another (I know not what singular) manner. For the
whole swarm being compared to a body, and the former parts, as it is meet
assigned to the East, what shall the Affrican troop be, reaching so far from
the head into the West, but the tail. But from these is all the cala^ity of
Italy; which they did strike without intermission with a by blow (see the
subtlety of Scorpions) through the Mediterranian sea, and the Islands thereof,
Sardin^a, and Sicilia as if the holy Ghost had pointed his finger hither, when
as by an itterated mention of months he said, And (...) 10.
they had tails like Scorpions, and stings, and in their tails they had power
to hurt men five months. For so the Complutense book reads, Syras,
Primasius, Andreas, and Aretas, agreeing therewith. Such interpretation
although it be not unproper for declaring of the time; yet that there is
another significati^ of that serpentine train and extending it self much
further, I have already said, neither do I here alter, if any shall suffer
himself to b^ persuaded to admit of some secondary sense (besides this
primarily intended such as I am not easily wont to admit) let him for me.

And this is one way, how the five Months of type of Locusts may be fitted to
the thing it self acted. There is also another, if because these five months
are twice set down, the account be Ver. 5, 10.
therefore dou led: as if forsooth the Holy Ghost would use the number of five,
for the analogy and decorum of the type; but doublee it, that it might answer
the antitipe in some more large space For wherefore otherwise should he iterate
the mention of these months almost ^n the same words? Is there not some
mystery in this iteration? I do not r^member the like to be any where else, in
the continued de^cription o^ the same type,

If therefore this shall please, three hundred years for so many do twice
five months of years make, will comprehend, that noble space of the kingdom
of the Sarac^ns, which is drawn from the beginning of the Calip^ate of the
Apasid^ (who first made Ba^da^ heir Imperial seat) to the taking of the same
Bag^ad by Togrul ecus King of the Turks (whom we call Ta^grolipix;) that is,
from the year of Christ 750 to the year 1055. This space truly is larger
about five years, but since the account is made by Months, there is no
greater care to be taken of a few days, then is wont to be of hours where the
account is by days. This also may be added, that this space may begin fitly,
from the taking away of the yoke of the Exarchate from the city of Rome, wherein
the calamity of the former trumpe^ ceased. For this happened at the same time,
happily also the same year.

If thou enquire yet wherefore the Holy Ghost did not comprehend the whole
continuance of the Saracenicall plague in these n^bers, Chap. 9.
since the principality of the Abi^die to wit from the year 630, the Saracens
by continued success had so enlarged their Empire, that now it was come to its
perfection: it may be answered because this number of five Months; was rather
of the type of L^cust^, (...)
then of the Antitype of the Saracens. And therefore what did properly comply
with them, was sufficient, if in these it should be set forth by some more
remarkable space of time, although it did not perfectly measure it.
Notwithstanding I determine nothing here, but leave it to others, to whom God
shall have given more abi^itie, to be further searched out. In the mean while,
this difficulty does nothing prejudice the interpretation concerning the
Saracen^. For whatsoever interpretation thou shall follow, the same difficulty
will press thee.

It remains yet to treat of the King an^ his name. They Verse 11.
had, says he, over them a King the Angel of the bottom^esse pit. whose name
in Hebrew is Abaddon, but in Greek A^ollyon, that is, a Destroyer

The Holy Ghost seems, in that he calls the Angel of the bottoml^sse pit a
King, to intimate, that these Locusts shall be a Nation, not Christian but
Infidel, which had not given their name to Christ. For the Children of
unbelief or Pagans are said by Paul, Ephesians. 2.2. to be subject to the Prince,
whose power is of the air, who is none other then the Angel of the
bottomless pit. Contrariwise, who so become Christians are taken out of the
power of Satan, to be converted to God, Acts 26. 18.

Whatsoever it may be, it is a thing most worthy the examination, Chap. 9.
wherefore he calls this Prince of the bottomless pit here plainly by a
new name and unheard of; and not as he is wont, The Devil, Satan, the
Serpent, or Dragon? or that he had rather from the notion of destroying; why
not rather Asmodaus, ^ name ((...)) of like signification, whereby the Jews
^^d already used to call him; but Abaddon never? whether because since the
Muhamedans do glory, that they do adore and worship no other God, but that
one sole God De^^^urgus, or Maker of the universe, which to the Chaldeans and
Syrians ^oundeth (...) Abada, and to the Arabians themselves is made known by
the Epithit^ (...) Abdi, that is eternal; the holy spirit would meet with
them in a word of the like sound, but of a contrary sense? by which forsooth he
would intimate, that they were so far of, (whatsoever they pretended) from
worshipping Abadan or Abdin that eternal maker of the world, that in the
estimation of God Himself, whom they would have to be (...) one only person,
and not to be come unto by Christ, they took for their King or divine power
not him, but an evil Angel Abaddon, that is, not the Maker but the destroyer
of the world. So when the Jeroboamites thought they worshipped the God of
Israel in their Calves; the Scripture notwithstanding says, they sacrificed to
Devils, 2 Cro^. 11. 15.

Or shall we say that there is allusion to the common name of the Kings of
Arabia of that Coast, whence Mu^amed with his Locusts was first to arise? who
are afterward called Ob^d^ a name of authority, from the Ancient King Obodi
being esteemed of his in the number of the GODS, and from whose Sepulcher Oboda
continued a name of the Kings of Arabia to the Region of the Nabat^ans; as the
Kings of Egypt Phara^hs, Chap. ^^
and Ptolom^i, of the Romans, Caesar's, of the Parthians Arsac^ and the
neighboring KINGS of Arabia, Petr^a, A^et^? For Stephanus the Byzantine out of
the fourth book of Vra^ius a Writer of the Arabian History, says (...).
Oboda a Country of the Nabat^ans, where Obodes the King whom they made a God
was buried. But Strabo and Josephus assure me that from him, the Kings of that
Coast were afterward called by the common name Obodas of whom this mentions
two of that name; one a Warrier, and too well known to the Jews for the
slaughter of Alexander Iamnaus De^bello I^d^ico lib. 1. cap. 3.
their King; whom certainly that Obodas the Arabian con^trained to fly to
Jerusalem, his whole Army being slain in the Country of Gilead about Ninety
years before Christ. Whom the Jews not unworthily might call with a small
change Abad Antiquit. jud. lib 16. ^. 11. 13. 14. 15.
don, that is a destroyer. The other dull and Idle, of the same time with Her^d
the great, whose vicegerent Syll^us (who governed the state as he listed)
sought Salome the Sister of Hero^ in marriage: but being frustrate of his
desire, and becoming the enemy of Herod, by false accusations of him unto
Augustus, brought him into great danger. Of this Obada Strabo maketn mention
once or twice in the Arabian expedition of Aelius Gallus* and that with the
same note of slothfulness; and says the same was ^oyned in affinity to the
neighbor King Areta and this was a common name as I said of the bordering
Kings of Petr^^.) Out of the same Writer is to be gathered, that the Kingdom
of Obod^ being seated more toward the South, reached to the Red Sea. In which
Coast of Land I do verily believe the Ismaelites and Sar^^^ens inhabited. For
surely it is manifest that the Na^a ha^^s whose coast Vranins witnesses did
comprehend the region Oboda were Ismaelites, obtaining that name from Nabaiot^
the first borne of Ismael, ^en. 25.23.13.
Iosphus adds, that Oboda being dead, Areta, by the favor of Augustus joined
his Kingdom to his own.

If any therefore being moved with so great an agreement and aptness of
things, shall be of opinion that the holy ghost of purpose used this name
Abaddon, that by a certain par^nomasia of the name of Kings pointed his finger
to that nation, whose custom was to name their Kings with the like appellation,
I surely think him worthy to be pardoned; especially since both words seem to
be from the same root, common to the Hebrews and Arabians, although, as
otherwise it comes to pass, in a contrary signification; and seeing with the
old prophets examples sometimes happen of allusions little or nothing
differing. So that which Esaias calls Christ (...) that is, A branch, Matthew
turns it to (...) 11.1.
the name of Jesus of Nazareth chap. 2. verse 24. you may see also Ier. 1. 11.
12. (...) an almond tree (...) I will hasten. Amos. 8.2. a basket (...) that
is, of summer fruits, because there comes (...) that is an end, etc, And also
that the Jews of the later age did use such agnominations, even this may serve
for an argument, that a little before the coming of our Savior, because that
Acheron the river of hell (as they heard from the Grecians) in sound did not
differ from Accaron the city of the Philistines (for so in times past Ekron was
pronounced) of Beelzebub the God See the Lxx. Mat. 12.24. Luke 11.15.
hereof, they made the name of Satan the Prince thereof, that is the Prince of
hell. For hence, truly as I conjecture, is Beelzebub the Prince of Devils in
the gospel.

The second woe Trumpet OR, The sixth Trumpet.
Another woe of pl^gues (which until this day O grievous!) ^^. Chap. 9.
lies upon it calls forth the ^etra^chs of the Turk^s with a numerous troop
of horsemen, from Euph^^tes (where they had now long stayed) into the Roman
Empire.

Loose (says the voice from the sour horns of the Altar of Ve^se 14.
incense the four Angels which are bound at the great river Euphrates. Angels
are put for the nations which they were thought to govern, a metonymie not
unusall in this book. That appears out of this, that those who are
immediately loosed by ^teirdion of the oracle, are an army of horsemen, sent
for^h to kill men.

He bids loose the Angels bound, Who breaking in upon the Roman regions,
the former plague yet enduring were restrained at Euphrates a few ages, that
they should not at their pleasure overrunne further. In the beginning truly
they adventured a little further, even unto Nira^ of Bithynia, but Solomon
being vanished were again driven back to Eu^hrates, by the Christian Sea
worthies in their expedition unto the holy land. Ar^gmenta.


Furthermore the four Angels signify so many Sultani^s or Kingdoms into
which the Turks were d^vided, when first having passed over Euphrates, they
had spread themselves into the neighboring coasts of A^a and Syria These
Christopher Ric^erius, concerning the original of the Turks, does thus reckon
up out of Scilix a Greek author; the first of Asia, the second of Alepo, the
third of Damascus, and of Antioch the fourth. The first of which the Asian or
of Asia the less had its beginning in C^tlamusus (otherwise called by
Elmachinus except I be deceived Sedyduddrulas) allied to that Tangrolipix who
first took Bagdad. He began his Kingdom, in the parts of Asia bordering Chap.
9.
upon Euphrates; Caes^ria or Capadocia being conquered and taken from the
Romans to him and his poster^ty about the year of Christ 108. as the same
auther witnesses. The borders whereof afterward Solomon his successor enlarged
as far as Nicaea of Bithynia; but being vanished by ours in that renowned
expedition unto Jerusalem, he was constrained to leave the whole region which
he had gotten and to retire to Euphrat^s And the seat of this Tetrarchie,
though in the beginning it were else where, yet for the most part was at
Iconium in the same Ca^adocia.

The second was the Tetrarchie of Alepo the city thereof being Alepo which is
watered with an arm of Euphrates, brought thither by one of the Sultanus,
Siarsud aulas was the first king hereof (as witnesses Elmachinus) having
obtained Alepo in the year 1079. whose successor was R^duwanus Salgh^^ides, in
the year 1095.

The founder of the third Tetrachie, whose chief city being Damascus, (by the
testimony of the same author) was Tagiuddaulas Nisus the nephew of Togrulb^cus
(or Tangr^lipix) who subdued Damascus in the same year 1079. His successor was
Ducathes or Decacus the brother of R^duwanus, the Sultan of Alepo in the year
1095. Whom (says Scilix) all the region of D^cap^lis obeyed. But this reached
to Euphrates.

To these Scilix reckons the Antiochian ^o^ a fourth, contained within
moderate bounds. For says he the Calipha of Egypt out of the Saracenicall
stock possessed the regions of Syria unto Laodicea. But forasmuch as that
Anti^chean Kingdom, as it was a little remote from Euphrates, so it endured
not but fourteen years, Anti^chia being presently taken by ours under the
conduct of B^^mund: happily it were better leaving out Antioch to add for the
making up of the number of four^ the Bagdad or Persia^ Empire upon the other
side of Euphrates (for Scilix had only respect to the Turks, who had passed
Euphrates) that so the whole Turkish Empire, beyond and on this side Euphrates,
may be understood to be divided into those four Sultanies: which with the
course of the Kings or Sultans for a certain time, see Reader described in the
following figure for thy more distinct Diagra^mate.
contemplation.

A Diagramme of the T^^kish Kingdom parted in Four Parts at Euphrates from
the year 1080. and so forth, out of Elmachinus, the Arabian, and S^il^p, a
Greek Author.
Beyond Euphrates, on this side Euphrates, Of Bagdad Togrulbecus Orbarsalanus.
Of Cesaria Capadocia and I. conium etc in Asia the less. Of Alepo Of Damascus
Ghelaluddaulas in the ye^re 1071

Barkyaruens

M^hamm^dus

Mahmudus began in the ye^re 1117. etc

Seijdud^aul^s by surname

Cutlumusus

S^limanus

T^nismanius*

Masutus

Calisastlanus etc

Sjar^uddulas

Roduwanus

Tagjud^aulas his sonn^

Bulgarus began in the year 1117

Tagjuddaulas

Decacus

Ababacus then alive in the year 1115

Sanguinus

Noradinus



And this was the state of the Turkish affairs, when first they passed
Euphrates, and as it were making a show of their breaking in upon the Roman
territories* they were restrained in their limited prison at Euphra^e^. But
howsoever this quaternion of Sultans remained not entire till the the time of
their loosing, but underwent diverse changes: yet the Holy Ghost esteems the
nation according to the state of the first irruption, wherein having passed
Euphrates, they are bound until an appointed time.

And those four Angels were loosed, being prepared for an hour and a day and
a month and a year, that they might slay the third part of men.

This loosing of the Turks happened a little before the year 1300, the
Caliphatship of Bagdad (with which the first Woe utterly expired) being now
extinguished by the Tartars in the year 1258, and the remnant of the Turks,
who on the other side of Euphrates, hitherto raighned in Persia, being cast by
the same (in the year 1289) as it were out of a s^^ng into the countries
belouging unto the Roman Empire on this side of Euphrates. For things thus
framing, it happened also, that at the same time the Latins, who had hindered,
and stayed the irruptions of the Chap 9.
Turks now almost 200. years were driven out of Syria and Palestina, in the
year likewise 1291. In the mean time the Turks, although as yet divided into
several provinces, invaded almost all the les^er Asia, parted it among
themselves to be possessed by right of inheritance, and at length uniting
themselves under the sole conduct of my Oth^man, without any restraint, cruelly
raged and passed over into Europe: ne there could they any ^ore be restrained
with any force, until they had destroyed the whole Constantinopolitan Empire
with miserable slaughters.

But unless I be deceaved, the Oracle designeth the time also of this
overthrow of C^nstantinople: to wit, that it should come to pass, a day, a
month, and a year, that is, 396 years after the Turks, the Saracenicall
Empire being given them, d^gan to be made ready by God; that is, from the time
that B^gdad was taken by them. For this was the beginning of the breaking of
the Turks when the Empire of the Saracens began to be subverted, and the
dominion of the Romans to be afflicted; yet so as the force of the cvill, was
to be restrained until the appointed time of setting them loose. Certainly the
space of time, agrees to an inch. For Almachinus the Arabian Historian, whom
we have sometimes cited, then whom none has more accurately noted, the moments
of times, reports that Z^grulbecus Salghucides the Prince of the Turks (whom
we call Tangrolipix, of the Zelzuc^ian family) the royal city of Bagdad being
taken, was clothed with the Imperial robe, by Caliph^ Ca^inus Biamrilla and
enstauled in the kingdom, in the year of the Hegira 4.9 that is 1057 of
Christ, then says he,, was the kingdom stablished to him. From this time
therefore the Turks, having the principal seat of the Sarecenicall Empire,
with the whole dominion beyond Euphrates are prepared, that after a
prophetical day, month and year, they should kill the third part of men; that
is in the year of Christ 1453 they should utterly cut of the rest of the
Roman Empire in the East, the royal city of Constantinople being taken. Fro
the space from the year 1057 to the year 1453 wherein Constantinople was
taken, is prec^^ely 396 years, whereof the day makes one, the Month 30, the
year 365. The exactness of the account is such that any one may easily
imagine that even the hour (which according to the proportion of the rest
should make fifteen days) agreed in like manner with the event, if the month
of the inauguration of Togrulbecus had been declared, as well as in the year
is. In the mean while, until that appear (...) an hour may he taken here,
not for the twentieth part of the day, but for a fit time, and the
coniunctionk^^ (and) to be expounded declaratively as it were (...)
prepared for a fit time, to wit, for a day, a month, and a year, to slay the
third part of men. But how many years after wards should run till the ruin
of the Turkish kingdom, is no where had: only it is said that it shall come to
pass at the end of the times of the Beast; to wit, the second Woe shall pass,
when the third Woe should be at hand for the abolishing of the kingdom of the
Beast chap. 11, v 14.15.

But before I depart hence, I shall not unwillingly confess this, that except
so exact an agreement of the prophecy with the thing done did as it were
enforce me, another interpretation should no way have displeased me, to wit,
this, that those Angels were prepared and furnished for every occasion whether
need shall require for an hour, or a day, or a month, or a year, to take the
matter in hand. But whether it be like, that so accurate answering of time, as
here the event shows, should have happened by chance, let others judge. Some
one perhaps there will be who will make conscience so to think.

It follows of the quality and number of the Armies: And the number, says
he, (...), of the Army of horsemen, were two hundred thousand, thousand. He
^ameth an Army of horsemen, and no other Armies, in the whole description of
the plague, as if this enemy from Euphrates should be wholly an Army of
Horsemen. Whether because in the Turkish war, the horsemen so far exceed
the foot men in number, that this is of no account in respect of that? rather
(which I believe the Holy Ghost especially respected) because this is the very
character, already consecrated by Ezechiel, of the Nation of Magog, of whom the
Turks are derived. For so he describes that Nation by warrfare on horseback
in that famous prophecy concerning Gog (this in the same age of Ezekiel was
the R^b. Moses Bar. Na^hman upon the Pentatench, Gog. says he, is a general
name, by which every Prince of Magog is called the same says Johannes
Baptista, of a lew becoming a Christian, in the prologue of the second part.
Leunclavius in the Pandicts of the Turkish H^story, p. 186. Gog at this day by
the Turks is called Giok or K^oc, with one only syllabl^: whence Kioc Can,
which otherwhere is Gog Can etc. Gog E^p which also is Gug Elp.
common name of all the King of Magog as Pharaoh was of the Egyptians) Chap.
38. 4. And I will bring thee forth, says he, and all thins army Horses Chap. 9.
and Horse men, and all of them cloth^d with armor. Again, verse 15. And thou
shall come from thy place out of the Northparts, thou and people with thee, all
of them Riders on hors^s, etc. furthermore, this Gog is called the chief
Prince of Meshek and Tubal; That is, who going out of his coasts commanded both
the Armeniaes beyond and on this side Euphrates. I comprehend here under the
name of the hither Armenia the Capadocians anciently called Meschim and Moschi,
and where the chief town Mazaca is, afterward called (aesarea, and in the
same Coast the Moschi mountains, being no obscure tokens that the Inhabitants
are derived from Meshek. The further or greater Armenia is that which is called
at this day Turcomania from the habitation of the Turks; wherein in time past
the City Thelbalana was, the Tibarenian and Balbitenian people, the river
Teleboas and other marks of the name Tubal. Yet notwithstanding, the War
which Ezechiel declares, is not to be taken for this irruption of the Turks
which John describes (this only he seems to intimate) be understood of
another the last under the return of the Jews, and that if a man may
conjecture, this which now is, something before departing.

But of the type of the Army of the Horsemen, there is another thing which
with the good leave of the Reader I will add; but on this condition, that no
man think me over much to regard the deceitfulness of names and e^ymologies.
Even solid and well cooked meats, are wont to taste more deliciously with
sauc^. Let not the Reader therefore disdain that I set such before him. To
wit, that the Turks before the loosing, now by long habitation have been
Perfians, and by that name called every where in the Byzantine Historians.
Certainly Nicetas, who in a History comprehended the most part of the time
wherein they were restrained at Eupbrates, almost always calls them
Persians, verily rarely Turks. Now the Persians, if thou mark even by the
very sound of the name, are Harse men: since (...) Paras by which name Persia
is called in sacred writ (with which Parthia is the same, only otherwise
Chap. ^.
pronouned) in the three Eastern languages, the Hebrew Chaldean, and Arab^an,
dothsignifie a Horse or Horseman Therefore by this reason the Euphratean
Horsemen are Turcoper^ians, that is, the borderers of Euphraces by a nam^ of
their Nation are called Horsemen.

Neither does example of such allusion (if any shall object dispose) seem to
be wanting in Daniel, chapter 8. where the Macedonians, who at that time were
called Aegeades (that is to say Goatish) are signified by a type of Goats, and
the King is set forth by the representation of a he Goat. Behold, says he,
Hircus Caprarum that is the Male of the Goats) comes Verse 5.
from the West, etc. for he means Alexander the great the KING of the
Aegeans. They are the Macedonians. For so that Nation was called, where the
first seat of the kingdom was, from Caramos the Founder, about two hundred
years before Daniel. The occasion of the name the Epitomizor Justinius
reports out of Trogus lib. 7. whose words I will not stick to mention.
Caranus, says he, with a great multitude of Gr^cians, being commanded by an
answer of the Oracle to seek places of habitation in Macedonia, when he had
com^into Emathia, he possessed himself of the City Aedessa, following a
stock of Goats flying from a shower, the Citizens not perceaving by reason of
the greatness of the showers and fogge: and calling the Oracle to mind,
whereby he was bidden to seek an Empire by the conduct of Goats, he appointed
it the State of the Kingdom; and afterward religiously observed,
whethersoever he removed his Army to have the same Goats his ensigns, using
those as guides for his enterprises which he had for authors of his Kingdom.
He called the City Aedessa Aegeas, for memory of the benefit, and the people
Aegeans. See the rest.

Such is the aptnes here, that a man may judge that the type of the Ram also in
the same vision concerning the King of the Persians Chap. ^. Persians.
has allusion to the signification of the name Elam (which is the other of the
two names whereby that Nation is called) For (...) with the Hebrews (whence
the name (...) a Ram) and (...) and (...) which the Chaldeans signify the
same, to wit, For^em s^n rebustu^^sse.
to be valiant or strong. Happily therefore (...) Elam with those sounded as
(...) a Ram with these, and thereupon the K. of Elam is figured to Daniel in
this type. Howsoever it be, when the matter it self is confirmed otherwise,
such agreement of names with the type cannot but be a godly solace to those
that studdie those things; whether we believe it to have happened by chance or
otherwise. And these things by the way.

Now again I return into the way to the Euphratean Horsemen: the number of
whom is, says he; (...), Verse 16.
two hundred thousand, thousand. Some read it (...), Duaemyriades my^^adum.
Cu^rnum Dei dua ^yriades, w^ll a d^p i^^t.
leaving out (...) as Cha. 5. 11. But a huge multitude is signified as Psalm.
68. 18. The Chariots of the Lord are twenty thousands, thousands, thousands.
For (...) or (...) is of those numerall words, which in the Hebraisme are wont
to be taken indefinitely, as Sexcenti with the Latins; and does express not
a number of ten thousand, but any great one whatsoever; especially when it is
so doubled, as is to be seen Daniel 7. 10. But there is no man ignorant how
great and how immense: the armies of the Turks in their expeditions have
been, and at this day are wont to be.

And I heard says he, the number of them. For indeed it might be demanded,
whence the number could appear unto John, as which was impossible for him to
account in a vision. I heard says he. The like is to be esteemed to come to
pass in other visions also, as often as any thing is declared which could not
be expressed in a vision; to wit, that the Apostle was instructed therein by
voice. Chap. 9.


It follows concerning their ammunition: And so I saw, Verse ^^*
says he, the Horses in appearance, and those that sa^e upon them, having
(even) Brestplates of fire, of Iacinct, and of brimstone, and the heads of the
Horses as the Heads of Lions, and as it we^e fire smoke, and brimstone issued
out of their mouths; by which the third part of m^n was killed.

No where in any of the Prophets, or other where in sacred writ does such like
representation of fire, Iacinthian smoke; and brimstone offer itself.
Wherefore I take it according to the letter, of that new kind of instruments
of war, and before this Trumpet never heard of, which these Euphrat^an enemies
should use after their loosing: I mean gunnes sending forth fire, smoke and
brimstone. For Gunpowder is a powder casting out fire, with Iacinthlan smoke,
the substance being sulphurous. Which who so do^ use in war, appear unto
their enemies, as if they were covered as it were with fiery Iacinthian, and
sulphurous Habergions, in respect of the air, corrupted with fire, smoke, and
sulphurous smell: by reason of which, the heads of the Horses also seem
dreadful and terrible, as it were of Lions. Hence it is that Io^^ says, ^^e
saw horses and horsemen, not indeed, but in appearance such; I say, in
appearance (...), not indeed, having brest-plates of fire, jacinth, and
brimstone; in appearance, having heads like Lions, to conclude, in appearance,
not indeed, there came forth o^^ of the horses mouths, fire, smoke, and
brimstone; for that the thing is wont to appear so to the beholders on the
adverse part. This is the force of (...) in appearance, which twi^e in this
sense is used in the fourth chap. ver. 3. (...), like a Ia^per stone to look
upon, and a Chap. 9,
Rainbow like an E^^rald to look upon. Neither is that word to be found in
the New Testament, any other where except once only.

By these three, fire, smoke, and brimstone issuing out of guns, Verse 9.
he adds, that the third part of men are killed, that is, they which were of
that third part of men, whom we called the Roman Empire. Neither is it
necessary here of elsewhere, whre mention is of a third part, that the whole
third part be understood, but to be taken partitively. Examples offer
themselves as well in this book as elsewhere in the Scripture of such an
Ellipsis of a word partitive: as Judges 12. 7. Iephte was buried in the Cities
of Gilead, that is, in one of the Cities. And Rev. 17. 16. The ten horns
shall hate the whore, that is some of them. So the third part of men was killed
((...)) that is they which were of the third part.

Who knows not that this was abundantly fulfilled in the overthrow of
Constantinople? was not that most noble City, the head of the third part of
men, conquered and given up to an universal slaughter by these engines casting
forth fire? Here Chalcocondylas. Mechmetes, says he, in the expedition against
Byzanti^m, caused great gunnes to be made, such as we never kne^ to have been
before that time -- those ^ee dispersed every where through his Army, that they
might s^oote bullets against the Grecians -- One of which was of that
greatness, that it was to be drawn by 70 yoke of O^en, and two thousand men
-- to this on either side two other great o^es also were adjoined either of
which shot^ stone, the w^ight wh^reof was half a tallent -- that admirable
piece of ord^^ance followed them, which carried a bullet which weighed about
three tallents, and did throw down a great part of the w^ll -- the ^^undering
whereof is reported to have binn so great, that the country Chap 9
adjoining for 40 furlongs distance was shaken, this piece of ^rdinance by day
did shoot^ seven bullets, in the night one, which was a sign of day, and did
show in what place the bullets should be cast forth that day. He which
desires. To know more and how gunnes were used in the besieging of the City by
sea, and how the walls being shaken with ordinance by the space of 40 days at
length fell down, and how Long the Captain of the Ge^^ales with his
soldiers being beatne with the bullets of the gunnes quitted there place, and
made way for the Turks into the City, let him have recource to Chalcocoudylas
himself. Morover of the same he may learn, that the Peloponesian straight was
also concured with the same arms, by Amurath this Mechmetes his Father, and
the Pelquenesians brought to obedience and by Mechmets himself were wholley
subdued, presently after the taking of Constantinople Corinthus also being
conqureed by this manner of ordinance.

To this of their weapos is added another thing concerning the nature of the
horses and horsemen. That their power was not in (...) 9.
their mouth only (of which hither unto) but also in their tails. For their
tails were like serpents, having heads by which they do hurt. That is, the
same which before has binne said of the Saracens, is true also of the Turks.
To wit, that they brought destruction where they came, not only by hostile
force, but also by the train of their Mahammedan imposture. Whence it is that
these are noe less serpents in their tail, then the Saracein^all L^^usts.
whose religion they received. but that one kind of serpentine tail is
attributed to these, and another to them, that arises from the natural
diversity of the shape of both, the Locusts and horses; whereupon a sharp
tail of Seorpions to those, but Chap. 9.
to these tails with serpentine heads did best agree.

But the rest of the men which were not killed with these plagues ve^^. 20.
(or which escaped these plagues) repented not of the works of their hands,
that they should not worship Devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and
brasle, and stone, and wood, which neither (...) see, nor hear, nor walk. etc.

But who these may be, it will be no hard matter to gather; since in the whole
Roman^ Empire, or on this side Euphrates there are none now which worship
Images (O shameful and grivous!) but christians. Must it not needs be then
that the very same worship Devils, also since both is ascribed to the same in
this place, But what Devils then thou will say? Shurely not those which they
themselves hold for unclean spirits, and so call them (for what christian
wittingly and willingly would worship such?) but those Demone, which by the
heathen theologists) were understood by this name Damonia; I mean Deastri
consecrated men dei^yed? see Hisiod (...) Verse. 121.? in simposi^
by the names both of Angels and of dead men, as it were mediators betwenne
God and men (...) says Plato, (...) Devils, are of a middle nature between
the Gods and mortal men. Likewise (...) God has noe society with man, but all
comunion and conference of Gods with men is by mediation of spirits, or
Devils. The same the other Platonists and the most philosaphers of other
sects, except the Epicurians do hold. I will only rite the words of Apuleius,
where in the de Dhmonio socratis
opinion of Plato and the rest is fully and perspicuously contained. Devils,
says he are mean powers by whom both our desiers and Let the Redet see Austin
de civit, dei lib 8. ct 9.
merits have access, to the Gods carriers between mortal men, and those that
dwell in heaven, hence of prayers, hence of gifts; which carry hither and
thither, thence petitions, thence supplies, or certain interpreters or bearers
of recomendations. Neither, Chap. 9.
says he, will it stand with the majesty of the heavenly Gods, to take care of
these things. Doubtless they had two sorts of Gods; heavenly who were
continually resident in heaven, and would not abase them^selves to these
earthly things, nor be defiled with the thought of them; these propperly and
singulerly were called Gods: others Devils, who being as it were mediating
divine power, and ministers of the heavenly and chife Gods, had the oversight
Daemones
of humane affayers Those the holy cripture (if I conjecture rightly) calls
the hoaste of heaven; these (especyally those that you ^^y see Hiero^ upon 22
chap. of Ezech. likewise upon Ho^^^ chap. 2. and upon Esaias. 46. Demonem verse.
5. 13.
they made of dead men) Baales of all the king of the Babilonians or Asyrians,
or in the Cald^ pronunciation, Bell, who first was consecrate by his for a
Devil. whence after it came to pass that such divine powers were called
Baalim, that is, Baales; as Baal^peor, Baal-berith, Baal-zebub, Baal-melach
(^er 19) even as from the first Emperor Julius Casaer, the other Roman
Emperors afterward are called Caesar's.

But how this doctrine of Devils, agrees with the worshipping of Saints and
Angels by the counterfeit-christians, the thing it D^mon^.
self speaks: with this only difference, that with them there were many
supreme or heavenly Gods; with us there is only one the Father of all. And
truly there ought to be but one mediator also, our Lord Jesus Christ, but that
the false prophets have brought in more like the heathen D^mones. Plainly
according to what Pa^l has prophesied 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2, 3. That it should come
to pass in the latter times, by the hypocrisy of false speakers faining lies
of De^strorum.
miracles, and through countorfeit holiness of the Monks abstaining from
marriage and meats, by reason of their ^ow: that (...), that is, this doctrine
of Devils should be brought back again into the world. The interpretation will
aptly serve if thou take the ginitive (...) passively, that it may be the
doctrine concerning devils as heb. 6. 2. (...) etc. The doctrine of baptism,
the doctrine of lying on of hands. For surely that, (...), by the hypocrocy of
false teachers, and what follows, that the order of construction maybe safe
it is expounded by the government of to substantives, (...) the preposition
setting forth the in^trument and cau^e^ which according to the Hebrew phrase is
familiar) But I have declared this more at large in another place in a peculiar
tracte, neither is it my mind here to repeat it.

Of the third w^e Trumpet. OR The sound of the 7. trumept.
The vision of the sixth trumpet being ended (for there is on Chap. 10. Yer^e.
1. 2.
only vision of one trumpet, even as of the seals and vialls) the next place
in order of things was due to the sound of the seventh, which notwithstanding
being put of to the prophecy of the little book to which the spirit of God is
now to pass: lest any thing Ve^se. 6.
in the mean space on his part should be wanting to the fulfilling of the
prophecy of the ^eales now to be ended, he supplyeth the cour^ of the trumpets
sound which was to be deterred with an oath wherein the event of the trumpet is
showed at least in general. To Yer^e, ^.
wit that it shall come to pas^e, when that Angel shall sound that the Roman
Beast being destroyed, the times of the last head being come to an end, the
mystery of God shall be finished, as he has declared to his servants the
prophets. For so, long ago, it was foretold to Daniell, that the fourth Beast
being slain, the Chap. 10.
king of the saints should rule through the whole world (c.7.) and together
that glorious promise of restoring Israel should be fulfilled (chap. 12.) But
that this Kingdom is it which he called the finishing of the mystery of God,
that acclamation subjoyned to the same Trumpet afterward sounding, suffers us
not to doubt: the Kingdoms of this world are become our Lords and his Christ's,
and he shall ra^gne for evermore: That it is wonder, that there are any Cha.
11. v. 15.
who should understand it otherwise. Therefore that time, of which the Angel
here swears, that it shall be no more, cannot be any Verse 6.
other, then either the time of the four Monarchies universally, or (which is
more near but the same in effect) of the last Kingdom; that is, the Roman, to
wit, the last period, of a time, times, and half a time: since the same which
here with John is said shall be, when time shall be no more; that with Daniel
was showed should be then, when that period of the last times shall be
accomplished.

And surely this consummation of the mystery of God is the matter of the
seventh Trumpet: to which are added as companions seven thunders. For they are
not the matter it self which the Trumpet does exhibit, but a temporary
thereof. To wit while the Angel makes his proclamation concerning the
mystery of the Trumpet, seven thunders utter their voices. He cried, says
Vers^ 3.
he, with a great voice, as a Lion roareth; and when he had cried, seven
thunders uttered their voices: that is, when he had begun his cry, seven
thunders also began to speak. Neither can they but contemporize with the
seventh Trumpet, since that which follows the sixth Trumpet, necessarily
falls into the seventh. But what is this voice of thunder? whether is it
(...) Bath Kol? If it be this; the seven thunders are so many Oracles, by
which the space of the seventh Trumpet is distinguished as it were by certain
periods; but of a matter not at all to be known, nor to be perceaved but in
the proper times, which the prohibition to John of writing the voices of the
seven thunders given from heaven, does intimate. Seal up th^se things which
the seven thunders have Verse 4.
spoken, and write them not. We shall therefore enquire in vain of those
things which God would have kept secret and to be reserved for their own times.

And thus has the seventh Trumpet been fitly enough accommod^ted in its place
and order, although the discovery of the sound thereof wherein the whole
mystery is fully unlockt, be reserved Chap. 10.
to another place. The purpose of which reservation, with the whole frame of
such disposition, although it be touched in the Key of the Revelation, yet it
will be neither needless, nor unprofitable, to repeat it here again, and a
little more at large; since the consideration thereof does escape most of the
interpreters. The diligent contemplation of the body of the Apocaliptique
visions fra^ed by the characters of the Synchronismes, gave me the first light
here, and will give light to thee o Reader also except I be deceaved. But the
matter (that I may discover it with what plainness and brevitie of speech I
came) stands thus.

Both prophesies as well of the Seals, as of the little Book are concluded
with one and the same issue of things; to wit with that which the seventh
Trumpet does exhibit. For the declaring whereof the Holy Ghost has deferred
the more full opening of the sound thereof, the mystery of the seventh
Trumpet, being touched before in its proper place in the order of the Trumpets
lightly, and as much as was there needful; until, a passage being made to the
new prophecy of the Little book, (Chap. 10. from the eighth verse to the end)
he had drawn up the first vision thereof, the course of the Revelation being
likewise finished, to the same issue of things (Chap. 11. 14.) and then that
Mystery of the seventh Trumpet, the common Catastrophe of both prophesies, and
only generally published, in the former prophecy (which was of the seal^s) is
here, the sound at length being uttered, fully expounded: and that surely in a
most apt order; when as otherwise without a foreknowledge of either prophe^ie,
that which depended upon both could not have bin understood.

And hence it comes to pass that the business of that translation, is not
taken in hand, by any Angel o^ the Trumpets, but b^ that great and excellent
Angel, who held in his hand the Little book the Symbol of the second
prophecy, which was presently Verse 8, 9.
to be eaten by John. For it was requisite for him, who should reveal the
second prophecy, that the explaining of the sound thereof, which contained the
Catast^ophe of either prophecy, should be deferred thither. Yea if that Angel
be Christ the Lord, as it seems may be gathered by his more royal attire
and the whole ^^rniture, this right of suspending the last sounding in favor
of the other prophecy, does agree to none so much as to him, who Chap. 10.
was the Author of both the prophesies. Hitherto truly he had appeared in
form of a Lamb; but now it seems he had put on the person of an Angel: for
that he was about to reveal to John the same mystery of Consummation, which
he had revealed long before to Daniel in the same appar^tion of an Angel, and
in the same rite and words of an oath: you may see DANIEL Chapter 12. verse 6.
7. with the fifth verse of the tenth Chap^er.

FINIS.
THE INTERPRETATION of the little Book: or of the other System of the visions
of the Revelation according to the rule of the Apocaliptique Key.
THe space of the Seals being run Chap. 10.
over, wherein the affairs of the Empire were described, let us proceed to the
other prophecy by much the more noble; as containing the fates of the Church
or of Religion. John is prepared to it by the delivering and eating up of an
open Book, as it were to take the degree of the faculty of prophesying.

And the voice, says he, which I heard from heaven, spoke unto Verse. 8.
me again (to wit, that voice as of a Trumpet speaking, Chap. 4. 1.) and
said, Go and take that little book which is open in the hand of the Angel
which stands upon the Sea and upon the earth.

I went therefore unto the Angel, and said unto him, give me Verse. 9.
the little book, and he said unto me, take it and eat it up, etc.

Furthermore since the prophecy now to be revealed, as the knowledge of all
divine and hidden things, especially to come, should be in the first receipt
indeed sweet and pleasant, but by Chap. 11.
reason of the lamentable estate of the Church, contained in the hidden part
thereof, bitter as Aloes, or for the obscurity happily of those Allegories and
Types, where with it is covered, it should much perplex the mind of the opener
or searcher into the meaning thereof: therefore it is said the book to be
eaten up, shall be to the Apostle in his mouth indeed sweet, that is at first
sight and first taste shall be delightful to his mind; but being received
into his belly and to be digested, it shall be bitter. And it shall make thy
belly bitter, says he, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as bony. The whole
representation is taken out of Ezekiel, saving that E^ech. 3.3.
there, the sweetness in the mouth, but bitterness in the belly, are either
not mentioned, or but obscurely.

The book being so received and swallowed down, the meaning of the symbol is
opened in most clear and express words; to wit, that there was imposed upon
John a charge of receiving from Christ, and bringing into the knowledge of the
Church, another yet, and a more noble prophecy by much, and which should run
over the same space of time with the former.

And I took, says he, the little book out of the Angels hand, and Verse. 10.
did eat it up: and it was in my mouth sweet as honey; but when I had eaten it,
my belly was bitter.

Then he said thou must prophecy again (this is the meaning of Verse. 11.
the symbol) before many people, and nations, and tongues, and Kings.

This was the inauguration of John; the prophecy follows, which has its
beginning from his work about the Temple of God; and therein he sets forth
a twofold estate of the Church to come in order, by the representation of a
twofold court, one measured, another cast out because of the profanation
thereof by the Gentiles.

The meaning of the inner Court measured with the reed of God.
1. THe court of the Temple within with those that worship therein, to Chap. 11.
be measured by the reed of God, sets forth the Primitive state of the
Christian Church exactly conformable to the rule of Gods word: and not yet as
afterward (when it came to the times of the outer court) (...).
irregular by the contagion of idolatrous worship, Chap. 11.
but orderly worshipping God for a few ages, in one Mediator Jesus Christ.

For that such a measure, was propounded in the type also of an Angel
measuring, in Ezekiel, I seem to gather out of that which is said to him,
Chap. 43. from the 7. verse. to 10. and afterward: But thou son of man, show
the Temple to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed for their
iniquities, and let them measure the pattern. You may see the place. But if
any one shall conceive otherwise, and would rather refer the type of
measuring to the signification of building, namely, that what the drawing or
setting out of a model (that is the platform of a work to be done) is to
builders the same as measuring to God in the language of the Prophets, it will
come notwithstanding to the same meaning. For what more will this court
measured by the ^eed of God set forth, then the State of the Church figured
thereby, to be the workmanship of God, built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Christ being the corner stone; contrary to the court
following, which God would not acknowledge for his frame, and therefore John is
forbidden to measure it. Whether thou shall interpret it after this, or that
manner, the matter as thou see, will come to the same pass. But who so shall
interpret it in a different sense, either I am deceived, or he can bring forth
no example of his interpretation out of the Scripture. But how fitly the
situation of the Altar in this court, may represent the frequet sacrifices of
the Martyrs in that state of the Church, that will be manifest, as well by the
thing it self, as by the contemporary vision of the red Dragon fighting Chap.
12. 3. 4.
with Michael concerning the childbirth of the woman, then when we come to the
interpretation thereof.

The meaning of the outer Court with the holy City trod^n under foot by the
Gentiles, and thereupon left unmeasured and cast out.
The outer Court trodden under foot by the Gentiles, and rejected Verse. 2.
by God from being measured, does set forth the holy City of God or the
Christian Church, by and by from the end of the times of the measured Court (to
which it next succeeded) to be given to new Idolaters, and (the affairs
thereof, being established now Chap. 11.
by the utter casting down of Gentile worship under the state of the former
Court) to be profaned with the contagion of renewed Idolatry, as it were
heathenisme brought to life again: in one word, Antichristian Apostacy to
reign in the Church forty two months of years. Which shall be fully and
particularly handled in the history of the Beast, contemporising with this
Court, and being a vision of the like matter. But let us consider the words of
the Text, the interpretation whereof we have in hand.

And there was given me, says he, a reed like unto a rod, and the Angel stood,
saying: Rise and measure the Temple of God, and the Verse. 1.
Altar, and them that worship therein.

But the Court which is without the Temple, cast it out, and measure it not.
For it is given to the Gentiles, and they shall tread under Verse. 2.
foot the holy City forty two months.

The meaning of which words that we may rightly conceive, we must know, that
(...) IEPON (by which name I comprehended the whole building of the Temple) was
distinguished by a double Court; one inner in which was placed (...), or the
Temple it self (together with the Altar of burnt offering at the entry
thereof) and was open only to the high Priests and Levites: Another outer,
which 2 Chronicles. 4. 9. is called the great Court; in Ez^ch. more then twelve
times (...) that is, (...) or (...), the Court without, or the outer Court.
This belonged to the Israelites or to the people of Israel, and therefore not
unproperly to be called the Court of Israel, although that part of this Court
which belonged to the men was so specially called by the Jews. The former
Court is set forth by the names of Temple, and (...). Arise, says he, measure
the Temple of God ((...)) and Thysiasterium: where (...) expresses not only
the Altar of sacrifice, which was placed there, but the pl^ce lying about also,
that is, the whole place of the Altar and sacrificing; as is to be gathered out
of the words next in coh^rence (...), and those that worship therein, that is,
(...) in the sacrificing place. Also how (...) is taken in the 14. Chap. verse.
18. and Chap. 16. 7. see Beza. Whence the old Greek and Latin Lexicon does
interpret (...), Altarium, the Altar place Sacrarium, the holy place; and
changing the order the Glossary of Philoxenus has it thus, Sacrarium Chap. 11.
(...), the holy place of the Gods is Thysiasterium. But this (...) together
with the Courtyard of the Temple, that is, (...), I learn out of the
description of the Tabernacle to be comprehended rightly by the name of the
Inner Court: where likewise all that enclosure which compassed (...) the
Tabernacle, and the Altar of Sacrifice, is reckoned by the name of one Court:
as it appears, Exodus 40. 33. So much, of the first Court which John was
bidden to measure. But the later Court is set forth plain enough by the name
thereof: (...), that is by the defect of the former substantive, (...), The
court which is without the enclosure of the Temple and Altar. In this since the
Gentiles, being admitted without right or reason, were harbored, it is
commanded at no hand to be measured, but to be cast out and accounted for
profane.

But thou will say that not the outer court is said to be trodden under foot by
the Gentiles, but the holy city. I answer, that the outer court and the holy
city, do mutually expound themselves, since the outer court is the place of
assembly for divine exercises for the holy city or for the people of Israel;
yea, in the desert, the Tabernacle having only one court (into which it was not
lawful for any but the Priests and Levites ordinarily to enter) there was no
outer court, but the camp of Israel or the holy city. Thereupon therefore the
sense is, as if he should have said, The court which is without the Temple cast
out, and measure it not: for it is given to the Gentiles, and they shall tread
(that) underfoot 42. months. But for the relative (that) there is placed a
substantive, and surely the same which declares the thing designed by the
antecedent; the holy city, says he, they shall tread underfoot forty two
months. For the enallage of the substantive for the relative is very usual,
as well in this book as else where; to wit, when either the substantive which
went before, is repeated instead of the relative, or the Synonimie thereof is
put instead of the relative. An example of the later manner thou have here, and
Acts 25. 21. And surely what else shall we say, is it to be given to the
Gentiles, that is, leave to be given them to take it, then to be trodaen under
foot? and what at length should the Gentiles tread under foot, except that
which was given them? that these words also, no less then of the Court, and of
the holy Chap. 11.
City, may seem mutually to expound themselves.

diagram of temple, with parts labeled A plot (...) that is, of the Temple and
the Courts thereof.
The plot The Inner Court

The outer Court

(...) or the Temple

The Holy of Holies

The Holy Place

The offering Altar

Thysiasterium the Altar place



To these two Courts (which and no more the Scripture mentions) a third was
added in after ages, to wit, in the Herodian Temple by the building of another
wall more compassing the Temple, which was called the court of Gentiles or of
those that were unclean; but was not accounted for holy. Moreover there was
written upon pillars there set, as well in Greek as in Latin letters; (...).
In Atrium sanctum Chap. 11.
transire alienigenam non debere, that a stranger ought not to enter into the
holy Court. Josephus de bello Iudaico, lib. 6. Graec 18.

The mystery of the two witnesses prophesying in sackcloath.
The Gentiles taking up their standing in the Court of the people of God or the
holy City, two Witnesses or Prophets from God preach mourning, and being
clothed in sackcloath. These are the Interpreters and Defenders of the Divine
Truth, which should bewail with continual complaints, that filthy and
lamentable pollution of the Church of Christ; and whom God should stir up
continually, to be monitors to the Christian world idol^zing with the Gentiles;
and guides to his Saints keeping the faith. To wit, according to the pattern
of those famous payres under the Old Testament; Moses and Aaron in the
wilderness, Elias and Elisaeus under the Baaliticall apostasy, Zorobabel and
Iesua under the Babylonian captivity. To wit those witnesses of the Revelation
are manifestly described by their number, condition, power, and acts; even as
also the state of the Church wherein they prophesied, answerable to that of
Israel, is figured by the representation of Babylon, the wilderness and
Gentilisme or Baalisme. What I have said of the description of the witnesses,
that behold with thine eyes Reader in the Table following,

Moses and Aaron. Elias and Elisaeus. Zorobabel and Iesua. (...). Verse. 6.
Having power over waters to turn the^ into blood, and to smite the earth with
every plague. Verse. 6. (...). Verse. 6. Having power to s^^t heaven that it
rain not. Verse 6. (...). Verse 4. These are the two olive trees and the two
candlesticks which stand before the Lord of the earth. Verse 4. (...), etc.
Verse. 5. Whom if any will hurt, Verse. 4.
fi^e proceeds out of their mouth, etc. Verse. 5. Of Moses and Aaron you may
see Numb. 16. of Elia, a Kings Chap. 1.

Now let us come to the text: And I will give, says he, unto Chap. 11.
my two witnesses, that they shall prophecy a thousand two hundred Verse. 3.
and threescore days, clothed with sackcloth. Where this comes first to be
observed that the whole prophecy which follows, from this verse to the
sounding of the seventh trumpet, the nature of the matter so requiring, is
exhibited not in a vision, but was dictated to John by an Angel, personating
Christ, the observation whereof is of no small consequence for the better
perceiving of the nature of the allegory or type.

To my two witnesses] he calls them two in regard of the type, which, as I
said, is of paires; as if he should have said, I will give to my Zorobabel and
Iesua, to my Eliah and Elisaeus, to my Moses and Aaron. To which is added that
he calls them witnesses, now by the Law there ought to be two witnesses to
confirm every word. Add that they may be called two, in regard of the number
of the Tables of God, which they used in their prophecy, of the Old and New
Testament, as it were witnesses of two Testaments.

That they shall prophecy clothed with sackcloth] to wit, mournfully be
wayling the trampling under foot of the holy City by the bringing in of the
Idolatry of the Gentiles, giving testimony to the truth of God, and exhorting
to repentance.

1260 dayes] as many, to wit, as are contained in 42 months. Which that they
are not natural days, it appears as well out of those three days and an
half, parts of these days, a little after to be assigned to the death of the
witnesses; which that they cannot be taken for natural days, those things
which are foretold to be then done do prove: as also out of that that the
Beast (the measure of whose time they also do contain) contemporized with the
company of the 144000 sealed: and the company of the sealed with the six first
trumpets: but the matters of the trumpets could not be run out, in so little
time as in 1260 natural days, or in the space of three year and an half. But
thou will ask, why is the profanation of the Gentiles measured by months,
and the prophecy of the witnesses defending the pure worship of God by days?
Forsooth, because the worshipping of idols, and every sin and error is of
the power of darkness and night, wherein the Moon rules; contrariwise true
Religion is compared to the light and to the day of which the Sun is the
ruler. Therefore the sending of Paul to convert the Gentiles Chap. 11.
from id^ls is said, Acts 26. 18. To turn them from darkness to light, from
the power of Satan to God. The same meaning has that. What fellowship has
light with darkness? Now then the 2 Cor. 6.14
Months are directed by the motion of the Moon which rules the night; days
and years by the motion of the Sun which rules the day. For the same cause
as afterward we shall see, the blasphemy of the Beast will be reckoned after
the motion of the Moon, by months: but the abiding of the woman in the
wilderness by years and days, after the motion of the Sun.

These are the two Olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing Verse. 4.
before the God of the Earth.

That is, they are like Zorobabel and Iesua, whom God in times past had
anointed, to restore again the Jewish Church destroyed under the captivity of
Babylon, and by these witnesses to take the charge of it in like manner under
the servitude of the Gentiles. For the allusion is to those two olive trees,
which Zacharias saw growing on either side of the golden candlestick, and
supplying the light thereof with oil, Zach. 4. of which the Angel being
demanded, what they meant, says, These are the two anointed Verse. 14.
ones standing before the Lord of the whole Earth; pointing at the two heads of
the Church then under the servitude of the Gentiles, Zorobabel the Captain,
and Iesua the high Priest, of whom he had prophesied a little before.

For the Candlestick there of seven lights, did signify the Temple, and in the
type thereof the Church of that time: whose restoring and preservation those
two anointed ones should procure, not by power, not by strength or by any
humane helps, but by the power of God alone, working after a certain invisible
and wonderful manner. Even as those two olive trees standing on each side the
Candlestick, did supply the lights thereof with oil, in a certain way
extraordinary and not perceiveable.

But thou will say, wherefore is there not mention here in John of one as in
Zachary, but of two Candlesticks, to which likewise, and not to the olive
trees only, those two Prophets seem to be resembled? I confess I am here at a
non plus, neither have I yet found out a reason of this difference apt and
evident enough. In the mean while I think there lies hidden in the words an
Hebraisme, and it is as if he should have said, These are those two olive
trees, at or besides the two Candlesticks, standing before the Lord Chap. 11.
of the Earth: (...) that the comparison is made only of the witnesses with
the olive trees, and the addition of the Candlesticks may be judged to belong
but to the description of the olive trees. ^or the copulative with the He^re ws
is sometime in stead of the praeposition (...) that is, for with, besides, at,
as 1 Samuel 14. 18. Because then was the Ark of God and the children of Israel,
that is, with the children of Israel. See Schindlers Lexicon. But the
difficulty concerning the two Candlesticks will remain nevertheless. Whether
therefore it be to be said that that one Candlestick with Zachary is here to
be accounted for a double one, in regard to wit of the double order of the
lights from either part of the shaft, and the two olive trees pouring oil into
each of them severally? There is also with Zachary mention of seven and seven,
that is of twice seven Infusoriorum.
pipes, but whereto it tends is not manifest enough. Or whether shall we
think that that pair appertains secretly to set out the condition of the
Christian Church? that is to say, either as it were consisting of two people,
the jews and the Gentiles? or which is happily nearer the truth, because in the
time wherein the witnesses should mourn it was to be divided, together with the
Roman Empire, into the Eastern and Western. Howsoever it be, it is certain that
the Candlesticks set out, not the Prophets or Bishops of the Church, but the
Chuches themselves, which appears out of that that the Angel before, Chapter 1.
20. does interpret the seven Candlesticks, to be so many Churches: the seven
Candlesticks, says he, which thou did see, are seven Churches.

When if any man will hurt, fire proceeds out of their mouth Verse. 5.
and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must so be
killed.

The witnesses do not revenge themselves by strength of hand, not with sword
or poyniards, if at any time they shall be hurt by their enemies; but the
revenge proceeds out of their mouths, that is, they pierce their enemies
with weapons of their mouth; to wit, whil they denounce the anger of ^od
hanging over the heads of those that abuse his Ministers, or by their
imprecations and groans obtain revenge. For this (...), which is showed to
proceed out of the mouth of the witnesses, is a (...) of revenge; according to
that o^ the Lord to Jeremiah, Chap. 5. 14. Behold, I make my words in thy mouth
Fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them. For Moses and Aaron and
afterward Chap. 11.
Elias; they upon the confederates of the conspiracy of Korah, and he upon the
servants of King Ahaziah a worshipper of Baal did bring down fire properly so
called from heaven: but the Fire of our witnesses, is to be interpreted
mystically, since that the holy Ghost tells us anon, that our Egypt, and
likewise the wilderness, are taken (...).
spiritually. Furthermore, that which the Prophets do denounce in the name of
God, the same it is said they accomplished, as that which the Lord says to the
same Jeremiah does show, Chap. 1. 10. I have set thee, says he, over the
nations and kingdoms, to root out and to pull down, and to spoil and to
everthrow, and to build and to plant; let no man now marvel that fire or
divine revenge is said to proceed out of the mouths of the witnesses, who
notwithstanding have the sole power of denouncing it or obtaining it from God.

So the witnesses do revenge their own injury: it so loweth by what means also
they revenge the contumely offered to the Temple of God.

They have power to shut heaven that it rain not (to wit a mystical Verse. 6.
rain) in the days of their prophecy.

That is they are furnished with the power of the keys, whereby they shut up
heaven against these new Gentiles, the corrupters of Christian worship, that
the grace of the blood of Christ sealed by Baptism, be not shed upon them for
the remission of their sins, so long as they by their Idolatries and
Superstitions shall persevere to be the cause of the mourning prophecy of the
witnesses. I will more plainly express it. They according to the word of God
do debar from the hope of eternal life, promised only to the pure
worshippers of God, those new Idolaters; until, being mindful of their
covenant in Baptism, they shall return to the worship of one God by one
Mediator Jesus Christ, forsaking the worshipping of Satan, and so shall put an
end to the mourning prophecy of the witnesses. Even as Elias also restored not
rain to the Israelites, now almost killed with drought before that the
prophets of Baal and his worship were destroyed.

But of this power of the witnesses, we have an example afterward, Chap. 14 9.
If any one, say they, shall worship the Beast, and his Image; and receive his
mark in their forehead or on his hand; the same shall drink of the wine of
the wrath of God, of the pure wine 10.
tempered in the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with Chap.
11.
fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels and in the presence 11.
of the Lamb, and the smoke of their torment shall ascend for ever and ever,
etc.

To conclude, they have power over waters to turn them into Verse. 6.
blood, and to smite the earth with every plague, as often as they will.

Such like power indeed Moses and Aaron used, when they brought Israel out of
the Egyptian bondage. Whence I gather, that the power of the witnesses figured
by this type, pertains not to all the days of the mourning prophecy, but to
the end of them, or the time of the phyalls; to wit, when by the conduct of the
witnesses or Prophets, as it were of Moses and Aaron, the Christian people is
to be brought out like wise from the tyranny and service of the Beast, by
pl^gues expressed after the manner of those of Egypt. For truly the first
plague of the Phyals does strike the earth with an Ulcer; by the second and
third, the waters are turned into blood; the rest do torment the worshippers
of the Beast or the Gentiles abiding in the court of the Temple, with other and
yet more grievous plagues. The interpretation of all which we will reserve to
their proper place. Let it suffice here to have referred this last power to the
pouring out of the Phyals. It follows.

And when they shall be about to finish their testimony, the Beast which
ascends out of the bottomless pit shall make war against Verse. 7.
them, and shall overcome them and kill them.

Of the function and power of the Witnesses hitherto; it follows now of their
destiny, which they were to find at the end of their Prophecy. The
description whereof is wholly compact out of the history of the passion of our
Lord. For the Lord Jesus likewise when he had ended his preaching of about so
many days as the prophecy of the Witnesses amount to, is slain by the Roman
Governor the Legate of this beast between whom and the Witnesses there is
war (but in the time of his sixth head) the third day after there being
likewise a great earthquake he rose again. And a little after, to wit, upon
the fortieth day, being received in a cloud he ascended into heaven. All which
things God would have to be represented in this slaughter of his witnesses by
his own death; that like as they have borne the likeness of those renowned
paires (of which is spoken before) in the state of their function: so they
should be made conformable Chap. 11.
in suffering and death, to their Lord Christ, that faithful Witness: which
truly ought to be both comfortable and glorious to them in the midst of their
miseries.

But let us give light to the text. When, says he, they shall be about to
finish their testimony (for so (...) is to be translated, no^ of the
Preterperfect tense, when they have finished) the Beast which ascends out of
the bottomless pit shall make war with them, and shall overcome them, and kill
them. That is, when now, part of the holy City or inhabitants of the Christian
world, acknowledging the horriblenesse of Gentilisme, repenting of their
Idolatries, and abominations and clensing the Temple of God within themselves;
the witnesses rejoicing should begin to put off their sackcloth, and to be
freed from their daily mourning, notwithstanding they should not yet be wholly
freed: that Roman sevenheaded Boast of the last time (of which Chap. 13.)
chasing that the preaching of those mourners had so far prevailed, shall make
war against them, overcome and kill them. The first of which concerning the
mourning of the witnesses already begun to determine, ^ath been continually
performed from the beginning of the reformed Church until this present.

The other concerning war and slaughter I conjecture is yet to come. But our
Brightman thought it already fulfilled, to wit, in the Smalcaldian war under
the Emperor Charles the fifth. Others apply it to the late ruin of the
Churches of Germany. And who would not much rather that so lamentable an
accident to the Church were past, then to fear it to be yet to come? But the
interpretation is not to be directed according to our wish. Yea rather the
error will be with greater danger on that part then on the contrary. For the
expectation of a future calamity conduces more to piety, then an
over-credulous security thereof, as if it were already past. There are two
things which persuade me that this last destruction is yet to be feared. The
first that those lamentable times of the Gentiles trampling under foot the holy
City, or Christian Religion, or the times of the forty two months, cannot be
said to have fulfilled their period so long as the Beast shall reign: and
therefore neither the Days of the Witnesses mourning in sackcloth, being of
the same time and of the same age with them. Another because this destruction
of the Witnesses is to be the next antecedent (as we shall hear afterward)
Chap. 11.
to the destruction and ruin of the great City, that is, Rome: which the
Series.
course of the Phyals suffers not to be so neet come; considering that we
have not passed the fourth of them as yet (although we hope it is in agitation
in the present Germane wars) as there it shall be taught. But that the ruin
of the City belongs to the fifth we shall show anon. Whose forerunner
therefore that this destruction shall be which we have in hand, it is very
probable; especially, since it is usual with Christ our Captain, to subdue
his enemies and to reward his with victory, by the method of the Cross.
Neither yet because this destruction is the last, and even yet to come, can any
thing be certainly determined, concerning the grievousnesse thereof above all
w^^ have gone before; for happily not so much in respect of the grievousnesse
(certainly not of the long continuance) as that it should be for a sign of the
mourning of the Witnesses then forthwith to be ended, and of the ruin of the
City of Rome being at hand; therefore it alone of all the destructions
wherewith the Beast should afflict the Saints, deserved a singular remembrance
and description: even as indeed the environing of the inhabitants of Jerusalem
by the Army of Cestius Gallus, a little before the ^atall siege by Titus, was
foretold for a sign of the sacking thereof then to approach and to be at the
doors. For even as our Savior told his Apostles enquiring the signs of the
time of the sacking thereof: When ye see Jerusalem besieged by an Luke 21.20.
Army; then know that the desolation thereof draws near: the like may be
thought here to be meant of the sacking of Babylon; when ye shall see that
three years and an half slaughter of the Witnesses, know ye that the
desolation of the great City draws near.

But the slaughter where with the Witnesses are foretold to be overcome by the
Beast, I think is to be understood in the most general signification, wherein
he comprehends death also metaphorically or analogica^ly so called. ^or he is
said to Dye in that sense, who being settled in any state whatsoever, whether
Politic or ^cclesiasticall or any other, cease to be what he was. Whereupon
also he kills who punishes any one with such a death. For so in the Sacred
style to live, is all one as, to be, to die, not to be. In which understanding
we are said to die to Satan and to sin, when for the time to come we cease to
be their slaves; Chap. 11.
and to live unto Christ, when we begin to be his. And the reason of
opposition does altogether seem to require, that in what manner
theresurrection of the Witnesses to life after the slaughter accomplished
should be, such should be the slaughter it self: but that appears to be
analogicall, because no resurrection properly so called can be before the
coming of Christ under the seventh Trumpet. But this comes to pass while the
sixth is in being.

The killing therefore of the Witnesses if we expound it according to such a
rule of understanding, it will seem to be a molestation and dejection of them
from the office and place which they a little while had gotten in the reformed
Church, by the ef^icacie of their preaching; whether it be joined with
corporal death, or otherwise: so that thenceforth they live not the
prophetical life such as then they had lived nor exercise the functions
thereof any more. Whereby it must needs likewise come to pass that the pillars
thereof being taken away, and the false Prophets of the Beast being again
brought in instead of the Prophets of Christ, the whole polity of the reformed
Church, as far as this shall happen, shall go to the ground: which whether it
shall happen sooner or later, only he knows, in whose hands are times and
opportunities.

In the mean time lest happily any one may be deceived, this is diligently to
be observed: that this last war of the Beast, is not of the same kind with
that which he had waged continually hitherunto against the company of the
Saints (of which indeed in the history of the Beast it is said, Chap. 13.7.
That it was given unto him to make w^rre with the Saints and to overcome them;)
b^t altogether different. For wherefore should that be declared as peculiar to
the last times of the Beast, which had been usual with him, if not from his
infancy, yet at least from his (...)
perfection? therefore it is one kind of war, which the Beast waged
universally against the Saints; another which in his last he shall wage with
the Prophets, who had begun now to put off their sackcloth, and to end their
prophetical mourning; that is, with the Bishops of the Church in the reformed
part thereof: which is more manifest out of the diverse event of either war;
there ^ur^ly with success, here very lamentable. For there the Beast ^^tained
power over every Tribe, Tongue and Nation, etc. But here he procures to
himself a sudden and fatal ruin, as is Chap. 11.
to be seen in the Text.

And their dead bodies (shall lie) in (...), the street of the Verse. 8.
great City, which spiritually is called Sod me and Egypt, where also their
Lord was crucified.

That City surnamed great is Rome, so called, not so much for the quantity to
look upon, as because she had been the Queen of other Cities; according to
that of the Angel, Chap. 17. 18. The woman which thou saw, is that great
City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth. As in like manner by the name
of the great King (as God is called, Psalm. 28. 2. and Matthew, 5. 35. and which
title did peculiarly comply in times past with the Kings of the Assyrians and
Persians) is meant the King of Kings, who ^ath authority over ^ther Kings.
Whereupon throughout the whole Revelation whatsoever other name Rome is called
by, either Babylon, or Harlot, it is always entitled the Great; as that Great
Babylon, that great Whore. Add hereunto, that through the whole Revelation,
that title is given to no City besides it, except at length, after the sacking
of it, to that new Jerusalem, Chap. 21.10.
descending from heaven, in the light whereof afterward the Gentiles should
walk. Which he that should think to be here meant, he certainly should have
need of some Neesing powder.
Hellebore. For neither was Jerusalem in the age of John, nor is any other
Jerusalem, ever to be the Great City, or head and Queen of other Cities of
the world excepting it.

It is added which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt: Egypt for the
tyranny over the people of God, like the Egyptians tyranny: Sodom, for
whoredom, to wit, spiritual. Now here (which let the Reader diligently mark)
is the Key of the Allegory (of which sort more in this Book do occur).
Whereby indeed the holy Ghost at once would intimate, that whatsoever in these
visions is exhibited any where of the plagues of Egypt, or destruction of
Sodom, all that is (...), that is, mystically to be interpreted; since that
Rome, or the state of the Roman Empire, the subject of all those plagues, is
mystical Sodom and Egypt. Now there fall out passages concerning the Egyptian
plagues, in the d^scription of the Trumpets and Phyals, as also in this very
history of the Witnesses; concerning the destruction of Sodom, in the
judgment of the Beast, Chap. 19. 20. and 20. 10. the meaning of all which is
to be opened by this Key. Hence also Chap. 11.
it may be demonstrated, that the subject of the Trumpets is the Roman
dominion. Because some of theirs are Egyptian plagues, and upon what should
Egyptian plagues be inflicted but upon Egypt? and this is Rome by the
authority of the holy Ghost.

So concerning the great City the matter is plain. But what that Street.
(...) of the City may be, whereof here is mention, is not so easy to be
known. Surely for a street or for that which in Latin we call platea, or a
market place, or any other place within the City it seems it cannot be
taken; and that for the reasons following.

1. For, first the Lord Christ who is said to be crucified in this (...), was
crucified neither in any street or market place, or court of the City of Rome
nor of Jerusalem; but without the gate of the one, (Heb. 13.12.) and only
within the Province of the other, by Pilate the Governor. Therefore The street
of that great City.
(...), is not any street, or broader way within the walls of either City, but
a place without the City.

2. It is very like that (...) put in the singular number does note out some
thing of that sort or kind, whereof there is but one in a City, not more. But
there are more streets then one in every City, at lest in a famous City.

3. It is to be thought that the bodies of the Witnesses ly^ there, where they
be overcome in battle. But it is not the custom for Armies to encounter
within the walls of a City; but if not in the enemies land, at least in the
Region and Provinces subject to the City.

4. Whose slain karcases might be openly beheld for three days and an half
by people, kindreds, tongues, and Nations, and care taken that they should not
be buried; these lay not in any street or broad way of a great City, but
either seem to have been dispersed, or carried about through the Provinces:
to which therefore the signification of (...) ought to be applied. And if any
shall say, that the Army of the Beast whereby the Witnesses are discomfited and
slain is compact out of several people and tongues, and therefore they could
easily behold the dead bodies of those whom they had slain: we must have
recourse to the former Argument; that such Armies use not to meet within the
walls of a City. For at any hand the thing is to be so expounded, especially
where no reason of an allegory can be pretended, Chap. 11.
that no absurdity be committed against the litterall sense.

What else therefore shall we say here, but that by the name of (...), is
signified the whole Region and Territory subject to the dominion of the City;
and that that signification was drawn even from the Hebrew (...). to which it
often answers in the Septuagint Translation? to wit, after the manner and use
of the Septuagint who in translating of an Hebrew word (...).
of many significations, are wont to use a Greek word which properly answers
it but in one sense, to express the force of it in another sense, as by many
examples may be proved if here it had been pertinent. And now (...) with the
Hebrews signifies, whatsoever is altogether without the house, whether
without buildings, as streets and ways in Cities, or without the City, as
(...), a Region or ground lying about it. Surely Job 5. 10. where in the Hebrew
it is (...) upon the fields, the Chalde rendereth it: who gives rain upon the
face of the earth, and sends waters upon the face of the province or region
of the people: or from the notion of breadth, as though it were the same as
(...), Esaias 8. 8. And the stretching out of his wings (that is of the Assyrian)
shall fill the breadth of thy Land, O Immanuel. And Revel. 20, 9. concerning
Gog and Magog, (...). They went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed
-- the beloved Citi^. For hither it tends, that (...) which is the other word
which the Seventie translate (...), and (...) which signifies breadth or
(...), have all one and the same letters, and both of them by the Chaldeans are
expressed by the same word (...) Or, to conclude, by the notion of breadth,
which is proper to the word (...), the holy Ghost would intimate the largeness
of the dominion of that great City, wherein it has, and at this day does
exceed all other Cities: as if (...) had been put for Upon the large region.
(...), etc. Surely the word (...) is an adjective put Substantively, and
thereupon some what ought to be understood; and truly one thing and another
may be, to explain the signification thereof: neither know I whether that
signification of a street may at all be found among the ancient Greek Writers.

And now, to whom this interpretation shall approve it self, Chap. 11.
to him it cannot be obscure any more; either why Christ is said to be
crucified in (...) of the City of Rome, or where the dead bodies of the slain
Witnesses are to be cast forth; to wit, not in the City of Rome, but within
the Roman dominion. Truly I know very many of ours that may come to the same
end, do understand here by the name of the City the whole dominion of the
City. But then I pray you what shall (...) be? for (according to this
interpretation) it can be neither of those two things of which it must of
necessity be the one, to wit, either the Roman dominion, or else some
province thereof. Not the dominion, as which is expressed already in the name
of the City it self; not any province, because a great City may have many
such, but (...) means something that is one and singular being put in the
singular number. But it shall suffice to have noted these things of (...), the
street of the great City. Let us now proceed to the rest.

And (the men) of the kindreds and people, and nations, shall see their dead
bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be
put in graves. Or, and there shall be of kindreds and people, and nations which
shall see their dead bodies, etc.

Whether this be to be taken for a part of cruelty, or benefit, it is
doubtful; nor is it to be determined but by the fulfilling of the prophecy.
For it may be taken either as proceeding from enemies, adding this disgrace to
the great slaughter which they had made, the denial of burial to the dead
bodies of the slain: or as from friends and favorers of the Witnesses, to
wit, by this means providing for them as it were by and by to rise again. For
howsoever it was otherwise a part of a great cruelty, not to bury the dead,
and to be cast out unburied was esteemed, especially among the Ieues for an
exceeding ignominy: yet those which were so slain that they were not plainly
in despair, but that they might be restored to life again, it is to be
accounted a benefit to hinder them a little while from close burial. If we
must hold the first to be determined; by this Type seems to be intimated some
note of Infamy or Ignominy wherewith all the followers of the Beast not
contented to have slain the Witnesses, will moreover punish them. If the
latter; some rescue from the reformed people, for fear of whom, as being in
multitude the greatest part by far, and therefore the wound being yet fresh
Chap. 11.
and things not as yet settled, not to be provoked to desperation without
danger; or at least by secret means and favor, it should come to pass, that
the Witnesses should not be so dealt with, that there were no hope of reviving.
Achmetes out of the learning of the Indians Apotel. 130 If any in his sleep
shall seem to himself to be buried, that burial tends to the full
certainty of his ruin: If he shall seem to see some defect of things
pertaining to his burial, that defect is referred to hope. If thou now enquire
whether any thing in the Text appear, which inclines more to this
interpretation then the other? I truly should draw this for an Argument of this
matter, that since here he declares the subject in manner and words different
from that when he speaks of enemies in the verse following; he would not have
the same to be understood here as there, but diverse; there certainly enemies,
but here friends of the Witnesses. For of the enemies in the verse following
rejoicing and sending gifts one to another, he says, (...). And they that
dwell upon the earth. But of those that will not suffer the dead bodies of the
Witnesses to be put into graves, (...), of the people, and kindreds, and
tongues, and nations, partitively, as if he would note some certain ones of a
diverse disposition from the rest. Let the Reader judge.

Three days and an half.

That is, as it seems three year and an half. For those things that are
foretold to be done then, do argue, that they cannot be understood of days in
proper sense. For can any man believe, that the small space of three days and
an half is sufficient, either for spreading the fame of the death of the
Witnesses, or for the sending of messengers with gifts to and fro among the
Nations? Nay, it were not indeed sufficient for the providing of them. Add
hereunto that the half of a day properly so taken, or twelve hours, were
altogether unfit for determining of such acts. For such matters are not wont to
be observed by hours, but by months, at least by whole days. In the mean
time it is to be observed that the time here is computed, not of the killing of
the Witnesses, but wherein they lay dead and without life, now after they were
slain. But how long the war it self shall last, and how long time shall be
given for the killing of the Prophets, nothing but the fulfilling of the
prophecy will teach. Chap. 11.


And they that dwell upon the earth shall re^oyce over them, and Verse. 10.
shall be glad, and shall send gifts one to another, because these two Prophe^s
tormented them that dwelt on the earth.

Concerning the manner of sending gifts in a public joy or in great
gladness; See Esther 9. 19. 22.

But after three days and an half, the spirit of life from God entered into
them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell Verse. 11.
upon them, which saw them.

Such as the death of the Witnesses was, such shall be their raising up or
resurrection from the dead; to wit, a restitution to their former estate; and
that not so much by any humane power or aid, as the finger of God, who is
wonderful in his works. For (these words) the spirit of life from God entered
into them, intimates this. Achmetes apotelesm. 6. and 7. out of the learning
of the Egyptians and Persians. If any shall seem to see in a dream the
raising of the dead, that matter signifies the delivery of those that be bound
and an end of wars. Apot. 7. a freedom from calamities. You may see, Ezekiel.
chap. 37.

And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, Verse. 12.
Come up hither, and they ascended up to heaven by a cloud (or in a cloud) and
their enemies beheld them.

The witnesses shall not only be restored to their place and former station,
but shall be even advanced into some more excellent degree of honor and power.
For to be carried in a cloud, and to ascend into heaven, does signify that.
See Dan. 7.13. Esaias 14. 13. and 19. Whereupon in the declarations of dreams,
which Apomasar or Achmetes that Arabian whom I have so often cited, has
gathered out of the ancient monuments of the Egyptians and Fersians it is read,
if a King shall seem to himself to have sitten in the clouds, and to be
carried whither soever he would, the Barbarian enemies shall become his
servants, over whom he shall reign with authority. Also, if a King shall
seem to himself as it were to have ^lowen to heaven where the stars should
be, he shall obtain eminency and fame above other Kings. Likewise, if a King
being ascended up shall seem to himself, to be set in heaven, he shall reduce
a country greater then that which he possesses under his power, Apotel. 162.
and 164. These things I bring in to this purpose, that I may show that this
parable was used in that meaning which I say by Chap. 11.
the Prophets of God according to the custom of the East. The ministry
therefore of the witnesses shall not be despicable as before, neither shall
they be reckoned among the abject and contemptible sort of men. So that that
which our Savior said of himself, Luke 24. 26. Did it not behoove Christ to
suffer these things and (afterward) to enter into his glory? shall be
effectually verified also in his Prophets. And who knows whether or no the
reformed Church shall be worthily punished for the reproach offered Christ in
this behalf, by the taking away of the witnesses for a time; because they
reverenced them not according to the dignity of their embassage, while they
enjoyed them. It is too well known what offense the reformed Churches commit
in this behalf: and that while the Prophets of Christ mightily bestirred
themselves in reforming of the Church of God, others in the mean while
disgraced that most sacred work, by pillaging and interverting the maintenance
thereof; not leaving in some places so much as food (to the great disgrace of
true Religion) whereby the Ministers thereof might be honestly sustained and
according to the dignity of their calling; much less that any thing should
abound which they might set aside for the enlarging of the reformation, the
necessities of the holy war, the relief of afflicted brethren, and other
pious uses. Was not that praevarication of this kind, for which the Jewish
Temple was given to Antiochus Epiphanes to be profaned, and the Religion of
the true God likewise to be trodden down for the space of three years? An Host
(says Daniel) shall be given to him against the daily sacrifice by reason of
transgression, and it shall cast down the truth to the ground, and shall do it
and prosper. Chap. 8. 12. See also the history in the second book of the
Macchabees from the beginning of the third Chapter to the Saint and Judge. But
I will touch upon this sore no more. This only I will add. Happily this
increase of honor and power shall happen to the witnesses after their
resurrection by the command of the Supreme Magistrate (which seems to be that
voice from heaven) as in recompense of that infamy and ignominy, wherewith the
followers of the Beast did punish them being dead; if so be that were signified
by that prohibition of burial.

And the same hour there was a great earthquake and the tenth Chap. 11.
part of the city to (wit that great one) fell, and there were slain in Verse.
13.
the earthquake seven thousand names of men.

At what time the Witnesses or Prophets returned to life and ascended into
heaven, there was a great earthquake, that is, a great commotion of the
Nations, and alteration of Politic affairs; whereby indeed a way is opened
for the Witnesses, and power given them of reviving, with so great increase of
dignity and authority. In that stir of Nations (...) the tenth part of the
city is overthrown, and there are killed seven thousand names of men. Of
which words, that as far as may be possible in a future thing, we may attain
the nearest meaning to the truth, two things are by us to be premised and
proved. First, since there is no fall of the decaying Beast but is contained in
some of the phyalls, therefore the sam^ destruction of the Beast is here
described which belongs to the pouring out of the fifth phyall. For proof,
there is the same subject of the plague in both; there, the seat or throne of
the Beast, here that Great City. For that that Great City, to wit Rome, is
the seat of the Beast, is so evident, that there needs no proof. Further it
is confirmed; because the destruction which is here described, does so nearly
go before the utter abolishing of the Beast at the seventh trumpet, that
nothing is showed to have come between but the departure of the second woe.
And now the utter abolishing of the Beast is the work of the last phyall; the
departure of the second woe or of that plague from Euphrates, is of the sixth
phyall. Therefore the destruction of the great City which next preventeth that
departure, falls into the fifth phyall. The other thing by us to be premised,
is, that the fall of the great City, is the very same destruction of Babylon
which is sung, Chap. 18. It is proved, because it is certain out of the same
Chapter, that that destruction of Babylon or of the City Verse. 2.
of Rome, was to go before the full destruction of the Beast, and the
Imperial Reign of Christ to be begun with, the seventh trumpet. But now the
destruction of the same City which is here declared, does so nearly go
before that same kingdom, that the spirit, presently passes to that kingdom,
and the description of the seventh trumpet, without mentioning any other
destruction besides. It must needs therefore be that the same destruction of
that City is described in both. For who can be persuaded to think that the
holy Ghost should altogether let slip that Chap. 11.
great destruction, interposing the mention of some less destruction, and with
it no way to be compared.

These things being thus, it follows, that the interpretation of this place
is to be directed by the rule thereof, and as it were to be tried by the same
touchstone; and so such a meaning of these words to be sought, as may agree
with the description of that destruction of Babylon. Which how it may be done
let us now see. Philippus Nicolas a Divine of the Augustine Confession, a
learned and acute man, thinks that by (...) is understood the Decharchie of
the City, or the ten kingdoms subject to the dominion thereof, which forsooth
in this stir of the Nations, should fall away from Rome, to the Empire
whereof they had been subject so many years, not obeying the command thereof
any more. To wit, the very same which is in another place said, The ten Kings
which had delivered over their power to the Rev. 17. 16.
Beast, then when the word of God shall be fulfilled, shall hate the Whore,
shall make her desolate and naked, shall eat her flesh and burn her with
fire. But such understanding of the word ^EKATON howsoever it first offered it
self even to me, thinking of the meaning of this place, and by reason of the
concinnitie of the matter it self did like me very much: yet afterward
considering it better, it seemed somewhat harsh and unusual; that I fear it
will not easily be approved, by those who desire a plain and genuine
interpretation.

I seek therefore another interpretation. And first it comes into my mind,
that (...), is happily a name of tribute; either of that which the Pope
receives out of the whole kingdom of the Beast, or of that which the City it
self receives out of her large possessions by right of Lordship. That tenth
of the City shall fall in that great commotion of affairs, that is, shall
cease; and thereby is intimated, that the principality of the City shall be
utterly extinguished; to wit, deprived of the ground allotted for her
patrimony (and the Pope thence driven by force) loosing the prerogative and
dominion, which she was wont to have over Cities and People far and wide;
when, that Prerogative and Dominion which she had gotten, shall continue no
longer; to wit, the Metropolis of the Kingdom of the Beast, or Seat of the
false Prophet. For it is known, that tribute is the Symbol of Dominion, and
by that name the most Provinces, under Chap. 11.
the Empire of ancient Rome paid yearly the tenth part of all their fruits.
Which that it was usual also in the Eastern kingdoms, may be proved as well
out of 1. Macca^. 10. 31. and 11. 35. as also out of that brief of all the
power of a King, 1 Samuel 8. (but take heed thou take not that which is said
there of tithes to be meant of sacred tithes, they were the Kings, and used to
be paid to Kings as to Gods Vicegerents:) which also Aristotle confirms in
the second Book of his Oeconomicks. Therefore it ought not to seem strange if
any man should here affirm, that by the name of tenth a kind so commonly
used, there may be meant any kind of tribute in general belonging to the
City. But there is no need to come to that, since in Italy that manner of
tribute has not yet worn out of use, and furthermore the Pope of Rome, in his
Ecclesiastical Empire now long since has imitated the same: by exacting
yearly the tenth part of all Ecclesiastical Benefices. But one thing hinders
this interpretation, namely, that then it should rather have been said (...)
then (...). Furthermore, the word (...), fell, (whereby it must needs be that
some effect agreeable to an earthquake is signified) is not plyant enough to
such interpretation. Yea, if it could stand, yet it should seem to express
the ruin of Babylon (wherewith we presuppose it to be the same) too obscurely
and weakly and not answerably to so great a ruin.

At length therefore, until some one shall inform something more certainly
and more agreeable to the Text; I fall to this, that I conceive by (...) the
tenth part of the City, is understood truly a part of the City, but not any
part of the City as it is at this day, but the whole; I say the whole
Pontificiall Rome, which is the tenth part of that ancient Rome. Which that it
is so, and that it is not at this day more then a tenth part of that old Rome
such as it was in John's age, may be perceived by the demonstration following.

For tru^ly Lipsius affirms, Or maintains.
that old Rome such as it was in John's age, as touching the form, was in a
manner round, but not exactly; that the Semidiameter thereof, from the A
milliario a^reo.
golden pillar standing in the head of the Market place of Rome to the utmost
of the buildings was reckoned for seven miles to conclude that the compass of
it was forty two miles. Since therefore it was not exactly round, for the
measuring of the plot thereof let us Chap. 11.
lessen the Semidiameter one mile (to wit, so much as in a six angled figure
should be lessoned in the side for the Perpendicular line) there will be six
which multiplied with 21. the half of the circumference, it will give the plot
of the City to be 12^.

But now the present or Pontificiall Rome has not in compass but thirteen or
fifteen miles, as they know says Lypsius, who have measured it; the form as
may be seen by the plot thereof next to a foure-square, somewhat long as it
were in a double proportion. For the measuring of which therefore, let there be
placed a draught of parallel lines right angled, whose perimeter may be
fifteen, the longitude double to the latitude, such doubtless as will be out
of the sides 2 and 5, which being multiplied between themselves, a plot 12 will
be the product. Now the number 126 does comprehend the number 12 ten times.
Therefore the later plot is of the former, and consequently Rome at this day of
that ancient Rome, the tenth part, which was to be demonstrated. Who so is not
so well accustomed to this manner of demonstration let him use the judgment of
his eyes in the following plots.

hexagonal diagram of Rome Ancient Rome in compass 42 miles

Rome at this day in compass 15 miles

(...) The tenth part of the City.



We cannot certainly here examine all things exactly; but it is wonderful that
that which we are able is so agreeable. I define the circuit of the City at
this day by the walls wherewith Chap. 11.
now it is compassed: for without, contrary to that of old, it is not at this
day inhabited, but the whole, how great soever it is, is enclosed with walls,
and walls which the Popes Hadrianus the first and Leo the fourth as it were by
fatal instinct made the utmost bound thereof, being now become the Seat as it
were of the Pontificiall kingdom, for so Blondus delivers, that the walls
which are now extant were built by Hadrian 1, by gathering 100000 crounes out
of Thuscia. Those afterward, as it is known out of others, Leo 4 either
repaired or finished about the year of our Lord 850 and by adding that part
which is beyond the river or builded by Leo, made up the City in that form
and circuit wherein it is now seen. And although it has much of the space
enclosed within the walls void and not inhabited, yet since walls are to be
reckoned amongst the chief works of the City, the City it self cannot be
thought lesser then the walls: larger indeed it might be, if it were (as in
times past that old one was) extended every way without the walls with continued
buildings.

That I may now at length make an end, the sum comes to this; the holy
Ghost would say or intimate this, that so much of the great City, as had
remained to this earthquake, was at that time ruined, to wit, (...) the tenth
part of the City, neither was there any more to be standing at that time. Nine
parts many ages before were to fall, and truly we see they are fallen; partly
by destructions and ruins, which the Barbarians so many times brought upon it,
partly decaying with overmuch oldnesse, partly also (as at the fourth trumpet
we have showed) thrown down with thunderbolts: the Tenth was reserved by
destine for the Pope of Rome, which was to be ordained head of the new Empire,
and mother of the Christian harlots. This by that earthquake which shall be
joined with the rising of the witnesses shall be utterly demolished.

Yet notwithstanding happily it was not necessary that we should interpret the
speech of the holy Ghost concerning the tenth part of the City so strictly as
we have done, according to Geometrical rules: it would have been sufficient,
if, as in times past when ^andling the destruction of the Jewish people he said
by Esaias, the tenth thereof shall be reserved, and shall return into Esaias 6. 13.
their land: so here we may understand, not so exactly the tenth, Chap. 11.
as some least part, as it were the tenth, of that ancient largeness of the
City of Rome, should remain for the seat and last destruction of this Beast.

It is added: and in the earthquake were slain seven thousand names of men.

Here if by names of men we understand heads of men, or several men: the
number seems over slender, and not agreeable to the greatness of the
destruction which other where the holy Ghost intimates. For shall not the
number of the slain be far greater, in the destruction of Babylon, then
seven thousand men? And is it likely that the pouring out of the fifth phyall
upon the throne of the Beast, should pass away with so small a slaughter of
men? That this scruple may by some means be satisfied; First, it is to be
observed, that by the name of the City here is understood, not citizens and
inhabitants, but buildings and walls, that is, the royal Seat of the Beast:
and so a double ruin of Babylon is described in these prophesies: First, of
Babylon taken for the royal City of the Beast, to wit, the City of Rome, at
the fifth phyall: Again, of Babylon taken for the Citizens or State of Rome;
which doubtless the Pope with the Senate of Scarlet Cardinals and the other
company of Citizens, especially Ecclesiastical do make. Who, Rome being
destroyed and burnt, betake themselves to dwell elsewhere, to be reserved for
the last phyall. At the pouring whereof it is said above other destructions of
any Land, Nations, and Cities, in that greatest earthquake of all which ever
have been, even that Babylon the great came in remembrance before God, to give
unto her Rev. 16.19
the cup of the fierceness of his wrath: when as notwithstanding that burning
and overthrow of Babylon, which is described in the 18. and 19. Chapters, does
altogether prevent the full destruction of the Beast and false Prophet, as in
the text there is manifest. I know some do otherwise untie this knot, saying
that Babylon which is mentioned at the last phyall, is Constantinople, the
Metropolis of the Turks: but they shall never persuade me, that the holy Ghost
in the first and chiefest representation of all used so notable an * Homonymia,
and to understand two, not always only When by one word diverse things are
signified.
one and the same Babylon, though in a double respe^t. That we may come
therefore to the purpose. It may happily come to pass, that the former
destruction of Babylon, that is, the ruin and overthrow Chap. 11.
of the City of Rome, is to be acted without any cruel, much less total
putting to death of the Citizens. And although the smoke thereof shall ascend
evermore, that is, she shall be wholly Revel. 19.3.
turned into ashes, and made even with the ground, never after to be inhabited;
yet notwithstanding a great part of the Citizens shall escape out of the
destruction of the City; either because they shall betake themselves to flight
in time, or for some other cause, which the event will manifest.

And this is one way, whereby the scruple concerning the oversmall number of
the slain may be satisfied. Another is if we say that by (...) names of men,
happily is meant (...), men of name, for such A figure, when words are
understood contrariwise.
Hypallage is not unusual in the Scripture, that in the government of Nounes,
that that Nowne which is in stead of the Epithet should go before the other.
The places of Scripture following witness this, Lev. 5. 15. (...) the silver
of shekles for shekles of silver, or silver shekles. And verse. 3. of the same,
and Chap. 7. 21. (...) the uncleanness of a man, for a man of uncleanness,
that is unclean, Romans 9. 31. (...), the law of righteousness; for the
righteousness of the Law, and Ephesians. 2. 7. (...), the riches of his grace for
his rich grace, and the like. And a name is familiar almost in all tongues for
renown, especially in the holy tongue; wherein (...) men of name, are men of
renown, children (...) without name (Job 30. 8.) Numb. 16.2.
are (...), ignoble, or base; in the Chalde, Idiots. Whence Beza in his
annotations upon Ephesians. 1. 21. and Philip. 2. 9. concerning the exaltation of
Christ above every name; as also Heb. 1. 4. takes Name in the signification of
dignity and (...), worth. Such interpretation if we follow (neither do I see
what should oppose it) the name of men shall be (...), dignities of men; (...),
men of name, famous men and excelling in dignity; of whom there shall be
ruined in this commotion of affairs and nations about seven thousand (and what
if of the order of the false Prophets which they call the Clergy?) yet I
think the number of seven thousand is so to be defined, that a few more or
less after the manner of the Scripture may be understood. Of the common people
what number shall fall in this war, was to no purpose to mention, since that
might be conjectured by the destruction of the famous ones, neither would the
holy Ghost descend Chap. 11.
to reckon the off-scumme in the account of the slain.

But yet another interpretation may be given, that there is no need to
interpret it of men by polle: to wit, if we interpret the names of men,
Companies and Societies of men, used to be called by their proper names no
less then men in particular, as are Cities, Incorporations, Parishes,
Boroughs, Covents, and the like titles of humane Companies. For these what
other thing are they, if we would consider the matter, then (...), names of
men; for so the polity of the Th^bans is called by Eschynes (...), and the
Roman name is put for the Romans. What therefore if in this commotion of the
nations seven thousand of these titles of humane Societies, whatsoever they be;
whether in the City of Rome, or in the state of the Church as they call it, be
to be killed? that is, subdued, by the adverse power, which the Scripture is
wont to call killing? But we ought not rashly to determine of a future thing,
since the Commentary of a Prophecy is the event of the things foretold.
Notwithstanding to this end I have produced these things, that it may appear
that the interpretation is much more free here, as touching the words, then
happily is commonly accounted: when as the use of the Scripture does not tie
the word Name to some one and certain signification. Neither can (...) joined
together be any where found, but in the place we have in hand; neither (...)
simply for men by polle, but twice only, Act. 1 15. Revel. 3.4. Other where it
is used sometimes in one sometimes in another signification. It remains.

And the rest were afraid, and gave glory to the God of Heaven.

To wit, by their astonishment wherein even unwillingly and unthankfully they
acknowledge his hand. For to acknowledge the wisdom, goodness, and power of
God by what token soever, is to give glory to God. Even as they who being taken
with the manner by God confess their sins, and are said to give glory to
God, as Achan. It follows:

The second woe is past, and behold the third w^e comes Verse. 14.
quickly.

The meaning is that that great earthquake is to continue till the end of the
second Woe or the sixth Trumpet; and together with it the mourning Prophecy of
the Witnesses is at length to be Chap. 11.
finished. For truly after so great a victory over the followers of the Beast,
and their ascending into the heaven of authority and honor, they shall put on
sackcloth no more. But now if the second Woe, or the plague of the sixth
Trumpet, be that overflowing of the Turks from Euphrates into the Roman
Empire now long since, as there we have interpreted: it can scarcely be, but
that this departure of the same plague, is that drying up of the water of
Euphrates to come to pass at the pouring out of the fifth phyall, whereby the
way is prepared for the Kings of the East to come, Chap. 16. 12.

At which coming of the Kings of the East (lest a gap be left otherwise
between either Trumpet) the seventh Trumpet seems to begin; and so that
wonderful preparation of the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, for the war
to be waged in Armageddon (there verse. 13, 14. together with the event thereof
at the last phyall (verse. 17, etc.) ought to be placed in the beginning of the
same seventh Trumpet. And surely it seems to be very meet, that the
preparation to war, do pertain to the same Trumpet to which the war it
self pertains.

But out of this a doubt arises, which requires satisfaction, and therefore
not to be passed in silence. For since there is the same term of forty two
months of the Beast, as is of one thousand two hundred and sixty days of the
mourning of the Witnesses; and since those days of the mourning of the
Witnesses are ended at the departure of the plague of the sixth Trumpet, or
second Woe; it may be demanded not unfitly, wherefore the months of the Beast
should not be further reckoned, since after that term no little of the Beast
yet remains, being not to be abolished, before the seventh Trumpet is begun.

It may be answered, that this comes to pass either because then the
conversion of Israel and as it were a new Kingdom begins (for they are
called the Kings from the rising of the Sun) or because in the continuance of
the Beast, consideration is had especially to the Empire of the City of Rome;
but that great City the royal seat of the Beast in this earthquake is taken
and overthrown: even so far, that from thenceforth the Beast shall as it
were, change his form, since being driven so from his Metropolis, it can no
more be accounted for a Kingdom of seven Chap. 12.
hills, (which is the other signification of the seven heads thereof).

There is moreover in the Text, concerning the sound of the seventh Trumpet,
and the Imperial reign of Christ in that great day of Judgment: the
interpretation whereof we will put off to the end of the book, that we may
there at once set forth all the prophesies appertaining thereunto.

The meaning of the red seven headed Dragon contending with Michael about the
child birth.
The first vision of the open book, which we handled Chap. 11. went through
the whole course of the Revelation from the beginning to the end, and that, as
elsewhere we have touched, to show the conextion of the same with the Seals
and Trumpets. Now the other prophesies of the same time and Ecclesiastical
affairs, come to be knit to that vision, to the making up of the body of the
open book, among which

The battle of the seven headed red Dragon with Michael, does comprehend the
same space of Ecclesiastical affairs with the measured Court: wherein truly
the Roman Empire Draconicola.
worshipping the Dragon tyrannized with lamentable persecutions against the
Church in travail with child, laboring to bring forth Christ to be King in
the Roman Empire, and at least three hundred years made war against the Spirit
of Christ mightily working in his servants. But the woman at last after many
sorrows cuttings and slaughters in childbirth, brought forth the King even
Chap. 12. 5.
Christ such as she traveled with, to rule the Nations with an iron Rod, and
the Dragon being thrown down from his Roman throne, salvation and strength,
and the Kingdom of our Chap. 12.10. 14.
God, and the power of his Christ was brought into the Empire.

The sum of the whole matter being premised for perspicuitie, let us come to
the exposition of the Text particularly.

And there appeared, says he, a great wonder in Heaven.
VVHither indeed John was called in the beginning to behold, Chap. 12. 1.
and where he had beheld all the former visions. Neither do I think an other
sense is to be sought of this circumstance. For it Chap. 12.
is manifest even out of the end of the foregoing Chapter, that John hitherto
looked toward heaven.

A woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and upon her
head a crown of twelve stars.

Truly a most beautiful image and representation of the Primitive
childebearing Church; to wit, shining round about by the faith of Christ the
Sun of righteousness treading under feet the rudiments of the world (whether
Legal shadows, or darkness of Gentile superstition) and to conclude
glorious with the ensigns of the Apostolic offspring.

Most men would have the Moon to be a symbol of earthly and mutable things,
which the Church of Christ contemns as below her self, which although it be
true; yet no where, as I take it, in the whole Scripture, is the Moon noted by
this property. But the interpretation of prophetical Symboles, is not easily
to be attained other-where, then from those properties which the Scripture
some-where does warrant. And now this is certain, that the most feasts,
wherein typical worship was celebrated by sacrifices, were ordered according
to the motion of the Moon; as the new Moon, the Paschall, Pentecost, the
Feast of Tabernacles; yea the account of the whole Ecclesiastical year
depended upon the motion thereof; to which happily belongs that Psalm 104
19. He made the Moon (...) that is, (...) for festival seasons. Why therefore
may not the Symbol of the Moon be referred to the Mosaicall worship? which
doubtless the Church by the revealing of Christ, discerns as it were
prostrate, and put under her feet: according to that of the Apostle to the
Colossians, Chap. 2. 14. affirming Christ to have blotted out the handwriting
of Ordinances which was against us, and nayling it to his Cross to have taken
it out of the way.

Furthermore, since God is said to have created the Sun the greater light to
rule the day; but the Moon the lesser light to rule the night: Why may not the
Symbol of the Moon having rule over the night signify the power of
darkness, or the tronpe of darkness, that is, the worshipping of Satan and
of his spirits in idols? So truly that the whole matter may be transferred to
Baptism, whereby the Church being to be illuminated, and to put on Christ,
trampleth under feet the worshipping of Idols, Chap. 12.
of Satan, and his Angels, by the renouncing of their ^ervices and pompes. For
all these things did that old short form of renunciation plainly contain; and
furthermore they that were to make abjuration did turn themselves toward the
West, as it were to the climate of heaven whence night comes; as on the
contrary, being to make profession of their faith in Christ and the true God
three in one, they turned themselves toward the East, as it were the Clymate
whence the Sun by expelling the darkness reduces the day. Dyonis Areop. de
Hierarch. Eccles. c. 2. Cyrill. Hierosol. Cateches. 1. mystagog. Gregor. Naz.
Orat. 40. Hieron. upon Chap. 6. of Amos. Ambros. de ^is qui mysteri^s
initiantur: c. 2. Moreover with respect to the same image or representation (as
before also is observed) the continuance of Christian Apostacy or of
Christianisme defiled with Idols, is defined by months according to the motion
of the Moon; but of the woman and the Witnesses persevering in the ^aith of
Christ, by years and days, according to the motion of the Sun. Yet to
whether interpretation I should rather incline, I am doubtful, and whether to
one of the two only, or to both. Surely the Apostle to the Galathians, Chap.
4.3. seems to call both of them, as well the Mosaicall paedagogie, as the
worship of the Idols of the Gentiles promiscuously the elements of the w^rld;
the Church of Christ glories that both are put under her feet. Let the Reader
use his judgment.

And she being with child, cried traveling in birth and was in Verse. 2.
pain to be delivered.

The Church as universally and seperately considered as an Idea, is a Mother:
but as she is considered in relation to the several persons which are
continually begotten in her, she has an offspring, which she is said to
travel with and bring forth to God. This in the Prophets is so familiar, that
concerning that, there is no need to add one word. You may see Ezekiel. Chap. 16.
unto verse. 21. likewise Chap. 23. verse. 4. Esaias Chap. 54. Hosea Chap. 2. verse.
4, 5. The Allegory therefore in this part is not to be wrested by any man's
importunity, to wit, that he separate the Mother from her off^^ing, which yet
otherwise may grow together into one and the same Church. Kimchi upon Hosea 2.
verse. 3, 3. The Synagogue or Congregation is compared to a Mother (...) by way
of universality; but (...) in respect of Chap. 12.
particulars to children.

But these (...), pangs and torments, by reason of which the woman in travel
cried, were those grievous persecutions which the Primitive Church suffered in
bringing forth. For it is plain that tribulations and adversity are likened
to the sorrows of child bearing. Whence those words of Esa. Chap. 66. 7.
Before she traveled she brought forth; before her Partus.
pain came she was delivered of a man child. The Chalde paraphraseth. Before
tribulation come upon her, she shall be redeemed; before great fear come upon
her as the sorrows of a woman in travel, her King that is the Messiah shall
be revealed. But Jeremy Chap. 30. verse. 6, 7. ^e interprets this
representation, Ask ye, says he, and see whether a man does travel with
child. Wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman
in travel? and all faces are turned into Auriginem.
palenesse? Alas for that day is great, so that none is like it, it is even the
time of Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it. See also what our
Savior calls (...), Matthew. 24. 8.9. Mark. 13. 8. (...), these are the
beginning of sorrows, etc.

And there appeared another wonder in heaven, for behold, a great Verse. 3.
red Dragon having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his
heads.

And his tail drew the third part of the Stars of heaven and did Verse. 4.
cast them to the earth.

A wonder or representation of the Empire of Rome Heathen worshipping the
Dragon; whose marks are every were seven heads, and ten horns: seven heads
indeed, as well for the seven hills upon which the City was builded, as also
for the seven sorts of ^overnours who were successively to govern that Citi^:
the ten horns for the ten Kingdoms which were to arise in the time of the last
head to which they gr^w; which interpretation is not mine, but the Angels,
Chap. 17. where the more proper place will be to handle these things if any
thing be to be added. In the mean time another Character of the Roman Empire
is added to these, whereas it is said, he drew the third part of the stars of
heaven with his tail, and did cast th^^ to the earth; that is, he subjected
the third part of the Princes and Rulers of the world to his Empire. For even
so much, to wit, the third part of the known world in John's age, the Dominion
of Rome did comprehend Chap. 12.
within its limits. But a tail out of the learning of the Indians with
Achmetes signifies the attendants and train of authority, Apot. 152. but
what more the tail of a Serpent intimates, shall anon be seen. And these
truly were the Characters of the Roman Empire generally; but the effigies of a
Dragon does more-over point out the worshipper of the Dragon and the enemy of
the Seed of the woman in special, that is, Rome heathen enemy to
Christian^tie; and since he is red also, this notes that he is terrible and
red with the blood of the Saints. Moreover, the type of the Dragon seems to
have reference to Pharaoh, the cruel and malignant enemy of the old Synagogue
bearing children in Egypt, in like manner as the Roman Dragon was of the
Christian Church bringing forth her children. For even he likewise, for the
same cause is represented by a Dragon, Psalm. 74. 13, 14. Tho^ did divide the
Sea by thy streng^h; thou brakest the heads of the Dragons, (that is of the
Egyptians) in the waters. Thou brakest in pieces the heads of Leviathan (the
Chalde of Pharaoh) thou gave him to be meat to the people inhabiting in the
wilderness, Esaias 51. 9. Awake, Awake thou, put on strength, oh arm of the
Lord, Awake thou as in the ancient days, as in the generations of old. Art
thou not that arm of old that has cut in sunder the pride of Egypt and
wounded the Dragon? So Ezekiel. 29.3. Pharaoh King of Egypt the great Dragon? In
all these places in Hebrew it is (...) which word the Seventie, Symmachus^ and
Jerome do translate Dragon, and truly the Syriaque interpreter calls the
Dragon in the Revelation always by that name. The Arabian tongue says Drusius
is to confirm it, wherein a Dragon is called Thennin. And Exodus 7.10. And
Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh, and it became (...) a Serpent or
Dragon. Surely, sometimes it signifies a Whale or great Fish, but as it were a
Sea Dragon whereof doubtless it bears a certain resemblance. But thou will
ask wherefore is there so much ado about this word? Doubtless, that I might
show that what shape Satan abused of old for the overthrow of the first Adam;
in the same type of that infamous and cursed living creature, it is the manner
of the holy Ghost to set forth the kingdoms possessed by the Devil and mortal
enemies to his Church the seed of the woman.

And the Dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be Verse. 4.
delivered for to devour her child as it was borne. Chap. 12.


To wit, as Pharaoh laid wait for old Israel borne in Egypt, and as after
Herod for Christ the son of Mary our Lord: ^o the Roman Dragon laid wait for
mystical Christ which the Church was to bear, that he might slay him
presently after his birth.

And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations Verse. 5.
with a rod (or Scepter) of iron.

That is, she brought forth mystical Christ, or Christ formed in his members,
the son not of Mary but of the Church; according to that of the Apostle to
the Galat. Chap. 4. 19. My little children of whom I travel in birth again,
until Christ be formed in you. For since the words are a periphrasis of
Christ, it must needs be, that some Christ be set forth in them; to wit, as in
prophetical Types best beseems, not Christ verily, but analogically so
called. Who, says he, was to rule all nations with an iron Scepter, that is,
authority being obtained by force of the sword, or by war; seeing he was to
have rule over them, which from the beginning were not Citizens, but either
enemies or strangers; he had need to subdue them, before he should rule them.
The words are fetched out of Psalm. 2.9. not according to the modern reading of
the Masoreth, but the old reading of the 70. and the not (...) but (...) that
is, not break them, but rule them.
Apostles. Of which that this is the meaning, I seem to gather out of Chap.
19. verse. 15. where in like manner as in the Psalm, they are used of Christ
our Lord, to whom originally they agree: Out of his mouth, says he, went a
sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations: for he shall rule them
with a rod of iron. But here they are attributed to mystical Christ or a
Christian man, the birth of the Church among the Gentiles, who is described
according to the type of Christ his head; to every such one of his the Lord
promises that he at length will give the like power, under the name of the
Church of Thyatira: He that overcommeth, says he, and keeps my works unto
the end, to him will I Revel. 2. 26, 27.
give power over the nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and as
the vessels of a potter they shall be broken to shivers; even as I also
received of my Father. It will something help in this place to hear the words
of Andreas where with he Commenteth upon the meaning of Methodius upon this
place: The Church, says he, by those who are initiated by Baptism, without
intermission begets Christ; as being to be formed in them to the
consummation of the fullness of their spiritual age. A man child Chap. 12.
is the people of the Church -- by whom Christ in his Godhead as it were a
sword in the strong hand of the Romans, does rule the nations. He alludeth to
the type of the fourth kingdom in Daniel, concerning which I agree not with
him (for how could David allude to that?) otherwise it is not much from the
scope, as now shall appear.

And her child was caught up unto God: and to his thro^^. Verse. 5.
(...) for to the throne of God. The son of the woman A figure, when by two
words one thing is signified.
was caught up to the throne of God, that is, lifted up to the Roman throne,
where he should rule the nations with that authority which was spoken of.
Surely, Christ the son of Mary is properly lifted up to the throne of God;
but mystical Christ or Christ formed, whom the Apostolic Church brought
forth, is analogically lifted up. For truly the throne of higher powers (as
the Apostle calls them) is the throne of God, a terrestrial heaven: There is
no power (says he) but of God. Whence in the declarations of the
interpretation of dreams; If any shall seem to Romans 13.1.
himself in his sleep to be lifted up to heaven, they do interpret it of
royal Soveraigntie. It is also known that in the holy tongue the Magistrates
are called (...), that is Gods: God stands Psalm. 82.1.
in the Congregation of God.
the mighty, he i^dgeth among the Gods: Verse. 6.
likewise, I have said you are Gods, and all of you the children of the most
High. Therefore even as they are said to ^it in Moses chair, who teach the
Doctrine given by Moses: so in the Throne of God, who are his Vicegerents upon
earth. That therefore the Child of the Apostolic Church is said to be caught
up or received to the Throne of God; is all one as to be lifted up to that
excellency, as it may ^it as it were with God; which I say, is meant of regal
advancement. And this was then fulfilled, when as Christians bore the sway
under Constantine the Great and his successors, the Dragon being thrown down.

But thou will say, ^ince it was said that that mystical Christ shall rule the
Nations over whom he should reign with an iron Scepter, even as Christ the
Lord should do: with what manner of war and with what battles (if this be
the meaning of that iron Scepter) has that Child of the Apostolic Church
subdued the Roman Empire unto it self? I answer by a double war; first
spiritual, wonderful, and divine, against Devils the Princes and Gods of that
world: which certainly it stoutly waged, Chap. 12.
the Army of Celestial Angels ayding it against the enemies; which afterward
shall be handled: but the other even corporal then when it had attained to the
Throne; which so many famous victories do witness, partly of Constantine
against Maxentius, Maximinianus, and Licinius; partly of that great Theodosius
as well against others, as against Eugenius and Arbogastus the Devils
Standard-bearers; before the stubbornness and pride of the Gentile worshippers
of the Dragon Rebbels against the Christian Empire (being utterly broken and
consumed) ceased.

But before we depart hence, one thing yet remains to be spoken of: to wit,
that the Child of the Woman was not lifted up to the Throne of God so soon as
it was borne, but so soon as it was grown ready for a Kingdom. Therefore it
is said she had brought forth a Son (...) who was to rule, to wit, not
presently, but when he had grown up. Even as also Christ the son of Mary, our
Lord, (whose likeness in all things this mystical Christ the Child of the
Church does resemble) being taken up to the Throne of God, entered his
Kingdom, not so soon as he was borne, but when as likewise he was come to his
perfect age; there to sit until he shall have made all his enemies his
footstool. It follows,

And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place Verse. 6.
prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundredth and
threescore days.

Which since it is afterward to be repeated, and somewhat more fully to be
described, we will put off the exposition to that place.

And there was war in heaven; Michael and his Angels, fought Verse. 7.
with the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels; but prevailed not,
neither was their place found any more 8.
in heaven.

It has been said, that the woman in travel with her child being safe,
escaped the Dragons lying in wait. But how it came to pass that he who had so
diligently watched her, not withstanding failed of his purpose, now at length
begins to be mentioned To wit, that it came to pass by the help and
succors of Michael, who went forth valiantly to fight against the Dragon lying
in wait, and becoming Conque^our, thrust him down from heaven into the earth.
Thereupon the woman's son not only escaped Chap. 12.
safe, but was lifted up to the throne of God, and she her self departed into
a place safe from the fury of the Dragon.

And there was, says he, war in heaven, etc. To wit, while the woman was in
travel; not after she was delivered, as many take it. For it is certain out
of the 14. Verse. that this war was waged before the flight of the woman into
the wilderness. But the woman fled not into the wilderness, before she was
delivered, and her son caught up to the throne of Majesty. Verse. 5, 6.
Michael and his Angels fought with the Dragon not alone, but taking with them
the Martyrs and Confessors of Christ their King, for whose cause they fought.
Concerning whom therefore a little after it shall be sung in the triumphant
song, that they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of
their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death: which cannot be
spoken of bare and sole Angels. And the Dragon fought and his Angels, that is,
the Devils taking with them likewise the Roman tyrants, and their ministers
which worship them. But thou will demand who is this Michael? Not, I suppose,
Christ himself, but as in Daniel, unless I be deceived, is manifest, one, yea
even the chiefest, of the chief Princes, or seven Archangels, Chap. 10. 13. to
wit, that great Angel, who in the same is said, to stand for the children of
God. Chap. 12. 1. and whom Christ that great chief General, and consequently,
King of Angels and men, has so opposed against Satan and his black guard
raging against his Saints. For the Angels are sent forth, for the safety of
them who are heirs of salvation, Hebr. 1. 14. and they protect and defend
them, according to their hidden and invisible manner of working, against evil
spirits, which work in men, that are enemies of God and his Christ; although
they appear not in a visible shape. So that in this war (we have in hand) of
the Primitive Church of Christ against the Roman worshippers of the Dragon,
the Angels under Michael their Captain acted their parts; as well by
strengthening the holy Martyrs and Confessors of Christ against the threats of
tyrants, and violence of torments, and mittigating their pains in agonies, and
sometime taking away plainly the feeling of any pain; as also by breaking and
weakening the force of the adverse spirits, sometime on a sudden casting lets
and impediments in the way of the persecutors who were led by their instinct,
frustrating their purposes, sometimes by casting Chap. 12.
terrors and other distractions into the mind, so that thereupon desisting
from their project, they have granted, even against their will unto the Church
truce and space of breathing: until at length, after three hundred years
war, when as it seemed to Christ to have now enough exercised his, and was
pleased to bestow a full victory upon his Angels; the child of the woman,
Christians prevailing, being placed in the Imperial throne, the kingdom of
the Devil being conquered suffered a wonderful great fall. For this is that
which he says: The Dragon prevailed not, neither was his place found any more
in heaven, that is, being conquered and put to flight with all his forces he
was deprived of heaven. (In the saying, prevailed not, there is an Hebraisme of
which afterward).

And the Dragon was cast out that old serpent, called the Devil Verse. 9.
and Satan, which deceives the whole world (that is, persuades to Idolatry,
and hitherto had possessed the Roman Empire) he was cast out into the earth,
and his Angels were cast out with him.

That is, he with all his Demons.
Devils (hitherto worshipped instead of God) were thrown down from the top of
their divinity which they enjoyed, to the bottom of execration and contempt.
That what is read to have come to pass long ago in the delivery of Israel
from the tyranny of the Egyptian Pharaoh, whose likeness this Dragon ^areth,
that God executed judgment upon the Exodus 12. 11.
gods of the Egyptians: the same shall find place here at least (...).
according Numb. 33.4.
to the letter. The Jews deliver, that it was so even there also. I or see
both the Targums, R. Solomon, R. Aben Ezra, with R. Moses ben Nachman, etc.
Neither is there cause that any should wrest the clear words of the Scripture
to another meaning; especially since it may seem that Esaias 19. 1. has
allusion thereto.

Prevailed not, for was overcome, is an Hebrew figure, as I have said, whereby
the Adverbs of denying do express the contrary of that to which they are
applied; as in this same vision a little after is used, they loved not their
lives unto the death, that is, they Verse. 11.
valued their life at nothing, or they spent it freely for Christ. For this
kind of speaking with the Hebrews is not of (...).
diminution, but (...).
augmentation. So, Pr^v. 12. 3. A man is not established by wickedness, that
is, shall be utterly removed and rooted out. Chap. 12.
The same Book 10. 2. Treasures of wickedness profit nothing, that is, they
hurt, they damnifie. 17. 21. The father of a fool shall have no joy, that is,
he shall be grieved. And, 1 Cor. 16. 12. If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be Anathema, that is, whosoever hates and blasphemeth. See
Bux^orf. Thesaur. Gram. lib. 2. cap. 19. So here, The Dragon and his Angels
prevailed not, is the same as, they were utterly vanquished.

But a more full History of this victory, I have already made at the
interpretation of the sixth seal, with which this fall of the Dragon does
contemporize; yea it is the argument of that seal, as far as it respects
that notable change of the Roman Empire. But that which I have said,
concerning the Child of the woman placed on the throne of the Empire and the
Christians then bearing sway: that truly is clear and evident out of the
triumphant song which is annexed.

I heard, says he, a loud voice saying in heaven, now is come Verse. 10.
salvation and strength and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his
Christ, for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before
our God day and night?

But they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the Verse. 11.
word of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death --

Which words, as they are most clear, and spoken without any obscurity of
allegory; so are they the key for interpreting the whole vision. For hence it
may plainly be perceived, as well what that lifting up of the child of the
woman to the throne of God may be, to wit, an introduction of salvation,
strength, and the kingdom of God, and the power of his Christ into the Roman
throne; as also by the vanquishing of what enemy he came to the kingdom, to
wit, by the throwing down (...), or of that Accuser who day and night accuses
the brethren, and traduceth them before God; to conclude what manner of forces
Michael and his Angels used with him in that battle against the Dragon and his
guard, to wit, the holy Martyrs and Confessors, who overcame him by the blood
of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimoni^, because they loved not their
lives unto the death, that is, they freely yielded their lives unto the death.
And surely it is altogether unpossible, that the lifting up of the child of
the woman, the throwing down of the Dragon, and the introduction of the kingdom
Chap. 12.
of God and Christ should not level at one and the same event of things; since
the flight of the woman into the wilderness, begins from them all as it
were from one certain term of things, Verse. 6. and 14.

Now that Satan here is called by a new name (...) or Accuser, who before is
styled Dragon and Devil; it is to be understood that this also proceeds from
the custom of the Hebrews; by whom indeed he is called by the same name, which
they have now long since taken into their own language. For they call him (...)
Kategor. R. I^da in the book Musar, as Drusius cites him: Kategor, says he,
is Satan, the adversary or wicked acc^ser, who is adversary to man, or acc^seth
him before the blessed Creator. Maiemonides ad Pirke Avoth (where in Gnome R.
Eliezer both this and the word Paraclit of contrary signification, derived also
from the Greeks, is used) (...) that is, He is termed Paraclit (...) an
advocate who pleads for the good of a man before the King; the contrary
whereof is Kategor, an accuser. For he it is who trad^ceth a man before the
King, and endeavo^reth to kill him. And surely, if ever, then during the time
of this child bearing and war, Satan worthily deserved the name (...) of an
accuser and malicious detracter. Which so many reproaches and infamies do
witness, wherewith the Dragon-worshippers all this time overwhelmed the
Christians, objecting against them Thyestaean feasts, Oedipodian incests,
adultery, promiscuous lusts, murders, treasons against Princes, plagues,
famine, burnings of houses, and what public calamity soever happened. But it
seems here rather respect is had to the History of Job, where Satan by
accusing and calumniating brought to pass, that he was permitted by God to try
Job by temptations and tribulations. That which here also the holy Ghost
intimates to be done by him, according to his custom. The skillful will
understand what I mean. It follows in the triumphant song.

Therefore rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them (that is Verse. 12.
ye holy Angels and blessed spirits, by whose labor happily employed this
victory is gotten) woe to the inhabitants of the Earth and of the Sea (that is
the world) for the Devil is come down unto you, having great wrath (and
therefore Chap. 12.
like to hatch some new mischief) because be knows that he has but a short
time.

For although even from that time forward by Constantine the Great he was cast
down from the Roman throne, yet the worshipping of the Dragon continued with
the people some time: hereupon when, not very long after, he perceived ^e must
be at length also thrust out, and that the whole Roman Empire should be washed
with the Baptism of Christ, matters coming to that pass; being all in a rage,
he studieth to bring the victory of the Church, by what way possibly he could
into danger; and if he should fail of his purpose, or be cast out, to
undermine it by some new stratagem. In both which we shall anon see the most
wicked spirit bestirred himself.

The Mystery of the woman inhabiting in the Wilderness.
The child bearing woman, the Dragon being vanquished honceforth dwells in
the Wilderness, whereby the state of the Church delivered from the heathen
tyranny until the seventh Trumpet and the second coming of Christ is figured;
not in the type of one lying hid and invisible, but as it were in a certain
middle condition, like that of the Israelites wandering in the Desert, from
their departure out of Egypt, until their entrance into Canaan: a state indeed
thereof, safe from the fury of that red Dragon, as of Pharaoh but not as yet
come to that glory, as it were the possession of Canaan, whereunto at length
she was to attain, the rest of the enemies being vanquished. A state indeed
which outwardly should be better then the servitude of that Ethnic tyranny,
out of which as it were out of the bondage of Egypt, the Christian people by
the power of Christ escaped: considering that leave was given from thence forth
by the favor of Christian ^mperours and Kings to worship Christ freely, like
as was to the Israelites in the Wilderness of serving Jehovah; the Temples
also and Tabernacles for Christian worship being stately built, the polity of
the Church settled with Laws, sacred Revenues, Tithes and Offerings; but no
less unhappy by manifold Apostasy, then Israel continuing in the Wilderness
by the Calfe, Baal Peor, Balaam, Korah, etc. Neither is that happily Chap. 12.
to be neglected that the forty two months of this Christian woman abiding in
the Wilderness, do answer to so many Mansions of Israel in the Desert. See
Numb. 33. The reason and aptness of the Type being thus unfolded, let us open
the Text particularly and fit it to the thing in hand.

And when the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the Earth, he persecuted the
woman which brought forth the man Verse. 13.
child.

And to the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly
into the wilderness from the face of the Serpent 14.
into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a
time.

An^ the Serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood after the woman, that
he might cause her to be carried away by the 15.
flood.

Here is the first attempt of Satan cast down, not indeed as yet utterly cast
out, but staying a little while below; that while her child should get the
upper hand he might if by any means he could oppress the Woman betaking her
self to the estate of one in the wilderness, before she could in perfect
safety from his fury attain thither. For she came not presently into the
Wilderness after she began to get away, but by some space of time interposed.
Even as Israel also in his passage undertaken thither out of Egypt spent some
time. Now the words here put are so to be conceived, that there may appear to
be some kind of reference to that which formerly was spoken of the woman's
flight into the Wilderness, with this or the like understanding: When the
Dragon saw that he was cast unto the Earth, he persecuted the Woman which
brought forth the man child. For when as (as aforesaid) after the birth of her
child, and his taking up into the Throne, it was granted to the woman that she
might depart (to wit, by giving her two wings of a great Eagle, as it were by a
certain ^light) into the wilderness where she should be nourished for a time,
times, and half a time: he cast out of his mouth water as a flood after her,
that he might cause her to be carried away by the flood. So also Pharaoh
persecuted the people of Israel marching from his dominion into the
Wilderness, but with another flood.

The great Eagle is the Roman Empire. His two wings two Caesar's of the Empire
parted into two parts, the West and East by Chap. 12.
whose protection and conduct the Church departed into an Eremiticall estate.
For it is known that the Roman Empire, so soon as it had received the
Christian faith, became parted into two parts, and fled as it were with two
wings of Caesar's. The Eagle being the Ensign of the Roman Empire makes this
interpretation obvious to every understanding. But what forbids to confirm
the signification also of the Prophetical Type out of the Apocriphall Writer?
that is Esdras the Prophet (for by this name Clemens Alexandrin^^ cites him,
Strom. lib. 3. a little before the end) in whom the type of the Eagle
signifies the fourth Kingdom, the twelve feathered wings, so many first
Caesar's thereof. See Chap. 11. and 12. But tell me Reader whether thou will not
say that here is respect had also to that of the Lord, concerning Isreal's
departure out of Egypt, Exodus 19. 4. Ye have seen, says he, what I did to the
Egyptians, how I bare you on Eagles wings, and brought you unto my self, that
is to say, into the Desert?

But there is another thing in this verse, which requires manifestation:
wherefore the time of the Woman's abiding in the Wilderness, which before was
accounted by days, is here turned into years, or a time, times, and half a
time? I certainly can find out no other cause of this changing one for
another, then that it should be the Key of the like notation of time in Daniel,
and should admonish us, that the Church is now in the very same times, which he
had defined, by the period of a time, times, and half a time. And surely
without this sign that setting down of time had been most uncertain, and
intricate. For from whence or by what mark could it have been known, that
time, does signify a year? or that times does not signify more then two
years? But now out of this change it is evident that that space is to be
resolved into one thousand two hundredth and sixty days, and therefore
signifies, Ayeere, two years, and an half.

These things being brought to light in this manner, let us diligently consider
at length, what that water may be, which like a blood the Dragon cast out of
his mouth, to drown the woman, while she made have into the Wilderness. The
wellspring of the mouth is speech and doctrine, according to that Prove. 18. 4.
The words of a man's mouth are as deep waters, the wellspring of wisdom is a
flowing brook. Whence the word (...) which signifies Chap. 12.
(...) and to run out like a fountain, is applied to Doctrine, as Psalm. 78.
2. I will open my mouth in parables, I will cast out or utter dark sayings
from the foundation of the world: which is alleged concerning the doctrine of
our Savior, Matthew. 13. 35. So Prove. 1. 23. Wisdom is said to preach in the
streets: I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto
you. What therefore shall that casting out of the mouth of the Serpent the
venomous Beast be, but pestiferous doctrine, that is, ^eresie? according to
that, Prove. 15. 28. The mouth of the wicked will power out or issue forth evil
things. The history of this time she weth it, proceeding out of the mouth of
the Dragon like a flood, I say, Arianisme and the offspring thereof. By this
flood of his the Dragon had well near caused the woman to be carried away;
certainly he desired it. And verily it was a wonder that the Roman Emperors,
who then newly had given their names to Christ, and had not as yet fully
settled Christianity, had not cast away the faith being offended and alienated,
by such horrible discord of opinions among Christians (even but a little while
taking breath after persecution) in so chief a point, with such mortal hatred
of the parties, tumults, cruelty against their brethren, even equalling that of
the heathen.

But the Earth helped the woman; for the Earth opened her mouth and swallowed
the flood which the Dragon cast out of Verse. 16.
his mouth.

That is, the multitude of Christians in Councels prevayling in the Orthodox
faith, drank up the Diabolical inundation: even as the Earth is wont to do
the water, when it is exceeding dry. For if the water (but venomous and
contagious such as proceeds out of the mouth of the Serpent) does represent
heresy; the reason of the analogy did altogether require, that that which
should drink it up and abolish it, should be figured by the Earth, as which by
its dryness is wont to drink up the inundations of waters. Which truly in
this matter falls out so much the more apt to signify the thing in hand,
because even other where in an hystoricall and simple speech, the earth in many
places is wont to be put for the inhabitants of the Earth. See Genesis 41. 57. 1 Samuel 14. 25. Deuteronomy. 9. 28. and in many places beside.

Concerning the ten horned Beast blaspheming God, and the two horned Beast or
false Prophet his Author and chief priest.
A New Tragedy of evils did set upon the woman being entered At Chap. 13.
the bounds of the Wilderness: for forthwith she falls upon a double Beast,
in appearance indeed little to be feared; as resembling the Panther or Lamb,
but no whit the Dragon or Serpent, the likeness of whom alone she abhorred;
Yet in truth Fiduciariam.
the only one in trust for that Dragon cast down^, and one that in his stead,
should much vex her offspring which she should bring forth in the Wilderness.

And the Dragon was wroth with the woman (for from thence Verse. 17.
I fetch the story of this Chapter) and went to make war with the remnant of
her seed (to wit with them which she was to bring forth in the Wilderness)
which keep the Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ,
and he stood upon the sand of the Sea.

That is, when the Dragon had perceived (he who even now was deprived of the
Roman Empire) that he nothing prevailed by the flood of Arianisme to
overwhelme the woman flying into the Wilderness, but that nevertheless she
was come safe thither; and furthermore that the Roman Empire would no more
suffer, that he in his proper name, should manage the affairs there, as in
times past: he sets upon her by another way; to wit, by substituting
covertly for himself Regnum ^icarium.
a deputed Kingdom; and to that end he stood upon the sand of the Sea, that he
might raise to himself a new deputed form of the Roman Kingdom then to have
its beginning. Now the history of a twofold Beast to manage the Roman State
follows; the one Ten horned, the other Two horned, tied in a near alliance
between themselves, both of them reigning together, and in the same Dominion.
The first of which being the Ten horned thou may call Secular; the other
being Two horned, Ecclesiastical.

Of the Ten horned Beast.
The Ten horned or secular Beast, is that Whole state of ten Kingdoms or
thereabouts (into which the Empire of C^sars Chap. 13.
was parted by the wars of the Barbarians after the Dragon was thrust out)
growing together again into one Roman Commonwealth, the wickedness of the
Dragon being renewed.

I saw, says he, a Beast rise up out of the Sea, having seven heads Verse. 1.
and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the
name of blaspemy.

The same Beast is here described which afterward, Chap. 17. bears the Whore;
even the seven headed Roman Beast under the course of the last head. I saw
says John, the type of that last State of the Roman kingdom, wherein
governing under the seventh head, it should be divided into ten kingdoms, and
yet, even as he had done under his former heads, he should blaspheme the only
true God by the worship of Idols. For the number of Seven heads, is the ensign
of the Roman kingdom as is the bearing of Ten horns. The name of Blasphemy is
a note of Idolatry. The crowns s^t upon the horns (which are only of the last
head) do show that that kingdom should be exhibited under the course of the
last head; which will be further confirmed by the rest of the description of
the Beast.

And ^he Beast which I saw was like unto a Leopard, and his feet Verse. 2.
were as the feet of a Bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion.

That is, this kingdom, in respect partly of regiment and state, partly of its
nature was so ordained; that it did resemble in a certain confused temperament
those three Monarchies, long ago^ set forth to Daniel by the same Beasts. For
truly in the residue of the shape of his body it should resemble the Gr^cian;
in the feet by his going the P^rsian, in his mouth by making Edicts the
Babylonian Kindgdome. For the Leopard is the type of the Kingdom of the
Gr^cians; the Bear of the Persians; the Lion of the Babylonians.

First therefore, that Kingdom in the body of it was plainly like the
Grecian, that is a Kingdom divided into more Kingdoms like unto that, Dan.
7. 6. and 8. 8. 22. For the Grecian was divided into four parts, but this last
Roman was to be parted into ^enne Kingdoms; the type thereof is the bearing of
ten horns upon the head of the last Beast, which by the interpretation of
the Angel afterward, Chap. 17. are ten Kings or Kingdoms Verse. 12.
domes, into which the Roman Empire of the sixth head being Chap. 12.
rent should grow together again into a new Kingdom under the seventh for to
bear the Whore. Now that the ten horns are only of the last head, that is
the seventh, and not promiscuously of them all, as it is commonly accounted, I
thus demonstrate: the head flourishing, the horns flourish; which declining,
the horns also growing thereupon must needs decline. First therefore the
horns could not be on the five first heads, because those five heads, as the
Angel says, Chap. 17. were passed then Verse. 10.
in the age of John, and together with the courses of the heads, the courses of
the horns, also growing upon the same were passed; neither in the sixth,
because that reigning in the age of John (as also the Angel clearly affirms)
notwithstanding the time of the horns was not as yet come. For, says he, the
ten horns are ten Kings, which have received no Kingdom as yet. They
remain therefore for the last head. Away with you paynters therefore, which
here at your pleasure distribute the ten horns among seven heads; bestowing
upon some, one, upon others, according to your liberality, two: which how
unfit it is, and far from any ground of the Text, yea and plainly repugnant
to the interpretation of the Angel; there is no man which being now admonished,
shall thoroughly consider, but will confess. It is therefore to be taken for
true and certain, that it is the seventh head alone in that scale of heads one
standing above another, being the highest in situation, the last in time, which
bears the horns. I now therefore proceed to expound the remaining Effigies
of the same last Beast.

And this Beast in the feet, by which the body is supported, with which it
moves and goes, and the former of which in Beasts are in stead of hands and
arms for handling, snatching and fighting; in feet, I say does exceedingly
resemble the Empire of the Persians: since as they did rely upon the Councels
of their Magi Wisards.
Wise men in managing their affairs, so the Roman Kingdom of the last state
is governed by the authority of the Monks and Idolatrous Clerks like to those
Wise men. Whether that belongs which afterward shall be said of that other
Beast the Verse. 12.
false Prophet, that he exercises all the power of this ten horned Beast
before him. For feet here are to be considered, not as the basest and more
unworthy members of the body, but as they are in Beasts, not only instruments
of going, but also of fighting and Chap. 12.
catching their prey; in which of Bears (I speak of the former feet) the
principal strength of the body consists. Neither are feet here to be
understood, that part only which makes the tract upon the ground, but which
as the foresaid part comprehends the thighs and arms also.

To conclude, the ten horned Beast, makes Edicts with a Babylonian mouth; to
wit, commanding the worshipping of Idols and Images, denouncing the penalty of
death and burning alive, against those that refuse, in like manner as that
Nebuchadnezar against the Jews refusing to worship the golden Image, which he
had erected to his Bell of sixty cubits long, Dan. Chap. 3. Notwithstanding I
would not that the interpretation of others should receive any prejudice by
this of mine; theirs I mean, who conceive it rather respects the natural
disposition of these three Beasts; the nature or cruelty of all which the
ten horned should express. Let every one use his own judgment.

And the Dragon gave him (he that was cast down who stood Verse. 4.
upon the Sea sand) his power (that is his strength or forces (...) or (...))
and his seat and great authority.

(...) with the Seventy signifies forces or an Army, out of the use, as it
seems of (...) of the Hebrews, whereby both, as well strength and power, as
also an army is signified: the Seventy, Exodus 14. 28. concerning the Army of
Pharaoh drowned do thus translate: The waters covered (...) all the Host of
Pharaoh: and 15. 4. (...) his Host has he cast into the Sea: and so in many
places; not only with them alone, but also with profane writers. From this
notion are (...), The Lord of Hosts. And Mat. 24. 29. (...) the powers or Hosts
of the heavens shall be shaken: likewise in the next verse. it is said, The Son
of man shall come in the clouds of the heaven (...). which in the Chapter
following is expounded (...) Verse. 31.
(...), in his glory, and with all the holy Angels with him. So in this place,
The Dragon (or Satan) gave to the ten horned Beast (...), that is, his
forces, or his Host. Now the forces of Satan are his Angels or Demons.
Devils, and Idols the receptacles of Demons.
Devils. To wit, these forces, he gave to this last Beast to be garnished and
adorned, together with his seat and great authority: that is, in one word,
that universal authority, Chap. 13.
from which lately he had fallen, being overcome and vanquished by Michael and
the holy Martyrs and Confessors of Christ. So that the Dragon or Satan, in this
Beast of the last state did in a certain manner recover his ancient dominion
which he had exercised in the state of the Red Dragon; but in a representation
so unlike the former, that the Seed of the woman in the Wilderness did for the
present little observe it. For now the Dragon did not behave himself like a
Dragon as before, that is, he professed not himself to be what he was, the
sworn enemy of the Christian profession: for if he had done this, the Seed of
the woman would presently have known him, and would have taken heed of him as
of a most cruel enemy; to wit, out of that inbred antipathy, which God even
from the beginning of the world had ordained should be between them: I will
put, says he, enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed, and
her seed. But surely when as he had transfigured himself into the Genesis 3.15
shape not of a Serpent, but of another Beast, having no affinity with a
Serpent; it was not so hard a matter for him to deceive the seed of the woman,
(that is, the Christian Church being joyful for the late victory, and now
secure from the Dragon) and to allure it to obey him. Which the false deceiver
did so cunningly and secretly under the mask of a Beast which he himself did
hate: that not till it was too late the Church did know her self to be
deceived by the old enemy, and to worship the Dragon under this mask. For who
would have suspected that under the representation of a Leopard, or of a
Panther (which is the same) there had lain hid the Dragon; that is, under the
shape of that Isidor. lib. 12. 2. (...) so called because he is the friend of
all other Beasts excepting the Dragon.
Beast, which, when as other Beasts being allured either by the beauty of the
skin, or the sweetnes^e of the smell, love to come near unto and look upon;
only the Dragon is said to abhor and to fly from? Or, that I may a little
more clearly unfold the matter; who would have judged that under an Empire
pretending the worship of Christian Religion, demolishing Idols; horrible
idolatry, and lately abolished heathenisme, should be mainly set up, and
promoted by laws and Edicts.

And I saw one of his heads (to wit the sixth) as it were, wounded Verse. 3.
to death (this came to pas^e in the battle with Michael and the holy Martyrs)
and his deadly wound was healed, to wit, by the medicine of this substituted
authority. Chap. 13.


Now that the seven headed Dragon. (I mean the Roman Empire upon which the
old Serpent did sit, that is to say, Rome heathen) was the Beast of the fixed
head; may as well appear out of that which is said afterward concerning those
heads, Chap. 17. that five were already fallen in John's time, one (which is the
sixth) governed the Roman State at that time; as also chiefly, because that
this Beast of the last course succeeded him next in the same seal. The Dragon,
I say, is said here to have given his seat to the Beast of the last course or
seventh head; therefore he was his last predecessor, or a Beast of the last
head save one. Neither let that move any man that yet under the course of the
sixth head, (this Beast) did notwithstanding appear seven headed there in the
vision. ^or although the heads kept their courses, not together, but in order
and one after another: yet notwithstanding the Beast with all the furniture of
his heads and horns, is presented under any State; to the end that one and the
same Roman kingdom might be every where signified, although sometime by some,
sometimes by other courses of governments.

But let us return to the text; where the Complutense edition, Irenaeus,
Aretas, the Siriaque Paraphrast lately set forth, and among the Latins
Primasius consenting does not allow the word (vidi I saw) but joyneth the words
(...) with the word (...), as it were to this purpose, The Dragon gave him his
power and his seat and great authority, and one of his heads wounded with a
mortal stroke, that it might be healed. I suspect that also the vulgar Latin
anciently read it so, because of that (de capitibus suis) for otherwise it
would seem it should have been said (de capitibus eius) But whether this
reading be to be preferred before the other, I will not rashly affirm; only
this; it seems to be so very ancient, that I marvel it is not marked by R.
Stephanus. But whatsoever it be, the reading received, if we interpret it
rightly and as the matter it self altogether requires, it will come plainly to
the same sense: I saw, says he, one of his heads (...), that is, as if it had
been wounded to death; to wit, not then, the Apostle looking on, but before it
rose out of the Sea in this form, (...) or in a preterpluperfect sense: even
as before, Chap. 5.6. he said he had seen in the midsts of the Elders and
Beasts a Lamb standing (...), that is, as it had Chap. 13.
been slain, not slain then while he looked on.

But that which is added concerning the curing of the wound, that either he saw
done while yet the Beast rose out of the Sea, or as soon as he rose thence.
Neither was this healing any later destiny (which notwithstanding is believed
of the most hitherto) but the very nativitie of the last Beast. There was a
passage from every of the other heads to the course of the succeeding head,
without a wound; but in the passage from the sixth to the last, the Beast fell
down with the deadly wound: from the healing whereof, I say, neither sooner nor
later, the ten horned Beast, or the Beast of the last head, took his
beginning, neither fetched he his original higher. Which that it is so the
whole order of the following narrat^on proves. For whatsoever evil the Beast
is mentioned to have committed, whatsoever worship and adoration is done unto
him by the inhabitants of the earth, all that is said to come to pass after
the curing of that wound. I saw, says he, one Verse. 3.
of his heads as it were wounded to death, and the wound of his death, or
deadly wound, was healed, and the whole earth wondering followed the Beast, to
wit now healed, and they worshipped the Dragon, etc. Then also there was given
unto him a mouth speaking great things Verse. 4.
and blasphemies, etc. And he opened his mouth against God, etc. Verse. 5.
All these things came to pass after the healing: but before this Verse. 6.
none of the heinous acts of the Beast are reported, no mention of any
subjection or honor conferred upon him by the Nations. Whatsoever before is
mentioned, pertains partly to the form of the Beast, partly to the occasion
and manner of his rising. And wherefore, I pray you, should we frame unto our
selves an Ante-christian Beast, whereof for sometime no actions are related, no
persecution mentioned? yea if we follow the reading of Iren^us and the
Complutense, leaving out the word vidi, I saw, there will be no place more left
for such interpretation.

And all the world wondered after the Beast. Verse. 3.


That is with full approbation and consent they took part with the Beast.

And they worshipped the Dragon which gave power unto the Beast, and they
worshipped the Beast, saying, who is like unto Verse. 4.
the Beast? who is able to make war with him?

That is then worshipped not the Beast simply as the Beast, but Chap. 13.
also as the substitute of the Dragon; and therefore they worshipped not the
Beast only, but under the mask of the Beast the Dragon himself also. For to
worship the Beast except as an Idolater the Dragons Vicegerent, in which sense
it is here spoken, had been no more impious, then to yield obedience to any
worldly authority. Doubtless the Beast does signify the kingdom. Now to
worship the Beast, out of the use of the Hebraisme and the East, is no other
thing, then to be subject to the same. Which that (...).
explication added to the word of worshipping does not obscurely show: they
worshipped, says he, the Beast, saying, who is like unto the Beast? who is
able to make war with him? As if he should have said, they did freely yield
themselves in obedience to the Beast, as to one who so far excelled in power,
that none was able to make resistance or to wage war with him. In which same
sense, Verse. 12. the earth it self and not alone the inhabitants thereof, is
said to have worshipped the Beast, that is, to have yielded to his dominion.
(...), says he, (...), etc. And ca^seth the Earth and them that dwell therein
to worship, etc. So in the blessing of Jacob, Genesis 27. 29. Let people serve
thee (...) and nations bow down to thee: be lord over thy brethren (...) and
let thy mothers son bow down to thee. Moreover ^oncerning this acception of
(...): See Genesis 37. 7. and 49. 8. in the blessing of Judah, also Esa. 45. 14.
But to be subject to the Beast according to his r^ligious constitution as he
resembles the seven headed Dragon, that truly is blasphemy and impious against
God. Whereupon who do so worship the Beast are said to worship the Dragon in
worshipping the Beast.

And there was given to him a mouth speaking great things and Verse. 5.
blasphemies, and power was given unto him to Fa^iendi of doing.
continue forty and two months.

Hitherto of the constitution and state of the Beast. Hereafter is expounded,
in what matters he exercised his power committed to him by the Dragon; that is
to say in two; in blasphemy against God, and persecution of the Saints. But the
whole description is taken out of the prophecy of Daniel, Chap. 7. where is
handled the same Roman Beast of the last State which is here spoken of. But
those things which are declared there by the Angel to Daniel more succinctly,
are here opened more at large to Chap. 1^.
John, as it were an explication being interposed.

There was given to him, says he, a mouth speaking great things; those words
(a mouth speaking great things) are out of Daniel; but here those great words
are expounded by blasphemies: by which name, as by and by shall be said, Idol
worship is signified, a matter indeed of the highest contumely against God.
Further he says, that the Beast should so blaspheme forti^ two months, to
wit, annall months; during the very same space of time, wherein the Gentiles
should trample the ou^er Court of the Temple, or the holy City; and not
without cause: for since that profanation of the Gentiles does altogether tend
to the same impiety, whereunto the blasphemy of the Beast does; each of them
may signify the dominion of the power of darkness and of the night, and
therefore measured not by years or days, according to the motion of the Sun,
but by months after the motion of the Moon, which rules the night. And
surely, unless the holy Ghost would have the specifying of the time to be
referred to the blasphemy; to what end has he brought it in in this place
presently after the mentioning of blasphemy? Therefore the months of the
Beast are not to be measured from the beginning of his cruelty or war against
the Saints, but of his blasphemy. So that if the word of doing should signify
^^^e certain act or state of the authority of the Beast (some such thing some
may imagine is meant here by the power of acting or doing) that should be
altogether referred to the act of blaspheming. But (...) seems rather to be
used in the signification of continuing or abiding, as otherwhere it is wont
being joined with words of time. For so Acts 15. 33. (...) after they had
tarried there a space: and 18. 23. (...), when he had spent some time, or some
while: and 20. 3. (...), there abode three months. 2 Cor. 11. 25. (...), a
night and a day I have been in the deep. Add Jam's 4. 13. To day or to morrow
we will go into such a city, (...) and continue there a year. Where Drusius
notes (...) to be so used, ^ccles 6. 14. and facere in the Latin tongue,
Seneca epist. 67. Quamvis pa^cissimos una fecerimus dies, although we tarried
but a few days. In tabella ^ar^orea.
^n the ma^ble table; Cum qua fecit annos 9. with whom he dwelt nine years.
Apud A senum 1. c. Is servus fugerat and annum a suga fecerat i. egerat,
manserat, finierat, transegerat. That servant Chap. 13.
fled and continued (that is) he dwelt, he abode, he ended, he spent, a year
in flight. These things being thus, why may not these words, (Bestia fecit
menses quadraginta du^s) have this construction, the Beast lived, remained,
continued blaspheming forty two months? The force of which speech those that
understood not, seem to have inserted into the text that word (...) war
which is extant in some coppies.

Now that which I said, that here by the name of blasphemy, as it were by way
of eminency, is signified Idolatry, or spiritual fornication: that may be
proved by a double or treble argument. First because Babylon the Metropolis of
this Beast, is termed the mother of harlots, and the Kings and inhabitants of
the Earth are said to play the harlots with her. But the Beast, which we have
in hand, is none other thing, but the generality of those Kings and
inhabitants. Secondly, it must be such a manner of blasphemy as may fall into
the courses of the next antecedent, yea rather of all the other heads; for the
names of Blasphemy were put upon them all, Verse. 1. Add hereunto that this
Beast of the last course is descended and compact of the renewing of the
impiety of his predecessor of the sixth course. Now what blasphemy can be given
to all these in common, except only idolatry? None at all.

The use of Scripture, expressing the idolatry of the ancient people by this
name does further confirm this. Which that it may be understood, it is to be
known, that there are three words in the Hebrew rendered in the acception of
blasphemy by the Greek interpreters, and the vulgar Latin, (...) and (...)
all which signify idolatry.

For the word (...), Ezekiel. 20. 27. yet in this your fathers have * blasphemed
me, when I had brought them into the land; for the (...)
which I lifted up my hand to give it to them. They saw every high hill and all
the thick trees, and they offered there their sacrifices, etc.

For the word (...) Esaias 65. 7. which have sacrificed upon the mountains and
upon the hills (...) have reproached me. In the English translation have
blasphemed me. And surely (...) answers the Greek (...) exactly as
Theodotion has translated, Prove. 14. 31. for each of them signifies to
reproach. Whereupon 2 Kings 19. 22. it is joined with (...) as a Synonima:
(...) whom haste thou reproached and blasphemed? as also Psalm. 44. 16. The
Septuagints are wont to render each of them Chap. 13.
by (...), which signify to reproach to provoke. Also the Chalde rendereth
each of them by their word (...) which also signifies to reproach. Furthermore
(that I may add this also) that it was usual not only with Esaias, but also
with the Jews of the later age, by the Nomenclatura.
name of blasphemy, to understand the worship of idols, may be gathered even
out of the Chalde Paraphrast where Psalm. 69. 10. for those words, the reproach
of them that reproached thee has fallen upon me, the Chalde has The rebukes
of the wicked who rebuke thee, while they make their idols partakers of thy
glory, have fallen upon me.

It remains concerning the word (...) which is the other of the two to which
in the seventie (...) answers. In Forster it is to vex with contumelies,
reproaches, cursing words. Jerome in the Psalms according to the Hebrew truth,
as often as it fa^leth out (and it happens five times) always translateth it
to blaspheme, with others it is to contemn, or contemptuously to provoke; so
that the most true signification may seem to be, with reproaches and
contumelies to provoke to wrath. By this word, I say, as well as by the former
that idolatry is signified, may appear out of Deuteronomy. 31. 20. When they shall
have eaten, says he, and filled themselves, they will turn unto other Gods
and serve them (...) Detrahentque mihi.
and will reproach me. So indeed is the vulgar in this place, in the sense of
blaspheming, though not in the word. For what other thing is it, to detract
from God, then to blaspheme him? But otherwhere he expresses the word also, as
Ierm. 23. 15. 17. from the Prophets of Jerusalem is pollution gone forth upon
all the land. They say (...) unto them that blaspheme me (^ow the speech is of
idolaters) the Lord has said, ye shall have peace and every one that walks
in the crookedness of his own heart.

To these if you please, may be added for illustration sake, that the
prophanations of Antiochus wherewith he polluted the Temple of God and his holy
things, are called (...), blasphemies, 1 Mac. 2. 6. and 2 Mac. 8. 4. And that
Kimchi interprets that of, Genesis 4. 26. Then the name of the Lord was
profaned by calling upon it in an acception not much different: thus, Then men
went astray after idol^ and the invocation upon the name of the Lord was
polluted and profaned. But how rightly I enquire not; yet so he has turned it
and took it.

Hereupon with the School Doctors there are three kinds of blasphemy: one when
that is attributed to God which agrees Chap. 12.
not unto him: Another, when that is taken from God which is due to him: A
third, when that is attributed to the creature which is appropriated to God, as
in idolatry. For even as an adulterous wife reproacheth her husband, so the
Church prostituting her self to idols, reproacheth God: since idolatry is
spiritual adultery.

And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name and
his tabernacle and them that dwell in heaven. Verse. 6.


What heretofore he had spoken generally concerning blasphemy, here he
specially prosecuteth, and distinguishes a threefold idolatry of the Beast.
For first he blasphemeth the name of God; to wit, in the worshipping of images,
ascribing the incommunicable name of God unto stocks and stones. Wisd. 14. 21.
or the name of God, that is, his person, (give me leave so to speak) which
then comes to pass, when any thing besides God himself is worshipped with
divine honor. Secondly, his tabernacle, that is, the humane nature of Christ,
wherein the Deity dwells (...). Pitched his Tabernacle.
personally. (...), and the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, Ioh. 1. 14
and Ioh. 2. 19. Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up. But
he spoke, says the Evangelist, of the temple of his body. And is not that also
to this purpose (a much more perfect tabernacle then that which was made with
hands) Hebr. 9. 11. This tabernacle I say the Beast blasphemeth, whiles he
believes the body of Christ is daily made of bread by the transubstantiating
Priest, and therefore adoreth the Bread instead of Christ the tabernacle of
God; yea he takes it for a sacrifice propitiatory for the living and the dead,
as it were crucifying Christ afresh. Also he blasphemeth the heavenly
inhabitants, that is, the Angels and Saints of heaven, whiles he calls the
Devils and Idols which he worshippeth by their names, what a reproach is this
against the blessed spirits? yea, and a contumely also against Christ their
Lord? in derogation of whose prerogative and glory, they are set up, even
against their wills as mediators and intercessours with God, patrones and
protectors of mortal men after the custom of the heathen. See those things
which we have written out of the divinity of the Gentiles concerning Devils
and their offices at the end of the sixth trumpet. And the Beast not content
with this alone, moreover disgraceth the blessed spirits with contumelious and
wicked fables and miracles; that thou may doubt whether he sin more Chap. 13.
by the worship which he would seem to give unto them, or by contumelious
fables.

Hitherto concerning the blasphemy; it follows concerning the other part of
the Beasts impiety, whereby he shows himself the Deputy of the red Dragon
by persecuting the Saints.

For moreover, it was given to him, says he, to make war with Verse. 7.
the Saints and to overcome them.

In Daniel thus: made war with the Saints and prevailed against Dan. 7.21.
them. But with what Saints? to wit, with the seed which happened to the woman
in the wilderness. Now although the whole reign of the Beast be a certain
war against the Saints, (according to that which was said in the beginning,
and the Dragon being wroth went, under the mask of this Beast, to make war
with the remnant of the seed of the woman which kept the commandments of God
and have the testimony of Jesus) notwithstanding another manner of war is
here meant, as appears, Verse. 10. where concerning the like recompense Talio.
at length to be rendered to the Beast, it is said, He that leads into
captivity, etc. He that kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword.
It is a war therefore that is waged with slaughter and blood. Add hereunto
that we yet handle the description not of the Ecclesiasti^all Beast but the
secular, with which a war of another kind will scarcely agree properly.

But this war the Beast did not wage presently at his beginning, but after he
had come to his perfection; 1. The 1200 year.
in the twelfth age from the birth of Christ. His first expedition fell heavy
upon the Albigenses and Waldenses and by what other name soever the true
worshippers of Christ were then called: of whom there was such a slaughter,
that through France alone, if P. Perionius in his History of that War make a
right account, there were slain at the hand of ten hundred thousand men. For
this cruelty extended not only to burning men alive, loss of their goods,
banishments, and other punishments of that kind; but, that nothing might be
wanting in so cruel a persecution to the true name of a war, whole armies
were mustered against them, and with those expeditions bearing the Cross,
first appointed against the Saracens, now turned against Christians of the
uncorrupted and pure Religion, who refused to worship the Beast, they rag^d
with incredible fury and cruelty about seventy years. Histories of this
slaughter Chap. 13.
are ordinary, to which I refer the Reader* Notwithstanding I am disposed to
recite the words of Thuanus an excellent Historian but of the other side;
Against the Waldenses, (says he, in the Preface of the History of his time)
when as exquisite punishments did little prevail, and the evil was
exasperated by the remedy which was unseasonably applied* and the number of
them daily increased, whole armies at length were mustered; neither was the
war fought against them of less weight, then that which ours before waged
against the Saracens; of Which this was the issue, that they were rather
beaten, put to flight, every where spoiled of their goods and dignities, and
scattered here and there, then being convicted of error, brought to
repentance. Therefore they who had defended themselves with arms in the
beginning, afterward being conquered by arms, fled for refuge into our
country of Province, and the Alps bor^ring upon France, and found in those
places refuges for their ^^ and doctrine: A part departed into Calabria, and
there continued long, even till the Popedom of Pius 4. A part passed over into
Germany and settled their dwelling among the Boh^mians, in Polonia and Livonia:
others turning Westward foundrefuge in Britain.

But truly in this war, this also happens worthy of memory, that the
Albigenses themselves being conquered upon a time at Morellum with a great
overthrow by Simon Monfort, Captain of the soldiers Cruce signatorum.
of the Cross, seemed to have made use of this Prophecy concerning the Beast
his overcomming of the Saints for an Argument of comfort and constancy. For
when the Bishop of Tolosse hindering the slaughter, admonished those Out of the
Epi^^^es of the Prelates of France who ^^llowed the camp of the ouldiers of
the Cross at the latter end of the ^on^inuation of the holy War. Edit.
Basi^. (...) 1560 page (...)*
which happily yet remaining abode in their Tents, by sending a religious man
unto them, that being convinced by so great a scourge of God being angry and as
it were giving sentence against them, now at length leaving their madness they
would be converted to the faith which they call Catholic: they retorting the
sentence, that they were the vanquished people of Christ, as it were with this
shield they frustrated the Bishops purpose, and all of them to the last man
valiantly died, being slain by the hand of the soldiers returning back upon
them.

After this war upon the Waldenses and Albigenses, cruelly did the Beast rage
diverse ways, as well against other remnants of them and in other places, as
also against others their companions Chap. 13.
of the same pure Religion in what place soever: till at length nevertheless
after the year 1500. whole Kingdoms, Principalities, Commonwealths, the
Churches being reformed, fell away from the dominion of the Beast to the party
of the Saints. Against whom afterward war is waged, and continues at this
day, neither shall it be ended, until the ruin of the Beast.

Now if any do diligently consider the whole series of this slaughter
compr^hended in some few more then four hundred and fifty years, and cast
the account of the number slain: either I am deceived or he will see and
wonder that persecution of the Beast not only to have equalled, but also
exceeded those ten heathen Persecutions when as yet the Dragon in his own
name bare sway. We heretofore showed the number of the Albigenses and Waldenses
that were slain estimated to ten hundred thousand men. From thence to the
reformation of the Church, no man has set down the account of them that have
been cut off partly by fire, partly by sword, partly by other torments. When
as not withstanding it is known to be no small number. From the beginning of
the Jesuits to the year 1580. that is, in little more the thirty years,
Baldwinus de Antichrist^ notes almost Cap. 6. n. 41.
nine hundred thousand Orthodoxe Christians to have been put to death, and
that alone by the hand of the Executioner, the Duke ^ Alva that cruel Champion
of the Sea of Rome Fra. Jun. and Tilenus ad Bellar. lib. 3. de Pont. Romans cap.
7.
gloried that he had been the author of the slaughter of 36000. souls in
Belgium only within a few years. Dou^a^^ de Antich. page 4.50.
Vergerius witnesses who best knew it, that the Inquisition, as they call it
of haereticall pravitie, in scarce thirty years space consumed one hundred and
fifty thousand Christians by sundry manners of torments. De visibili Monarch.
lib. 8. dein. 34.
Sanders confesses that many Lollards and Sacramentaries throughout all Europe
were burned; who notwithstanding, ^aith he, were not put to death by the Pope
and Bishops, but by Civil Magistrates; even so, as it was prophesied it was to
come to pass. For of the Secular Beast it is said, that he should make war
with the Saints, and overcome them: and Chap. 17. verse. 14. Of the te^^s Kings
that they shall make war with the Lamb and with his elect and faithful; but
of the Ecclesiastical Beast, not that he himself shall kill with the Sword
but cause that whosoever will Verse. 15.
not worship the Image of the Beast, be slai^e with the Sword by the Chap. 13.
same Image of the Beast, as a little after we shall see. It follows.

And power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and Verse. 7.
nations.

But what is this power? Is it of subduing the Saints? as if it should extend
it self so far as the Roman Dominion reaches. For happily the speech is
not of the largeness of Dominion but of Persecution. But if any would rather
take it otherwise, the sense will be, that the authority of the Beast shall be
so great, that no kindred, Tongue or Nation can resist his impiety. Now here
he means not every several man (since there are many found in every age who
kept their covenant with the Lamb) but entire kindreds, tongues, and nations,
that is, Commonwealths; of which, it is most true, that there was none found
whom the Beast had not holden in obedience to his impiety for many ages: so
that those Christians truly so called, which dwelt dispersed here and there
throughout the Provinces of the Beast, alone for that time made the undefiled
Virgin Church; as who had (it is a grief to think of it) no City,
Commonwealth, much less any Principality, or Kingdom of their profession.
But here it is to be remembered that the form of the Beast is that impiety
which succeeded the Dragon by communion whereof those many Kingdoms (as we
have said) of the Roman Empire become one Beast. They therefore that took this
upon them, are said to yield to the authority of the Beast. Which all kindreds,
tongues, and nations did.

And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not
written in the Book of life of the Lamb slain from Verse. ^.
the foundation of the world.

If any man have an ear, let him hear.

Now least any one being bewitched by so universal and Catholic Verse. 9.
consent to the laws of the Beast, should presume it to be piously and well
done, and that he may follow the example of so many kindreds, nations, and
people, without danger; or els^ being discouraged and weakened with the
grievousnesse of the persecution, break his covenant made with the Lamb, and
yield to worship the Beast: the holy Ghost denouneeth in what state and account
they are with God, who shall yield obedience to this moster of impiety, by a
very fearful Elogie: to wit, that Chap. 13.
they are not registered in the Catalogue of that Lamb slain, but being
deprived of the Kingdom of God, shall perish eternally.

To this dreadful Admonition is joined an Apostrophe to move attention: If any
man, says he, have an ear, let him hear: as Verse. 9.
if he should say, O ye godly Christians, listen attentively, and deeply ponder
what was even now uttered of the so unhappy condition of the followers of the
Beast; neither is it a matter of light moment, but even such as whereon the
maine point of your salvation depends. For so ought the words to be referred
to the former, and not to the words following; in like manner as it is evident
the same are referred in the Epistles to the Churches twice or thrice. See
Chap. 2.29. Chap 3. verse. 6.13.22.

He that leads into captivity, shall go into captivity: he that Verse. 10.
kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword.

A consolatorie Epiphonema of the godly against whom, refusing to obey him, the
Beast should cruelly rage with war, imprisonment, and most cruel
punishments: to wit, that it shall come to pass hereafter that God, their just
avenger, shall exact punishment of so many slaughters, and so great cruelties,
and render the like to the outrageous Monster.

And here is, says he, the patience and the faith of the Saints.

That is, the Saints being confident of the equity of the supreme Verse. 10.
Divine power and of his Justice in disposing humane affairs, shall be little
troubled or dejected in their minds at those things which they should suffer;
but courageously resisting the Beast, constantly and patiently expect revenge
certainly and abundantly to come from God.

So hitherto we have handled the Secular Beast; now the Apostle proceeds to
the description of the other Beast seen by him, to wit, the Ecclesiastical
Beast, or rather Pseudopropheticall which exercises the government of the
former Beast and his blasphemies.

Concerning the other two horned Beast or the false Prophet.
The two horned Beast or fal^e Prophet is the Bishop of Rome Verse. 11, etc.
with his Clergy; having horns indeed like a Lamb, of whose authority of
binding and loosing he braggeth that he has a deputation, Chap. 13.
but speaking Idolatry and slaughtering of the Saints as the Dragon. For this
Beast was the author and founder of that ten horned Beast, successor to the
Dragon for tyranny and blasphemies under the mask of Christian profession,
whose authority likewise as he exercises, in the function of a high Priest;
so also the Pope himself takes upon him to be head and Monarch of the same, no
less then of his Clergy (with whom severally he makes up the
Pseudopropheticall Beast) making that seventh and last head of the Roman
Commonwealth, in the City standing upon seven hills: who doubtless by signs
and miracles, which to do or to feign was given to him with his Clergy;
especially by the thunderbo^t of Excommunication as of Divine revenge he
brought by little and little to that pass, that the Kings lately risen up out
of the dissipated Empire of the Caesar's in the Roman Commonwealth; with one
consent subjecting their necks to him and to Rome now otherwise without Empire,
they put on the Image of the old and now demolished heathen Empire. Which so
happily prospered with him, that the Roman Beast the Caesarean head being
wounded, not only revived plainly in that Image, but even the Image it self
at the pleasure of the false Prophet punished with the Secular Sword, even as
the false Prophet with the Spiritual, any whosoever should be disobedient.

And I saw, says he, another Beast coming up out of the earth Verse. 11.
and he had two horns like a Lamb, but he spoke a^ a Dragon.

He saw another, to wit, the Pseudopropheticall or Pseudo Ecclesiastical
Beast, which, as we said, the Pope of Rome with his Clergy make up. For the
Pope by himself and alone, though he may be termed a false Prophet, yet he
makes not up the Beast, except his Clergy be joined with him: since the Beast
does signify a company of men composed of a certain order of members like as
a Beast has; not one man alone. But he sees him coming up out of the earth:
that is not as that former, out of the Sea or dominions of the world, that is
to say issuing from a more noble pedigree; but sprung from the lowest
condition: or rather begotten, not by the assembly of armies or people
contending by war, as that Secular Beast; but springing up secretly and
without noise, like herbs and plants growing out of the earth. For the Sea,
a^it may signify a company of people in one Dominion^ Chap. 13.
so in war, an Army. And he had two horns lik^ a L^^^^: that is, that
twofold power of binding and loosing committed to Peter and the rest of the
Apostles by Christ, and in that point indeed like the Lamb, in as much as he
said. As my Father has sent John 20. 21.
me, so send I you. Surely this authoriti^ the Beast pretends, and in that he
carries himself as Christ's Vicar: but he speaks as the Dragon, intruth the
red Dragon whom Michael a little before had cast down and deprived of the
Roman Empire: whiles that, as he, he patronizeth the worship of false Gods and
Idols by his authority and Decrees, and in like manner causes the true and
pure worshippers of that s^aine L^^^^e to be rooted out by persecutions and
slaughters.

For he exercises all the power of the former Beast before him.

Verse. 12.
That fiduciarie power of the Dragon, committed upon trust to the former Beast,
and consisting in Idol worship^ the two horned Beast exercises, as High
Priest; who is to have the ^hie^^ oversight in the execution of religiousacts.
In the presence of the Beast, is the same as with him or in his behalf; as if
he should say, this two horned Beast, is Chaplain to the tenhorned Beast; so
that it ought not to be wondered at if he speak like the Dragon^ For so the
Hebrew (...) to which (...) answers, sometime is aequivalent to the dative
case of the person to whom something is acquired, or for whose sake it is done;
as ^o^ that which is said, ^ Sam. 2. 18. Samu^l was (...) minis^ring before the
Lord, it is Chap. 3. 1. (...) minis^ring to the Lord. And particularly, does
the Pope of Ro^^ the head of the Beast exercise the supreme regiment of that
Beast also.

Moreover he causes, that the earth and they that dwell therein. do worship
the first Beast, whose deadly wound was ^^al^d.

That is, whatsoever at all that first Beast be, whatsoever obedience is given
to his impi^ti^, he acknowledges this High Priest the author thereof: as by
whose means it is brought to pass, that the earth and the inhabitants thereof
wors^ipped that first Beast, which being healed of the mortal wound rose out of
the Sea. By what way and by what means and crafty fetches he compassed it, that
he d^^lar^th particularly (...).
in that which follows.

For, says he, ^^ ^^th great wonders, so th^^ he maketh^fire come Verse. 13.
(...) from heaven on the earth in the sight of men. And deceives them that
dwell on the earth, by reason of those Chap. 12.
miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the Beast, Verse. 14.
saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an Image of the
Beast which had the wound by a sword, and he lived.

For he does (...). for the Hebrew van and thence (...) in the Scripture is a
conjunction not only Copulative, but also disjunctive, rational, causall,
ordinative, explanative, as the reason of the sense requires; which once to
have showed let it suffic^. Now to the matter. The Pseudopropheticall or
Pontificiall Beast, was the author unto the nations of establishing that ten
horned Beast whereby the power of the Dragon revived. For by wonders and
miracles he persuaded them, to consent with him in framing the Image of the
Beast slain in the sixth head. Which at length being formed according to his
pleasure, that wound received in the state of the Dragon, seemed to be cured,
and the Dragon-worshipping Beast to be renewed, by the bringing in of new
Idolatry and tyranny like the former. For the Roman Beast of the last head,
is the Image of the Beast slain in the sixth head, He said, says he, to them
that dwell on the earth, that they should ^ake Verse. 14.
an Image of the Beast which had the wound by a sword: that is, his Image in
such condition as it was, when he received the wound. (...) and he lived, that
is, and so at length the Beast revived or was renewed. For these words do not
belong to the description of the Beast whose Image was to be expressed, as it
were the words of the false Prophet speaking; but of the Angel reporting or
bringing in the event of that counsel: to wit, so that slain Beast revived.
And it is as if he had more at large said after this manner. (...), ^^ying, to
them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an Image of the Beast which
was wounded with the sword; (and they did so) and he revived. As 2 King. 20. 7.
Esaias said, Take a ^^mpe of dry figs; and they took and laid it on the boil,
(...) and ^e r^o^vered, that is to say, Ezechias or the boil.

Doubtle^^e this is that which was said in the description of that Secular
Beast, that the Dragon gave him his power and great authority, and thereupon
his mortal wound recovered; that is, the Dragon imprinted the form of his
worship and authority upon a Beast of another religion, whiles he placed his
Angels or Chap. 13.
Demons.
Devils, not indeed as in time past, by those titles by which they professed
themselves enemies of our Lord Christ, but under color of Christian Religion,
to be worshipped by the names of Saints and good Angels; yea and (O
blasphemy!) of Christ himself. For he who worshippeth Idols, by what name
soever he calls them, worshippeth Devils.

Yea and that nothing might be wanting to the full Image of the slain Beast,
that is, of the Dragon; the Pope himself also caused himself to be honored
with divine honors and authority peculiar to God, as certain Emperors
worshippers of the Dragon had done: so that he as God sits in the Temple of
God 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
showing himself that he is God, as Paul says. Which although John or the
Angel revealing the history of the Beast unto him, does not here specially
touch, yet under the general name of an Image, he would have it comprehended a
part of that similitude wherein the slain Beast is resembled.

And hitherto of the framing of the image; now of the wonders used for
persuasion thereof. He does, says he, great wonders so that he even makes
fire come down from heaven on the earth. I should here not unwillingly fall
into the opinion of Graserus, if it could be warranted by the writings of the
Hebrews; that this bringing fire from Heaven should be spoken by a proverbiall
hyperbole, (...).
for amplification of that which went before, as if it had been said, He does
great wonders, yea even such and so great, that they may seem not far
different from the miracles of Eliah himself, by which he did vindicate the
true worship of God. For the Jews commonly, says Graserus, do attribute so
much to that miracle of Eliah, that they use it proverbially for all wonderful
works wherein the glory of God is more co^spicuous.

But if any man be not pleased here with, let him follow the Complutense
reading witnessed also by many other coppies ((...) he does great wonders, and
causes that fire comes down out of heaven upon the earth) and so, as if the
sum of those things which are more largely set forth afterward were
propounded in these words; let him interpret it of a double kind of means,
which the false Prophet should use, to induce the inhabitants of the Christian
world, to frame anew the Image of the Beast slain in his sixth head; that is to
say, by provision of miracles, and excommunication. By the one Chap. 13.
of which he might draw the nations unto error, by the other he might break
the contumacy and pride of the stubborn. For both these, and to what end they
tend, are handled in order in the words following. Concerning the wonders, in
these words: And Verse. 14.
he deceives them that dwell on the earth by the wonders which he had power to
do, saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make the Image of
the Beast which was wounded with the sword; and the words that follow to the
16. verse. But concerning Verse. 16.
excommunication in these: He causes all to receive a mark in their right
hand, or in their foreheads, and that no man might buy Verse. 17.
or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the Beast, or the number
of his name. A Synechdochicall speech, whereby the censure of the
Ecclesiastical Anath^ma is meant, by the forbidding of commerce with others.
And that truly is not unaptly resembled to fire from heaven, or lightening. For
what is it I pray you, in the name of God to deliver any one over to that
eternal fire, other then to call for fire from heaven? especially since that
punishment of the wicked proceeding from God, is again and again in this
book set forth by the lake of fire and brimstone, or Asphaltites where Sodom
and Gomorrha were burned with fire rained down from heaven. Yea the Apostle
Peter teaches, 2 Pet. 2. 6. that God has ordained that burning, (...), that
is by Ellipsis.
defect of the former substantive usual in the Hebrew (...), an example of
their punishment that after should live ungodly: And I^de delivering the
meaning of Peter here more plainly (...), that is, to bear the likeness or
type of eternal fire, or to resemble the pain of eternal fire. For that the
words of Jude are so to be interpreted, or in a like sense the comparing of the
words of both the Apostles together, and the nature of the thing it self, will
persuade the considerate Reader.

Upon which occasion give me leave to add this also; because it was wonderful
memorable, and a sorrowful ^men of the Jews now rejected of God, which
Josephus reports befell them in De bello Iudaicol. 5. c. 3. according to the
distinction of (...).
the very beginning of that fatal war, the overthrow being received at the
passage of Jordan from the country of Jericho: to wit, when some were by the
enemy thrown into the river, others not being able to withstand their force
leapt into it of their own accord, the lake Asphaltites was filled with the
dead bodies Chap. 13.
tumbled down with the stream of the river, by which accident, says he, the
affliction though in it self most grievous, yet to the Jews seemed to exceed
itself.

But as touching the event of the prophecy; concerning the wonders, it is
notorious, that that universal Idolatry which has reigned in the kingdom of
the Beast for about 1200 years, as well that first begotten consisting in the
worship of Saints departed, Relics and Angels, as the worshipping of Images
in the next place, and in conclusion that last b^asphemy of the breaden God, at
first was commended to poor Christians, afterward they were persuaded to it
and confirmed in it by an abundant company of wonders, to wit, by cures and
miraculous visions, restraining of Devils at least in show, and other effects
to be admired, and that not of one kind. All which the two horned Beast or the
Pope of Rome with his guard of false prophets, is said to have done, as far
forth as they themselves have ^eigned, or being seigned by others, they have
approved by their authority, or those things which in truth were the works and
delusions of Devils, they have obtruded for true and divine miracles to seduce
the Christian world. Doubtless this is that very same thing which the Apostle
Paul to the Thessalonians foretold, That the coming of the man of Sin shall be
after the working of Satan, with all power 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.
and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness.

Now examples of the Popes lightening or Anathema, whereby he has vindicated
his authority in determining and commanding, they surely are so obvious to
every one, that my labor of citing them out of the Annals of the Church here
may be altogether spared. One thing very notable I will call to remembrance,
and which so nearly touches the Image, the framing whereof we now deal with,
that it alone may suffice to confirm the truth of this prophecy.

To wit, in that controversy with the Greeks concerning the Iconomachica.
oppugning of Images which arose about the year 720. and was agitated with
great heat and persecution of Idolaters for 120 years, it can scarcely be told
into what danger that Image of the slain Dragon, as then yet rude and
unperfect, nor as yet complete was brought. Neither the worshipping of Images
alone as it is commonly believed, but also of Saints departed and relics
Chap. 13.
was strongly opposed in that controversy, Leo Isa^rious (says Theophanes
hist. Miscol. lib. 21. cap. 23.) did wickedly err not only For his is the
History called Miscella from the 17. book which is falsely spread abroad in the
name of Paulu^ Diaconus, translated out of Greek by Anasiasius the Library
Keeper, he flourished under Nicephorus and Ee^ the (...) Se^ Baron. an^ 7.17.
20. and 813. 8, 9, 10.
about the relative adoration of venorable Images ((...)) but also about the
intercessions of the most chaste mather of God, and of all Saints, whose
relics that most wicked va^let as his masters the A^^bians (that is the
Muhamedans) detested. The same he says of Constantine, whom the Patrons of
Idols called in disgrace Copronymus, in the same book the last Chapter. This
most pernicious, says he; and (...), fierce man, etc. first indeed d^ parted
from God, and his un^^ filed Mother and all Saints. So this base Gr^cian
Idolater does revile the godly Emperor. Again, lib. 22. cap 42. Every where
he resisted in writing and without writing the intercessions of the holy Virgin
and Mother of God and of all the Saints as unprofitable, by which all succor
stoweth unto us, exsting out their relics and making them odious: and
wheresoever there was report of any notable relic to remain for the health
of souls and bodies, or as the custom is; to be honored of the godly
disposed, presently he threatened death against such as evil doers: or else
proscriptions, banishments, torments; but there-lique most acceptable to God;
as a certain treasure kept by the owners, was taken away to be made odious
afterward. Let the Reader see the 54. Chapter. The same Chap. 48. Wheresoever
any one distressed or gri^ving should pray the accustomed prayer of Christians;
Mother of God help^, or should be taken celebrating the vigils, etc. he was
condemned as the Emperors enemy, and pronounced notworthy to be remembered.
Yea, it appears that the worship of Saints was opposed yet under Theophilus
the last of the five Emperors opp^gners: of Images by that Hymn of Theodorus,
wherein the Church of Constantinople was wont every year Apud. Baron. a^. 842.
28.
(oh wickedness and grief!) to celebrate the memory of Idolatry having at
last gotten the victory. There it is in the ^^ode: (...) that is, That savage
Le^ius; together with John (he was Patriarch of Constantinople under
Theophilus) having forsaken pie^ie; did wickedly affirm that the holy relics
of Saints and their Images were a^ no hand to be worshipped.

What therefore herein does the Pope of Rome? he succoureth the Image of the
Beast incredibly in danger of ruin: and when Chap. 13.
he could do no good by letters and threatenings, he betaketh himself to his
thundering craft. He strikes Leo of Isaura the ringleader of Image-oppugners
with Anathema, he absolveth his subjects in Italy from the Oath of Allegiance,
and as much as lay in him, he bereaved him of his Exarchatship of Ravenna, and
the rest of his Dominion in that place. By which act, as he gave courage to the
Idolatrous faction in the East, so he seasonably skared the Kings of the West,
that they should not undertake the like. With the same lightening he ordained
that the Albigenses, their defenders and receivers should be blasted, and
surely the Synod of Lateran of 280 Bishops under Alexander the third did blast
them. The same lightening also does the great Council of Lateran under
Innocent decree to be called down from heaven upon the Tom. 4. Conc. Edit. Romans
an. 1612. page 44, 45.
Lords temporal, who being required and admonished by the Church neglected to
free their lands of them: to wit, that they should be excommunicate by the
Metropolitans and other comprovinciall Bishops: and if they refused to give
satisfaction, their vassals should be absolved from their fealty by the Pope,
and their lands should be exposed to be taken by Catholics.

And he had power to give life unto the Image of the Beast, that Verse. 15.
the Image of the Beast should both speak, and cause, that as many as would
not worship the Image of the Beast, should be killed.

Except the Image had been endued with a vital faculty, the slain Beast had
not revived by the making of him. Neither indeed was the Beast worshipping the
Dragon, which it ought to represent, an idle Beast; but such as was wont
stoutly to bestirre himself, and violently to fly upon his adversaries.
Therefore such it behooved that Image to be, in which he should revive again.
Wherefore it is said the false Prophet had power not only to allure the
Christian people to make his Image in the Beast of the last course: but also to
be^^w life upon him, whereby he might both by Edicts command (...) equal
manner those things which should be needful to defend his dignity, and punish
the disobedient and such as refuse to be subject to his religious Constitutions
with the Sword or Secular death. And surely all that power which the Image, or
Secular Idolatrous Beast has, of raging against the Saints, he exercises but
as delivered him by the Pseudopropheticall Beast. For so the matter is handled,
that th^^e whom the Pse^dopropheticall Chap. 13.
Beast shall condemn of heresy (as they call it) or of wronging the Image, he
gives power to the Secular Beast to kill them. That is to say, he has no such
power of himself, but depending upon the Ecclesiastical judgment. And this is
that which they call Delivery over to the Secular power in the books of Martyrs
so often mentioned. Doubtless the Pseudopropheticall Beast, as indeed he would
seem, does not himself put any to death, but yet those who are condemned by
his sentence, he delivers over to the Secular power as it were to the
executioner to be put to death.

And he causes both small and great, rich and poor, free and Verse. 16.
bond (that is of whatsoever degree, state or condition) to receive a mark in
their right hand, or in their foreheads.

And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark or Verse. 17.
the name of the Beast, or the number of his name.

What the forbidding of buying and selling means (that I may begin with the
(...).
last first) I have already showed; to wit, to be branded with the Popes
excommunication, into the which who so they be that do fall, are restrained
from company and commerce with other citizens. So that Canon of the Council of
Lateran Tom. 4. Council. edit. Romans page 37.
set forth under Alexander, which was mentioned a little before, against the
Waldenses and Albigenses, plainly forbids under Anathema, That no man
presume to keep or maintain them in his house or land, or traffic with
them. And the Synod of Turonensis.
Tours in France under the same Pope with the like threatening forbids, where
the followers of that heresy (as they call it) shall be known to be, that no
man presume to give them harbor in their land or afford them protection; and
that no communion be had with them in selling and buying. And what? does not
the false Prophet here also speak like the Dragon? For the Dragon Dioclesian
set forth the like Edict, That no man should sell or secretly give any thing to
the Christians except first they should burn incense to the Gods of whom Beda
thus sings in the Hymn of Julian the Martyr.

Non illis emendi quidquam, aut vendendi copia:
Nec ipsam haurire aquam dabatur licentia,
Chap. 13.
A^^equam thurificarent
Detestandis idolis.
They had not leave to buy or sell, Or use commerce where they dwelt:
Or drink cold water out of well,
Such affliction they felt:
Before the Idols detestable,
Their incense offering smelt.
Perhaps therefore the holy Ghost used this Synecdochicall speech, to intimate,
that although that Papal Anathema; vaunteth it self of a separation from the
internal and invisible communion with Christ, yet in truth it has no further
force then to exclude from the external and visible commerce with other
Citizens.

Now that which is said of the Mark; the mark of the Beast, Verse. 16.
is properly of his Name; and therefore it is said, the Mark or Name of the
Beast, and in the Chapter following, the Mark of his Name. For he alludeth to
the old custom, by which servants were wont to be marked with the names of
their Masters, soldiers with the names of their Commanders, the first
especially in their forehead, the other in their hands. And therefore by like
reason the followers of the Lamb also in the Chapter following, that they may
be (...). Cap. 141.
contrary to the followers of the Beast, are written in their forehead with the
names of the Lamb and his Father; with the same meaning of the type in both,
to show who is his Lord, and for whom each company fights: those professing
themselves servants of the Beast, and his Image, these of Christ and his Father.

As touching the Number, it is rather to be judged an Appendix of the Name or
Mark of the Beast, then the mark it self; and in very deed, it is the number,
not so much of the name of the Beast as of the Beast himself; as also by and by
it is called. Now it is therefore only called the Number of the Name, because
it is contained in letters of the name of the Beast brought into number, God so
disposing it. Neither yet does it follow, that because the Number does so
nearly agree with the Name, therefore the number of the Beast is to be
confounded with the Name: for the reason of the opposition requires, that,
even as in the company of the Lamb the mark of the Name, is distinguished
from the Chap. 13.
number of the company, even so also it be done in the company of the Beast.
Add that the Mark of the Name and the Number are altogether of a different
signification, I say, if we direct the interpretation according to the A^logie
of other places. For the one, that is, the mark of the Name, does show to
which Lord they have addicted themselves who bear it. The other, that is, the
Number shows from what stock and from whence they derive their pedigree, who
are marked therewith. As the number of twelve, and the number made out of the
multiplication of twelve virgins, as in the structure and dimensions of now
Jerusalem, is a symbol of the Apostolical lineage and offspring.

But that we may stay no longer upon these general things: let us see at
length what may be that Name of the Beast, wherein also his Number noted by the
holy Ghost is contained. It is indeed that which even then when the Revelation
was newly written some supposed, that (...) in so many men's mouths. For by
this name, after the division of the Empire and the ten Kings risen in the
Provinces thereof, and not before, the Roman false Prophet with the rest of
the inhabitants of the West for distinction sake was called; and that even of
those, to whom the Revelation was written, the seven Churches of Asia. For the
Greeks and the other Eastern people, with whom the name abode in that division
of the Empire, would have themselves only called Romans; they termed us with
our Pope, and under him the Bishops, Kings, and Rulers, Latins, by a certain
fatal instinct. And this very name the letters thereof being subducted after
the manner of the Greeks and Hebrews, makes up the number noted by the holy
Ghost, but a mystical number; wherein is showed of what progeny the Beast is,
and how falsely he braggeth himself to be a successor of the company of the
Apostles, when as in truth he is of the ^ragon.

For the number of the Name of the Beast is 666. which if thou strive to derive
out of the number of twelve, the symbol of the Apostolic lineage, thou shall
bestow thy labor in vain: for from thence howsoever thou s^^lt multiply it,
thou shall never bring it to 666: but surely from the number of Six, which is
the number of that red Dragon, to wit, of the Beast of the (...) head, very
^asily; for the whole sum how great soever it be, is compact out of the
numbers of six, by unites, tennes, and hundreds: as if the whole seed of that
Dragon had diff^sed it self through the body of this last Beast and all his
members.

Here is wisdom, says the Spirit, let him that has understanding Verse. 18.
count the number of the Beast, for it is the number of a man: and his number
is 666.

Which surely that it ought to be accounted after the same manner as I have
said, I seem to gather out of the Analogy of the company of virgins whose
number 144 contrary to the Beast, is altogether Apostolical, begotten of
twelve multiplied by it self. For the reason of contraries is contrary. And
there indeed both, as well the Name written, as the Number of the company
written upon, the holy Ghost has expressed; but here he has left the Name to
be conjectured out of the Number.

That therefore I may comprehend the matter in few words, to receive the Mark
of the Name of the Beast; is to subject himself to his authority, and to
acknowledge him to be his Lord; but to receive the Number, is to embrace his
impiety, derived unto him from the Dragon, to wit, the Idolatry of the
Latins. Whence that happily will not be unworthy consideration: although no
man can receive the mark of the Name of the Beast, or be subject to his
authority, but together also he must receive his Number, that is, he must
needs be partaker of his impiety: yet it may be, that one may admit the Number
or impiety of the Beast, but yet refuse the Mark or Name. That which now long
since is true of the Greeks, who howsoever they embrace the same form of
impiety, derived from the Dragon, or Idolatry of the Latins, and the same
established at the first in that second Nicene Council by the authority of
the Latin Pope who earnestly labored even there also to set up the Image of
the slain Dragon: yet notwithstanding to be subject to the Latin Pope, or to
bear his Name as in times past (before they departed asunder a Schism being
made) they have refused now for about 700 years.

Concerning the company of 144000 sealed virgins of the Lamb.
THE Company of virgins, the followers of the Lamb standing At the 14. Chapter.
on mount Sion, and the same select company out of the Gentiles put in the
place of Israel, of which mention is made at Chap. 14.
the beginning of the seventh Seal (for it is described as there we observed
in a double vision, for to join the prophecy of the Seals with the prophecy
of the Little book) does signify the Church which in the midest of the Papacy
continued faithful to the Lamb, and a Virgin under Babylon: the native and
not degenerate progeny of the twelve Apostles Apostolically multiplied; and
which likewise alone was taught after the example of the heavenly Quire purely
and rightly to honor the Lamb and his Father with the Evangelicall song.
Which none of the followers of the Beast, as ill hap was theirs, could learn.
Also a people not addicted as the followers of the Beast to any one Sea, but
accompanying the Lamb whither soever he was to go. And to conclude, often and
sharply admonishing the worshippers of the Beast concerning the Evangelicall
worship prescribed, and Gods severitie manifested against Idolaters; and
warning all at length to withdraw themselves with speed from commerce
therewith, except they will perish eternally. This is the sum of the vision.
Now let us open the text according to the rule thereof.

And I looked, and lo a Lamb stood on mount Sion, and with Verse. 1.
him an hundred forty and four thousand.

By the number an hundred forty and four thousand, or twelve times twelve
thousand it appears, that the same company is here described which was sealed
at the beginning of the seventh Cap. 7. v. 4.
seal; to wit, that legitimat^ not degenerate offspring of the Apostles,
bearing this number of twelve as the Ensign of their pedigree. Let the Reader
remember what we have there noted.

Mount Sion also was the throne of the Kingdom of David and the same is called
the City of David because having taken it from the Jebusites, he had built it
without with new walls, within with a royal tower, streets, and courts.
Therefore here parabolically used, it will signify that part of the earth
which Christ, having vanquished the Dragon, had made the habitation of his
Church, that is, the Christian world. In this world the Virgin Church has her
mansion, and even there she keeps her faith and undefiled chastity with the
Lamb, when the Beast seemed to have polluted and trodden all under foot with
adulteries and slaughters, and to have left nothing sound and untainted. Chap.
14.


Having the name of the Lamb, and the name of his Father written in their
foreheads.

These words, the name of the Lamb, are ill left out in some copies, which the
Vulgar, Primasius, Andreas, Aretas, the Complutense Edition, and the Syriacke
interpreter do acknowledge; so that it is the true reading, is not to be
doubted: but that the matter it self does require that it be so read, will
evidently appear in the course of the interpretation. For the allusion is (as
we have noted in the history of the Beast) to the ancient custom, whereby as
well servants as soldiers were known in times past by their Masters and
Generals name or brand marked upon them; and the servants indeed on their
foreheads especially: (as witnesses Rodiginus, lib. 5.33.) but soldiers in
their hands, Vegetius lib. 2.5. Soldiers marked with enduring brands, and
inserted into the muster rolls are w^nt to swear. Aetius also, lib. 8. 12.
They call them brands which are marked upon the face or other part of the body,
such as are in the hands of soldiers. But of the marking of soldiers Lipsius
instructs us more fully, lib. 1. de milit: Rom Dialog. 9. (The Romans) did
stamp their young soldiers when they were first entered under their
Principibus.
Generals and did mark them in the skin: these were true brands and
imprinted in the hands of the soldiers, they were marked with the name of the
Imperatoris.
Emperor. Hence Austin calls it the Kings mark, and Chrysostom, (...).
This is derived either from this that in ^lmes past the name of the Emperor.
General was wont to be written upon the shields, spears and Standards, and
by that example in the skin; or from consecrations: for those whom they
consecrated or entered to God they burned them with marks. To return to the
purpose therefore: they bear the name of the Lamb and his Father in their
foreheads, which break not their faith whereby they have bound themselves in
Baptism to the Lamb as their General and Lord, and to his Father, and do
not backslide to the worship and pompes of Satan and his Angels, which once
they renounced. For so anciently (that I may in this place bring in that for a
further light to the things to be spoken of) the short form of renunciation in
Baptism was conceived in most Churches, See constil. Apost l. 7 c 4^. Cytil.
Hi^ros. Catech. mystagog 1. Cst^ysost. Hom. 21. ad popul Antio^h.
(...), I renounce Satan and all his works, and his pompes, and all his
worship. In many, and those most ancient Chap. 14.
Liturgies it is added Constit. Apost. Ibid.
(...), and his Angels. In others Tertu^. de spectac. cap. 4. Ambr. He^^am.
lib. 1. cap. 4.
And all his inventions, and all under him. And others in the same sense Author
constit. Apost. Ibid. Ambros. de its qui myster. initiant. c. 2. Hieron. ad cap.
And his world. All which may be conveniently expressed in the Apocaliptique
style: (...), I renounce the Dragon and all his power, that is, as Cyrillus
Alexandrinus does declare the form of Baptism. I forsake the rabble of
Devils, I rei^ct all their pomp and worship. The Church of Rome was a little
more brief here then others, For with it there is mention only of Satan his
pompes and works, where under the name of Satan, as it were the Prince it
understands his Angels also, and under the name of pompes and 5. Mat. lib. 7.
cont. Iul.
works it means Idolatrous worship and all the furniture thereof.

Now that the Sacrament of Baptism, by which we solemnly profess says to the
Lamb^ and his Father, and by which we take upon us their name and are called
Christians, is the seal of the Lord, the Fathers every where declare and that
from the Primitive Church. Hence is that of Origin, Let us bear the immor^all
Hom 8. Indivers places of the Gospel.
Lavour in our foreheads. When the Devils shall see it they will tremble.
Augustine also calls it In Joan. tract.
The royal mark, the Imperial mark, the mark of the Redeemer. The same
moreover ^each 6. secundi. contra Petilianum ultimo. primi contra Cr^sconi. um
30. and al^bi. See him also 6. de Baptis. c. 1. Epist. 23. 50. 200.
that this seal is abolished, and as it were blotted out by Idolatry and
Superstition. Tertulli^^us de spectac. Cap. 4. Treating concerning Baptism
under the name of a S^ale: When, says he, we entering into the water, profess
the Christian faith in the words of the rule thereof, we make protestation with
our mouth that we renounce the Devil, and his po^pe, and his Angels. What will
be the chief and principal thing wherein the Devil and his pompes and Angels
are reckoned, but Idolatry? And Chap. 24. Do we not forsake and make void the
Seal by making void the witnessing thereof? And of the same kind is that lib.
Idololat. Cap. 19. There is no agreement between the mark of Christ and the
mark of the Devil. Likewise Austin Tract. 7. in Joan He has lost the mark
of Christ, he has received the mark of the Devil. Christ will have no
partner, he alone will have possession of what he has bought. With these
Isidor. Origin. lib. 18. cap. ^9. de spectaculor^ execratione. He denies God
which dares to do such things, and he is become a rev^lter from the Christian
faith which again coveteth that which he has heretofore (...) in his
Baptism, Chap. 14.
that is the Devil, and his pompes, and works.

Therefore all they which shall have received the mark of the Beast, have
refused Christ's, and his Fathers, they have forsaken it, made it void, and are
accounted as if they never had received it. Only those 14,000. which had not
fled over to the Camps of the Beast, but did closely stick to the Lamb, do
show the Lords Mark as yet in their foreheads.

One thing remains yet to be remembered; to wit that, that although the sealed
in both places, as well here as Chap. 7. be the same; yet the reason of the
seal is not the same in both; and that in regard of the different end of
sealing. For there the matter of protection was handled; here of service and
fealty. But it is not necessary that therefore we seek another seal there,
plainly different from the Sacrament of Baptism. For Baptism performs both.
For, besides that seal which is of our profession, God adds moreover
another, to wit, the seal of his grace, whereby he acknowledges those for his
who are baptized, and takes them into his protection. This therefore, except I
be dece^ved, is handled in the former vision, of the sealed, the other in the
present. And it favors this interpretation that Clemens Alexandrinus in
Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 17. calls Baptism (...), a perfect safeguard: Also
that Nazaanzen orat. sunct. Baptis. says that the same is called a Seal,
(...), because it is a preservation. To conclude that of Basil. Exhort ad
Baptis: Except the favor of the Lord be sealed upon thee, except the ^ngel do
take knowledge of the mark upon thee, how shall he fight for thee, or defend
thee from thine enemies? Where Nicetas the Scholiast, Because being thereby
marked we are acknowledged to what Lord we belong, and are kept safe from
snares. Now let us proceed to the re^^.

And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, Verse. 2.
and as the voice of a great thunder: and the voice which I heard was as of
harpers harping with their harpes.

And they sung as it were a new song before the throne and before Verse. 3.
the four Beasts and the Elders, etc.

He declares indeed the voice and the song of the Celestial Angels,
glorifying the Father and the Lamb; after which manner they are read to have
done, when first the Lamb had undertaken Chap. 5.11.
to unseale the book of prophesies. And having respect to Chap. 14.
these Angels, anon he says, verse. 6. And I saw another Angel fly in the
midst of heaven, that is, another besides one of those singers. For he has
made m^ntion of no Angel before this, except we shall say, those musicians to
have been a Quire of Angels.

Now the voice of many waters, and like thunder, signifies, none other thing
then the voice of a very great multitude: such as was wont to be heard in the
Temple while it flourished, of the Levites the singers, singing praises to God
with the voice and musical instruments. By reason of the multitude of whom,
together with the acclamation of the people, a sound was made like the roaring
of the Sea or the noise of Thunder. It is no conjecture, but a manifest thing;
because that in the tryumphant Song, Chap 19. 6. where the parable is all one,
it is clearly expres^ed. I heard, says he, as it were the voice of a great
multitude (mark a great multitude) and as the voice of many waters, and as the
voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Halleluia. Hence in Ezechiel, Chap. 43.
2. where in the Hebrew it is simply, His voice (that is, of the God of Israel)
as it were the voice of many waters, the Septuagints paraphrastically render
it, (...), the voice of his host as it were the voice of many doubling. The
Chalde likewise, The voice of those that praise his name, as the voice of many
waters. Add that out of the same Prophet concerning the Cherubins, Chap. 1.
24. I heard, says he, the noise of their wings like the noise of great waters,
as the voice of the Almighty, the voice of speech, as the noise of an host. To
conclude from this nation it is, that that which in Daniel is the voice of a
multitude, by John is put the voice of many waters in the description of the
person of the Son of God in the beginning of the Revelation expressed out of
Daniel. For that Dan. 10.6.
which Daniel has, his feet like in color to pollished brass, and the voice
of his words, like the voice of a multitute: that John declares, Revel. 1. 15.
his feet like unto fine brass, as in a burning furnace, and his voice as the
sound of many waters.

Furthermore, the song is a new one, such as is sung to God after Christ is
exhibited to the world. Wherein indeed to him that sits upon the throne, and
to the Lamb, together and alone, redemption, power, riches, wisdom,
strength, honor, glory, and blessing, are religiously and Evangelically
ascribed. The form of this song is extant, Chap. 5. and that by the title of a
new Chap. 14.
Song: that it can scarce be doubted but that respect is here had Cap. 5.9.
thereto, since no where else in this Book mention is made of a new Song. The
Lamb, say they, which was slain is worthy, Cap. 5.12.
(that is, as before is a little more plainly said, by the Elders and Beasts,
because that he was slain) to receive power, riches, wisdom, Verse. 13.
and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. Therefore to him that
sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb, be blessing and honor, and glory,
and strength, for ever and ever, Amen. This is the short form of the new song,
which if God shall at any time make me more fully to understand, I will happily
more largely explain it, for it is deeply settled in my mind, that the whole
mystery of Evangelicall worship is in it contained.

As concerning the present purpose, it seems to be called new, either as it
were another or diverse from that which was ^ung before Christ was sent (for
under him according to that saying of the Apostle, Old things are passed away
and behold all ^ Cor. 5. 17.
things are become new:) or for the new benefit at his coming granted to none
of the former ages of the world, but only to these last times. For which
benefit indeed God afterward (...).
is honored by thankesgiving, as well by Angels, as by men. And to confirm
this reason of the name, as well that of Esaias will serve, Chap. 42. 9. 10. I
declare new things, sing to the Lord a new song: the which title also of a new
song diverse times occurreth in the Psalms, not other wise to be understood, as
it seems, then of that whereby the Divine power is praised for some new
benefit especially of delivery (according to that Psalm 40. verse. 2. 3. He
brought me up out of an horrible pit, etc. and has put a new song in my mouth)
or at least because according to the custom of such songs, it is sung with
extraordinary gladness and joy. That both these agree with the Evangelicall
song I need not strive to show in many words: the matter is plain.

And no man could learn that song, but the one hundred forty and Verse. 3.
four thousand which are bought from the earth.

In the whole Christian world there is no man that has skill to sing the song
of the Angels, as long as the Beast bare sway, but those which be of the number
of the one hundred forty and four thousand servants of the Lamb: for these
only without any spot of Idolatry, do glorify the Father and the Lamb upon
the earth, as the blessed Angels in heaven do; even the very same Chap. 14.
thing which in the Lords Prayer that it may be done of all, the Church
incessantly beggeth of the Father. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in
heaven. So that a platform or absolute example of the lawful and perfect
worshipping of the Divine power cannot be taken from any, but from the
inhabitants of heaven.

These are they which are not de^iled with women, for they are Verse. 4.
Virgins.

That is, they converse not with unchaste women or harlots. But what manner of
women are these? Surely not such as are commonly called so, but Cities,
according to the usual phrase of the Prophets; and those indeed of Christian
name, but addicted to idols whose Queen is that great Babylon called the
Mother Chap. 17. 5.
of Harlots, with whom the Kings and inhabitants of the Earth commit
fornication. With such, those who are of the company of the Lamb have not
conversed, that is, they have not defiled themselves with Idolatrous incest.
For they are Virgins, that is, free from all spot of Idolatry. For the reason
of analogy does altogether require that these be called Virgins in the same
sense, wherein the rest, the Kings and people are said to play the Harlots with
Babylon. Furthermore, since that Babylon is called the Mother of Harlots, it
follows, that her daughters, the other Cities, be likewise petty harlots,
with whom the inhabitants subject to each of them may be defiled with
spiritual fornication.

These are they which follow the Lamb whither so ever he Verse. 4.
goes.

That is, they faithfully cleave to him, and forsake him not upon any occasion;
the Metaphor being drawn from them which never depart from the side of some
one, but accompany him in every place. Or thus: in what City, Region, or
Territory so^ver the Lamb shall set up his tent, thither they follow him:
contrary wise other men, who although they be called Christians, yet except the
Lamb shall abide at Rome the seat of Peter, they will not seek and follow him
any other where.

These are bought among men, being the first fruits ((...)) unto Verse. 4.
God and to the Lamb.

That is, redeemed out of the other profane multitude, that they should be a
sacred peculiar to God and the Lamb, like the first fruits. Neither do (...)
or primitiae signify only first Chap. 14.
fruits, as it is commonly conceived, but also whatsoever being exempt from
profane uses is consecrated to God; to wit, the very same that in Hebrew (...)
is, by which name, the Scripture comprehends, as well the tenths themselves,
as also whatsoever oblations there were, except the burnt offerings. Whereupon
Chrysostom calls the tithes which Abraham paid to Melchisedech, (...).
Irenaeus in like manner, affirms that the primitias first fruits of his
creature which he says even yet In Epist. ad Heb. hom. 12. see also the same
Hom. 35. in Genesis
God requires for himself in the Church, ought to be no less then a tenth
part: since Christ, says he, has not dissolved the natural things of the
Law, but has enlarged them; and since Christians have not a less, but a
greater hope then the Jews. See him advers. haeres. lib. 4. cap. 27. and 34.
according to the Edition of Fev^rden. What say you, that Calimachus also in the
Hymn against Delus, calls the tithes accustomed to be presented to Apollo,
(...), that is, primitias decimiferas, the first fruits amounting to the tenth
part? out of all which it may appear, that the word (...) signifies not an
oblation only of firstlings, which in Hebrew is (...) but also any other; and
that thereupon the reason of the name is grounded, because Gods portion is to
be given to him, before any thing be spent for our own use. Furthermore
because the word primitiae, first fruits, does not comprehend a definition of
how great or small a part; hence it comes to pass that the ancient
Christians, although they conceived their oblations ought to be no less then a
tenth part; yet not withstanding they called their (...), or oblations of
fruits; (...) or primitias, first fruits rather then tithes; as it were by a
name of liberty not of bondage. These things although for the most part making
nothing for my purpose, yet I was desirous to observe them, that I might if I
could gratify them, who among us do sometimes employ their endeavor in
finding out of the Fathers and Councels, the antiquity and right of paying
tithes in the Christian Church. In the mean time (that I may return to that
from which I have a little digressed) we must confess that a more strict
signification of first fruits does very well agree to this place; to wit, that
the company of Virgins be called first fruits, in respect of the company of
Palme-bearers which at length will follow them in a larger number. Let the
judgment hereof be free Chap. 14.
to the Reader.

And in their mo^th was found no lie (so the vulgar, Syrian, Verse. 5.
Complutense, Aretas, and Andreas in the Palatine Coppie, in others guile) for
they are without fault.

There is no lie found. Such to wit as is found in the mouth of the followers
of the Beast or of all the Idolaters Christians by name; who pretend to worship
the Lamb and his Father, but indeed give the honor proper to the Divine
Majesty, unto creatures: Surely, every Idolater is a liar, when as he
worshippeth for God that which is not God. To which belongs that of the
Apostle to the Romans 1. 25. They changed the truth of God into a lie, while
they worshipped and served the creature (...) as the Creator. Whereupon Idols
are called lies, as Amos 2. 4. Their lies have caused them to err, or have
seduced them (the vulgar has it Idola, idols) after the which their fathers
have walked. Likewise Esaias 28. 15. We have made a lie our refuge. R. Sal. (...)
Also Ierem. 16. 19. The Gentiles shall come from the ends of the earth, and
shall say, Surely our fathers have inherited (the Chalde col^erunt have
worshipped) a lie, vanity wherein there is no profit. Shall a man make Gods
unto himself, and they are no Gods? Hence also, Revel. 21. 8. Idolaters and
liars, and likewise, Verse. 27. framers of abomination and a lie, seem to be
put (...) or as it were Synonimaes. Furthermore, since the Idolatry of any men
whosoever is a lie, then surely theirs, who in the mean time feign themselves
worshippers of the true Deity is most properly guile, or a deceitful lie: So
that if we mark the hypocrisy of the followers of the Beast, in opposition of
whom that sealed company of the Lamb is described; the reading which has
guile will seem to be preferred before the other which has a lie; although in
respect of the matter it self there be not much difference. In the mean while,
for the more full understanding of this place, let the Reader compare that of
Zephan. 3. 13. Surely very like unto this: The remnant of Israel shall not do
iniquity, nor speak a lie, neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in
their mouth.

And I saw another Angel fly (...) in the midst of Verse. 6.
heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to proach to the inhabitants of the
earth and to every nation, and kindred, and t^ngus, Chap. 14.
and people.

The description of the Company being ended, the History of things done, in
that state of the Church, as well of the Company, by the conduct of the Lamb
their Captain, as of the Lamb himself, against the traitors and enemies,
follows. The order of these is twofold; first of a threefold admonition to
the followers of the Beast, represented by so many loud voices of Angels;
secondly, of revenge, by a parable of Harvest and Vintage. The first of the
monitory Angels is that, which he here calls Another: another indeed, as I
have said, in respect of those musical Angels a little before mentioned, of
the number of which this Evangelist was not. And here we are to call to
remembrance (what before I showed) that the Angels in such like visions, do
represent them over whom they have the government; and that which is done in
common or by the works of both, that is said to come to pass, the Angels being
Authors, as it were Guides and Conductors of the thing done. And hence
immediately it may be imagined, that the Angel flying so loftily (if so be that
also ought to be esteemed as any part of the parable) is the Ruler not of any
estate of men whatsoever, but of a more eminent rank, and is to use such for
the declaring of his Gospel. Further, that Gospel is called (...) or eternal;
and that as I guess not so much in respect of the future time, as the time
past; as it were, that which was promised (...), that is, a secul^, or from the
beginning of the world; that is to say, that The seed of the woman was sometime
to break the head of the Serpent, that is, the kingdom of the Devil, was to
be destroyed by the coming of Christ, and the kingdom of God to be
established. In which sense also the Apostle says, that that was promised by
God (...) before the world began, Tit. 1. 2. So therefore (...) shall be the
same that (...), and (...) which in Hebrew should be (...) Evangelium antiq^^m
the ancient Gospel: even as (...) the old wast places, Esaias 58. 12. (...) old
paths, I^r. 6. 16. and (...) the ancient mountains, paths, waste places, Deuteronomy.
33. 15.

Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him, for Verse. 7.
the time of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and
earth, and the Sea, and the fountains of water. Chap. 14.


The first Angel calling to remembrance that now the time of the kingdom of God
is at hand when judgment is to be executed upon Idols and Idolaters; and so
the Devils now being cast down and despoyled of the Roman throne, is begun
already to be put in execution: therefore he exhorts the nations, kindreds,
tongues and people, who from that time were become Christians, that being
mindful hereof, they worship that only true God the Creator, as he is
declared in the Gospel, and that they take heed of Idols: Pear, says he, God,
that is, reverence and give him glory, even the glory of adoration and
religious worship; as in the words following it is expounded. Because the time
of his judgment is come, that is, wherein Christ by his Cross has spoiled
powers and principalities, and has by his Apostles and Evangelists declared to
the nations, which through so many ages he had suffered to walk in their own
ways, that they should be converted from their Idols: if not, then at his
return from heaven, they should be punished with eternal death. Wherefore
then should Christians who profess faith in Jesus Christ this Judge, and
triumpher over Devils return as it were by a back door to worship Idols and
Devils again.

Happily the time of judgment might be more strictly taken here; to wit, for
the judgment of God before showed forth upon the Dragon and his servants,
whereby heathenisme was overthrown: but I had rather extend it more largely,
and take it ^niversally, for the kingdom of Christ begun and published in the
last times, in which Idols are not any more to be suffered; according to that
of our Savior in the Gospel of John, Chap. 1^. 31. Now is the judgment of
this world, now shall the Prince of this world be cast out. See also Chap. 16.
11. From which judgment indeed Paul the Apostle also (even as the Angel here)
brought an argument to dissuade the Pagan Athenians from the worshipping of
Idols, Acts 17. 30, 31. God, says he, not regarding the times of ignorance
hitherto, now commands all men every where, to repent, because he has
appointed a day in the which he will judge the world righteously, by that man
whom he has ordained; having given assurance thereof unto all men openly, in
that he has raised him from the dead. Whereunto the same Apostles warning to
the Lycaonians is very like, Chap. 14. 15. We declare unto you, says he, that
you should be converted from these vain things, unto the living Chap. 14.
God, which made heaven and earth, and the Sea, and all things that are
therein. And who in times past suffered all nations (to wit, his judgment not
as yet being made manifest to them) to walk in their own ways. There is to be
supplied, but now he publishes his judgment to all. That which the Angel here
has expressed, saying, the time of his judgment is come.

But thou will say when, and where, and by what Ministers I pray you did this
Angel execute his declaration? Certain preambles thereof were given out, when
first superstition began to grow in the Church, at the monuments and about the
relics of the Martyrs, as appears out of the History of Vigilantius, with
whom, withstanding such like superstition, many others, even of the Bishops of
that time were of opinion, witness Ierom his adversary who undeservedly with
bitter words inveighed against him for this cause. But this denunciation
appears to be most manifestly fulfilled, from the year of our Lord 720, in
the Greek and Eastern Churches, where this Evangelizing Angel did indeed fly
(...) in the midst of heaven, that is, in a lofty and high place: forasmuch as
he used Ministers of his Gospel, not of a base and vulgar condition of men, but
of chiefest authority in the Christian world; as for example the Emperors of
Constantinople, Leo Is^urus, Constantine Iconomachus, Leo Armenius, Michael
Balbus, and Theophilus, who all of them, especially the first, did most
severely make protestation by their Edicts and Decrees, for the presenting of
religious worship to one God the Creator, against the worship of the creature,
not only that which was used in the worshipping of Images, but also about
Saints, and their relics. Let the Reader resort to the testimonies which I
cited out of Theophanes concerning this matter, when I treated of the two
horned Beast. Moreover, by the authority of the second, a Council consisting
of 338 Bishops was assembled at Constantinople, and by their unanimous consent,
the adoration of Images was accused and condemned of impiety. Thou will say
Reader that the sentence of the Synod if it be not troublesome to thee to read
it, is the self same Sermon of this Angel, and grounded upon the same
foundation with it, according to our interpretation. For when it happened by
the fraud of some there, which had indeed agreed with the rest in condemning of
Images, Chap. 14.
and yet favored the Invocation of Saints (neither indeed was the like consent
passed against this, as was against that superstition) that two Cannons, one
concerning the worshipping of Mary the blessed Mother of God, the other
concerning the honoring of the other Saints in heaven with religious
Invocation were in the beginning put amongst the Decrees of the Council: when
Constantine the Emperor with the Fathers of the ^ounder judgment had observed
them, they accused them forthwith of error, and in testimony of their
judgment, caused them to be rased and blotted out of the book. Of which act,
if there be any doubt, I have witness; First, the Author of the Confutation of
this Constantinopolitan definition, inserted in the Acts of the second Council
of Nice. Who when he had taken upon him to confute the first Edition thereof,
to those Canons thus he said: (...). After this their Edition, says he, they
also renounced the Oblation of intercessions acceptable to God, blotting this
out of this their writing. Moreover the Acts of Stephen the Monk Apud Surium,
tom. 6. nov. 28.
the Pseudomartyr; to whom, when the Bishops which were sent by the Emperor to
confute him began to recite the Decree of the Council: he forthwith excepted
against the Title of the Council, Holy: that it ought not to be called Holy,
because it had proscribed holy things. Have you not, says he, rent the sacred
implements adorned with Images? have you not cast away in contempt this
Epithet Saint from all the righteous, from all the Apostles, from the
Prophets, from the Martyrs, and godly men? For it is decreed by you, o ye
worthy men, that when any should repair to any of these, and ask of him
whether he should go: he should answer, to the Apostles, to the forty
Martyrs; or if he should be demanded whence he came; in like manner he should
answer out of the Temple of Theodor the Martyr, out of the Temple of George the
Martyr. Are not these your Doctrines? How comes it then to pass therefore that
you who have proscribed Holy things, have assembled an holy Council? These
things Stephen himself. Let us further hear the relater of the Acts of that
Council (who lived also at the same time) exclaiming against the same men
tragically for the taking away of the worship of the Mother of God? How, o
Christ, should I not admire thy lenity, which no words can express? How shall
I be able to express the depth of thy bo^^ti^, which surpasses Chap. 14.
the power of any speech? for these most audacious tongues have so far burst
out, that they have not doubted to utter that fearful and wicked thing also;
to wit, that that same Virgin Mother of God, is not useful after her death,
and void^ of all profit, neither can be any help or safeguard at all. To these
I will yet produce Cedrenus as a witness. He reports that Constanti^^
published an universal law (without doubt by the Sentence of the Council, the
Acts whereof except the definition only are at this day wanting) that none of
the servants of God should be any more called A^^^ Holy; but, that their
relics which were found should be had in contempt: (least they should be
superstitiously worshipped, O Cedre^us, although they were true relics; but
if false, that they should be cast out of the Churches) and that the
intercession of them is not required; for it profits nothing. That wicked
one, says he, added that no one should implore the intercession ^o not of
Mary. Now let me demand of the Reader, whether he think not that it is clear
by these testimonies, that some what was Acted in that Council against the
worship of Saints and relics? I have stayed some what the longer in proving
this, because it is not alike known to all as that concerning Images.

But we are not here at an end yet. First, that cavil is to be taken away
concerning the Epithet Saint given away by Sentence from the Just, as it were
by way of disgrace and contumely. For it is manifest by the very definition of
the Synod (which even to this day is extant in the Acts of the second Nicene
Council) that the Apostles and the righteous are honored by the title of
Sanctity, every where by those Fathers. Therefore they are not to be thought
to have simply forbidden that which they themselves practiced. But, as it may
be conjectured, the name (...) (for of this only the speech is) in the opinion
of that age seemed to imply the honor of intercession. Whereupon, that by any
means provision might be made against superstition, in common speech of
Churches the use thereof, especially when they went thither to pray was
forbidden. For (...) seems to be derived from (...), by which word is
signified (...), ^he act of worshipping or the thing worthy of worship and
adoration. Wherefore Hesychiu^ deriveth both (...), and (...) from (...), I
adore, I worship. Yea, moreover, which manifestly conduces to the worship of
the dead, it is of a common original with (...), Chap. 14.
to sacrifice to the dead, to celebrate their funerals, and with (...), a
celebrating of funerals, Soul Masses.
sacrifices for the dead. Furthermore (that I may add this also by the good
leave of the Reader, and without the aspersion of babbling) it might come to
pass, that the name (...) Saint, to the common people of the Graecians (for we
may observe examples amongst us of like use of words in a wrong sense by the
vulgar sometimes) should seem to sound though falsely (...), him by whom our
prayers are offered to God, that is, (...), an Usher and Intercessour with God:
as Gregory Nazian, calls Christ the Lord; according to that of the Apostle to
the Ephesians 2. 1^. (...), Through him we have access unto the Father.

Whatsoever it may be; this appears out of the testimonies already brought,
that by the use of this very word, it was at that time esteemed that that
superstition toward the Saints departed this life, was nourished and
cherished. Which, that it might by all means and policy be hindered, the use
thereof was forbidden: not indeed simply and universally, which our Adversaries
falsely allege; but only in naming of Temples, which were dedicated to the
memory of the Apostles and Martyrs. For the taking away of that error, as it
seems, whereby it was believed either that those were places of approaching
to God by the Intercession of the Martyrs, or consecrated to the worshipping of
them whose names they did bear. Therefore in stead of the surname (...), it
seemed fit to put in place thereof that of Apostles and Martyrs, indeed no
less honorable: whether with full consideration and advise, it is his part to
judge, who has well and thoroughly looked into all the circumstances of that
time, and reasons of the action. In the mean time it nothing detracteth from
the virginity or purity of the Church, if happily sometimes in such things
which belong to the way and manner of the doing of a thing, it shall not so
wisely discern. For it is no matter of necessity that she who is chaste,
perpetually either do, or speak wisely. For the like reason in a manner, the
word Priest for Evangelicall Elders, Sacrifice for the Sacrament of the
Eucharist (not to name other the like) are commanded not to be used in very
many Reformed Churches. And not indeed altogether rashly, except (as it seems
to some) the name Ministers instead Chap. 14.
thereof be not a name fit enough: by which although they who exercise a sacred
Function may be called rightly and by warrant of the Scripture; yet thereby are
not Elders distinguished from Deacons. Should we not therefore rather have
called them by the Apostolic name Elders if we had been unwilling to call
them Priests? But these things are for another place.

Furthermore, the Cry of this Angel sounded, not only in the East, but also in
the West, though the Pope of Rome stormed at it; not indeed with a full mouth
as there, yet with a public and solemn voice. First, in the year 790, in
the Synod of Franckford under Charles the Great, of almost 3^0 Bishops, besides
Abbots and others. Where the worship and adoration of Images, together with the
second Council of Nice, which had established it, and which Pope Hadrian
governed and approved by his Legates, are condemned. And again in the Synod of
Paris, in the In Catal. test. ver. edit. 1608. page 1123.
year 825, assembled by the commandment of Lewis: wherein it is at large
declared as well by Divine authority, as by the judgment of the Fathers, that
the adoration of Images is a wicked and ungodly thing, and that the Synod of
Nice was to be rejected as guilty of such superstition. Add hereunto the
Commentary sent from Charles the Great to Pope Hadrian the maintainer of Idols,
after that Council of Franckford; that here also thou may acknowledge the
Angel fled in the height of heaven. And so far have we perceived the
exhortation of the first Angel. Now let us hearken to the cry of the second.

The second Angel Proclaims that Rome, was turned from the City of God into
Babylon, for her filthiness and multitude of idolatries, with which, having
despised the exhortation of the first Angel, she had as well defiled her self,
as also became the Author and President to all Nations in her compass that
they should do^ the same which She did; for which cause, becoming now
thoroughly liable by reason of Her impenitency to the Divine judgment ordained
against all idolaters, She was not to be any longer born withal, but by an
irrevocable Decree to be destroyed and cut off; and that the preparation to
that destruction is incontinently and continually made even from this cry.

And the company of the Al^^igenses and Waldenses appear indeed to be the
Ministers of this cry, partly by word, partly by deed; as being the first of
all mortal men who proclaimed the Chap. 14.
Church of Rome for her Idolatry and mystical whoredom, to be the
Apocaliptique Babylon; and they the same also began her ruin; for as much as
she being so detected, forthwith a great multitude of men began to detest her,
and privately through all the Provinces of her dominions to revolt from her;
besides, her authority was thenceforth daily more and more weakened, and then
the ruin began to be, which shall not stay, until at length it be come to the
burning of the City it self. In a word, from the cry of this Angel, there
began incontinently as it were a mustering of holy Soldiers for the
overthrow of Babylon.

Babylon is fallen, is fallen. Verse. 8.


As if he should say, now the foundations of the ruin of Babylon are laid. For
from this time the preparation of waging war against her shall be undertaken.
He imitateth Esaias, Chap. 21.9. Who in the very same words, and not different
occasion of things, related the destruction of that old Babylon, not then come
to pass; but as here the foundation of things being laid, he foretold that it
should most certainly come to pass. For as much as Esaias uttered his prophecy
as the Chronology teaches, at the same time, wherein the Medes being about at
length to destroy Babylon gained their own liberty, having built the City
Ec^atane under their new King Deioces, they laid the foundation of that
Kingdom which proved fatal both to Ninus and to Babylon.

-- Because she had made all nations drink of the wine of the poison of her
fornication.

With the wine of the poison of her fornication, that is, besotted them with
philters, being poisoned win^. For (...) here, has not the force of anger or
wrath, but as it is used by the Seventy, poison; that is, they would have it
aequivalent to the Hebrew word (...) which one while signifies anger, another
while poison. Hence it is that in the Seventy Deuteronomy. 32. 33. (...), that is,
their wine is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel venom of Aspes. Likewise,
Job 20. 16. (...), that is, he shall suck the poison of Dragons, the Serpents
tongue shall s^ay him. Add Psalm. 58. (...), their poison is like the poison
of a Serpent. See also, if thou please, Deuteronomy. 32.24. Job 6.4. Yea and
wheresoever in the Old Testament the signification of poison hapeneth, thou
shall see it expressed Chap. 14.
not above once only, otherwise then either with this, or the word (...).

But there is a twofold mention made, in the Revelation (...) or of such like
poisoned wine: (...), of the wine of the poison of her fornication, whereby, as
I said, the amorous poison or philter is signified (according to which the same
is called, Chap. 18.23. by an accustomed word, for that purpose (...), or
veneficium, poisoning or sorcerie) and (...), of the wine of the poison of
wrath; which is a potion of those that are to suffer torment. For truly by the
former has the holy Ghost expressed the allurement of spiritual fornication;
out of the custom of harlots provoking love by their philters: this latter
has allusion to the manner of the Jews, who were accustomed to give to those
who were to be punished by death, a cup of wine, with which there was mixed
Myrrh or some other drugge of that kind, that they might bring them into a
senseless stupiditie. For that cause they are said to have offered to our
Savior while he was hanging on the Cross such a like potion: but he refused
to drink it, Matthew. 27. 34. They gave him, says he, wine (...) mingled with
gall, that is, (...). For (...) and (...) are equivalent. Now the Evangelist by
the word (...) has set ^orth in the general a buter species, according to the
use of the Seventy (with whom even Wormwood is named (...)) this Mark sets
down to have been Myrrh: And Mark. 15.23.
they gave unto him to drink, says he, wine mingled with Myrrh. Myrrh indeed
in Hebrew (...) in Syriaque (...) has its name from extreme bitterness. And
hence it comes to pass, as it seems, that the Prophets in setting ^orth
destructions so often use the parable of the Cup: as which was wont to be
offered to them that were to die, according to the custom of the Nation. Thus
was the cry of the second Angel, whom presently the third follows. What new
admonition he yet further adds, let us attentively hear.

The third Angel going further then the former two, admonishes the worshipp^rs
of the Beast; how fearful a danger hangs over their heads, if they yet
proceed in following him: and therefore he persuades them, that casting off
all delay, they thenceforth withdraw themselves from his ^ellowship, and by
this means they may provide for their own salvation; for they Chap. 14.
cannot be saved, who hereafter shall stick^ to him. Which cry surely, the most
famous of all the rest, was accomplished most happily in the former age by the
means of Luther, and his companions and successors. Upon which that notable
reformation of the Church which we see, has followed; men not now singlely, as
came to pass at the voice of the foregoing Angel, but by whole Provinces and
Tribes at once, every where shaking off the yoke of the Beast for the
vindication and reformation of Religion.

And the third Angel, says he, followed them (that is the former two) saying
with a loud voice, if any man shall worship the Verse. 9.
Beast and his Image, and shall receive his mark^ in his forehead, he shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God ((...)) which is mingled with pure wine
in the Cup of his w^ath, and shall be tormented with fir^ and brimstone in the
presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb; and the smoke
of their torment does ascend up for ever and ever, and they have no rest day
nor night, who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receives the
mark of his name.

A terrible description of a terrible punishment, the like unto which the
compass of the whole Canon scarce has (...) is the potion of punishment,
accustomed to be given to those that are to be put to death as at the 8. verse.
we showed. Mere wine, that is, not allayed with water, does more powerfully
intoxicate, and yet more if diverse kinds of wine be mingled: such therefore
would some have to be understood by these words (...), that is, of mingled
wine; since otherwise he should speak contradictions. But I approve rather,
that (...), be the same with pure wine mixed with Myrrh, Gall, Frankincense or
the like drugge of bitter taste, which was used in the Cup of (...) as the
Jews ^alled it: according to the custom of the Nation; and alluding to that
of the Psalm 75. 9. according to the Seventy, (...). Where the Chalde has:
the Cup of malediction in the hand of the Lord, and strong wine, full with the
mixture of bitterness, thereby to take away the understanding of the wicked.
For we have said that that potion was given, that the use of reason might be
taken away from him that was to die. Now Chap. 14.
for that which the Septuagint have, (...) in Hebrew it is (...) Vinum rubens,
red wine, to wit, which had not lost its color by mixture of water. For the
Wines in the holy Land were red. The other parts of the description are
manifest in themselves.

But it will here be behovefull, a little to observe the degrees of this
threefold cry, and how the latter exceeds the former in grievousnesse. For,
the first Angel admonished, of the duty alone, of worshipping God rightly
according to the prescript of the Gospel; he upbraided them not with the fault
committed on this part. The second proceeded further, he threatens the ruin
of spiritual fornication and that to be punished by death and destruction
inevitably: but that which he does threaten as yet only to Babylon as the
principal cause of the crime, not as yet to her partakers. But the third it
being come to the height, denounces horrible and heinous torments, and those
to have neither end nor any ease, to the whole train of the Beast and to all
which shall abide in his obedience. It follows

Here is the patience of the Saints. Here are they who keep the Verse. 12.
Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.

As if he should say, this cry shall be the touchstone, of proving as well the
patience as the obedience of the Saints. Of the patience surely, if resting
upon expectation of so terrible punishment, and such as shall recompense all
the delay, they shall be nothing troubled with so long prosperity of the
Beast, nor be any whit dejected in their minds at that madness of persecution
wherewith the refractory, and disobedient to his government shall be assailed:
and of obedience to the Commandments of God and the faith of Jesus, if having
heard this threatening, without further delay, they withdraw themselves from
communion with the Beast, and renounce his Image and Mark. These are they who
keep the Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus, that is, which rightly
and Evangelically worship God in the faith of Jesus Christ: and therefore not
unworthy to be called by the name of professors of the Gospel.

So the Virgin Church having obeyed the threefold admonition, the vindication
of her against her enemies follows, under the type of Harvest and Vintage;
which once being overpast, the blessed reward of the just is no more deferred,
as that denunciation Chap. 14.
from heaven bears witness, premised to the description of both.

I heard, says he, a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write, Verse. 13.
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth: yea, says the
spirit, that they may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them.

I know very many refer this heavenly declaration to the former, as it were
to comfort the Saints now to suffer all grievous things, from the Beast
provoked by the precedent voice. Of which opinion lately also I my self was.
But now having waied the matter more exactly, I incline to think rather that
it should be referred to the matters following, as it were a warning of the
resurrection and judgment presently succeeding under the seveth trumpet; the
preparation of which should begin to be taken in hand in the next vision. So
that that may be called, (...) from this time, not in respect of the matter
exhibited in the former vision; but the next following to be exhibited; upon
which immediately, the resurrection of the dead and the judgment should
follow. As if he had said: Now it i^^^me to that which only remains to be
fulfilled, to that time wherein the dead in the Lord shall be raised up to a
blessed life. For in the Gospel of Matthew 23. the last verse. the Lord says to
the Jews: You shall not see me, (...) until you shall say, Blessed is he that
comes in the name of the Lord, that is, not from the moment of time wherein he
had spoken these things, but from the time of the Passover, which he went then
to celebrate: after which he no more offered himself to be seen publicly of
the Jews. Now the reason moving me so to think, as I say, is threefold. First
because I remember not that any where in the sacred Scripture, the day of
death, but only the day of resurrection and judgment is named a day of
reward. Secondly, the denunciation from heaven, with a commandment to write,
seems not to be used, but to show some notable importance of matters.
Certainly such like commandment is no where else to be found, except in the
beginning of the whole Prophecy. To conclude, if good attention be given to
this thing declared, in sense it altogether agrees with that at the sounding
of the seventh Trumpet, Cap. ^1. when Verse. 18.
the time is said to be come, wherein the cause of the dead (to wit for Christ)
shall be judged, and that God should give reward unto Chap. 14.
his servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and to them that fear his name
small and great, and should destroy them which destroy the earth. So here,
Blessed, says he, are the dead from this time, which die in the Lord, that
they ^ay rest from their labors, that is, henceforth they shall lead their
life void of the former evils and calamities (whereby surely is intimated their
freedom from enemies and Tyrants) and t^eir works do follow them, that is,
they shall obtain a most blessed reward of all their sufferings and good deeds.

In the mean while, this interpretation being admitted, I change nothing of
the sense of the words (...) st^l understanding them with the followers of the
former opinion, not of any whosoever dying in the faith of Christ, but
specially of the Martyrs, who have given their lives for Christ (for of such
consists the first resurrection) so that I think it may be rendered with
Beza, Who die for the Lord or for his sake. Even as Ephesians. 4.1. (...), Prisner
in the Lord, is Prisoner for the Lord; to wit, the same that (...), Chap. 3 1.
In which same sense the ancients (as out of Tertullian is gathered) took that,
1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. The dead in Christ shall rise first, that is, the Martyrs,
which have been put to death for the confession of Christ. Thou may see him
de anima c. 55. For as much as it is known, that with the Latins the Ablative,
and with the Greeks in like manner the Dative, which otherwise signifies the
instrument and manner of doing, does also express the cause, for which or
wherefore; as verberat odio he beats for hatred, invidi^ pulsu^ est, he is
driven away for en^y, and the like. Now since the Hebrews declare this
Ablative or Dative by the preposition ^and in imitation of them, the Greek
Scripture by (...), thence it comes to pass that E N, also there signifies
the cause for which. Indeed this signification is more rare with this particl^;
but I doubt not but a diligent observation will afford more examples, then I
have now in a readiness.

So much for the declaration from heaven. Now let us search out the meaning of
the couple of visions, before which we have said it is praemised, as far
forth as we may in a future thing, and with the modesty and sobriety beseeming
us: and first of the H^rvest, wherein the first degree toward the consummation
is laid. And I saw, says he, and behold a white cloud; and upon the Chap. 14.
cloud one sitting like unto the Son of man, having on his head Verse. 14.
a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle. 15. And another Angel went
out of the Temple, crying with a loud voice, to him that sat on the cloud,
thrust in thy sickle and reap, for the time of reaping is come, because the
harvest of the earth is ripe. 16. And he that sat upon the cloud thrust in his
sickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped.

The name of Harvest comprehends three things; the cutting down of come, the
gathering it, and the threshing it. Whence it comes to pass that it frames a
twofold parable in holy Writ, and of contrary sense; one while of slaughter
and destruction, as it were of cutting down and threshing; another while of
restoring and safety, according to the property of gathering. An example of
the former is obvious in Leremy, Chap. 51. 33. where he says thus of the
overthrow of Babylon: The daughter of Babylon is a threshing fl^^re, the time
of her threshing is come: Yet a little while and the time of her harvest will
come. Likewise of Esaias, Chap. 17. 3. Of the destruction of Damascus, and the
overthrow of Israel by Tiglatbpelesar: The fort^esse shall cease from Ephraim,
and the kingdom from Damascus, etc. ver. 5. And it shall be as when the
harvest man gathers the corn, and reapeth down the ears with his arm. But
an example of the latter is scarsly to be found any other where save in the New
Testament. The Harvest, Luke 10.2.
says our Savior, is great, but the laborers are few. Yet there are some,
who from this understanding do interpret that complaint of Israel in ^erem. 8.
20. The Harvest is past, the Summer is ended, and we are not saved, that is,
the time is past wherein we thought we should be saved, and we are not saved.
But whether of these the Harvest in this place represents, let us try out if
we can, by the order of things done, which other where the holy Ghost has
represented concerning the same times of the Church.

The treading of the winepresse, which is performed in the Vin^age succeeding
this Harvest, that it is the same with that bloody slaughter executed by him
that ^itteth upon the white horse, Chap. 19. 11. is manifest out of that which
is added to the description of the same horseman, v. 15. He it is which
treads the winepresse of the fiercen^sse and wrath of Almighty God. And now
this being granted and set down, it must needs be, that the prophetical Chap.
14.
parables, which together immediately prevent both, and no other vision coming
between, either set forth the same matter, or if diverse, yet notwithstanding
by some means conjoined and tied together. Since therefore here that Harvest
goes next before the Vintage; and there the preparation of the marriage of the
Lamb, together with the destruction of Babylon, goes next before that cruel
slaughter: it must needs follow, that either that preparation or destruction
are the Harvest which we seek, or belong to the same with the Harvest, or the
Harvest with them.

If we shall say the destruction of Babylon is the Harvest, that would as well
be agreeable enough to the nature of the type which does signify the cutting
dow^e and threshing; as also especially it would agree to the example of Jeremy
foretelling the fall of old Babylon also by the same figure. The place is that
which I cited a little before: The daughter of Babylon is as a threshing Ier.
51.33.
floor, the time of her threshing is come: Yet a little while and the time of
her Harvest will come. Moreover since both, as well the Harvest as the Vintage,
for as much as they make an end of the year, sets forth the end and
consummation of things; but the Harvest goes before the Vintage in time:
therefore, if it had been plainly known, that both served to signify the
consummation of the Roman Tyranny; surely the Harvest might very fitly set
forth the overthrow of the City it self, as it were the first fruits of the
full destruction; the Vintage succeeding the Harvest, the ruin of the whole
Kingdom of the Beast not any long distance following it.

Neither indeed is there any thing that might let this accommodation, but this
one, that the destruction of Babylon, is not upon trial found out to go next
before that cruel slaughter expressed also by the representation of vintage,
Chap. 19. as hitherto we have presupposed, but another event of things (as it
seems following the destruction of Babylon) to wit, the preparation of the
marriage of the Lamb, or the adorning of his Bride. Shall not therefore the
Harvest be to signify that preparation, or (if this agree not) some matter to
be therewith done? But thou will say, what manner of preparation is that of the
Bride? or what is that which is to be done together therewith? Surely, I yet
see not, what other thing that preparation of the Bride can Chap. 14.
be, but that conversion of the Jews and gathering of Israel so long ago
expected; of her which long since (according to the parable of our Savior)
being invited to the marriage of the Kings son, refused to come; but now at
length being ready and Matthew. 22.1.
prepared makes haste. For it seems the Gentiles cannot be called that
Bride, since they now long ago and for many ages have been married to Christ.
Therefore they are the Jews who as yet are expected to come to be the Lambs
wife. Now with this conversion and return of Israel (whereby she shall be
chosen into the Virgin company of the Lamb, and made a part thereof) there
shall be joined the cutting down or overthrow of the Turkish Empire: according
to that which is read at the sixth phyall, but in another figure, The waters of
that great river Euphrates are to be dried up, that the way of the Kings of the
East might be Cap. 16.12.
prepared. For the time of this phyall most directly agrees to the time of the
preparation of that Bride; since even as that is set between the overthrow of
Babylon, and the last slaughter of the enemies; So this phyall comes in the
midst between the phyall which is powered out upon the throne of the Beast, and
the last phyall: for the Church of Christ as by the conversion of Israel it
will prove as it were double: so either part seems shall have a proper and
peculiar enemy at that time; that, the Roman Beast of an uncircumcised
original: this, the Muhammedan Empire of a circumcised stock, and sprung from
Ismael, ominous to the generation of Isaac, the overthrow of both being to be
accomplished under the coming of Christ, why may not the Harvest serve for the
representation of this, and the Vintage of that?

Moreover, that prophecy of Joel whence either representation as well of
Harvest as of Vintage is taken, though it give no strength, yet at least it
will yield some color to the interpretation of Harvest. For it is manifest
even out of the first words of the prophecy, that there the time of Isreal's
conversion is handled. In those days, says he, and in that time in which I
shall bring again the captivity of Iud^ and I^rusalem; ^. I will gather
together Joel 3. 1.
all Nations into the valley of Iehosaphat, and I will plead with them there
for my people and mine heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the
Nations, and parted my Land. Then it follows in the Hypotyposi.
typical description of the warlike preparation: Put ye in the sickles, for
the harvest is ripe: come and get you down, for Chap. 14.
the press is full, the fatts overflow, for their malice is great. Howsoever
Chap. 13.
therefore, in this application of the figure of Harvest, we may observe this,
that the matter to be done is so, that both the notions of harvest, as well of
cutting down and threshing, as of gathering, may agree unto it; this, on the
behalf of Israel to be gathered into the barn of the Church, that, of the
slaughter of the enemies to come to pass jointly therewith, yet
notwithstanding since the last vindication of the Church against the enemies is
here handled, therefore I am altogether of opinion that the sense of cutting
down and threshing is to be preferred.

But whatsoever the Harvest may be, surely the description proves that the
Lord thereof and the Author of the reaping should be Christ himself the King.
For is there in the whole Scripture attributed to any King besides him, that
title of the Son of Man with a cloud for his Chariot? So that it is in no wise
safe in my judgment to wrest that to any other meaning. It seems rather to
be gathered that the power of the Divine Majesty in accomplishing that
Harvest, as also in the next ensuing Vintage, shall be more conspicuous and
notable, then has happened in any works hitherto, of those which are done in
the names only of Angels.

Hitherto we have guessed at the meaning of the Harvest; let us proceed now to
the Vintage: which, as in the seasons of the year it is accustomed, so here
for order, it is agreeable to reason that it follow the Harvest.

And another Angel came out of the Temple which is in heaven, Verse. 17.
he also having a sharp sickle. 18 And another Angel came out from the Altar,
which had power over fire: and cried with a loud voice to him that had the
sharp sickle, saying, thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of
the vine of the earth; because her grapes are fully ripe, 19 And the Angel
thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth, and
cast it into the great wine press of the wrath of God: and the wine press was
trodden without the city, and the blood came out of the wine press even unto
the Horse bridles by the space of one thousand and six hundred furlongs.

This is the description of the Vintage. At the interpretation whereof we shall
so much the more certainly level, by how much the signification of the parable
is here less doubtful, and the designment Chap. 14.
of the treading of the clusters of grapes more pla^^e. For truly, the treading
of vintage in parabolicall Scripture constantly signifies a cruel, bloody,
and deadly slaughter. This first. Furthermore, that this slaughter, here
handled, is the same with that great slaughter, Chap. 19. (as a little before I
showed) those words concerning the treading of the wine press of Gods wrath
Cap. 19. 15.
put in to the description thereof do declare. Therefore it will be the same
also with the war of that great Day of God Almighty at the last phyall. With
which that that deadly slaughter, Chap. 19. is the same, this makes it out of
doubt, that both of them are the last ruin of one and the same enemy. For each
of them are to fall at the last upon the Beast, the false Prophet, and their
confederates. But their last slaughter can be but one. Now if our vintage shall
design the same slaughter with them, it must needs rest upon the same enemies
with them: therefore upon the Beast and false Prophet. The vine therefore or
viney^rd of the Earth, whereof here is mention, is the dominion of the Beast.
The grapes ripe for gathering, are the followers of the Beast swelling with
blood guiltiness, ripe for judgment. To conclude, the vessel or winepresse,
is the place of slaughter. The same forsooth which at the seventh vial being
interpreted in Hebrew is called Armageddon; happily because there at the
universal slaughter of the Beast the troops or bands shall be destroyed. For
See Drusius Praeterit. lib. 10. page 434.
Arma (...) signifies destruction; Gedon or Geddon (...) a troop, army, or
their Army. * He gathered them, says he, into a place which is called in
Hebrew Armageddon (the books of Plantines Printing are with a single D
Armagedon) and the seventh Angel powered Chap. 16. 16.
out his phyall into the air: and there came a great voice out of the Temple
of heaven, from the throne saying, It is done.

Now where this wine press or place is like to be, for treading of the grapes,
is yet in Gods secret, and therefore not by us too curiously to be searched
out, nor determined, until either the event it self shall manifest it, or the
state of things nearer thereunto, shall happily yield some mark. Yet this we may
lawfully tell without the reprehension of rashness; out of so diligent a
dimension of the space through which the slaughter should extend, it may seem,
the holy Ghost points his finger to some such Region, as may extend a
thousand and six hundred f^^longs in length. For by so many furlongs he
enformeth the slaughter shall Chap. 14.
be made without the City. That is, if I be not deceived, in the Region or
Dominion of the City. Hence it comes to pass, that some by that circuit
think the Holy Land is meant, as which comprehends exactly so many furlongs
in the length thereof, that is, two hundred Italian miles, but not above an
hundred and threescore Gracian; which to be the length of the Holy Land, Jerome
relates in his Epistle to Dar^anus. For the Gracians, say they, measured their
miles by ten furlongs, every of which was an hundred paces; now a pace (which
they call Orgya a faddom) is six Roman foot: so in the whole a Grecian mile
contained 6000 Roman foot. On the contrary the Romans define a pace by five
foot, a furlong by 125 paces, a mile by eight furlongs, that is, only 5000
foot. Whence it comes to pass, that the Grecian mile, although it agree with
the Roman in the number of 1000 paces, yet it is greater by a fifth part then
the Roman. By which means 200 Roman miles make not above 160 Grecian. This is
the sum of the account. Furthermore, this adds no little weight to the
conjecture, that the name of the place is expressed by an Hebrew word
Armageddon, as if it were to come to pass in the land of the Hebrews. But by
what means shall this be brought to pass? Surely, to those that conceive
Antichrist shall come out of the East, this opinion is easy and prompt enough;
to us not so; except any one happily may think it likely, that the false Prophet
after the overthrow of Rome shall remove into the East, and Seat himself
there. Indeed there are some of the servants of the Beast themselves who
affirm this; to wit, that the Pope of Rome shall have his Seat at Jerusalem
before the last Day of Judgment. For indeed it cannot be affirmed with any
likelihood of truth, that the Beast, his affairs at home in the West being in
such state and danger as is supposed, should again (as long ago in the
expedition to Jerusalem) Lead an Army into Palestine, leaving so many enemies
at his back; and there at length utterly be abolished. Moreover, least we who
affirm Antichrist to be in the West should be inferior in this respect, to
them who affirm him to be in the East, there is a place likewise near at
hand, to which the said number of furlongs in like manner agrees; for example
Stato della Chiesa, or the large possession of the Roman Church, which from
the City of Rome, to the furthermost mouth of the River P^, and the Marshes
of Verona, extends Chap. 14.
the space of two hundred Italian miles, that is, 1600 furlongs.

But whither go I? let us cease to be (as happily hitherto* we have been) too
curious. Let us descend to other matters, which will be more worth our labor.
And so let the Reader first mark this: that here the Cutter of the clusters of
the Vine, is not the same as is the Treader of the winepresse: but as the
functions of the grape gatherer and the Treader of the winepresse are several,
so also they have several workmen; for the grape gathering or cutting of the
clusters, an Angel furnished with a Vinedressers sickle; for the treading,
Christ himself the King accompanied with a heavenly troop of horsemen. Which
out of the vision, Chap. 19. (which I have so often cited) may evidently
appear. For there John saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse, and he
Verse. 11.
which sat upon him was called faithful and true, and with righteousness he
judges and makes war -- and he was clothed 13.
with a vesture sprinkled with blood (with the blood of grapes) and his name is
called The Word of God. And the armies which are 14.
in heaven followed him on white horses, and clothed with white silk and
clean: And out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, that with 15.
it he should smite the nations: for he shall rule them with a rod of iron; and
he it is who treads the winepresse of the fierce wrath of God Almighty --
etc. Can any thing be more plainly spoken? And furthermore in the context, to
which we give light according to our ability, it is no where said, that the
Angel who gathered or cut the clusters of grapes, is the same also as did tread
the winepresse; but only that he cast the cut clusters of grapes into the
winepresse. Which being done, the winepresse is trodden without the City. And
by whom but by Christ the King, coming forth of heaven with his heavenly
troop of horsemen? That forsooth it is, which the holy Ghost would signify,
by mentioning of horses Verse. 20.
immediately added: and blood, says he, came out of the winepresse even to the
horse bridles. For wherefore is that concerning horses inserted, unless by
this mark he might give notice, that the winepresse should be trodden by him,
to whom that company of horsemen belonged.

That therefore I may comprehend the matter in few words; this is the sum of
that vision of the vintage. The Angel the Vintager with the help of the
Saints, the government of whom for the effecting of this business is committed
to him, shall lop Chap. 14.
and cut away the clusters of grapes belonging to the Beast; and by that his
cutting off shall cause them to be gathered together into Armageddon; and being
gathered together the Lord Jesus shall tread them at his coming: according to
which Paul says, concerning the man of sin (which is this self same Beast)
that he shall be destroyed by the Lord, (...) with the brightness of his
coming. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8


Now both as well the Harvest as the Vintage, is obtained by prayers: the
Harvest (as it seems) by the prayers of the Church universally: for the Angel
which there bears the person of the suppliants, is said to come generally out
of the Temple: but the vintage rather by the prayers of the Martyrs and
Confessors, against whom the wicked ones exercised cruelty with slaughters and
torments, and sacrificed then to Christ; wherefore the Angel which calls for
this, comes out of the place where the Altar stands, and is said to have
power over the fire, even the fire of Martyrdom. For that is commonly known,
that the blood of Verse. 18.
the Martyrs cries to God for revenge. For surely the Scripture every where
witnesses, that the divine power will bestow neither prosperity upon the
Church, nor inflict punishment upon their enemies, without their prayers. So at
the prayers of Daniel the captivity of Babylon is set at liberty. And in the
parable concerning the widow wearying the unjust Judge with her clamors, the
Apodosis.
application is, that God in like manner constrained by the prayers of his
Elect, will at length rise up to their revenge. Add hereunto, that, when the
trumpets should be sounded for the destruction of Rome, the prayers of the
Martyrs are first called into remembrance by God at the incense offering. Hear
therefore ^ Christ the King and call to thy Fathers remembrance so many humble
supplications of thy servants for thy kingdom, so many gro^nings of the
afflicted and slain for thy name sake; and when the time that shall seem unto
thee most fit shall come, Arise reap the Harvest, and gather the grapes.

Thus far Reader I was able to proceed in this more large kind of
interpreting, and no further. In the rest which remain, I only give
Prophetical Essays; to wit, part of those which three or four years ago I
had communicated privately to my friends upon most of the Apocalyptique
visions. Those whatsoever they be Reader I commend to thy courtesy; and
beseech thee to make a favorable construction Chap. 17.
thereof: until our Good God Almighty shall bestow abiliti^ and leisure upon
me, to finish these also in the same method with the former (except the
judgments of learned and godly men shall prohibit me.) Moreover, thou shall
know that in these I thought not fit to keep so strict an order of Chapters,
but I have set the mystery of Babylon before the vision of vyals; which yet
John has set after; whether because one of the Angels of the vyals had
declared it? or because he would put it as a Key for the opening of all the
foregoing visions? it seems to be for both causes. But it is not fit for the
interpreter every where to keep the same order as the Historian does. At Chap.
17.


Concerning mystical Babylon the head City of the Apostasy of Christianity.
THe Metropolis of (...)
Apostasy (...), or mystical Babylon; is the City of Rome, or, as we now call
it, the Sea of Rome, being in times past the Spouse of Christ become not only
an Harlot, but also (...) the mother City of Harlots, that is, the head of the
Cities Christian spiritually committing ^ornication with her. Where Reader, I
would have thee to observe even this first (because we are now about the chief
part of the Revelation) that the great and universal (...)
Apostasy of the visible Christian Church is not defined and marked of the
holy Ghost by any other heresies or errors, then that spiritual fornication
so much laid to the charge of ancient Israel also. This only therefore as a
Cynosura.
guide ought to be regarded by him, whosoever would search out of the Records
of Ecclesiastical affairs the beginning, progress, stay and decrease, of the
Apostasy of Christianity; if he aim at this mark, that which is sought may
even palpably be perceived; but if otherwise, he shall either fail, or be
uncertain. For though this Babylon be guilty of other errors, yea heresies
(for it is no new thing, that harlots and whores be infamous for other vices
and crimes also) yet seeing the holy Ghost has marked that great Apostasy of
the visible Church with none of those, therefore they are to be accounted
either symptoms only of that Apostasy, or adventitious errors, and such as
are alike common to other times and sects; or if the heresy shall happily be
of great moment (as is that of justification and salvation hoped for by the
merits of works) yet it is such as which of late, and when the whore was now
grown old, has Chap. 17.
been permitted by the just judgment of God to enter into the Church, as it
were (...) a recompense of her Romans 1. 27.
great error: least indeed they who had so long and so obstinately contemned
the long suffering of God, and the preaching of the Witnesses, afterward (as we
read was provided against our first parents) stretching out their hands should
take of the fruit of the Genesis 3.22.
tree of Life and eating thereof should live for ever.

Furthermore Reader, this is singular in this place, nor to be passed over with
light observation (of which likewise I advertised thee in the Apocaliptique
Key) to wit, that this vision concerning the great Whore and the Beast bearing
her, is opened to John and us by the Angel (which he used not to do) by a most
plain interpretation: without doubt to that end, that by the benefit of the
interpretation thereof, as being the chiefest vision of all the rest, the other
mysteries contained in the Revelation, hitherto indeed shut up, but depending
upon it wonderful artificially, might be revealed. Here therefore be
attentive, and least the Angel shall have taken this pains in vain as far
forth as it concerns thee; remember this right well, that the interpretation
of the Allegory or parable (such as this of the Angel is) is not a new Allegory
or parable. For what strangeness should this be, or more truly madness of an
interpreter? or what profit is there of interpreting an Allegory by an
Allegory, or a parable by a parable? therefore do not thou here look after I
know not what ages of the world, or such like fained things; but take the
meaning of the prophetique Angel according to the letter (...), not as if he
were yet allegorising, but rather interpreting the meaning; knowing that it is
thy part not to open the meaning of the Allegory, as otherwhere it happens,
but to apply its interpretation already given it to the things themselves.

Which application, as far forth as God has revealed to me, I will declare
to thee thus.

1.
The Woman, which John saw sitting upon the Beast, is that great City, which
then reigned over the Kings of the earth, v. 18.

The Application. What is this but Rome?

2.
The Beast carrying her now become a whore, is that Beast, which before this
vision being showed to John, was of a certain Chap. 17.
other form, but he was not as yet of that shape, wherein he should carry the
Whore; but in such a form afterward he was to arise out of the bottomless
pit, and in it at length utterly to perish: that is, that form wherein he
should carry the Whore, should be the last of the Beast, beyond which he should
not continue his life, verse. 8. It follows in the same verse. (that thou
may know also by that mark that this is the very same Beast showed, Chap.
13.) And they that dwell on the earth shall wonder, whose names are not written
in the Book of life from the foundation of the world laid, beholding the Beast
which was, and is not, and yet is to come. In Greek (...) Et tamen adfutura
est.
For so I read it with the Complutense Edition, Primasius, and the Syriaque
Interpreter, that it may agree in sense with the precedent description: The
Beast which was, and is not, but at length shall ascend out of the bottomless
pit. But now of what form the Beast had been before, and in what shape he was
to ascend out of the bottomless pit; that we shall know particularly by those
things which the Angel by and by adds.

The Application. In the mean while, if the Woman be Rome it self, what then
can this Beast of many forms be upon which she rides (that is rules) but the
Kingdom or Empire of Rome?

3.
The seven heads of the Beast, is a double type, first they are Ver. 3. and 7.
seven mountains or hills, upon which the City being the Metropolis Verse. 9,
10, 11.
of the Beast is seated: again seven orders of Kings or successive Rulers, and
that on the same hills (which the unity of the type sets forth) Hoc teneas
vultus mutantem Protea nodo.
this is a sure mark of her) whereof indeed five, that is to say, of Kings,
Consuls, Tribunes, Decemviri, Dictators, now in the age of John were past: one
(of Caesar's) was yet remaining; but that also under Christian Caesar's so to be
changed, that it seemed as another Ruler, but of a very short continuance: yet
in truth not another: but the last, and as already I have said in respect of
the changed Caesarship the eight, but in truth but the seventh (for there are
only seven heads of the Beast) that very same it is under which the Beast
should be at length (...), that is, the bearer of the mystical whore, and in
that state and form wherein she is seen of John in the present vision. In
whose time it might be said, both that he was Chap. 17.
in time past, and notwithstanding not yet sprung up. For in time past he had
been a Beast under the courses of the five first heads, partly also the sixth;
but as yet he was not under the course of the last head (to wit, of the
Popedom) under which at length he should bear the Whore.

The Application. Now therefore hark Reader; if the sixth head of the Roman
Beast which reigned in John's age in the City standing upon seven hills; now
almost for 12. 1200. Years.
ages ^ath ceased to reign there: it must needs be that he who now bears
sway there (since that which is as it were the seventh and of short continuance
cannot be called a head) is that last, of long continuance and truly the
seventh Ruler of the seven hills; and therefore that State, or Commonwealth of
Nations over which Rome now reigns, and long has reigned, is that government
which John foresaw should bear the Whore.

4.
The ten horns of the Beast, the Ensigns of the last head, Verse 12.
are ten Kingdoms, not yet risen in the age of John; but into which at
length the body of the Roman Beast should be rended, in his last course, by
the wound of the Caesarian head; and which with one consent should confer all
their authority upon the Beast, to be made whole and restored under the
government of Verse. 13.
that last head.

The Application. But unless from that time that the Emperors have ceased to
reign at Rome, the Roman Empire be divided and rent into ten or more
Kingdoms (even of Nations in John's age, strangers from the Empire and
barbarous) when, I pray you ever, or by what means at length shall we expect
it to be divided?

5.
Those ten Kingdoms, which shall so grow together, by the Verse. 14.
government of the false Prophet their head, shall fight with the Lamb, yet at
length the victory falling out on the part of our Lord the Lamb.

The Application. That battle has been fought long since, and even daily is
in action: this victory even in some sort i^ accomplished; but we hope shall be
fulfilled sometime much more gloriously.

For truly out of the same ten horns, or Kings they shall Chap. 17.
be, who at length shall hate the Whore, whom they have so long Verse. 16.
borne (which partly we perceive to be fulfilled) shall make her desolate, and
naked, shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. For God by whose
providence it comes to pass, that with so mavelous a consent they should
grow together into this Beast of the last head, until his appointed time: he
even the same will sometime put into their hearts, that they shall execute his
will also upon their Metropolis the Whore: these things the Angel has
interpreted.

But what moreover is contained in the description of the parable, Verse. 4.
that this Whore held in her hand a golden Cup, full of abominations, and
filthiness of her fornication; likewise that she did Verse. 5.
bear her name written in her forehead: that needed not the interpretation of
the Angel. For truly in both there is an Allusion to the custom of whores,
and stews in time past. Which whores were wont to drink to their Paramores
philters in a golded Cup: in the Stews the Cells had the name of the whores
written upon them: even as that of Tertullian declares in his book De
Pudicitia: under the very gates of lust, under the very titles of lust. But
Seneca more perspicuously, Controvers. 2. lib. 1. Thou art called, says he, a
wh^re, thou stoodest in a common place, a title is put upon thy Cell. See also
Martial. lib. 11. Epig. 46. Moreover if a whore was famous, it seems she
bare her name and title not only written on her Cell, but in her forehead.
Seneca intimates that in the place cited: Thy name, says he, hangs in thy
forehead, thou have received the reward of adultery, and the hand that was to
give sacred things to God, has received rewards. To which I^venal also had
respect, Sat. 6. concerning the unbridled lust of Messalina the Empress.

-- nuda papillis
constitit auratis titulum mentita Lyciscae.
She stood naked with her gilded pappes bearing the title of Lycisc^.
But if that of Seneca be to be taken of the front of her Cell, this also of
Babylon may be so taken; neither will it be harsh, for the nature of the figure,
which comprehends both, as well the Whore, as the place or Brothelhouse in
which she prostituteth her self.

The fall of Antichrist. Chap. 15.
OR, The meaning of the seven Phyals as far forth as is yet given us to
understand:
And first, Of the Phyals in general.
THe holy Ghost propounds the history of the Phials, and of At Chap. 15.
the Angels pouring them out two manner of ways. First in general from the
beginning of the 15. Chap. unto the end of the 5. verse. where the vision of the
seven Angels having seven Phyals being only briefly rehearsed: before he comes
to the particular description either of the Angels or Phyals: a narration is
framed of another vision exhibited together with them; wherein is figured for
the time of the pouring them out, the state of the Church cleansed from
idolatrous pollutions and filthiness in that sacred Laver or Sea of the Temple
not made of brass as Solomon's, Verse. 2, 3.
but of Crystal, and singing the (...).
tryumphant Song for the victory over the Beast the whole time of the effusion:
and that whiles yet she stood upon the brimme of the Laver, as it were scarce
gone out of the bath wherein she had cleansed her self.

Then he comes to the clothing and preparation of the Angels, and to describe
the Phyals particularly from those words of the 6. verse. (...), Verse. 6.
(...), etc. And the seven Angels came out of the Temple having the seven
plagues, clothed in pure and white linen and having their breasts girded with
golden girdles, that is, in their Priestly habit. For take heed that thou
join not the words which we Ezekiel. 44.17. 18. Maiemon de vasis sanctuarii, c.
10. sect. 1.
have set down, with those of the precedent verse. for truly that which is
there said of the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony opened in Heaven,
that pertains not to the beginning, but to the event of the Phyals. That is
to say the Temple, which, in the mean space while the Phyals were poured out,
was filled Verse 5.
with smoke from the Majesty of God, and from his power, so that no man was
able to enter, verse. 8. (he all^deth to the seven days dedication as well of
the Tabernacle, Exodus 40. 34. as also of the Temple, 1 King. 8. 10. 2 Chronicles. 5.
13.) the Phyals being past it Chap. 16.
will be so clear; that the Arc of the Testimony it self, (Christ) shall be
apparent: even as we have it at the sound of the seventh trumpet (Chap. 11.
19.) with which that the last of the Phyals does contemporize, has been
showed, Synch. 3. part. 2.

Hypotheses.
Suppositions concerning the Phyals particularly.
1. The effusion of the Phyals signifies the ruin of the Antichristian At
Chap. 16.
Beast. It appears out of the Text: for which see Synch. 7. part. 1. For even
as that former and more ancient (...).
Polity of the Roman Kingdom was to be overthrown by the plagues of the
Trumpets: so this last by the plagues of the Phyals. This is the cause of so
great li^^^esse between them twain; since even this last bears the Image of
the former Roman Polity.

2. The seven Phyals are so many degrees of the ruin thereof. For like as the
Beast grew up by degrees: he is also so to be abolished by degrees.

3. Whatsoever then it is, on which every of the Phyals is poured out; that
suffers damage and loss from the Phyall; since the effusion of the Phyals,
is the effusion of the wrath of God (Chap. 15. verse. 1.). Therefore no
interpretation can stand here, whereby the effusion of a Phyall falls out to
the benefit of that, upon which it is poured out.

4. The Earth, the Sea, the Rivers, the Sun, are something concerning the
Antichristian Beast, answering to the earth, the Sea, and the Sun. For all
the Phyals are poured out upon the Beast: therefore also every of them upon
something of the Beast, or at least which is inseparable from the safety of
the Beast, or concerns his benefit.

5. The whole body of the Beast, or the Antichristian universe, is in like
manner as it was done in the Trumpets, tacitly compared by the holy Ghost to
the Systeme of the world, whose parts are Earth, Sea, Rivers, Heaven, Lights:
So that the earth in the Popedom answers to the earth in the natural World;
Sea, to sea; Rivers, to rivers: Sun, to sun.

6. To conclude (as already I have once or twice showed) because God uses
Angels as ministers of his providence, for moving and governing of the motions
and changes of humane affairs: Chap. 16.
therefore those things that are brought to pass by the the hands of many, are
notwithstanding attributed to an Angel as it were the ruler and guide of the
thing to be done, after the common manner of speaking.

The Exposition of the Phyals according to the rule of the suppositions.
The first Phyall powered upon the whole body of the Beast.
The Earth in the Antichristian universe does signify the people, Verse. 2.
or the common sort of Christians, the footstool (the more shame) of
Antichrist; upon which as the Basis that vastness of Papal Hierarchy being
(...), like the Tower of Babel -- Vertice ad auras aetherias tendit.
reaches to the very skies.

The Phyall being powered out upon this Earth pertaining to the Beast, it drew
that disposition from the effusion, that it filled the followers of the Beast,
with fury and madness, as it were with ulcers, and those so foul and
malignant, that they could not be healed; nor be closed up by any Cicatrice,
but they would break forth again.

This was fulfilled when the Christian common people, called the Waldenses,
Albigenses, Wiclifists, Hussites, and by other names, began every where to
renounce the authority of the Beast, calling Rome Apocaliptique Babylon, and
the Pope Antichrist: with which blasting of its earth burning with the Romans
10.2.
zeal of God, the followers of the Beast being stricken, they were wholly
enflamed, with the ulcers of grief and indignation; by which being enraged
they for very many years wonderfully tyrannized with fire and Sword; but in
vain; for they were smitten with an evil and uncurable ulcer, which the more
they bestirred themselves, the more it grew worse and worse with them. Exodus
9.8, 9.
So in times past the Land of Egypt being sprinkled from Heaven with dust like
ashes, it filled all the Egyptians and their cattle with ulcers. Now the world
of the Beast is called (...).
spiritual Egypt, Chap. 11. 8. and thereupon the ulcerous sore here is to be
interpreted (...).
spiritually, that is, mystically, and by analogy: which is diligently to be
observed in the figures of the two following plagues also, taken from the same
history.

The second Phyall upon the Sea of the World Chap. 16.
of the Beast.
The Sea in the Antichristian world is the whole compass of Verse. 3.
the Papal Society, wherein not only several Christians, but whole Nations,
People, Kingdoms, Provinces, Diocesses, otherwise among themselves dis-joyned
and severed, are gathered together in one: or thus: the Antichristian Sea is
the compass of the Popes jurisdiction or dominion compassing and enfolding (as
the Sea does the Land) men and Nations worshipping Christ.

The second Phyall being powered out upon this Sea, presently it became as the
blood of a dead body, or cold and congealed blood, such as is wont to be of
those that are dead and slain, or of a member cut off; seeing it is destitute
of the influence of spirit and heat, the intercourse with the fountain of life
being dissolved. The sense is. The Pontificiall Sea was slain as it were with
death, beheading, or slaughter.

Now this was fulfilled, when by the labor of Luther and other famous
reformers of the Church of that Age, God wonderfully blessing their
undertakings, not now some single persons only of the common people of
Christendom, but even whole Provinces, Diocesses, Kingdoms, Nations, and
Cities renounced communion with those of the Beast, and there being made a
great dismembring of the dominion which was so large in times past, they
departed from the body of the Beast. By which event the Sea of the Popes
Dominion became dead for a great part of it, like the blood of a dead body; in
which the Popes creatures could no longer breathe and live.

The third Phyall upon the Rivers and Fountains of the world of the Beast.
The Rivers and Fountains of waters of the Bestian world, are Verse. 4, 5, 6, 7
the ministers and defenders of the Antichristian jurisdiction, whether
Ecclesiastical, as Jesuits, and other Emissary Priests; or even Secular and
Lay, as the Spanish champions, to both of which as from that jurisdiction is
committed a charge of soliciting and advancing the cause, which they call
Catholic, in Chap. 16.
like manner as the rivers derive their original out of the Sea: so also they
bestow their labor and cost, to the enlarging and preserving of it; even as
also the rivers return to the Sea.

Now these Rivers whilst they at random run through their Channels, wherein
now there was no more safety for them; by Gods just judgment, by the effusion
of the third Phyall, are turned into blood, in like manner as even they had
heretofore imbrued the Saints of God, and his Prophets with blood. For from
this Phyall the state of the Beast, came to that pass, that the ministers and
defenders thereof, now changing course, are compelled to suffer the same
slaughters, wherewith they had been accustomed to slay the Saints and Prophets
of God, while their government flourished, as it is plainly set sorth, verse. 5,
6. as it were a Key for the opening of the parable.

Which thing concerning the Ecclesiastical Emissaries with their attendants I
think was fulfilled, when in our ENGLAND, in the reign of ELIZABETH of famous
memory, and also afterward, those bloody Proctors for the authority of the
Beast, were according to the laws made for that purpose punished with death
(which had never before sobefallen them) for soliciting the Papal cause. And
not they alone, but the Spanish champions for the cause of the Beast, who were
much more to be feared then they, going about to recover by force of arms, the
dominion of the Church of Rome, thirsting for blood, drank blood by full
draughts, especially in that memorable overthrow of the year 1588. and some
years following; the English and the Dutch, by Sea and Land, abundantly pouring
out the Cup of the mighty hand of God. So that wonderful great praise was
given to God for his just and true judgments upon them both, not only of the
Islanders themselves, revenging their blood now long since shed: but also of
the neighboring French groaning yet under the Cross and the Altar, yea even
then the Massacre of the year 1572. being fresh. And thus far the Phyals seem
to have gonne on: the rest remain to be powered out yet.

The fourth Phyall upon the Sun of the Beastian heaven.
What the Sun is in the world of the Beast, that we may Verse. 8, 9.
search out; first it is thoroughly to be looked into, what the heaven Chap. 16.
may be, lest otherwise wanting the line of Analogy, we wander far from the
scope. For the Sun is not to be placed or conceived to be any where but in an
heaven fit for it. The Heaven therefore of the Antichristian world, is either
that supreme and universal authority of the Pope; or any other excellent, and
regal Authority whatsoever in that world of the Beast, that is, in the whole
universality of the Provinces acknowledging the Pope of Rome for their head.
For so in the physical world, all that which is upward, and above the earth
and waters is called Heaven, in the notion of the Hebrews and the holy Ghost.
Now in that Antichristian heaven (according to the type of natural Heaven)
there are very many Stars, and of a diverse magnitude, Princes, Dukes,
Prelates, Lords of Countries, and Kings. There are also great lights, like
Sun and Moon. All which are carried about with the motion of the Heaven, and
by direction thereof keep their courses. Now of these, the most glorious, and
by far the greatest light of all, which shine in the Papal Firmament, is the
Germane Empire, the proper inheritance of the House of Austria now for these
two hundred years or there abouts. Is not this therefore the Sun of that
Heaven? Now upon this Sun the fourth Phyall is even now to be powered out;
that it being pulled away from the heaven of the Beast, and shining to another
purpose, may burn and torment the inhabitants of the Antichristian world, even
to blasphemy, whom before it was wont to refresh with its heat and beams.

And behold, whiles I bring to light, these things which before I had written,
a fame has filled the whole Christian world, the godly rejoicing at it, that
there is now at length come from the North Gods revenger of wrongs, to succor
afflicted and distressed Germany; a godly King, happy, and which way soever he
comes, a conqueror, whose prosperous progress is wonderful speedy. Is not
this he, whom the Lord of Hosts has destinated to execute the work of this
Phyall? So I hope and heartily pray. Gird thee with thy sword therefore, O
great King, go^ on prosperously and bear rule; because of truth, meekness and
righteousness: and thy right hand shall teach thee mavelous things, Psalm.
45. 3, 4.

The fifth phyall upon the Throne Chap. 16.
of the Beast.
The fifth phyall is to be powered out upon the Throne or Seat Verse. 10, 11.
of the Beast; that is, Rome it self. Where the holy Ghost hides not the
matter any more with any veil of Figures or Allegories; happily because of the
great light which shall then arise to these Prophesies by this most evident
sign, whereby it shall be clear what phyals are past what to come.

Now by this destruction of the Citi^ of Rome (which I think to be the very
same, which is said shall immediately follow the resurrection and ascension of
the witnesses, Chap. 11. verse. 12. 13.) the name of the Pope shall not indeed
utterly perish, but from thence forth he shall be deprived of his glory and
splendour, so that for grief they shall bite their tongues: in the mean time
notwithstanding persevering as yet in their impenitency their hearts being
hardened, they will abuse their griefs unto further blasphemy.

The sixth phyall upon Euphrates.
The sixth phyall shall be powered out upon that great River Euphrates, Verse. 12.
that being dried up, a passage may be prepared for new enemies of the Beast to
come from the East; that is, for the Israelites to be wonderfully converted to
the pure faith and worship of Christ, and now seekers for the kingdom promised
so many ages since. Whom the worshippers of the Beast happily shall esteem for
the army of their seigned Antichrist to arise out of the Jews, God so revenging
the obstinacy of their error: of whom that we are the forerunners, they doubt
not at this day to affirm.

But that I may take these Kings to come, as it is said, from the Sun rising,
to be the Jews, two things serve for it. First, that this is the last phyall
save one; at which therefore except the lews should be converted, it should
necessarily come to pass, that they should be destroyed (with the rest of the
enemies of Christ amongst whom they yet remain) in that great Day of
universal revenge and judgment, which the next and last phyall shall bring
upon them. Then the place of Esaias tending to that purpose Chap. 16.
persuades me to this, whence this of the Revelation is borrowed, as it is
very likely. And the Lord, (says he, Chap. 11. 15, 16.) will destroy (I had
rather turn it. Like as the Lord has destroyed) the tongue of the Egyptian
Sea, and (rather [so]) he shall lift up his hand upon the River (Targum the
River Euphrates) in the strength of his spirit, and shall smite it in the seven
streams, so that m^n may pass over it dry shod. 16. And there shall be a way
for the remnant of my people which shall be left by the Assyrians (therefore
Euphrates is understood) as it was in that day, wherein he ascended from the
land of Egypt. Let the Reader look upon Zach. 10. 10, 11. and there the Chalde
Paraphrast.

But what at length shall we say this Euphrates is, whose waters shall be dried
up? For I something doubt whether it be to be taken literally or no, especially
in the place of Esaias. In the mean while to this of the Revelation I would have
something of a parable and allegory interlaced, and yet not very much; that the
Analogy of the other phyals, concerning the object of the pouring out, may
also here remain safe. For mystical Babylon it seems shall have her
Euphrates also, even as that ancient Babylon; to wit, the Turkish Empire as I
conceive, which shall be the only obstacle to those new enemies from the East,
and on that part the only defense of the Beast. Neither will such understanding
of Euphrates be without example of Esaias himself, who Chap. 8. 7. by the like
parable of Euphrates has expressed the Army of the Assyrians bordering upon
the same River. The Lord, See Ierem. 47.2, etc.
says he, shall cause to come against them (the Syrians and the Israelites)
the waters of that River (so Euphrates (...) is wont to be called) strong and
many, the King of Assyria and all his glory (Targum his Army) etc. why should
not now this Euphrates of the phyals by the same reason be understood of the
Turks? being no less borderers upon Euphrates before their overflowing then
the Assyrians, yea inhabitants of the same tract. To this it makes not
alittle, that the loosing of that great Army of Horsemen long stayed at that
great River Euphrates, at the sound of the sixth trumpet, Chap. 9. 15. we
interpreted to be meant of the Turks thence to overrun the Roman Empire,
having followed the series of the trumpets and the apt truth of the matter.

Therefore by the sixth phyall this Euphrataean deluge shall be Chap. 16.
dried up. Plainly according to that which is said, Chap. 11. that next after
that overthrow of the City which shall come to pass in a great earthquake
(which there we ^itted to the former phyall) the second woe shall be past, that
is, the plague of the sixth trumpet. But by what means, that is, to come to
pass, and by what authors; whether by the Jews themselves (which happily
Ez^chiel intimates, Chap. 38. and 39.) who shall possess the holy land again;
or by some intestine discord fitly to go before the return of these; or
happily both, but in order and one after another; or by some other cause; we
shall labor in vain in guessing, as at a matter wholly yet to come. Whatsoever
it be, this let being removed, it is said a way of going to some place is
prepared, for these new Christians from the East; and that as it seems to
make an expedition against the Beast; to the ruin of whom all the phyals
serve. For whence otherwise, or wherefore from this drying up should so great a
trembling and fear at an instant a^^aile the worshippers of the Beast, yea
even the Devils themselves as it seems, that it should minister occasion for
so horrible and unheard of a preparation for war, as is here described;
unless they with their whole diabolical band should fear all extremity by
the coming of these new Kings of the East?

The seventh phyall upon the Air.
The seventh and last phyall is powered out upon the Air, that Verse. 17.
is, on the power of the Air, or of Satan; embracing and fostering in his
bosom the dominions, not of the Beast only, but of all the enemies of our
Lord Christ in what country soever. Now as the Beast fetched his spirit and
life from the beginning out of him; so upon his power and conduct especially
the last fortunes of the worshippers of the Beast shall depend: which may
appear as well by the preparation of so many allyances and aids for the war
of this last phyall, to be procured, as it is said by diabolical devices: as
also from that, that the Dragon Satan, now not only by his Vicars the Beast and
the false Prophet, bestirreth himself to bring his matters to pass by raising
this universal army; but he by himself, in this last danger of his Kingdom
it may seem shall have his proper and peculiar parts to act also, verse. 13.
especially in calling them forth to join in this war, with whom Chap. 20.
otherwise the Beast and false Prophet, as they had at no hand prevailed by
their authority, so neither by favor, or representation happily of the common
danger.

Therefore upon so many enemies gathered together in one by the conduct of the
power of the Air, and shut up as it were in a Cave in Armageddon, the seventh
Phyall shall thunder, not Verse. 16.
with a humane arm now any more, but with a heavenly and thunder striking
revenge (for it is the battle of that great day, and Verse. 14.
of God Almighty.) By this the overthrow of the Beast shall be thoroughly
consummate; neither shall there be an utter overthrow of a Cell only, or of so
much as is within the walls of Babylon, as before under the fifth Trumpet, but of
the City it self, that is, of the Senate and people of Babylon, wheresoever
they shall be after the destruction of the Town: Moreover of all Kings, and
Cities till then committing fornication with Idols and false gods, and of other
Tyrants joining together in opposition against the holy Church of Christ.

Concerning the thousand years of the seventh Trumpet and other prophesies, of
wonderful things contemporising therewith.
HEre Reader, I will briefly deliver what I think, nor in a matter incredible
in respect of inveterate prejudice, and the At Chap. 20. etc.
most abstruse of all the prophetical Scripture, and most to be admired, will
I make any overlong discourse. In so great a mystery, it will be sufficient to
understand the matter in general, and not curiously to search into the reasons
of several circumstances: least happily enlarging more freely then is
requisite, that of Solomon be laid to my charge. In the multitude of words
there wants Prove. 10. 19.
not sin.

But concerning the matter it self, it is grounded upon the undeceivable
sequel of the Apocaliptique order, which before I have demonstrated; and the
consent of other Scripture especially Prophetical, does wonderfully confirm
the same. This was so plainly perceived by the Christians of the next Age after
the Apostles that Iustine Martyr witnesses, that not only himself, but if
Chap. 20.
there were, at that time, any entirely Orthodoxe Christians, they Dial ^um
Trypho^c.
did with full consent believe it.

Which opinion of the first Christians, their successors after an Age or two
rejected, either because it was corrupted by some additions, or (as indeed I
suppose) not rightly understood; notwithstanding the heat of contention being
proceeded in so far, before the matter could be brought to an end (which thou
may justly admire and grieve at) that who so could not otherwise quit
themselves from the force of the contrary opinion borne up by the foundation of
the Revelation; would rather call into question the most Divine Prophecy,
witnessed and sealed both by all the Disciples of the Apostles, and their next
successors; yea and by presumptions fained for that purpose openly and boldly
extenuate the authority thereof, rather then yield and submit: till at length
having gotten a fit interpretation (as they themselves then supposed) of Istius
Mil. lennii.
this thousand years, yielding the Revelation to be Canonical, they desisted
from their impious and fearful enterprise.

But truly, Reader (that I may stay thee no longer in the preface) I will so
deliver the whole matter, that as little as may be, I may seem to have
departed from the received opinion, concerning the day of the coming of Christ,
immediately following the ruin of Antichrist. Do thou weigh the matter in the
fear^ of God, setting apart all prejudice, and out of the judgment of charity
pardon me, if any where I shall err. So therefore take it.

That the seventh Trumpet, with the whole (...).
space of the thousand years, and other prophesies thereto appertaining do
signify that great Day of Judgment, (...) much spoken of by the ancient
Church of the ^ewes, and by Christ and his Apostles, not some short space of
hours (as it is commonly believed) but (after the manner of the Hebrews
taking a day for time) a continued space for many years, and circumscribed
within two resurrections, as it were the bounds: With the Prophe^s every where
(as when they say ^n that day) and otherwhere in the Old Testament* And in the
New, Mat. 6. 11. with Luke 11.13. Ioh 16.26. 2 Cor. ^. ^. Heb. 3. 8, 9. 13.
etc. likewise Chap 4 to conclude, 2 Pet. 1. last. verse. where (...) for ever.
a Day, I say, first, to begin at the particular, and as it were morning
Judgment of Antichrist, and the rest of the living enemies of the Church, by
the glorious (...) appearing of our Lord in flaming fire: and then at length to
determine (after the reign of the thousand years granted to new Jerusalem his
most Chap. 20.
holy Spouse upon this earth: and after the utter destruction of new enemies
yet to arise, the great Day waxing toward evening and Satan being again
loosed) at the universal resurrection, and judgment of all the dead. Which
things being finished the wicked shall be cast into Hell to be tormented for
ever; but the Saints shall he translated into Heaven to live with Christ for
ever.

This indeed is that time of the wrath of God upon the Gentiles, and of judging
the cause of them that died for Christ, for which the triumphing Eld^rs give
thanks at the sound of the seventh Trumpet, Chap. 11. 18. For that then God
would give reward to his servants the Prophets and Saints, and them that fear
his name, small and great, and would destroy them which destroy the earth.

This is that Day of Judgment and perdition of wicked ones, of which Peter 2
Epist. Chap. 3. verse. ^. speaking, presently adds: but be not ignorant of
this one thing, beloved (to wit, the day which I even now spoke of) that one
day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. In
which same day indeed, the Apostle with his brethren of the same kindred the
Jews (to whom he writes) expects that new form of things to come, of which
by and by he says, verse. 13. But we look for new heavens and a new earth,
according to his promise, wherein dwells righteousness. Observe, according
to his promise. But where was this promise of new heavens and a new earth
extant (when John had not yet seen the Revelation) except that of Esaias, Chap.
65. 17. and 66. 22. which promise surely whosoever shall read, I should
marvel, if he should judge that it shall be fulfilled elsewhere, then on earth.

This also is that Kingdom joined with the appearance of (...).
Christ ready to judge the world; of which Paul to Timothy, 2 Epist. Chap. 4.
verse. 1. I charge thee before our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick
and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom. For after the last and
universal resurrection, according to the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. verse. 24,
25, 26, 27, 28. Christ (the last enemy being destroyed, that is, death) shall
deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, that he may be subject to him, who
subdued all things to himself; so far is he from being said then to enter
upon any new Kingdom. That Kingdom therefore which neither shall be before
the (...).
appearance of our Lord, nor after the last resurrection, Chap. 20.
is necessarily to be concluded between them.

This is that Kingdom of the Son of man which Daniel saw, who when the times
of the horn of Antichrist were fulfilled, or the times of the Gentiles come to
end (Luke 21. 24.) shall appear in the clouds of Heaven, when there shall be
given him power, glory, and a Kingdom; that all People, Nations, and Languages
should serve him: or when (as the Angel by and by expounds it) a Kingdom,
power, and greatness of Kingdoms under the whole Heaven (mark it well) shall
be given to the people of the Saints of the most High, Dan. 7. 13. 14. Also the
18.22. ^6. 27. Neither yet (as I said even now) shall this Kingdom be after
the last resurrection: since the Son of man is not to enter upon a Kingdom
then; but, as Paul witnesses, to lay it down and deliver it to his Father.
Now that the same Kingdom is handled in both places, as well by John as
Daniel, may be proved by these two Arguments. First, that both begin at the
same term, to wit, the overthrow of the fourth or Roman Beast: that of Daniel
when the Beast governing under that last regiment of the horn with eyes, was
slain; and his body given unto the burning flame, Dan. 7. 11. 2^. 27. That of
the Revelation, when the Beast and false Prophet (that wicked Verse. 10.
horn in Daniel having mouth and eyes as a head) are taken, and both cast
alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone. Secondly, from the same
session of Judgment premised to both. For it will appear that the one is
borrowed from the other, and altogether tend to the same purpose, by comparing
the words of the description of both.

Dan. Chap. 7. Verse. 9 I beheld till the thrones were set. For so it is to be
rendered with the Vulgar, 70. and The^d. and so the word (...) or (...) for a
throne is used in Targum at the 15. v. of the 1. cap. of Jer. And I saw
Thrones. Rev. 20. 4. Verse. 10 And the judgment was set. That is, the Judges,
as in the great Sanedrin of the Jews, to the rule whereof the whole
description is framed. And they sat upon them. And judgment was given to the
Saints on high: that is, power of judging. Hence is that of P^ul, the Saints
shall judge the world. And judgment was given unto Chap. 20.
them. Verse. 22.
Chap. 20 Verse. 22 And the Saints obtained the kingdom: that is to say with the
son of man, who came in the clouds of heaven. And the Saints lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand years.

Furthermore I would have the Reader understand this. Whatsoever almost is
found from the Jews, whatsoever is delivered by the Lord in his Gospel, or any
where in the new Testament by the Apostles concerning the day of the great
judgment; that is taken out of this vision of Daniel; to wit, that judgment
to be accomplished by fire, Christ to come in the clouds of heaven, to come in
the glory of his Father with multitude of Angels, the Saints with him to judge
the earth, Antichrist to be abolished (...) with the brightness of his coming,
etc. So that they go about wholly to undermine the pillar of the Evangelicall
faith concerning the glorious coming of Christ, who, neglecting the ancient
tradition of the Church, endeavor to turn this prophecy to another end.

Lastly, that I may conclude; this is that most ample kingdom, which by Daniels
interpretation, was foreshewed to Nebuchadnezzar in that Prophetical Statue of
the four kingdoms: not that of a Stone cut out of a Hill whiles yet the Series
of Monarchies remained (for this is the present state of the kingdom of
Christ) but of the Stone when they were utterly broken and defaced, to become a
Mountain and to fill the whole world.

These things Reader I have thus discussed, not rashly affirmed. I leave the
whole matter to the Church to be determined by the word of God: to the
judgment whereof, as it is meet, I do^ willingly submit mine opinion
concerning this mystery.

IN THE DIALOGVE OF IVSTINE MARTYR WITH TRYPHO THE JEW there is a notable place
concerning the thousand years Reign of Christ.
TRYPHO. But tell me the truth; do you confess the restoration of Jerusalem
and do ye expect the gathering together of your people, that they triumph
together with Christ, and the Patriarchs, and the Prophets, and our Tribes; or
those also who before your Christ came were Proselytes? or do you grant those
things that you may seem to get the better of us in dispute?


IVSTINE. Trypho. I am not brought to such a pinch, that my words and thoughts
should differ. I confessed to you heretofore that not only I, but many besides
me do verily think as you well know will come to pass (...). i. But
contrariwise I have signified to thee that many who are not Orthodox and pious
Christians deny this. I pointed out those to thee who are in name Christians
but indeed Atheists and profane heretics, because what they teach is
altogether blasphemous wicked and foolish. But that I may manifest to the world
what I speak^ to you I will collect all our disputations into one body wherein
I will set down in writing what I hold in this point agreeable to what I
profess to you: my determination with my self is to follow neither men nor
their opinions, but God and his word.

For although ye have conferred with some who bear the name of Christians, but
are not so indeed, but dare blaspheme the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of
I^cob, and who say that there is no resurrection of the dead, but that
presently after death their souls are received into heaven; yet you must not
think that those are Christians, as neither any man (if he judge aright) will
acknowledge the Sadduces or such like heretics, as those of the Genists,
M^rists, Galil^ans, Hell^nians and Pharisees who are Baptists to be I^ws (not
to trouble you with the expression of all that is in my mind) they be called
Jews, and the children of Abraham, and confess God with their mouths, but
their heart (as God himself complains) is far from him. (...), But I, and
all entirely Orthodoxe Christians do both know the future resurrection of the
body, and the thousand years in that Jerusalem that shall be reedified,
adorned, and enlarged; as the Prophets Ezekiel and Esaias and others do declare.

For so Esaias of the time of those thousand years (...). Esa. 65.17.
For there shall be a new heaven and a new earth, and the former shall not be
remembered, neither shall they come into their minds; but they shall find joy
and rejoicing in those which I create. For behold I make Jerusalem to triumph,
and my people to rejoice and so forth to the end of the Chapter. But of that
(for the days of my people shall be as the days of the tree of life) he
adds. In these words we understand that the thousand years are impli^itely
pointed at. For as it was said to Adam in that day thou eatest of the tree, in
that same day thou also shall die; we know he did not accomplish a thousand
years: we know also (says he) that saying, that a day with the Lord is a
thousand years, is to our purpose. Moreover, a certain man with us whose name
is John, being one of the twelve Apostles of Christ, in that Reve^ation which
was showed to him, prophesied that our faithful members of Christ should
accomplish those thousand years at Jerusalem; and then the general, and (in a
word) the everlasting resurrection, and last judgment of all jointly together;
even that whereof also our Lord spoke, wherein they shall neither marry, nor be
given in marriage, but shall be equal with the Angels; even sons of the
resurrection of God. For the gifts of prophecy are extant with us, even till
this time, etc.


There is another place to this purpose in the same book.

After the discourse of the great Day of judgment which he calls (...); when
the Jews should lament Christ whom they have crucified, and Christ himself
inaugurated after the order of Melchisedech should be the Judge of quick and
dead, presently he adds.

At whose second coming think not ye that Esaias or other Prophets warned us to
offer up sacrifices of blood, or drink offerings, but true and spiritual
sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving.

THE OPINIONS OF THE LEARNED HEBREWS CONCERNING the great Day of Judgment, and
the Kingdom of CHRIST then to be.
CArpentarius in his Commentary upon Plato his Alcinous, page 322. affirms;
That the seventh Millenary, is called by the whole School of the Cabalists,
The great Day of Judgment: because then (says he) they suppose that God will
Judge the souls of all men. By the name of the Cabalists (if I be not mistaken)
he points at the Doctors of the Talmud; with many of whom it is manifest this
tradition was frequent, for we read in Gemara Sanedrin, Perek Chelek. (...)

R. Ketina said; The world does continue six thousand years, and Esa. 2.11.17.
in one it shall be destroyed. Of which it is said; And the Lord only shall be
exalted in that day. But he understands that destruction which shall be by
fire; whereby the world shall be purified as gold, and shall be freed from the
servitude of the curse, under which it groaneth by reason of man's sin, into
the glorious liberty of the sons of God, Romans 8. 22. It follows a little
after (...)

That is, Tradition agrees with R. Ketina; Even as every seventh year of
seven years, is a year of release: so of the seven thousand years of the
world, the seventh thousand year, shall be the thousand of release, as it is
said: And the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. Likewise in the 92
Psalm (the title) is said to be, A Psalm (or) song for the Sabbath day, that
is, the day that is nothing else but rest. Again it is said in the 90 Psalm.
For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday.

Here let the Reader note two things. First, that the ancient Jews did
understand that Prophecy in the second of Esaias where these words, (And the
Lord alone shall be exalted in that day) are twice taken, for the day of the
great judgment, and the kingdom of Christ; whose steps our later Rabbis have
seemed to imitate. R. Schelomo says. (...)

In that day, that is, in the Day of judgment. Again, (...) when he shall
arise to shake the earth terribly, that is says he, (...) In the day of
judgment, when the Lord shall break the wicked of the Earth. Rabbi David
Kimchi says (...): In that day, that is, in the days of the Messaih, when the
Lord shall execut^ his judgment upon the wicked. That, And the Lord alone
shall be exalted in that day: is as much as if he had said, (...): And the Lord
shall be King over all the earth. The other observable thing is that those
Rabbis think that the title of the Psalm 92 (...) does appertain to the
argument of the Psalm, and ought to be understood of the Sabbatis^^e of the
thousand years.

And now I suppose that it is manifestly proved out of these Rabbis that the
ancient Jews did define that day to be the space of a thousand years, which
they called the day of judgment. That which is more confirmed out of Miarasch
tehillius, upon that saying in the 90 Psalm. Make us glad for the days (or
according to the days) wherein thou have afflicted us: that is (says he) by
the Babylonians, the Grecians, and the Romans, and that in the days of the
Messiah. And how many are the days of Messiah ^ R. Iehosuas said, that they
are two thousand years; as it is said, According to the days ((...)) wherein
tho^ have humbled ^^, that is, according to two days: for one day of the holy
and blessed God are a thousand years, according to that, Because a thousand
years in thy fight are but as yesterday. The Rabbis have also said, that
according to the time to come ((...) in the world to come, Heb. 2. 5.) The day
of the Messiah shall be one. For God which is holy and blessed in the future
(that is, in the future age) shall make one day to himself, of which day we
reads, Zach. 14. And there shall be one day, which shall be known to the Lord,
not day nor Chap. 20.
night; and it shall come to pass, that at evening time it shall be light.
This day is the world to come, and the resurrection of the dead.

But they agree not amongst themselves at what millenary this day shall be;
neither does the seventh millenary like them all. There have been of them, and
yet men of no small authority, who touching the sixth millenary, have thought,
as the house of Eliah; whose tradition is yet extant touching the space of 1000
years of the great judgment, in these words, (...) etc. (...)

That is, The tradition of the house of Elias. The Just whom God shall raise up
(to wit in the first resurrection) shall not return into dust. But if you make
enquiry what is like to happen to the Just, in those thousand years, wherein
God which is holy and blessed shall renew his world, touching which it is said,
And the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day; we must know, that the Lord
shall give them as it were the wings of an Eagle to fly upon the face of the
waters. Whereupon we read (Psalm. 46. 3.) Therefore shall we not fear though
the Earth be removed. But you will say perhaps, they shall have affliction: but
he preventeth that (Esaias 40. 31.) They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew
their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles.

Yet he takes it for granted that the world shall continue no longer then six
thousand years. His tradition is thus. (...)

That is, The world does continue six thousand years, two thousand before the
Law, two thousand under the Law, and two thousand years the days of Christ.
The one of which two thousand years therefore according to his opinion was that
great Day, of which it is said. And the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.

Such was the opinion of R. Asche the brother of R. Abba in these express
words: that is, according to the opinion of R. Chanan the son of Thahalipha:
(...) God which is holy and blessed shall not renew his world but at the
seventh Millenary: But R. Asche said that that shall be (...) after the fifth
Millenary.

Moreover, we may in some part understand by those things which follow, what
the ancient Rabbis thought touching the kingdom of the Messiah in that great
Day to come.

In brief sums of R. Eliezer the great (who lived presently after the second
Temple) Chap. 34. thus we read: (...)

That is, As I live says the Lord, I will raise you up in the time to come, in
the resurrection of the dead, and I will gather you with all Israel Petrus
Galat. 12. book. chap. 1.

Likewise the Paraphrast Jonathan (who lived before Christ) upon the 14 Chapter
of Hosea the 8 verse. They shall be gathered together out of the midst of their
captivity, they shall dwell under the protection of their Christ, and the dead
shall live, and good shall grow in the land, and there shall be a memorial of
their goodness fructifying, and never failing, as the remembrance of the sound
of the Trumpets over the old wine which was wont to be offered in the Sanctuary.

The Targum upon the 50. Psalm, the 8. verse. The Just shall say ((...)) in the
day of the great Judgment: Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence,
that he may revenge his people.

R. Saadas (among those Rabbis whom ((...)) they call excellent) upon that in
the 7. Chapter of Daniel, the 10. verse. And the Judgment is set, and the
Books are opened, etc. (...) That is, the day of Judgment, as it is written:
Mal. 4.1.
Be^old the day comes that shall burn as an oven. Likewise, Esaias 5. 16. Zeph.
3.8.
And the Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in judgment. Again, * Why wait you
for me, says the Lord. That is the great day at which time God will rise to
Judgment.

And a little after: (...) (...)

That is: And know thou, that (the judgment is set, and the the books are
opened) which I have interpreted formerly of the day of Judgment, and time of
Wisd. 3. 7.
visitation: there shall be a day wherein all the actions of the sons of men,
both quick and dead, shall be searched into.

The same verse. 18. The Saints of the most high God shall receive a Kingdom:
(...)

That is: Because the children of Israel have rebelled against the Lord, their
kingdom shall be taken from them, and shall be given to these four Monarchies
which shall possess the kingdom in this world, and shall lead Israel captive
and subd^e it to them even till the world to come, until Messiah shall reign.

Compare that of Luke 21. 25. to wit, The Jews shall be led captive into all
Nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden under foot of the Gentiles, until the
times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. Then they shall see the Son of man
coming in a cloud, etc.

And that of Tertullian against Marcion in his fi^t Book and tenth Chapter.
Christ the high Priest of the Gentiles will vouchsafe to accept and bless the
Circumcision the posterity of Abraham, at his last coming when they shall know
him.

With this agrees that which we find thus written in the Book Berachoth,
Chapter (...) (if we dare trust Petrus Galatinus) Ben Zuma says, It shall come
to pass, that Israel shall not remember their departure out of the Land of
Egypt in the world to come, and in the days of Messiah. And how does this
appear? That which is written in Jeremy the 23. (will prove it) Behold the
days come, and they shall say no more, the Lord lives which brought the
children of Israel up out of the Land of Egypt, etc. which wise men interpret
thus, not as if the name of Egypt should be blotted out, (or forgotten) but
because the wonders which shall be effected in the days of the kingdom of
Messia (that is, when he shall destroy the Kingdoms of the world) shall
principally be remembered (...) and their d^parture out of the Land of Egypt
(...) that is, shall be less spoken of.

By these and the like let the Reader learn, why Saint Jerome does so much
charge the Millinaries with Iudaisme: whereon he so earnestly insisteth, that
this may seem to be his prime argument, whereby he may convince that erroneous
opinion. But howsoever that opinion be true or false, whether those Fathers
were in an error or no; to be of the same mind with the Jews is not always
culpable. But if otherwise; why do we not explode the world to come, Gehenna,
and Paradise? Do not we Christians consent with the Jews in these things?
Have not we the names likewise (of the Kingdom of Heaven and the Day of
Judgment) from the Jewish Robbins? For where are those things read in the Old
Testament? which yet are very frequent among the Jewish Doctors.

Moreover, who hearing the opinion of the ancient Jews touching the one
thousand years of the day of Judgment, cannot but think with himself that
he is moved to believe it, the Apostle Peter with them (for both his Epistles
are directed to the Jews) speaking of the Day of Judgment, and presently
after the mentioning thereof adding, You are not ignorant, that one day with
the Lord is as a thousand years, would confirm the tradition of the Rabbis
touching that matter? Especially when those words do not seem to be taken out
of the Psalm (as the common opinion is) but out of the Vulgar form and manner
of the Jews making mention of the Day of Judgment. Yea he will further think;
unles Christ the Lord and his Apostles had used the name of the Day of
Judgment being derived from the Rabbis, in the same sense with them, why have
they not some where declared it? Is it not a dangerous matter, yea the high way
to deceive men to use in doctrine the words and phrases of such as are
erroneous without all caution and note of dissent?

Seeing these things are so, I leave it to the judgment of learned men and
great Divines to judge, whether this be not the best and easiest way to deal
with the Jews; not to wrest those plain Prophesies touching things
appertaining to the last and glorious coming of Christ, to his first coming;
but to persuade them that they expect none other Messiah, who can fulfill all
those things, namely changing those things that are to be changed (for a
Christian must consent no further with the Jews in any thing, then his
profession does give him leave) then that Jesus of Nazareth whom their Fathers
have crucified. That which the Relation in so many places and so carefully does
inculcate. Behold, (says it not far from the beginning) (Jesus Christ the
first begotten from the dead, who loved us, and washed us from our sins in
his blood) comes in the clouds, and every eye shall see him, even they that
have crucified him, and all Tribes of the Earth shall mourn before him. I am
Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, says the Lord, which is, and which
was, and which is to come. Likewise whilst it gives that royal Kingdom to
the Lamb, namely to Jesus that was slain, as in the seventh Chapter
concerning the multitude with Palms in their hands: The Lamb shall feed
them, etc. in the seventeenth Chapter, the fourteenth verse. The Lamb shall
overcome them, because he is Lord of lords, and King of kings. Chapter 19.7.
The Marriage of the Lamb is come. Chapter 21.9. speaking of the New Jerusalem,
I will show thee the Bride of the Lamb. And in the 23. verse. The Lamb is the
light thereof, etc. For whilst that we wrest those plain Prophesies touching
things which shall be at the second coming of Christ to his first, the Jews
laugh at us, and they are hardened in their infidelity.

The Apostle Peter uses this means to convert the Jews, unless I be much
mistaken, Acts 3. 19. Repent, (says he) and be converted, that your sins may
be blotted out, when the times (...).
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and he shall send
JESUS CHRIST; which was preached unto you: whom the Heavens must receive until
the times of restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of
all his holy Prophets.

1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.
(...). To our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ be glory both now and for ever.
Amen.
FINIS.
A COMPENDIVM OF Mr. Mede his Commentary upon the REVELATION containing two
Prophesies.
FIrst, the sealed book or Seal Prophecy. Secondly, the Prophecy of the
little book open. In the Seal Prophecy is described the imperial Chap. 4.
Session, conformable to Isreal's encamping in the wilderness. The twenty four
Elders signifying Verse. 4.
the Bishops and Prelates answering the Levites and Priests in so many courses.

The four Beasts by tradition of the Elders of the Hebrews were 1. A Lion. An
Ensign Verse. 6
of the Host of Ezekiel. 1* 14.
Israel. 2. A Bullock. An Ensign of the Host of Israel. 3. A Man. An Ensign
of the Host of Israel. 4. An Eagle. An Ensign of the Host of Israel.


They were full of eyes, signifying sharp sightednesse. Verse. 6.


Their wings, agilitie. Verse. 8.


Wings full of eyes, zeal joined with knowledge. Ibid.


Six wings, most ready to execute Gods Commandment. Ibid.


In the same Seal Prophecy is set forth the dest^nie of the Empire. Chap. 5.


The first Seal; the opener is (a Lion) sh^wing a white horse Chap. 6.
and his rider: signifying, Christ the Emperor from the East, Verse. 1, 2.
laying the foundation of the conquest of the Dragon, i. the Devil, and all
the Oracles became silent through the World.

The Second Seal (a Bullock) showing a red horse and his rider, Verse. 3, 4.
signifying Trajan from the West, whose reign with Hadrian his successor was
full of blood, (...).

The third Seal (a Man) showing a black horse and his rider; signifying
Septimius Severus from the South, and by the balances Verse. 5. 6.
in his hand, Justice and careful provision for the Commonwealth in his time
and Alexanders.

The fourth Seal (an Eagle) showing a pale horse and his rider; signifying
Maximinus from the North, in his time and Gallus, Verse. 7. 8.
Volusianus, and Decius, the sword, famine, and pestilence met together,
therefore called Mortifer.

The fifth Seal (no beast horse norrider) enters from Aurelianus V^^^. 9,
10, 11
in Anno 268. wherein is set forth the ten years persecution under
Dioclesian.

The sixth Seal, an admirable shaking of Heaven and Earth, Verse. 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17
signifying the change and subversion of the state of Rome heathen by
Constantine the Great.

Before the entrance to the seventh Seal (which is a seal of Chap. 7.
Trumpets) there is care taken for the Church: set forth by a company of
144000. to be sealed of every Tribe of Israel 12000, in Verse. 4. 5.
reckoning of which, there is an unusual order, yet in that Type such as might
best represent the profession of pure Religion miraculously in the bosom of
the Empire, to be preserved in the midst of the combustions of the World,
polluted with idolatrous worship, and conspiring the ruin of the Church, and
therefore it is fenced with the Seal of God. The twelve Apostles aptly
answering the Type of Israel; the number 12. being the Ensign of the
Apostolic race, and by multiplying expressing the Apostolic pregenic. To
which is added (by the representation of innumerable Palmebearers) (...)
a most ample estate of every Nation, People, Tribe, and Ton^ue, and ^.
praising God.

The seventh Seal contains seven Trumpets, sounding the Chap. ^.
allar^e to the ruin of the Empire by a sevenfold order of plagues, the four
first of less extent.

The first Trumpet wastes the Territory of the Roman Empire, with a terrible
breaking in of the Northern Nations: for by the third part of the Earth* is
meant the people, or political Verse 7.
Universe of the Roman Empire, it being the third part of the then known
habitable world. This happened from the death of Theodosius, Anno 395. by
Alaricus and the Goths, and by the Barbarians, Radagaiso being their Captain,
Anno 404. and by the Vandales and Alanes, etc. Anno 405/6.

The second Trumpet assaileth the dominion of the Roman Verse ^. 9.
Empire expressed by the Sea, Rome being taken by Alaricus Anno 410. After
which the largeness of the Roman dominion was daily cut off, until Anno 455.
that Gensericus took and spoiled Rome again; after which the whole body of
the Empire was divided into ten Kingdoms, Anno 456.

The third Trumpet utterly throws down the Roman Hesperus, or Western
Caesar, Anno 476. fetching his last breath under Verse. 10, 11.
the fatal name of Augustulus, a Prince of bitterness and sorrows, therefore
resembled by a falling Star called Wormwood.

The fourth Trumpet takes away the light of the Roman Verse. 12.
Majesty, shining till then under Ostrogothean Kings, when the Consulship of
Rome failed, Anno 542.

The three woe Trumpets. Verse. 13.


The fifth or first woe Trumpet, sends the hostile hands of Chap. 9.
Saracens, and Arabians, in the Type of Locusts, not only to destroy Verse. 3.
and waste, from the year 830, to 980. that is 150. years, or five months of
years, but also to poison with the venomous doctrine of Muhamedisme. The
Locusts had a King over them whose name was (...) a Destroyer. Verse 11.


The sixth or second woe Trumpet, lo^seth the four Angels, Verse. 13, 14.
that is, the four Sultanies, or Kingdoms into which the Turks were parted,
being before restrained at Euphrates, which loosing happened a little before
the year 1300. uniting themselves under the conduct of one Othoman, which
should come to pass after a prophetical day, a month and a year, being 396.
years, to wit, from the year 1057. wherein Tangrolipix had taken the royal
City Bagdad, from which time the Turks are prepared to kill the third part of
men, that is, in the year 1453. Constantinople Verse. 15.
being then taken. The number of the horsemen are two hundred Verse. 16.
thousand thousand, their Munition, Gunnes, and Ordnance, expressed Verse. 17.
by Fire, Smoke, and Brimstone.

The seventh, or third woe Trumpet, is put off to the prophecy Chap 10.
of the Little Book: It contains the consummation of the Verse* 7.
Mystery of God, which event is declared in an Oath, taken by an Angel; and a
Cry, upon which seven thund^rs utter their Verse* 6.
Verse* 3.
voices, which John is forbidden to write.

Ver^. 4.
The Prophecy of the Little Book (wherein the destiny of the Church is
cont^ined) follows: to which the Apostle is fitted by Verse. 8, 9, 10.
taking the Book, and eating it; which was sweet in his mouth, but bitter in
his belly.

The measur^d court, sets forth the Primitive state of the Christi^n Church,
conformable to the rule of Gods Word, shortly after to ensue, and contrary to
which is the Court not to be measured, it not being Gods workmanship, but to be
profaned by idolatrous worship renewed, or Antichristian Apostasy, to reign
forty two months of years.

While this Court is profaned, two Witnesses bewail the profanation, Ve^s. 3.
give testimony to the truth of God, and exhort to repentance 1260. days,
answerable to the forty two months of profanation, denouncing Gods
judgments, which began to be executed at the Phyalls, and debarring the new
Idolaters from the hope Verse. 5.
of eternal life. Verse. 6.


The destiny of these Witnesses is (when they have finished their testimony)
to be made conformable to Christ in suffering, to be Verse. 7.
in^licted upon them by the Roman seven-headed Beast: these shall in the end
suffer a mystical death, and lie unburied three Verse. 8, 9, 10, 11.
years and an half; after which they shall be restored to their former
estate, or to a more excellent dignity. And upon a commotion, and alteration
of political affairs, the City of Rome as Verse. 12, 13.
now it is (being but a tenth part of the old City) shall be overthrown at
the fifth Phyall, wherein shall be slain ^000. men of Name, or of the Clergy,
or Companies of men. This is the ending of the second woe or sixth Trumpet: at
which time the Kings from the East, or the Jews, shall begin as it were a
new Kingdom: or the Beast, i. the Pope, shall change his form, being driven
from his Metropolis Rome, by the overthrow thereof.

So this Vision (Chap. 11.) of the open Book goes through the whole course of
the Revelation, to show the connection of it with the Seals and Trumpets.

THe Roman Empire worshipping the Dragon, that is, the Chap. 12.
Devil in Idols, persecuted the Church of God (represented Verse. 3, 4.
by the woman in travel to bring forth Christ in the Roman ^mpire to be King)
300. years. But after she brought him Verse. 5
. forth (the Dragon being cast down from the Roman throne by Constantine) he
was there enthroned. This chance of the Dragon Verse. 7, 8, 9.
contemporiseth with the sixth Seal. The woman after the bringing Verse. 13, 14.
forth of her son, dwells in the wilderness 42 months, or for a time,
times, and half a time; typifying the state of the Church in a middle
condition, freed from the rage of persecution, and not attained to the state of
glory, but still persecuted by the Verse. 15.
flood of errors and heresies ^ast out of the Devils mouth.

A new Tragedy of evils falls upon the Woman entered into Chap. 13.
the wilderness, she lights upon a double Beast, the one ten horned, Verse. 1
etc.
being the secular whole estate of ten Kingdoms, into which the Empire was
divided by the wars of the Barbarians. The other two horned being
Ecclesiastical, which the Pope with his Clergy make up; both Beasts reigning
together, and tied in a near alliance, governing under the seventh head,
exercising the cruelty of the Dragon, and pretending the worship of Christian
Religion, demolishing Idols, but promoting by Laws and Edicts ^dolatry, and
lately abolished Heathenisme, termed blasphemy against God, V^rs 6.
his Name, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven His Name, when any
thing besides God is worshipped with divine worship Joh. 2. 19. and verse 21.
His Tabernacle; that is, the humane nature of Christ, wherein the Deity
dwells, by transubst^ntiation. And them that dwell in heaven, that is, by
calling idols which they worship by their names in derogation of Christ his
prerogative and glory.

The company of 144000 virgins followers of the Lamb, mentioned Chap 14.
and sealed before at the seventh Seal for connection of the Verse. 3, 4, 5.
two prophesies; signify the Church in the midst of the Papacy continuing
faithful to the Lamb, the native progeny of the twelve Apostles
apostolically multiplied, purely and rightly honoring the Lamb and his Father
with the Evangelicall song, not addicted to any one Sea, but accompanying the
Lamb whithersoever he goes, often and sharply admonishing the worshippers of
the Beast concerning Evangelicall worship, and warning all to withdraw
themselves from those Idolaters, except they will perish eternally, set forth
in the Cry of three Angels.

The first admonishes to worship God purely and rightly according Verse. 6, 7. ^
to the Gospel: fulfilled in the year 720 in the Greek and Eastern Churches,
when the Emperors Leo Isaurus, Constantine Iconomachus, Leo Armenius, Michael
Balbus, and Theophilus, by their Edicts and Decrees made Protestation for
presenting religious worship to one God the Creator, against worshipping of the
creature, not only Images, but also Saints and their relics: as also by the
Council of 338 Bishops assembled at Constantinople by Constantine Iconomachus
the adoration of images was accused and condemned of impiety, etc.

The second Angel threatens mystical Babylon for the crime Verse. 8.
of spiritual fornication with inevitable destruction: Fulfilled in the time
of the Albigenses and Waldenses who were the ministers of this Cry; by word and
by deed, proclaiming the Church of Rome to be the Ap^calyptike Bab^lon by her
idolatry and mystical whoredom, etc.

The third Angel denounces horrible and heinous torments, Verse. 9, 10, 11, etc.
easelesse and endless, to the whole train of the Beast, and those that shall
abide in his obedience.

After this threefold admonition by the Angels, follows the Verse. 14 15.
vindication of the Church against her enemies, under the types of Harvest and
Vintage; By Harvest is understood the preparation of the Bride by the
conversion of the Jews, together with the overthrow of the Turki^h Empire; the
Lord Ie^us being the Lord of the Harvest, and this at the sixth phyall.

As touching the Vintage, the vineyard of the earth is the Verse. 17, 18, 19,
etc.
dominion of the Beast: The grapes, the followers of the Beast: The winepresse,
the place of slaughter Armageddon in the 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
seventh phyall: to which place the grapes being gathered by the Angel the
Vintager with the help of the Saints, the Lord Jesus shall tread them at his
coming. Now both Harvest and Vintage is obtained by prayers of the Church
universally.

Mystical Babylon is Rome, the mother City of spiritual Chap. 17.
fornication. Verse. 1, 2.


The Beast, is the Roman Empire. Verse. 3.


Seven heads, are seven hills upon which Rome stands, or seven Orders of
succ^ssive Rulers, viz. Kings, Consuls, Tribunes, Decemviri, Dictators,
Emperors, (in respect of the change whereof into ten Kingdoms it might seem
another Ruler, yet is but the same) and Popes: which last Beast is the bearer
of the whore.

The ten horns, are those ten Kingdoms into which the Empire Verse. 4.
is divided.

The cup in her hand, etc. has allusion to whores and stews, Verse. 4.
which is interpreted by the Angel to John, in the Chapter following at the
eighth verse.

In this Chapter is figured the state of the Church cleansed from Idolatrous
pollution, and singing the triumphant song at the pouring Chap. 15.
out of the phyalls.

The effusion of the phyalls signify the ruin of the Antichristian Beast. The
seven phyalls, so many degrees of the ruin thereof. Verse. 6, 7.
And whatsoever the phyall is powered out upon, suffers damage and loss
thereby.

The first phyall is powered out upon the Earth, that is, the people, or common
sort of Christians; this was fulfilled by the Albigenses Chap. 16. v. 2.
and Waldenses, etc.

The second phyall is powered out upon the Sea, that is, the compass Verse. 3.
of the Popes jurisdiction; fulfilled by Luther, etc. Reformers of the Church.

The third upon the Rivers, that is, upon the Ministers and Verse. 4, 5, 6, 7.
Defenders of the Antichristian i^risdiction; fulfilled in the year 1588, upon
the Spanish Champions, Priests and Jesuits, by laws executed upon them in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth.

The fourth upon the Sun, that is, the Germane Empire, now Verse. 8, 9.
(by the wars there) in pouring out.

The fifth, upon the Throne of the Beast, that is, Rome it self. Verse. 10, 11.


The sixth upon Euphrates, to prepare away for the Kings of Verse 12, 13, 14,
15, 16.
the East. viz. The conversion of the I^raelites, by removing the obstacle, the
Othoman Empire of the Turks, agreeing with the plague of the sixth Trumpet,
Chapter 11.

The seventh phyall is powered out upon the Air, that is, upon Satan, Verse. 17,
etc.
comprehending, not the dominion of the Beast only, but all the enemies of
Christ, gathered to gether under the conduct of the Power of the Air, and shut
up in Armageddon.

The seventh Trumpet, with the whole space of 1000. years Chap. 20.
thereto appertaining, signifying the great Day of Judgment, circum scribed
within two resurrections, beginning at the judgment of Antichrist, as the
morning of that day, and continuing during the space of 1000 years granted to
new Jerusalem, (the Spouse of Christ) upon this Earth, till the universal
resurrection and judgment of all the dead, when the wicked shall be cast into
Hell to be tormented for ever, and the Saints translated into Heaven, to live
with Christ for ever.

FINIS.
Erratain the latter part of this Book.
Page line. Erat. Corrected. 3. l.13. as measuring is measuring 7. l. 3. cap.
6. Gr^. (...). 19. l. 6. that may that they may 21. l. 31. to the Saint to the
sift 24. l. ^0 That t^nth That this tenth 39. l. 33. with her child her child
56. l. 3^. a few days. a few days together. 65. l. 19. that the Roman that
that Roman 75. l. 11. twleve virgins twelve being eminent as well in the
company of virgins 81. l. 27. nation notion 94. l. 16. other drug other bitter
drug 96. l. 12. the ruin the crime 122. l. 14. for many of many 125. 18. add
in marg 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. against line 28. add Dan. 2.35. 2^8. l.19. and 30. ^.
(...) p. 133. in the marg. over against 1. 27. put. lib. 11. c.1.


