Musarum Deliciae: OR, THE MUSES RECREATION.

Containing several select Pieces of sportive Wit.

By Sr J. M. and Ja: S.



LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Sign of the Anchor in the New Exchange, 1655.

THE STATIONER TO THE Ingenious READER.
PLain Poetry is now disesteem'd, it must be Drollery or it will not please: I
have therefore, to regal the curious Pallats of these Times, made a Collection
of Sir John Mennis, and Doctor Smiths Drolish Intercourses; which as they need
no recommendation to your acceptance, the world being well acquainted with the
ingenuity both of those persons, and their preductions; so neither can you
suspect them adulterate, since they are inimitable by any but themselves.

Read, Laugh and enjoy. H. H.

MUSARUM DELICIAE: OR, The Muses Recreation.
To Parson WEEKS. An Invitation to London.
HOw now, my John, what, is it the care
Of thy small Flock, that keeps thee there?
Or has the Bishop, in a rage,
Forbid thy coming on our Stage?
Or want thou Coin? or want thou Steed?
These are impediments indeed:
But, for thy Flock, thy Sexton may
In due time ring, and let them pray.
A Bishop, with an Offering,
May be brought unto any thing.
For want of Steed, I often see Vic
Trudge up to Town with hazle stick;
For Coin, two Sermons by the way,
Will Host, Hostess; and Tapster pay.
A willing mind pawns Wedding-ring,
Wife, Gown, Books, Children, any thing.
No way neglected, naught too dear
To see such friends, as thou have here.
I met a Parson on the way,
Came in a Wagon the other day,
Who told me, that he ventured forth
With one Tithe Pig, of little worth;
With which, and saying grace at food,
And praying for Lord Carryers good:
He had arrived at's Journeyes end,
Without a penny, or a friend.
And what great business do you think?
Only to see a friend, and drink.
One friend? why thou have thousands here
Will strive to make thee better cheer.
Ships lately from the Islands came
With Wines, thou never heardst their name.
Montefiasco, Frontiniac,
Viatico, and that old Sack
Young Herric took to entertain
The Muses in a sprightly vein.
Come then, and from thy muddy Ale,
(Which serves but for an old wifes Tale:
Or, now and then, to break a jest,
At some poor silly neighbors Feast)
Rouse up, and use the means, to see
Those friends, expect thy wit, and thee.
And though you cannot come in state,
On Camels back, like Coryat:
Imagine that a pack-horse be
The Camel, in his book you see.
I know you have a fancy, can
Conceive your guide a Caravan.
Rather then fail, speak Treason there,
And come on charges of the Shire;
A London Goal, with friends and drink,
Is worth your Vicaridge, I think.
But if besotted with that one
Thou have, of ten, stay there alone;
And, all too late lament and cry,
Thou Have lost thy friends, among them, I.
To a friend upon a journey to Epsam Well.
SIR, though our flight deserves no care
Of your enquiry, where we are;
Yet, for to put you out of doubt,
Read but these Lines, you will smell us out.
We having at the Mazard dined,
Where Veal and Mutton open chin'd,
Hang on the Shambles; thence we pace
To Putney's Ferry, Coomes old Chase
We next passed over, then to the Town
Which name of King does much renown;
Where having supped, we went to bed,
Our selves and Cattle wearied.
Next morning e're the Sun appeared,
Our Horses and our selves well cheered;
To Epsam Well we asked the way,
Of young and old, of poor and gay:
Where, after five or six mistakes,
We found the Spring, near hid with brakes.
These waters clear, two Hermits keep,
Who always either wake, or sleep;
And by alternate courses, wait
On Man or Beast, if here you bait.
It Is here the people far and near
Bring their Diseases, and go clear.
Some drink of it, and in an hour,
Their Stomach, Guts, and Kidneyes scower:
Others do Bathe, and Ulcers cure,
Dry Itch, and Leprosy impure;
And what in Lords you call the Gout,
In poor the Pox, this drives all out.
Close by the Well, you may discern
Small shrubs of Eglantin and Fern,
Which show the business of the place;
For here old Ops her upper face
Is yellow, not with heat of Summer,
But safroniz'd with mortal scumber.
But then the pity to behold
Those ancient Authors, which of old
Wrote down for us, Philosophy,
Physic, Music, and Poetry,
Now to no other purpose tend,
But to defend the fingers end.
Here lies Romes Naso torn and rent,
New reeking from the Fundament:
Galens old rules could not suffice,
Nor yet Hippocrates the wise.
Not teaching, how to cleanse, can do,
Themselves must come and wipe it too.
Here did lie Virgil, there lay Horace,
Which newly had wiped his, or her Arse,
Anacreon reeled too and fro,
Vexed, that they used his papers so.
And Tully with his Offices,
Was forced to do such works as these.
Here lies the Letter of a Lover,
Which piece-meale did the thing discover.
Sonnets half written would not stay,
But must necessity obey.
This made us for a while to think,
The Muses here did seldom drink:
But hap what would, we light from stirrup,
And straight descend to drink the syrrup.
The good old Father takes a cup,
When five times washed, he fills it up
With this prized Liquor, then does tell
The strange effects of this new Well.
Quoth he, my friends, though* I be plain,
I have seen here many a goodly train
Of Lords and Ladies, richly clad,
With Aches more then ere I had:
These having drunk a week, or so,
Away with health most jocund go:
Mean while the Father thus did prate,
We still were drinking as we sat;
Till Gut by rumbling, us beseeches,
My boys, beware, you will wrong your Breeches.
Ah, does it work? the old man cries,
Yonder are brakes to hide your thighs.
Where, though 'twere near we hardly came,
Ere one of us had been too blame.
Here no Olympic games they use,
No wrestling here, Limbs to abuse,
But he that gains the glory here
Must scumber furthest, shite most clear.
And, for to make us emulate,
The good old Father does relate
The vigor of our Ancestors,
Whose shiting far exceeded ours.
Quoth he, do you see that below?
I do, quoth I, his head's now low,
But here have I seen old John Jones,
From this hill, shite to yonder stones.
But him Heaven rest, the ma^^s dead,
This speech of his me netled;
With that my head I straightway put
Between my knees, and mounting scut,
At chiefest random, forty five,
With Lions face, dung forth I drive,
The ayre's divided, and it flies,
Like Draco volans through the skies.
Or who had seen a Conduit break,
And at the hole with fury reak:
Had he but hither took the pain
To come, had seen it once again.
Here Colon played his part indeed,
And over-shit the stones a reed.
Whereat the Father, all amazed,
Limps to the place, where having gazed
With heaved up hands, and fixed eyes,
Quoth he, dear, let me kiss those thighs
That prop the tail will carry hence
Our glory and magnificence.
His suit being granted, home he walks,
And to himself of wonders talks;
From whence he brings a painted stake,
High to be seen, above the Brake:
And having asked my name, he writ
In yellow Letters, who 'twas shit,
Which still stands as a Monument
Called Long-taile, from the Man of Kent.
This being all the first day did,
We home retired, where we lay hid
In Alehouse, till another day
Shall prompt my Muse; then more I Will say.
'Till when, take this, to make an end,
I rest your servant, and your friend.
To a friend upon his Marriage.
SInce last I writ, I hear dear honey,
Thou have committed Matrimony;
And soberly both Morn and Even,
Do take up smock, in fear of Heaven.
Alas poor Soul, thy Marriage vow
Is as the Rites, unhallowed now;
Slighted by Man, ordained by Bishop,
Not one, whom zeal has scared from his shop.
The Ring profane, and Surplice foul,
No better then a Friars Cowl,
With Poesy vile, and at thy Table
Fiddlers, that were abominable,
Who sung, perhaps, a song to Hymen,
And not a Psalm to edify men.
It is the opinion of this place,
Thou can not get a Babe of Grace.
This story is sad; to make amends,
I Will tell thee news, to tell thy friends.
You heard of late, what Chevaliers
(Who durst not tarry for their ears)
Prescribed were, for such a plot
As might have ruined Heaven knows what:
Suspected for the same's Will D'avenant,
Whether he have been in it, or have not,
He is committed, and, like Sloven,
Lolls on his Bed, in garden Coven.
He had been racked, as I am told,
But that his body would not hold.
Soon as in Kent they saw the Bard,
(As to say truth, it is not hard,
For Will has in his face, the flawes
Of wounds received in Countries cause:)
They flew on him, like Lions passant,
And tore his Nose, as much as was on it:
They called him Superstitious Groom,
And Popish Dog, and Curre of Rome;
But this I Am sure, was the first time,
That Wills Religion was a crime.
What ere he is in's outward part,
He is sure a Poet in his heart.
But it is enough, he is thy friend,
And so am I, and there is an end.
From London, where we sit and muse,
And pay Debts when we cannot choose;
The day that Bishops, Deans and Prebends,
And all their friends, wear mourning Ribbands;
If this day smile, they will ride in Coaches,
And, if it frown, then Bonas Noches.
In answer to certain Letters, which he received from London, whilst he was
engaged to follow the Camp.
WHat, Letters two, on New-years-day?
It Is sign, thy Muse has leave to play,
And swelling grape distills his Liquor,
Which makes thy Pulse and muse flow quicker.
Alas poor Souls! in Mud we travel,
And each day vexed with Martch and Gravel,
And when at night, we come to quarter,
Drink, what thou would not give to Porter.
From Northern soil, I lately came,
With Horses two of mine, one Lame;
But when I came to house of state,
Where quondam fled his Grace in Plate:
Expecting after journey scurvey,
Solace, I found all topsie turvy.
New Orders bid me thence away,
The people grumble, they want pay;
And now, like wandering Knights we wend
Without a penny, or a friend:
Our score grows great, from whence we go,
And every Alehouse turned a foe.
These give their friends intelligence
That we are coming, without pence;
And those we fear, will shut the door
At wandering Prince, when known so poor.
However, we march on to morrow,
And here, and there, small sums we borrow.
Judge, if thy Muse could soar so high,
When pinion's clipped, what Bird can fly?
No, no, good Wine and ease I Am barred of,
Which makes my Muse to come so hard off;
And hearing fellows nine in London,
Get cash, carouse, while I am undon:
While not one Captain here will tarry
But John, with Horse of Commissary;
And here he spends his time and pence,
Without a hope of recompense,
And scarce sees friends, but such as grutch him,
If he have coin, they none, they catch him
With that old beaten, trodden way,
Jack, can thou lend, till next pay day?
Till now, at length my pocket's grown
Like Nest defiled, when Bird is flown.
Judge, from such stories, if you can
Expect a Muse from any man.
Yet have I still respects from them,
Who weekly think upon. J. M.
To noble Kenelm, say, I drink,
And unto Lord of Down, I think
The day, when Janus, with face double,
Looks on the passed, and coming trouble.
The first day ever rich or poor,
Wrote forty years, and one before.
The House, the Talbot, Corney Host,
My liquor now, but Ale and Tossed.
In answer to this last, or some such like Letter.
WHy seeks my friend so vain excuse,
For the long silence of his Muse;
As if her faculty were worse,
Because joined with an empty purse?
Lines may accrue, although the pence
That use to purchase Influence
From constellation of Corney,
Be fewer, then will fee Attorney.
Thou know that Vacuus cantabit,
(There Is Latin for thee, though but a bit)
Sing then, and lets be free from blame,
Thy Verse is fat, though horse be lame.
See thou not, Ovid, Homer, Virgil,
With Muse more needy, John, then your Gill;
Indite things high, and rest the Ivy,
From wealthy Tacitus and Livie:
From Cicero, (that wrote in Prose)
So called, from Rouncival on's Nose.
For, though 'twas hid, till now of late,
Yet it is a truth, as firm as fate,
That Poets, when their Money scants,
Are often inspired by their wants.
Want makes them rage, and rage Poetic
Makes Muse, and Muse makes work for Critic.
As for thy pocket, which thou say
Is like to a defiled Nest,
A Nest, that is of all bereft,
Save what the Cat in Maulthouse left;
There is a Proverb to thy comfort,
Known, as the ready way to Rumford,
That, when the pot ore fire you heat,
A Lowse is better then no meat;
So, in your Pocket by your favor,
Something, you know, will have some savor.
But soft, the word is now come forth,
We all must pack into the North;
When mind of Man was set to play,
And riding Boot lay out of the way;
We were commanded in a Minute,
To journey base, the Devil's in it;
For now I have no more mind to it,
Then is an Apple like a Nut:
Yet look I must for riding tackle,
In corners of my Tabernacle;
And look, as men for slanders hark,
Or one that gropes in privy dark,
So must I search with fear of mind,
And seek for what I would not find.
Had I two faces, like to Janus,
(A Month that now has overtane us.)
With one of them I Will smile in Town,
While the other among my foes did frown.
But wishes help not, nor can with*
Hold, from embracing thee, James Smith.
Long Aker, from the Angel Tavern,
Two hundred miles from head of Severn.
Where, for my shillings twain, I dine,
With Tongue of Neat, far worse then mine:
The tenth of January day durty.
One thousand, hundreds six, and forty.
Description of three Beauties.
PHiloclea and Pamela sweet,
By chance in one great house did meet,
And meeting did so join in heart,
That the one from the other could not part.
And who, indeed, not made of Stones,
Would separate such lovely ones?
The one is beautiful, and fair,
As Lillies and white Roses are;
And sweet, as after gentle showers,
The breath is of ten thousand flowers.
From due proportion, a sweet air
Circles the other, not so fair;
Which so her Brown does beautify,
That it inchants the wisest eye.
Have you not seen, on some bright day,
Two goodly Horses, White, and Baye,
Which were so beauteous in their pride,
You knew not which to choose, or ride?
Such are these two, you scarce can tell,
Which is the daintier Bonny bell:
And they are such, as, by my troth,
I had been dead in love with both,
And might have sadly said, goodnight
Discretion, and good fortune quite,
But that God Cupid, my old Master,
Presented me a Sovereign plaster:
Mopsa, even Mopsa, pretty Mouse,
Best piece of Wainscot in the House;
Whose Saffron Teeth, and Lips of Leeks,
Whose Coral Nose, and Parchment Cheeks;
Whose Past-board forehead, eyes of Ferret,
Breast of brown Paper, Neck of Caret;
And other parts, not evident,
For which dame nature should be shent,
Are Spells and Charms of great renown,
Concupiscence to conjure down.
How often have I been reft of sense,
By gazing on their excellence,
Till meeting Mopsa in my way,
And looking on her face of Clay,
I soon was cured and made as sound,
As though I never had a wound.
And when, in Tables of my heart,
Love with such things as bred my smart;
My Mopsa, with her face of Clout,
Would in an instant wipe them out:
And when their faces made me sick*
Mopsa would come with hers of Brick,
A little heated by the fire,
And break the neck of my desire.
Now from their face I turn mine eyes,
But (cruel Panthers) they surprise
Me with their breath, that incense sweet,
Which only for the Gods is meet;
And jointly from them does respire
Like both the Indies set on fire,
Which so orecomes man's ravished sense,
That Souls to follow it, fly hence.
Nor such like smell you, as you range
By th'Stocks, or Old, or New Exchange.
Then stood I still as any Stock,
Till Mopsa with her puddle Dock.
Her Compound or Electuary,
Made of old Ling, or Caviary,
Bloat Herring, Cheese, or voided Physic,
(Being sometimes troubled with the Tysick)
Did Cough, and fetch a figh so deep,
As did her very bottom sweep;
Whereby to all she did impart,
How Love lay rankling at her heart;
Which when I smelt, desire was slain,
And they breathe forth perfumes in vain.
Their Angels voice surpised me now,
But Mopsa's shrill; To whit to whoo
Descending through her hollow Nose,
Did that distemper soon compose.
And therefore Oh thou virtuous Owl,
The wise Minerva's only foul:
What at thy shrine shall I devise
To offer up for Sacrifice?
Hang Aesculapius, and Apollo,
Hang Ovid with his precepts shallow:
With patience who will now endure
Your slow and most uncertain cure,
Seeing Mopsa's found, for Man and Beast,
To be the sure Probatum est?
Oh thou, Loves chiefest Medicine,
True water to Dame Venus wine,
Best Cordial, soundest Antidote,
To conquer Love, and cut his throat;
Be but my second, and stand by,
And I their beauties both defy,
And all else of those Faery races
That wear infection in their faces;
For I Will come safe out of the Field
With this thy face, Medusa's shield.
A journey into France.
I Went from England into France,
Neither to learn to sing, nor dance,
To ride, nor yet to Fence:
Nor did I go like one of those
That do return with half the nose
They carried from hence.
But I to Paris rid along
Much like John Dory in the song,
Upon a holy Tide:
I on an ambling Nag did get,
I think he is not paid for yet,
And spurred him on each side.
And to S. Denis first we came,
To see the sights at Nostredame,
The man that shows them snuffles;
Where who is apt for to believe,
May see our Ladies right arm sleeve,
And eke her old Pantofle.
Her Breasts, her Milk, her very Gown,
Which she did wear in Bethlem Town,
When in the Inn she lay;
Yet all the world knows, that is a fable,
For so good Clothes never lay in stable,
Upon a lock of Hay.
No Carpenter could by his Trade
Gain so much Coin, as to have made
A Gown of so rich Stuff;
Yet they (poor fools) think for their credit,
They must believe old Joseph did it,
Cause she deserved enough.
There is one of the Crosses Nails,
Which who so sees, his Bonnet vailes;
And, if he will, may kneel:
Some say, it is false, 'twas never so,
Yet, feeling it, thus much I know,
It is as true as Steel.
There is a Lantern which the Jews,
When Judas led them forth did use;
It weighed my weight down right:
But to believe it, you must think
The Jews did put a Candle in it,
And then 'twas wondrous light.
There Is one Saint there has lost his Nose,
Another's head, but not his Toes,
His Elbow, and his Thumb;
But when w'had seen the holy rags,
We went to th'Inne, and took our Nags,
And so away did come.
We came to Paris, on the Seyn,
It Is wondrous fair, but nothing clean,
It Is Europes greatest Town;
How strong it is, I need not tell it,
For any man may easily smell it,
That walks it up and down.
There many strange things you may see,
The Palace, the great Gallery,
Place royal does excel:
The New Bridge, and the Statue's there,
At Nostredame, Saint Christopher,
The Steeple bears the Bell.
For Learning, th'University,
And for old Clothes, the Frippery,
The house the Queen did build.
Saint Innocents, whose earth devoures
Dead Corpse, in four and twenty hours,
And there the Hen the Great, by ^^vllias.
King was killed.
The Bastile and St. Denis street,
The Chastelet, just like London Fleet,
The Arsenal, no Toy;
But if you will see the prettiest thing,
Go to the Court, and view the King,
Oh it is a hopeful Boy.
Of all his Nobles, Dukes and Peers,
He Is reverenced for his wit and years,
Nor must you think it much:
For he with little switch can play,
And can make fine Dirt pies of Clay,
Oh never King made such.
A Bird that does but kill a Fly,
Or prates, does please his Majesty,
It Is known to every one;
The Duke of Guise gave him a Parret,
And he had twenty Cannons for it,
For his new Galleon.
Oh that I e're might have the hap
To get the Bird, that, in the Map,
Is called the Indian Ruck;
I Will give it him, and hope to be
As great as Guise or Luyne,
Or else I had ill luck.
Birds round about his Table stand,
And he them feeds with his own hand,
It Is his humility;
And if they do want any thing,
They need but chirp for their kind King,
And he comes presently.
And now, for those rare parts he must
Entitled be, Lewis the Just,
Great Henry's lawful heir;
When to his style, to add more words,
They Had better call him King of Birds,
Then King of lost Navarre.
He has besides a pretty firk,
Taught him by nature how to work
In Iron, with much ease;
Sometimes into the Forge he goes,
And there he knocks, and there he blows,
And makes both Locks and Keys.
Which moves a doubt in every one
Whether he is Mars or Vulcans Son,
Some few believe his Mother;
But let them all say what they will,
I am resolved and do think still,
As much the one as the other.
The people do dislike the youth,
Alleging reason, for, in truth,
Mothers should honored be;
Yet others say, he loves her rather,
As well as ere she loved his Father;
That Is a notorious lie.
His Queen's a little pretty Wench,
Was born in Spain, speaks little French,
Not like to be a Mother:
For her incestuous House would not
Have any Children, but begot
By Uncle, or by Brother.
Now why should Lewis, being so just,
Content himself to take his Lust
With his lascivious Mate,
And suffer his little pretty Queen,
From all her race, that e're has been.
Once to degenerate?
'Twere Charity for to be known
Love others Children, as his own,
And why? it is no shame:
Unless that he would greater be
Then was his Father Henery,
Who (men thought) did the same.
Hankins Heigh-hoa.
NOrth Britain loved Sculler of our times,
That twy-beat'st this way, that way going Thames;
Divine Aquarius of all fluent rimes,
Such as describe Lepanto's bloody streams.
Lend me thy Scull, full of Pyerian sweat
My sorrows to repeat,
And in each Pie, I Will bake up every she,
Big as thy Boat for thee.
Thrice had all New Years Guests their yewl guts filled
With embalmed Veal, buried in Christmas Past,
Thrice had they Ivy herby wreath, well pill'd;
Crane slept at Totnam first, at Chelsey last;
Since first my heart was broached on Cupids spit,
Roasting bit after bit,
In her loves flames, who casts it now behind,
And blow'st away with wind.
When I had built with practick Architecture
Newcastle Mine, refined to such a frame
Proportionable, as might deserve a Lecture,
And that the Mast staid only for a flame;
Her love alone, without or Match or Tinder,
New styled this new built Cinder,
And so an Emblem of our Love we beeted,
The word black, but love lighted.
Often have I perboyl'd been with blubbering grief,
Seasoned and sows'd with brine of bitter tears,
With Sallads sliced, and Lettuc'd up with Beef,
With Vinegar and Sugar, hopes and fears,
Undone like Oysters, peppered with despair,
All for this Laundres fair,
Who now she thinks, a bitter bit has got
To furnish her flesh-pot.
My Kitchen door, like Pluto's gates still open,
Down coms this beauteous Queen, like Proserpin,
I smeared with soot, and she with suds of Soap,
Was ever match more necessary seen?
And faith we swore, I by my Oven and Peel,
She by her Starch and Steel;
Which sacred Oath I kept, but she hers broke,
And turned it into smoke.
Hartford, now Hatesford, which my Heartsford
Be ever ruinous, as thou art this day;
Because thou bredst this well washed Laundry Lass, was*
Let Ware beguile thee of thy rich road way;
And may thy Craifish River fall from thee
As she forsakes me:
But he that has her I do wish no worse,
Then a true Sedgely curse.
You Chargers from my hands that luster drew,
To brighten you to Stars, but spotless fair;
You twinkling Sawcers, Constellations new,
And glazing Platters, which like Comets are,
Be ever dark, let neither Chalk nor Sand,
Nor the Oily circling hand
For evermore re-kindle you again,
But mourn you for my pain.
Draw me the bravest Spit that e're was bent
With massy Member of laborious beast;
Drill me from Mouth to Tail incontinent,
Dress me and dish me at the Nuptial Feast,
Thus for her Love and loss, poor Hankin dies,
His amorous Soul down flies
To th'bottome of the Cellar, there to dwell;
Susan, farewell, farewell.
Some Gentlemen shut out of their seats in Paul's, while they went to drink.
NOwnes, Gentlemen, how now? shut out?
Must we, mixed with the zealous rout,
Stand hoofeing on the vulgar stone,
To hear the Cheuri-illeson?
First, Let the Organs, one by one,
Treble their Lamentation;
And the Quyries sing, till they
For want of moisture fall to play,
Ere it shall be said, that I
Let my choice devotions fly
Up from hence, in th'foul-mouth'd peal
Of Prentice Orisons, where my zeal
Shall stand cheap-rated, faith, for why?
The best seat's shut, and we put by.
We did but step aside awhile
With juice of Grapes our Lamps to oil;
Where staying long, we came too late,
And shared the foolish Virgins fate.
Yet saw I two or three within,
Fair Virgins, such as had no sin:
Or if they had, their worths high rate
Might it soon transubstantiate
Into a Virtue, whose least share,
A branch of holy Saints might wear.
Should great Saint Peter me deny
Passage, to enjoy such company,
We should fall foul, unless that he
Put me to them, or them to me.
Upon a lame tired Horse.
ABout the time -- -- --
Aurora in her Mantle wrapped the clime,
When the bright Day, and thirsty Sun had quaft
A thousand Flagons, for his mornings draught,
Brim full with Pearly dew; I got me up,
And tasted freely of a liberal cup;
Pursued my journey, on a Horse as poor
As is a sterved Beggar at the door,
Or Pharaoh's leanest Cow; there was as much
Flesh on his back, as on an old Man's Crutch.
Now men observing, that I was so fat,
And durst ride on a Horse so lean as that,
Did scoff and jeer me, as I passed the way,
And, as I thought did one to the other say,
The horse has stripped his flesh, and on his back
Does carry it, as Pedlars do a Pack.
For I have often seen upon my troth,
Poor ragged Pedlars carry packs of Cloth.
Another swore, that I was some Saint Paul,
Because my Horse was so spiritual.
A Clown unto his fellows cries, Gods soes,
I think this Horse has Corns upon his Toes.
Another swore, that I no more did ride,
Then Children, that a Hobbyhorse bestride;
Another said, my horse did sure intend,
To tell each step unto his journeyes end.
But, e're I got out of a Lane to th'Heath,
I Will take my oath, they jeered my Horse to death.
Upon a Surfeit caught by drinking evil Sack, at the George Tavern in
Southwark.
WHo thought that such a storm, Ned, when our Souls,
From the Calm Harbor of Domestic Bowls,
Would needs abord the George, t'embark our brain,
To the Cantabrian Calenture of Spain?
Oh had thou seen, (and happy are thy eyes
That did not see) that Fridayes Crudities,
Such Hecatombs of indigested Sack
Retreated up my throat, oh what a wrack
'Twas, to a thick-brain'd paper-Boat of wit,
In a Canary voyage to be split?
We drank old Lees, and gave our heads a fraught,
Of that Don Pedro left in Eighty Eight:
A bawdy house would scorn it, 'twas too poor,
For those that play at Noddy on the score.
Felt-makers had refused it; Nay, I think
The Devil would abhor such posset drink.
Bacchus, I Am sure detests it, it is too bad
For Heretics, a Friar would be mad
To bless such vile unconsecrable stuff,
And Brownists would conclude it good enough
For such a Sacrifice: I Would wish no worse
A draught unto the Ignorant, nor curse
My foes beyond it. Not a Beads-man sure*
At a Town Funeral would it endure;
Much less a Man of sense; 'twere an affront,
To put an understanding Fur upon it,
Or Burgo Mistress: It is such a thing
Would dam a Vintner at a Christening.
Yet we must quaff these dregs, and be constrained
To what the L^ety, seven years since disdained*
Oh would I might turn Poet for an hour,
To Satyrize with a vindictive power
Against the Drawer! or I could desire
Old Iohnsons head had scalded in this fire*
How would he rage, and bring Apollo down
To scold with Bacchus, and depose the Clown,
For his ill government, and so confute
Our Poet Apes, that do so much impute
Unto the grapes inspirement! Let them sit,
And from the winepresse, squeeze a bastard wit
But I, while Sever^, and old Avon can
Afford a draught; while there is a Cider-Man,
Or a Metheglenist, while there is a Cup
Of Beer or Ale, I do forswear to sup
Of wicked Sack: Thus Solemn I come from it,
No dog would e're return to such a vomit.
The Lowse' s Peregrination.
DIscoveries of late have been made by adventure,
Where many a pa^e has been set on the Tenter,
And many a Tale has been told more then true is,
How Whales have been served whole, to Saylors in Brewis.
But here is a poor lowse, by these presents desies
The Catalogue of old Mandevils Lies:
And this I report of a certain.
My Father and Mother, when first they joined paunches,
Begot me between an old Pedlers haunches;
Where grown to a Creeper, I know how a pox I
Got to suck by chance of the blood of his doxie.
Where finding the sweetness of this my new pasture,
I left the bones of my pockified Master,
And there I struck in for a fortune.
A Lord of this Land that loved a Bum well,
Did lie-with this Mort one night in the Strummel,
I cling'd me fast to him, and left my companions,
I scorned to converse more with Tatterdemalians;
But sued to Sir Giles, to promise in a Patent,
That my Heirs might enjoy clean Linen and Satin;
But the Parliament crossed my Intention.
This Lord that I followed delighted in Tennis,
He sweat out my fat with going to Venice,
Where with a brave Donna, in single Duello,
He left me behind him within the Burdello;
Where leacherous passages I did discover,
Betwixt Bonna Roba, and Diego her Lover,
Youl'd wonder to hear the discourse often.
The use of the Dildo they had without measure,
Behind and before, they have it at pleasure;
All Aretines ways, they practice with labor,
An Eunuch they hate like Bethlem Gabor;
Counting the English man but as a Stallion,
Leaving the Goat unto the Italian:
And this is the truth that I tell you.
Thus living with wonder, escaping the talent,
Of Citizen, Clown, Whore, Lawyer, and Gallant,
At last came a Soldier, I nimbly did ferk him,
Up the greazy skirts of^s robustuous Buff Jerkin;
Where finding companions, without any harm I
Was brought before Breda, to Spinola's Army:
And there I remain of a certain.
King Oberon's Apparel.
WHen the Monthly horned Queen
Grew jealous, that the Stars had seen
Her rising from Endymions arms,
In rage, she throws her misty charms
Into the bosom of the night,
To dim their curious prying light.
Then did the dwarfish Faery Elves
(Having first attired themselves)
Prepare to dress their Oberon King
In highest robes, for revelling.
In a Cobweb shirt, more thin
Then ever Spider since could spin,
Bleach'd by the whiteness of the Snow,
As the stormy winds did blow
It in the vast and freezing air;
No shirt half so fine, so fair.
A rich Wastcoat they did bring
Made of the Trout flies gilded wing,
At that his Elveship, began to fret,
Swearing it would make him sweat,
Even with its weight, and needs would wear
His Wastcoat wove of downy hair,
New shaven from an Eunuch's chin;
That pleased him well, 'twas wondrous thin.
The outside of his Doublet was
Made of the four-leav'd true-love grass,
On which was set so fine a gloss,
By the oil of crispy moss;
That through a mist, and starry light,
It made a Rainbow every night.
On every Seam, there was a Lace
Drawn by the unctuous Snailes slow trace;
To it, the purest Silver thread
Compared, did look like dull pale Lead.
Each Button was a sparkling eye
T'ane from the speckled Adders Frye,
Which in a gloomy night, and dark,
Twinckled like a fiery spark:
And, for coolness, next his skin,
'Twas with white Poppy lined within.
His Breeches of that Fleece were wrought,
Which from Colchos Jason brought;
Spun into so fine a Yarne,
That mortals might it not discern;
Wove by Arachne, in her Loom,
Just before she had her doom;
Died crimson with a Maidens blush,
And lyn'd with Dandely on Plush.
A rich mantle he did wear
Made of Tinsel Gossamer,
Bestarred over with a few
Dyamond drops of morning dew.
His Cap was all of Ladies love,
So passing light, that it did move,
If any humming Gnat or Fly
But buzzed the air, in passing by;
About it was a wreath of Pearl,
Dropped from the eyes of some poor girl
Pinched, because she had forgot
To leave fair water in the pot.
And for Feather, he did wear
Old Nisus fatal purple hair.
The sword they girded on his Thigh,
Was smallest blade of finest Rye.
A pair of Buskins they did bring
Of the Cow Ladies Coral wing;
Powdered over with spots of Jet,
And lined with purple-Violet.
His Belt was made of myrtle leaves,
Plaited in small curious threaves,
Beset with Amber Cowslip studds,
And fringed about with Daizy Budds.
In which his Bugle horn was hung,
Made of the babbling Eccho's tongue;
Which set unto his Moon-burn'd lip,
He winds, and then his Faeries skip:
At that, the lazy dawn'gan sound,
And each did trip a Faery round.
A Poets farewell to his thread bare Cloak.
CLoak (if I so may call thee) though thou art
My old acquaintance, prithee now let us part;
Thou were my equal friend in thirty one,
But now thou look like a mere hanger on,
And art so useless to me, I scarce know
Sometimes whether I have thee on or no.
But this I needs must say, when thou go from me,
These ten years thou have been no burden to me:
Yet that is thy accusation; for if I
Divorce thee from me, it is for Levity.
Thou have abused my Bed, that is, thou have
Not kept me warm, when thou were over-cast.
Transparent garment, proof against all weather,
Men wonder by what art thou hang'st together;
Nor can the eyes of the best reason pry
Into this new Occult Geometry.
A fellow the other day but cast his eye on,
And swore I was mantled in Dent de lion.
Another ask't me (who was somewhat bolder)
Whether I wore a Love-bagge on my shoulder?
I fear a fire, as fair maids the small pox,
And dare not look toward a Tinder-boxe,
Nor him that sells'em up and down; I know,
If he comes near me, it is but touch and go.
A red-fac'd fellow frights me, though some fear
That which makes his nose red, makes my cloak bare.
They say my thick Back, and thin Cloak appear,
Very like powdered Beef, and Vinegar.
An other vowed (whose tongue had no restriction)
It was no garment, but the Poets fiction.
Did ever man discover such a knack,
To walk in Querpo with a Cloak on's back!
A very zealous brother did begin
To jeer and say, Sir, your Original sin
Is not washed off (pray do not take it ill)
I see, you wear your Fathers Fig Leaves still.
A Scholar (in an elevated thought)
Protested, 'Twas the Web Arachne wrought
When she contended with Minerva: but
Another Raschal had his finger cut,
And begged a piece to wrap about it. Thus
You see (kind Cobwebs) how they laugh at us.
Good Cambrick Lawn, depart; let me not be
For ever fettered thus in Tiffany.
Although I never yet did merit praise,
I Would rather have my shoulders crowned with Bays
Than hung with Cypress. If this fortune be
Always dependant on poor Poetry,
I would my kinder destiny would call
Me to be one o'th'Clerks of Blackwell-hall;
For though their easy studies are more dull,
Yet what they want in wit, they have in wool.
Once more farewell, these are no times for thee,
Thick Cloaks are only fit for knavery.
The only Cloaks that now are most in fashion
Are Liberty, Religion, Reformation:
All these are faced with zeal, and buttoned down
With Jewels dropped from an imperial Crown.
He that would Cloak it in the new Translation,
Must have his Tailor cut it Pulpit-fashion.
Do not appear within the City; there
They mind not what men are, but what they weave.
The habit speaks the Man. How can thou thrive
When a good Cloak's a Representative?
The Females will not wear thee, they put on
Such Cloaks as do obscure the rising Sun.
How can thou hope for entertainment, when
Women make Cloaks even of Committee men?
Farewell good Cover-wit, upon the bryer
I Will hang thee up; if any do enquire
Where his brains were that let his Cloak thus swing,
Tell him, his wits are gone a wool-gathering.
Upon a Fart unluckily let.
WEll Madam, well, the Fart you put upon me
Has in this Kingdom almost quite un-
Many a boystrous storm, and bitter gust
Have I endured, by Sea, and more I must: done me.
But of all storms by Land, to me it is true,
This is the foulest blast that ever blew.
Not that it can so much impair my credit,
But that I dare pronounce, 'twas I, that did it.
For when I thought to please you with a song,
'Twas but a strain too low that did me wrong;
Yet winged Fame will yet divulge it so,
That I shall hear often where soever I go,
To see my friends, I now no longer dare,
Because my Fart will be before me there.
Nay more, which is to me my hardest doom,
I long to see you most, but dare not come;
For if by chance or hap, we meet together,
You taunt me with, what wind, Sir, blew you hither?
If I deny to tell, you will not sail,
I thought your voice, Sir, would have drowned your Tale;
Thus am I hampered wheresoever you meet me,
And thus, instead of better terms you greet me.
I never held it such a heinous crime,
A Fart was lucky held, in former time;
A Fox of old, being destitute of food,
Farted, and said, this news must needs be good,
I shall have food, I know, without delay,
Mine Arse does sing so merrily to day;
And so they say he had. But yet you see
The Foxes blessing proves a curse to me.
How much I wronged am, the case is clear,
As I shall plainly make it to appear.
As thus, of all men let me be forsaken,
If of a Fart can any hold be taken:
For it is a Blast, and we Recorded find,
King Aeolus alone commands the wind.
Why should I then usurp, and undertake
The Subject of a Royal Prince to make
My Prisoner? No, but as my duty binds,
Leave that command unto the King of winds.
So, when I found him struggling to depart,
I freely gave him leave with all my heart.
Then judge you, gentle Ladies, of my wrong,
Am I not well requited for my Song?
All the revenge that I require is this,
That you may Fart as often as e're you piss;
So may you chance, the next time that we meet,
To vie the Ruff, and I not dare to see it.
In the mean time, on knees devoutly bended,
My Tongue craves pardon, if my Tail offended.
A young Man courting an old Widow.
DAme Hecuba, fie, be not coy, that look
How it drew up your wrinkles, like a Book
Of Vellam, at a fire? glazen your eyes
And view this face, these limbs, here virtue lies
Restorative, will make you smooth and straight,
As you were in the sixth of Henry th'eighth.
Come, let us kiss, that solitary Tusk,
As Garlic strong, but wholsomer then Musk,
Invites me nearer yet; the hottest fires
Never scorched, as do your ashes my desires.
Time was, I Have heard my Grandfather report
When those eyes drew more company to Court
Then hope of Honor; they have virtue still,
And work upon my breast, for as they dril
That humor down your yawning cheeks, my blood
Grows dull, congeals, and thickens with your Mud.
Somewhat youl'd say now! I perceive your gums
Are laboring for it, as when we brace our Drums,
To make them sound the better: oh take heed,
A little wind shivers a cracking reed.
One syllable will fetch your lungs up; stay
And make but signs, I Will guess what you would say.
Good Granam, do but nod your tottering head,
And shake your bunch of keys, you will raise the
Why may not you and I be one? there be
In one world, several tempers, Harmony dead.
Is made up thus, and Contraries preserve
That subject, where they do each other serve.
Nor are we therefore over near akin,
Because your Granchilds Niece has married bin
To my great Uncle; 'Twas a lovely pair,
They say, who knew them then, equally fair
In years and Fortune: this a Priest may do,
Spite of stern Natures Laws, 'twixt me and you.
He can take you as you are, me in my prime,
And tie up in one knot both ends of Time;
Amongst all your Coffers and your bags of Gold,
A cunning Goldsmith ever likes the old.
The new may prove as current, and may pass
From hand to hand, as fast as a young Less.
But you are more grave and stayed, come, pray consent,
And blaze but one good snuff, e're you be spent.
Touch-wood should take fire soonest, as it falls,
Fresh joy clings fully close to aged walls.
So let us join thus in one volume bound,
A Chronicle and Corant may be found.
Upon Chesse. play. To Dr. Budden.
TO thee Laws Oracle, who had the power
To wage my pens employment for an hour,
I send no Frogs, nor Mice, Pigmees nor Cranes,
Giants nor Gods, which trouble so the brains
Of feigbning Poets; nor my leisure sings
The Counterbuffs of the four painted Kings:
Those worthy Combatants have had their times,
And Battles sung in thousand curious rimes.
I sing the fierce Alarm, and direful stroke
Of passing timbred men, all heart of Oak;
Men that scorn Arms defensive, nor, in heat
Of bloody broiles, complain of dust or sweat.
Men that do think, no victory is fit
That Is not compacted by the reach of wit.
Men that an Ambuscado know to lay,
T'entrap the Foe in his retiring way;
Plot Stratagems, and teach their brains t'indite
What place is fittest to employ their might.
Dull downright blows, are fit for rustic wits,
Within the compass of whose scalp there sits
A homebred sense, weak apprehension,
That strike the first they cast their eye upon;
Those are the Chaff of Soldiers, but this Corn
Of choicest men, at highest rate is born.
Here life is precious, where the meanest man
Is guarded by the Noblest, who do scan,
(Not what a poor man is, but) what may prove,
If bravely to the Armies head he move;
Such may his valor be, he may of right
Be an Executor to Rook or Knight,
Whose Lands fall to the King (their Master dead)
With which this Pawn lives to be honored,
And do his Prince good service. Tell me then,
Thou that do distribute Justice to men,
Must Honors ever follow blood? or should
Virtue be graced, though in the meanest Mould?
Tell me, thou Man of Peace, are not these Wars
Lawful and commendable, where the scars
Are for Command, where either Enemy
Seeks to himself a fifth great Monarchy?
Where neither knows his confines, but each foot
Is his, where he or his, can take firm root?
Pity with me, the fortunes of those Kings,
Whose battle such an untaught Poet sings.
Know, that great Alexander could not have
An Homer; and remember, in wars brave,
Each deeds a Poem, and he writes it best
Who does engrave it on a conquered Crest.
If I offend, part of the blame is thine,
Thou gav'st the Theme, I did but frame the Line.
Two angry Kings weary of lingering peace,
Challenge the field, all Concord now must cease;
So do their stomachs with fired anger burn,
Nothing but wounds, blood, death, must serve the turn.
They pitched their field in a fair checkered square,
Each form two Squadrons, in the former are
The common Soldiers, whose courageous scope
Is venturing their lives, like Fortune, Hope.
These still march on, and dare not break their rank,
But for to kill a Foe, then it is their prank
To make the ground good against the Enemy,
Till by a greater force subdued, they dye.
The Kings for safety, in mid battle stand,
And Marshal all their Nobles on each hand.
Next either King, an Amazonian Queen,
Like our sixth Henryes Margaret is seen,
Ready to scour the Field, corner, or square,
She succors, where the Troops distressed are.
Next stand two Mytred Bishops which in War
Forget their Calling, vent'ring many a scar
In Princes cause, yet must no Bishop stray,
But leave the broad, and keep the narrow way.
Next are two ventrous Knights, whose nimble feet
Leap over men's heads, scorning to think it meet
They should stand Centinells, while the poor Pawnes,
With danger of their lives do scour the Lawnes.
The Battles out-spread wings, two Rooks do guard,
These flank the field so well, that there is barred
All side assaults; these, for their valors grace,
(The King in danger) with him change their place.
But Majesty must keep a settled pace,
Rides not in post, moves to the nearest place,
That Is to his Standart; If there be report
Of the Kings danger, all troops may resort.
But now they sound Alarm, each heart does swell
With wrath, strikes in the name of Christabel,
Strike, strike, be not aghast, Soldiers are bound
To fear no death, much less to dread a wound.
Now without mercy dies the common Troop,
A Rook, a Bishop, and a Knight does droop;
Yet neither boasts of Conquest, though each hope
To win the field, which now is half laid open
By Soldiers death; now dares a martial Queen
Check her Foe King, when straight there steps between
A venurous Soldier, or a Noble man
Who cares not for his life, so be he can
From danger keep his King; he fears not death,
In Princes cause, that gives each Subject breath.
But this Virago dies, being left alone,
When straight a nimble Soldier steppeth on,
And through the thickest Troops hews out his way
And till he come to the head does never stay.
This brave attempt deserves the honoring;
The Queens colors are his, given by the King*
Who knows that valor should not want reward,
And venurous spirits, best keep a Princes guard.
Now is the War in heat, bloody the Field,
Mercy is banished, none has thought to yield,
Basely to beg his breath; the fame now ran,
That they must fight it out, to the last man.
All Soldiers dye, but one, who to his King,
Grieved with his great loss, does this comfort bring,
That their great Foe, whose Troops are all now dead,
Must to their swords, yield up his conquered head.
Then with their Check, and Check on either hand,
The poor disheartened King does mated stand.
Though thus to dye it be the Princes fate,
Who dares pronounce he had a whisking mate;
Who, rather then mumping forgo the Field,
Joys in the place he stands, his breath to yield?
But now the conquering couple want their breath,
Their festered wounds do rankle, and grim death
Creeps through the gashes, down the Victors fall,
And then one general Hearse entombs them all.
The loose Wooer.
THou do deny me, cause thou art a Wife,
Know, she that is Married lives a single life
That loves but one; abhor that Nuptial curse,
Tied thee to him, for better and for worse.
Variety delights the active blood,
And Women the more common, the more good,
As all goods are; there is no Adultery,
And Marriage is the worst Monopoly.
The Learned Roman Clergy admits none
Of theirs to Marry; they love all, not one:
And every Nun can teach you it is as meet,
To change your Bedfellow, as smock or sheet.
Say, would you be content only to eat
Mutton or Beef, and taste no other meat?
It would grow to loathsome to you, and I know
You have two palats, and the best below.
Upon the biting of Fleas.
SUmmon up all the terrifying pains
That ever were invented by the brains
Of earthly Tyrants; Then descend to Hell,
And count the horrid tortures that do dwell
In the dark Dungeon, where the horrid stone
Makes Sisiphus his panting entrails groan.
Where Tantalus (in th'midst of plenty cursed)
Is doomed to famine, and eternal thirst;
Where the pale Ghosts are lashed with whips of steel,
Yet these are gentle, to the pains I feel.
Vexed with a Thousand Pigmy friends, and such
As dare not stand the onset of a touch.
Strange kind of Combatants, where Conquest lies
In nimbly skipping from their Enemies,
While they, with eager fierceness lay about
To catch the thing they feign would be without.
These sable furies bravely venture on,
But when I'gin to oppose them, whip, they are gone.
Doubtless I think each is a Magic Dauncer,
Bred up by some infernal Necromancer,
But that I do believe, none ere searce knew
('Mong all their Spirits) such a damned crew.
Some, when they would express the gentle sting
Of a slight pain, call it a Flea-biting.
But were they in my place, they soon would find
A cause sufficient for to change their mind*
Some, telling how they vexed another, say
I sent him with a Flea in's ear away,
Only to show what trouble has possessed
Him, whom this little creature does molest.
It is reported, that a Mouse can daunt
The courage of the mighty Elephant.
Compare my bigness, and the Fleas to theirs,
And I have smaller reason for my fears,
And yet I tremble when I feel them bite;
Oh how they sting my flesh? was black-brow'd night,
And the whist stillness of it, made by Fate,
To make man happy or unfortunate?
If there be any happiness or rest
In pangs of torture, I am fully blessed.
All my five senses are combined in one,
For, but my sense of feeling, I have none,
And that is left me, to increase my smart;
Bloud-sucking Tyrants, will you nere depart?
Why do you hang in Clusters on my skin?
Come one to one, and try what you can win.
You Coward Aethiop Vermin! Oh you Gods,
You are unjust, to load me with such odds.
If Jove-born Hercules cannot deal with two,
Then what can I against a Legion do?
Their number frights me, not their strength; I Will dare
The Lion, Panther, Tigar, or the Bear
To an encounter, to be freed from these
Relentlesse demy-Devills, cursed Fleas.
Upon Madam Chevereuze swimming over the Thames,
'TWas calm, and yet the Thames touched heaven to day,
The water did find out the Milky way,
When Madam Chevereuze by swimming down,
Did the fair Thames the Qu^ of Rivers crown.
The humble Willows on the shore grew proud
To see her in their shade her body shroud;
And meeting her the Swan (wont to presume)
Bowed to her whiter neck his sullyed Plume.
Was not great Jove that Swan? so shaped, he came
To Leda's sight; but Gods and Courtiers shame
Twice to appear alike; I rather dream
Jove was not here, the Swan might be the stream,
And took far greater pleasure to be cooled
In silver drops, then in his shower of gold.
And now let Aristotle's Scholars tread
Their Masters timeless footsteps to the dead,
In searching out the deepest secret, which
Or earth or water may be thought most rich.
Venus by Proxy from the flood ascends,
Bright Chevereuze the whole difference ends,
Adding so great a treasure to the waves,
As the whole earth seems useless, but for graves.
Water above the Earth by nature lies,
But she has placed it now above the skies.
The flame she took, a spirit of water drew,
Framed opall Rain, out of extracted Dew.
But her chaste breast, cold as the Cloistered Nun,
Whose Frost to Crystal might congeal the Sun,
So glazed the stream, that Pylots then afloat,
Thought they might safely land without a Boat.
July had seen the Thames in Ice involved,
Had it not been by her own beams dissolved:
But yet she left it Cordial, 'twas no more
Thawed to so weak a water as before,
Else how could it have born all beauties freight?
Of force it must have sunk so great a weight.
Have sunk her? where? how vainly do I err?
Who know all depths are shallow unto her.
She dreads not in a River to be drowned,
Who, then the Sea it self, is more profound.
Small Vessels shake, the great Ship safely rides,
And, like her Royal builder, awes the Tides.
Above their foam, or rage, we see her float,
In her bright scorn, and, Madam, here is my Vote:
So may all troubled waves beneath you shrink;
So may you swim for ever, your foes sink.
Upon Aglaura in Folio.
BY this large Margent did the Poet mean
To have a Comment writ upon the Scene?
Or is it that the Ladies (who ne^re look
In any, but a Poem or Play-book)
May in each Page, have space to scribble down
When such a Lord or Fashion came to town?
As Swains in Almanacks account do keep
When their Cow calv'd, and when they bought their Sheep?
Ink is the life of Paper, it is meet then
That this, which escaped the Press, should feel the Pen.
A Room with one side furnished, or a Face,
Painted half way is but a foul disgrace.
This great Voluminous Pamphlet may be said
To be like one that has more hair then head,
More excrement than body* Trees that sprout
With broadest leaves, have still the smallest fruit.
When I saw so much white, I did begin
To think Aglaara either did lie in,
Or else did Penance, never did I see
(Unless in Bills dashed in the Chancery)
So little in so much, as if the feet
Of Poetry, like Law, were sold by th'sheet.
If this new fashion do but last one year,
Poets, as Clerks, would make our Paper dear.
Does not that Artist err, and blast his fame,
Who sets out pictures lesser than the frame?
Was ever Chamberlain so mad, to dare,
To lodge a child in the great bed at Ware?
Aglaura would please better, did she lie
In the narrow bounds of an Epitome;
Pieces that are weaved of the finest twist,
As Silk and Plush, have still more stuff than list.
She that in Persian habits, made great brags,
Degenerates in this excess of rags,
Who by her Giant bulk, this only gains,
Perchance in Libraries to hang in chains.
It Is not in Books, as Cloth; we never say,
Make London measure, when we buy a Play;
But rather have them pared; those leaves be fair
To the judicious, which much spotted are.
Give me the sociable pocket books,
These empty Folio's only please the looks.
Upon Lute-scrings Cate-aten.
ARe these the strings that Poets feign,
Have cleared the Air, and calmed the Maine?
Charmed Wolves, and from the Mountain crests
Made Forests dance, with all their Beasts?
Could these neglected shreds you see,
Inspire a Lute of Ivorie,
And make it speak? oh then think what
Has been committed by my Cat,
Who in the silence of this night,
Has gnawn these cords, and marred them quite,
Leaving such relicts as may be
For frets, not for my Lute, but me.
Pusse, I will curse thee, may thou dwell
With some dry Hermit in a Cel,
Where Rat never peeped, where Mouse never fed,
And Flies go supperlesse to bed:
Or with some close-par'd Brother, where
Thou Wilt fast each Sabbath in the year,
Or else, profane, be hanged on Monday,
For butchering a Mouse on Sunday.
Or may thou tumble from some tower,
And miss to light upon all four,
Taking a fall that may unty
Eight of nine lives and let them fly.
Or may the midnight embers sindge
Thy dainty coat, or Jane beswinge
Thy hyde, when she shall take thee biting
Her Cheeseclouts, or her house be --
What, was there never a Rat nor Mouse,
Nor Butry open? naught in the house
But harmless Lutestrings, could suffice
Thy paunch, and draw thy glaring eyes?
Did not thy conscious stomach find
Nature profaned, that kind with kind
Should staunch his hunger? think on that,
Thou Caniball and Cyclops Cat.
For know, thou wretch, that every string
Is a cats gut, which Art does bring
Into a thread; and now suppose
Dunstan, that snuff'd the Devils nose,
Should bid these strings revive, as once
He did the Calfe, from naked bones;
Or I to plague thee for thy sin,
Should draw a Circle, and begin
To Conjure, for I am, look to it,
An Oxford Scholar, and can do it.
Then with three sets of Mops and Mowes,
Seven of odd words, and Motley shows,
A thousand tricks, that may be taken
From Faustus, Lamb, or Frier-Bacon;
I should begin to call my strings
My Cattlings, and my Minikins;
And they re-catted, straight should fall
To mew, to purre, to Caterwawle;
From Pusses belly, sure as death,
Pusse should be an Engastrumeth.
Pusse should be sent for to the King,
For a strange Bird or some rare thing.
Pusse should be sought to far and near,
As she some cunning woman were.
Pusse should be carried up and down,
From Shire to Shire, from Town to Town,
Like to the Cammell, lean as Hag,
The Elephant or Apish Nag,
For a strange sight; Pusse should be sung
In Lousy Ballads, midst the throng,
At Markets, with as good a grace
As Agincourt, or Chevy Chase;
The Troy* sprung Britain would forgo
His Pedigree, he chanteth so,
And sing that Merlin (long deceast)
Returned is in a nine lived beast.
Thus Pusse thou see, what might betide thee,
But I forbear to hurt or chide thee.
For It may be Pusse was Melancholy,
And so to make her blythe and Jolly,
Finding these strings, shel'd have a fit
Of Mirth; nay, Pusse, if that were it;
Thus I revenge me, that as thou
Have played on them, I on thee now;
And as thy touch was nothing fine,
So I Have but scratched these notes of mine.
To a Lady vexed with a Jealous Husband.
WHen you sit musing, Lady, all alone
Casting up all your cares with private moan,
When your heart bleeds with grief, you are no more*
Near unto comfort, than you were before.
You cannot mend your state with sighs or tears,
Sorrow's no Balsome for distrustful fears.
Have you a Foe you hate, wish him no worse
A Plague or Torment, then the Pillowes curse.
Observe your Lord with never so strict an eye,
You cannot go to piss without a spy.
If but a Mouse does stir about his bed,
He starts, and swears he is dishonored,
And when a jealous dream does craze his pate,
Straight he resolves he will be separate.
Tell me, right worthy Cuckolds, if you can,
What good this folly does reflect on man?
Are women made more loyal? has it power
To guard the Tree, that none can pluck the Flower?
Is it within the power of jealous heads,
To banish lust from Court, or Country beds?
I never knew, that base and foul mistrust
Made any chaste, that had a mind to lust.
It cannot make her honest, that by kind,
To loose and wild affections is inclined.
Debar her Lord, she, to supply his room,
Will have a Horse boy, or a Stable-groom.
Keep her from youth of lower rank and place,
She Will kiss his Scullion, and with Knaves embrace:
Suspect her faith withal, and all mistrust,
She Will buy a Monkey to supply her lust:
Lock her from Man and Beast, and all content,
She Will make thee Cuckold with an instrument:
For women are like angry Mastives Chained,
They bite at all, when they are all restrained.
We may set locks and guards to watch their fires,
But have no means to quench their hot desires.
Man may as well, by cunning, go about,
To stop the Sun in motion, as by doubt,
To keep a nettled woman, if that she
Strongly disposed be to Venery.
How many thousand women that were Saints,
Are now made sinful by unjust restraints?
How many do commit, for very spite,
That take small pleasure in that sweet delight?
Some are for malice, some for mirth unjust,
Some kiss for love, and some do act for lust.
But if the fates intend to make me blessed,
And Hymen bind me to a female breast,
(As yet, I thank my stars, I am not tied
In servile bonds to any wanton Bride)
Let Cinthia be my Crest, and let me wear
The Cuckolds badge, if I distrust, or fear.
It Is told me often, a smooth and gentle hand
Keeps women more in aw of due command,
Than if we set a Ganneril on their Docks,
Ride them with Bits, or on their geer set Locks.
For then, like furious Colts, they will frisk and fling,
Grow wild and mad, and will do any thing.
But if we slack our reyns, to please their will,
Kindness will keep them from committing ill.
You blessed creatures, hold your female rights,
Conquer by day, as you overcome by nights,
And tell the jealous world thus much from me,
Bondage may make them bad, whose minds are free.
Had Collatin been jealous (say this more)
Without a rape, Lucrece had died a whore.
Invitation to dalliance.
BE not thou so foolish nice,
As to be entreated twice;
What should Women more incite,
Then their own sweet appetite?
Shall savage things more freedom have
Than nature unto Women gave?
The Swan, the Turtle, and the Sparrow
Bill a while, then take the marrow.
They Bill, they Kiss, what else they do
Come Bill, and Kiss, and I Will show you.
The Country man's Song in the Spanish Curate.
LEt the Bells ring, and the Boys sing,
The young Lasses trip and play,
Let the Cups go round, till round goes the ground,
Our learned Vicar we will stay.
Let the Pig turn merrily hey,
And let the fat Goose swim,
For verily, verily, hey,
Our Vicar this day shall be trim.
The stewed Cock shall Crow, Cockadoodle do,
Aloud Cockadoodle shall Crow;
The Duck and the Drake that swim in the Lake
Of Onions and Clarret below.
Our Wives shall be neat, to bring in our meat,
To thee, our Noble Adviser,
Our pains shall be great, and our pottles shall sweat,
And we our selves will be wiser.
We Will labor and swink, we will kiss and we will drink,
And Tithes shall come thicker and thicker;
We Will fall to the Plough, and get children enough,
And thou shall be learned, Oh Vicar!
Upon the sight of an old decayed patched Bed, with a Pillow having T. R. as a
mark on it.
Prologue,
MErvail not (Reader) though the Sun shine bright
About you, if I bid you all good night,
I Will tell how't may properly be sed,
Though you are up, yet I am going to bed.
Poetaster, My slumbring Muse upon thy drowsy bed,
Rest once again thine unattired head
Where, for thy great Mecenas so commands,
Thy best assayes with saporiferous bands.
While darkness did thine outward senses blind,
Tell me what fancies did usurp thy mind.

Muse. What think you Sir, while sleep enthralled my head,
What subject could I have, except my bed?

Poetaster. A bed no subject to be written on,
But lain, yea by the Muses tread upon.

Muse. The pillow from the bed I think's not far,
And yet on that were written T. and R.
But to be lien on, right I like it well,
For why in lying, Poets bear the Bell,
And to be trod upon, it is not unmeet,
The Muses scand their subjects with their feet.

Poetaster. The R. O muse thou there saw (to be brief)
Was nothing but a Rogue, the T. a Thief:
In the next verse, but two, I blush to tell,
Thou first broughtst forth a Lie, and then a Bell.
Take heed of Libels Muse, thy Poet fears,
If thy feet stumble, he may lose his ears.
To sever Theives and Poets I am loath,
Because I know Mercurius was both.

Muse. Within thy verses as Birds of a feather,
Liars, rogues, thieves, and Muses flock together,
By whom I Am softly to my subject led,
For flocks and feathers do fill up the bed.
Bacchus his merry boules may humor breed,
But divine raptures from the bed proceed.
Let the Pot Poets in their fury try,
With dipping their Malignant pens to dry
The Muses fountain, my inventions streams
Can nevr fail, while beds procure me dreams.
If we one Science justly may admire,
What shall we here where all the Seven conspire?
The letters on the pillow witness may
That on this bed some Grammar lately lay;
In Logic also it must needs be able,
For 'twas a Cord would make a pretty Cable:
That beds have Rhetoric we need not fear,
While to his pillow each man lends his ear:
Who number all the feathers in it can,
Must be a good Arithmetitian.
The joints cry creek when on them any lie,
As if the stocks hung by Geometry.
Its music sure is pleasant which can keep
In spite of snorting eyes and ears asleep.
The bed I take for deep Astronomy,
Which always studies to eclipse the eye.
If you seek Planets, this is Vulcans gin,
That Mars and Venus were so fettered in.
Astrology in this does also dwell,
For men by Dreams may future things foretell:
To read strong lines, if any mind be bent,
Herein the bed can also give content.
Not sage Apollo, nor the sacred Nine
Can then this Bed-cord show a stronger line.
Methinkes l'me very sleepy still, and loath
To rise, but that I Have on me never a cloth.
'Twas T. and R. as sure's I live, 'twas they
That stole the Coverlet and Sheets away.
Out! a Roap choke you both, you are arrant knaves,
I Would knock you soundly, had I but Bed-staves.

Epilogue.
IF ought obscure you in my Verses, mark,
Poets use not their Beds but in the dark.
If false or foolish any thing you deem,
Sith't came from Bed, account it for a Dream.
If in my Verses boldly any catches,
The Bed, my subject, was as full of patches:
The blurs and blots I make, let none disdain,
The Bed in one place had an ugly stain.
If my unpollish't lines being dull and dry,
Do make you heavy, I will tell you why.
Some sudjects make men laugh, some make them weep
But the Bed-post is to bring all asleep.
A Letter to Sir John Mennis, when the Parliament denied the King Money to pay
the Army, unless a Priest, whom the King had reprieved, might be executed. Sir
John at that time wanting the Money for provisions for his troop, desired me by
his Letter to go to the Priest, and to persuade him to dye for the good of the
Army; saying, What is it for him to hang an hour,
To give an Army strength and power?

The Reply.
BY my last Letter John thou see
What I have done to soften Priest;
Yet could not with all I could say,
Persuade him hang to get thee pay.
Thou Swad, quoth he, I plainly see,
The Army wants no food by thee,
Fast oftener, friend, or if you will eat
Use Oaten straw, or straw of Wheat;
They Will serve to moderate thy jelly,
And (which it needs) take up thy belly.
As one that in a Tavern breaks
A Glass, steals by the Bar, and sneaks:
At this rebuke, with no less haste, I
Trudged from the Priest, and Prison nasty:
The truth is, he gave little credit
To'th' Armies wants, because I said it.
And, if you will press it further, John,
It Is fit you send a leaner man.
For thou with ease can friends expose
For thy behoof to fortunes blows.
Suppose we being found together
Had passed for Birds of the same feather?
I had perchance been shrewdly shent,
And mauled too, by the Parliament.
Have you beheld th'unlucky Ape
For roasted Chestnuts mump and gape,
And offering at them with his paws,
But loath he is to scorch his claws;
When viewing on the Hearth asleep
A Puppy, gives him cause to weep:
To spare his own, he takes his help,
And rakes out Nuts with foot of whelp.
Which done, (as if 'twere all but play)
Your Namesake looks another way.
The Cur awakes, and finds his thumbs
In pain, but knows not whence it comes,
He takes it first to be some Cramp,
And now he spreads, now licks his vamp;
Both are in vain, no ease appears,
What should he do? he shakes his ears,
And hobling on three legs he goes,
Whining away with aching toes.
Not in much better case perhaps,
I might have been to serve thy chaps,
And have beshrew'd my fingers end,
For groping so in cause of friend;
While thou would munch like horse in Manger,
And reach at Nuts with others danger:
Yet have I ventured far to serve
My friend that says he is like to sterve.
The Fart censured in the Parliament House.
PUffing down coms grave ancient Sir Io. Crook,
And reads his message promptly without book.
Very well, quoth Sir William Morris, so;
But Harry Ludlows foysting Arse cried no.
Then starts up one fuller of devotion
Then eloquence, and says, An ill motion.
Nay, by my Faith, quoth Sir Henry Ienkin,
The motion were good, were not for stinking.
Quoth Sir Henry Pool, It Is an audacious trick,
To Fart in the Face of the body Politic.
Now without doubt, quoth Sir Edward Grevil,
I must confess, it was very uncivil.
Thank God, quoth Sir Edward Hungerford,
That this Fart proved not a Turd.
Indeed, quoth Sir John Trevor, it gave a foul knock,
As it launched forth from his stinking Dock.
I, quoth another it once so chanced,
That a great Man Farted, as he daunced.
Quoth Sir Richard Haughton, no Justice of Quorum,
But would take it in snuff, to have a fart let before'um.
Such a fart as this never before was seen,
Quoth the most learned Council of the Queen.
Quoth Mr. Daniel, this young man's too bold,
This privilege belongs to us that are old.
Then woe the time, quoth Sir Laurence Hyde,
That these our privileges are denied.
Quoth Mr. Recorder a word for the City,
To cut off the Aldermans right, were great pity.
Well, quoth Kit Brook, we will give you a reason,
Though he had right by descent, he had not livery and seisin.
Yet, quoth M. Peak, I have a president in store,
His father farted last Sessions before.
Then said Mr. Noy, this may very well be done,
A fart may be entailed from the father to the son.
Says Mr. Moore, let us this motion repeal,
What Is good for the private, is ill for the Common weal.
A goodyear on this Fart, quoth gentle Sir Harry.
He has caused such an Earthquake, that my Coal-pits miscarry.
It is hard to recall a Fart when it is out,
Quoth Sir William Lower with a loud shout.
Yes, quoth Sir Laurence Hide, that we may come by it,
We Will make a proviso, time it and tie it.
Quoth. Sir Harry the hardy, look well to each clause,
As Well for Englands Liberty as Laws.
Now then the knightly Doctor protests,
This Fart shall be brought into th'Court of Requests.
Nay rather, says Sir Edwin, I Will make a digression,
And fart him a project, shall last him a Session.
Then Sir Edward Hoby alleged with the spigot,
If you fart at the Union, remember Kit Pigot.
Swooks quoth Sir John Lee, is your Arse in dotage?
Could you not have kept this breath to cool your pottage?
Grave Senate quoth Mr. Duncomb, upon my salvation
This Fart had need of great Reformation.
Quoth the Country Courtier upon my Conscience,
It might have been reformed with Frankincense.
We must have this Fart by Parliament enacted,
Said another, before this business be transacted.
And so we shall have (oh do not abhor it!)
A Fart from Scotland reciprocal for it.
A very good jest it is by this light.
Quoth spruce Mr. James of the Isle of Wight.
Quoth Sir Robert Johnson, if you will not laugh
I Will measure this Fart with my Jacobs staff.
Now by my troth, quoth sage Mr. Bennet,
We must have a selected Committee to pen it.
Philip Gaudy stroak'd the old stubble of his face,
Said, the Fart was well penned, so sat down in his place.
Then modest Sir John Hollis said, on his word,
It was but a Shoo that creak'd on a board.
Not so, quoth Sir John Ackland, that cannot be,
The place underneath is matted you see.
Before God, said Mr. Brook, to tell you no lie,
This Fart, by our Law, is of the Post-nati.
Fie, quoth M. Fotherby, I like not this Embassage,
A Fart Interlocutory in the midst of a Message.
In all your Eloquence then, quoth Mr. Martin,
You cannot find out this figure of Farting.
Nay, quoth Dr. Crompton, can any man draw
This Fart within compass of the Civil Law?
Then Sir William Pady, I dare assure'm,
Though It be Contra modestiam, it is not Contra naturam.
Up starts Ned Weymark the Pasquil of Powls,
And said, this Fart would have fitted the Master of the Rolls.
Said Oxenbridge, there is great suspicion,
That this Fart savours of Popish Superstition.
Nay, said Mr. Good, and also some other,
This Fart came from some reformed Brother.
Then up start Sir John Young, and swore by Gods nails,
Was nere such a Fart let in the Borders of Wales.
Sir Walter Cope said, this Fart as 'twas let,
Might well have broke open his privy Cabinet.
Sir Jerome in Folio, swore by the Mass,
This Fart was enough to have broke all the Glass.
And Sir Jerome the less said, such an abuse,
Was never committed in Poland or Pruce.
In compass of a thousand miles about,
Sir Roger Owen said, such a Fart came not out.
Quoth Sir John Parker, I swear by my Rapier,
This Bombard was stuff^d with very foul Paper.
Now quoth Mr. Lewknor, we have found such a thing
As no Talebearer dares carry to the King.
Quoth Sir Lewis his Brother, if it come of Embassage,
The Master of the Ceremonies must give it passage.
I, quoth Sir Robert Drury, that were your part,
If so it had been a foreign Fart.
Nay, said Sir Richard Love lace, to end the difference,
It were fit with the Lords to have a conference.
Hark, quoth Sir John Townsend, this Fart had the might,
To deny his own Master to be dubbed Knight,
For had it ambition, or orationis pars,
Your Son could have told him, quid est Ars.
Quoth Sir Thomas Lake, if this house be not able
To censure this Fart, I Will have it to the Council Table.
It were no great grievance, quoth, M. Hare,
If the Surveyour herein had his share.
Be patient Gentlemen, quoth Sir Francis Bacon,
There Is none of us all but may be thus mistaken.
Silence, quoth Bond, though words be but wind,
Yet I do mislike these Motions behind.
Then, quoth Mr. Price, it stinks the more you stir it,
Naturam expellas furca, recurrit.
Then began sage Mounson silence to break,
And said, this Fart would make an Image speak.
Up rises the Speaker, that noble Ephestion,
And says, Gentlemen, I Will put you a question:
The question propounded the ears did lose,
For the Major part went there with the nose.
Sir Robert Cotton, well read in old stories,
(Having conferred his notes with Mr. Pories,
I can well witness that these are no fables)
Said, 'twas hard to put the Fart in his Tables.
If 'twould bear an Action, says Sir Tho: Holcrost,
I Would make of this Fart a Bolt or a shaft.
Quoth Sir Roger Ashton, 'twould mend well the matter,
If 'twere shay'd and well washed in rose water:
Why, quoth Sir Roger Acton, how should I tell it,
A Fart by hearsay, and neither hear it nor smell it?
Quoth Sir Thomas Knevet, I fear here does lurk
In this Hallow Vault, some more powder work.
Then precisely rose Sir Anthony Cope,
And prayed to God, 'twere no Bull from the Pope.
Quoth Sir Tho: Chaloner, I Will demonstrat this fart
To b'a voice of the Belly, and not of the heart.
Then by my Faith says Sir Edwin Sandyes,
He plays not by th'line, this Gentleman bandies.
Then said Sir George More, in his wonted order,
I mean but to speak against the houses disorder.
The Fart which we favor far more then is fit,
I wish to the Sergeant you would commit.
The Sergeant refused it, humbly on's knees,
For Farts break Prison, and never pay Fees;
Wherefore this motion without reason stands
To charg me with what I cannot hold in my hands.
Then quoth the Clerk, I now plainly see
That a private Act is some gain for me.
All which was admitted by Sir Thomas Freak,
This Gentleman says, his Shoo did but creak.
Then said Sir Richard Gargrave by and by,
This Gentleman speaks as well as I.
But all at last said, it was most fit,
The Fart as a Traitor, to the Tower to commit:
Where as they say, it remains to this hour,
Yet not close prisoner, but at large in the Tower.
Partus Chaucheri Posthumus Gulielmi Nelson.
LIsten you Lordlings to a noble game,
Which I shall tell you, by thilk Lord S. Iame,
Of a lewd Clerk, and of his haviour bold,
He was, I trow, some threescore winters old.
Of Cambridge was this Clerk, not Oxenford,
Well known at Stilton, Stewkey, and Stamford.
He haunted fenny Staunton, and Saint Ives,
And fair could gloze among the Country Wives.
A lusty Runnyon ware he in his hose,
Loud could he speak, and crackle in the Nose.
For Schollarship him cared him light or naught,
To serve his turn, he English Postills bought.
He used no color, nor no Rhetoric,
But yet he couth some terms of art Logic,
He was full rude and hot in disputation,
And wondrous frequent in his predication.
Full gravely couth he spit, fore he began speak,
And in his mouth some Sugar Candy break,
But yet his preaching was to small effect,
Though loud he roared, inth' Northern Dialect.
He ware a Cassock deep, but of small cost,
His state was spent in Nutmeg, Ale and Toast.
A gauld backed spittle Jade for traveling
He kept in summer, but the wintering
Too costly was, rode he early or later,
Naught was his provender but grass and water,
Well liquor'd were his Boots, and wondrous wide,
Ne Sword, ne Rapyer ware he by his side,
A long vast Cloak-bag was his Caryage
There nis the like from Hull unto Carthage.
But, sooth to say, he was for ay formal,
And ware a thread bare Cloak Canonical.
He had a Deanship and a Parsonage,
Yet was in debt and danger all his age,
His greater sum he pays by borrowing,
And lesser scores, by often punishing.
If that a Problem, or a common place
Comes to his share, he is in jolly case;
Then to a Nape of Ling he would invite
Some Rascal Tapster, hardly worth a Mite.
Well was he known in every Village Town,
The good Wives clep'd him Gossip up and down;
Often was he Maudlin drunk, then would he weep,
Not for his sins, of them he took small keep:
It was the humor fell down from his eyn,
Distilled from Ale, he drank but little wine;
And being asked why those tears did fall,
Soothly he preached at a Funeral.
And when with drinking he was some deal mellow,
His Motto was, Faith Lad, I's half good fellow.
Thus preached he often on an Alehouse Bench,
And, when the Spirit moved, cough'd for his Wench,
And Bastards got, which, if God send them grace,
They may succeed him in his Seniors place.
He was an idle Senior for the nonce,
Foul may befall his body, and his bones.
Upon the same.
TWice twenty Sermons, and twice five, I ween,
(And yet not one of them in print is seen)
He preached, God and St. Mary's witnesses,
Where loud he roared, yet had but little pith.
Imitatio Chauceri altera, In eundem.
LEave, Ieffrey Chaucer, to describen a Man
In thine old phrason, so well as I can.
^ken no glozing, for my wit is rude,
Nath'lesse I Will limb out his similitude.
Fierce was his look, 'twas danger him to meet,
He passed like a Tempest through the street.
Narrow his eyn, his Nose was Chamised,
Sawfleum his Face, forked his Beard and head.
Pardie I wot not what men do him call,
Dan Thomas. ne Dan Richard, n'of what Hall
He is, (...) College; but, by the holy Mattin,
He was a frequent guest at John Port Lattin;
And eke at all other days festival,
He had a liquorous tooth over all;
Ne was there any Wight in all this Town,
That tasted better a Pasty of Venisoun,
Ybaked with Gravy Gods plenty,
It relished better then Austin's works or Gregory,
Yet politic he was, and worldly wise,
And purchac'd has, a double Benefice.
Small was his Wage, and little was his hire,
He let his sheep accumber in the mire;
And solac'd at St. John's, or at St. Paul's,
That was a Sanctuary for his Souls.
Sir John of them, must always taken keep,
A shitten Sheepherd cannot make clean sheep.
Ne God Mercurius, ne Melpomene,
E're looked upon him at's Nativity:
Or if they looked, they looked all ascaunce,
So was he made a Priest by foul mischance.
Pardie he was of the worst clay y'maked,
That e're Dame Nature in her Furnace baked.
For in his youth he was a Serving-man,
And busily on his Masters errand ran;
And fairly fore a Cloak-bag couth he ride,
Algates a rusty whinyard by his side;
And he that whilom could not change a groat,
Has changed, for a Cassock, his blew Coat.
One cannot see the Body, nor the Bulk,
That whilom did attend on aged Fulk;
A larger Gown has all y'covered,
And a square Cap does pent-house his swynes head.
Yet notes he got, when his Master disputed,
And when the learned Papists he confuted.
The Borel men sayn, he preach well enough,
But others known, that he stolen all his stuff.
Lustful he was, at Forty needs must wed,
Old January will have May in Bed,
And live in glee, for, as wise men have sayn,
Old Fish, and young Flesh, would I have fayn,
And thus he swinketh; but, to end my story,
Men sayn, he needs no other Purgatory.
The Nightingale.
MY Limbs were weary, and my head oppressed
With drowsiness, and yet I could not rest.
My Bed was such, as Down nor Feather can Swan;
Make one more soft, though Jove again turn
No fear-distracted thoughts, my slumbers broke,
I heard no Screech Owl shreek, nor Raven croak;
Sleep's foe, the Flea, that proud insulting Elfe,
Is now at truce, and is asleep it self.
But 'twas nights darling, and the worlds chief Jewel,
The Nightingale, that was so sweetly cruel.
It wooed my ears to rob my eyes of sleep,
That whilst she sung of Tereus, they might weep;
And yet rejoice the Tyrant did her wrong,
Her cause of woe, was burden of her song.
Which while I listened to, and strove to hear,
'Twas such, I could have wished my self all ear.
It Is false that Poets feign of Orpheus, he
Could neither move a beast, a stone, or tree
To follow him, but wheresoever she flies,
The Grovy Satyr, and the Faery hyes
Before her Perch, to dance their Roundelayes,
For she sings Distichs to them, while Pan plays.
Yet she sung better now, as if in me
She meant with sleep to try the Mastery.
But while she chaunted thus, the Cock for spite,
Days hoarcer Herald, chid away the night,
Thus robbed of sleep, my eyelids nightly guest,
Methought I lay content, though not at rest.
Epitaph on Mistrisse Mary Prideaux.
HAppy Grave thou do enshrine
That which makes thee a rich Mine,
Yet remember, it is but loan,
And we look for back our own.
The very same, mark me, the same,
Thou shall not cheat us with a Lame
Deformed Carcass, this was fair,
Fresh as morning, soft as Air;
Purer then other flesh as far
As other Souls their bodies are:
And that thou may the better see
To find her out, two stars there be
Eclipsed now; uncloud but those,
And they will point thee to the Rose
That died each Cheek, now pale and wan,
But will be, when she wakes again
Fresher then ever; and how ere
Her long sleep may alter her,
Her Soul will know her Body straight,
'Twas made so fit for it, no deceit
Can suit another to it, none
Cloth it so neatly as its own.
Upon drinking in the Crown of a Hat.
WEll fare those three, that when there was a Dearth
Of Cups to drink in, yet could find out mirth,
And spite of Fortune, make their want their store,
And naught to drink in, caused drinking more.
No brittle glass we used, nor did we think
'Twould help the taste, to have windows to our drink.
We scorned base Clay, with tortured in the wheel,
Martyred at last, the force of fire does feel.
Both these do fail, we drink not morally,
In such like Emblems of mortality.
The Cups that Brewers use, and long use may,
But used by women the contrary way,
Polluted not our Pallats; nor the horn,
Due to the forehead, by our lips was worn.
We did abhor these hell-bred, blood bought Metals,
Silver and gold; nor should that which makes Kettles
Serve us for cups; nor that which is the Newter
Betwixt these five, and is yeleped Pewter;
But it was as rare a thing, as often tried,
As best of these, though seven times purifyed
A seven times scoured Felt, but turned never,
And pity it is, I cannot call it Bever.
The circumlated Crown, somewhat deprest,
And by degrees, toward the one side thrust,
That to our lips it might the better stoop,
Varyed a little th'figure of a Hoop;
From a just Circle drawing out an Angle,
And that we might not for our measure wrangle,
The Butlers self, whose Hat it was and Band,
Filled each his measure with an even hand.
Thus did we round it, and did never shrink,
Till we that wanted Cups, now wanted drink.
An Epitaph upon Doctor Prideaux's Son.
HEre lies his Parents hopes and fears,
Once all their joys, now all their tears,
He Is now past sense, past fear of pain,
'Twere sin to wish him here again.
Had it lived to have been a Man,
This Inch had grown but to a span;
And now he takes up the less room,
Rocked from his Cradle to his Tomb.
It Is better dye a child, at four,
Then live and dye so at fourscore.
View but the way by which we come,
Thou Wilt say, he is best, that is first at home.
On his Mistrisse having the Green-sicknesse.
WHite Innocence, that now lies spread
Forsaken on thy widdow'd Bed,
Cold and alone; for fear, love, hate,
Or shame, recall thy crimson mate
From his dark Mazes, to reside
With thee, his chaste and Maiden-bride:
And left he backward thence should flow,
Congeale him in thy Virgin-snow.
But if his own heat, with thy pair
Of Neighboring Suns, and flaming hair,
Thaw him into a new Divorce,
Lest to the heart he take his course:
O lodge me there where I Will defeat
A future hope of his retreat;
And force the fugitive to seek
A constant station in thy cheek.
So each shall have his proper place,
I in your heart, he in your face.
Upon the naked Bedlams, and spotted Beasts, we see in Covent Garden.
WHen Besse! she never was half so vainly clad,
Besse never was half so naked, half so mad.
Again, this raves with Lust, for Love Besse ranted,
Then Besses skin was tan'd, but this is painted,:
No, this is Madam Spots, it is she, I know her,
Her face is powdered Ermin, I Will speak to her;
How does your most enammel'd Ladyship?
Nay pardon me, I dare not touch your Lip.
What kiss a Leopard* he that Lips will close,
With such a Beast as you, may lose his Nose.
Why in such have? before we part it is meet.
You should do penance Madam in a Sheet:
It Is time when Schism and Error so loud cries.
To punish such notorious Sectaries.
I publicly appear half Adamite,
In private practice you are one outright.
But Dapl'd Ladies, if you needs must show
Your nakedness, yet pray why spotted so?
Has beauty think you luster from these spots?
Is Paper fairer when it is stained with blots?
What have you cut your Mask out into sippets,
Like wanton Girls, to make you Spots and Tippets;
As I have seen a Cook, that over-neat,
To garnish out a dish has spoiled good meat?
Pride is a Plague, why sure these are the soars,
I will write (Lord have mercy) on your doors,
Devils are black who doubt it, but some write
That there are likewise Devils that are white:
Well, I have found a third sort that are neither,
They are Py'de Devils, black and white together.
Come, tell me true, for what these Spots are set,
Are they Decoyes to draw fools to your net?
Are they like Ribons in the Mane and Tail,
Of an old wincing Mare that is set to sale?
You that use public trade must hang out Signs,
Bushes you think will vent your naughty Wines.
I Will tell you (Ladies) never give me trust,
If these baits move not more to scorn then Lust.
Perhaps they may a stomach tempt, that loves
A Gammon of Bacon that is stuffed with Cloves;
Or White-broath with Pruines, but never hope,
That Love or Lust, to this patch't Lure should stoop,
Unless of such rude Ruffins, as nere blush,
To enter wherefoe're they see a bush.
Whose Breeches and whose Shirts make plain report,
That they as ready are as you for sport.
Take my advice to be secure from jeers,
Wash off your stinking Spots with bitter tears.
O you sweet Rural beauties who were never
Infected with this ugly spotted Fever.
Whose face is smoother then the Ivory plain,
Need neither spots from France, nor paint from Spain.
Whose snowie Mountains never saw the light,
And yet the Sun never saw Snow so white;
Whose dress the Emblem is of Modesty,
Whose looks secure you from attempts; whose Eye
Has made Jobs Vow, and kept it, and whose whose
Behavior chaste is, as your Virgin-soule:
Which to adorn, take up your choicest thoughts,
Not to get Pendants, Paintings, Ribonds, Spots:
Trust me (sweet Ladies) I that never thought
To love again, do now extremely dote;
Men that have Wit, Religion or Estates,
Will be ambitious to make you their Mates;
Whilst all those naked Bedlams, painted Babies,
Spottified Faces, and Frenchified Ladies,
With all their proud fantastical disguises,
Will prove at last, but fools and beggars prizes.
Dear Coz: the want of thy sweet company,
Puts me upon this idle Poetry:
May you return with Olive in your hand,
Bring thy dear self to me, peace to the Land.
To Sir John Mennis, on a rich prize which he took on the Seas.
WAlking last Friday morning in my Garden,
Where stands a house that I have grunted hard in:
And finding there sweet William by my Bower,
It made me think of John for half an hour.
Thou art (I hear) where thou do play Carnoggin
Thou broughtest from Wales, against flute of Hogan Mogan.
And where thou richly do abound in Ghelt,
And ropes of Pearl now stripped off from thy Belt;
But now laid up in safety on the shelfe,
Pearl that is more orient, then the East it self;
A Bag of Diamonds too: and I Divine,
That long ere this, all the Hauns Towns are thine;
After thine own thou needst not call these Lands,
For they are ready Christened to thy hands,
Whiles thus in thy Seraglio thou do bristle,
Poor Lady at New Castle may go whistle,
Or gnaw the sheets for anguish, no John comes,
He wears out all he has in foreign bums,
He Is not at all concerned in us (poor fouls)
His friends may hang and who is will carry coals.
Nay never toss your nose; I knew thee man
When thou were little better then poor John:
The worlds well mended since the war began,
You Are now become the great Leviathan:
And as that monster when he has got a prize
Now eats, then farts out Pilchards as he lies.
So thou devour'st at Sea, making no bones
Of smaller vessels, and their precious Stones.
We have no booties brought us in from Sea,
To furnish us for rates or monthly pay.
No Jewels, nor rich prizes, no such matter,
When Troopers come, we run and pawn a Platter,
That we can spare, for we have little meat,
If this world hold, we shall forget to eat.
We shall be freeborn people then (Oh Hector)
When we have nothing left but a --
Hard-hearted Knight, how can thou hear this tale
And not bepisse thy self with grief or Ale?
Have thou no moisture, no relenting left?
Will thou sit always brooding ore thy theft,
And part with never a penny to the Muses,
Nor to thy friends, nor yet to pious uses?
We Will draw thy picture (Churl) and thy shape both
Standing like Dives in the painted cloth.
One that nere thought upon his friends till then,
When he was in the Devils frying pan.
Then when it is too late thou will confess,
Thou have more sinned in Friendship then
I. S.

A Defiance to K. A. and his round Table. Incipit J. A.
AS it befell on a Penticost day,
King Arthur at Camelot, kept his Court royal
With his fair Queen dame Guinever the gay,
And many Princes and Lords in Hall.
Heralds with Hukes, hearing full hie
Cried largess, largess, Chevaliers tres hardy.
A doubty Dwarf to the uppermost Deske,
Boldly began wick kneeling on knee;
Cried, King Arthur God thee save and see.
Sir Rhines of Northgales greeteth well thee,
And bids that thy Beard anon thou him send,
Or else from thy jaws he will it off rend.
For his Roabe of State is a rich Scarlet Mantle,
With eleven Kings Beards bordered about,
And there is room left in a Cantell,
For thine to make it out.
This must be done be thou never so stout,
This must be done, I tell thee no Fable,
Maugre the teeth of all thy round Table.
When this doubty dwarf his dismal message had said,
The King fun'd, Queen screek'd, Ladies were aghast,
Princes puffed, Barons bluster'd, Lords began to lowre,
Knights and Squires stormed, like Steeds in a flower
Yeomen and Pages yelld out in hall,
With that came in Sir Guy the Seneschall.
Silence my Sovereign, quoth this Courtious Knight,
And therewithal the stowre began to still.
The Dwarfes dinner was full dearly deight,
Of Wine and Wassell he had his will.
And when he had eaten and drunken his fill,
A hundred pieces of fine Coined Gold,
Was given the Dwarf for his Message so bold.
But say to Sir Rhines thou Dwarf quoth the King,
That for his bold Message, I him defy,
For shortly I mean with Basins him to ring
Out of Northgales where he and I
With Swords, and no Razors shall quickly try,
Which of us two is the best Barber.
And then withal he shook his good Sword.
Excutitur
Sic Explicit, I. A.

FINIS.

