A SPEECH OF THOMAS MERCER, Merchant, Spoken a little before his death, being
executed in the Parish of S. Mildred, near the Poultrey, the 27. of May. 1645.

wherein is set forth, 1. His sins against God, 2. The Cause of Gods Judgment
still among us, and 3. His advise to his Wife.


LONDON, Printed by Peter Cole at the sign of the Printing Press in
Corne-hill, near the Royal Exchange, 1645.

A Speech of THOMAS MERCER, Merchant, spoken a little before his death, being
executed in the parish of S. Mildred near the Poultrey the 27. of May, 1645.
IT is observeable, that the actions of dying men are most remarkable, and I
conceive here are many good people does expect I should say something
concerning my latter end; I must confess it has bin my chiefest aim, to apply
my heart unto wisdom, and to make my peace with my God, whom I have so highly
offended, both in thought word, and deed: If you should ask what those sins
are, I should answer; that for number they would put the best Arethmitician
past his account, for they are innumerable; more then the sands on the
Seashore, for their weight intolerable, not to be borne, neither by men nor
Angels; but by the imputative Righteousness of my blessed Savior, who I hope
has nailed them to his Cross, hid them in his wounds, and bathed them in his
most precious blood, that they may neither shame me here, or condemn me
hereafter: I must confess I have searched my heart-from one corner to the
other; and left no place unsearched, nor sin I hope unrepented of; although the
world may judge of me, and that scandallously it matters not; I wave it, as S.
John says, They judge but according to outward appearance, I believe they are
such as have Argus eyes, that pry into other men's faults, and sentens them but
few of them have Cornelius hands to cherish and comfort them whom they judge;
but as our Savior says, Judge not, lest ye be judged; for my part I heartily
forgive them all, the Lord in mercy forgive them. I shall only leave unto them
this lesson of a servant of Christ's, that would never look upon any man's fault
with one eye, but would presently reflect upon himself with the other eye: and
say thus, in this my vile heart, remains this sin, which without the special
grace of God, I should have committed. Blood I know is a crying sin, and the
vengeance of God due to it, if not truly repented of, but I know that by true
repentance, and humiliation and lively faith to lay hold one the merrits of
Jesus Christ, he is both able and will wash away my sins in his precious blood,
therefore not to despair but steadfastly to lay hold on the precious promises
that he has made to all true penitents be their sins never so great or many,
but he will pardon them, therefore I raise these as comforts to my self of his
mercy unto great sinners Manasses that made Ci^les to run down with blood,
Peter that denied his Master, Saul that persecuted the Church, David that
sinned in a big nature, yet upon true repentance obtained mercy, not that I
presume upon these because they sinned and repented, therefore I should be
saved, but Lord grant me true repentance for mine own sins, for I know I shall
not suffer for other men's sins, nor be saved by another man's righteousness, for
as our Savior says concerning them one whom the Tower of Siloam fell except
ye repent ye shall also likewise perish. And therfare I shall desire of you
all good people your charitable opinion of me, and your prayers for me as long
as I shall live here in this life, and though the rigor of the Law has taken
hold of me, more then of others, God knows my heart, I speak not against any
favor others have received, for as we say Lex nervae republicae, and it is well
known, to the greatest Lawyers the Law is the nerves and sinnewes of the
Commonwealth And without the Law there could be no communion amongst men, but
when Justice shall be perverted, when the Law says it is so, and the Judge says
it is so, according to Law: and yet Judgment pass contrary to Law, it makes
me not wonder then, and indeed the more not to wonder, that when Gods
Judgments and heavy ones to are upon us, when we are shething one another
Swords in one another bowels, and yet we fast and pray, and humble our selves.
Yet no Judgment diverted: but rather increased what is the reason! lay it to
beart I beseech you, Justice is turned backward, it has cast of the veil from
of her face and respects one more then another, this is not God-like, who
has no respect of persons, but the soul that sins is to dye. We have
fasted indeed but how, as the Lord complains in the 58. Esaias to strife, and to
debate, and smite with the fist of wickedness, to taking of bribes. But I pray
God establish your laws in the right meaning of them, and you that are Judges,
follow the example of that in the 2 Cro. 19. 6. 7. That Judges take heed what
they do, for you judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in
Judgment: wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed, and do
it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, no respect of persons, nor
taking of gifts, as I shall answer before God, that the accident that happend,
for which I now die, I had no prepension, or intended malice against any man,
but I blame none, I forgive them all, the Lord forgive them in mercy, psa. 116.
I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice and supplication, because he
has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I
live, the sorrows of death compassed me and the pains of hell gat hold upon
me, I found trouble and sorrow, then called I upon the name of the Lord. Oh
Lord I beseech thee deliver my soul, gracious is the Lord, and righteous, yea
our God is merciful, the Lord preserves the simple: I was brought low, and he
helped me, return unto his rest O my soul, for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee, for thou have delivered my soul from death, my eyes
from tears, and my feet from falling, I will walk before the Lord in the land
of the living, I believe, therefore have I spoken; I was greatly afflicted; I
said in my haste all men ore liars, what shall I render unto the Lord for all
his benefits? I will take the cup of salvation, and will call upon the name of
the Lord, I will pay my vows now unto the Lord, in the presence of all this
people, precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints. O Lord
truly I am thy servant, and the Son of thine hand maid, thou have loosed my
bonds, I will offer up unto thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call
upon the name of the Lord: I will pay my vows now unto the Lord in the presence
of all this people, in the Courts of the Lords own house, in the midst of thee
oh Jerusalem praise we the Lord.

Oh most gracious, eternal, everliving, and ever loving Lord God, and my most
merciful Father in Jesus Christ for his sake have mercy upon my poor soul. Oh
thou just Judge of all the world have mercy upon me: oh holy and blessed Spirit
have mercy upon me: oh holy blessed and glorious Trinity have mercy upon me,
and cleanse me from all my sins of what nature or degree soever; Lord thou
know my private humiliations prayers and tears before thee though in much
weakness, yet accept them from the most unworthiest of all thy servants: I
pray thee deal not with me after my sins, neither reward me after mine
iniquities: Lord I am heartily sorry for my sins, and am grieved that I can be
no more sorrowful, but o, specially I am grieved that I have offended, so
good, so gracious and so merciful a Father, so loving a Savior Oh forgive me
that I have grieved thy Holy Spirit, that from time to time has sugg^sted such
good motions into my heart, oh I have slighted them, and slighted, Thy word,
Sacraments, and Sabbath, all thine ordinances: I beseech thee Holy Father, for
Jesus Christ his sake, lay not those sins to my charge; and I beseech you good
people take warning by me of slighting the means of salvation, which I fear
has bin the main cause, that the Lord has bin pleased to lay his afflicting
hand upon me, which I confess, I have justly deserved; and therefore desire
heartily to be forgiven; the good Lord forgive me; and sanctify his
afflictions unto me, and to all good people; for I know that affliction come by
the Almighty providence of God: but S. Paul comforts them, that suffers
afflictions here in this life; if we bear them patiently, we shall receive an
eternal wait of glory hereafter, which God of his infinite mercy grant unto
all afflicted persons, in what place, or case soever, especially in this
kingdom, And herein and above the rest, let us pray for the Kings most
excellent Majesty, Lord as thou have graced him with a Crown, so crown him
with thy grace, bless his noble Consort, Queen Mary: And Lord as thou have
made them both of one flesh so make them both of one spirit in truth, in the
Protestant Religion. Bless our hopeful Prince Charles, with the rest of that
Royal Progeny. Lord bless the Parliament, unite the King, and his great
Council together, for the good and peace of this Kingdom. Lord heal the
distractions of the people; and Lord if it be thy will sheath up thy devouring
sword, settle we pray thee this unnatural war, that thy people may embrace one
another in bonds of peace, and not in effusion of blood, and in thy good time
stop this issue of blood, and turn the stream of that into the bosom of
thine, and thy peoples enemies; bless I beseech thee all good people here
present, Lord bless all my kindred and acquaintance. Lord I beseech thee
bless my dear wife and children, whom I ever loved with a real inward, and
unfeigned affection, though I confess I have not bin so careful as I ought to
have bin. Lord lay not this sin to my charge; and I beseech thee set not any
offense of mine stain any of them by any outward scandal or reproach, but
bless them all I heartily beseech thee, for out of the deapths have I called
unto thee Lord, hear my voice, and let my cry come up unto thee, for if thou
should mark what is done amiss, who could stand before thee; therefore with
David in thee 119. Psalm. I pray remove from me reproach, and contempt, for I
have kept thy testimonies, thou have taught us O Lord, whereby a young man
shall cleanse his way, that is by taking heed unto thy word. Grant Lord I
beseech thee, that all young men here present may take heed, and learn this
lesson, that by my example they fall not into the like errors I have done,
which has bin the cause that God has taken me in the flower and strength of
my years, and taken me from my dear wife and children, the Lord bless them,
and provide for them, and I believe the Lord will according to his promise in
the 68. Psalm. 6. The Lord set the solitary in families, and he brings out those
that are bound with chains, but the rebellious dwell in a dry land: and in the
37. Psalm. He has promised not to forsake the righteous, nor suffer his seed to
beg their bread. And here I shall desire all my loving neighbors, that they
would give this causion of comfort unto my dear wife: my direction is that in
the first place she seek Jesus Christ and to lay hold one him by a lively
faith, to seek to him by prayer, to hear often his word, and as often as
oppertunitie permits to receave the Sacrament, and all in sincerity of heart, I
speak not this as if these things were wanting in her, but that she should
persist as she has begun to her lives end. And my soul for thine thou will be
prosporous here and everlastingly happy hereafter. I pray God bless my poor
tender babes, and I pray dear wife to thy power, (for I know thou love
them,) to bring them up in the rudiments of learning especially of Religion and
the Lord bless it to them, and make them obdient children to thee, And I
in^reat thee be wary of giving them the raines at first, for to muuh
indulgencie being perceived does encourage young twigs to sprout up like the
Ivy which surrounds the oak and binds it as it were at its command, therefore
while they are green be careful of them, and fo^low Sollomans rule in the.II.
Prove 6. te^ch a Child when he is young in the way that he shoould walk, and
^hen he is old he will not depart from it, and I pray thee comfort thy sealfe
in the Lord although the time be hard and charity be cold, it matters not if
you rely upon him you cannot want, the Lord knows says S. James what is best
for you, as I told you before you have his promise in.37. Psa. and. 67. 6. he
sets the sollitary in families, and though he do afflict by gentle means it is
for our good, for as David says, it was well for me that I was afflicted, for
before I went astray; and the Apostle says, Flagelum omnem filium quem
recipit, he whips every Son whom he receives; therefore take Crosses as
comforts, they are true symptoms of Christians, if so sanctified unto them as
we have bin taught, that the Cross is an unseparable companion of a Christian,
and for my part I never read of any of the dear Children of Christ, but have
suffered afflictions by one means or oother. And though they seem tedious and
irksome here; yet by the providence of God unto whom they are sanctified, they
are joys in sadness, lights in darkness, Heaven in hell, but here heed must be
taken, that affliction; must be seriously laid to heart, and grounded upon the
right princill from whence we receive them. We must not bear them in
ostentation, or in imaginary shows, that pleases not God, and therefore we must
labor to know whether they be from God or not, and there be several signs, by
which they may be known first if we bear them patiently, and that for Christ
who suffered patiently for us. 2. They must be borne willingly, submitting to
the will of our Heavenly Father as Christ did 3. They must be borne
comfortably, not as punishment, but as pledges of Gods favor seeing then that
God is pleased to deal with us as with his dearest Servants, how thankful
ought we to be, and ready always to embrace them here, that we may find the
comfort of them hearafter, for David knew well enough that the Lord would
maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the right of the poor, psalm. 140.
12. And therefore it matters not what my fellow actors upon the stage of this
world say, God is the great spectator that beholds the secrets of every man's
heart, and therefore I wave al relations of this world, and role my self upon
my chief Rock, my savior Jesus Christ and with David I shall pray, Lord let
the sighing of the prisoner com before thee, according to the greatness of thy
power preserve thou those that are appointed, to dye and Lord I return unto
thee from the bottom of my heart all humble and hearty thanks for that great
and inestimable providenc over me, forgiving me so long and so large a time of
repentance, that when men would have destroyed me, even as it were in a moment
before i might have time to send up one sorrowful groan unto thee for my
sins, and that i had ofended so gracious a God.

Yet even thou Lord, had compassion on me, and liftest me up, Oh what shall I
render unto thee for all thy benefits toward me. I will take the cup of
salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord as long as I live. Oh Lord hear
my prayer, and have mercy upon me a poor sinner, accept of me in Jesus
Christ. Sweet Jesus plead thy merits for me to thy Father, who has made full
satisfaction for all my sins, and for the sins of all those that truly lay hold
on thee, Lord yet strengthen my faith that nothing may separate me from thee,
neither life nor death, nor any thing may separate me from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus my Lord, and only Savior, who sits at the right
hand of God making intercession f^r all that are weary, and heavy laden with
their sins: now Lord I come unto thee, where I shall receive everlasting joy,
and comfort: Oh I beseech thee accept of my poor person and prayers now before
thee. And though death look grym, one nature, yet by thy grace, it is
advantage unto all thine Elect, for thou have broken the bars of death, and of
hell; and therefore through thy merits, I meet death, as a Bride groom does his
Bride, with joy and comfort, and that through Jesus Christ my Lord, and only
Savior, in whose blessed name and words I conclude my imperfect prayers, in
that absolute form of prayer which be himself has taught us, saying, Our
Father, etc.

FINIS

