THE CHARACTER OF A Complete Physician, Or NATVRALIST.
DR. Hackwel in his Apology very aptly calls Anatomy, and the Knowledge of
Simples, the two Legs of Physic. And that the Complete Physician may have both
his Legs, I shall follow his footsteps.

Anatomy is of greatest fame and repute, tho not of much real use to the curing
Mankind. The use of Simple does the most part to the only end of this Art,
Man's Health, which is the Difference in its Definition. The former respects
Contemplation, the latter the Practice; and therefore called by us Physic. The
former is performed at home in a House, with little expense of time, labor, or
pains taking; the latter requires all these in a high measure.

The Complete Physician (supposing in him University Learning) must begin with
Anatomy, the Subject of his Art: He must know all Parts, and their
Sub-divisions, whether similar or organical, chiefly the Vessels and all
Passages of the Body, the use of Parts, their Situation, Connection, Figure,
Structure, Proportions, Complements, Defects, Communities, Differences,
compounding Elements, Faculties, Actions, and Uses, which are performed by
Artificial Dissections, Measurings, Ligatures, Inflations, Injections, and
other useful Operations. He is to be well versed also in Comparative Anatomy,
in all sorts of Animals whatsoever; By which means he will discover the seat of
Diseases, and Symptoms, their Causes, and Effects, Sympathies, and Antipathies;
which way the matter of Diseases passes from part to part, and also of all the
fluids in our Bodies. It Is helpful also very much in the Prognostics, as well
as in the Diagnosticks.

In the Practical it teaches what Veins or Arteries are fittest to be opened,
where Fontanels to be made, where Cupping-glasses, Plasters, Ointments, etc.
are to be applied, where and how Incisions to be made.

This part of Nature has bin very well cultivated by many learned Hands, both
abroad and at home, by the Two Glories of our Nation the Immortal Harvey, my
honored Friend and Patron, and Dr. Glisson, and some others; tho now much
neglected where it ought to be most cultivated.

One part seems to be wholly neglected (from which the greatest Practical Skill
is to be attained) that is by feeding, or sudden killing Animals with Poifons,
Volatile, or Lixivial Salts, or with any of the stronger Simples, and after
opening them, to find out the effects upon the Blood, and Humors of the Body.
Whosoever has rightly considered and digested the Physical qualities (which is
a great defect in Medicine) will attain very clearly the true Nature of things,
as appliable to Man's Body, and discover plainly the infinite Errors in
Practice, and may demonstrate his Practice by reasoning from Effect to Cause,
and from Cause to Effect; and then by comparing one to another, and those to
the Tribes hereafter mentioned.

The other Leg of Physic is, The knowledge of Natural things, in the Latitude
after expressed.

It Is not the business of this Paper to set forth the great and large extent of
Physic, that is of all Tangible Bodies of the Universe. This has bin
frequently performed in many Orations, and Harangues at the College of
Physicians, especially in that incomparable Speech of Sir Thomas Millington,
both for Matter and Language, Anno 1679.

That which is intended in this Paper is, to set out a Complete Physician, and
thereby to guide people in their choice, when they have occasion to use one;
wherein men are exceedingly mistaken, to the loss of Health, Life, and Money.

I begin with the Name, which is in our English Tongue the most proper of any
Language whatsoever. The word Physician, derived from the Greek (...), is
plainly and fully rendered by the word Naturalist, (that is) one well versed in
the full extent of Nature, and Natural things; hereunto add the due, and
skilful preparation and application of them to Men's Bodies, in order to their
Health, and prolongation of Life, and you have a comprehensive Definition of a
Physician. It Is not then a particular Knowledge or Art of one or a few things,
but in general of all Bodies, whether Elements, inanimate, or living.

Now this Knowledge implies not only a bare visible skill of their Names, and
Parts only; but a strict and serious examination of them by diligent
experiments, and trials of them by all the Senses, by all ways, and
comparisons amongst themselves, to investigate their Natures relating to men
principally, and all other uses they may be applied to. I shall speak briefly
to each, and first of Plants.

Vegetables being the largest Genus in Nature, comprehends the greatest part
by far of Materia Medica, or things used for Physic. These are to be known in
all their Parts, by Name, as also as digested into Tribes, and Families as they
are reasonably well done by both the Baubins, and better by Dr. Morison, tho
not so suitable to the design of teaching others, as it is to be wished they
had. But of his Work and a better Method, something shall be showed in due time.

By a right Method may be more than conjectured the properties of Simples by
the bare first sight of them, and fully known by the other senses, as every one
must confess, who has seriously reflected on this Matter. Nay, hereby also may
well nigh be known (I had almost said) perfectly, what they will afford, what
Waters, Chemical Oils, Spirits, Salts, and in what quantity. This, I do not say
of all the Tribes, but of most of them in a just Method delivered. But if you
apply them to the other Senses, especially taste and smell, and other trials may
be found out their full Nature. But then there is required some exercises of
the Senses, and exactness in them, and also the skill of words adapted to each
sense. As for Tastes the Vintners have added some, and where defect is, more are
to be invented. The want of words appliable to our Senses, is the greatest
impediment to the improvement of this most divine and useful Art.

The next thing is, to range into a good Method what Properties are suitable to
what Diseases, and what parts in particular, (let the instance be bitter) as
also in what hurtful. And by this way, you may in a few sheets of Paper
comprise all Diseases well defined, and their Remedies by Simples (generally
the best way of Practice) more fully, more scientifically, and better retained,
than in many and huge Volumes of Herbals, Pharmacopaea's, and Practical Writers.

This being done, then the Physician is to find out by Trials, Sympathies, and
Antipathies, as to Mixture of them one with another, Preparation of them by
Powdering, etc. and by Distillation; whereby may be known, what is fit for
Distillation, what for Decoctions. It Is a shame to see the Pharmacopaea's
stufft with such a multitude of distilled Water and not one in ten good for any
thing, nay offensive both to taste, smell, and stomach. Nay, there are few of
the more generous Spirits, but have Ingredients which afford nothing
beneficial, but rather prejudicial to those Compound Waters: Whereby the
Apothecaries Shops are surcharged to their great trouble, and hurt to the
Patient, by such nauseous and offensive Waters, whereof more may be said on
occasion, and some may be added, wholly unknown, tho very common, and written
of by Authors, and no Virtues annexed to them.

Then let him observe what Seasons (not Astrological Configurations) are best
to gather Herbs; for it is certain, some Plants shall at some Seasons yield
well, at other little, or nothing good.

This Physician also is to have some skill in Chemistry, to detect Cheats,
improve Philosophy, and some Medicines which may be useful.

He may attain to the Knowledge of Emperics Medicines, being generally less
compounded than in the Shops; and thereby shall find out some useful Medicines
by a skilful Analysis of them; but more especially by experimenting them with
other Bodies.

He is acquainted with the Philosophical Trades, especially the Refiners and
Dyers, for he that is versed in the latter, chiefly of the Silk and Linen Dyer
may without much difficulty discover, the compounds of Medicinal Waters, which
has hitherto puzzled all the World. Add hereto that no Manufacture but affords
some light in Physics.

As for Minerals, dissolved in their proper Menstrua, he shall have the most
dry and astrictive Taste and Nature of Gold, the most bitter of Silver, the most
nauseous rough and contracting taste of Copper, the sweetish of Lead and Tyn,
the rough and astringent of Iron.

As for Animals they mostly serve for food, and yield much volatile Salt, some
Water, Spirit, and Lixivial Salt, little differing each from other, all which
the Physician ought to know, which and what parts of them are best and useful,
and wherein. Two Books I recommend for Birds, Mr. Willoughby Published by the
excellent Mr. Ray; The other of Shells, etc. done by Mr. Lyster of York, both
which are Treated in a most singular Method.

And for Insects, Musset and Johnson are best.

As for Fishes, they are yet very confusedly digested. These with the other
Natural things are Methodized in an easy way, and may come abroad.

Earths, Their Natures are easily discovered by the Senses, and ready
Experiments, and pretty well known.

Stones many have written of, but their Qualities falsely delivered for gain
only, and are not of much use; yet some our Country affords, much surpassing
Pearl and Coral in destroying Acids, their principal, if not sole use.

This Physician can discern betwixt true and Counterfeit Medicines, what
Remedies either Simple, or Compound; as for Strangers brought from foreign
Parts, he can discover their Uses and Qualities, and whereof compunded, and
perhaps exalt their Virtues by imitating them, and easily find the Cheats in
them.

He can give proper Names and Definitions to all Natural things brought to him.

He knows what things are of great Charge, but of little Use, and the various
degrees of their Natures. He can invent more grateful, plain, and effectual
Medicines than are commonly in use, except to such Persons to whom nothing that
is Physic is grateful.

From Ignorance of these things, proceeds (that great Impediment of Improvement
in this Art) the Doctrine of Occult Qualities. The unsteddiness of Physicians
in their choice of and adhering to good Medicines, (not knowing they are so)
for in this sense Hipp. Aphor. (...), Experience is Deceitful,) is most true.
Hence Receipts get Credit, Medicines so often altered, and new ones gap't
after, whereof as yet there is no end.

This Physician rightly considering finds, The Herbals make some Plants as well
as the Chemists make almost all their Medicines to be Universal, so leading
people into many, and sometimes dangerous Errors.

He is able to advise fitting Diet, and Remedies, at all times and places,
wheresoever he comes, which cannot be done without the foresaid Knowledge.

But the Reader will ask whether there be any such Physician in the World, or
ever was, or may be. Answer yea, and that it is not difficult where a good
Method and stubborn Labor go together.

He is furnished with a good Library, of such Authors as Treat on those
Arguments. It Is a great reproach that some Physicians of great Fame and
Practice, gotten by ill and ungenerous ways, know very little or nothing in
any thing abovesaid, and have scarce a Book toward any of those ends, unless
of Anatomy.

This Physician does truly maintain the honor of his Profession, avoids the
due reproaches of such as are Subordinate to him, can with sensible Arguments
confute the obstreperous falsehoods of the Adversaries of his Faculty, and his
own, can judge clearly of the falsehoods and deceits of Physic-mongers.

He takes that way that one of the great Masters of his Art, Galen did, spares
no Pains, Travail, or Charge to investigate new and better Materials for his
Art. Galen and many other have Travailed into far Countries to this very
purpose.

Lastly, He takes nothing upon trust, but consults his own Senses, and other
strict trials, and becomes a Complete Naturalist or Physician.

But tho my task here ends, yet his Religion and Morality are to be considered.
As for the former he has woven into his Practice the Religio Medici of that
famous Person, and Honor too of this Art, Sir Thomas Brown of Norwich, to whom
I recommend the Reader.

His Morality is sober, grave, continent, pitiful to, and careful of his
Patients; Writing his Receipts solely for their good, and not for the gain of
others his Subordinates. He is continent wise and prudent, mild and modest,
has veracity and clearness in all his Sayings. In his Prognostics exceeds not
the boundaries of his Art, and Nature, his proper Sphere; abominates the common
way of conforming his Religion to his Interest, and the usual frauds of
Astrology and Uromantie.

He is decent in his Habit, courteous in Behavior, neither morose, nor
talkative, able and ready to satisfy any of his Patients in hearing the Sick
man's Complaint, and rationally to satisfy him in his Scruples. Determines
nothing till he has a full and clear Idaea of the Disease, Symptoms, and their
Causes, and not till then; squares his Intentions and Medicaments to each of
them.

He smiles at the common Vogue of the World in choosing their Physicians, and
envies not those empty ones who gain great Estates and Glory, by outward shows,
and by ungentile, and some by sordid and debauched ways. Such as have only a
modish Habit, a neat and well-furnished House, a Coach and Horses, a Velvet
Coat, a fine Periwig, a curiously-headed Cane, a smooth and starched Behavior,
flattering Language, commending all, enslaving his Judgment to the hearer's
Opinion, officious needless, and frequent Visits. He laughs outright at those
who spend their precious time in hearing and hunting after News, and carrying
it from House to House, and those who read Lectures on Chairs, Beds, Rooms and
Hangings, or on Don Quixot. He thinks the usual aucupium of Entertainments;
telling of Shows misspent time, and judges not these any part of his
Profession. But in all these little Arts, which serve only to gain, he uses
commendable Prudence. And at all spare times you shall find him in his Study,
where I leave him.

But perhaps the considering, inferring, and knowing Reader does expect a
Character also of those who are called Mountebanks, and Empiricks; because
contraries illustrate each others. To whom this answer may be given. The first
is, He that may be called so, without any Action at Law, as being not lawfully
permitted to Practice by the Laws of England. But this sense reaches not the
meaning of the word. Empiric is a Greek word coming from (...), Experience, and
signifies no more than an Experimentor; that is, one that pretends only
Experience for his Practice, (which Hipp. Aph. 1. calls Deceitful) without
ability of giving a rational account of the Disease, Cause, Symptoms, and
Medicines he prescribes; so that an unlawful Practiser, (if able) may not be
called in this true and genuine sense an Empiric; Nor he (though a Licenciate
to Practice) be untruly said to be an Empiric, tho in the highest order of
Licenciats. I conclude by saying, That he who has the fewest of the abovesaid
requisites of a Complete Physician, according to the degrees of his recess
therefrom, may deserve this ignominious Title.

Mountebanks are properly and only such, who upon Stages and in open places
proclaim (commonly with the addition of Antic tricks as good as those
forementioned, disclaimed by the Complete Physician, tho done in retail, and in
private, and therefore less observed) the great Experience of his most singular
Remedies, suitable to all Persons, Ages, and Sexes.

To fill up this empty Page, take a part of an Elegant Fable of Phaedrus, of a
Cobbler turned Physician.

Non artis ulla Medicum se prudentia,
Verum stupore vulgi factum nobilem,
Rex, advocata concione, haec addidit,
Quantae putatis esse vos dementiae,
Qui capita vestra non dubitatis credere,
Cui calceandos nemo commiserit pedes.
Hoc pertinere vere ad illos dixerim,
Quorum stultitiae quaestus impudentia est.
FINIS.

