A SPEECH Spoken in the Honorable House of COMMONS. BY Sir John Maynard Knight
of the Bath, one of the 11. impeached Members, Wherein he has stated the case
of Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne, and done him more real service, in
procuring his liberty, then all his seeming friends in the Kingdom. Whereunto
is annexed the Copy of a Petition presented August 1. 1648. to the honorable
House of Commons, subscribed by near ten thousand persons, in the behalf of
L. C. John Lilburn, with the Answer, Orders, and Proceedings of the Lords and
Commons thereupon.

London, Printed for I. Harris, Aug. 11. 1648.

A Speech spoken by Sir John Maynard, Knight. of the Bath, in the honorable House
of Commons, July, 27. 1648. etc.
Mr. Speaker,
WE are called hither as Trustees and Representatives of the PEOPLE; and it is
our duty to represent to you the grievances of any, which are injured, or
oppressed, and to be as careful of them as of our selves, being the essential
part of our privileges.

The Law of the Land is every Englishmans birthright, and you are the
Conservators of the Law, in which is wrapped up our Lives, Liberties and
Estates.

Mr. Speaker, without any further preamble, or introduction, I shall acquaint
you briefly with the sufferings of Lieut. Col. John Lilburne, who has been
imprisoned two years illegally by the Lords, who by Law have no jurisdiction
over Commoners in criminal cases, against their wills.

About four years since, there was a great falling out betwixt Col. King, and
Lieut. Col. Lilburne, his Officer; both faithful men to your service, and of
high Spirits, fierce and resolute: The difference grew to such a hight, that
Lieut. Col. Lilburne complained to his Commander in chief the Earl of
Manchester, that Col. King had betrayed Crowland, etc. and humbly besought his
Lordship to call a Council of War, and he would make good his accusation:
The Earl of Manchester hoping to compose the difference, put it off, and
Lieut. Col. Lilburne persisted; but seeing justice delayed, he came to London,
and divulged abroad that Col. King was a Traitor to his trust: whereupon Col.
King sued him at the Common Law in an action of 2000. l. and Lieut. Col.
Lilburne applied himself to the House of Commons, and prayed that the whole
business might be heard and tried at a Council of War, by that Ordinance
which was established in the Earl of Essex Articles, they being both
soldiers, and having subjected themselves to the Law-martiall; for Lieut. Col.
Lilburne knew by the letter of the Common Law he was gone, it being Treason by
the Common Law to hold a Fort or Castle against the King.

It seems this business depended before Judge Reeves, who was a faithful
worthy Judge, and never descerted the Parliament, but adheared when we were in
the lowest condition: But Lieut. Col. Lilburne being young and hot, writ a
Letter to Judge Reeves, wherein he expressed himself in acrimonius language,
which had better been forborne; but in a satyricall way he showed how he was
hardly dealt withal by himself and the Earl of Manchester, and spoke truth
in sharp language; viz. That the Judges took many extraordinary Fees which
they could not justify by Law, and that their proceedings in their Courts were
so irregular, that no man knew where to find them; and that the Earl of
Manchester had delayed him justice, etc.

Whereupon he was convented before the Lords, the Earl of Manchester being
Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore: his Lordship asked Lieut. Col.
Lilburne whether he did not deliveto Judge Reeves such a scandalous Paper:
Lieut. Col. Lilburne answered, that his Lordship was Judge and Party in his own
cause; that he was in England and not in Spain, and the Quere put unto him was
like the oath ex officio, which proceedings they themselves had condemned as
tyrannical and unjust, a little before in his own case; and by Law no man
ought to be asked such an ensnaring question, whereby he might condemn
himself; and that if he had offended, the Law was open, and therefore he
appealed to the House of Commons, as his competent Judges, being his Peers and
Equals, and then delivered his Protest against their jurisdiction.

VVhereupon he was commanded to withdraw, and committed to Prison for so doing.

Not long after he was sent for a second time before the Lords, and commanded
to kneel, which he absolutely refused, as a subjection to their jurisdiction,
so they remanded him to Prison to be kept close, not suffering wife, child, or
any other friend to come to him for the space of three weeks, nor suffering
him to enjoy the benefit of Pen, Ink, or Paper.

After three weeks imprisonment, he was again forced before the Lords, into
whose House he went with his Hat on his head, and being there, refused to hear
his Charge read; which was rashly done, but you know Master Speaker, what
Solomon says, Oppression will make a wise man mad: but after Lieut. Col.
Lilburne had made this one fault, (for I conceive he had committed none before,
but that the injustice rested upon the Lords) he was fined four thousand
pounds for his contempt, and seven years imprisonment. Upon the whole matter I
beseech you judge in point of Law and Equity, whether this was not like a
Council Table, or Starchamber sentence? And I pray observe likewise the
Warrant, which the Judges confessed was illegal, when Lieu. Col. Lilburne
pleaded upon his Habeas Corpus.

I shall acquaint you with some Presidents, that you have relieved Commoners
committed by the Lords, and fined in this Parliament in the like case. Col.
King having a difference with the Lord Willoughby of Parham, the Lords took
upon them to hear the cause, against Col. Kings will, fined him five hundred
pounds, and committed him to the Fleet; Col. King appealed to the House of
Commons, and showed that the Lords had no jurisdiction over him; and so was
released by the House of Commons, and the Fine discharged.

Captain Mazy, under the command of Col. Manwaring, being on the Guards, who
had opened the Commissioners of Scotlands Packets, being for the same committed
to the Fleet, the House of Commons released him, and inclined to have rewarded
him: the case was the same with this. And the like proceedings of Master
William Larner, Bookseller, his Brother, and Maid.

But that which is most observable, is, that Master Richard Overton who
affronted the Lords more then Lieut. Col Lilburne, and protested to the Lords
faces against them, at his first coming before them, and afterward appealed
to the House of Commons, and all the Commons of England, and particularly to
the General and whole Army: notwithstanding the Lords approved of his
Protestation, by their releasing him out of prison, without any stooping to
them: yet Lieut. Col. Lilburne has lain two years and above in prison, and
all his estate kept from him, to the hazard of sterving him, his wife, and
children.

Master Speaker, you have heard the report at large made by Master Maynard, and
thereupon you gave him his liberty to follow his affairs, though you did not
absolutely determine the business; but such is his misfortune. that he is since
committed by a warrant of this House, upon the single information of one Master
Masterson a Minister, who was not sworn: And truly Master Speaker, I conceive
it one of his greatest sins and errors that he has committed, viz. his
idolizing this House, for he believes that you are the Supreme Authority, and
the chief Judicatory, in representing the People, from whom All POWER is
derived, according to that Maxim * Quicquid efficit tale, est magis tale: But I
have showed him the contrary, as you may find it in the first of Henry the
fourth, Membrana 14. numero 79. There the Commons made their Protestation that
they had no jurisdiction but in making of Laws, and Money matters, as granting
of Subsidies, etc. And truly I conceive it not honorable, nor just, that We,
that are Legislators, should be Administrators or Executioners of justice; but
to leave these petty things to the Constables, Justices and Judges, whom we may
call to question, and punnish if there be occasion.

Master Speaker, I dare not speak against your Warrant, for what is past; but
I pray observe, It is a Prison Door with two Locks and Bolts upon it, so that
it is impossible the Prisoner should ever get out, but dye in Prison.

Lieut. Col. Lilburne is committed in order to his trial at Law, and yet is
debarred all Law; for upon his pleading, when he had brought his Habeas Corpus,
the Judges confessed the Warrant to be illegal, and yet they durst not release
him: Secondly, The cause is general, which is nothing in Law, viz. For
treasonable and seditious practices, etc. But Sir Ed. Cook tells us the
particular Treason is to be expressed, and that which is worst of all, the word
of God does not warrant it: For Festus the Pagan and corrupt Judge, who
expected a bribe from poor Paul, would not send him to Caesar without
specifying the cause in his Mittimus.

It is not in the power of Parliaments to make a Law against the Law of God,
Nature, or Necessary Reason: and it was the chief cause why Empson and Dudley,
those Favorites and Privy Counselors to Henry 7. were beheaded, as it
appears in the Indictment, which you may read in the 4. part Institutes, chap.
Court of Wards, for the subverting the fundamental Laws of the Land: They had
an Act of Parliament for their Indemnity, as the 11. of Hen. 7. wherein the
Judges were authorized to proceed by information, whereas by Law it should have
been by Indictment, and they were to judge by discretion, which was contary to
Law, for it ought to have been by Juries of 12. men.

I brseech you for the time to come that we commit none but our own Members,
and that we avoid these old Counsel Table warrants, which run in generals,
during pleasure, which was the cause of that excellent Law, got with so much
difficulty, called the Petition of Right, and that for Abolishing the
Starchamber, and regulating the Counsel Table, is not inferior to it.

I pray let us remember and apply it to our selves: How dangerous and fatal it
has ever been for Kings to extend and stretch their Prerogatives above and
beyond Law: for the same Fate befell the Counsell-Table, Starchamber, and High
Commission. And I pray let us keep our selves within our Sphere, and not make
our Privileges, Entia, transcendentia, * which are not to be found in any
predicament of Law.

As touching generals, I pray remember what you your selves declared in answer
to the King, in the case of the Lord Kimbolton and the five Members accused,
and Alderman Pennington, Alderman Foulk, Col. Ven, and Col. Manwaring, viz.
That it is against the Rules of justice that any man should be imprisoned upon
a general charge, when no particulars are proved against them, 1 part book
Decl. page 840, 841.

But leaving that, I shall acquaint you what this brave invincible spirit has
suffered and done for you: he was persecuted by the Bishops, had five hundred
stripes with knotted cords, from the Fleet to westminster, there he was
Pilloried, and gagged, lay long in a nasty close Prison in Irons, without Pen,
Ink, or Paper, or any company: Alas! I cannot remember half his sufferings:
this in his youth, when he was but about twenty years of Age, from which
murdering imprisonment this Parliament set him free, with Dr. Bastwick, etc.

Shortly after he was questioned for his life at the Lords Bar, for asserting
the privileges of Parliaments, and was accused by a single witness of
Treason, but he was cleared by other witnesses, and discharged by the Lords:
when the Parliament was to be forced, he fought with the Cavaliers, and brought
many friends to assist in the Court of Requests, he was one of the first that
took up Arms, and behaved himself bravely at Keinton, where he kept the Field
all night: Afterward he fought stoutly at Brainford, was taken prisoner, and
used cruelly, and got a pestilentiall Fever in the Castle of Oxford: he was
arraigned for his life before Sir Robert Heath, and Sir Thomas Gardener, where
he asserted the Parliaments cause, having the Observator without book, and
spoke more for us, then many of us are able to speak for our selves: he
relieved with money, and held up the spirits of his fellow prisoners; he
resisted strong temptations from several great Lords, who offered him great
preferment; he was an emminent actor in that famous Battle at Maston Moore, and
took in Tickhil Castle with only four Troops of Dragoones, and for his pains
had like to have been hanged; you must pardon me for injuring him, for I am not
able to remember half his services to the public.

For all his sufferings and actings for you, I beseech you first take off the
mark of your own displeasure, which wounds him to the heart.

Secondly, that you would discharge him from the Lords imprisonment.

And lastly, that you would pay him his Arreares, and pass the order into an
Ordinance for the 2000. l. out of the estates of those which gave that
barbarous, cruel, bloody, tyrannical judgment against him in the
Starchamber, they are your own expressions in your Vote of May 4. 1648.

Master Speaker, I have forgot one material thing, which is this; you have
allowed Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne forty shillings a week, but he has not
received a Penny, neither is he in any hope of it, for he cannot flatter, or
comply, besides this supposed gift of yours has almost starved him, his
friends in the Country thinking he had received it having thereupon withdrawn
their benevolence, and he and his Family thereby exposed to want and misery.

After Sir John Maynard, Commissary Copley etc. had several times moved the
House to take the business into consideration, the House was pleased to refer
it till Tuesday following, being August 1. 1648. on which day the Petition
hereunto annexed, was by several eminent Citizens, presented to the Honorable
House of Commons, after a motion made in the House by the Lord Car, who
exceeding nobly of his own accord, appeared in his behalf, being a mere
stranger to him, and having no other inducement thereunto, then his love to
justice, and an heroic sympathy with him in his unparralleld sufferings.

TO The honorable the Commons of England IN PARLIAMENT Assembled.
The humble petition of diverse well-affected Citizens, and others, in the
behalf of Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne, prisoner in the Tower of LONDON.
Shows,
THat the general good of the whole Nation is so much concerned in the honor
and good repute of Parliaments, that although in our understandings we have
received no satisfaction, for the long destructive imprisonment of Lieutenant
God, Lilburn; yet we chose rather to be silent, in the same, expecting from
time to time his enlargement by this Honorable House, then by our Petitions to
intercede, in his behalf.

But observing not only his own endeavors, and daily solicitations to be
fruitless but that whilst he sought his Freedom from the imprisonment of the
Lords, he became A prisoner unto you; and perceiving many of his greater
Friends, in whom he much trusted (as changed with time) turned their backs upon
him, and that many of the common enemies made advantage by the hard usage of so
eminent a friend, to alienate the hearts of the People from you, and which, as
we fear, has had no small influence in those unhappy Risings and Revolts that
have been seen of late against you.

We hereupon judged our selves bound in duty and conscience both to you and
him, at this time to break our silence, and to testify before this honorable
House, that we verily believe there is no declination in him from those just
Principles that induced him, to oppose the tyrannous proceedings of the
Starchamber, and for which he under-went so cruel a Whipping, Gagging, and
imprisonment, as this honorable House voted to be illegal, against the
liberty of the Subject, and also barbarous, bloody, wicked, cruel, and
tyrannical, and that he ought to have good Reparations therefore.

Neither do we believe there is any alteration in him, from that judgment and
affection that in defense of the just, Authority of this honorable House,
induced him so freely to venture his life, and spend his blood at Westminster,
when first this House was in most danger; or after that at Keinton Battle, and
Brainford, whence he was led Captive in a most barbarous manner to Oxford,
where he was so many ways in danger of his life, that had not this honorable
House at that time, manifested a most tender regard unto him, he had certainly
perished.

We also profess our selves fully persuaded, that as he afterward most
thankefully, valiantly, and successfully again adventured his life, for the
just liberties of the Commonwealth, so if occasion should minister opportunity,
he would evidence himself still to be the same he then was.

And concerning his demeanor before the Lords, and for which they sentenced
him 4000l. seven years imprisonment, and incapable of bearing any Office in
the Common wealth during his life: when you shall please to consider that he
really looked upon himself as injured in all their proceedings with him; and
not only so, but that if he should in the least circumstance, or civil
complement, have owned their authority over him, being a Commoner, that therein
he should have betrayed those common known liberties of the Nation, for which
he had so freely spent his blood, and so many ways adventured his life,
inasmuch as in him was subjugated all the men and women in England to the
illegal summons, attachments, sentence, fines, and imprisonments of the Lords:
and when you shall be pleased to mind the late strong allegations of Sir John
Maynard, Sir John Gayer, Alderman Adams, Alderman Langham, and Alderman Bunce;
whereby it clearly appears, that the Law of the Land appoints another way
for the Trials of Commoners, (and upon all which allegations they are all
enlarged) we trust his demeanor before the Lords will evidently appear to be
no ways criminal.

And concerning the cause of his commitment by you, when you shall consider how
probable it was, that the party informing was transported in his apprehension
of things never intended, the whole company present, except the Informer, all
well-affected persons, being ready to depose upon Oath, that there was not the
least evil mentioned, as by a Petition long since presented to this House, is
manifest -- when you shall consider how hard and uncertain a condition it is
for him, and in him, for all the People of this Nation to be made liable (by
any Authority whatsoever) to be attached and imprisonned upon general
accusations, which in Law are no crimes, as Judge Bacon and Judge Rols in the
open Court lately declared in his case, the particular offense being of right
to be incerted in every Warrant of Commitment, by whomsoever -- when you shall
please to consider that all commitments of right ought to refer to a speedy
trial at Law, and not during pleasure, as your commitment to him has proved,
which is another hard condition we are all made subject to in his case.

When with serious deliberation you shall weigh these things, and what it is
for a man born of a generous parentage that has done and suffered so much for
the liberties of his Country, and for defense of this Parliament, to be made a
prisoner for no less then 7. years by the Lords, who have no jurisdiction
over him: and appealing to the House of Commons, (who ought to be the refuge of
Commoners) not only not to be relieved, but by them, upon mis information, and
that by one single person, to be as it were rivited in prison, to continue
above two of those 7. years, as he has done, forcibly withheld from a legal
Trial, though continually cried out for by him: to have his dearly purchased
Arreares, and Voted Reparations, to a great value held from him, whilst in
seeking the same he has spent nigh half the value, to the great indebting of
himself, as he confidently averreth: and all this time to have no allowance to
maintain himself, his wife and children, but that they must either starve, or
depend upon the uncertain (and to a free and ingenious mind, the unwelcome)
charity of compassionate People, and that also to be taken from him, by your
voted allowance of thirty shillings per week, whereof no one penny has been
paid, as he is ready to testify, and was enforced to make known, or had
perished, so much his friends depended thereupon, (as well they might) being by
some men's art, confidently published in several of the weekly Pamphlets.

When you shall seriously lay these things to heart, and judge impartially
thereof, as if his case were one of yours, we cannot but confidently hope his
instant enlargement, with full possession of all that has of a long time been
due unto him, and that he shall receive such further respect as may encourage
him, and all others in the ways of public virtue, fidelity, and resolution.

All which we most earnestly entreat: again professing from our very hearts, we
see no cause in him, but that the affection of this Honorable House may justly
be the same toward him, as it was when they voted him worthy of reparations
for his cruel suffering by Starchamber, or delivered him from his many dangers
at Oxford -- And which being added unto those, would bind both him and us, and
all well affected People in constant affection and service to this honorable
House.

But if this (for reasons we cannot discern) shall not be granted, we yet
humbly entreat that you would he pleased forthwith to order him a speedy and
legal trial by twelve sworn men, according to the known Law of the Land; a
justice not to be denied to Traitors, Vagabonds, or your worst of enemies.

But if this also shall be denied, by a Parliament of England, (as our hearts
will not give us leave to imagine) we shall not then well know what to do,
unless it be to bewail his sad condition, and ours in him.

This Petition being read in the House, having nigh ten thousand hands to it,
the House of Commons in answer, made these following Orders.

Die Martis, 1. August, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that the Order of Restraint of
Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, be taken off, and discharged.

Ordered that a Message be sent to the Lords, expressly to recommend Lieutenant
Colonel Lilburne, and to desire them to take off their hands of restraint from
him, and that the Lord Car carry up the Message: Mr. Copley, Sir John Maynard,
Mr. Holland, Col. Ludlow, the Lord Car, Sir Peter Wentworth, and Col. Boswel,
Ordered that it he referred to this Committee to consider how Lieutenant
Colonel Lilburne may have satisfaction and allowance for his sufferings, as was
formerly Voted.

Ordered that it be recommitted to the Committee of Accounts to state the
Accounts of Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne.

Ordered that a Conference be desired by the Lord Car, where Sir John Maynard,
and Master Copley are to manadge the Conference with the Lords, for the
enlargement of Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

The House of Commons having (to the great contentment of the petitioners, and
all other well-affected persons,) passed the foregoing Orders, the next day the
Lord Car, (to whom, together with Sir John Maynard, Mr. Copley; etc. Mr.
Lilburn is deeply engaged for their faithful and constant endeavors for his
liberty) carried up the desire of the House of Commons to the House of Lords;
whereupon they immediately made this ensuing Order.

Die Mercurii, 2. Aug. 1648.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilburne now a prisoner in the Tower of London, has all the restraint of tbis
House hereby taken off from him, and that the Fine and sentence imposed upon
him by their Lordships is likewise taken off him, any former proceedings of
this House in any wise notwithstanding.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.


