Memorial.
HENRY PARKER having served the Parliament as Secretary to the Committee of
Safety, and to the Lord General, the Earl of Essex, from the first raising of
the Army, and having done some other extraordinary, acceptable service besides;
on the 18. of November 1643. Petitioned the Honorable House of Commons for the
Sequestered Place of Mr. Abbot: Whereupon this Order was made: The humble
Petition of Henry Parker Gent. (especially recommended by my Lord General) was
read, and Ordered to be referred to Mr. White, Mr. Seldom, Mr. Solliciter, Mr.
Prideaux, and Mr. Brown, to consider what is fit for the House to do further
upon it, and to report their opinions. Ordered, That the House do declare, that
they are sensible of the good service Mr. Parker has done to the Common
wealth, and they will in this particular mentioned in his Petition, or in
something else as advantageous, consider him for his good service.

This Committee appointed to report their opinions about the Prerogative
Office, and what was fit to be done in confirmation or alteration of the same,
either met not, or concluded nothing therein, being diverted by weightier, and
more public employments.

About June following the Judges place of the Prerogative being of more
necessity to be settled without further delay; another Committee was appointed
to prepare an Ordinance for settling the same, and that was settled accordingly.

The Judges place being settled, and the Registers place thereby more cleared of
some objections, and difficulties that at first contravened about the same: Mr.
Abbot thought it a fit time to appear, after his long retirement, and to plead
to his Delinquency: Mr. Oldsworth also procured an Ordinance to be read in the
House, for investing himself in Mr. Abbots place: and Henry Parker again
Petitioned, that he might enjoy the benefit of his former order, and was therein
again recommended to the House by the letters both of Sir Will. Waller, and
the Earl of Essex.

Hereupon all the pretenses of Mr. Abbot, Mr. Oldsworth, and Henry Parker were
referred to be examined by another Committee which met sometimes, and (after a
long time spent) made some entrance in trying Mr. Abbots Delinquency; which
could not be made clear to them till of late: but it is now laid open and
testified sufficiently; as is ready to be reported.

The said Parkers suit therefore now is, that since the House did first intend
him this place, or something else as advantageous, in case this proved not
feasible: and did add this clause for his benefit, and not because he should be
put off upon further attendance or expectation. And for as much as Mr.
Oldsworth is not only barred in some degree by the self-denying Ordinance, but
was also a Competitor subsequent in time: and it does not appear, that he made
any formal request to the House for this place (acquainting them withal how
far the House had condiscended before, about the same) but proceeded directly
by way of Ordinance, for possessing himself of that place: All the premises
considered; That he may be made capable of that favor which the Honorable
Houses Order first intended him.

His Friends may also urge in his behalf:

1. That the said Parker never sought for any stipend from the State, nor ever
received penny under that name; but did disburse some moneys for the State,
upon special command and order; of which there is 100. li. yet unpaid.

2. That though he was once for a short time placed so, as that he might have
reaped much benefit by it, if he would have exacted upon poor soldiers; yet he
was so far from that, that he would never strictly demand any thing as due, nor
suffer his Clerks; but did instead of gaining, sometimes lose by some Officers
that were in want.

3. That when he left this Kingdom, and betook himself to serve the Merchants
at Hamburgh, he was driven thereunto by necessity; and because he was loft to
press upon the State for a subsistence, and not out of any want of zeal: and
this he presented in an humble Petition at his departure, though he could not
procure the same to be read.

4. That his attendance upon this business of the Registers Office so many
years, has not only put him to trouble and pains, but also to some charge and
difficulty.


