A late Printed SERMON AGAINST False Prophets, Vindicated by LETTER, From the
causeless Aspersions of Mr. FRANCIS CHEYNELL.

By Jasper Main, D.D. the mis-understood Author of it.

LUKE 21.19. (...).

Printed in the Year, MDCXLVII.

A late printed SERMON against FALSE PROPHETS, Vindicated by Letter, from the
causeless Aspersions of Mr. FRANCIS CHEYNELL.
AS often as I have, for some years, considered the sad Distractions of this
Kingdom, me-thinkes, thus divided against it self, it has verified upon it
self the Fable of the People sown of Serpents Teeth; where, without any
known Cause of a Quarrel, Brother started up suddenly armed against Brother,
and making the place of their Nativity the Field, and Scene of their Conflicts,
every one fell by the Spear of the next, upon the turfe, and furrow which
hatched and brought him forth. It Is true, indeed, some have preached, and others
have printed, that the Superstitions of our Church were grown so high, that
they could not possibly be purged but by a Civil War. But finding, upon my
most sober and impartial Inquiries, that these Superstitions were only the
misconceipts of some men's sick Fancies, who called certain slight harmless
pieces of Church Ceremony Superstition, I thought it a piece of Charity to them
and the deluded people, to let them no longer remain in the Case of the
distracted Midi^^ites in the Book of c. 7. v.
Judges; where, upon a Dream told by a man to his Neighbor, and upon the
sight of such inconsiderable things as lamps, and broken pitchers, every man's
sword was against his fellow; and a well-ordered Host of friends, struck with
an imaginary fear, became a confused and disordered heap, and rout of
enemies. This desire to rectify mistakes, and withal to show upon what
slender threads of vanity their Sermons hang, whose accidental, misguided
Arguments, under certain false colors, have strived to prove things
indifferent to be unlawful; and then, that thus by them pronounced unlawful,
they are to be extirpated by the Sword, caused me at first to preach a Sermon
against False Prophets, which has since past the Travel of a more public
Birth: wherein, what a cold Advocate I am in my pleadings for Superstition,
will appear to any, who with an unclouded understanding shall read it: yet M.
Cheynell, (one of the Preachers sent down by the Parliament to Oxford) in a
morning Sermon of his preached at S. Mary's Jan. 17. upon Esaias. 40.27. Having
directed the Doctrinall part of it against one M. Yerbury, an Independent, (who
publicly in a Dispute with him held, that the Fullness of the Godhead dwells in
the Saints bodily, in the same measure that it did in Christ) not without much
violence offered to his Text, He directed the use and Application of it to me;
whom (after some characteristicall reproaches of my person, and defamations of
my Sermon) He challenged to a public Disputation with him. This (after two
days) coming to my knowledge, I disputed with my self what I was to do in
such a case: To return reproaches for reproaches, or to vindicate my self in
the place where I was thus publicly reviled, had bin to make my self Second
in a fault, which the whole Congregation condemned in him as the First. Besides
if I could have dispensed with my self for being so unchristianly revengefull,
as to remove part of the Civil War, which has too long imbrued our Fields,
into the Temple, and there to answer Challenges, and fight Duells from the
pulpit, this license was denied me; who have for diverse months been compelled
to be a speechless member of this silenced University. Again, To sleep over
my infamy, and to dissemble my disgrace, had been to beget an opinion in the
minds of those that heard him, that either I wanted a good cause, or else my
good cause wants a Defender. At length (something contrary I confess, to the
peaceableness of my studies, which never delighted much in those quarrelsome
parts of Learning, which raise tempests between men) following the Scripture
counsel, which is, to take my offending Brother aside in private, and to tell
him of his fault, I resolved by the secrecy of writing to wipe off those
Calumnies for the future, and to answer the bold Challenge for the present,
which he hurled at me in the Pulpit; and having first banished all gall, and
Bitterness from my pen, sent him this following Letter.

SIR,
THat a Text of Scripture in your handling should wear two faces, and the
Doctrine of it should be made to look one way, and the use of it another, is
at all no wonder to me. But that pretending so much to Holiness, and
Christianity as you do, you should think the Pulpit a fit place to revile me
in, would hardly enter into my belief, were not the Congregation that heard you
on Sunday morning last at S. Maryes, my cloud of Witnesses. From some of which
I am informed, that you solemnly charged me with imprudence and impudence, for
publishing a late Sermon against false Prophets. SIR, Though report, and my
name perfixt in the Title Page might probably persuade you, that I am the
Author of it; yet to assure you, that I caused it to be published, or consented
to the printing of it, will certainly require a more infallible illumination,
then, I presume, you have. Besides, if I should grant you that 'twas printed
with my consent, (which yet I shall not) yet certainly the seasonableness of
it in a time where godliness is made the engine to arrive to so much unlawful
gain, will excuse me from imprudence, though perhaps not from an unthriving,
in your sense, wart of policy. And as for the impudence you charged me withal,
I am confident that all they who heard you with impartial Ears, and have read
that Sermon with impartial Eyes, have, by this time, assigned that want of
modesty a place in a more capable forehead. I hear farther that having in a
kind of pleasant disdain shuffled pipes, Surplices, pictures in
Church-windowes, Liturgy, and Prelacy together in one period, and styled them
the musty Relickes of an at-length-banisht Superstition, you were pleased out
of that heap to select Images, and to call them Idols, and then to charge me
as a defender of them.

SIR, Had you done me but the ordinary Justice to pluck my Sermon out of your
pocket, as you did the Practical Catechism, and had faithfully read to your
Auditory what I have there said of Images, I make no question, but they would
all have presently discerned that I defend not Pictures in Church windows as
they are Idols, or have at any time been made so, but that it is unreasonable
to banish them out of the Church as long as they stand there merely as
Ornaments of the place. From which innocent use having not hitherto digrest,
for you to call them Idols, and then to charge me as if I had made them equal
with God, by my defense of them so formallized, will I fear, endanger you in
the minds of your Hearers, and beget an Opinion in them, that you are one of
the Prophets who use to see Vanity. I hear farther, that when you had traduced
me as a Defender of the forementioned musty Relicts of Superstition, you said,
that this was the Religion to which I professed my self ready to fall a
sacrifice. Certainly, Sir, This is not fair dealing. For if, once more, you
had plucked my Sermon out of your pocket, and had read to the Congregation that
passage of it which endeavors to prove that it is not lawful to propagate
Religion, (how pure soever it be) by the sword, they would have heard from your
mouth, as they once did from mine, that the Religion to which I there profess
my self ready to fall a Sacrifice, is that defamed, true, Protestant Religion,
for which the holy Fathers of our Reformation died before me. In saying,
therefore, that I profess my self ready to fall a sacrifice in the defense of
Surplices, the Common Prayer Book, or Church Ornaments, (things which I have
always held not necessary, unless made so, by right Authority) you have
incurred one danger more, which is, not only to be thought to see Vanity, but
to be guilty of the next part of the Text. I am farther told, that to deliver
your self from the number of the false Prophets there preached against, you
prophesied in the Pulpit; and chose for the subject of your prediction, a thing
which is possible enough for you to bring to pass; which was, that you will
have my Sermon burnt.

Sir I have, for your sake, once more severely considered it. And can neither
find Socinianisme, or any other Poland Doctrine there which should deserve
that doom. But if it must die like Bishop Ridley or Hooper, for its adhaesion
to the best Religion that this Kingdom ever enjoyed, I must repeat the words
of my Sermon, and tell you, that (without the fear of being thought by you a
Pseudo-Martyr) I shall account it one of the happiest passages to Heaven, to be
dissolved to ashes with it in the same funerall-pile.

Lastly, Sir, having, with all the sober detraction, which might probably beget
a dislike in the minds of your Hearers, of me and my Sermon, sufficiently
defamed both, I hear you did beat up a Drum against me in the Pulpit, and
challenged me to a public dispute with you. If by a dispute you meant a
pen-combate, I shall be as ready to enter the lists with you, as you have been
to summon me to it, if you will grant me two things. The one is, that, if we
engage our selves in a Conference of that nature, you will confine your self
to the particulars in my Sermon which you quarreled at; and not use your
strange, wild Art of multiplying Questions upon Questions; or like another
Hydra, what ever the Hercules be, make three heads spring up in the place where
you find one convincingly lopt of. The other is, that, when you have made your
Charge, and I my Resistance, you will consent that the debate of every
question, thus disputed, may be made public and printed. But if by a Dispute,
you meant that I should fight a Duel with you upon the same stage, and in the
same Theater of men and women, before whom you, and Mr. Yerbury played your
prize, I doubt very much, if I should accept of your Callenge in that sense;
whether all discreet men would not count this a spice of the phrenzy in me,
which you complained of in the Pulpit, for being imputed to you by Him that
wrote the Conference at your late Scruple-House; and say I deserved to be cured
by the Discipline, and Physic of a dark room. To deal freely with you,
Sir, I by no means can approve of an English Disputation in a University. But
because you shall not loose your challenge, nor I be thought to desert the
cause, which I profess to defend, so you will choose the Divinity School, and
Latin weapons, I shall not refuse (as well as God shall enable me) to give you
a meeting there, and to sustain the Answerers part in the defense of the
lawfulness of white Surplices, Church Ornaments; the Common Prayer Book, and
Prelacy; which are the particulars in my Sermon, which you called Relicts of
Superstition. To one of these two offers I shall patiently expect your answer;
unless without troubling me any further, you will let me quietly retire back
again into the shade, from whence you have too importunately called me: Who,
never the less, have learnt so much Charity, as to pray God to forgive you the
wrong which you intended toward

From my chamber this evening. Jan. 19. 1646. The Author of the Sermon against
False Prophets. J. MAIN.


To this letter (in which (as briefly as the laws of a Letter would permit) I
endeavored to wash out the spots, with which M. Cheynell in his Sermon strived
to defile and sully mine, and withal to comply with him in any sober way of
Dispute, which might befit two Vniversity-men) after two days was returned an
Answer: First, strange for the messenger's sake that brought it, which was One
Jellyman (some say) a preaching Cobbler; who from repairing the decays of
Vniversity-mens shoes was now thought fit to have a part in the conveyance of
their disputes. Next, for the double Super scription of it, which without, on
the side of the first paper that enclosed it, was as fair and full of Candor
as the whited sepulcher in the Gospel, and was directed, To D. MAIN AT
CHRIST-CHURCH. But this outward stone was no sooner rolled away, but another
Inscription, very unlike the first appeared, which ran thus. FOR M. JASPER
MAIN (ONE OF THE NEW DOCTORS) STUDENT AT CHRIST-CHURCH. By which parenthesis,
it seems M. Cheynell, thought it an error in the University, to make me a
Doctor. And truly (if I may be believed upon my own report) as often as I
compare my unworthiness with my degree, I am of his opinion; and think I am a
Doctor, fit only to stand in a parenthesis; and, without any injustice done me,
to be left out of the sentence. This second Superscription was underwritten
with a kind of a preamble Letter to the more inward Letter; with the lock and
guard of a seal upon it; and ran thus.

SIR,
I have sent several times to your lodging this day to answer your challenge
yesterday; if you cannot meet to morrow, let me understand your mind to night.
For I have a great deal of business, since the University was silenced for
your sake.

What kind of meeting was here meant, or whether I (having I thank God, the
use of my understanding) could consent to it, will appear by the Letter it
self; which (being an Answer to mine) was verbatim this.

SIR, I use to spend my morning thoughts upon a better subject then a pot of
dead drink, that has a little froth at top, and dreggs at bottom;

SIR, It appears by your Letter, that you do not understand my Text, and the
learned Scribe, or Intelligencer, did not understand my plain, very plain
English Sermon. I am not at leisure to repeat every Sermon that I preach,
(preaching so often as I do sometimes twice, and upon just occasion thrice a
day) to every one that is at leisure to cavil at that which they heard but at
second hand; yet to show how much you are mistaken, I will give you a breife,
but satisfactorie account.

My Text stands upon record, Isa. 40.25. the Doctrine I raised from the words,
was as follows.

Doct. There is no creature in heaven, or earth, like God in all things, or
equal to God in any thing.

The first Corollarie I deduced from thence, when I came to make application,
was briefly this.

That no picture can be made of God, because there was nothing like him in
heaven or earth. All nations are less then vanity in comparison of God; to whom
then will ye liken God, or what likeness will ye compare unto him? Isay.
40.17.18. The Prophet urges this Argument, against all manner of images which
are made to represent God, who sits upon the circle of the earth, and
stretches out the heavens from the 19. v. of the same chap: to the 23. ver.
and he enforces this Argument verse. 21. have ye not known -- have ye not
understood? etc. as if he had said, ye are ignorant sotts, irrational, and
inconsiderate men, if ye apprehend not the strength of this Argument. Now,
SIR, be pleased to produce your strong reasons, and overthrow, if you can, the
Doctrine or the Corollary: Your, Intelligencer was (if not a false Prophet yet)
a false Historian, when he told you that I accused you of making images equal
with God. SIR, I said, that images were not like unto God; and thereupon
wondered that you took upon you to plead for the retaining of those images
which have been too often turned into idols, not by the piety, but
superstition of form times. You say, that by the same reason there should be
no Sun in the firmament. Whence I collect, that you will be forced to
maintain, that images are as necessary in the Church, as the Sun in heaven; be
pleased to read the 22. page of the false Prophet.

Moreover, you plead for Copes, and for those parts of the Common Prayer Book
which were borrowed from Rome page 21, 22. The Visitors will ere long enquire,
whether there has not been a Superstitious use of Copes at Christ-Church? and
therefore I did not make any such inquiry in my Sermon, but as a Friend I give
you and your adherents timely notice of it, because I believe you had need
study for an Answer.

You maintain, that some things in the excellencies and height of the
Doctrines of Christian Religion depend for their credit and evidence of their
truth upon the authority of Christ's miracles conveyed along in tradition and
story, page 16. and therefore I say your Religion leanes too hard and too heavy
upon Tradition.

You are offended that I spoke not distinctly concerning Prelacy, you may (if
you please) try your strength, and endeavor to prove that Christ has put the
sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction in the hand of a Prelate. 2. You may
(if you can) justify, that no Church that ever the Sun looked upon has been
more blessed with purity of Religion for the Doctrine of it, or better
established for the Government and Discipline of it, then the Church of
England, page 17. if you believe this confident assertion, you may proceed and
justify all the Doctrines, which were publicly countenanced, or approved; all
the superstitious practices, and prelaticall usurpations, nay, the delegation
of the Prelates, usurped power to Chancellors and all the Tyranny of the high
Commission, together with all the corruptions and innovations introduced into
the State, Church, University from the year 1630. till 1640. by a prevailing
faction, who were not the Church or University, but the disease, indeed the
plague of both. If you dare not undertake so sad a task, you cannot justify
the 17.18.22, 23.27.35. pages of the False Prophet; you must prove that the
proceedings of the Parliament are Turkish, page 15.1^. that none of the Members
of either House of Parli^^ent (who complain of the blemishes of the Church)
are t^ ^^^^^^med good Protestants, page 18. that the Reformation which they
have made is (...) vanities, page 20. that they are guided by no other
principles but such as are contrary to all rules of right judgment, either
common to men or Christians, page 21. that the Ministers who have appeared for
the Parliament, are all of them False Prophets, who have encouraged the
Parliament to oppression, sacrilege, murder, and to make all names that are
great and sacred, cheap and odious in the ears of the people. That the
Ministers are the liars, and the Parliament Men the compliers, as appears by
all your unworthy insinuations, hints, intimations, quite throughout your
Scurrillous Libell, falsely called a Sermon: let any prudent man judge whether
this be not your maine drift and scope, a carceribus usque ad metam.

You talk of a Religion, in which you were borne, were you borne in a Surplice
or a Cope? Christiani non nascunt^r sed fiunt. Sir, the Parliament does not
defame nor will they suppress the true Protestant Religion, and therefore if
you fall in this quarrel, I said, that you must be sacrificed in the defense
of Tyranny, Prelacy, Popery: if you put not Religion in Copes, Images,
Prelates, or Service-Booke, quorsum haec perdito? why do you talk of being
Martyred? say, that (if the King will give you leave) you will burn your Copes
and Surplices, throw off the Bishops and Common Prayer Book, you will break your
windows, and take the Covenant, and make it evident that you are and ever will
be of the Kings Religion; for you hold none of these things necessary now,
(whatever you have said heretofore) unless they be made necessary by right
Authority.

Sir, if I made any prediction, it was that your Sermon would be confuted,
before it was burnt; you know Paraeus was burnt before he was confuted; and if
you be not guilty of any doctrine received in Poland, I wonder, First, why you
did endeavor to incense an Officer of this Garrison against me, because I had
refuted M. Yerburies blasphemous errors. 2. Why you did maintain those
damnable Doctrines on the last Sabbath: forgive me this injury, for I hear
you did but vent them, and were no way able to maintain them.

Sir, I acknowledge that I do contend for the restitution of the true
Protestant Religion, and contend for the civil right which we have to exercise
the true Protestant Religion: we were in manifest danger to lose our right, by
the force and violence of potent Enemies, whereupon the high Court of
Parliament judged it fit to repel force by forces: be pleased to show how the
Parliament does hereby canonize the Alchoran, or declare themselves to be of
the Mahumetan persuasion; the Parliament will not compel you to be happy,
only take heed that you do not compel them to make you miserable. Though you
renounce all Doctrines that M. Yerberie maintains, yet I think you are too
great a friend to the Rebels in Ireland; you contend for a Vorstian liberty,
not for a liberty of conscience, for you desire a liberty for men that have no
conscience, such as turn from being Protestants to be Infidels. There is one
of M. Yerburies opinion, who says, that the righteous are at liberty, [he that
is righteous let him be righteous still] and the wicked are at liberty, [he
that is wicked let him be wicked still,] but you are of a more dangerous
opinion, the wicked as (as you think) are at liberty to kill and slay, but the
godly are not at liberty to defend themselves by the power of the highest Court
of Justice in the Kingdom from illegal and unjust oppression, violence. I am
convinced by many passages in your Sermon, especially the 15, 16, 17. pages,
that you think we ought not to fight against the Rebels in Ireland, because it
is part of their Religion (as it was of your brethren the Cavaliers) to put all
Roundheads (as you term them) to the sword; missajam mordet, the Mass may be
armed, but the Gospel must not: What think you of the War foretold in the
book of the Revelation? Sir, you abuse your betters when you talk of the
Scruple-house. You are not worthy to carry the books of those Reverend
Ministers after them, nor could your Carfax-Sermon have ever silenced the
ungifted Preachers; you would have found them gifted Disputants: if you think
otherwise try one or two of them in some of their beaten points; Sir, I speak
thus freely, because I was not present at the famous meeting, November. 12. but I
see you can cite one of your own Prophets, Poets I should say, but he is no
truer a Prophet then you are like to prove a Martyr, a Cretian Prophet. Sir,
the knowledge of my Brethrens worth, and your famous pride and
self-conceitedness has provoked me to let my pen loose, that I might disabuse
and humble you.

It seems you are unwilling to come upon the stage (though that be a fitter
place for you then the pulpit) to appear before a Theater of men and women:
Sir, you love the stage too well, take heed you do not love women too ill,
there is a friend of yours that does entreat you to beware of dark rooms and
light women; for though a great Physician does advise you to the use of such
pleasing physic, yet the Frenchmen will assure you, that it is not wholesome
for the body, and the English can assure you, that it is not good for the soul;
your kind of phrenfie must be cured by more severe remedies, your devil will
be better cast out with prayer and fasting. You are misinformed when you say,
that I did beat up my drum. No Sir, you did sound a charge and made a
challenge, my acceptance of it was but the echo which answered the 17. and 21.
pages of the False Prophet. In the 17. you seem prepared to enter into dispute
presently with the greatest Champion that appears for the Parliament, Sir, one
of the meanest that appears for them, takes up that Gantlet which you threw
forth with so much scorn and confidence.

In your 21. page you threaten to press us in a rational logical way; Sir,
do your best, you shall find that we have neither lost our reason nor our
logic. We can distinguish between demonstration and superstition; and truly
Sir, if you had not put more Poetry then Logic into your Sermon, though your
Sermon might have been longer, yet your Libell would have been shorter; if you
please to blot out those few places of Scripture which you have abused by
misapplication and imprudent insertion of them into so profane and wild a
stamp, you may do well to turn your Libell into Verse, and then it may pass
current amongst the Balladmongers for a triobolar Ballad, and you will be
ranked in the number of those who are reputed the most excellent Authors, next
to them that write in Prose. If you are offended that I did not show you so
much respect, as I have showed toward the learned Author of the Practical
Catechism, consider the difference, nay, distance between his person,
education, learning, civility, writings and yours, and you will see a very
sufficient and satisfactory reason. Sir, if that Author did overlook your
Letter, I believe he did advise you to contend only for the lawfulness of
Prelacy, because I see that is interlined, and he was present at the sad debate
at Vxbridge; if that learned Doctor has any thing to object against me, he
knows my mind, habet aetatem, he is able to speak for himself, the Orator
needs not borrow eloquence of so profane a Poet.

You are unwilling to dispute in English, to which I answer:

First, your Sermon is English. Secondly, many of the persons whom you have
abused and deceived by your printed Sermon, understand not Latin. Thirdly, you
have been too much addicted to English Plays, and English Verses, and you have
with a pleasant kind of ignorance shuffled them (with other Verses published in
more learned languages) in the same book printed by the Vniversity-Printer, and
therefore I believe you are most able, and most engaged to dispute in English,
for the disabusing and undeceiving of those whom you have seduced by a Sermon
preached and printed in English. Be pleased to perform that task to morrow at
two of the clock at S. Mary's Church, where your Sermon was preached, and I will
meet you; and if you dare examine your Sermon by the Word of God, I shall be
the Opponent, because you have chosen to be the Respondent.

If when the Doctor of the Chair comes home, you please to dispute in the
Divinity Schools, let us agree upon the state of the questions in controversy,
and I will accept your challenge at your own weapon, which will I fear have
more false Latin, then true steel.

SIR, You make a dishonorable retreat, when you say that Prelacy is lawful;
you have cried it up jure divino, and assured the King, that he cannot in
conscience pass the Bill against Prelacy, because it is a Government
instituted by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ. Now stand your ground,
or confess your error, acknowledge that you and your adherents have persuaded
the King to destroy so many thousand of his loving and gallant subjects, that
Prelacy might be established in its tyrannical height and rigor; and now the
God of heaven and Lord of hosts has broken all your forces, you tell us that
the Parliament must not pursue their victory; but we must in charity bear with
those malignant, Prelaticall, and Antichristian errors, which will not consist
with faith; be pleased to return such an answer as will endure the public test
and touchstone, and you shall be rationally, nay spiritually dealt with by

The Prior opponent of the false Prophet, Francis Cheynell.


To this letter (which (as all the world may judge) declines that part of
intercourse, which obliges one man's letter to carry some correspondence to
another, and instead of a confutation, only multiplies questions, and urges
me to prove diverse passages of my Sermon, which M. Cheynell's part was to
convince) because the superscription of it darkly, and the close of it more
clearly required me to meet him at an English disputation the next day at S.
Mary's before the Townsmen and their wives, (very unfit moderators, certainly,
in the points there to be discus'd) I for the present (to divert that meeting)
returned him this short Answer.

SIR,
THough in the Letter you sent me yesterday by (I think) Jellyman the Cobbler,
you have given me such a taste of your Logic as well as civility, that I have
small encouragement to meddle any farther with you, (unless you will promise
hereafter to write with better consequence, and less distemper) yet, Sir, least
you should triumph over me, as one beaten by your Arguments, not by your
rudeness, I have thought fit for once to return you this answer. First, that
without the danger of a dark room (as I told you before) I cannot consent to
meet you at S. Mary's at two a clock. Next, that I do embrace your offer to
meet me at Latin weapons in the Divinity School, when the Doctor of the
Chair comes to town. Thirdly, that if your Syllogismes be no better then your
wit, (which I perceive strived to be facete, when it adventured to say, that
you fear my weapon will have more false Latin then true steel) I doubt the
Poet you contemn so much, will go equal with you in the conquest. Lastly, not
being engaged (I confess) to preach thrice a day) I will with as much dispatch
as I can, put order to your chaos, and return a fuller answer to your strange
letter; wherein I know not whether you have less satisfied, or more reviled

From my Chamber this morning Jan. 22. 1646. The Author of the Sermon against
false Prophets, J. Main.


This Letter might have been lengthened with many other reasons (besides those
already set down) to show how unfit 'twas for me to meet M. Cheynell at an
English disputation at S. Mary's, as M. Yerbury did. As first, because the
frame and carriage of the whole dispute between us, in all probability would
have been as irregular and tumultuous as the other was; where, because neither
of them kept themselves to the laws of disputation, which enjoyne the
Disputants to confine themselves to Syllogism, raised from the strict rules of
Mood and Figure, which admit not of extravagancy: In the judgment of all
Scholars who were present, it was not a Dispute, but a wild conflict, where
neither answered one another, but with some mixture of ill language, were both
Opponents by turns. Next, because the greatest part of the Auditory would have
consisted of such a confluence of Townsmen and women, as understood good
Arguments and Replies as little as they do Latin; and so the issue of this
Disputation would probably have been the same with the former; where M.
Cheynell was thought to have the better by one Sex, and M. Yerbury by the
other. Loath, therefore to forfeit my discretion before such an Incompetent
Assembly of witnesses, with as much dispatch as one engaged by promise could
make, I returned to his Letter this fuller Answer.

SIR,
Among the other praises, which greater friends to the Muses then I perceive
you are, have bestowed upon Virgil, he has been called the Virgin Poet. Yet
Ausonius ordering his Verses another way, has raised one of the most loose
lascivious Poems from him that I think ever wore the name of a Marriage-song.
Me thinks Sir (and I doubt not but all they who shall compare them together will
be of my opinion) you in your Letter have just dealt so with my Sermon; it went
from my hands forth a sober Virgin, but falling into yours, it returns to me so
strumpeted, so distorted in the sense, and misapplied in the expressions, that
what I preached a Sermon, you by translating whatever I have said of false
Prophets to the Parliament, have with the dexterity of a falsification,
transformed and changed into a Libell. This I do not wonder at, when I remember
what the Physician was, who said, that where the Recipient is distempered, the
most wholesome food turns into his disease; just as we see in those harmfull
creatures, whose whole essence and composition is made up of sting and poison,
the juice which they suck from flowers and roses, concocts into venom and
becomes poison too. Having said this by way of Preface to my following Reply,
first, Sir, (confining my self to your method) how you spend your morning
thoughts, being impossible for me outright to know, unless your thoughts were
either visible or you transparent; I desire you will not think me overcurious,
if I open a door upon you, and proceed by conjecture. You say, you use to spend
them upon a better subject then a pot of dead drink that has a little froth at
top, and dregs at bottom. To what passage of my Letter this refers, or why a
language which I do not understand, should possess the porch and entrance to
yours, I am not Oedipus enough to unriddle. But if I may guess what your
morning thoughts were, when (as you confess) you did let them loose by your pen
to discharge themselves upon me in a shower of rude, untheologicall, flat,
downright detraction, though they were not employed upon a frothy subject, yet
they show that you were at that time in his distemper in the Gospel, a piece of
whose raging and distraction 'twas to foam at mouth.

Next Sir, had I been present at your Sermon, (as I am glad I was not, for I
desire not to be an Auditor where I must hear my self libelled from the pulpit)
I shall easily grant, by the taste which you have given me in this short
Conference with you of the perspicuity of your style, and the clearness of your
matter, that 't was possible enough for me not to understand it. I do,
therefore, acknowledge it as a favor from you, that you will let me no longer
wander in uncertainties, or write to you upon the mis-report of a fallible
Intelligencer; but will your self be my Clue to guide me to what you said.
Which favor, you have much heightened, by robbing your weightier employments of
so much time to convey it in, as might have been spent in providing your self
to preach thrice a day, and yet not do it so hastily, or with such a running
negligence, as to be thought to preach but once a week.

As for your Text, and the Doctrine built upon it, at whom soever it was shot,
I shall not quarrel with it. But how your Corollary should concern any thing
that I have said in my Sermon contrary to your Doctrine, I cannot possibly
imagine; who do there only speak of the vanity of some of our Modern Prophets,
who can see Idolatry in a Church-window: And do only strive to prove that for
people to refrain the Church (as you know who did) because some (though perhaps
not of our age) paid worship to the windows, was a fear as unreasonable as
theirs was, who refused to go to Sea, because there was a Painter in the City
who limn'd shipwracks.

Sir, had you a mind to deal pertinently or ingennously with me, you would
witness for me, that though I speak in defense of the Ornamentall use of
Images, yet I in no passage of my Sermon do defend any Image or pourtraicture
made of the Deity. Sir, it is not your saying, That no picture can be made of
God, because there is nothing like him in Heaven or Earth, or the following
proofs of your letter (which I conceive to be a piece of your Sermon at St.
Mary's, which because I came not to it, you in charity have sent home to me)
that persuades me that any such picture is unlawful: Nature, as well as the
numerous places of Scripture, which you have quoted to prove that which I never
yet denied, have long since taught me, that to make, or draw any picture, or
Image of God is not only a breach of the second Commandment, which is built
upon the invisibility of his Essence, and Nature, but that the Attempt would be
much more vain, then if a Painter should endeavor to limn a soul or mind,
which not affording any Idea, or resemblance to his fancy to be taken by,
cannot possibly by him be expressed in Colors. The Task, therefore, to make any
Draught or Figure of God (pray Sir, being misled by your example, do not think
me superfluous in my pursuit of an Argument, to which I was not bound to reply)
is (besides the sinfulness of it) much more impossible. For, First, Sir, if the
Schoolmen (which I hear you once said you had long studied to little purpose)
may be Judges, He cannot be limn'd or drawn, because he is a Spirit: Therefore
not capable to be represented by any gross, material Thing. Next, because He
is Infinite; and therefore not capable to fall under Symmetry, or be
circumscribed within the finite lines which stream from a Painters pencill.
Thirdly, because He is Simple, that is, (as your Schoolmen say, for you know
Sir, I am but an English poet) All in All, and All in every part: Or, in other
Terms, a Thing entirely uniform, and indivisible within it self, which admits
not of any false representation of it self by limbs or parts. Lastly, Sir,
(because I will not be tedious, and go over all his other Attributes) who shall
paint his Omaiscience, who his Omnipotence, who his Eternity, who his Vbiquity?
Knowing this Sir, and much more of him (not by the Help of a borrowed
Illumination) I could not trespass so much against my own studies, and
Conscience as to allow of any picture of God. And therefore, in this
particular, challenging me, (as you impertinently do) to produce my strong
reasons, and overthrow, if I can, your Doctrine, or Corollary, deduced from
Esaias 40.25. where God by his Prophet says, To whom will ye liken me, or shall
I be equal says the Holy One? You would fain have me be your Adversary in an
undefensible Cause, that your conquest of me might be the easier. In short, you
would have me profess my self to be an Anthropomorphite, that you might have
the advantage to confute me for an Heretic.

Sir, since you deny that you said in your Sermon, that I made Images equal
with God (which if you had said, my Sermon without any new confutation, would
have disproved you) I am in that particular satisfied, and shall think it was,
though not a wilful one, yet a mistake in the reporter. But, then, Sir, I must
tell you, that I am not at all satisfied with that which follows. Where you
say, that Images are not like unto God, and Thereupon wonder that I took upon
me to plead for the retaining of those Images which have been too often turned
into Idols, not by the piety, but superstition of former times: For here, Sir,
if I would take the advantage of expression not well considered, upon you, in
saying that Images are not like unto God, and thereupon that I did ill to plead
for the retaining of other Images not of God, a Sophister would make the world
believe, that you think all Images superstitious, and therefore fit to be
banished out of the Church, but only such Images as are made of God; which
would expose you to the opinion of being thought very subject to speak
contradictions. But being a mere poet, Sir, whose ability, you know, lies not
in making use of Aristotle's Eleuchs, but in the soft, harmless composure of an
Elegy or Ode, I shall deal more gently with you; That is, take you in the most
advantageous sense which you possibly, upon your better morning thoughts can
put to your words, and believe, that the fault you find with me for the
retainment of Images, is, because by the superstition of former times they have
been turned into Idols. Sir, if I be not deceived, my Sermon, in this
particular, is able to save me the labor of a reply. Where I have once for all
said that which you will never be able to control (how poetically (that is not
dully) soever you may think it expressed) that by the same reason that Ornaments
are to be turned out of the Church, because some out of a mis-guided devotion
have adored them, we should not have a Sun, or Moon, or Stars in the
firmament, but they should long since have been banished the skies, because some
of the deluded Heathen worshipped them. The little fallacy with which you think
to entrap me, when you say, that hence you collect that I will be forced to
maintain that Images are as necessary in the Church, as the Sun in the
Firmament, will expire, like all other thin Sophismes, in vanity and smoke,
when I have shown the weakness and infirmity of it, which will be briefly done
by repeating only the sense of my Sermon in other words, and saying, that if
Images do agree with the Sun, in that they have both been made Idols, though
one be no necessary part of the Church, and the other be a necessary part of
the building of the world, yet if for that reason wherein they agree, one must
be banished, any man that has Logic (though he be a Poet) may infer, that to
will be as reasonable that the other should be banished too.

In your next Paragraph, or fardell of I know not what, you say that I plead
for Copes, and for those parts of the Common-Prayer-booke which were borrowed
from Rome: And then confute me with the threats of an ere-long Visitation. Sir,
there is neither Logic, nor School Divinity in this. As for Copes, you know I
join them with Surplices in my Sermon; and say that by the same reason that
the false Prophets of our times would persuade the people that Surplices are
unlawful because Papists wear them, they may endeavor to persuade them, that
Linen is also unlawful, because Papists shift; and so conclude Cleanliness to
be as superstitious as Surplices or Copes. Sir, you may call this Poetry, but
there is a Logic in it, which I hope does not cease to be Logic, which you
cannot resist, because it is not watrishly or flegmatickly expressed. As for those
parts of the Common-Prayer-booke, which I do not say were borrowed from Rome,
(as you impose upon me) but are to be found in the Rubric of the Church: if I
had said they had been borrowed from that Church, yet you have said nothing to
prove, that upon this supposition it is Popery to use those Prayers in Ours.
Foreseeing, I believe, that if you had offered to maintain that what ever is
in the Popish Lyturgie is Popery, that is, superstitious, and fit to be
proscribed out of the Church, you would (meeting with a good Disputant, and one
not addicted to Poetry) have been compelled to confess, that the Lords Prayer,
and David's Psalms are Popery too, (though the one were delivered by Christ,
the other by one who lived long before Antichrist) because they are bound up in
the same volumne with the Mass. Sir, if this be your Logic, it is Socrate
ambulante coruscavit, and will be a false fire to lead you for ever out of the
way. But here, Sir, though I need not take the pains to confute the Nothings
you have said against me, in this particular, yet whenever you shall call upon
me to make good my undertaking, I do promise to make it evident to you, that
all the ancient parts of the Common-Prayer-booke, which I plead for, I do not
plead for because they are used by the Church of Rome, but because they were
part of the Lyturgie of those Churches which were thought primitively pure, and
not superstitious, and were in the world long before Popery, or Antichrist was
borne. I must, therefore, for ought you have yet said to alter my opinion,
still stand to my former conclusion; which is, that by the same reason that
either the whole, or any part of our Co^mon-Prayer-Book is to be turned out of
the Church, because in some things it agrees with the Lyturgie of the Church of
Rome, Italy, and Rome it self is to be turned out of the world, (and so a new
Map to be made of it where these places are not) because they are the Popes
Territories, and lie under his Jurisdiction. Lastly, Sir, as for the Visitors
you threaten both me and Christ-Church withal, (of whom some report that you
are one) when you come to execute your Commission, so you will not urge it as a
Topicke to convince my understanding, but as a Delegacy of power to examine my
studies, life, and manners, I shall bring all the submission with me which can
be expected from one subject to the trial. and examination of such a power.
Being withal very confident, that when that time comes, however you may
perhaps find an old Cope or two in our College, yet you will never bring
Logic enough with you to prove, that they are either Idolatrous, or have been
put to a superstitious use. And therefore, Sir, in this particular you have
lost your friendly counsel, there being no need at all that we should against
that time study for an Answer.

In your next Fascicle, you say, that I maintain that some things in the
Excellency, and Height of the Doctrines of Christian Religion depend for their
credit, and the Evidence of their Truth, upon the Authority of Christ's Miracles
conveyed along in Tradition, and Story; And, therefore, conclude that my
Religion leanes too hard, and too heavy upon Tradition. Sir, though I have
always looked upon the Scriptures of the Old Testament and the New, as two
glorious lamps, which to all eyes (that have not lost the use of seeing, by
being kept sequestered from the sun too long in the dark) mutually give light
to one another, so that a vigilant Reader, by comparing Prophecies with their
Accomplishments, will have very great reason to believe that both are true, yet
because this amounts but to the discourses and persuasions of a single man's
reason, if I prefer Tradition, which is the constant, universal consent of all
Ages, as a fuller medium to prove doctrines by which are hardly otherwise
demonstrable, do I any more, I pray, then prefer the universal Testimony, and
Report of the Church of all Times, before the more fallible suggestions of a
private spirit?

Your next Paragraph, is perfectly the Hydra with repullulating Heads which I
warned you of in my first Letter; And multiplies so many causeless questions as
make it nothing but a heap, partly of such doubts, partly of untruths, as
would make it one of Hercules labors to examine them. First, you bid me prove
that Christ has put the sole power of Ordination in the hand of a Prelate.
Sir, if the practice of the Apostles in the Scripture in this point were not
clear, yet the practice and opinion of the Church for 1500 years ought to be
of too great Authority with you to make this a scruple. Knowing that no Church
in the world thought otherwise, till the Presbyterian Model crept forth of
Calvin's fancy; nor any good Protestant in the Church of England, till such as
you recalled Aerius from his grave, and Dust to oppose Bishops. Next, you bid
me justify, that no Church that ever the sun looked upon has been more
blessed with purity of Religion for the Doctrines of it, or better established for
the Government, and Discipline of it, then the Church of England has. Sir, you
repeat not the words of my Sermon so faithfully as you should. I am not so
extravagant as to say, that no Church that ever the Sun looked upon, but that
the Sun in all his heavenly course for so many, many years, that is, (in my
sense) for many Ages, saw not a purer Church then ours was, both for the
Doctrines, and Discipline of it. Against this you wildly object, I know not
what Doctrines publicly countenanced, but tell me not what these Doctrines
were, speak of certain superstitious practices, and Prelaticall usurpations,
but do not prove them to be either superstitious, or usurpt; quarrel with the
Delegation of Bishops power to Chancellors, then proceed to the tyranny of the
High-Commission-Court, and at last conclude with I know not what Imaginary
corruptions and Innovations introduced into the State, Church, and University.
Sir, if I should grant this long-winded Charge of yours to be true, (as truly I
think it is only a seeing of vanity) yet my confident Assertion is not hereby
enfeebled I hope, when I spoke of the purity of our Church, you did not think I
freed it from all blemishes or spots. The Primitive Church it self had some in
it who broacht strange doctrines; Saint John had not else written his Gospel
against the Gnostics, nor Saint Paul his Epistle to the Galatians against
those that held the necessity of Circumcision. The next Ages of the Church have
not been more distinguished by their Martyrs, then Heretics; yet the Primitive
Church ceased not to be Apostolically pure, because it had a Cerinthus, or
Nicolaitans in it; nor the succeeding Churches to be the Spouse of Christ,
because one brought forth an Apelles, another a Marcion, a third a Nestorius, a
fourth an Eutiches, a fifth an Arius. Sir, as long as the best Church in the
world consists of men not infallible there will be errors. But then you must
not charge the Heterodox opinions or Doctrines of particular men, though,
perhaps, countenanced by some in public authority upon the Church. Besides,
Sir, every Innovation is not necessarily a Corruption, unless it displace, or
lay an Ostracisme upon some other thing more worthy and better then it self.
You your self say, that the corruptions introduced were brought in by a
prevailing faction, who were not the Church. If they were not, my Assertion
holds good, that notwithstanding such corruptions, yet our Church in its time
was the purest Church in the world. This, then, being so, me thinks, Sir, you
in your pursuit of Reformation, by making Root and Branch your Rule of
proceeding, have been more severe then the laws of right Reason will allow
you. If there were such a tyranny as you speak of streaming it self from the
High Commission Court, why could not the tyranny be suppressed, without the
abolishment of the Court? Or if there were such a thing as Prelaticall
usurpation, why could not the usurpations be taken away, and Episcopacie left
to stand? Sir, if you be Logician enough to be able to distinguish between the
faults of persons and the sacredness of functions, you cannot but pronounce
with me, that to extirpate an order of the Church, ancient as the Christian
Church it self, and made venerable by the never-interrupted Reception of it in
all the Ages of the Church but ours, for the irregular carriage of a Prelate or
two, (if any such have been among us) is a course like theirs, who thought
there was no way left to reform drunkenness in their State, but utterly to
root up, and extirpate, and banish Vines.

The remainder of your Paragraph is very politically orderd; which is, that
because you find it hard for you to confute my Sermon by your Arguments, you
will endeavor to make the Parliament my Adversary, who, you think, are able
to confute it by their power: And bid me prove that the proceedings of the
Parliament are Turkish.

Here, Sir, methinks, being a Poet, I see a piece of Ben Johnson's best Comedy,
the Fox, presented to me; that is, you, a Politic Would-be the second,
sheltring your self under a capacious Tortoise-shell. Why, Sir, can you
persuade your self that the great Council of the Kingdom, by whom you are
employed, if they will vouchsafe to read my Sermon, will not presently
discern your Art? And withal perceive, that though the Text, upon which I,
out of the Integrity of my soul, preached that Sermon, stick as close to False
Prophets, as the Centaures shirt did to Hercules, and set them a raging, yet
that they having never Parliamentarily professed to propagate Religion by their
spear, can no way be concerned, when I say that such a persuasion in us
Christians would be Mahumetan; and we thereby should translate a piece of the
Alchoran into a piece of the Gospel. Sir, I am so confident of the wisdom of
that Honorable Assembly, of my own innocent meaning, and of your guilt, (who
have been one of those Turkish Prophets, (and in your Letter to me still are)
who have preached that piece of the Alchoran for good doctrine) that for answer
to all your slye, impotently-malicious mis-applications and shiftings off that
which I have said only of such as your self to the Parliament, I shall only
appeal to my Sermon. And by that, if you please to undertake the Devils part,
and be my Accuser, shall be content to stand or fall. In the mean time, Sir, I
must repeat what I said before, that if it be read, or looked on through those
refractions, with which you have mis-shap'd, and crookt it, I shall consent to
what you say in the end of your filthy Paragraph; That 'twas once a Sermon, but
you almost a Carceribus usque ad metam have made it a Libell.

In your next (what shall I call it?) you are very Critically pleasant; And
because I talk of a Religion wherein I was borne, ask me, whether I were
borne in a Surplice, or Cope; and then very distinguishingly proceed, and say,
Christiani non nascuntur, sed fiunt.

To the first, I reply, that it had been as unnatural for me to be borne in a
Surplice, or Cope, as for you to come into the world, with a little Geneva
set-ruffe about your neck.

Next, Sir, for your sharp distinction, I hope, though the Muses be your
Step-dames, yet you think not the figures of Rhetoric to be so superstitious,
that it shall be Popery in me, to make use of a Metonymy, and to express my
self by the Adjunct, when I mean the place, and Country. I grant, Sir, that
men are not borne, but re-born Christians; yet 'twill be no great Error in
speech for a man to say he is born in Christianity, if he be a Christian, and
were born in the place where Christianity is established. Sir, I doubt you
begin to think secular learning to be a profane thing; And that you are bound
to persecute Tropes out of Expression, as you have Liturgy out of the Church.
If you do, Sir, we shall in time, (if we proceed in this conflict) fulfill a
piece of one of Saint Paul's Epistles between us; I become a Barbarian to you,
and you to me.

I am glad to hear you say, That the Parliament will not suppress the true
Protestant Religion; Sir, I never thought they would. But, then 'twill be no
harm to you, if I pray, That whilst you pursue such a through Reformation of
it, as of late years has left it doubtful in the minds of the people what the
true Protestant Religion is, you let not in Popery at that Gate, by which they
strive to shut it out. If Queen Mary's days do once more break in upon us
through the sluice which we open to them by our unsetledness, and Distractions,
and if I then fall a sacrifice in defense of the same Religion for which I now
contend, I hope you then will think your self confuted; And no longer believe
that I am such an ill Judge of Religions, or so profusely prodigal of my life,
that I would make it a Holocaust, or Oblation, either to Tyranny, or Popery.

In short, Sir, let the King and Parliament agree to burn Copes, and Surplices,
to throw away the Common Prayer Book, or to break our Windows, I shall not
place so much Religion in them, as not to think them alterable, and this done
by Right Authority. But as for the Covenant, it is a pill, Sir, which no secular
interest can so sweeten to me, that I should think my self obliged to be so far
of any man's Religion, as to swallow both parts of a contradiction in an Oath,
if it appear to me to be such.

Your promise that my Sermon should be first confuted before it be burnt, gives
me hope it will be longer lived, then upon the first report I thought it would.
But then I wonder you should pass that sentence on it, and choose Paraeus for
your precedent. I must confess to you Sir, had I written so destructively of
Parliaments as He did of Kings, I should think it no injustice from that High
Court, if they should doom me the Author to be sacrificed on the same Altar
with my Book. But having (upon the highest warrant that can possibly lend
courage to a good action) directed it wholly against False Prophets, and no
where reflected upon the Members of either House, but where I maintain it to be
unlawful to speak evil of dignities, to condemn it to the flame for speaking
such Truths, as I could not leave unspoken, unless I had prevaricated with the
Scripture, will be so sar from the reproach of a punishment, that 'twill
increase the esteem and value of it from its sufferings; and make it ascend to
heaven as the Angel in the Book of Judges did, in the breath, and air, and
perfume of an acceptable sacrifice to God.

Sir, As your she-Disciple did very much mis-inform you, if she told you that I
endeavored to incense an Officer of this Garrison against you, so 'twas one
Error more in her (as upon just occasion I shall demonstrate to you) to tell
you that I vented damnable Doctrines in her Company, which I was not able to
maintain. She is my Gentle Adversary, and I desire she should know, that as I
desire not to fight serious duells with that unequal Sex, so when ever she
will again provoke me to a Dispute (so it be not at Saint Mary's, for S. Paul
forbids women to argue in the Church) she shall return with prizes, and I will
confess my self conquered. In the mean time, Sir, whither she came to you, or
you went to her, Her Sex puts me in mind of some false Teachers, not mentioned
in my Sermon, but branded by Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 3.6
* for creeping into houses, and leading captive silly Women. If your
Intelligencer be one of these (as I shrewdly suspect she is) I should be sorry
for those Friends sake in whose Acquaintance we both meet, that she should be
liable to the Character of such silly women in the next verse; where it is said,
That they were ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the
Truth.

You proceed, and say, That you were in manifest Danger to loose your Right to
the Exercise of the Protestant Religion, whereupon the High Court of Parliament
thought it fit to repel force by force. Sir, do not entertain me with your own
false fears, and jealousies; but demonstrate to me that the King (for Him I
presume you mean) meant to extirpate the true Protestant Religion by the sword,
and to plant Popery in its stead, And you shall not more falsely charge me that
I make the Parliament by such a Resistance to Denizon the Alchoran, then I
shall truly pronounce the Kings party, in fighting for him to that end, guilty
of a Mahumetan persuasion. In saying this, you exceedingly mistake me if you
think I contend for a Vorstian Liberty, or am hereby a Friend to the Rebels in
Ireland. Sir, I hope you can distinguish between men's Disloyalty and Religion.
As Rebels I hold it fit, if they will not otherway return to their Alleagance,
that they be reduced by force. There is a right to their subjection pursued by
such a War, which makes all Arms warrantable which are employed for the
recovery of such a loss. But to think, that as they are Papists, nay, (Sir, I
shall not shrink from my word) if they were outright Infidels, that the
Protestant Religion is to be imposed upon them by force, is to make our selves
guilty of all the hard Censures which have past upon the Spaniards Conquest of
the Indians, where their Silver Mines were the true cause, and Religion the
pretense. Notwithstanding your Holy War, therefore, mentioned in the Revelation
(which place I have considered, and find it as mysterious, as the pale or black
Horse) for ought you have said in disproof of it, I find not my self tempted to
desert my Opinion: which is, That to come into the field with an Armed Gospel,
is not the way chosen by Christ to make Proselytes. And, therefore Sir, I will
not so much distrust the Wisdom, or Justice of the Parliament, that upon your
bare Assertion, they will make me miserable, because I maintain that they
cannot warrantably compel any man to be happy.

Why the bare mention of your Scruple-house should put you into such a fit of
ill language, as to pronounce me unworthy to carry the Books of the Reverend
Divines after them, who met there to heal Doubts, or why my Carfax-Sermon
should contribute to the raging of that fit, I cannot reasonably imagine. Sir,
I have no mind to fight many Duells at Once; nor, (having received a challenge
from no other but your self) to engage my self with them by whom I have not
been provoked.

Whither they be ungifted preachers, or Gifted Disputants, is best known to
themselves. But, certainly, Sir, if the Report which was made to me (by some
who brought both their understandings as well as Ears with t em to the famous
meeting November 12.) be true, there was nothing so demonstratively by them
either objected, or replied as might encourage them, or their Hearers, to
believe this piece of Popery, that they are unerring, and infallible in the
chair: pray, Sir, do not think my Famous pride, or self-conceitedness (which
you say has provoked you to break your chains, and to let loose your pen,
that you might whip me into Humility) has prompted me to say this.

Had you named the Reverend persons whose Books I am not worthy to carry after
them, so they be Greek or Latin Books, and those well understood by them,
perhaps I should have expressed a greater Act of Humility then you are aware of,
and have been content (though one of the new Doctors yet by the second
Subscription of your Letter but a Master of Art) to sit a while at the feet of
such learned Gamaliel's. But speaking indefinitely as you do, I hope Sir, for
twenty years study sake in this University, (where I have learnt to distinguish
the letters of the Greek Alphabet, and at first sight do know that it would
beget a (...), or quarrel among the Vowells, if (...) in a word should usurp
the place of (...)) you will find me a nobler employment then to carry Books
after Them who count Liberaries Superfluous, humane, Secular Things; And think
a Minister, not Minister of Gospel, (as your Scribe has twice erred in the
transcription of your letter, in a vowell very fatal to you) needs no other
furniture but the Spirit, Cottons Concordance, and the English Bible without
the Apocrypha.

Sir, I am sorry the Fit which the mention of the Scruple-house did put you
into, should be increased by the mention of a Dark Room. There goes a Story of
one who had tasted a while of Bedlam, and was at length, by the help of
Discipline, diet, and Physic, cured of his Distraction; yet not so perfectly,
but that still when he came within the sight of the place, his fancy remembered
him of his old Distemper, and tempted him to do something which required a
second cure. I speak not this parable to upbraid any with an infirmity which is
unavoydably natural to them, and no way contracted from the pride, or
irregularity of their own Wills; But if you have read Tully's Paradoxes, you
may remember, Sir, that he there maintains the Opinion of the Stoics, that not
only they whose chains and fetters, proclaim them distempered, but that all
foolish, over passionate men are to be reckoned into the number of those who
are to be cured by manacles, and chains: pray Sir, do not take it ill, if
(being as you say a Poet) I cite a Poet who was of this Opinion; but maintains
it like a Philosopher, (I will not say a School Divine.) And having insisted in
verse upon Covetousness as one, Ambition as another, The love of beauty either
in real or painted faces, as another Species of Madness, He concludes in
Anger, and says, Ira furor brevis est; that is, That the Choleric man, during
the fit of his choler, is in a short phrenzy. That which Seneca, Tully, and
Horace, called madness, (though not the other more natural, (which I should be
uncharitable to object to you) you by this letter (especially the angry part of
it) have given me very justifiable cause to apply to you, who (as all
dispassionated men may judge) have fulfilled the Poets definition of Madness
upon your self in all the parts of it but one, which is, that your Anger
against me is not furor Brevis, a short distraction, but extends from the word
Scruple-house to the End of your Letter. For first, Sir, in Language almost as
unclean, as the sin of uncleanness it self, you endeavor to raise a Suspicion
upon me in the world as if I had been more familiar then I should with light
Women in dark Rooms: Sir, besides the poverty of your wit, and quibling
Antitheses of Expression, (to which I find you in other places of your letter
very subject) I am not afraid (with all the confidence of an Innocent man) to
tell you, That as I never was an Enemy to that Sex, so I never converst with
any of them single, or in a dark Congregation, so loosely, to deserve to have
the slander fastened upon me, which Tertullian, and Minutius Faelix from him,
say was labored to be stuck upon the Christians of those Times, which was,
That they used to meet in Conventicles, where their custom was, after the end
of the Sermon, to put out the Candles, and then to commit Folly, the holy with
the holy. Sir, in plain Terms, (How blameable soever other Errors, or
vanities of my life may make me stand in the presence of God, who upon a true
Repentance, Sir, is not so Fatally tied to the Spindle of absolute Reprobation,
as not to keep his promise, and to seal merciful pardons, yet) in this
particular, my known Conversation in this University, and all other places,
bids me defy you; And challeng not only your self, but the precisest of your
Informers, either here, or any where else, (who use not to suffer the looks,
Gestures, or thoughts of any who are not of their Tribe, much less notorious
matter of Fact, to escape unquestioned) to appear in an accusation against me;
where it shall be probably, not conjecturally proved, that I have been frail
with the frail Sex either holy or profane.

Sir, all they of that soft Sex, with whom I have converst, have accused me of
too great severity, and ruggedness, toward them, but you are the first, who
ever endeavored to make me guilty of being too amorously affected.

Next, sir, However you may tell me that you have not so lost your Reason, or
Logic, but that you, (the meanest who appears for the Parliament) are ready to
take up the Gauntlet which I threw down, and to answer the challenge which I
first sounded in the Pulpit; yet, certainly, They who shall read that passage
of my Sermon, where I say, That if I were presently to enter into a dispute
with the greatest Patriarch among these Prophets, who (notwithstanding that
which I said before) will still perversely strive to prove that our Church stood
in such need of Reformation, that the growing superstitions of it could not
possibly be expiated, but by so much Civil War, I should not doubt with
modesty enough to prove to him back again, that all such irrational Arguments,
as have only his zeal for their Logic are composed of untemper'd Mortar: And
shall compare the wild Torrent of ill language, with which the furious
remainder of your paragraph over-flows, with the Sober Web, and Composition of
my Sermon, which you there think no worthier of, then of a Triobolar Ballad,
They will find that you have said nothing in the progress of at least forty
Folio-lines together, which shows not that your Reason assisted not your pen.
One passage I confess (like a lucide Intervall) has some taste of sobriety,
and not short fury in it; which is, that how meanly so ever you think you may
speak of me, yet you think you are to make a more honorable mention of the
Author of the Practical Catechism. That learned Doctor, Sir, I am acquainted
with, but not so inwardly as that he should contribute to the interlining any
letter I write to you; or should suggest to me what he, not I, think fit to be
maintained. I wish your lucid intervall had been as long as your fit; For, then
I persuade my self you would never have suspected that he did overlook my
letter, or advised me to contend for the lawfulness of Prelacy, because he was
present at the sad debate at Vxbridge.

What you mean when you say, That if the learned Doctor has any thing to
object against you, He knows your mind, and (being none of the new Doctors, who
you presume are Infants) is able to speak for Himself, I cannot possibly
divine: unless by this Oraculous Expression, you would have him understand you
ready to enter into a second conflict with him, and would put me to the mean
employment to convey your challenge. Sir, if I know that Doctor well, you had
best content your self with me, who am a more poetical adversary; and whose
weapons, you know, when they strike most, being sheathed in Roses, ought to be
terrible to none but such, whose buying and selling Consciences (like the
money changers in the Gospel) will drive them out of the Temple at the sight of
a whip made of straws and rushes. Nevertheless, Sir, if you be so fruitfully
quarrelsome, that you think your leisure will serve you to hold combat with us
both, let me desire you to hold this Opinion of us, that as I shall at no time
recruit my self from him as an Orator, so he is too good a scholar to need my
assistance as a Poet. This word Poet, I do observe, through the whole phrenzy
of your letter, you strive to make use of in a disgraceful sense; And object it
to me as a Reproach that the Muses are my Friends. In one place you call me a
Cretian Prophet, That is, (according to your Comment) a Poet; In another place
you tell me, that only the few places of scripture which I have misapplied in
my Sermon, can preserve it from passing among the penny-merchandizes of those
that sell Ballads. In your next paragraph, (where you challenge me to dispute
with you in English at St. Mary's, as Mr Erbury did) one of your Arguments to
move me to that frantic enterprise is, because I am an English Poet, and have
been not only addicted to Plays, but have shuffled my Mother Tongue Verses,
with other Verses published in more learned languages, in the same Book Printed
by the Vniversity-Printer. First, sir, though the ungentleness of your style,
and Expressions, do sufficiently testify that neither the Muses, nor Graces
assisted at your Birth, yet I hope you are not such an enemy to numbers, to
think poetry Superstitious, and therefore to be turned with Imagery out of the
Church. If you do, you will compel me to call Nazianzen in to my Aid; who,
besides his writing of a Play (if Erasmus have not misnumbred them) has
written thirty thousand Heroic, Jambick, Hendecasyllable, Elegiack, and other
verses. Tertullian, Sir, you know has confuted Marcion in Verse; and Synesius
thought it as great a glory to be called a good Poet, as some who wrote in
prose did to be called fathers of the Church. I will not repeat a piece of
Prosper to you nor tell you what S. Austin has said in the praif of Virgil. To
be a Cretian Prophet, that is in your sense, a lying Poet, but in all theirs who
understand the first C. of Titus, an Evil Beast, and a falfe Prophet) Is I
confess a crime. But then, sir, as one excellently says in his Defense of
Poesy, This is a kind of Poetry which belongs to those who lie in prose as well
as those who fain in Verse. For Pliny, when he speaks of men with one foot,
whose breadth interposed between them and the sun, shades their whole body, to
be as great a poet as Ovid, when he speaks of a Virgin transformed into a
Laurel, so, Sir, when you, (contrary to the direct mind, and Expressions of
my Sermon) fain that to be spoken of the Parliament, which is only spoken
against False Prophets. you are a far greater Poet then I have yet shown my
self either upon the Stage at Blackfriars, or in any University Book here in
Oxford. Next, sir, I was never so addicted to English Poetry, but that in the
same University Book I had Latin Verses too; And the Reason why I wrote in
both Languages was, because I was prompted to it by my Obedience to their
Commands, who had Authority over me, and thought English the fitter Language
for that part of the Court, whose Sex does make it a Solecism to be written to
in Latin.

Lastly, Sir, As for your Arguments to give you one of Mr Yerbury's Meetings,
at Saint Mary's; I. Because my Sermon Preached there is English, next, because
you conceive that to be the readiest course to undeceive the people who
understand not Latin; thirdly, because I am an English Poet; if you think I
have not sufficiently answered them in my two former letters to you, I desire
you once more to consider, if I should have consented to that course, whither
you, as well as I, in the opinion of discreet men, might not have endangered
our selves to have that half verse in Horace applied to us, Aut insanit Home,
aut versus facit, That either we are both mad, or both Poets,

The way to avoid such an Imputation, in a Time of liberty, where every body
may say what they list, is for us to stand constantly to the more Academicall
Proposition I made you; which was, to meet at Latin Weapons in the Divinity
School. Where; sir, not agreeing upon the true state of the Questions before
hand, (For if we agree before hand, nothing will be left us to dispute) if you
please, the Question shall be that which concludes your Letter; That is,
Prelacy, which, how far it is, or it is not to be defended to be Jure divino
shall then appear. In the mean time, sir, as I can by no means allow that
victory, and Success, are always the true signs of a Right cause, (Because,
The Lord of Hosts, who, you say, has broken all our forces, is sometimes
falsely thought to assist, when in truth he does only permit) so, Sir when you
write next to me, let me request you to keep your promise; which is, to deal
with me rationally for the Matter, and Spiritually, that is, like a Divine for
the language and form. Otherwise, sir, though I have long since learnt from
the best Master, that when I am reviled, I am not to revile again, yet,
instead of a Conference, meeting with nothing but Invectives, it is possible you
may so far provoke me from my mild temper, that the Philosophers expression
in Lucians Nigrinus may be verified upon me; (...). The English of it will
endure the public test; to which if you will be pleased to submit your Letters
with the same readiness that I am content to submit mine, I doubt not but the
world will judge, that as you have not yet confuted, so you have very
unchristianly injured

From my Chamber, Jan. 23. 1646. The Author of the Sermon against False
Prophets, J. MAIN.


To this Answer (in which the Reader may see, I have not much digrest from the
copy which was before me, but have proportioned my Defense to every
considerable particular of M. Cheynels Charge) at the end of six days was
returned this Reply.

SIR,
If I had not answered you according to your folly, you would have been wife in
your own conceit; but if I should again answer you according to your folly, I
fear I should become too like unto you, Prove. 26.4, 5. I told you that I did
let loose my pen, that you might see how easy it is to answer you with a
running pen, nay a running negligence in the less serious part of the day; I
did let fly so many quibbles that you might smell the stench of your own
elaborate folly; glad I am that you have censured me for imitating of you, I
hope you will now be at leisure to censure your self, for setting me so foul
a copy; do but read over your own Sermons and Letters, and suppose they were
mine, and then seriously and impartially pass your sentence on them, and I dare
say you will be a gainer by this conflict.

I am very much pleased with your fair condescension to have all things in
controversy rationally and spiritually examined.

1. Sir, you did as I conceive preach in defense of all images set up in any
Chapel in the University; you know there are diverse Images of some persons in
the glorious Trinity set up in some Chapels within this University: You must
then acknowledge all Images of that sort ought to be taken down.

Imago nos tantism^t memoriale excitat uti Jesuitae passim. Dico non esse tam
certum in Ecclesia an sint faciendae imagenes Dei, sive Trin^tatis, q^a Ch^^sti
and sancto is hoc ^nim ad sidem ^ertin^t, tilud e^t in opi^one. B^lla. deim g
l. 2 c. 8 J^animata sp^ritualem quandam virt^^em exconsecratione adipiscuntu^,
etc. Tho. p. 3. q. 83. art 3. Deum imaginibus inhabitante colunt, Deum cut^m
virtu^e ^stam sp^^^tua^^ ret^^he^e alquando sive ^^^^be es^t^n^m. Casetanus hac
in re^nc Gentilibus quidem sanientio^ hab^tur.
You are not persuaded by any Scriptures which I have cited, but nature has
taught you (so pure is your nature) that it is a breach of the second
Commandment to draw a picture of God: (revise that fancy) the Schoolmen whom
you prefer before the testimonies cited out of the Word, have taught you that
it is not only sinful, but impossible to draw any picture of God. But, be
pleased to consider that the Scriptures are a perfect (nay indeed the only
All-sufficient perfect) Rule, and therefore you need not go about to patch up
the rule with the low general dictates of nature and Schoolmen, you may study
the L^llian Art. and fill your brain with Sebund's fancyes, but my Schoolmen
(as you call them) are the best Tutors, and the best Scholars. If you prove
that is is impossible to picture God, you do not touch the point in
Controversy, for vain men will fancy and endeavor to do, that which is
impossible for to be done. Believe it Sir, they who had consulted as many
Muses, and courted as many Graces as you have done, and were able to
demonstrate out of their Poets that we are Gods offspring, yet were not able
without the help of divine Revelation to infer, from thence, that the Godhead
is not like to Gold, as you may see it convincingly proved; Act 17.29. For as
much then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the
Godhead is like to Gold or Silver, or stone graven by Art or man's device, I
dare not therefore make the Schoolmen my Judges in this weighty point, and I
believe you cannot prove them to be Judges in any point which concerns the
Mystery of faith or the power of godliness, but enough of that.

3. The word (thereupon) is sometimes Illative, sometimes Ordinative, you are
sufficiently answered; but let me add, that if no Image is like God, then sure
those Images, which are not made to represent God, and yet are by Idolatours
turned into Idols, and worshipped as if they were divine, cannot reasonably be
defended. Sir, I must guess at your meaning, because I believe you have omitted
two or three words (such is your running negligence) which should help to make
your sophistical criticisme perfect sense.

Truly Sir, if it be so high a fault to picture God: I may justly wonder that
any picture of a Saint turned into an Idol should be retained and pleaded for
by any man that pretends to be a Protestant, and if it be impossible to picture
God, it is also impossible to picture God-man. And I believe that you will
acknowledge our Mediator to be (...).

4. That the Sun and Images cannot be put in the scales of a comparison in
point of fitness to be preserved, is a truth written with a Sun-beame; Sir, I
never durst argue from the abuse of a thing against the use of it, if the thing
be necessary; But the Sun is necessary, and Images are not necessary, ergo
there is no parity of reason between the terms of your comparison.

5. It appears to me by your shifting fallacy, that you make Copes as
necessary as clean Linen.

6. You will never be able to prove, that all, that the prelates and their
Faction have borrowed out of the Missall, Ritualls, Breviary Pontifical of
Rome are to be found in any Lyturgie received by the Primitive Church; And I
would entreat you to consider, whether they, who do profess a separation from
the Church of Rome, can in reason receive and embrace such trash and trumpery.
And yet though you would willingly be esteemed a Protestant, I find you very
unwilling to part with any thing which the Prelates have borrowed from the
Court (rather the Church) of Rome.

7. Your next Paragraph does concern Tradition; I shall give you leave to
prefer the constant and universal consent of the Church of Christ in all
ages, before the reason of any single man; but Sir, you do very ill to call
the testimony of the spirit speaking in the word to the Conscience of private
men, a private spirit; I think you are more profane in the stating of this
point then Bellarmine himself.

8. You have not yet proved that any Prelate can challenge the Sole power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction Jure divino.

9. I should be glad to know for how many years you will justify the purity
of the Doctrine, Discipline and Government in England. I believe the Doctrine,
Discipline and Government of the Prelaticall faction whom you call the Church,
was not excellent, if you reckon from 1630. to 1640. and that is time enough
for men of our time for to examine. I believe that you will acknowledge that
the Prelates did lay an Ostracisme upon those who did oppose them; who were in
the right both in the point of Doctrine and Discipline, we shall in due time
dispute. Though Prelacy it self be an usurpation, yet there were many other
encroachments which may justly be called Prelaticall usurpations, and the
Parliament has sufficiently declared its judgment in this point, they have
clearly proved that Prelacy had taken such a deep root in England, and had
such a destructive influence, not only into the pernicious evils of the
Church, but Civil State, that the Law of right reason (even Salus populi quae
suprema lex est) did command and compel them to take away both root and
branch; you may dispute that point with them; Sir, you cannot prove that
Prelacy is an Order of the Church, as ancient as the Christian Church it self,
and made venerable by the never interrupted reception of it in all Ages of the
Church but ours.

10. I am no Turkish Prophet, I never preached any piece of the Alchoran for
good Doctrine, much less did I ever make it a piece of the Gospel; all that I
say is this, that Christians incorporated in a Civil State may make use of
Civil and natural means for their outward safety. And that the Parliament
has a Legal power more then sufficient to prevent and restrain Tyranny.
Finally, the Parliament has power to defend that Civil right which we have to
exercise the true Protestant Religion, this last point is sure of highest
consequence because it concerns Gods immediate honor, and the Peoples
temporal and eternal good. Pray Sir, show me if you can, why, he who says
the Protestants in Ireland may defend their Civil right for the free exercise
of their Religion, against the furious assaults of the bloody Rebels, does by
that assertion proclaim himself a Turk, and Denison the Alchoran; you talk
of the Papists Religion, Sir, their faith is faction, their Religion is
Rebellion, they think they are obliged in conscience, to put Heretics to the
sword, this Religion is destructive to every Civil State into which true
Protestants are incorporated, and therefore I cannot but wonder at your
extravagancy in this point. Sir, Who was it that would have imposed a Popish
Service Book upon Scotland by force of Arms? You presume that I conceive the
King had an intent to extirpate the Protestant Religion; Sir, I am sure that
they who did seduce or overawe the King, had such a design. I do not believe
that the Queen and her Agents (the Papists in England who were certainly
confederate with the Irish Rebels) had any intent to settle the true
Protestant Religion; and you cannot but believe that their intent was, to
extirpate the Protestant Religion by the sword, and to plant Popery inits
stead; I know Christ does make prose^ites, and break the spiritual power of
Antichrist, by his word and spirit, for Antichrist is cast out of the hearts
and consciences of men by the spirit of the Lord Jesus; but Christ is King of
Nations as well as King of Saints, and will break the temporal power of
Antichrist by Civil and natural means. If Papists and Delinquents are in
readiness to resist or assault the Parliament by Arms, how can the Parliament
be defended or Delinquents punished but by force of Arms? I know men must be
converted by a spiritual persuasion, but they may be terrified by force of
Arms from persecution. All that I say, is, the Parliament may repel force
with force, and if men were afraid to profess the truth because of the Queens
Army. and are now as fearful to maintain errors for fear of the Parliament,
the scales are even, and we may (by study, conference, disputation, and prayer
for a blessing upon all) be convinced, and converted by the undeniable
demonstrations of the Spirit; Sir, this is my persuasion, and therefore I am
sure far from that Mahumetan persuasion of which I am unjustly accused.

11. I am glad that you speak out, and give light to your dark room; I did
not accuse you of Convenicles. I believe you hate those Christian meetings
which Tertullian and Minutius, Pliny and others speak of; we had lights and
witnesses good store at our meetings. And as for your conceit, that I deserve
to be in Bedlam, because of the predominancy of my pride and passion, and the
irregularity of my will; Sir, I confess that I deserve to be in Hell, a worse
place then Bedlam; and if you scoff at me for this acknowledgement, I shall
say as Augustine did, Irrideant me arrogantes, and nondum salubriter prostrati,
and elisi a te Deus meus, ega tamen confiteor dedecora mea in laud tua. Sir,
be not too confident of the strength of your wit, make a good use of it, or
else you may quickly come to have as little wit as you conceive, God has
bestowed on me. 1. Do you believe that your nature is corrupt? 2. And does not
a wanton wit make the heart effeminate? 3. Did you never converse with any
woman of light behavior? rub up your memory. 4. Superstitious persons are
usually lascivious, I could tell you more, but I spare you. 5. Are you more
temperate then the Disciples to whom Christ gave that caveat, Luke 21.34? you
may then apply your self to Prayer and Fasting; do not say that this is a
filthy Caveat, but beware of that filthy sin, and acknowledge that the Caveat
is given you, upon sad considerations.

12. You tell me that God is not so fatally tied to the Spindle of an absolute
Reprobation, but that upon your Repentance he will seal your Pardon. Sir,
Reprobatio est tremendum Mysterium; how dare you jest upon such a Subject, at
the thought of which each Christian trembles? Can any man repent, that is given
up to a reprobate mind, and an impenitent heart? And is not every man finally
impenitent, save those few to whom God gives repentance, freely, powerfully,
effectually? See what it is for a man to come from Ben. Johnson, or Lucian, to
treat immediately of the ^igh and stupendidious mysteries of Religion; the Lord
God pardon this wicked thought of your heart, that you may not perish in the
bond of iniquity and gall of bitterness; be pleased to study the 9. Chapter to
the Romans.

You say if we agree upon the true state of the Questions before hand, nothing
will be left us to dispute. Sir, it is 1. one thing to state a question for
debate, so that you may undertake the affirmative, I the Negative, or e
contrat: 2. another thing to state a question in a supposition as the
Respondent usually does, and a third business to state a question after the
debate in a prudent and convincing determination, as the Moderatour should do;
I speak of agreeing upon the state of the question in the first sense, that
the Question may be propounded in such terms as do so far state the point
in Controversy, that you and I may know which port to take, the Affirmative or
Negative.

The questions as I conceive are these that follow.

1. Whether all that our Prelates have borrowed of the Church of Rome, and
imposed upon the people, ought to be still retained in the Church of England?
2. Whether the Images of our Mediator, and the Saints are useful Ornaments in
Protestant Churches? 3. Whether any Prelate be endued with the power of sole
Ordination and Jurisdiction Jure divine? 4. Whether they who defend the
Protestants of Ireland against the Rebels by force of Arms, are therefore to
be esteemed Mahumetans? 5. Whether that faith which is grounded only upon
Tradition, ought to be esteemed a Divine faith? 6. Whether the spirit speaking
in the word to the conscience of private men ought to be esteemed a private
Spirit? 7. Whether any Reprobate can ever be converted or saved? 8. Whether the
Papists of England, and Rebels of Ireland with their Confederates did
endeavor to extirpate the Protestant Religion and plant Popery in its stead?
9. Whether they who endeavored to impose a Popish Service-Booke upon Scotland
by force of Arms, were of the Mahumetan persuasion? 10. Whether the Schoolmen
are Competent judges in any point which concerns the Mystery of Faith or
Power of Godliness? 11. Whether the National Covenant contradict it self?
Sir, if you please to answer upon the three first questions in the Schools,
and hold them as you seem to hold them all Affirmatively, I shall endeavor to
prove the Negative.

To all your scoffs and abuses I have nothing to reply; if God bids you revile
or curse me, I shall submit to God; you call me Fool, Bedlam, Turk, Dog,
Devil, because I give you seasonable advice: Sure Sir, Nazianzen, Prosper,
etc. were not guilty of such Poetry, nor did Prudentius teach you any such
streines.

I did very honestly forewarn you of a visitation; it is I think proper enough
to enquire into matters of fact at a visitation. Now whether Copes have been
put to a superstitious use is not a question to be determined by any but
In-Artificiall Arguments, I mean by sufficient witnesses. To that which you
Prophecy of, that I am like to be a Visitor; I answer 1. I think you have
little ground for such a Prophecy: I call it a Prophecy, for I am sure the
Houses of Parliament have not yet named any Visitor. 2. You talk much of the
wisdom of the High Court of Parliament; and can you imagine that so wise a
Court or (as you term it) Council will make choice of a Bedlam, a Turk, Dog,
etc. to visit so many prudent and learned Doctors?

Sir, you say you are not satisfied with my Arguments, you might have
considered that I do reserve my arguments till we meet at Schools, our work
for the present is to draw up the Points in Controversy into formal
questions; I have you see formed some questions, if you please to add more,
you may, I shall be ready to give you the best satisfaction I can, after these
are discussed, if I be not called away to some better employment by those who
have power to dispose of

Your humble Monitor, FRAN: CHEYNELL.
An Omnia e Missali Breviario necnon Pontificali Romano a Prelat is nostris
decerpta, populoque obstrusa in Ecclesiam recipienda sint? Christi Sanctorumque
imagines Reformatorum Templis utili sint ornatui? Soli Praelato potestas
Ordinationis nec non Jurisdictionis Jure divino competat?


In hisce quaestionibus animi tui sententiam expectat FRANCISCUS CHEYNELL.




Having read over this Letter, I felt two contrary Affections move within my
self. First, I was sorry, that it began in that kind of bitterness, which
uses to have the same mischievous effect upon minds not addicted to quarrel,
as blear eyes have upon other eyes more sound. Which find themselves
insensibly infected by beholding; And in the presence of those that are bleared
unawares learn their imperfections, and become bleared too. Next, I was glad,
that the Controversies between us, (which like the original of mankind,
began in two, and in a short time had multiplied themselves past number) were
at length reduced to three latin questions, and those to be disputed in the
Divinity School; where that part of Oxford, which understands no other Tongue,
but that in which they daily utter their commodities, if they had been present
toward the making of a throng, had yet been absent to the dispute. Thus
divided, therefore, between my provocations to Answer the reproachful Preface,
and my Alacrity to comply with the Conclusion of the precedent Letter, I
returned this following Answer.

Sir,
When I had opened the Letter you sent me on Saturday night last, Jan. 30. and
found by the first period of it, that as your first Letter showed you a great
Master in Detraction, so in this you had learnt the Art to make the Scripture
revile me too, and taught two of Solomon's Pro. 26. 4, 5.
Proverbs to call me Fool; Finding also in the next period how naturally and
uncompelled ill language flows from you; who do here confess that you did let
loose your pen that I might see, how easily, and with what an unforced
Dexterity, in the less serious part of the Day, without premeditation, or the
expense of Study, you could revile me; And withal, that you did let fly so
many quibbles (as the exercise of your Recreation, I presume) to mind me of my
more industrious Trifles, I must confess I not only looked upon you as a
Person fit to sit in the Psa. i. 1^
Seat of the Scornful, but as one very capable to be requited with a Proverb;
which the same Pro. 26.18.19.
Chapter which you quoted, presented to me at the 18. and 19. Verses; where
it is said, That as a madman who casteth-firebrands, Arrows, and death, so as
the man that deceives his neighbor and says he is in sport.

Sir, I should not have applied this price of Scripture to you by way of
Retaliation, (which may seem to have some bitterness in it) had you not at the
very threshold and first unlocking of your Letter, verified this Proverb upon
your self, by casting firebrands and Arrows first, and thereby deceiving me,
who (upon your promise that I should be spiritually dealt with, that is, as a
Divine engaged in a needless Controversy with a Divine ought to be)
unsuccesfully flattered my self, that for the future, though I could not expect
much Reason or proof or Argument from you, yet you would certainly bind your
self to the Laws of Sobriety, and good Language. How you have made good your
promise, will appear to any, who (besides the reproachful proverb with which
you begin your Letter, and for which, a greater then Solomon has said you
shall be in Mat. 5.22
Danger of Hellfire) shall read the puddle of your letter which streams from
the first foul Spring, and Head of it; where, having first charged me in my
writing to you with Elaborate Folly, you make it an Excuse to the Dirt and mire
of your pen, that I set you the Copy, and was foul in my Expressions first.

Sir, Though the saying of Tacitus be one of the best confutations of
Detraction, Convitia spreta exolescunt, and though I have always thought that
to enter combat with a Dunghill is the way to come off more defiled, yet
finding my self engaged (like one of the poetical Knights errant) with an
Adversary that will not only provoke me to fight, but, whose best weapon is to
defile me out of the field, I shall for once apply as good perfume to the stench
you speak of, as can possibly in such times make me walk the streets in my own
Oxford, uncondens'd not by you made foggy, Air; And shall make it evident,
first to your self, next to the world, (if you will consent that what thus
secretly passes between us shall be made public, and Printed) that you are
not only fallible in your most sad, and melancholy considerations, but in
those more pleasant, mirthful chymes of quibbling, for which I before placed
you in the Chair.

First, sir, you bid me read over my two Sermons and the two letters which I
have sent you, as if they were yours, and then impartially tell you, whether I
am not to pass sentence upon them as you do; That they are Diffoiles Nugae,
Elaborate Follies.

To which my Reply is; First, that there is so much loyalty, and so little
self-interest in them, that my imagination can never be strong enough to
Suppose them to be yours, Next, That what Folly soever betrays it self in your
expressions, yet the matter is built upon such sure rocks of the Scripture,
that it is not all the waves or Tempest which you can raise against them, will be
able to reduce them to the fate of a House built upon the Sand. Thirdly, (since
all Disputes, as well as wit, are like a Rest Kept up at Tennis, where good
players do the best with the best Gamsters) I do sadly promise you, that when
ever you shall either write or urge to me such Arguments of serious
Consideration, that I shall not have reason to think St. Paul's saying verified
in thy Expressions, that my Foolish things are sufficient to confound, and
bring to naught your wise; I will lay aside the Folly you tax me withal. In the
mean time, if you think my Letters to you By what Glass soever my Sermons were
made) are elaborate, pray compare the Dates, and Receipts of them, with the
No-d^^es, and uncertain Receipts of yours; And you will find that the longest
letter, I have yet written to you, was but the creature of two days, when your
unelaborate answer to it back again was the Birth, and Travel of a whole week.

Having said this, Sir, by way of Answer to your ungospel-like preface, I shall
next, (confining my self once more to your own method) address my self to the
examination of the rest of your letter. A hard task, I confess; It being so
much a Twinn-brother to your former* where your evasions, and little escapes
are so many, and your true substantial, solid disproofes of any one thing
which I have said either in my Sermons or Letters, so few, that, to deal freely
with you, my Conflict with you hitherto has been (and for ought I yet foresee
is like to prove) like the Fight between Hercules, and the River Achelous;
which when 'twas foiled in one shape, could tire the Conqueror, and presently
provoke him to a fresh encounter in another. Sir, I could wish (without your
strange endless multiplycation of Questions) you would assume to your self some
constant figure, wherein I might say, I grappled with a bodyed Adversary. But
changing Form, as you do, and putting me still to prove that which you have not
yet so much as seemingly confuted, pardon me (I beseech you) if I say, that my
combat with you is not only like the combat of Hercules with that River, but
like his, who thought he had entered Duel with a Giant, and after much toil
found himself encountered by a cloud.

First, you conceive, that I preached in defense of all Images set up in any
Chapel within this University. Sir, This is but your conceit, of which you,
not I am guilty. My sermon, if you mark it, is not so confined either to
Vanlings Draughts, or any other man's pencil, as to defend what ever their
Irregular Fancies shall draw, or not to defend what ever, either here, or any
where else, they shall regularly limb. But if your conceit were true, what does
your Logic infer, That because some Chapels are adorned with the Images of
some of the persons in the Glorious Trinity, therefore I must acknowledge all
Images of that sort ought to be taken down? Pray, Sir, how long has the
single- Topic of your mere Assertion been of such forcible Authority, that
without any other proof, you should think me obliged to hold such Images
worthy of expulsion, because you say they are? Had you either from Scripture
(the most perfect Rule for the Decision of Controversies) or from Reason,
(Though in your esteem but a piece of nature corrupted) urged any one necessary
Argument to prove them unlawful, or things which deserve to be called the
Idolatry or Superstition of the place, perhaps being a servant to
Demonstration, (though a favorite of the muses) I should have been one of the
first that should have cried out for Reformation. But this not being done by
you, nor indeed, possible to be done by any other, though my sermon speak not
of any Image of any person in the Trinity, yet I conceive all Arguments, which
shall strive to prove, that no picture of any person in the Trinity ought to be
the Ornaments of a Church, or Chapel Window, will be as frail and brittle as
the Glass in which they stand. Sir, I have said in my last Letter, and shall
repeat it in this, that it is not you, but nature and the numerous places of
Scripture, which forbid to make any picture of God, (either taken for the
Divine essence common to all the three persons, or for the person of God the
Father distinct from the other two) which persuade me that any such picture
(besides the impossibility) is unlawful. And therefore you need not have put
your self to the uncecessary trouble to hang your Margin with quotations taken
out of Bellarmine, or Aquinas; since all such quotations applied to that which
I have said and you have cited, which is, That all pictures of God are a breach
of the second Commandent, do strike me no more, then if I should enter conflict
with those dead Arras-Captains, which in hangings threaten to assault the
spectatour with imaginary, woven Lunces. Much less need you so superflously
have called S. Paul from the third heaven to prove, that (because he once
quoted this Greek Hemistick out of Aratas (...), that we are the Offspring of
God) God is not like to gold, silver, or stone, graven by the art of man's
device. Since by that which I have said of him in my former Letter, you are
obliged to testify for me, that I have urged convincing reasons to prove he
cannot be: which Re^sons, as borrowed from nature and the schoolmen (with whom,
sir, I hope you are not implacably fallen out) I do not urge as the supre^^
Judges of what I there prove, but as subservient mediums, which carry a music
and consent to that which God has said of himself in the more perfect Rule of
his Word. So that for doing this, to charge me (as you do) with the Study of
the Lullian Art, is either nonsense in your Letter, or an Illation which
resolvs it self into a contemptible mistake; which is, That because Lullius,
who wrote of Chemistry, was ca^^ed Raymundus, I, who have read another
Raymundus who wrote of Natural Theology, am to be called a Lullianist, which
is a Logic as wretched, as if I should say, Mr Cheynell has read Caserane,
and has made him a marginal note, Therefore he is a seeker of the Philosophers
Stone, and studys to convert the Ore and Tin of the kingdom into Gold. Sir,
Your Logic is not much mended when you say, That the Word (thereupon) is
sometimes Illative, sometimes Ordinative. For ^^ke it which way you will, As it
stands in your last letter, you are bound to give me thanks as a Poet, that I
deal^ not with you as a Sophister, and proclaimed your infirmity for having
uttered a contradiction. Which contradiction, I confess, might have been
avoided by the insertion of the ^^^itled worder two, for w^^^ of which, yo^ say
my sophistical Crititis^^ is abortive, and came but with one leg into the
World.

In answer to your next Paragraph, I shall most readly grant, That it is a high
fault to picture God. Because, any such Draught not being possible to be made
of him, but by resembling of him to something w^^ is able to afford a Species
or Idea to the sense, would, (besides the Falseness of it, where a gross
material figure should represent a Pur^ invisible Essence) degrade him from the
honor which he ought to hold in our Minds which are his Temple; in which
Temple if he should hang up in a frame or table, which should contract and
shrink him to the finite Model of a man o^ any other creature, 'twere the way
to convert him into an Idol; and so (as I have often said) to sin against the
second Commandment, which as it may be broken by spending our Worship upon
false Gods; so it may also be broken by our false portraitures, and
apprehensions, and venerations of the True.

The case of the Saints is far otherwise. For whose pictures turned into Idols,
as I have no where pleaded, (For as Idols I acknowledge they are the crime of
those who worship them) so, as Orndments, you will never be able convincingly
to prove but that they may be i^nocently retained, and be looked on by those who
do only count them speechless Colors. The like may be said of Pictures made of
Christ, which pretend to express no more of him then is capable of
Represontation, and exceed not the lines and sy^^etry of his Body and flesh.
For I shall grant you that to Limb his Divinity, or to draw him in both his
Natures, as he is (...) God as well as man, is altogether impossible, and not
in the power of any Painter, though we should recall Apelles, or Parrhasius
from their Graves, and once more put Pencil^ into their Hand. You know, sir, if
a man should have his picture drawn, 'twould be an impossible task, if he
should enjoin the Painter to limb his soul, as well as the proportion and
feature of his Body, since the Soul is a thing so unexpressible to the sense,
that it scarce affods any Idea to be understood by the mind. Sir, if you have
read Aristotle's Books (...), you will there find, that the proper Objects of all the senses besides those of the Eye (though much grosser then Spirits or Souls)
cannot be brought into picture. A Painter may draw a flower but he cannot limb
a scent. He may paint fire, but he cannot draw heat. He may furnish a table
with an imaginary banquet, but he that should offer to raste of this banquet
would find himself co^en'd. The Reason is, because Nature it self makes it
impossible for the proper Object of one sense to be the Object of another; And
finds not art or col^^^s for any thing invisible; But only for those
Superficie's, Symetry's, and sensible parts of Things, which are first capable
to be seen, and then to be transcribed into a picture. But why that part of
Christ, which after his Resurrection, (when it began to cease to be any longer
a part of this visible World) was seen of above five hundred brethren at once,
may not be painted; Nay, why the figure of a Dove, or of cloven Tongues of fire
(wherein the third person in the glorious Trinity appeared, when he descended
upon our Mediator Christ, and sat upon the heads of the Apostles) may not be
brought into imagery, I must confess to you, I am not sharp-witted enough to
perceive. Though this I shall freely say to you, (and pray do not call it
Poetry) That to maintain that Christ thus in picture may be worshipped, is such a
piece of Superstition, as not only teaches the simple to commit Idolatry, but
endeavors to verify upon him in colors the reproach which the calumniating
Jews stuck upon his person and to make him thus painted, a Seducer of people.

As for your fourth paragraph, (which assaults me the second time with an
Argument without an Edge, which is, that the Sun and Images cannot be put in
the scales of comparison in point of fitness to be preserved) having in my
former Letter already answered you, I shall not put my self to the needless
trouble, the second time to confute it.

For answer to your Fifth, pray, Sir, read that part of my Sermon which you
have corrupted into a quibble; And there you shall find, that what I say of
clean linen is not, as you say, a shifting Fallacy. But I there say that which
you will never be able to control; which is, That by the same reason that you
make Surplices to be supersti^ious because papists wear them, you may make
Linen also to be superstitious because papists shift; And so conclude
cleanliness to be as unlawful as Surplices or Copes. Sir, this is (...); I
confess, the same Answer twice served in to you, not out of scarcity or
barrenness, or for want of another Reply, but because much of your Letter is
but crambe repetita, a carret twice boiled.

Your sixth paragraph is a faggot bound up with more sticks in it, then you,
without poetical License, can possibly gather from my Letter; where, Sir, I
only promise you, (when ever you shall call upon me) to derive to you all the
ancient parts of our English Liturgy from Liturgy's which were in the Church
before popery was born. Of which if any part be to be found in the Rubricks of
the Church of Rom^ your logic will never be able to prove, that therefore it is
to be rejected as trash and trumpery in ^^^rs. Good things, Sir, lose not their
goodness, because they are in some places mingled with superstitious. Nor, as I
told you before, do David's Psalms cease to be a piece of Ga^^^ical Scripture,
because they are to be found bound up in the volumn with the Mass. Sir, if what
ever is made use of by the Pope, or touches upon Rome, should be superstitious,
the River Tiber would be the most blameable river in the World. What you mean
by a prelatical Faction here in England, or what they borrowed from the Rituals
or pontifical of Rome, is expressed to me in such a mist of words (which sound
big to the common people, and signify nothing to the wise) that I must confess
my dullness, I do not understand you. If you mean, that they inserted any new
pieces into the old garment of our Co^mon-prayer-book; and those borrowed from
the Missal, or Breviary of Rome, I believe, Sir, (abstracting from those
alterations made in the prayers for the King, Queen, and Royal issue, which the
Death of Princes exacted, (unless, for constancy sake, you would have them
allow of prayers for the dead; and in King Charles and Queen Mary's days, to
pray still for King James and Queen Anne, which would be a piece of popery
equal to the invocations of saints) you will find nothing medern or of such new
contrivance, as past not Bucers ^xamen in the reign of Edward the sixth; And
was confirmed b^ Act of Parliament in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. In saying
this in their defense, who had the ordering of such changes, I hope Sir, you
will not so uncharitably think me imbark't in their Faction (which truly to me
still presented it self like the concealed Horses under ground, a fiction made
to walk the streets, to terrify the people) as to persuade your self, after my
so many professions to fall a sacrifice to the Protestant Religion, that it can
be either in the power of the Church or court of Rome, to tempt me from my
Resolution: Which is, to go out of the world, in the same Religion I came in.

Sir, I gave warning in my last letter not to venture your writings upon the
Arg^ment, which deceives none but very vulgar understandings, and which I in my
Ser^on call the Mother of mistakes; which is, from an accidental concurrence in
some things to infer an outright similitude and agreement in all. Because
Bellarmine says tradition is a better medium to prove somethings by, then a
private spirit, and because I in this particular have said so too, you tacitly
infer that I and Bellarmine are of the same Religion; which is the same, as if
a Turk and a Christian saying that the Sun shines, you should infer, that the
Christian is a Mahumetan, and for saying so, a Turk. I confess, you do not say
we are both of the same Religion: but that I, in preferring Tradition, which
you your self, in your s^^^^^h paragraph, t^ow to be the Constant and uni^ersal
Report of the Church) before he Testimony of the Spirit, speaking in the Word
to the Consci^^ce^ of private men, am more profane than he. Here, sir, you must
not take it ill, if I expose you to the censure of being deservedly thought
guilty of a double mistake. The one is, that if Bellarmine in this particular
were in an Error, and if I had out-spoken him in his Error, yet the Laws of
speech will not allow you to say, That in an unprof^^^ subject, either of us is
profane; more heretical, or mistaken you might perhaps have said: and this,
though a false Assertion, might yet have past for right Expression. But to call
him positively, and me comparatively more profane, because we both hold, That a
Drop is more liable to corruption then the Ocean, or the testimony of al ages
of the Church is a fuller proof of the meaning of a text in Scripture, then the
solitary Exposition of a man who can persuade none but himself, is as
incongruous, as if you should say, that because Bellanmine wrote but three
Volumn^, and Abulensis twelve, therefore Abulensis was: a greater Adulterer
then He. Your other mistake is, That you confound the Spirit of God speaking in
the Scripture with the private Spirit (that is) Reason, Humor, or Fancy of
the person spoken to. Sir, let that blessed Spirit decide this controversy
between us. He says 2 Pet. 1.20
that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of private Interpretation. That is, so
calculated, or Meriduanized to some select mind and understandings, that it
shall hold the candle to them only, and leave All others in the Dark. But, if
you will consent to the Comment of the most primitive Fathers on that Text, The
meaning of it is, That as God by his Spirit did at first dictate the scripture,
so he dictated it in those things which are necessary to Salvation,
intelligible to all the world of M^n, who will addict their minds to read it.
It being therefore a Rule held out to all mankind, for them to order their
lives and actions by and therefore universally intelligible to them, (it should
else cease to be either Revelation or a Rule) for you to hold that is ^^^not be
understand without a second Revelation, made by the same Spirit that wrote it,
to the private spirit of you the more-Cabinet Reader, is as if you should
enclose and impale to your self the Air, or Sun-be^^es; And should maintain
that God has placed the Sun in the firmament, and given you only eyes to see
him In short, sir, it is to make as word, which was ordained to give light to
all the World, a Dark Lanthorn, In which a candle shines to the use of none but
him that bears it.

Your Eighth Paragraph being the third of your eleven Questions as also the
close of your ninth, shall receive a latin Answer from me in the Divinity
School.

Your next Paragraph is again the Hydra with repullulating Heads: Where,
first, you put me to prove the purity of the Doctrine, Discipline, and
Government in England. Which, being managed by a Prelaticall faction, whom, you
say, I call the Church, was not excellent, if I reckon from the year 1630. to
1640. As for the Doctrine, Sir, I told you before, that the Primitive Church it
self was not free from Heresies. If therefore I should grant you (which I
never shall, till you particularly tell me what those erroneous doctrines were)
that some men in our Church were heterodox, nay heretical in their opinions,
yet I conceive it to be a very near neighbor to heresy in you to charge the
doctrines of persons upon the Kingdom or Church. Such Doctrines might be in
England, (as you whether out of Choice or Luck have said) yet not by the Tenets
or Doctrines of the Land: No more, then if you should say, that because M.
Yerbury and some few others hold the Equ^lity of the Saints with Christ, the
whole Kingdom is a blasphemer, and was by you confuted at S. Mary's. The
public doctrine of the Church of England I call none but that which was
allowed to be so by an Act of Pa liament of England; and that, Sir, was
contained in the 39. Articles. If any Prelate or inferior Priest, for the
Cicle of years you speak of, either held or taught any thing contrary to
these, (as it will be hard I believe for you to instance in any of that side
who did) you shall have my consent, in that particular, to count them no part
of our Church. In the mean time, Sir, I beseech you be favorable to this
Island; and think not that for ten years space 'twas heretical in all the
parts of it on this side Berwick. Withal, Sir, I desire (since you have
assigned me an Epoch to reckon from) that you will compare the worst doctrines
which wore the date of the Trojan War amongs us, with those which have since
broke loose in the space of a War not half so long, and you will find, that
our Church for those ten years you speak of wore a garment, I will not say, as
seamless and undivided as Christ's coat: But since the Soldiers did cast lots
upon it, so much heresy, as well as schism, has torn it asunder, that it is
now become like Joseph's coat imbrued in blood, where no one piece carries
color or resemblance to another. As for the Discipl ne and Government of our
Church, (if you would speak your conscience, and not your gall) you would
confess, that the frame and structure of it was raised from the most Primitive
Model that any Modern Church under the Sun was governed by. A Government so
well sized and fitted to the Civil Government of the Kingdom, that till the
insurrection of some false Prophets, who presumed to offer strange fire before
the Lord, and reduced a Land which flowed with milk and honey, into a
wilderness; they agreed together like the two Scripture-brothers, Moses and
Aaron; and were the two banks which shut up schism within its channel, and
suffered not heresy or sedition to overflow their bounds. In short, Sir, I
know not into what new form this Kingdom may be molded, or what new creation
may creep forth from the strife-full heap of things, into which, as into a
second Chaos, we are fallen; But if the Civil State do ever return to its
former self again, your Presbyterian Government, which was brought forth at
Geneva, and was since nursed up in Scotland, mingled with it, (if I be not
deceived in the principles of that Government) will be but a wild Vine
ingrafted into a true. Upon which unequal, disproportioned Incorporation, we
may as well expect to gather Figs of Thistles, or grapes of thorns, as that
the one should grow so Southern, the other so Northern; that one harmonious,
musical Body should arise from them thus joined. What Errors in Government or
Discipline were committed by the Prelates, I know not; neither have you proved
them hitherto chargeable with any; unless this were an error, that they laid an
Ostracisme (as you say) upon those that opposed your Government. I believe,
Sir, when Presbytery is set up, and you placed in your Consistory with your
Spiritual and Lay-Brethren, you will not be so negligent, or so much asleep in
your place, as not to find an Ostracisme for those, who shall oppose you in
your office. In the mean time, Sir, to call them, or those, who submitted to
their Government, A Prelaticall faction, because the then wheels of their
Government moved with an unanimous undisturbance, is, I believe, a calumny,
which you would feign fasten upon them, provoked (I suppose) by the description
which I have made of the conspiracy of the False Prophets of Jerusalem in my
Sermon. I must deal freely with you, Sir, do but probably make it appear to me,
that this Faction in your letter was like the Conspiracy in my Sermon; Do but
prove to me, that the Prelates devoured souls; That they took to themselves
the Treasure, and precious things of the Land; That to effect this, they
kindled the first spark toward a Civil War; and then blew it into such a
flame, as could not be quenched but with the blood of Husbands ravished from
their Wives, and the slaughter of parents pressed and ravished from their
children: Do but prove to me that they made one widow, or built their Honors
upon the ruin or calamity of one Orphane; Lastly, do but prove to me that the
Priests (whom you make to be the lower orb of their Faction) did so mingle,
and confound the services of the Church, as to put no difference between the
holy, and profane, or that in compliance with them, they saw vanity, and
divined lies to the people, and I shall think them capable of all the hard
language, which you or others have for some years heapt upon them. Till then,
Sir, pray mistake not Concrets for their Abstracts; nor charge the faults of
persons, upon the innocence of their functions. Prelacy is an Order so well
rooted in the Scripture, though now deprived of all its Branches in this
Kingdom, that I verily persuade my self, that as Caiaphas in the Gospel when
he spoke Prophecy, perceived not himself at that time to be a Prophet; so you
(overruled by the guidance of a higher power) have in this Paragraph
exceedingly praised Prelacy, whilst you labored to revile it. For either it
must be Nonsense, or a very great Encomium of it, when you say, that as long
as it enjoyed a root here in this Kingdom, it had not only a destructive
influence into the evils of the Church, but of the Civil State too. If the
Influence of it were so destructive of evils, (as indeed it was) pray with what
Logic can you say, that Salus populi quae suprema lex est, did compel the
Parliament to extirpate a thing so preservative and full of Antidote both to
Church and State?

Sir, if men's styles and denominations be to be given to them by the place and
clymate where they are borne and bred, I shall grant you are an English, nay an
Oxford Christian. But if you preach, and maintain, that Religion as to be
propagated by the Sword, I must tell you, that an English Presbyter may in this
case be a Turkish Prophet; and that though his Text be chosen from the Gospel,
yet the Doctrine raised from it, may be a piece of the Alchoran. I shall allow
you to say that the Protestants in Ireland had a Right to the defense of the
free exercise of their Religion against the furious assaults of the bloody
Rebels. But when you tell me that Christ is King of Nations as well as King of
Saints, (which I shall grant you) and say, that as one of his ways to make
Proselytes is by the persuasion of his Word and Spirit; so, if that will not
do, his other way to break the power of Antichrist, that is, (as I conceive you
mean) to convert men from Popery, is by civil and natural means that is, (if
you mean any thing) to compel them to be Protestants by the Sword; Methinks
I am at Mecha, and hear a piece of Turcisme preached to me by one of Mahomets
Priests. In short, Sir, whether the Papists in England were confederate with
the Irish Rebels I know not: But do you prove demonstratively, not jealously,
to me, that the Queen and her Agents had an intent to extirpate the Protestant
Religion, and to plant Popery by the Sword; and the Army that should bring that
design to pass, shall, in my opinion, be styled an Army, not of Papists, but
of baptized Janissaries. As for your bidding me dispute the right of taking up
Arms in such a case, with the Parliament; First, I must desire you to accept
the Answer which Favroinus the Philosopher gave to a friend of his, who asked
him, why he would let Adrian the Emperor have the better of him in a Dispute;
I am loath to enter into an Argumentation with those who command Thirty Legions.
Next, Sir, if I were of consideration enough to be heard to speak publicly to
that Great Assembly, having first kissed my weapon, I should not doubt, with all
the respective liberty, which might witness to them that I strive not to
diminish the rights of their power, but to defend the truth of my cause, to
tell them, that to come into the field with an armed Gospel, is not the way
chosen by Christ to make Proselites. If this be an error or mis-perswasion in
me, show me but one undeniable demonstration of the Spirit to disprove it,
besides your unto picall persuasion of your self to the contrary, and, without
any farther conference, or dispute in this point, I shall acknowledge my self
your convert, and be most glad to be convinced. In the mean time, Sir, you are
obliged, (though I be in your opinion in an error) to think more nobly of me,
then of those Cowards of your side, who durst not speak Truth in a time of
danger, when you see me, in the like time, such a resolute Champion (as you
conceive) for the wrong.

Sir, it is one of the praises of a good picture to be drawn so livingly, that
every one in the room that beholds it, shall think it looks only on him; It Is
just so with some Texts in Scripture, and some parts of moral Philosophy;
which when they speak very Characterizingly of an irregular passion, or vice,
if they meet with a man Conscious, and one subject to such passions, remember
him of his guilt, and prick his mind as if he only were signified by that
which was writ to all the World. By your charging me that I dealt more sharply
with you then I should, you give me cause to suspect, that my Letter proved
such a picture to you; and you to your guilty self seemed a person so
concerned. The words of bitterness which you have laid together in one heap,
are composed of such Language, as upon your twentieth perufall you will never
be able to find in my Letter. Sir, Christianity, and my profession (however
you in your letter forgot both) have taught me not to return Vomit for Vomit.
And the love which I bear to to the Civility of expression, would never suffer
me to be so revilingly broad. If I made use of one of Seneca's Epistles, or of
Tully's Paradoxes, or Horace's poetical Controversies, and if you would apply
what they said of Ambition, Pride, or Choler to your self, certainly, Sir, you
have no reason to call this the Luxuriancy of my wit. And thereupon to infer
these provocative conclusious; that my wit is wanton, therefore I am
effeminate. That I am superstitious, therefore lascivious too. Sir, as my wit
is so poor that I shall observe your Council, that is, never wax proud upon
the strength of it, or despise those that are more weak, so (without sparing
me at all) I do once more challenge you to prove, that the wantonness of it
has betrayed me to the loose Conversation of any that are light. Lastly, Sir,
I hope you do not thing I have so much of the vain glory, or
selfe-conceitedness of those Reverend Hypocrites in the Gospel in me, who were
able to boast of their long Prayers, and broad phylactaries, and of their
fasting twice a week, that I will offer to think my self more temperate then
the Apostles. Yet, Sir, I dare once more challenge you, and the precisest of
your inspired informers, to prove me at any time guilty of the breach of the
Text you quote against Surfeiting, and Drunkenness. Luke 21.34. That part of
your Paragraph, therefore, which ends in exhortation, is a piece of Homily,
which returns to you, to be made use of toward some other on the next last
Wednesday of the month, where Fasting, and Sobriety will be seasonable The^ams.

I grant, Sir, that Reprobation is a Mystery to be trembled at. Yet Sir, all
they who (maintaining it to be absolute) do revive the fiction of the three
destinies, where one holds the Distaffe on which the Thread of every man's Fate
is spun, and do preach a piece of Zeno's Philosophy for a piece of Saint
Paul's Epistles, can have no reason to accuse me of a jest, because I applied a
spindle to the Distaffe, on which men's fates are rolled. Sir, in plainer
terms, as absolute Reprobation, is a piece of Stoicisme, which was never held
to be Christian, till it crept forth into the Church from the same fancy, which
was the womb in which the Presbyterian Government was formed, so me thinks,
Lucian, Sir, (how cheaply soever you think of him, or me, for having closed my
last letter to you with a piece of his Nigrinus) in his confutation of this
Heathenish Error (which has made so many hang themselves) urges Arguments
which would become one of the Fathers of the Church. I know not whether you
have read his (...). But if you have, he there tells you, that if there be such
a thing as the fatal Decree, you speak of; 1. That all they who lie under the
Inflexibility of it, being tied by an unalterable necessity to do what they do,
can in no reason be rewarded if they do well, nor with any Justice be punished
if they do ill. Next, that the Sins which they commit, (if they cannot but
commit them) are not to be called their Sins, but the Sins of that Decree
which laid this necessity upon them. And, therefore, Thirdly, that a murderer
(thus predestined) if he should be arraigned, may say to any Judge thus
stoically persuaded. Why do you accuse me? Pray call my Destiny to the Bar;
and do not sentence me, but my fate to the Rack and Wheel. I was but an
oversway'd Instrument in this Murder; and was but such an Engine to my
Destiny, as my Sword was to me. Though this were spoken by a Heathen, only in
disproof of Fate, yet since Saint Chrysostom in more then three Sermons had
said the same things in disproofe of absolute Reprobation, I hope, sir, neither
Calvin, nor Piscator, have so mistaught you to understand Saint Paul, as from
any Epistler of his to conclude peremptorily, that any without their desert,
are given up to a Reprobate mind, and finally struck and necessitated to a
remediless impenitence. The 9. Chap. of the Romans, I have long since
considered, and studied it by the most sere^e, impartial lights which might
uncloud the great Mystery to me which lies so obscurely there wrapped up. And
to deal freely with you, the best Commentator I ever yet met with to lead me
through the darkness of it, was another place of Scripture or two set in
presence, and scale with this, both which joined, me thought, made perfectly
the Cloud which guided the Jews through the Wilderness, which was a Cloud to
the Egyptians, but a pillar of fire to the Israelites. Sir, I know that
neither Saint Paul has written Contradictions, nor any other of the Apostles
written that which is Contradictory to Saint Paul, Sir, I presume, also, that
Aristotle's Book (...) has not so ^orsaken your memory, but you know that an
Universal Affirmative, and a particular Negative are a perfect Contradiction,
and cannot both be true. Here, then, stands the case. You, building your
Opinion upon the (...) or great depth of the ninth Chapter to the Romans,
infer from thence that God gives Repentance only to some few, whose
peremptory will it is that they only shall be saved. Saint Paul in his first
Epistle to Timothy, Chapter 2. verse. 4. gives us a line and plummet to sound
this Depth; and saves expressly, That it is the will of God that all men should
be saved. Between these propositions, it is his will that all shall, and it is
his will that only a few shall be saved, there is no Medium, in which they may
be reconciled; but one of them must necessarily be true, the other false. This,
then, being so, I have always held it safer to build my Faith upon those
clear places of the Scripture, which have no veil before their face, then
those which are mysterious, and lead me to a (...) over which I stand amazed,
but cannot from thence infer. I do farther profess to you, that I am not so
wedded to this or any other Speculative Opinion, but that, if you will show
more convincing Scripture for the contrary, I shall most readily renounce my
own thoughts, and espouse my self to yours.

Your premonition or forewarning of me that we at Christ-church would e're long
taste of a visitation, has since come to pass, and in part approved it self to
be true Prophecy. Whether im^^ired by you or no, I know not, but there have
been two with us, who have taken away as many Copes and guilt can lesticks, as
if they had been superstitious. Sir, it is no wonder to me that in our times
silver should be Popery; Or that Church utensills if they be Gold should be
called superstition. But certainly, Sir, 'twas a great misinformation to send
them to search for Copes or things of value to my poor Protestant Chamber;
where there never was a Cope, though, perhaps, they might have found a
long-difused Surplice, there. And as for Idols of price, if they had searched
my purse, I believe that all the popery, which, in these impoverishing Times,
they could have found in it, cast into the fire, like the Jewish Earerings,
would neither have come forth a Silver Crucifix; much less so wealthy an Idol
as a Golden Calfe.

Sir, since at length I understand you, that by agreeing upon the true state of
the questions before we dispute them, you mean that we should agree upon the
terms in which they are to be held, I am very ready to comply with you in that
reasonable particular. But to accept of any, either of your eleven English, or
yout three Latin questions, in the terms in which you have formed them, I can
by no means consent. First, Sir, Because I find a piece of Artifice in the
Web, and contrivance of them, which has something of a Trap, and Snare, and
Engine in it. Which is, that by making them as Popish questions as you can,
(especially one of them) where you insert the words Missall, Breviary, and
Pontifical) words odious to the people, and part of the dismal spell which
for six years has raised the spirit of discord to walk among us; if I should
hold it affirmatively under these terms of hatred, it is possible it may beget
an opinion in the minds of those that know me not, that, though I have more
then once professed my self ready to fall a sacrifice in the defense of the
Protestant Religion, yet that this was but a disguise which concealed my
hypocrisy, 'till provoked I were put to defend the superstitions of the Church
of Rome. Sir, I know upon what lesser ground^ then this, some in our credulous
times have been unjustly called Papists. Next, Sir, if I should hold them
affirmatively, with their fares thus looking toward Popery, and should bring
them thus clothed in your terms of superstition into the Divinity School, I
doubt very much whether the publickness of the Defense may not draw an
aspersion not only upon me, and the Moderator, (if he will vouchsafe to sit in
the Chair whilst we quarrel) but upon the Whole already too much defame
University, which such as you have from numerous Pulpits called long since
Ropishly affected; But if it should allow of such a Dispute, 'twould lend fuel
to your calumnies, and be endangered to be no longer thought P^pish, but (...)
right a Papist. Thirdly, Sir, your first and last Question (if they were purged
of their odious terms) cannot p^^liquely be maintained without some affront to
the Parliament, who by one Ordina^^^ have put down the Common Prayer Book, by
another Epis^^p^^y. If therefore, under your terms, I should p^l^^quely stand
up in defense of them, you had need procure a third Ordinance, which when I
have done may keep me safe. Yet, Sir, to as^^^e you that this is no evasion in
me to decline a dispute, because my Sermon ^as the occasion of your challenge
of me in the Pulpit, and of this private conference between ^s since; Since
also you allow me the liberty of alteration, and to add my stroke to the
A^^ill on which the questions to be disputed on between us are to receive the
last form, and shape, in which, with least offense, and scan^^^l, they may walk
into the public. Lastly, since the three Latin Questions you sent me are
dree passages of my Sermon, but so corrupted from themselves, as show them to
have been once p^r^^y P^^^^stant, but passing through your hands have
degenerated, and ^^^^ed themselves with a to-be-suspected robe of Popery, the
nearest way I knew for us to agree upon their true state, is to deal with them
as the Bishops at the Reformation dealt with the Religion of the Church of
Rome; that is, p^rge them from their corruptions, and restore them to the
Primitive rule from whence they have digrest. Which Ride, being my Sermon, (if
you read it with open eyes) presents you with your three questions, in this
more ge^^i^e form.

An Liturgia Ang^ican^ ideo elimin^^da sie, qui^ ^^^^ullas parts ab Ecclesia
(...) na^a (...) est, Neg. Christi, Sa^^t^rumque imagines in Reformater.
Eccles^is ^^ite r^ti^eri p^ssi^t, Aff. Regimen Ecclesia Anglic^na per Epis^^p^s
s^t Antichristianum, ex eo quod Ecclesia Romana (qua^ nonnulli sedem
Antichristi statuunt) sic gubernatur, Neg.


Upon these three Questions (which are but three periods of my Sermon cast into
a problematicall form) if you approve of them, and, like a generous Adversary,
will promise me, that neither for sen^ing of them to you now, nor for defending
them hereafter, I shall be questioned, (for this I require no other security
but your word) I will not fail (God assisting me) to meet you in the Divinity
School at University weapons, when ever you shall think fit to call upon me;
and to bring with you those Arguments, which, you say, you reserve for that
place, and in your two letters have not vouchsafed to afford me, who do daily
pray (for I begin to be weary of fighting with shades) that this unnecessary
conflict may at length end in a Christian peace between you the opponent, and
me the defender of

From my Chamber this Afternoon, Feb. 4. 1646. The Sermon against False
Prophets, J. MAIN.


In the evening to the afternoon, in which this Letter was sent, M. Cheynell
returned an Answer, not so large, I confess, as I expected; but composed of
Language, so complying with my desires, that I unfainedly felt a new strife
within my self, how, having hitherto tolerably borne his rougher assaults, I
should preserve my self from being conquered by his civilities. Which I
confess, have such a forcible charm upon my nature, softend, and tutored to it
by Religion; that the World cannot afford an Enemy, who shall raise such a
tempest of persecution against me, but that I shall be ready to afford him my
Embraces, and Arms, if he will be content to be received there in a calm. I
do farther confess, that M. Cheynell, by undertaking to secure me against the
danger which might have followed a public dispute, has not only verified my
expression, and shown himself a generous adversary, but by that engagement of
himself, has made me see, what reason I have to complain of my hard fortune,
which has left me only the will, and not the power, to be in the like kind,
as generous to Him back again. His Letter was to a syllable this.

SIR,
You may be confident that the Messenger was not sent by me, because he
returned without you and without his fees. I never writ up one Letter to London
that did in the least measure reflect upon you; if your Sermon had not been
printed, I had not spoke one word against it. I desire to deal with you in a
rational way, and therefore I do accept of your Academicall proposition or
challenge so often sent me; and because I find my prayers in some measure
answered, and you more civil then heretofore, I shall deal freely with you. I
do here under my (...) b^nd assure you, that if you be questioned for
defending these Propositions in a Scholasticall way, (you know reproaches are
not Scholasticke) in the public Schools, I will answer for you; the
Parliament will not question you for any learned national debate about
Prelates or the Common-Prayer-Booke, for the satisfaction of your self and
others.

I will meet you if you please, at the Doctor of the Chair his lodgings to
morrow about two of the clock in the afternoon; I doubt not but by his advice
we shall, agree upon terms fit to express the points in Controversy; if you
like the proposal be pleased to send your approbation of it in two lines by
this bearer to*

Mert. Coll. Feb. 4. 1646. Your friend to serve you, FRAN: CHEYNELL.


To this Letter (which was the last I received from him) by the same Messenger
that brought it, I returned this Answer, which was the last he received from me.

SIR,
I shall (God willing) meet you to morrow at your hour, at the Doctor of the
Chaire's Lodging. Where if you be as willing to submit to the terms which he
shall think fit to put the Questions in, which we are to dispute upon as I
shall be, there will be no variance* between us there, nor shall we I hope,
bring any with us from the Divinity School. Where Sir, you shall meet one who
is so great a lover of truth, that if you can convince me for being all this
while in an Error, I shall think my self indeed, a gainer by this conflict.
And no longer style my self the defender of the Sermon against False Prophets,
but one, who for being confuted by you ought to remain

From my Chamber, Feb. 4. 1646. Your Affectionate friend and Servant, J^SPE^
MAIN.


Here, if any be curious to know how this last act of our conf^^^nce ended, or
what Catastrophe did sh^^ up the conflict between us, which had so much busy
Epitasi^ and expectation in it, I could wish Master Cheynell himself were the
Historian. Nevertheless, none will have reason to think me partial or
unfaithful in my Report, having not only Master Wilkinson, if I deliver false
story, but the Doctor of the Chair to disprove, and contradict me. At whose
lodging in Christ-church when we met, First, with a prudence becoming the
gravity of his person, and the Dignity of his pl^^e, he told us, that he could
not think it fit to fit moderatour to any disputation which was not either
preforma, and conduced to the taking of a degree, or pro T^^mi^^, which is a
Di^^^ity exercise, at which the University Statutes require his presence in the
chair. Next, if we resolved to meet in the Schools without a moderatour, his
advice was, that Master Cheynell should have his scribe and I mine, to write
down faithfully his Arguments and my Replies: which thus taken and compared,
would not be so liable to the variations of report, as when the ears and
memories of the h^^^ers are their only Register.

There remained but one difficulty, which was, how to make us agree upon
questions fit to be disputed in such a public way. M. Cheynell utterly refused
Mine, and the Doctor of the Chair thought it no way reasonable, that in the
dangerous attire they wore, I should accept of his; especially the first: Which
upon M. Cheynells unlocking of the full extent and meaning of the terms,
revealed it self to be a kind of Trojan horse; consecrated indeed to Pallas
without, but lined with an Ambush of Armed enemies within. For, besides the
Words Missall, Breviary, and Pontifical (against which I before gave in my
exceptions) by A pr^^^^is decerpta, popidoque, obtrufa, Master Cheynell said,
he not only meant those parts of our English Lyturgie which have been borrowed
from the Church of Rome, but the Scotch Lyturgie too, as it was imposed upon
that Nation by the Sword. Which, though it were a mistake in him to say it was
imposed by the sword, (since the date of the reception of it in that Church was
the year 1637. At which time the Sword of both Nations lodged peaceably in the
Scabberd) and though upon the perusal of it since, E^^nde it the same in all
points with ours, but only in the contraction of the form of the
Administration of the L^rds Supper, and so for the matter of it as defensible
as ours, ye having been turned out of that Kingdom, and Church as solemnly as
it was at first introduced, that is, by an Act of Parliament; To whose birth
the King and Houses concurred, for me to have disputed publicly for the
second reception of it, had been the way not only to raise a Northern Army of
men against my self, (who would, doubtless, have thought it a very bold piece
of insolence in me to disallow in a public dispute, the proceedings of a
whole State) but of such Northern Women too, whose zeal upon the first
reading of that innocent Lyturgie, mistook it for the Mass book, and thereupon
converted their Joynt-stools, upon which they sat, into Weapons, with which
they invaded the Reader, and chaced him, with his Newborn Popery in his hand,
out of the Church. These Reasons being laid to those other, which in my last
letter but one, produced to show how scandalous, as well as unsafe, it would in
all likelihood, prove both to the University and my self, if I should
publicly maintain a question which carried so much danger with it, I pressed
M. Cheynell with the intimation which he gave me in his last letter, which was,
to stand to that frame of Questions which the Doctor of the Chair should
contrive for us. To whose Ordering of the term of his first Question if he
would submit, I promised him to accept of his other t^^, (th^^ (...) in the
D^^t^^ (...) the Chaires opinion, the terms of his third Question were
something hard) in th^^^ (...) ^orm^ into which he ^^d ^ast them. To this his
reply was, that after the Words p^pulo obtrusa, in his first Question, he would
allow me to insert these two words of Mitigation, ut fertur. Whereto my answer
was, that this addition would so little deserve the name of a Mitigation, that
it very much increast my burden, and hung more weights upon me. Since hereby I
obliged my self, not only to stand up for the Readmission of the Scotch
Lyturgie; which could not be done without an affront offered to the Act of
State that banished it, but for the Justification of all the unknown practices
of the Prelates, who had the contrivance of that Lyturgie, against the Sinister
reports, and Calumnies of the incensed people. Who, as for some years, they
have been falsely taught to think the Order of Bishops Antichristian, so
looking upon their persons through the mist cast by some False Prophets before
their eyes, it ought to be no wonder if their best Actions have seemed Popery.
The Conclusion of all was this. M. Cheynell at length, without any farther
Clouds of discourse, told me plainly, that to any other alterations then this
he could not consent; being bound up by his instructions to hold this Question
only in the latitude and sense, which was signified by the terms in which he
had Arrayed it. Whereupon, the long expected scene between us closed, and the
Curtain to this Controversy was let fall. And we, after some mutual
exchanges of Civility, parted, I hope like two Divines, in perfect Charity with
one another.

THE END.

