Spiritual Wisdom Improved against TEMPTATION.

IN A SERMON PREACHED At Stepney September. 16. 1660. And now made public to
obviate misrepresentation.

By MATTHEW MEADE.

Joh. 18.23. If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if I have
spoken well, why smitest thou me?

Psalm. 120.2. Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful
tongue.

Conscia men's recti famae mendacia ridet.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Three Crowns in the lower end of
Cheapside over against the Great Conduit. 1660.

To the Congregation at Stepney, that were the Auditors of this Sermon, All
Covenant-mercies be multiplied through our Lord Jesus Christ.
I Shall not put my self to the charge of importuning your acceptance of this
Sermon, being persuaded that you whose ears were tied so fast to the Preachers
lips when it was delivered, will not disdain to cast your eyes upon it when it
is translated from the Pulpit to the Press. Had not an unsavory breath (that
common telltale of a foul stomach) blowed upon it to infection, it had layen
still with its elder brethren in the dark sepulcher of oblivion. Nor yet could
that have raised it again, had not your affectionate desire rolled away the
stone from the mouth of the sepulcher. You (it seems) first discovered other
men digging pits in the field of my reputation, to find the unknown treasure of
their own, and therefore thought the publishing this Sermon the best way to
fill them up again; which I readily assented to, that the world may see how
easily innocence and plain dealing may be baptized into the name of Faction and
Sedition; nay that I preached Rebellion and Treason, is charged upon this
Sermon, merely because I spoke of sinful compliance with the ceremonies against
conscience; That I mentioned not either the King or his Government, neither at
that time nor any other, save only to pray for him, as by the command of God I
am bound to do, I have thousands of witnesses among you.

How little my Sermons have been stuffed with State matters you can all testify;
I did determine to know nothing among you, 1 Cor. 2.^.
save Jesus Christ and him crucified.

That I have not in this Sermon spoken any thing of the nature of temptations,
etc. is not only because the subject leads not directly to it, but because I
have heretofore in twenty Sermons from Rev. 3.10. handled that subject among
you.

I had thought I might have continued with you long enough to have outlived my
design upon this Text; Psalm. 31.15
but the wise God (in whose hand my times are) has given me a quietus est, not
only in reference to my place, but to my conscience also.

The greatest evil I shall wish to those that succeed me, shall be, that they
may be as true to the interest of your precious souls, as I did always desire,
2 Cor. 12.14.
and to my power endeavor to be: God is my record, that I sought not yours but
you. My care and prayer has always been that you might receive heavenly
treasure out of a poor earthen vessel.

I may say that no part of Gods Vineyard in the whole Nation has had more
choice and eminent laborers (my self excepted) then this of Stepney for
several years together; Mr. Buroughs. M. Whittaber. M. Bridge, and till now
Mr. Greenbil.
and in this regard I had a hard province to write after such coples; but who
looks for a man's head upon a child's shoulders? nor will God require the
improvement of ten talents where he gives but one.

What good the Lord has done by me, bless him for; set my name to no more then
the weaknesses and infirmities that were discovered in my performances.

I have ground to hope that through the dew of Gods grace watering the seed of
the word, some were converted, some convinced, some confirmed; Romans 10.1
and my hearts desire and prayer to God for all, shall be that they may be
saved. Heb. 13.10, ^1.


Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that
great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant make
you perfect in every goodwork to do his will, working in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

MATTHEW. MEADE.

TO THE Ingenuous Reader.
THis Sermon had never borrowed one hour of thy light, could prejudice and
ill will (which never speaks well) have suffered it to have layn in darkness,
it was honestly born, but, unknown to the parent, it was brought under a
Canonical Baptism, where it received the sign of the Cross, and so is made
Crucianus though not Christianus; had it but pleaded the holiness of vestures,
the decency of a ceremony, no doubt though its subject had not been so good,
yet its censure had not been so bad.

The Author intended no more in the delivering of it to his hearers, then a
help to the delivering of them from the power of the Tempter. When should the
Watchmen give warning, but when the enemy is approaching? and when should they
call loudest to spiritual watchfulness, but when they are nearest to the snares
of spiritual wickedness? This was the practice of our Lord Christ; Mar. 6.41.
Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation.

What it was in the Sermon that could possibly offend, I cannot guess, unless
the eighth head; and I wonder not much at their offense at that, since it
appears they are weak brethren. It is sad that men should walk not as wise but
as fools, when the drift of the discourse was to teach them to walk not as
fools, but as wise; and that a Sermon of temptation, should become a
temptation; thus is Christ himself a stone of stumbling, 1 Pet. 2.3.
whilst they that so mannerly how their bodies at the name of Jesus, cannot
bend their consciences to the truth of Jesus; but herein is that Scripture
fulfilled; ^oh. 5.9.
For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see not might see, and
that they which see might be made blind.

There is somewhat spoken about sinful compliance with ceremonies, and not
much; if it had been more, it had not been much, coming from one that was born
too late to remember them practiced, and thinks he should live too long to see
them imposed: If to speak against Will Worship and superstition, be a fault,
(for that is my crime) who can love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, and at
this time be innocent? I had rather be charged with frowardness before men,
then to be charged with unfaithfulness before God.

Expect not Iliads in a nutshel, much in this little, it being but conceived
but the day before it was born: I resolved as not to diminish one sentence from
it, to make it more excusable; so not to add one sentence to it, to make it
more commendable; only a little in the Introduction which I then omitted, and
now, to make what follows sense, have added.

It was seed sown on good ground, Mat. 13.4. compared with the 9.
preached to an honest congregation at Stepney, though some fell by the way
side, and that the wicked one picked up: Thus as bold thieves will dare to pick
pockets at the very bar of judgment, so Satan will be tempting and insnaring,
even when and where his temptations are discovering.

This sermon has a disorderly publication, both in regard of diverse Sermons
that were Preached before it on the same text, and diverse that are to follow
after it, but as this finds acceptance, so I at present purpose to deal with
the rest, either to the closet, or to the house top.

If any thing in it prove useful to thy soul in the houn of temptation, let God
have thy praises, who deserves them; and let him have thy prayers who needs
them, and who promises to be in return for them.

Thy Servant for Jesus sake, MAT. MEADE.

PAge 1. line 13. r. but a while. p. 10. l. 11. for should r. would. p. 12. l,
5. dele though ^ die. p. ib. l. 8. add not. p. 15. l. 17. for our r. out.

EPHESIANS. 5.15, 16. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools but as
wise: Redeeming the time because the days are evil.


TO be good at all times is a Christians duty, but to be good in bad times is a
Christians glory; to be a Lot in Sodom, a Job in the land of Vz, a Saint in
Nero's house; Phil. 2.15.
To be blameless and harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of
a crooked and perverse nation, this is the credit of a Christian profession.
Bad times and bad manners too often corrupt good men. Peter was very zealous
for Christ among the Disciples, but when he had been a but while in the High
Priests hall, how does he then deny Christ!

Joseph had been but a while at Court, and he had learned the Court-oath, to
swear by the life of Pharaoh: The Israelites were no sooner mingled with the
Heathen, but they forthwith bow and sacrifice to their gods: They were mingled
among the Heathen, and learned their works, and they served their Idols, psalm.
106.35.36.

-- Grex totus in agris
Vnius scabie cadit, Iuvenal.
and porrigine porci.
The Apostle Englishes it, 1 Cor. 15.33. Evil communications corrupt good
manners. Sin is of a very leavening nature, A little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump, Deuteronomy. 7.^, ^, ^.
Gal. 5.9. And therefore it is that God commands Israel at their entering into
Canaan, utterly to destroy all the Nations, to make no covenant, nor to marry
with them; why? lest they should learn their manners and their customs.

And this was the reason of this Apostolical Suada, or Exhortation in the Text
to the Church of Ephesus, to walk circumspectly.

This Ephesus was the Metropolis and chief City in Asia minor: A City much
given to superstition and Idolatry; Acts 15.27.
there was the Temple of the great Goddess Diana: A City where the preaching
and professing the Gospel was much persecuted; 1 Cor. 1^.32.
and therefore the Apostle Paul says, He fought with beasts at Ephesus.

Now what with superstition among them, and persecution upon them, the days
were very evil, and hence he gives them this counsel in the Text; See then that
ye walk circumspectly, not as fools but as wise; redeeming the time because the
days are evil.

The words have in them four parts.

First, A great duty enjoined, See that ye walk circumspectly. Secondly, The
injunction explained, Not as fools, but as wise. Thirdly, The explanation
amplified, Redeeming the time. Fourthly, The reason of all urged, Because the
days are evil.
The first general, viz. the injunction of a duty, we have already spoken to,
and are come to the second General, viz.

The explanation of the injunction, which sets out to us the manner of this
circumspect walling, and that both negatively and affirmatively.

Negatively, not as fools.
Affirmatively, but as wise.
This negative caution which the Apostle gives Christians, not to walk as
fools, does imply in it this affirmative conclusion.

That there are many Professors of Religion are fools in their profession.

This I have spoken too at large; and am now upon the explanation of the
injunction, as wise; from whence we laid down this assertion,

That it is the Christians duty to walk wisely.

I have explained the term, what it is to walk wisely.

I have confirmed the point, that it is the Christians duty.

I have given you the properties of this spiritual wisdom.

The fourth thing is to show you when this spiritual wisdom is in season.

Answ. At all times, spiritual wisdom is never out of season; Eccles. 3.1.
Solomon says, There is a season to every thing, and a time to every purpose
under heaven.

Yet there are two things he allots no time for, for sin and for holiness: He
does not say There is a time to sin, because there is no time for that; he does
not say There is a time to serve God, and be holy, and wise to salvation,
because all ^me is for that. Holiness and spiritual wisdom is always in season.

But yet there are four peculiar seasons of this walking wisely.

In times of outward prosperity. In times of outward trouble and affliction. In
times of temptation. In times of spiritual desertion.
Where the wisdom of walking in prosperity lies, I have showed you already in
five things. Where the wisdom of walking in affliction lies, I have showed you
in Twelve things.

Now in the third place, I shall show you that it is the Christians duty to
walk wisely in times of temptation. And then show you wherein the wisdom of
walking in temptation lies.

That it is the Christians duty to walk wisely in time of temptation: Christian
wisdom is never more necessary then when we are assaulted by that cunning
adversary.

To clear this, I shall lay down seven gradual conclusions.

1. That the Saints of God are very incident to temptations from Satan; these
are the Butts the Devil shoots the arrows of his rage against; the pyrate does
not assault the empty ship, nor the theif break open the poor man's cottage; but
where the prize is, there the onset is.

Grace will keep us from sinning in temptation, but it will not keep us from
sufferings under temptation. Christ was made like to us that he might be
tempted, and we are tempted that we may be made like to Christ.

The more a man is renewed and sanctified, the more is he tried and buffetted;
the more God has done for him, the more will Satan do against him; The more
God increases his grace, the more Satan disturbeth his peace.

Nay immediately upon the greatest discovery from God, the Saints have the
soarest batteries from Satan; When God discovers most of his love to us, Satan
will then discover most of his rage against ns; if Christ does but take us into
the banqueting house, Cant. 2.4.
Satan will presently lead us into the wilderness.

Paul was no sooner come down out of the highest heaven, but he is straight way
set upon by an enemy from the lowest hell. He had no sooner received abundance
of revelations to comfort him, Cor. 12.^, 7.
but the next news is a Messenger of Satan to buffet him. After that glorious
revelation he falls into a grievous temptation, insomuch that the joy of his
spirit was much abated by the thorn in the flesh.

Thus it was with the Lord Christ himself; he no sooner hears the voice of
God from Heaven, saying This is my beloved son, but immediately the spirit from
hell comes and questioneth his Sonship; Matthew. 3. 16. c^mp. with Mat. 401.
he was no sooner gone up out of the water where he was baptized, but he is
forthwith lead up into the wilderness to be tempted.

And if he did thus to the green tree, what will he not do to the dry? So that
it is clear, that the Saints of God are very incident to temptations from Satan.

Secondly, Ps. 119.117. and 17.5
Man is very weak at best to withstand temptation when it is least. So long as
God holds us up we cannot fall; but if God gives us up, we cannot stand. It
is man's weakness to presume upon his own strength, when as his best strength is
but weakness.

Peter promises not to leave Christ; but when the temptation comes then he
leaves his promise. To persist in duties of sanctification, and to resist in
cases of temptation, both these are man's work to do, but we must have Gods
strength to do them. How vain is man to think himself any thing, when without
Christ he can do nothing! Ioh. 15.^.


Thirdly, We have in our natures much for temptation to work upon: Our corrupt
hearts are like tinder, apt to take when the Devil strikes fire. He that
promises himself that the frame of his heart will be the same under a
temptation as it was before, may as well promise himself that though he fall
into the water, he shall be dry, because whilst he was upon the shore he was
not wet.

It is not with Christians as it was with Christ; when Satan came to tempt him,
he found nothing in him, no carnal principles, no secret lust, no corrupt
matter to fasten his temptations upon. The Prince of this world comes, and
has nothing in me, Joh. 14.30.

But it is otherwise with Christians: Satan has for the compassing his ends a
sure party in our own bosom: When Satan beleagureth us without, sin is ready to
betray us within. A man's enemies are they of his own house.

Christ had only the suffering part of temptation when he entered into it, but
we have also the finning part of it. Though when Satan came to Christ, he found
nothing in him; yet when he comes to Christians, he finds much in them.

Though Believers are not in sin, yet there is sin in Believers; much lust
remains in the Best. Where grace is, it destroys sins power, but it does
not destroy its presence. Though we are sanctified in every part, Cor. 13.1^.
yet we are sanctified but in part. Though Regeneration takes much sin out of
us, yet Temptation finds much sin still in us. There is much for temptation
to work upon, and therefore we have need to walk wisely in temptation.

Fourthly, Satan with great cunning suiteth his temptations to man's nature and
disposition; as he has great malice, as being a Devil, so he has great
knowledge, as being an Angel; and as his knowledge is great by intelligence, so
it is heightened by experience. For he has been trading with souls well nigh
Six thousand years. He does not love to sail against the wind, nor row against
the tide; he suits the temptation without us to the lusts and corruption within
us, and so has wind and tide with him. If he meet with Peter, he deals
with his carnal fear, with David's lust, with Jonahs passion, with
Diotrephes his ambition.

Oh how vvisely does it behove us to walk in temptations!

Fifthly, As all Saints are tempted to commit sin, so many commit the sin to
which they are tempted: As Satan is always very treacherous, so he is often
very prosperous. He cannot make us fail finally, but yet he makes us fall
free-quently: He does often bruise our heel, though he cannot break our head.
He blovveth the coals of lust in David, and how quickly does it flame in
Adultery and Murder! Though Satan cannot break our backs, yet he may break our
bones, and send us halting to our graves; and therefore we had need walk
vvisely in temptation.

Sixthly, A man may withstand a temptation at one-time, and yet fall under the
same temptation at another: For the influences of grace may be more at one
time, and less at another; a man's own heart may be in a watchful frame at one
time, and in a sleepy, carnal frame at another; and Satan then comes soonest
when the heart is securest. Mark. 13.37.
It is the believers duty to watch always, but the believer is not always in
that duty.

Now if Satan comes once and finds him watching, he will go and come again
when he may find him sleeping.

Satan is not for ever conquered, because he is once resisted; What he fails
in at one time, he attempteth at another. When he left Christ, it was with an
intent to come again, Luke 4.13. when the devil had ended all the temptation,
he departed from him, for how long? for a season; (...), until another
opportunity; for he set upon him again, Joh. 14.30.

We shall never be out of Satan's reach, till we come into the bosom of Jesus
Christ.

As Christ sometimes leaves us, and then returns again; so does Satan.
Christ leaves us to make us act grace, and walk more strictly; Satan leaves
us to make us lay aside grace and walk more remisly.

When Christ departs, we are apt to be cast down, and to say We shall never see
comfort; When Satan departs, we are apt to be lifted up and to say, We shall
never see trouble. When as both withdraw, to return again; Christ withdraws
that he may return with the greater mercy, and Satan withdraws that he may
return with the greater fury.

7. In every temptation the soul runs a great hazard of eternal destruction:
The design of the Tempter is the ruin of the Believer: As the design of Christ
in regeneration is to save the soul: so the design of Satan in temptation is to
destroy it. Our blessed Redeemer would fane make us as happy as himself in
heaven; and this cursed Tempter should fain make us as miserable as himself in
hell. He that kept not his own station, Jude v. 6.
grudgeth us ours; it is matter of his envy that we should possess that
habitation which he so sinfully left; and therefore his work on earth is to
hinder us in our working for heaven. He envieth us everlasting crowns of
Righteousness, when he himself lies in everlasting chains of darkness; and
therefore he would fane defile us here, that so he might destroy us for ever.

Surely therefore if at all times a Christian should walk wisely, then in time
of temptation more ospecially.

Query, But you will say, Where lies the wisdom of walking in a time of
temptation? Suppose I am much exercised with temptations of several kinds,
wherein does the wisdom of walking consist at such a time?

I shall answer the Question in thirteen particulars.

1. In submitting to the will of God in temptation. There is no tempration
befalls us but it is according to the will of God: God wills our trials,
that he may try our wills, whether they will how to his will or no: A Christian
should say the will of the Lord be done, Act. 21.14.
though he be undone; much more he should be contented when it is the will of
God he should be tried.

God orders, and disposes, and timeth all our temptations: Satan cannot do
what he pleases, but what God pleases.

He had not power to touch Job till God gave him leave; Job. 1.12.
and when he had power he could go no further then the wise God gave him order.
In temptation it is not what Satan will, but what God will.

Yet how frowardly do many of the children of God carry themselves in
temptation, speaking hardly of God, as if he had forsook them, because he
suffers Satan to buffet them?

Now then, if I submit to the will of God in temptation, and say, Although I
could rejoice to be rid of this temptation, yet it is not fit I should choose my
condition, then I walk wisely in temptation.

2. In disclaiming self-confidence, and not trusting to our own strength:
Self-confidence usually meets with some sad miscarriage for its recompense.
Satan desires no greater advantage against us, then to find us in our own
strength when he comes to assault us. Solomon says, He that trusts in his own
heart, is a fool; Why a fool? Pro. 28.26
because he is sure to be deceived. So foolish was Peter; Though all men
forsake thee, Mat. 26.33.
yet will not I. What? deny my Master the Son of God, my Redeemer! What deny
the blessed Jesus? Thou art Christ the Son of the living God; and therefore
though I die, though I should die with thee, and 16.16.
yet will I not deny thee; and yet who forsook Christ so sadly as Peter? and
26.35.
he does only forsake him, but forswear him.

The strength of a Believer lies not in himself but in his Savior; God can
overcome Satan without our hands, but we cannot so much as defend our selves
without his arm: He can do all things without us, we can do nothing without
him. 18 am. 15.29.
He is the strength of Israel.

And therefore when the Apostle lays down directions for the withstanding
temptations, he gives this as his first counsel, Be strong in the Lord, Ephesians.
6.10.
and in the power of his might; Gods power is greater to help us, then Satan's
is to hurt us: As without Gods leave he cannot tempt us; so when he does tempt,
God will not leave us; when Satan does his vvorst to throvv us down, God
will do his best to make us stand: As we are kept by the power of God to
salvation; 1 Pet. 1.5.
so we are kept by the power of God from temptation.

Now then, if in temptation I disclaim self-confidence, and rest upon divine
omnipotence, if I cease from my own strength, and rely upon the strength of
God, then do I walk wisely in temptation.

3. In distinguishing between temptations from God and Satan. Sometimes God
tempts, and sometimes Satan; God tempts for good ends, Satan for evil ends.
God tempts to try grace, Deuteronomy. 13.3. The Lord your God proves you, to know
whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart.

Thus it is said, God tempted Abraham, Genesis 22.1. It was to try his faith and
obedience.

Thus he tempted Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. God left him to try him, that he
might know all that was in his heart.

But Satan tempts to destroy grace, not to try it.

As the design of temptation is the ruin of grace, so God is said to tempt no
man. Ian. 1.13.


But as the design of temptation is the trial of grace, so God tempts every
man. 1 Pet. 1.97


God tempts for probation, Satan for reprobation; God when he tempts,
comes with his fan, to fan out the chaff and the rubbish, Mat. 1.12.
but to keep in and preserve the wheat; but Satan when he tempts, comes with
his sieve, Luc. 22.31
to let out the wheat, but to keep in the rubbish: The fan casts out the
worst and keeps in the best; but the sieve keeps in the worst, and casts
out the best. So God by his temptations purges corruption out of us, and
nourishes grace in us: But Satan by his temptations labors to confirm sin,
and weaken grace.

God tempts because he would have us stand, Satan tempts to make us fall:
God tempts to purge out sin, that when Satan tempts he may not take
advantage againstus by our sin; God tempts to cleanse corruption out of us,
Ioh. 14.10
that so when Satan comes he may find nothing in us; God tempts us because
he loves us; Satan tempts because he hates us: God tempts to make us like
Christ; Satan tempts to make us leave Christ.

Now then, if I distinguish aright between temptations from God, and
temptations from Satan; between those that are only to try grace, and those
that are to destroy grace; that I may improve the former, and resist the
latter, then do I walk wisely in temptation.

4. It is wisdom not to bring our own reason to the temptation, but to bring
the temptation to the blood of Christ. Vain man thinks in the strength of his
own reason to out-argue the Tempter; this is to shoot with Satan in his own
bow. To argue with him is as the proverb has it, To light a candle to the
Devil.

Yet how ready are we to parley with him! when he knocks at the door, how apt
are we to look out at the window!

Eve ventureth to treat with him about the forbidden fruit, and from treating
she falls to eating, Pro. 6.27.28.
to the ruin of a whole world at once. Can a man take fire in his bosom, and
his clothes not be burnt? Can he go upon hot coals and his feet not be burned?

Reason is but a carnal weapon, but our enemy is spiritual; Ephesians 6.12
and therefore the weapons of our warfare must not be carnal; 2 Cor. 10.4
he must be spiritually subdued: The blood of Christ can quench temptation,
Reason cannot. Satan says to carnal Reason, as the evil spirit did to Sceva's
sons, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are you? and it leaped upon them
and overcame them. Act. 19.14; 15, 16.


Bring Reason to a temptation, and it bears down that; but bring a temptation
to the blood of Christ, and it cannot stand before that.

Now then if I oppose not temptations by my own Reason, but bring them to the
blood of Christ to extinguish them, then I walk wisely in temptation.

5. It is wisdom to lay in provision in time of temptation; To store the heart
with somewhat that may keep temptation out. There is Gospel provision, which if
laid up in the heart, will keep our all temptation from entering to hurt; Mat.
26.^^
and that is the sense of the love of God in Christ. Though we be under
temptation, yet this will keep us from entering into temptation.

sense of the love of God in Christ does constrain grace, and restrain sin; it
strengthens the new man, and weakens the old; and there temptation never
prospers, where grace flourishes, and sin withers.

Now then, If I lay in suitable provision in time of temptation, that may be a
help to preserve me when Satan does assault me, then I walk wisely in
temptation.

6. The wisdom of walking in temptation lies in fighting Satan with Scripture
weapons. There is not a temptation of Satan which the word does not arm you
against.

It is storied that a certain Jew should have poisoned Luther, but was
prevented by his picture which was sent to Luther with a warning from a
faithful friend, that he should take heed of such a man when he saw him; by
which means Luther knew the murderer, and prevented the design.

The Scripture does not only warn us, and show us the face of those lusts,
which Satan works by to destroy us, but it armeth us against them: Satan is
never so worsted as when Scripture weapons are used: Those shafts strike Satan
to the quick that are taken out of Gods quiver. 1 Samuel 17.40, 9.
David with stones out of the Brook slays Goliath, that enemy of Israel; so with
stones out of the Brook of Scripture may we conquer this enemy of God and souls.

When the Lord Christ was forty days together combating with Satan, Luke ^^.
he uses only Scripture arguments.

When he tempts him to turn stones into bread, Christ answers him with
Scripture, It is written, Man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God, Mat. 4.4.

When he tempts him to cast himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple, Christ
urges Scripture again, It is written, Thon shall not tempt the Lord thy God,
verse. 7.

And so when he tempts him to worship him, still Christ opposes Scripture to
the Tempter. It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve, verse. 10.

Thus the Lord Christ fetches arguments out of Scripture, and with these puts
to flight the Tempter.

The word of God has a power in it to quash all Satan's temptations; do but
oppose his assaults with Scripture commands, and he will never be able to
stand. And therefore the Apostle gives good advice in this very case of
opposing Satan, Ephesians. 6.17. Take the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of
God.

So that if in temptation I oppose Satan with scripture weapons, if I urge
scripture injunctions against the serpents suggestions, and so set Gods wisdom
against Satan's cunning, then I walk wisely in temptation.

7. It is wisdom to look upon temptation as broken and overcome in Christ, and
to consider Satan as a conquered enemy: This will not make us the less careful,
but the less fearful: All the temptations that befall the people of God, are
already overcome in Christ; For this purpose the Son of God was manifested,
that he might destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.5.

The Lord Christ was a common person, and that not only in his death, but in
his life; Christ was not born for himself, but for us; Isa. 9.6.
To us a child is born, to us a son is given. Romans 5.19. Gal. 3.13.
He did not obey for himself but for us; By the obedience of one shall many be
made righteous. He did not dye and suffer for himself but for us; He was made a
curse for us.

Whatever evil Christ did undergo, he underwent it for us; he was tempted for
us, he broke Satan's head for us. As when Adam was tempted, he being a common
person, we were all tempted in him, and he falling in the temptation, we fell
in him. Omnes er amus ille unus homo. So when the Lord Christ lived in the
world, and was tempted by Satan, we were tempted in him, and when he conquered,
we conquered in him; so that we are more then conquerors through him that loved
us, Romans 8.37. Satan now through the victory of the cross is a conquered enemy:
He fights against the members of Christ with broken weapons; for the Captain of
our salvation has spoiled Principalities and powers. Col 2.15.


So that if I look upon temptation as broken, and Satan's power as spoiled and
overcome by the death and cross of Christ, then I walk wisely in temptation.

8. If the temptation travel with a dilemma or difficulty on each hand, and the
Christian chooses that part of the dilemma that is for the glory of God, though
grievous to the flesh, rather then that part that is profitable and gratifying
to the flesh, but tending to the dishonor of God, then he walks wisely.

Sometimes the people of God are brought to such straights by temptation, that
either they must sin much to avoid suffering, or suffer much to avoid sinning:
Their own carnal advantage and outward safety lies through sin, but the glory
of God lies through suffering.

Such a dilemma was that which the three children were brought into by their
temptation, Dan. 3.11. they must either turn or burn; either they must bow to
the image the King had set up, or burn in the furnace he had caused to be heat.

If they worshipped the Image, they should obey the Kings command, but then
they broke the command of God; if they did not worship, they should provoke the
Kings displeasure, but then they kept in Gods favor: If they did worship, they
dishonored the God of Sion; if they did not worship they provoked the King of
Babylon.

Here is the dilemma; now see how wisely they choose, verse. 17, 18. If it be so,
our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the fiery furnace, and he will
deliver us out of thine hand, O King: But if not, be it known unto thee, O
King, we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the Image which thou have set up.

What a choice spirit is this? not found in every house where the profession of
Religion is hanged out at the door. How many in this hour of temptation are
caught in this ensnaring trial? what say some? Come let us rather conform to
the ceremonies, then lose our liberties; rather let us bow at the name of
Jesus, then lose all for the sake of Jesus; it is better to baptize with the
cross, then to bear the cross; and to wear a Surplice, then to pinch our
carcass.

Thus many (it is to be feared) destroy their consciences, to keep their
places; and conform against their judgments, to preserve their profits; this
is as if a man to save his hat should lose his head, or as if a man should sink
the ship to avoid the storm. Alas poor souls, how are they fallen in the hour
of temptation!

Suppose a man were put to this, either he must swear canonical obedience, or
he must be put to silence; either he must prostitute the seals to all, or he
must preach to none; Either he must take up the ceremonies, or lay down his
Ministry; This would be a great temptation, which part ought a man to choose in
this case?

Why, you will say, It is pity but such a man should preach; I but it is
greater pity that he should sin; you will say, He may do much good in his
Ministry would he but conform. I but he must not do evil that good may come on
it. Romans 3.8.
If I suffer for conscience sake, God is honored; but if I sin for Gods sake,
he is dishonored; for my lie cannot advance his glory; and 3.7.
and therefore the resolution of the three children is a good pattern, we will
not worship the image thou have set up.

So that if when temptation brings me under a dilemma, I choose that part of the
dilemma which is for Gods glory, though to my loss, rather then that part which
is for Gods dishonor and my gain, then I walk wisely in temptation.

9. Wisdom lies in a diligent endeavor to improve grace by temptation. As the
Israelites were multiplied by being oppressed; Exodus 1.12
it is said, The more they were afflicted, the more they grew; so a true
Israelite, the more he is tempted, the more is his grace increased; as trees
are the deeper rooted by the wind that most shakes them, so believers are most
strengthened by the temptations that most try them.

Temptation is the Devils bellows which he brings to blow out the spark of that
heavenly fire that is in us; but as the breath of the bellows makes the fire
flame the more, so the blasts of temptation make grace increase the more. God
has an overruling hand over temptation, and he turns them to good when Satan
intends them for hurt, and makes grace prosper by that very means whereby Satan
hopes to make it wither. Thus can God out-shoot Satan in his own bow.

So then, if I labor to grow in grace in time of temptation, if I turn a
tempting season into a growing season, then do I walk wisely in temptation.

10. It is wisdom in temptation to use no indirect means for riddance, but to
rest upon the promise for deliverance. There is no temptation that can befalus,
but God has made a suitable promise to relieve us; that so we might not
sinfully deliver our selves, but patiently rest on him for deliverance.

He has promised to tread Satan under our feet, to bind the strong man, Romans
16.20.
not to suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, but to make a way for
us to escape, Cor. 10.
that we may be able to bear it. O that Christians would study the promise, and
converse much with the promise in time of temptation. Heb. 13.5.
God has promised never to for sake us, and therefore neyer let us forsake the
promise.

There are three things very remarkable in every promise.

The faithfulness of the Father who gives it. Owen.


The grace of the Son which is the matter of it.

The power of the Spirit which accomplisheth it.

The faithfulness of the Father makes the promise good to us. The grace of the
Son makes the promise sweet to us. The efficacy of the Spirit make the promise
good in us.

So that the promise is a sure resting place for a tempted soul.

Now then, if in temptation I use no indirect means for riddance, but rest upon
the promise for deliverance, then do I walk wisely in temptation.

11. The wisdom of walking in temptation lies in not yielding to temptation.
Temptation from Satan is our suffering, but it is from our selves if it becomes
our sin: The Devil may flatter us, but he cannot force us; He may provoke, but
without our consent he cannot prevail: He may tempt us unto sin, but he cannot
tempt us into sin: He could never come into the house if we did not open the
door: Iam 1.^.
Every man is tempted; when? when he is assaulted? no, but when he is drawn
away of his own lust and onticed. The true procreating cause of sin is in every
man's soul; Satan is the Father of temptation, but the heart is the Mother of
sin. Suggestion without could do nothing, were it not for corruption within; it
is not calliditas diaboli decipientis, Aug. de ^ec.orig l 2 ap 37.
but voluntas hominis consentientis; outward crast could do nothing without
inward lust; Satan woes our wills, but we will our own woes.

(...), the fire is in our wood, though it be the Devils flame; we may do the
Devil wrong (as bad as he is) to lay all our sins at his door, as though we
were innocent; For though the Bastard be gotten by him, it is conceived and
brought forth by us.

This is an old trick, as old as Adam: when God asks him, Go^. 3.11, 12.
Have thou eaten of the tree I forbad thee? mark how he shifteth it off; The
woman which thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the fruit of the tree and
I did eat. And when God comes to the woman and asks, What is this that thou
have done? says she, the Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. Adam shifteth the
fault from himself to the woman, and she from her self to the Serpent.

But had not they been willing, what could the Serpent have done? if we are
tempted, it is Satan's fault; but if we yield, it is our guilt.

Sceva at the siege of Dyrrachium so long alone resisted Pompeys Army, that he
had two hundred and twenty darts sticking in his shield, and lost one of his
eyes, and yet gave not over till Caesar came in to his rescue. Deuteronomy. 22.23, to
2^.
Under the Law if a man met a Damsel and lay with her, if she consented she
dyed, but if she cried out she was innocent and acquitted. So if when Satan
assaults us, he obtaines consent from us, we die; for fin when it is finished,
brings forth death; Iam. 1.15.
But if we consent not, but cry out to Christ for help against temptation, we
shall be delivered.

So that, if I stand out and yield not when temptation comes, if I consent not
to the sin the temptation leads to, if though Satan persuades, yet he prevails
not, then I walk wisely in temptation.

12. The wisdom of walking in temptation lies in praying much, when we are
tempted much; this is the Lord Christ's own counsel, Watch and pray, Mat. 16.41.
that ye enter not into temptation.

Prayer is faiths recourse to the fountain of strength, to fetch help and
succor against the Tempter; in praying much, when we are tempted much, we
counter work Satan in his design; for one of his great designs in temptation,
is, to stop the stream of prayer.

Christ should be most sought when we are most assaulted. Paul had a strong
temptation, and he made strong supplication; The thorn in his flesh caused the
groans of his Spirit: The Messenger of Satan coming to buffet him, made him
send many a Message to Christ to come and support him. For this I besought the
Lord thrice, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8.
(that is often) that it might depart from me. When Satan does his worst in
tempting, a Christian should do his best in praying.

There are four things especially which should be the matter of our Prayer in
Temptation.

Pray that our grace may be above our trial.

Pray that Temptation may be first Sanctified to us, then removed from us.

Pray that though we suffer by temptation, yet we may not sin in temptation,
deliver us from evil.

Pray that Christ would not be so far from us, when Satan is so near to us;
that when we are under the greatness of Satan's malice, we may be under the
experience of Christ's promise; who has said, my grace is sufficient for thee.
2 Cor 12.


Faiths diligence for preparation, in the hour of the souls temptation, lies
much in supplication; Satan may tempt us, but if he find a praying frame of
heart, he cannot hurt us.

I have heard of a malicious woman who gave her self to the Devil, provided
that he would do a mischief to such a Neighbor whom she mortally hated; the
Devil went once and again to do his errand, but at last returns and tells her
he could do no hurt to that man; for when ever he came, he found him either
reading the Scriptures or praying. There is no voice God loves better, or that
Satan likes worse then the voice of prayer. One of the fathers calls it Diaboli
Flagellum, the Devils whip to torment him; The Apostle when he would teach us
to stand against Satan, bids us, pray always. Ephesians. 6.18.
He that prays much is seldom taken in sin, but he is never taken with sin;
he seldom acts it, but he never likes it.

Now then if temptation does not make me lay aside duty, if I turn times of
temptation, into times of supplication, if when I am in greatest danger I run
to Christ for help and succor, then do I walk wisely in temptation.

13. It is wisdom when Satan is tempting, for us to be believing; all the
Christians strength and comfort is fetched without doors, and he has none to
send of his errand but Faith.

In temptation thy work is to believe, and then God will do the rest. Therefore
says David, At what time I am afraid, Psa. 56.
I will trust in thee, he tells God he will make bold to step into his house,
when taken in a storm, and does not question his welcome.

It is one means of preservation to believe that God will preserve us; As the
duty that Satan hates most, is the duty of praying; so the grace that Satan
opposes most is the grace of believing; all his temptations are levelled at the
ruin of Faith.

He may tempt thee to sins against the Law, to uncleanness, unjustice, etc. but
this is not his ultimate end, his great design lies against thy interest in
the Gospel; what ever sin he tempts thee to, his aim is not only to draw thee
to commit that sin, but to ruin thy faith, and so rob thee of all good and
benefit by Jesus Christ. This was his design in sifting Peter; and this the
Lord Christ foresaw, and therefore tells Peter, I have prayed for thee, Luke 22
32
that thy faith fail not. And hence it is that the Apostle exhorts us, Above
all to take the shield of faith, Ephesians. 6.16.
wherewith we shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. Every
grace is of use in this combat, but faith is above all. 1 Job. 5.4.
This is the victory that overcomes, even our Faith.

Faith has two hands, a receiving hand and a working hand, and the receiving,
hand releiueth the working hand; the receiving hand fetches in from Christ,
the working hand improveth it for Christ; in temptation the receiving hand
fetches in strength and succor, and the working hand uses this strength
whereby we conquer; could we but believe, Satan could never hurt us; for then
in our greatest conflicts the Lord Christ would help us.

There are eight things we should exercise our Faith upon in temptations.

1. Believe the great efficacy of the blood and Cross of Christ to quench
temptations.

2. Believe that thou have interest in all the fullness and merits of Christ,
and say when thou art in temptation, Christ is my wisdom, right cousness, 1
Cor. 1.10
sanctification and redemption.

3. Believe that when thou art in Satan's hands, Satan is then in Gods hands.

4. Believe that the promises run with the sweetest streams, when Satan raises
the greatest storms.

5. Believe what spiritual assistances there are at hand, to help and encourage
us in the combat; the love of God, the grace of Christ, the power of the
spirit, and besides all this, Psalm. 4.7. Heb. 1.14.
The good Angels guard us by Gods commission, when the bad Angels molest us by
Gods permission.

6. Believe that the Lord Christ has learned to have compassion, Heb. 1.19.
and 6.5.
by his own trial in the day of his humiliation.

7. Luke 17.32 Ioh. 17.15
Believe that while we are conflicting on earth with the tempter; Christ is
interceding for us in heaven with the Father.

8. Believe the glorious recompenses that are appointed for all such as
overcome when they are tempted; Rev. 2.26. and ^.12.
to him that overcomes will I give to sit with me on my threne, as I also
overcame and am set down with my Father on his throne. Rev. 3.21. Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life, Rev. 2.10.

Now then if when I am tempted much, I trust much; if I turn times of
temptation into times of believing, then do I walk wisely in temptation.

And thus I have done with this third season of walking wisely, and that is in
time of temptation.

Now the Lord help you and me to pray for, Iam. 1.^.
and seek after this spiritual wisdom, that we may be fortified against
temptation, 2 Timothy 3.15.
and so made wise to Salvation.

FINIS.

