Memoires Of the Affairs of FRANCE, During the Reign of the present KING LEWIS
the XIV. CONTAINING The most noted Exploits of the now Prince of Conde, the
late Marshall de Turenne, and all the chief Commanders in the French Armies.
Done out of French.

Ex pede Hercules. Licensed May the 10th, 1675.

Roger L'Estrange.



London: Printed by J. C. for T. Dring, at the Harrow at the corner of
Chancery Lane in Fleet Street. 1675.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THis brief Account of many great Actions, Translated out of the French History
reduite en Sommaire, may satisfy the Curious as to the Affairs of France under
her active Monarch who now governs, till a more elaborate History, and
consequently more correspondent to the Grandeur of its Subject gives a fuller
and particular account to the public

It Is possible, some may think our Author writes with too much concern and
interest of his own party: such upon due consideration, will acknowledge this
the best, or, if you had rather, the most jante of all the defects proper to
that people; and that the French are to be applauded in this particular, more
than some of their Neighbour-Nations, that they always speak the best of their
King and Country; not seeking to find fault with the Royal Conduct, but to
magnify it rather more than less, than the true merit of the Actions.

Historical Abbreviations, though in a small Volume, are not always of the
least use: for beside the Example of Justin the Epitomizer of Trogus among the
Ancients, we have in this our Age, the judicious Dr. Heylin, who with much
judgment and fidelity, has in this sort of Miniature, drawn to the life the
Tragical History of our late Sovereign, of ever-Sacred Memory.

There is no need of a further Preface, than only to admonish the Reader that
the Dates and Timing of things, so often occurring in this short History, must be
understood according to the Foreign (or new) Style, ten days more forward than
ours. Farewell.

J. W.

Some Books lately printed for T. Dring, at the Harrow at Chancery-lane-end in
Fleet Street.
1. A Relation of the Conference between Will. Laud Archbishop of Canterbury
and Mr. Fisher the Jesuit. The third Edition, in Folio. Price 8 s.

2. Systema Agriculturae; the mystery of Husbandy discovered: Treating of the
newest and most advantageous ways of improving all sorts of Lands, in Folio.
Price 8 s.

3. Englands Eminent Danger and only Remedy: Faithfully considered and
represented, in Octavo. Price 2 s. 6 d.

4. Ancilla Pietatis; or the Handmaid to Private Devotion. The ninth Edition,
in Octavo. Price 4 s.

5. Poems upon several occasions, in English and Latin. By John Milton; with a
small Tract of Education, to Mr. Hartlib, in Octavo. Price 2 s. 6 d.

6. The French Cook, prescribing the newest ways of Cookery. The third Edition,
in Octavo. Price 2 s. 6 d.

7. The Four Ages of England, or the Iron Age, with other select Poems written
in the year 1648. in Octavo. Price 1 s.

8. The Devout Communicant exemplified, in his behavior before, at, and after
the Sacrament. The third Edition, much corrected, in Twelves. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Plays.
Love and Honor. Unfortunate Lovers. Thierry and Theodoret. Woman-Hater.
Changeling. Albumazar.
Plays lately Printed.
Love-tricks, or the School of Complements. Com. Hero and Leander. Com. Amorous
Prince, or the curious Husband. Com. Town-shifts, or the Suburb-Justice. Com.
Six days Adventure, or the new Vtopia. Com. Dumb Lady, or the Farrier made
Physician. C. Old Troop, or Monsieur Raggou. Com. The Rehearsal. Gentleman
Dancing Master. Com. Mamamouchi, or the Citizen turned Gentleman. Com. Fatal
Jealousy. Trag. Morning-ramble, or the Town-humours. Com. Empress of Morocco.
Trag. Reformation. Com. Careless Lovers. Com. Macbeth. Trag. Siege of
Constantinople. Trag. Dutch Lover. Com. Country-wife. Com.
Now in the Press.
Woman turned Bully. Com.
THere is now in the Press both a Latin and English Dictionary, composed by
Tho. Hollyoke D. D. Son of Francis Hollyoke, the Learned Enlarger of Rider's
Dictionary; which said Dictionary is in great part already printed in a fair
large Folio, and will in a short time be finished and published, and will
contain above 6000 words in the English, and 2000 in Latin, more than has
been in any Dictionary yet extant: Besides, it will have the Phrases, the
Customs, Habits and Ceremonies of Countries, for the better understanding of
the Latin Historians; not only fit for Schoolboys, but necessary and useful
for all Students and Scholars whatsoever; and will be sold by Tho. Dring, at
the corner of Chancery Lane in Fleet Street, and others.

Goldman's Dictionary lately printed with large Additions, in 4o, and sold by
T. Dring.

ERRATA.
PAge 11. line 22. read Tournon. p. 19. l. 1. r. at the same time. p. 67. l.
19. r composed it. p. 71. l. 7. r. his Eminency. p. 71. l. 11. r. deceased. p.
79. l. 16. dele [to] p. 90. l. 13. r. disadvantagious.

MEMOIRES OF THE Reign of LEWIS the 14th The present KING of France.
Anno 1643.
LEwis 14th Eldest son of Lewis 13th, being in the fifth year of his Age,
succeeded to the Crown; the 65th in number of our Kings.

The King never dies in France; uno avulso, non deficit alter. Therefore
immediately after the Court of Parliament had assembled, the King was received,
accompanied with the Queen Regent his Mother, Monseigneur the Duke of Anjou the
King's Brother, Monsieur the Duke of Orleans his Uncle, and Monsieur the Prince
of Conde; where the Queen was declared Regent during the Kings minority, and
Monsieur the Duke of Orleans General of all the Forces.

No sooner was the King seated in the Throne Royal, thereby to take possession
of the Crown of his Ancestors, but he saw himself under the shadow of
victorious Palms, brought from Rocroy by the Duke of Enguien General of his
Triumphant Army.

On the 9 of May, the Duke of Enguien having Rendezvouz'd his Troops on the
Banks of the Oise, and the Sum, received advice, that the Enemy under the
command of the Count d' Isemburg, had invested Rocroy the second past: upon
this intelligence he sends immediately the Sieur Gassion to give some diversion
to their Attempts; who on his arrival, having made their chief Force draw
together, took that opportunity to put 100 men into the Town; and this Succor
gave the Besieged occasion to retake their Outworks, which the Enemy had
quitted. The 18 of May, was resolved on to relieve the place effectually; to
that end the Duke of Enguien, assisted by the Marshall de l'Hospital, and the
Mareschals of the Camp, appeared with his Cavalry that day about two of the
clock afternoon, and immediately on his arrival caused his Army to draw into
Battalia. At five in the evening the Enemies Cannon began to play, and cut off
many of our men; but they were soon answered by our Artillery, which appeared
as the Lightning to that Thunder which was to follow. The night coming on, by
order of a Council of War, the dispute was deferred till next morning the 19 of
May. During this interval, a French Cavalier in the Enemies Army came over to
ours, and gives advice to the Duke of Enguien that General Beck was to arrive
the next morning by 7 a clock with 1000 Horse, and 3000 Foot, to reinforce the
Enemy: hereupon it was resolved to fight by break of day; which no sooner
appeared, but the General having taken the Right wing of the Army, and the
Marshall de l' Hospital. the Left; about a quarter of a League from Rocroy,
they disposed themselves to do their best.

The Enemies Army being composed of 25000 men, viz. 17000 Foot, and 8000 Horse;
the Infantry commanded by the Comte d' Isemberg, and the Cavalry by the Duke
d'Alberquerque, and the Comte de Fontaines Marshall General du Camp under
Fancisco de Mello General for the King of Spain. The French Army was 14000
Foot, and 6000 Horse. The Duke of Enguien having visited the several Divisions,
and encouraged the Officers to perform their Duty, the Skirmish begins, and
1000 Musketeers of the Enemy are forced to give ground. On the Left, the Sieur
de la Ferte-Seneterre charging the Enemy, the Combat was so obstinate, that he
was Wounded in ten several places, and taken prisoner, though a while after
rescued. During this advantage, the Enemy took our Cannon; but the Marshall de
l' Hospital with his succors charged and recovered them again: In this lively
action he was wounded in the Arm with a Musket Shot, so that he was forced to
leave the fight. This accident gave the Enemy such advantage, that once more
they took our Cannon, and used them against us: but the Baron de Siron
Marshall de Camp of the Cavalry having a body of reserve, rallies our men, and
stops the Enemie's success. In the mean while our Right wing, having routed the
Cavalry, attaques the Spanish Foot, which she cuts in pieces. In fine, the
Sieur Gassion coming up, they are all put to the Rout. We lost there about 20
Officers, and as many Wounded. On the Enemies side, beside a great number of
Dead of lesser note, the Comte de Fontaines was killed, and the Comte d'
Isemberg wounded to death; and 6000 Prisoners, among whom 200 Officers and 20
pieces of Cannon.

From this signal Victory, which has insencibly carried this Discourse beyond
its intended Bounds, we will proceed to the Funerals of Lewis the Just; the
preparatives for which, were made the 22 of July: the day preceding ended the A
space of forty days, during which time Prayers are continually made for the
Dead.
Quarantaine, during all which time the Queen Mother remained shut up, thereby
to give place more opportunely to the sensible regrets for the loss of her
Spouse. Monday was appointed for the Funeral-Ceremonies, at which did assist
the Princes, Prelates, and Sovereign Courts of Justice. The Kings Body was
placed in the midst of a Chapel all flaming with Lights, and the Solemn
Service made at St. Denis in France, where also the Body was deposited in the
Vault of his Predecessors.

The 29th of July, Madam the Duchess of Enguien was happily delivered of a
Son, who bears the Name of Duke d'Albert.

The 2 of August, the Duke of Beaufort, youngest of the two Sons of the Duke of
Vendome, was arrested, and imprisoned in the Bois de Vincennes.

The Duke of Enguien, after the Victory at Rocroy, and the taking of Cirq,
returns to Paris with the Comte de Rantzau; and on the 7th of October, the King
and Queen Regent were pleased to leave the Louvre, to inhabit at the Palais
Royal: about which time also was sent to the Abbey of St. Germains desprez, one
of St. Placidus's Arms, by the great Master of Malta; which Relic was
solemnly received by the Religious.

The Civil troubles in England continuing, the Comte de Harcour was sent on the
part of his most Christian Majesty to compose, if possible, the discontents
between the King of great Britain and his Parliament; but he found the Spirits
of the Dissenters so little disposed that way, that he returned without success.

About, the same time a crew of Raskals at Rovergue, who took the name of
Croquans.
Devourers, did raise a Tumult, which notwithstanding was soon after suppressed
by the Comte de Nouaille.

As our Kings have always had this advantage, to give Laws to Strangers, and
not to receive them; so also have they been constant Mediators of Concord among
Christian Princes, and particularly of the reconciliation of the Duke of Parma
with his Holiness, of which the Treaty was concluded at Paris, and the Articles
signed by the Cardinal Dongly Plenipotentiary for his Holiness, and by the
Cardinal Bichy Plenipotentiary on the part of his Majesty for the Duke of
Parma. In which Treaty he continued the Title enjoyed by our former Kings, of
Arbiters of Christian Princes. A while after, les Sieurs de Servient, and
d'Avaux, Plenipotentiaries for his Majesty, parted from France to conclude the
Peace, which in fine was presently effected.

The 21 of November, Monsieur Lesoit Doctor and professor at the Sorbonne, who
for his singular merits had been named to the Bishopric of Chartres, was
consecrated at Paris.

The Marshall de Guebriant, a Breton, whose valor was signalized in the last
King's Reign, being now at the siege of Rothweil in Germany, was wounded with a
Faulcon-shot the 24th of November, of which he died; his Body being conveyed to
Paris, by the King's express order, his Funerals were performed with great
solemnity.

Anno 1644.
The Year 1644. was no less fertile in producing new Laurels for France than
the former. But before we attempt to display these Victories, it is not
impertinent to observe, by the by, the Death of Anne de Montasie, Widow of
Charles of Bourbon Comte of Soissons, Prince of the Blood, and great Master of
France, who died at Paris, aged 67 years: she left by her Will, 100000 Crowns
to the Chevalier de Soissons, Bastard-son to the deceased Comte de Soissons,
who was slain in the Battle of Sedan.

The Town of Gravelines was besieged by Monsieur the Duke of Orleans, who
invested it the 6. of June, assisted by the Dukes of Guise and Nemours, the
Comte de Harcour Eldest son of the Duke d'Elbeuf, and the Mareschals de la
Meleraye, de Gassion, de Cosse, and the Marquess d'Alegre. This Siege may be
placed in the number of the most difficult, such was the stout resistance of
the besieged; which notwithstanding had no power to stop the Victories of
France. Here in one of our Attaques fell the Marquess de Nangis. In fine, the
Besieged under the Conduct of Ferdinando de Solis, finding himself out of all
hope of Relief, which Picolomini had once made a show of giving, surrendered to
the Duke of Orleans the 29th of July. And at the same time died Urban 8th,
after he had possessed the Holy Seat 21 years.

Now also past an Arrest in the Parliament of Paris, prohibiting all Physicians
whatsoever, except those of the University of Paris, to administer in that City.

In Germany, the Duke of Enguien desiring to relieve Friburg, besieged in
August by the Enemy, had no sooner begun his March on this design, but he
understood of the Surrender: this news inflamed his courage to such a degree,
that he resolved to recompense the loss of the Town by a Fight; in which he
succeeded, remaining Master of the field, though not without considerable loss
on our side. In pursuit of this Victory he besieges Philipsburg the 24 of
August, which a little before we had lost, and in less than 3 Weeks forces
Gasper de Bamberg the Governor to surrender. We lost there the Comte de
Journon Governor of Dauphine, and the Marquess of Pluvaud, with 70 Soldiers.
Spire at the same time submitted to the King's obedience, and received a
Garrison of French.

Amidst these serious relations, let us mingle something of sport, though in
truth it was ended with a sad Catastrophe. A Citizen of Paris named Bertou,
being at Vitry, a Town two Leagues from Paris, with several other jovial
Companions, undertook to present a Comedy, where Bertou should personate a Dead
man; who according to the design of the Play, was to be raised to life by the
Enchantments of a certain Magician: But being touched with the Magicians Wand to
that purpose, he was found without motion. Never did Actor represent a dead
man's part more truly, for indeed he was dead. Which Accident gave matter for
serious consideration to all the company.

The 6 of October, Elizabeth Queen of Spain, Aunt to our King Lewis 14, dies at
Madrid, in the 42 year of her age, leaving two sons to Philip 4th, King of
Spain, her Spouse.

Anno 1645.
In the Month of February, the year 1645. begun with a horrid Tempest,
accompanied with such an Earthquake at Poictiers, as proved the ruin of
several houses, and the more elevated parts of some Churches.

A few days after this, died at Paris, in the Abbey of St. Geneviefve, Messire
Francois de la Rochefaucault, aged 87 years, and Cardinal since the year 1607.
His Life was a model of Sanctity, and that by the testimony of the most
virtuous persons of his age. The Pope himself, Urban 8th, who having granted
him something which he desired, gave him besides this Elogie: Behold here all
that remains of Sanctity, Piety, and Truth, in our Apostolic College. Long
time before his Death he Regulated the Abbey of St. Geneviefve of Paris, to
which Father Fore, deceased not long before him, was elected; which course is
still observed in the promotion of the Abbot, the place being Triennial.

A while after this, the Comte de Harcour departed hence, to execute his charge
of Viceroy in Catalonia.

In the mean time the Comte du Plessis-Praslin lays siege to the Town of Rose
in the County of Roussilon, with 8000 Foot and 2000 Horse: Those of our party
that lay on that side of the Town next the Sea, were surprised with such an
impetuous and sudden storm, that the Galleys of the Sieur de St. Just, and the
Sieur de Birades, were dashed to pieces; the Officers leapt into the Sea, to
save themselves by swimming: This notwithstanding was no impediment to the
progress of the Siege.

Not long after was celebrated the Nuptials of Mademoiselle de Rohan sole
Heiress to the deceased Monsieur the Duke of Rohan, with Monsieur de Chabot of
the house of Chabots or Jarnac in Angoumois, youngest son to the Governor of
Leucate: this gave occasion to her Mother, who could never be wrought to
consent to this Match, to publish that she was not sole Heiress (though she had
formerly declared it by a public Instrument, when a Marriage was treated for
her Daughter with Monsieur the Comte of Soissons.) To this purpose she produces
an Infant about 15 years old, baptized at Paris in the Church of St. Paul, by
the Name of Tancrede, which she maintained to be son to the late Duke of Rohan;
and that she had always kept him concealed, fearing he might be taken from her,
while Monsieur the Duke of Rohan retired himself at Venice; that he had been
nursed in Normandy, in the house of the father of her Maistre de Hostel, and
after that transported into Holland. Upon this Case did afterward arise that
famous Pleading in the Parliament at Paris.

In Germany, the Marshall de Turenne was defeated by Jean de Were, who
commanded the Army of Bavarians, near to Mariandal, the 5 of May. The Colonels
Rose, the Vicomte de Lamed, and the Sieur Passage, Prisoners of War, were
carried to Ingolstat. The misfortune of this Battle was recompensed in
Catalonia, the Comte du Plessis-Praslin having taken the Town of Rose, which
the Spaniards surrendered upon honorable Compositions the 28th of May. After
this la Motte in Lorain, which Garrison did much damage upon our Frontiers, was
surrendered to the Marquess de Villeroy the first of July, by Clicot Governor
of the place, who was forced to capitulate after a long resistance. The 11 of
the same month the Fort of Mardike submitted to Monsieur the Duke of Orleans.

About the same time Mary de Jars, called la Damoiselle de Gournay, Kinswoman
to the Sieur Montagne (from whose Pen we have the Book of Essays) being aged 80
years, died at Paris. She surpast all her Sex in Learning, having left behind
her several Printed works: many great persons did honor her, among whom Justus
Lipsius.

The 6 of July, Messire Josias de Rantzau, descended of the Illustrious house
of the Comtes de Rantzau in Holstein, whom the course of our History has shown
in many generous Actions for the Service of France, received the Staff of
Marshall from the hand of Monsieur the Duke of Orleans, by the King's order.
He had lost in several Encounters one Eye, one Arm, and one Leg; which
notwithstanding had no ways diminisht the vivacity of his Spirit, and that as
well in a Council of War, as in a brave resolution in Engagements.

The Duke of Enguien continuing still the progress of his Arms, and marching up
into Germany, gave Battle near Nordlinguen the 3 of August, where the
Imperialists were defeated, General Mercy slain, with 4000 Enemies, and about
2000 taken Prisoners, among whom General Gleen. After this he takes
Nordlinguen, which submitted to discretion. We lost there the Marquess de
Pisani, son to the Marquess de Rombouillet, and the Sieurs de Gremonville and
Marson; beside the Marshall de Grammont, who remained Prisoner, with the
Marquess de la Chastre.

The Town of Bourburg near Gravelines, sometime part of the Appenage of the
house of Vendome, but of late Usurped by the Spaniard, being besieged by
Monsieur the Duke of Orleans, surrendered the 19th of August: 600 men went out
of it, who were conducted to Gravelines as Prisoners of War. And the 21 of the
same Month was taken Mont-Cassel.

Hereupon Bethune, a considerable place in Artois, surrendered by Composition
to the King's Army: and presently after, the Marshall de Rantzau invests the
Town of Lilers, and the Marshall de Gassion that of St. Venant; both which
surrendered not long after, and thereby made us Masters of the River Lis. In
the mean time the Duke of Guise went to take an exact view of the Town of
Armentiers.

Not long after this, the Sieur Mazerin, of the Order of St. Dominique, Master
of the Holy Palace, and at present Archbishop of Aix, departed from Rome for
France.

The 7 of September, the King went to the Parliament. At the same happened a
difference in the Convent of Reformed Jacobins, in the new street St Honor,
between the Parisians and Gascons of this Reformation: these demanding to be
separated from the other. The affair was urged to such a point, that the Queen
Regent gave order to the Chancellor, with certain Bishops and Counselors of
State, to compose it: who ordained, that there should be no separation; that
none of the Parisians might be sent into Gasconie; and that there should be but
8 Gascons in the said Monastery; four of which to be of the Province of St.
Maximin, and the other four of Toulouse.

The Town of Armentiers, through which passes the River Lis, and in which are
about 6000 Inhabitants, surrendered by Composition to the Mareschals de Gassion
and de Rantzau, on the 10 of December. In the mean while, by the mediation of
the most Christian King, a Peace was concluded between the Kings of Sweden and
Denmark; the Sieur de la Tuillerie being sent Ambassador Extraordinary on the
part of his Majesty.

The 20th of September, was concluded at the Castle of Fontainbleau the
Contract of Marriage between Vladislaus King of Poland, and Lowisa-Maria de
Gonzague, Daughter to the Duke of Mantua, and Aunt to him now living. The
Contract, among other things, contained, that the Princess Mary should have in
the name of Dow^y two Millions and one hundred thou^and Livres of French money;
of which sum, the most Christian King should pay six hundred thousand Livres in
free gift; and for the other fifteen hundred thousand Livres, was to be valued
her Title which she might have to succeed her Father in the Duchy of Mantua.
The King Authorized this affair as her Father, and the Queen Regent as her
Mother, who thereupon did sign the Contract.

On Sunday the 29th of October, the Ambassadors of Poland made their
magnificent entry into Paris, at the Gate of St. Anthony. The pomp was so full
of admiration to the eyes of all Spectators, (who filled the Highways for the
space of two Leagues from Paris) insomuch that several Authors have in their
Writings left us very ample descriptions of it. I shall therefore dwell no
longer on this particular of small consequence, having so large a Subject of
the Exploits of War, and our Generals of Armies. Let it suffice that the
Ambassadors were the Bishop of Varuic, and the Palatine of Posnanie, who the
Tuesday following had Audience of their Majesty's, and afterward of the
Princess, the designed Queen of Poland.

During these Secular Grandeurs, the Church Triumphed in three Conversions: One
was of Prince Edward Count Palatine of the Rhine, Husband to the Princess Anne
de Gonzague Sister to the Queen of Poland, who abjured Heresy between the
hands of Father Fore a Cordelier, the 3d of November. This was immediately
preceded by that of the Marquess de Montausier, who was made Governor of
Angoumois and Xaintonge. Afterward, in the month of July, at the siege of
Bourburg, followed that of the Comte de Rantzau, who (as may be seen in the
course of this History) after many Exploits of War, and in diverse Combats,
having left himself but half a Body, had notwithstanding a Soul remaining so
sound and entire, as to dispose himself into the Bosom of the Church; in which
affair also was employed Father Fore.

On the 20th of October, the Town of Balaguier submitted to the Comte de
Harcour Viceroy in Catalonia.

The 3d of September happened a great fire in the Town of Angers, which begun
in the house of a certain Pastry-Cook; the Flame raged with such violence, that
it did much damage to many Houses: this occasioned the concourse of many people
to assist. During the Bustle, somebody advised to cast into the midst of the
Flames certain little Scappularies of the Virgin of Mount Carmel; with which
action the fire was appeased and extinguished, yet the Scappularies themselves
no ways indamaged.

During this, they murmur at Rome to see the Arms of France placed over the
Palace-gates of Cardinal Barberin, and Dom Thadaeo his Brother Prefect of the
City: But the Cardinal Barberin gave an account of the action to his Holiness.

On the 5th of November, the Queen of Poland was espoused to the Prince
Palatine of Posnanie, representing the person of the King his Master. The
Ceremonies were performed at the Palace Royal by the Bishop of Varuic, with
permission of the Cardinal of Lions Grand Aumosnier of France, and the
Archbishop of Paris: And after Mass, was celebrated the Feast Royal.

And now the Marshall de Gassion, who commands the King's Army in the Low
Countries, cuts in pieces the Spanish Forces, takes 19 Ensigns, and 8 Cornets
of Horse, and 4000 Prisoners. At the same time the French Army, under the
conduct of the Marshall de Turenne, takes Treves by Composition, of which
place the Comte de Laverne was Governor. Afterward the Archbishop Elector of
the Empire was restored to his possession.

This year the Assembly of the Clergy was held at the great Augustins in Paris.
And at the same time was finished that painful Work, the great Bible, which
contains seven several Texts, viz. the Hebrew, the Samaritan, the Chaldee, the
Seventy, the Syriack, St. Jerome's Translation, and the Arabic: The Work
consists of ten Volumes, and was perfected at the expense of the Sieur le Jay.
This admirable Piece being now completed, was presented to the King and Qu.
Regent, in the presence of Monsieur the Duke of Orleans, Monsieur the Prince of
Conde, Monsieur the Cardinal of Mazarine, and Monsieur the Chancellor. Le Sieur
le Jay received for recompense a Brieve to be Councellor of State, and 2000
Livres of Pension.

The 27th of November, Louise-Marie de Gonzague Queen of Poland, parted from
Paris to find the King her Husband, with the Ambassadors: the King and Queen
Regent accompanied her almost to St. Denis in France, and bid her adieu before
the Chapel of Clignancourt, leaving with her the Sieurs de Rhodes and Sanctot,
great Masters of the Ceremonies, the Sieurs de Berlise Conductor of
Ambassadors, and de Lineage Captain-Ensigne to the Regiment of Guards, to
conduct her to the Frontiers; and to cause the same honor to be paid her in
all places where she past, as to the King and Queens own persons. Having
remained two days at St. Denis, she past on to Senlis, Compeigne, Noyon, and
from thence to Peronne, where she was received by the Sieur d'Hoquincourt the
Governor. Passing still further, she rested in the middle of a Field, where
the Sieurs de Rhodes, Sanctot, Berlize, and Lineage took their leave of her,
having first delivered her into the hands of the Comte de Buquoy General of the
Spanish Army. Hereupon a suspension of Arms was made for three days. In the
mean time the Sieur de Hoquincourt caused to be erected a Table, for the
entertainment of 80 persons. Near at hand stood six Muid, in French, 3 of which
make a Tun.
Hogsheads of Wine with their heads knocked out. The King of France's Health was
begun by the Governor of Cambray; the King of Spain's by the Sieur
d'Hoquincourt: and in like manner the Combat of the Glass continued till the
Queens departure; at which time the Comte de Buquoy presented her with a
Company of 100 Spaniards for her Guard.

On the 4th of December, the Fort Mardike, which the French had took like
Lions, the Spaniards surprised like Foxes.

When the Queen of Poland passed through the Country of Cologne, toward Vtrec,
there was presented to her sight a Damsel, named Anne Marie de Skurman, a
Virgin endowed with many handsome qualities; she understood and spoke diverse
Languages, as the Arabic, Turkish, Greek, French, and Spanish; but above all
Latin, in which she would answer to certain questions of Divinity and
Philosophy, in presence of the Queen and Ambassadors of Poland. Among several
other Works, she has writ two Latin Epistles, Translated into By Monsieur
Colletet, one of the Academy.
French; besides two other which she writ full of Eloquence, in our Language,
to the Queen, and to Monsieur the Cardinal of Richlieu, who thought it not
below them to answer her in the year 1638. This Damsel is accounted one of the
Wonders of the Age.

Anno 1646.
The 6th of February, in the year 1646. Cardinal Francis Barberin, Dom Thadaeo
his Brother Prefect of Rome, with four of his Children, and all their Train,
arrived in Provence, having left Rome upon jealousy arising from certain ill
actions on the part of their Enemies. Cardinal Antonio their Brother came
hither the month before.

In February, Cardinal d'Est Brother to the Duke of Modenae, was declared
Protector of France in the Court of Rome; whereupon the Breve was carried him
by Monsieur the Abbot of St. Nicholas les Angers, who at the same time parted
from Paris for Italy.

The 14th of March, upon a difference happening between the Religious de la
Mercy and their Prior, whom they refused to obey because he was a Gascon; it
was Ordered by solemn Arrest, that the Gascon should remain Prior, in regard
the Gascons are Frenchmen as well as the Inhabitants of the other parts of the
Kingdom.

The 21th of February, deceased at Paris M. Thomas de Gauffre Priest,
heretofore Master of the Chamber of Accounts, who succeeded in the pious
Offices of Father Claude Bernard, in visiting the Prisoners, and assisting the
Poor and Criminals at their Execution. His Body was buried at la Charity. Le
Sieur Juif, Son of that famous Chyrurgeon not long since deceased, succeeded
him in those charitable Offices.

The displeasure which the Duchess Dowager of Rohan had conceived at the
Marriage of her Daughter Marguerite de Rohan with Messire Henry de Chabot, now
Duke of Rohan, was grown to that height, that it occasioned an Arrest in the
Court of Parliament at Paris, which was given at this time against Mr. Jacob
Jolly Proctor of the said Court, Tutor in the Cause of one called Tancrede. The
Arrest prohibited to the said Tancrede to call himself Son of the deceased Duke
of Rohan, or to take to himself the Name and Arms of the House of Rohan; and to
the Duchess Dowager and all others to give him that quality, under the
penalties in the said Ordinance contained: and lastly, the said parties were
condemned in the costs of Suit. This was after Martinet, the Advocate, had
pleaded with no less Learning than Eloquence for the Lady Marguerite Duchess
and sole Heiress of Rohan, and Gaultire for Henry de Chabot Duke of Rohan:
neither Jacob the Proctor, nor any other appearing for Tancrede.

In the month of April were published certain Apologies in defense of the
Cardinals Barberin, who had refuged themselves in France, and put themselves
into the King's protection.

Before we pass any further, let us deliver the Queen of Poland into the hands
of the King her Husband: she arrived at Warsow the 10th of March; the Prince
Charles Brother to the King met her: she was presented to the King by the Comte
de Bregy, in the name of both their most Christian Majesty's. The Marshall de
Guebriant also made another Complement; but the Queen offering to kneel, as is
customary to Queens when first they see their Husbands, the King raised her
with a kiss and embrace. Presently after this, the Apostolic Nuntio, in his
Pontificial habit, confirmed the Marriage with the usual Benediction.

On the 7th of May, the Cardinal Barberin went to the Assembly of the Clergy by
way of visit, where he was harangued by the Archbishop of Thoulouse.

In the same Month of May, Messire Philip Cospean Bishop of Lizieux, and
formerly of Nantes, a Prelate of great Piety and Learning, deceased in his own
Diocese, and in the 78 year of his age.

On the 7th of May, the King made his first Voyage out of the Territory of
Paris, for Amiens, where he was received with extraordinary joy.

At this time was decided by Arrest of the Parliament at Paris, the Process
formerly commenced, touching the Interment of Secular persons in Religious
Houses, between Nicholas Mazure Doctor of Divinity of the Faculty of Paris,
Curate of St. Paul, and the Religious Minimes of the Place Royal; in which all
the Curates of Paris joined with him of St. Paul; and all the other Religious
with the Minimes. The Arrest contained, that always and as often as any
particular person should choose his Sepulture in the Church belonging to any
Religious Men, or Religious Women, whether without or within the Parish of the
Defunct, the Curate or his Vicar, with all his Clergy, should conduct the Corpse
to the Church-door of the said Monastery, where it shall be received by the
Superior of the place, or some other of the Religious to that Office
appointed: after this, the Curate or Vicar having certified that the Defunct
died in the Communion of the Church, he shall depart with his Clergy. The
Lights and Torches serving at the said Funeral, to be equaly divided, one moity
to the Curate, and the other to the Religious. Prohibiting all Religious
whatsoever to fetch and convey the Body of any Defunct desiring to be buried in
their respective Churches, unless in case of refusal by the Curates or their
Vicars; being first duly acquainted therewith, and required to perform the
said Office. All this notwithstanding not to prejudice any agreements formerly
made between any Curates, and Religious Houses, touching Interments: the
tenours of all which are to be duly observed and kept.

In England, during this May, the King left Oxford in disguise, being there
Besieged by the Parliament-Forces, and fled to the Scots, who showed him no
part of that due reception which belongs to their King, but sent him under a
strong Convoy to Newcastle; to which place also the King of France sends the
Sieur de Montreuil to reside near him, and reconcile him to the Parliament.

On the 9th of May, the Comte de Harcour lays siege to Lerida, where in our
first Attaques we lost the Comte de Chabot, and the Marquess de Gevres, Sons to
the Comte de Tremes.

On the 14th of June, the Town of Courtray in Flanders was taken by the French
Army, notwithstanding that Duke Charles, Picolomini, and Lamboy made a show of
Relief.

In Italy, the Town Orbitello in Tuscany was besieged by the Prince Thomas.
Here our Admiral Commanding a Fleet on the part of the Besiegers, was killed by
a Cannon-shot in a Naval fight. In fine, Prince Thomas was forced to retire,
the Enemies Forces being augmented by fresh succors.

July 8th, the Prince of Wales Eldest son to the King of England arrived at
Caen in Normandy, and from thence directly to the Queen his Mother at St.
Germain en Lay.

The 13th of July, died Messire Roger de Bellegarde Duke and Pair of France and
Grand Escuyer, aged 83 years and 7 months: and the 26th of the same month
died also his Brother Octavius de Bellegarde Archbishop of Sens. His decease
was preceded by two other Prelates, viz. Messire Abra de Raconis Bishop of
Lavaur in Languedoc, and Messire Francois de Pericard Bishop of Eureux.

Longuvy, the only place that remained in the Duke of Lorain's Territories,
was taken about this time by the Marquess de la Ferte Seneterre.

The Assembly of the Clergy ending about the 30th of July, Messire Jean
Francois Paul de Gondy, Archbishop of Corinth, and Coadjutor in the
Archbishopric of Paris, made an Harangue to the King in the name of all the
Clergy.

And now Messire le President Believre was sent Ambassador into England, where
he had favorable Audience by the Parliament at London the 27 of July, and the
first of August by the King at Newcastle.

In the beginning of August, the Fort of Mardike was Besieged by Monsieur the
Duke of Orleans: the brisk Attaques which we gave, took from us at the very
first the Chivalier de la Fueillade, le Sieur du Terrail, of the same Race with
Captain Bayard; and three days after, the Comte de Fley, and the Chevalier de
Fiesque. The Duke of Nemours was Wounded by a Musket Shot in his Leg, but
without hurting the Bone; and as favorably, the Prince de Marsillac Eldest son
to the Duke de la Rochfoucault. The 22 of August, the Sieur de Grignan had his
Head taken off by a Cannon-shot. This resistance by the Besieged enflamed the
Courage of our party; and the mouth of the Channel being stopped by six ships of
Holland, so that the Besieged were forced to receive all their Relief from
Gravelines, to which they had been as a Bulwork: Mardike finding her self so
severely pressed, began to Parley: the Besieged were received to Composition by
Monsieur the Duke of Orleans; and the chief Articles were, that 3000 men, then
and there in Garrison, should come out, Life and Baggage safe, but should
remain Prisoners of War. The place thus taken, the Sieur de Chalen was made
Governor.

The 6th of September, the Comte Magnus Gabriel de la Gardie, Ambassador
extraordinary from Swedeland, arrived at Paris, where he was extreme kindly
received by their Majesty's, and lodged at the Hostel de Vendome.

In the mean while News arrives at Court, that on the 17th of September, his
Holiness at the Kings Instance had restored those of the House of Barberins to
their Goods, conditionally, that the two Cardinals should abide some while at
Avignon. At the same time the Marshall de Bassompierre, aged 68 years, dies
suddenly at Provins.

Dunkirk, which hitherto had been the receptacle of Pirates, who had
continually scowred the Seas on all the Coasts of France, was Invested by the
Duke of Enguien on the 17th of September, and assaulted so vigorously by our
Soldiers excited by the courage of their Commander, that on the tenth of
October it surrendered by Composition: The Marquess de Leide the Governor
marched out with 1500 men, of which 400 Sick and Wounded; and he confessed to
have lost 600 of his best Soldiers. The Marshall of Rantzau succeeded to the
place of Governor for the French. Dunkirk was first built 600 years since by
Baudouin Earl of Flanders. After that, it was burnt down by the English in the
year 1388. Rebuilt by the French, and after taken by the Spaniards, who kept it
till the present Conquest.

The King's Army in Italy, commanded by the Mareschals de la Meleraye, take the
Town, Castle, and Citadel of Piambino in Tuscany; at which time Monsieur the
Marquess Villeroy, the King's Governor, received from the hands of their
Majesty's the Oath of Marshall of France.

Portolongona, a place situated in the Isle of Elb, lying in the Tuscan-Sea
between the Continent of Italy and Corsica, which was heretofore usurped from
its own lawful Lord by a Captain of the Emperor Charles the 5th, in the year
1548. after that delivered into the possession of his son Philip the 2d, and
whose Successors held it ever since, was now Besieged and taken by the French
Army. In the midst of this Island rises a Spring, on this account the more
admirable, that its Waters are observed to hold proportion with the length of
the days of the year, in such manner, that when they are at the longest the
Stream is able to drive a Mill, but when at the shortest it is almost dry.

Lerida in Catalonia having been besieged by the Comte de Harcour for the space
of 7 months, was relieved the 21 of November, in the night, by the Marquess de
Leganez General of the Spanish Army; who forcing our Lines with 7000 Foot, and
3000 Horse, our party, though at the first they made a stout resistance,
encouraged by the Valor of their Commander, yet finding themselves o'repower'd
by the number of the Enemy, were constrained to retire (but in good order) into
Cerveres with 6000 Foot and 1000 Horse, by that means to secure the Country. We
lost there the Comte de Origny: In revenge of this action, the Sieur de St.
Colom-Marin, Marshall of the Field, took from the Enemy the Town of Arbera,
the 6th of December following.

The 26th of the same month Madam la Duchess of Orleans was happily delivered
of a second Daughter.

The same day, the 26th of December, being the Feast of St. Steven, Henry de
Bourbon Prince of Conde deceased at Paris, aged 58 years and three months: he
left two Sons and a Daughter, the Formerly called Duke of Enguien.
Eldest of which makes no inconsiderable part in the French History of these
last years, by reason of his many Renowned Exploits of War, Sieges and Battles,
in which things he has rendered his Name Renowned, having joined Mars and
Minerva in his own person. The second son is Monsieur the Prince of Conty. The
Daughter Mademoiselle de Bourbon, Married Monsieur the Duke of Longueville.

Anno 1647.
In the beginning of the year 1647. though the Winter-season invited our Troops
rather into Garrison, yet such was the courage of the Marshall de Gassion,
that nothing relenting at the extremity of the Weather, he undertakes the siege
of Ingelmunster; the Garrison of which place was no small impediment in our
Victualling Courtray. This place was Attaqu'd with such fury, that she was
forced to yield by the end of February. The Governor with his Garrison was
conducted to Courtray, having received no other composition than to remain
Prisoners of War. Also the Marquess of Marolles, Governor of Thionville (a
place heretofore taken by the now Prince of Conde presently after his Victory
at Rocroy, in the year 1643.) about the same time defeated a party of the
Garrison of Luxemburg, by means of an Ambuscade, where he killed and took
Prisoners above 100 men.

About the end of the said Month of February, the Marshall de Turenne invests
Tubinguen in Germany, and after a Siege of seventeen or eighteen days submits
the place to the King's obedience. This did contribute much to the Treaty of
Neutrality, not long after concluded with the Duke of Bavaria, in which was
comprised the Elector of Cologne.

Since the Archduke Leopold had quitted the Conduct of the Imperial Forces to
be General in the Low Countries, he had raised on the sudden a complete Army,
with which he Invests Armentieres, under the Government of the Sieur du
Plessis-Bellievre. This Siege being so surprising, made the courage of our
party yield to necessity, so that for want of Ammunition the place was
surrendered the 31 of May. The Garrison remained all Prisoners of War, except
the Governor and Principal Officers.

At this time the King and Queen Regent were at Amiens, to give their orders
more effectually for securing the Frontiers of Picardy.

The Archduke Leopold having taken Armentieres, lays siege to Landrecies,
where the Garrison not being sufficient to secure their Outworks, the Sieur
Heudicourt their Governor, after a courageous defense of three Weeks, was
forced to surrender the 18th of July.

The Marshall de Gassion finding that he was unable to succor Landrecies,
joined with the Marshall de Rantzau to revenge that loss elsewhere: this last
in three days made himself Master of Dixmude; and the Marshall de Gassion so
vigorously Assaulted la Bassee, that he forced the Besieged to surrender at the
end of eight days. After this, the Marshall in one day takes the Fort
Nieufdan near Newport, and Sluise, with several other little Forts, all which
he Demolished. During this, the Marquess de Caracene, sent to relieve Newport
in case of a Siege, obliges the Marshall to an Engagement, in which Rencounter
the Enemy lost 300 men, and we not above fifteen.

The French Army, being now in sufficient condition to oppose their Enemies,
the King and Queen Regent leave Amiens the 27th of July, and take the way of
Abbeville; passing thence to Dieppe, they were received by the Sieur de
Montigny, who met them in the head of 500 Gentlemen. The 9th of August they
arrive at Paris.

The Marshall de Rantzau considering that the Marshall de Gassion was
necessitated to remain in the midst of his Enemies to keep la Bassee, makes a
show of besieging Lens; and by that means having diverted the Enemy, and
brought off Gassion from all danger, attaques the Troops of Duke Charles,
lately arrived from Luxemburg, and defeats 800 men, of which he took 200
Prisoners. Presently after, the Armies of these two Generals being united, the
10th of September, march against the Common Enemy, and often Skirmish, but
always with advantage on our side.

The 23 of September, our Army having past the River Lis, the next day arrives
before Lens: The Marshall Gassion took the plain of Doway, and the Sieur de
Villequier the Bridge Avandin: the night following they opened their Trenches,
and the 26th the Cannon began to batter; but the Marshall Gassion being on his
way to succor the Sieur de Villequier at the Bridge Avandin, and understanding
that the Enemy had taken it, returns to the Trenches.

The 28th he hearing that the Besieged had raised a Pallisade near the
Town-gate, he gives order that the Posts be immediately plucked up: and being
told it was a matter of extraordinary danger, by reason of the Enemies
continual firing from that quarter; he goes thither himself, and as he was
trying to move one of the Posts, receives a Musket Shot in the side of his
head, with which he falls from his Horse; and being taken up and carried to
Arras, deceased the 10th of October, in the 38th year of his Age.

But the Sieur de Villequier continues the siege of Lens, and that with such
resolution and effect, that the Besieged are forced to surrender the third of
the same October; and the Comte de Palluau, Mestre de Camp of the Cavalry, took
possession of the place with a French Garrison.

In the mean time the Enemy thinking to divert the siege of Lens, besiege
Dixmude; which place, after a courageous resistance on our part, was forced to
surrender.

The Marshall de Turenne receiving orders from the King to march into Germany,
understands that Major General Rose by secret practices had debauched several
Soldiers of his Troops; hereupon, having first endeavored by all means
possible to reclaim him to his duty, though ineffectually; to prevent a greater
disorder, he secures his person, and sends him Prisoner to Philipsburg.

About this time, the Spaniards under the Conduct of Bonichausen, Marshall de
Camp Imperial, Colonel Frangipani Governor of Frankendal, and Colonel Garnier,
form a design to besiege Worms, the Garrison consisting but of 100 men. The
Sieur de la March, Governor of the place, perceiving the weakness of the
place, and being pressed by the Enemy who had already struck a terror into the
Citizens, engaged to surrender, in case he received no relief in two days.
Hereupon he sends immediately to the Governor of Philipsburg, who dispatches
the Sieur de la Poquetiere a Gentleman of Touraine, with 100 men, who guarded
with other Succors, pass the Enemy, enter the Town, and without ever resting
Sally immediately at another Gate on the opposite side, charging the Enemy in
that quarter so courageously, that in fine they beat them off, and That is, to
drive a Nail or Iron-pin into the Touchhole, so that they become useless.
Nailed their Cannon, in such manner, that the Enemy finding no hopes of
gaining the place, quitted the siege.

In Catalonia, the Marshall de Gramont, by order of the Prince of Conde,
having pursued the Spaniards who besieged Constantine, returned and joins with
our Army the 12 of October; and the 21, Monsieur the Prince of Conde, having
drawn together all our Troops, on advice that the Spaniards under the Conduct
of the Marquess d'Aietone prepared to fight us, and with design to engage them
marches toward Belpouche, about three hours journey from Lesborges, between
Lerida and the Enemy; but perceiving them to retreat toward Lerida, he sends
the Marquess de la Trousse to intercept their way, and follows himself upon
their Rear. The Enemy, who thought of nothing but a safe Retreat to Lerida, and
now seeing themselves encompast by the Marshall de Gramont's Forces, prepare
for fight; and they had undoubtedly beat our party, had not Monsieur the
Prince, seeing the hazard, advanced and stopped their success: but by the favor
of the Night, which came on apace, they repast the Segre, with the loss of
seven or eight hundred men, cut in pieces by our Forces. We lost there the
Sieur de Lupes St. Remy a Captain, de Serre a Cornet, and some Common Soldiers.

The 24th of October, Tutavilla Governor of Terragona, presenting himself
again before Constantin, was again beaten off by the Troops of Monsieur the
Prince of Conde, and the diligence of the Sieur de la Baume Governor of the
place.

This year 1647. concludes with the Duke of Guise's entry into Naples, the
Neapolitans (who of a long time had been oppressed with the Spanish Yoke) having
invited him, and put themselves under his protection, during his abode at Rome.
Embarquing then the third of November, attended only with his Aumosnier and
the Gentleman of his Chamber, he arrived happily at Naples the fifth, and was
there received with incredible joy of the Inhabitants, who had made a shift to
defend themselves to that present against the Spanish Domination,
notwithstanding their many Conspiracies; and had also expelled all those whom
they suspected of the Spanish Faction. Here the Machinations of the other party
were so great and dangerous, that the Duke run many hazards.

From the year 1280, in which happened the Massacre of the French in Sicily,
under Charles of Anjou first of that Name, and Brother of St. Lewis, to the
time of Rene d'Anjou, Naples had been the constant Field of Battle in all the
Contests between the Houses of Anjou and Aragon, as is observed in the course
of the French History, where we may see how Charles the 2d succeeded to his
Father in that Kingdom, and after his death his son Robert. Afterward, about
the year 1344, Joan the first of that Name, Daughter of Charles a Son of the
said Robert, succeeded to the Crown of Naples. Joan ending her life by a sad
and shameful death, Ladislaus son to Charles of Durazo succeeded, about the
year 1387. and remained in possession of the Kingdom of Naples till his death.
Ladislaus dying, Joan the 2d his Sister succeeds, in the year 1417. who finding
her self continually molested by those of the House of Aragon, declares Rene
d'Anjou her Heir and Successor, about the year 1435. But whether it was that
his own peaceful Inclinations, or the Inconstancies of the Neapolitan humor
stopped his designs, is uncertain: this is apparent, he never did any thing
effectually toward the Conquest of that Kingdom, to which his Birthright did
call him. This gave opportunity to Ferdinand son of Alphonso to seize the
Scepter, notwithstanding John Duke of Calabria son of Rene attempted (though in
vain) to recover the right of his Grandfathers: But Charles the 8th, King of
France, undertook this Enterprise with such a courage, that all Italy lay open
to his Arms; and having first made his entry into Rome, he was received at
Naples with extraordinary magnificence, in the year 1494. Charles after this
retiring into France, and Lewis the 12th extending his Conquests to Milain,
Francis the first desiring to extend them still further, at such time as he
Besieged Pavie, divided his Army, and sent half for Naples; but his being taken
Prisoner on the 24th of February, in the year 1525, put a period to those
designs. From that time to the present, Naples ever remained under the
Dominion of the Spaniards. And this last Change being so notorious, we have
made this short recapitulation of the several vicissitudes of that Kingdom.

From the time of Francis the first, to Lewis 13th, and Lewis 14th, so happily
reigning at present, the power of Spain was arrived to that point, that in fine
it seemed all Europe should speak no other Language than Spanish: but God,
whose Dominion extends over all Monarchies, has in a few years diminished the
swelling extent of this, which now of late begins, by little and little, to
fall within its ancient limits.

But to return to the Duke of Guise, after this little digression, and observe
some of the principal actions which at that time he performed in those parts;
we must know then in short: This Prince, on his arrival perceiving how much the
people were oppressed by the Spanish Dominion, in the first place dispatches
several Couriers to all those Towns which he conceived most material to
contribute to the overthrow of their Authority; and after he had duly disposed
of all things, by his rare Conduct, he visits the said places severally, and
takes an exact view of all their Ammunitions: after this, he raises 26000 men,
which he distributes into three Bodies. And at the same time, Salerne falls off
to the Republic.

Hereupon Dom John of Austria, and the Duke of Tursi, arrive in Naples with a
Counter Force, to stop the peoples Mutinies; but they having joined Policy and
Address to the Arms they had levied, the Spaniards could not possibly prevent
their Choice of our Prince for Duke of the Republic, and Generalissimo of all
their Forces. But since events of War are so uncertain, and what seems most
assured often wants success; Fortune was so indulgent to the Spaniards, that
our Duke was taken Prisoner by Tutavilla at the Pass of a little River; and
this was the utter ruin of the Neapolitans designs.

Anno 1648.
Let us now return to France. The King, and Queen Regent his Mother, having
been at Chartres to pay their Vows to our Lady, return to Paris the 27th of
March 1648.

In April, the Generals of our Armies prepare for a new Campaign, expecting the
usual Progress, in adding to their former Conquests. Accordingly, on the 20th
of August, his Majesty obtained a signal Victory before Lens; where the Prince
of Conde Commanding in chief, took Prisoner the General Bek, who died soon
after of his Wounds. This had filled all France with joy, had not an unexpected
accident disturbed the Feast. On the 26th Te Deum was sung in the Cathedral of
Nostre Dame at Paris; and on the same day, the Sieurs de Broussel, and de
Blancmesnil were Arrested; which caused a great disorder through all the City,
till by the Queens bounty in restoring their Liberty, it was appeased.

In the month of January, the same year, the Rebels of England had the horrid
Impudence to Condemn their King to the Scaffold: After that, forbid the having
any other King for the future, and changed the Government to a Republic.
Fairfax was declared General of their Forces, and Cromwell his Lieutenant; who
soon after, on the acquittal of the former, took to himself the whole
Authority: He made himself Master of Scotland, Ireland, and England, he made
and unmade the Parliament at his pleasure; and in fine, under the name of
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, he most Sacrilegiously usurped the
Command of a King.

This year ended with the Peace between France, the Emperor, and Swede,
concluded at Osnabruc.

Anno 1649.
In the year 1649, the King, Queen, and Princes leave Paris, in the night
between the fifth and sixth of January, and retire to St. Germains. The
Parisians believing they intend to revenge their insolences committed in the
action aforesaid, take Arms, and rise in Troops by order of the Prince of
Conty. Hereupon the King seizes St. Denis, Meudon, Corbeil, and Lagny. This had
no doubt occasioned a public Ruin, had not the Court of Parliament deputed
several of their Members to his Majesty, and obtained a general Amnestie,
which once more restored France to her former quiet.

Anno 1650.
In January 1650, the Princes of Conde, Conty, and Duke of Longueville were
Imprisoned in the Chateau de Vincennes; from thence removed first to Marcoussy,
and then to Havre de Grace, and restored to Liberty the 6th of February 1651.
The Princess of Conde retired to Bourdeaux with the Duke of Enguien her Son,
where were also the Dukes of Bouillon, Roche-Foucaut, and de Turenne.

In this year the Enemy recovered Piombino, and Portolongone, le Catelet, la
Capelle, and Vervins, as also Mouson, and Rethel, which notwithstanding they
kept not long.

Anno 1651.
Nor was the year 1651 more fortunate to us, seeing we lost then Furnes, and
Bergue in Flanders.

And now the Prince of Conde retires into his Government of Guienne, neglecting
to be present at the King's Majority, which was magnificently celebrated the
7th of September. Presently after, his Majesty takes a Journey toward Bourges,
to stop the ill intentions of the Princes; which place, upon his approach, they
quitted with their Forces.

The King stops not in his designs, but marches on toward Poitou, takes St.
Amand, sends the Comte de Harcour to attaque Rochelle, which the Comte d'Ognon
held at the Prince's devotion, and compels him to submit to obedience.

Anno 1652.
In the mean time the Parliament at Paris declares the Cardinal Mazarin guilty
of High Treason; who retires for a while: but not at all to remit ought of his
care or occasion to serve his Majesty, he raises several Troops, and presents
them to the King at Poitiers the 25th of January 1652, without having
encountered any obstacle. After this, Angers is Besieged by the Duke of Rohan,
and compelled to submit to the King's obedience, together with le Pont de Ce.
And now the King intending to justify his Minister, sends a Declaration to the
Parliament at Paris, commanding that all the proceedings against the Cardinal
Mazarin be forthwith brought over to him.

The King Besieges Estampes, in which place the Army of the Princes was shut
up; but the Issue being not very advantageous to the Royal Army, he was forced
to draw off, and invest Paris. Here happened many Attaques on both sides after
the arrival of the Lorainers; though these last shunned the Encounter as much as
possible, in such fort, that they came not hand to hand till such time as they
met in the Fauxbourg St. Anthoine; at which Encounter it is believed there died
more than 1000 men on both sides. The Fight endured from seven in the Morning
till three in the Afternoon. The Prince of Conde did all that could be expected
from a valiant Captain; nevertheless, had not Mademoiselle caused the City-Gate
to be opened, and the Cannon to be discharged from the Bastille, the Army of
the Princes had been utterly defeated.

Two days after this, the disorder was so great in Paris, that all people were
forced to wear Straw about 'em, as a mark of aversion to the Cardinal Mazarin:
After this, they set fire to the outward Gates of the Hostel de Ville, where
300 of the most noted Citizens being Assembled, to consult of some means
whereby to unite the City with the Parliament, the Mutineers, in order to
destroy them all, first Massacre the Sieurs le Gras Master of Requests, de
Janvry Counselor in the Parliament, Myron Master of the Accounts, and several
others, as they came out from the Assembly. The Sieur Doujat Counselor of the
Great Chamber, and several other persons of Condition, had run the same
fortune, had they not used Disguizes, and by the favor of the night past
unknown during this disturbance. Two of the Factious were Condemned by the
Sentence of the Parliament to be Hanged, and were accordingly Executed in the
Court of the Palace. The Sedition grew to that extremity, that even the
Priests, and Religious, Women and Children, were forced to wear Straw, and
thereby secure themselves from outrages: nay, the very Nuns, who to shun the
dangers of the Campaign sought refuge in this City, if at any time they were
seen in the Streets, or Churches, found themselves obliged to appear with this
ridiculous Badge. The Duke of Nemours about this time challenged the Duke of
Beaufort; they met with Sword and Pistol: The Duke of Nemours fires, but
without further execution than only to singe the Duke of Beaufort's Periwig;
but he in return failed not to kill his Enemy.

And now the people of Paris being pretty well tired with the effects of War,
begin to disgust the rule of the Princes, and upon this occasion depute several
of their Burgesses to Pontoise, where the King then was, to supplicate his
Majesty to honor his good Town of Paris with his return. This occasioned the
retreat of the Duke of Orleans, and flight of the Prince of Conde with his
Troops. Not long after, the King returns to the City, followed by the Marshall
de l'Hospital Governor of the place, the Prevost des Merchands, and the
Eschevins, who had been all constrained to absent; and was there received with
all the submissions and blessings which the people could possibly invent.

After this, the King went to the Parliament, which he re-unites with that part
which he had lately established at Pontoise. And then and there also he
publishes his Amnestie, in favor of all those who had risen, provided that by
their returning to duty they made themselves capable of such a Grace. But the
Prince of Conde being retired into the Catholic King's Dominions, appeared in
the head of an Army before Rhetel, of which soon after he got possession, as
also of Chasteau-Porcien, Sainte-Menchou, and Bar.

During the troubles at Paris, the Spaniards knowing the Marshall de Grancey
to be absent from Gravelines, lay siege to that place, and take it before it
could possibly be succored on our part.

Those of Guienne finding themselves in such disorder by reason of the Princes
party, invite the King's Army to come among them, commanded by the Count de
Harcour, who retakes Barbesieux, Pondesat, and la Reole; though the Baron of
Vatteville was come into the River of Bourdeaux to assist the Princes, on the
part of the Catholic King; who serving himself of the present troubles, sent
Dom John of Austria to Besiege Barcelona, of which with much ease he became
Master. However, the loss was in some sort repaired by the reduction of
Mont-rond; of which place, the Marshall de Palluau, who Commanded at the
Siege, had order to cast down the Fortifications.

Toward the end of this Campaign, the measure of our disgraces was arrived to
that fullness, as to loose also Dunkirk, and Casal; the first to the Spaniards,
the other to the Duke of Mantua.

The Cardinal de Rets, Coadjutor of Paris, having been arrested in the Louvre
by the Sieur de Villequier, was conducted to the Bois de Vincennes, where
having been detained for a considerable time, was from thence conveyed by the
Marshall de la Meleraye to the Castle of Nantes, from which in the open day he
escaped, first to Belle-Isle, and then to Rome.

The Marquess of Vieville, Super-Intendant of the Finances, being deceased, the
Sieur de Servient, and the Sieur Fouquet Attorney General, were jointly put
into the Office.

Also the Cardinal Antonio Barberin had the Office of Grand Aumosnier of
France, conferred the 8th of April, late void by the death of the Cardinal of
Lions.

Anno 1653.
The year 1653. began successfully in Bourgogne; Bellegarde is besieged by the
Duke of Espernon Governor of that Province, and in spite of the Marquess of
Bouteville's resistance who Commanded the place for the Prince of Conde, he
forced a submission to the Arms of his Majesty. Rhetel, Mouzon, and St.
Menehou, not long after followed the same fortune. But the taking of Rocroy by
the Prince, abated a little the public joy for these advantages.

This Success was followed by the reduction of Bourdeaux, and all the other
Towns of Guyenne who had taken Arms in the Rebellion. As also by the
accommodement of the Prince of Conty, and the Duchess of Longueville, who came
in to the Amnestie; but the Princess of Conde refusing to use that favor, put
her self directly on the way to Flanders with her son the Duke of Enguien.

Anno 1654.
On the 19th of January 1654, the King being seated in his Court of Parliament,
at which were present a sufficient number of Peers, Process was commenced
against Lewis de Bourbon, Prince of Conde; which ended the 27th of March. About
the end of May, his Majesty took his Journey toward Rheims, to be there
Crowned and Anointed: he arrived the third of June; and being received by the
Burgesses and Inhabitants with extraordinary testimonials of love, he was
conducted to the Cathedral of Nostre-Dame, where the Bishop of Soissons
attended him, with the Quire and Canons of the Church. The 7th following, was
performed that admirable Ceremony of his Anointing and Coronation by the said
Bishop, who in that Office represented the Archbishop of Rheims. At the same
time, the Town of Stenay was Besieged, and forced to surrender to the King's
obedience; though the Prince of Conde did his utmost to relieve it: But the
Prince acknowledging the loss unavoidable, immediately marched the whole Force
of the Spanish Army toward Arras, to which he lays siege with 30000 men, and
all this before our Generals could possibly put into the place any Succors
considerable: Here he made a Circumvallation that seemed to defy all the force
of the World: notwithstanding, the Lines that compassed it, how dreadful
soever, were so vigorously attaqued by our Army, sent to endeavor the relief,
that the Enemies were constrained to abandon their designs, sufficient to
intimidate any Nation but the French. We gained by this flight of theirs (which
happened on St. Lewis's day) sixty pieces of Cannon, and all the Baggage of the
Besiegers: It Is also possible they had all found their Graves on the place, had
not the Prince (the Archduke and other Chiefs having left him) bestir'd
himself more than ordinary to assuage the precipitate violence of the retreat.

The Marshall de la Ferte-Seneterre, desirous to end the Campaign as
gloriously as it was begun and continued this year, led the Body which he
commanded before Clermont, which he Besieges and takes. In the mean time our
other Chiefs observe the broken condition of the Spanish Army, which all the
Winter did nothing but only threaten Quesnoy; which place was so well
furnished by the Marquess de Chastelnau, assisted by the Marquess de
Monpouillon, and the Chevalier de Maupeou, that she found her self in no
condition to fear her Enemies.

Anno 1655.
The beginning of the year 1655, was remarkable for the decease of Pope
Innocent 10th, happening on the 7th of January: after whose death the Cardinals
entering the Conclave the 17th of the same month, and there continuing till
the 7th of April, where all the Ambassadors were also present to perform their
Complements; they elected to the Holy Seat Cardinal Chisi, a Gentleman of
Sienna, as the most worthy in the Sacred College: he had been in all the
considerable Offices belonging to the Chair of Rome, and being now in the
supreamest, took the name of Alexander 7th. His inclination to Peace gave hopes
that he would procure it to Christendom, provided he found the Spaniard as much
disposed to it as France; which hopes we have at length seen happily effected.

About this time the Duke of Guise arrived from Naples. And the Court thought
convenient to send into Portugal, to purchase there a certain number of Ships
for the King's service.

In May 1655, Monsieur the Prince of Conty, Lieutenant-Generalissimo, and
Viceroy for his Majesty in Catalonia, took by Assault Cap-de Tiers; and in
July, continuing the course of his Victories, he took Chastillon and Saulsone.
No less glorious success had our Arms in Flanders than in Catalonia, by the
taking of Landrecy, in the face of 35000 men, which being all their force, our
Enemies had united, if possible, to secure this important place, but the event
rendered their endeavors to no purpose.

Following the course of our succesful projects, in August, the same year, we
took Conde, and St. Guillain; the King commanding there in person, and having
for his Lieutenant-Generals de Turenne, and la Ferte-Seneterre.

In November following, Peace was concluded and proclaimed between France and
England; the Treaty was made at Westminster, Monsieur de Bourdeaux being
Ambassador from his Majesty to the said Republic.

During this year, the Dukes of Mantua and Modena arrived in France, to perform
to his Majesty their several Homages. Then arrived also his Enemy Cardinal
Antonio Barberin Nephew to the late Pope Urban the 8th, named by his Majesty
for his Grand Aumosnier in place of the decased Cardinal of Lions.

Anno 1656.
On the third of January, being the Feast of St. Geneviefve, 1656, Messire
Matthew Mole, Gardes Sceaux of France, deceased about seven in the Morning,
after three days sickness, in the 72 year of his age; during which time he had
past most of the chief Offices belonging to his robe; namely, that of the
President of Requests of the Palace; Attorney General in the Parliament, which
place he exercised near 27 years; first President in the said Assembly near
thirteen years, and lastly Guard de Sceaux; and all these with a marvelous
integrity and fidelity to the King's service. The next day the Chancelier of
France coming to attend the King according to the orders sent him by the Sieur
Mancini, his Majesty by the advice of his Eminency, gave him the Seals in the
Queens presence, with all possible demonstrations of the just esteem which he
had for this so eminent and sage Head of the French Justice.

In the same year, the King having laid siege to Valenciennes, where the
Marshall de Turenne commanded in the quality of Lieutenant General; and having
now reduced this important place, and the Spanish Forces to their very last
effort; but not being able to prevent the succors, he raised the siege. Though
immediately after, his Majesty's Army in Italy, under the conduct of the Duke
of Modena, took Valence; and at the same time his said Majesty forced la
Capelle to submission, in sight of the Enemy's Army, consisting of more than
30000 men.

On the 8th of September, the Princess Christina, late Queen of Swedeland,
after she had abjured Heresy between the Pope's own hands at Rome, and
resigned her Kingdom to her Cousin Charles Gustavus, Prince Palatine, arrived at
Paris, where she was most magnificently received; after this, and that she had
saluted the King at Compiegne, she returned to Rome.

This year ended happily with a Universal Jubilee, which began the first Sunday
of Advent, and ended the second of January 1657.

Anno 1657.
This year begins with the loss of the Town of St. Guillain, which the
Spaniards recovered from us, the Garrison retiring to Guise after an honorable
Capitulation.

The season now approaching to draw into the Campaign, Monsieur the Marshall
de Turenne took the way of Flanders, there to command our Forces: The King
followed not long after, making his Family immediately set forwards for
Compeigne.

Monsieur le Marshall de la Ferte having also directed his march toward
Luxemburg with a considerable Army, Monsieur the Marshall de Turenne assisting
him at a distance with his Troops, he invests Montmedy the 11th of June, and
wrought at the Lines with such a resolution, that in spite of all resistance
from the Besieged, they were completed the 15th following. In regard this
place was of such importance to the Catholic King, the Spanish Commanders did
their utmost to relieve it; but with no success, and therefore they think of
some other way. Having then intelligence that the Garrison of Calais had been
of late much weakened by the absence of 300 men, drawn off from thence to
reinforce that at Ardres, they resolve to attaque it at unawares; but it
resisted with so much glory, that the Assailants, not able to effect their
designs, retired with shame.

The Spaniards unable to relieve Montmedy, the Inhabitants were forced to
capitulate, the 6th of August. The Garrison, consisting of 300 Musketeers and
100 Horse, left the place, and were conducted within sight of the Walls of
Arlon. The King entered, and viewed the Walls round, on Horseback. He made the
Baron de St. Pe Governor, to whose place not long after succeeded the Marquess
de Vandy, one of his Majesty's Generals, and Camp-Master to the Carabines.

The Conquest of Montmedy, was followed by that of St. Venant; from which place
the Spaniards desiring to divert our Arms, made a show to attaque Ardres; where
notwithstanding they were forced shamefully to raise their siege, with the loss
of the entire Regiment of Persan, who were all cut to pieces. The rest of this
Campaign past in petty Skirmishes; in particular, the Garrison of Rocroy was
soundly beaten in seeking to raise a Contribution among the neighbor Villages.

Dom John of Austria, the Prince of Conde, and several Troops with them, having
put themselves into Dunkirk on some design, the Marshall de Turenne on his
part prepares to attaque Mardike; which he did so effectually, that it was soon
after surrendered to the discretion of our Commanders, the Enemy having
deferred to capitulate, till it was too late.

We were no less happy in Italy. The Castle of Monteri surrendered to the force
of our Arms; so also did the Castle of Non, which was taken before the very
face of the Comte de Fuensaldaigne, by the Prince of Conty. After this, we
invest Alexandria; but the siege there was no sooner formed, but raised again,
and that for the Conquest of Montecalvo, and the Castle of Monts, places which
made us Masters of Monferrat.

Nothing considerable past this year in Catalonia, where at that time the Duke
of Candale commanded, but died in his return at Lions.

The Magazine of Powder in the Townhouse at Bourdeaux took fire, by some
accident, which reduced that poor Town into a deplorable condition. This
misfortune happened on the third of December.

Innocent the 10th deceasing, (as aforesaid) Alexander the 7th succeeded in the
Papacy, who desiring above all things to see the two greatest Kings of Europe
united in a Peace, proposed it first to his most Christian Majesty, and
endeavored to incline him: but he received for answer, that the only
obstruction lay on the part of his Enemies, and that he was always most willing.

Anno 1658.
This so generous Declaration thus happily opening the way, gave no small hopes
for the effecting so great a good: but first his Majesty found himself obliged
to force the Spaniards to reason, by a further pursuit of his Victories,
beginning with the siege of Dunkirk; which soon after being taken, he put it
into the hands of Milord Lockhart the English Ambassador, conditionally that he
should permit no violence to the Religion of the Inhabitants.

The taking of this place, though of chief concern, 'twas too small a Conquest
for our Invincible Monarch. The Battle of Dunes, which we gained entirely, with
the addition of Bergues, St. Winox, Furnes, and Dixmude, followed this gallant
Enterprise. The Spaniards were seized with terror at the sight of so many
Conquests; and the consternation was so great among them, that at the very name
of the French they took their heels before Newport, with the loss of 800 Horse
and 3000 Cows, which our party took without any resistance.

Amidst so many Laurels, our invincible Monarch was assaulted by a violent
Fever, which in a little time reduced him to much extremity; but God, who is
always vigilant for the conservation of Kingdoms, restored this young Mars to
his people, beyond all their hopes. His health being thus recovered, his
Majesty leaves Calais, to return to Paris, where all the Sovereign Courts, and
the Burgesses, went out to meet him, testifying with how great joy they had
received the happy news of his recovery, of which they had been almost
desperate.

In the mean time, the Mareschals de Turenne, and la Ferte, to whose care his
Majesty had left his Army, to continue the glorious progress of their
successful undertakings; Having then first taken Moncassel, they invest
Gravelines under the conduct of Monsieur the Marshall de Bellefons; which
place, after a stout defense by the Besieged, who fought in despair, was
reduced to a Capitulation, as when taken from us, at such time as the Spaniards
made use of our Civil Wars. The Chevalier de Hautefeville Captain of the
Regiment of Guards, entered the 31 day of the siege with three Companies of the
said Regiment; and the Sieur Davignan was, the next day, left Governor till
further order.

The Spaniards foreseeing they were about to lose all that they had in these
parts, did their utmost endeavors to secure what they could possibly: but the
discreet vigilance of Monsieur the Marshall de Turenne did always frustrate
their designs. They were not able to succor Oudenarde, which surrendered
immediately to the French valor: they were glad to take covert in Armentiers,
and Tournay, for fear of being engaged to Battle; where without doubt they
would have been beaten, since in all our Encounters, Fortune had seemed to
forsake them, and to confer her Victories on us.

The King designing to visit Lions, arrives at Dijon, where receiving some
discontents from his Parliament, he interdicts them immediately, and pursues
his Journey to Lions, at which place he was received with incredible joy from
all people: And here it was that he received the complements of Madame Royale,
who came to visit him with the Princesses her Daughters. Also his Royal
Highness of Savoy presented himself with a very considerable Retinue,
extraordinary well furnished. Two days after, his said Highness parted again
for Turin, but with a most entire satisfaction at the sight of our excellent
Prince. The Deputies of the Estates of Languedoc, and those of Provence, had
Audience; but the Ambassador of Savoy had a particular one, as also the Envoy
of the Duke of Mantua.

Since, in the beginning of the year, all things did seem to concur to render
the Laurels of our young Mars more resplendant, all people began now to talk of
Peace. To that purpose, a Cessation from acts of Hostility was published on
both sides, to the end they might have the more liberty to treat of the future
tranquillity: and this daughter of Heaven, which God alone gives to his people,
after he has Chastized 'em, was equally desired by both parties. Monsieur de
Lyonne, then, is sent into Spain, and the Sieur Pimentel arrived at Lions,
during the King's abode there: this appeared a good and hopeful beginning,
since both Nations began of themselves to reassume their former Traffic, so
long discontinued.

Anno 1659.
Hereupon the Cardinal Mazarin, accompanied by the Duke of Crequy, the
Mareschals de Villeroy, de Clerembaud, the Grand Master of the Artillery, the
Sieur de Lyonne, and a great number of other Lords, takes the way of the
Frontier, where Dom Lewis d'Haro chief Minister of Spain would meet him of
France, to confer together for the perfecting so great a Work.

The Truce was already prolonged to further order; but before they begin the
Conference, it was agreed that Monsieur de Lyonne should have Commission to
meet and complement the Minister of Spain, and Dom Antonio Pimentel to perform
the like civilities to him of France.

Monsieur de Lyonne had order to propose to the Spaniards a Marriage between
their Infanta and the King of France: and in regard their chief fear was, that
in default of Male-Children to succeed to that Crown, that Kingdom might fall
to the King of France, their Queens being now with Child caused that
apprehension to vanish, and rendered them the more attentive to this Alliance.
Notwithstanding proceedings were for a time broken, by reason of a difficulty
presented on the behalf of the Prince of Conde, whom the King of Spain would
have comprised in the Treaty. Cardinal Mazarin therefore writ to the Pope, to
persuade that King to wave the Prince's Interest, and not for that to defer so
precious a benefit to both Nations. The Spaniards, during this year, were in as
bad a condition with the Portugals, and that made them the more easily incline
to wave this Article. The Alliance which about this time France had contracted
with England, and the interview of Madam Royale and his most Christian Majesty,
had given them sufficient cause of jealousy: They went, therefore, seriously
to work to effect the Treaty; and during the Winter, the King being returned to
Paris, Pimentel follows him thither, and renews the Propositions of Peace and
Marriage; to which Cardinal Mazarin and D. Lewis d'Haro conferred the finishing
hand. These two great Ministers being arrived in the Isle of Phesants, upon the
River Bidassoa, with a most magnificent Train, after many notable Interviews
and Conferences from the one part and the other, at last sign the Treaty of
Peace, and Contract of Marriage between the Infanta of Spain and the King of
France. Notwithstanding the Publication was not made immediately, that being
reserved to render the ensuing year more August and Famous: the present,
concluding with all dispositions requisite to our future hopes of an eternal
happiness, and a lasting Tranquillity to both Kingdoms, which not a year ago
none dared to promise or expect.

The Peace then being proclaimed, his Holiness, and all the Potentates and
Sovereigns of Europe, expressed their public joys and satisfaction, in those
many feux de joye which they commanded their people to make through all their
Dominions.

Anno 1660.
The Peace was Registered in Parliament the 12th of February, the Chancelier
being present, and with universal applause and acclamations.

In England, General Monk was so happy this year, as to contribute very much
to the Restoration of his Majesty Charles the second, the lawful and undoubted
Heir and Successor to that Crown.

To put a complete end to a War, which had lasted 25 Campagnes, the King
resolves on a Progress, thereby also to compose for ever the Factions in
Provence, and reduce to reason certain Pirates of Marseilles, who becoming
petty-Tyrants, did much oppress that important City. The Duke of Mercoeur
entered the place, Sword in Hand, at the head of the King's Light Horse. The
prudence and moderation of this Prince secured the Town from Pillage; and he
observed so much order and circumspection in this affair, that he soon reduced
the place to great obedience. After this, the King himself was received there
with Volleys of Cannon, and the joyful cries of Vive le Roy.

During this Journey, he caused to be demolished the Citadel of Orange, which
heretofore had been the cause of much mischief to the Catholics of the three
neighboring Provinces, and was still suspected; and withal, charged the Prince
of Orange, that hereafter he keep a more strong and able Garrison.

To secure the Marsellois from all fears of their past miseries, the King
caused to be traced out the Platform of a Citadel, and this for the future to
contain the Nobless and Citizens in their duty. His Majesty being at Aix, with
much joy and tenderness received the Prince of Conde at his return from the
Low Countries.

Their Majesty's continuing their Progress through Languedoc, were received
most magnificently at Thoulouse, and then at Bourdeaux, passing from thence to
Bayonne, and so to St. John Luz, they arrived in the Isle of Pheasants, where
was appointed the Interview of the two Kings, and the glorious reception of
Maria-Theresa d'Austria, Inheretrix presumptive to the Estates of his Catholic
Majesty. The Pomp and Consummation of these so great and splendid Nuptials, was
very advantageous to the two Crowns. The Ceremonies performed, their Majesty's
take the Road of Paris, and arrive happily at the Bois de Vincennes, where for
some days they rest, till the Queens most magnifique entry at Paris, the 26th
of August.

And now happens that horrid Earthquake, at the Pyrenean-Hills, which
swallowing the hot Bathes there, and several other places, caused extraordinary
terror to the Inhabitants of all that Voisinage.

The decease of the Duke of Orleans at Blois, the 2d of February, did much
abate our public Joy and Triumphs, their Majesty's and all the Court being
sensible of so great a loss.

Anno 1661.
To put the Treaty of Peace in Execution, and to determine the limits of our
King's Conquests, the Sieurs Courtin Master of Requests, Talon Intendant of
Artois, and Parmentier Substitute to the Attorney General, were commissioned to
treat with the Commissioners of Spain, Vilteingh, Colins, and Anglanzey: They
had labored much in these particulars a long while, first at St. Omers, then
at Arras, and lastly they concluded happily at Metz, where they limited the
Extents of Flanders, Artois, Hainault, and Luxembourg; and having worthily
acquitted themselves in their Employ, parted the 25th of November 1662.

The Cardinal Mazarin did not long enjoy that Peace which he had procured to
all France, having been almost ever since indisposed. The Fire which in the
beginning of February happened at the Louvre, and consumed the Gallery, of
Pictures that looked into the Garden, obliged his Eminence to forsake his Bed,
and retire to his own Palace, where his disease continuing, he was advised to
change the Air; which he did to Vincennes; but all this was not of force to
prevent his death on the 9 of March following, to the great regret of the King,
and all his Creatures.

But the following Marriages of the Duke of Orleans with the Princess of
England, and the Prince of Florence with Mademoiselle d'Orleans, caused the
loss of this great Minister to be almost forgotten.

The Sieur Fouquet, too intent on the increase of his own Fortune, was arrested
at Nants the 5th of September, and conveyed to Vincennes, and from thence to
the Bastille. He was the first cause of the erection of the Chamber of Justice,
which has been so advantageous to those people that deal in these affairs, by
the detection of the wasting of the King's Revenues, which they have applied to
their own private uses, and to the great Purchases which they have made in the
Kingdom.

The extraordinary profusion in the Conduct of this Minister, obliged the King
to take some pains in the reformation of his own Estate. We may say, that
hereupon he effected two wondrous things, and by which he surprised the
Politicians. The admirable order and Economy which he established in his own
house, and the Military Discipline in his Armies; in all which particulars he
raised the Grandeur and Dignity of the Offices, and yet made as well the high
as low Officers themselves exactly subject to his own Authority and Power, who
all remain at present in their perfect duty and dependence. The other thing is,
his having made himself so absolute a Master of all the Citadels and Fortresses
of his Dominions, so that the Princes and Officers of the Crown, the Governors
of Provinces, and of particular places, who heretofore made themselves of too
great value and consideration, are now in a perfect obedience.

He suppressed the Office of Super-Intendant of the Finances, and certain
Officiers de l'Espargue.
Officers in his Exchequer, and established a Council and Treasury Royal, where
nothing can be proposed, nor one single Sol paid out of his Coffers, unless it
has been there first resolved and ordered. But that which is most admirable,
is, that his Majesty does himself consider and weigh all things, as well of
great, as small concern, whether far off or near, necessary or superfluous. His
Manufactures, and Buildings at the Louvre, Tuilleries, and other Houses Royal,
have found a place in that vast Spirit, amidst the Citadels, and other
important places of his Kingdom. War, and affairs of State, have not absolutely
banished from his mind Pleasure and Magnificence: But having first heard the
serious discourses of the Marshall de Turenne, and the Sieur Colbert, he is
pleased to confer with our Illustrious Artisans, le Brun, le Nore, and all
those excellent Spirits who have the very genius and perfection of their
several Arts.

It seems about this time, Spain was minded to try whether his most Christian
Majesty's new form of Government would be maintained with force and vigor. To
this purpose, the Baron de Batteville past an affront on the Comte d'Estrade,
at the entry of the Swede's Ambassador Extraordinary at London. And the
Spaniards being the stronger, killed some French on the 10th of October. After
this, persuading the King of England that their Master had always acknowledged
him, and assisted against Cromwell, they endeavored to draw him into the
quarrel of his Catholic Majesty. Hereupon, our King complains at Madrid, and
Bruxelles, and calls home his Commissioners, who were laboring with those of
Spain about settling the Limits of Flanders. In fine, France came off with
honor in this action; and the Marquess de Fuentes, Ambassador extraordinary
from Spain, made our King reparation, and assured him, that his Master had
given order to all his Ambassadors and Ministers, to abstain, and strive no
more with those of France in all such Ceremonies and public actions where they
both happen to assist. This was performed in the presence of eight Ambassadors
and 22 Residents.

The Nativities of the Dauphin of France, and Prince of Spain, the first and
ninth of November, was a new Blessing to both Nations. Oh what disputes shall
these Illustrious Competitors hereafter manage, to maintain the Grandeur and
Glory of their Predecessors!

The King resolving a new promotion of Knights of both his Orders, a general
Chapter was held at Fontainbleau about the end of December. Here, to the
admiration of all men, the Duke of Longueville demanded precedence of him of
Vendome, scilt. the next place after the first Princes of the Blood; but in
regard of those Declarations, which Henry the great granted for the Duke of
Vendome the 15th of April 1610, Registered in the Parliament of Paris the 30th
of the same, the Duke of Longueville's pretensions were utterly defeated. The
Princes of Vendome having by their Legitimated birth, and in respect of
Marriage, priority above all other Princes, and a power to succeed to the Crown
before the Dukes of Longueville; and all this is comprised in the said
Declarations.

On the 30th of December, the Novices marching before the ancient Knights, the
six Ecclesiastics were first received into the quality of Commandeurs of the
Order: After them, the 66 Knights Laics. The King began with the Princes of
Bourbon and Vendome; but his Majesty not able to comprehend the pretensions of
the Comte de Soissons, and the Duke of Guise, they were not received, saying,
he would have them two go together, and march with the Dukes of Mercoeur, and
Beaufort, who by right of Birth, and by the Declaration of Henry the Great,
take place after the Bourbons, and ought to precede the Princes of Courtenay,
and Portugal, when they are acknowledged and received into this Quality. This
was adjudged authentickly, and with great and mature consideration of the Case,
and executed in the presence of the most Great and August Assembly of the
Kingdom, and in the sight of more than 100000 Witnesses, all the people that
were present at this so gallant action.

Anno 1662.
The next day, being the first of January, the grand Ceremony was continued at
the Augustins, the Knights wearing the Collers of the Orders; and the second,
being apparelled in Mourning-Robes, they assist at a solemn Service for the
Knights deceased; at which was a most magnificent Representation; a King at
Arms placed at the Head, and four Heralds at the Corners.

And now it was that the Portugals had so well defended themselves during this
first Campaign, that the Spaniards were forced to begin a new War.

On the 19th of January, the Carnaval begun with a Balet consisting of nine
entries, at the Madame's; in which, to render it the more excellent, was no
omission of cost, or pleasing objects. The grand Ball was danced the seventh of
February, where the Grandeur and glory of the House of France was most lively
represented, with the fifteen Alliances which she had contracted in the
Imperial Family.

The Treaty with the Duke of Lorain, in which he released all his Estates to
our King, under diverse Conditions, reserving, however, to himself the
Possession, was verified the 27th of February.

At this time the Portugals contracted a strict Alliance with England, giving
their Infanta, Tangier, and other advantageous Conditions to Charles the
second, for his defense and assistance against the King of Spain. The Succors
which they drew from thence, and France, have established that Crown against
all the efforts of his Catholic Majesty.

On the 27th of April, Peace, and a Renovation of the Alliance betwixt France
and Holland, was concluded and signed, after a Negotiation of eighteen Months.

It was on the 18th of June following, that the famous Carrousel, or Triumphant
Combat on Horseback began. It was composed of five Squadrons or Companies. That
of the King, were all apparrelled in the ancient Roman habit: That of the Duke
of Orleans, represented Persians; the Prince of Conde, Turks; the Duke of
Enguien, Indians; and the Duke of Guise, the Savages. The party of the Prince
of Conde gained the Prize, and received a Diamond from the Queen-Mothers hand.

The attempt late made at Rome, the 20th of August, on the persons of the Duke
and Duchess of Crequy, by the factions of the The Pope's Guards.
Corses and Sergeants.
Sbirres, against the Law of Nations, and the cruel and unjust persecution
raised against the French, caused the Duke Cesarini, and the other Partisans
and friends of this Crown, to oblige the Ambassador and his L' Ambassadrice, in
the Original.
Lady to quit the City, and retire into the Estates of Tuscany, and so return
into France. The Church, and indeed all Europe found themselves much
scandalized at so soul an action, much blaming the Fauters and adherents of
this capital Crime, which made so great a noise, and in the end was determined
in a Treaty.

The Marquess Mathei, a chief Minister and Plenipotentiary of his Imperial
Majesty, was expelled from his service, for having, unknown to him, and without
his agreement, accepted the Office of Commander of his Holiness's Arms.

The Emperor and our King were at this time reconciled, by the mediation of
the Marquess de la Fuente; the Comte Fuensaldagne having labored in that
affair four years without effect. And their Majesty's gave mutual testimonies
of affection and sincerity, by several Letters which this Ambassador exchanged
in the month of September.

Great joy appeared in France and Spain, at the birth of Madame at the Louvre,
the eighteenth of November. This Princess was Ondoyee.
Christened privately by the Cardinal Antoine, in presence of the whole Court;
and the 27th of December, the public Ceremony of her Baptism was performed by
his Eminence, she being named Anne-Elizabeth, by the Queen Mother, and the
Monsieur. She deceased the 30th following, and her Body was conveyed to St.
Denis.

About this time a Courier arrived to inform the King of the delivery of
Dunkirk, the Fort of Mardike, and the greater and lesser Fort of Bergue, and
that his Troops were entered. Presently upon this news, his Majesty sets out for
the place, where he made his entry the second of December, and returned again
the sixth, with the same diligence that at first he had taken the Voyage,
accompanied with the Duke of Enguien and Duke of Beaufort; this last but lately
landed from giving chase to the Pirates of Barbary.

This year was made happy in a conclusion of Marriage between the Duke of
Savoy, and Mademoiselle de Valois.

The Ballet of the Arts, consisting of seven Entries, was danced the first time
at Madame's, where was present the Prince, Eldest son to the King of Denmark.

Anno 1663.
The Duke of Crequy's return into France, and the reduction of Benevento in the
Estates Ecclesiastic, the 14th of March, into which place the Prince de la
Ricca had retired, contrary to his word past to the Viceroy of Naples, for
having killed an Artisan, and debauched away his Wife, had much alarmed the
Court of Rome, who through a panique fear, had made several Levies, which again
were disbanded as suddenly: Which occasioned a certain Cardinal to say,
Qu'elle possedoit la Science des Contre-temps.
That they played at cross purposes, having raised Arms, nobody knows against
who, and laid 'em down again, not considering where they have made Peace.

The Ceremony of the Nuptials of Mademoiselle de Valois, and the Comte de
Soissons Proxy to the Duke of Savoy, was performed at the Louvre the fourth of
March, by the Cardinal Antoine: the seventh following, the Princess departed
for Savoy.

About the eighth of June, Dom John, who had promised to himself the Conquest
of Portugal, was beaten in a set Battle at Evora, by the Comtes of Villaflora,
and Schomberg; recovering also at the same time, the said Town, and all the
other Conquests of that Prince during the last Campaign.

The Ottomans having formed a design against the Empire, and being as yet in
no very good condition to attaque it, propose an Accommodation. In the mean
time, the Premier-Vizier, followed by 25000 Janissaries, 30000 Spahys, and 40000
men drawn out of Asia, 15000 under the Bassa of Bosnia, 14000 under him of
Silistria, 8000 other Janissaries, and 12000 Spahys under their General
Ali-Bassa, 6000 under him of Waradin, 9000 under Michel Abaffi, 12000 of
Moldavia and Valachia, and 25000 who quartered near the Grand Seignior's person
at Andrinople, enters Belgrade the 18th of June, as a Conqueror; Besieges and
takes Neuhasel the 27th of October; besides that the vast body of such an Army
did ruin Nevutrade, Novitrade, and several other places.

This year his Majesty renewed the desires of the deceased King, and his own,
for the recovery of the Commanderies of the Order. And surely the Estates ought
to be restored, after so much care and concern, which these two great Monarchs
have showed for that most lawful and just Restitution.

Marsal was invested by the Comte de Guiche, the 17th of October: this
Marshall had given order for the siege; but the King's arrival in eleven days,
and the humble submission of Duke Charles, who restored the place to the
perfect obedience of his Majesty, filled the Court with joy; as also the Birth
of a Prince of Tuscany, the ninth of August.

The Duke of Beaufort being returned into the Mediterranean Sea, continued his
usual course in performing many brave actions, and taking considerable Prizes;
all which the King expected from his valor and courage.

The Conversion of the Duke of Meklebourg, occasioned the King to confer on him
his Orders of Knighthood, and to do him several other public Honors, not
usual to any but Sovereign Princes: He is descended of the Kings of the
Vandals, and from the Herules.

The Ambassadors from the Cantons of Swisserland, having been treated at
Vincennes with a magnificence truly Royal, made their public entry at Paris
the ninth of November, with so great a splendour, that there was found more than
1000 Coaches in their Train. The eleventh following, they had Audience of the
King, who took each of them by the hand, and remained Convert, but I suppose
rather uncovered.
Covered during the Harangue of the first Ambassador; to which his Majesty
answered with much joy and tenderness. The Ceremony of the Renovation of the
Alliance was performed at Nostre-Dame, where the Cardinal Antoine approaching
the place in which his Majesty was then seated, and having placed the Book of
the Gospels before him, the King put his hand thereon with the Ambassadors,
while the Sieur d'Ormesson read the Oath. After this, Te Deum was sung, and the
Cannon discharged.

The Deputies of Avignon arriving to assure the King of the Fidelity and Zeal
of that place, were presented by the Sieur de Lyonne, and had Audience the 24th
of November, in the Grand Cabinet.

Not long after this, the Duke of Enguien espoused the Princess Palatine Anne
of Bavaria. Their Majesty's were pleased to grace the Marriage Feast with their
presence: The Bridegroom-Duke Duke dined at the Princess Palatine's his
Mother-in-law, who regaled the Princes and Princesses with extreme
magnificence. At Supper, the King and Queens were entertained at a Table of
sixty Dishes, and six distinct Services, all nobly furnished.

On the 14th of December, the King was pleased to declare in Parliament his
pleasure to bestow the quality of Duke and Pair on fourteen persons, whom he
esteemed most worthy of that Honor, as well by birth as merit; and these were,
the Dukes of Vernuil, d'Estrees, de Gramont, de la Meleraye, de Mazarin,
Villeroy, Mortemar, Crequy, Saint-Aignan, Foix, Liancour, Tremes, Noailles, and
Coaslin.

The Articles of Marriage between the Emperor and the second Infanta, having
been published the 18th of the instant December, the Contract was signed by the
Count de Pelting, Ambassador for his Imperial Majesty.

The 27th of December, deceased at Turin Madame-Royale, much lamented by her
people, and the Court of France.

Anno 1664.
With much displeasure did France and Italy behold the death of the Duchess of
Savoy, which happened on the 14th of January; and not long after, that of the
Archduke Charles-Joseph the Emperor's Brother, to the no less sorrow of
Germany and Spain.

The first Representation of the Ballet of Loves Disguize, was performed the
13th of February, by a most delightsome contest between Pallas attended by the
Virtues and Arts, and Venus by the Graces and Pleasures: to accommodate the
dispute, Mercury directs them to the King, whose Arbitration they also desire,
and submit to. Here the Scenes were so many and complete, the fourteen Entries
so splendid, the Habits so extreme rich, the Speeches and Poetry so charming,
the Dancers so graceful and exact, that in effect this grand Divertisement
became most admirable.

And now our Troops appearing on their march in Modena, and Parma, the Marquess
Mathei finds himself obliged to visit that Frontier, and renew his Orders to
his reformed Officers of those Forces which he had lately raised. This also
gave occasion to revive the Conferences at Pisa, between the Sieur de
Bourlemont Plenipotentiary for the King, and the Sieur Rasponi on the part of
his Holiness, which at last were happily ended by the Treaty of Peace concluded
the 12th of February, where his Majesty, the Dukes of Parma, Modena, Cesarini,
and the other Partisans and Friends of France, received all satisfaction: It
contained, among other things, that the Corses were declared incapable to serve
for the future in Rome, and the Estates Ecclesiastic: And that a Pyramide
should be erected directly opposite to their Corps-de-Garde, with an
Inscription containing the Decree against 'em. This War first made known to the
Court of France the persons of the Cardinals d'Este, Maldachini, and Imperiale.

The third of March, the Duke of Beaufort parted from Toulon with seven
Vessels, to give chase to the Pirates of Barbary, who he had always defeated,
and made Prize of, in many Encounters.

The Peace of Italy obliged his Holiness to assist the Emperor with 2000 Horse
and 6000 Foot: And it was ordered at Ratisbone, that they march with diligence,
in regard the Ottomans were incredible for number.

The 7th of May, the King celebrates a great Feast at Versaille, which lasted
three days, under the Title of the Pleasures of the Enchanted Island. It began
with running at the Ring; and here the Marquess de la Valliere received the
Prize. The second day was represented a French Comedy, intermingled with
Music, Poetry, and Entries of a Ballet: and the third a Ballet upon the Water,
and artificial Fireworks.

The Cardinal Chisi during this Legation in France, made choice of the Sieur
Visconti, Auditor of the Rota, for his Datary: the Sieur Bucinocorsi, Clerk of
the Chamber, for his Major-domo: the Sieur Roberti, for his Secretary; and for
his Protonotary, the Sieur Colonna son to the Prince de Carbognano. He was
received the 12th of May at Marseilles, with extraordinary magnificence; the
like through all the Kingdom, till he arrived incognito at Fountainbleau, where
he was received by the King at the entrance into the Queen-Mothers Cabinet des
Bains. Afterward he made his public entry at Fountainbleau the 18th of July,
and at Paris the ninth of August: and returned to Rome with the same Pomp and
magnificence that at first he arrived in France.

Germany was at this time much Alarmed at the raising the siege of Canise, and
at the loss of the Fort of Serin. The Primier Vizier had defeated the whole
force of the Emperor's Army; and had it not been for the assistance of the
French Forces there, commanded by the Comte de Coligny, the Consternation of
that action had been extreme. The Comte de la Fueillade signalized his valor
on this occasion, who arriving the 15th of August, defeated more than 10000
Turks on the Raab, where they lost 150 Colors, and sixteen pieces of Cannon,
which were planted on the other side of the River; and all this notwithstanding
the Gross of their Army was not far distant. This great success obliged the
Turkish General to march toward Gran, there to join 20000 men, and thereby put
himself in a condition to repair his said loss and shame, and also more
effectually to secure that place, and Newhausel. He called back also those
Troops which had already past the Vaag, to wast the Countries of Moravia, and
Silesia, in order to his design of extending his Conquests to the very Walls
of Vienna, and into the Hereditary Countries of the Emperor. But this Rout
obliged a Truce between the two Empires, and the Enemy to decamp the 29th of
September.

The Enterprise of Gigeri did not a little contribute to effect this; so also
his Majesty's design to render Africa and her Kings free and Christian, and to
establish in that part of the World Commerce, and the Law of Nations. This had
been truly a most Heroic action, and to the great profit of the whole World.
It had had no doubt a favorable success, had the generous resolution of the
Admiral Duke of Beaufort been followed. For the victorious are always obliged
to fight and conquer; and they never take root in a strange Country, otherwise
than by continual Combats and Battles, which make 'em feared, and casts the
people into so great a consternation, that in fine they are glad to submit to
the discretion of their Conquerours.

The Duke d'Ossonne continuing the War in Portugal with no better success than
Dom John, the Spaniards strive now to raise a more puissant Force than ever,
under the command of the Marquess de Caracene.

About this time the English offered several acts of Hostility to the
Hollanders, and prepare for a War. The Parliament raise two Millions and a half
of pounds sterling to manage it; they do much damage on the Coast of Guiny, and
New-Holland; and their Fleet which scoured the Seas, had order to see that no
English were aboard any Dutch Vessel; and if they found any, or if they refuse
to be searched, to fight 'em.

The 16th of November, the Queen was delivered of the Princess Mary-Anne of
France, who deceased the 26th of December.

This year the Venetians were at rest, le Marquess Ville having visited all the
places of that State, and left 'em in good order.

The Chevalier d'Hoquincourt with only one Ship fought gloriously against 33
Turkish Galleys, sunk five, and much indamaged the rest.

The King desirous that Justice should be done in the most remote Provinces of
his Kingdom, established a Chamber of Justice in Auvergne, where the President
de Novion did well answer the choice which his Majesty had made of so learned a
person to preside there on Grand days.

Anno 1665.
The Ballet of the Birth of Venus was now danced: It was the Invention of the
Duchess of Orleans, to whose conduct his Majesty had remitted the manage of
this affair. It consisted of two parts, both beginning with excellent Dialogues
and Speeches. The first by Neptune and Thetis, and the second by the Graces. It
contained also twelve Majestic Entries; all which was augmented with a
Masquerade of ten Entries.

The Spanish Army now consisting of 10000 Horse and 20000 Foot, that King
refuses the Mediation of the King of England, as to a Peace with Portugal;
supposing the War with Holland would sufficiently employ that Prince, and
prevent his assisting the said Kingdom.

In the mean time, the States of Holland license all private persons to equip
out what Vessels they can to cruze about, and do what mischief they can to the
English, whose Regiments they also casheered, hoping thereby to repair the
damage they sustain by the rupture of Trade.

The Admiralties on both sides strive who shall equip the most potent Navy, and
prepare for a vigorous defense: The English having made Prize of 160 of their
Vessels. But that which surprised the whole World, was, that notwithstanding
this, they joined their force against those of Alger.

The Bishop of Munster's taking Arms, and the Intelligence he had with many
Princes of Germany, obliged the Estates of Westphalia to assemble, and the
Hollanders to stand upon their guard. They also desire the Hanse-Towns at the
same time not to furnish themselves with any English Merchandise; in like
manner as his Majesty of Great Britain had obliged them not to receive any out
of Holland. And the better to defend themselves, they oblige Valdee and the
Brunswic Troops to secure their Frontiers.

About this time, the House of Austria labored unsuccessfully to match one of
their Princesses to the Duke of Savoy, thereby to draw him off from our
Alliance; on which condition they offered to join Alexandrin to his Estates,
and several other advantages; which the Bishop of Laon did not approve: He
therefore demonstrated to this Prince, that solid Goods are of far greater
consideration than empty appearances; and that his Marriage with Mademoiselle
de Nemours would settle his Estate and House, which indeed ought never to be
separated from the Interests of France. He had before this taken much pains to
conclude a three and twentieth Alliance between the Houses of Savoy and France,
of the Duke of Nemours and Mademoiselle de Longueville. This Prince did what he
could to dis-engage himself, and procured the said illustrious Prelate to be
Installed Archbishop of Reims.

And now it was that the King sent into England the Duke of Verneuil, to
endeavor a Reconciliation between his two neighbour-Nations, and prevent a
cruel War. But they met the 13th of June; and Victory seemed doubtful for a
while, till at last she declared in favor of the Duke of York; the Hollanders
loosing their Admiral Opdam, and 17 ships.

At the same time the King Solemnized a great Feast at Versaille. After which,
his Majesty did proscecute with much assiduity a former design, to unite the
two Seas by the Rivers of Guyenne and Languedoc.

The Battle of Villa-viciosa this year, did much abate the Ambition of the
Spaniards, and no less raise the Courage of the Portugals.

The Treaty of the King of England with the Bishop of Munster astonished the
Hollanders; and the Troops sent to their succors, engaged us in a War with
that Crown.

The Duke of Beaufort took and carried off the ships in the Port of Bougie, in
spite of all resistance, from their Arms, Fire, or the Artillery of five Forts
that commanded the place. He burnt the Admiral of Alger, and two other Vessels,
in the very mouth of the Harbor. Those of Alger sent out twenty ships to expel
him out of their Road, he having only four, two of which they perceived this
Prince had taken from them. They were glad to use the advantage of the Night to
fight him in: but they were reduced to the utmost Consternation, when they
perceived they got nothing but blows. In fine, they were so terrified, that
they called back their Fleet again into their own Port. The 24th of August,
under Sarcelle, he encountered five Vessels of Alger; and the order which he
gave for their destruction was so admirable, that in three hours he became
Master of three; with the other two he continued fighting, when the Powder-room
taking fire, the Report was heard ashore; and of this accident the Pirates made
use, to fire the Saint Louisa.

By this time the Hollanders had recruited, and were got to the mouth of the
Thames, where they waited the motion of the English Navy.

On the 17th of September arrived the last hour of Philip the 4th of Spain,
whose decease was followed not long after by that of the Duke of Vandosme the
22 of October. Their Majesty's and all the Court did attest their Sorrows to
the Duchess his Widow, and to the Duke of Mercoeur. To that end, the King sent
the Duke de Saint Agnan, apparelled in a Mourning-Robe born up by two
Gentlemen, the Cornered Cap, and the Collar of the Order: the Ceremony was
conducted by the King at Arms, and a Herald; who having presented him with the
Holy Water, he cast it three times on the Sepulcher of the deceased Prince,
while his Majesty's Music sing the De Profundis. The Comte de Sery performed
the same Office on the part of Monseigneur the Dauphin; and the Comte du
Plessis-Praslin, and the Marquess de Pluvaut, for the Dukes of Orleans and
Valois: which ended the Ceremony.

The first of December, the Mareschals du Plessis, d'Aumont, and de la
Ferte-Seneterre, and the Marquess de Montausier, were received into the quality
of Dukes and Pairs of France.

Anno 1666.
The decease of the Queen Mother, which arrived the 20th of January, was most
sensibly resented by their Majesty's and the whole Court. Not long after insued
a Rupture between France and England, in pursuance of the League Defensive made
by the Crown of France with the Hollanders, in the year 1662. And now his
Majesty by his Declaration, published his Intentions to relieve 'em, and join
his Forces with theirs against the English, as well by Sea as Land.

The Queen of Portugal, who had hitherto with so much glory and generosity
supported that Crown, deceased the 27th of February; at whose death the Court
of Spain took no small advantage, by their many Intrigues and Cabals which they
raised afresh in that Kingdom.

The Bishop of Munster, who had so far terrified the Hollanders, as to occasion
them to invoke the aid of France for their defense, about this time happily
concluded a Peace: this occasioned the return of our Troops. Those of Holland
have now, therefore, no more to do, than to prosecute their Marine affairs, and
mind their Wars with England.

The 29th of May, the Duke of Beaufort parted from Toulon with his Majesty's
Fleet, on design directly to meet a Squadron of the English, and fight 'em in
assistance of the Hollanders; and this they happily performed, at the same time
when our Troops by Land defended them from the Insults of the Bishop of Munster.

Notwithstanding all the endeavors and Menaces of the Port, the Venetians,
and the Marquess Ville, appeared this year the aggressors of a War, by Sea and
by Land, in Dalmatia, and in the Isle of Candy, having besieged New-Candy, and
almost blockt up Canea.

The Families of Vandosme and d'Estree received extraordinary joy at the Birth
of a Prince of Savoy; they having been at no small labor, and great expenses,
to prefer the Princesses of Nemours, and particularly the Queen of Portugal,
the ornament and support of that Crown. The assistance of France, and conduct
of the Bishop of Laon in this affair, has defeated the Spanish designs in his
intended Conquest of those Dominions, which have now by this important Alliance
taken fast root, and reestablished that ancient Kingdom.

The Fleets of England and Holland being joined the 11th of June, there
followed a terrible Battle, and so resolute, that it continued till the 14th;
at which time the English Ships retiring into the Thames, and soon recruiting
with fresh men, they put out to Sea again, and another great fight began the
fourth of August, which concluded to the equal prejudice of both parties.
Several of the English pursuing their Enemies into the Vlie, fired there a
great number of Merchants-ships. They had yet another Battle near Calais, where
the English having the Wind, and the Tempest being great, they run their
Enemies on the adverse Shore.

In the mean time, the Duke of Beaufort having taken in the Squadron which had
conducted the Queen to Portugal, sailed with intentions to join the Hollanders
at Calais; but understanding they were retired, for fear to be alone exposed to
the Enemy, he gained Breast in sight of the English Fleet, they not able to
prevent it; though in this passage some of his ships being separated from the
rest by a violent Tempest, the Triumph, the Mazarin, and the Ruby fell among
the English, where valiantly fighting, they were much torn and shattered, and
forced to retire into Havre, except the Ruby, who was so far engaged, that her
Captain la Roche grapled with the Admiral of England, intending to perish
together, and in fine obtained quarter.

After the Alliance concluded, the 25th of October, between the Hollanders and
the King of Denmark, the Elector of Brandenburg, and the Princes of Brunswick,
certain Propositions of Accommodation were set afoot; His Majesty of Great
Britain protesting not to have made any act of Hostility against that
Republic, complained that they had taken 200 Vessels before ever the War broke
out. And in order to assure Navigation, to re-establish Commerce, and procure a
Peace, the States made known to his Majesty, that it was necessary to appoint
some place neutral, where to treat as well with them as their Allies.

The affair of Breme, which had so cruelly alarmed the Hanse and Imperial
Towns, was in fine determined the 25 of Nov. the Swedes contenting themselves
with the submission of the Inhabitants.

The Duke of Valois was Baptized at the Palais Royal the sixth of December, and
held over the Font for the King of England, by the Duke of Enguien, who named
him Philip-Charles; and by Mademoiselle for the Queen. He deceased the eighth
ensuing.

Anno 1667.
The Queens happy delivery of a Princess, on the second of January, was a
joyful Newyears-gift to all France; and welcomed with the Ballet of the Muses,
adorned with many Entries, and Dialogues. This served for a pleasing
Divertisement all the Carnival; appearing always different, by reason of
continual new Embelishments and Scenes.

The Grand Seigneur having now resolved and disposed all things necessary for
the important Siege of Candy, sends the Grand Vizier to make the necessary
preparations for the siege, and to assemble in the Isle 40000 men, and 15000
Pioneers; he held it in a manner invested round with Batteries and Attaques, in
which he wrought from December, to the 27th of June, at which time it was
besieged with great vigor and resolution, and extraordinarily well defended by
the Marquess Ville, and those Troops and Succors which the Venetians had sent
him.

On the seventh of February, the Pope made a promotion of four Cardinals, the
Duke of Vandome, the Archbishop of Saltsburg, the Duke of Monstrate, and the
Sieur Delphino; and names Roberti Spinola, Visconti, and Caraccioli, who were
reserved in petto, since last year.

The several Musters of the King's Troops, and in particular, that of Ouilles,
the Feasts and Triumphs at Versailles, and those noble Divertisements of
running in Courses de Quadrilles.
Squadrons, and such other delights, surprised the Spaniards, and their
Ambassador, who became persuaded we past a whole Campaign thus.

And now the War between England, France, and Holland, growing toward an end,
Breda is chosen for the place of Treaty; at which place the several Deputies
meeting, conclude a Peace the 31 of July.

On the 20th of April, the King went personally to the Palace, to cause there
to be verified his new Ordinance, by which he reforms and regulates Judicial
proceedings.

On the tenth of May deceased the Queen of Poland; and on the 22, Pope
Alexander the 7th, to whom succeeded Clement the 9th; both which have sustained
the Grandeur and Glory of the Church with much Majesty.

The Marriage of the Duke of Guise with Mademoiselle d'Alencon, was celebrated
the 15th of May. The next day, the Court departed to put the Queen in
possession of her Rights late fallen to her in the Low Countries: the reasons
of which are public, and in Print. The march of our Armies gave the Alarm to
Flanders and Holland; and obliged the Marquess de Castel-Rodrigo to demolish
several places that wanted sufficient Forces to defend 'em. We begun at
Armentiers; and his Majesty having past as far as Charles-Roy, caused the
Fortifications to be repaired.

After this, he forces Tournay to surrender the 24th of June, and Douay the
sixth of July. On Dunkirk-side, the Marshall D'Aumont with another Army takes
Bergue and Furne, and invests L'isle, where the Siege was carried on with much
vigor, his Majesty being always in action, and going the Rounds continually.
This Town was taken after a Siege of seventeen days, and nine from the first
opening the Trenches. The Comte de Brouay, who demanded four days, was much
surprised to find the King answer with a denial, and within three hours after
force the place to surrender.

This proposition from that Governor obliged our Monarch to lie that night at
Arlebec. He ordered the Comte of Lislebonne to march with the Lorain Forces,
and join the Marquess de Crequy, and Bellefonds, and then to meet the Enemy;
which they did so happily as to defeat the Prince de Ligne, and the Comte de
Marcin; which staggered all Flanders. His Majesty was ready to assist, and
remained about a quarter of a League from Gand, sleeping in his Coach that
night at the head of the Bridge over the River of Bruges, to back and assist
his Army in case of occasion.

The Town and Citadel of Courtray was also taken, with Oudenarde and Alost;
which being retaken by the Enemy, was soon after recovered again by the
Marshall de Camp General, and demolished.

The Empress being delivered of an Archduke, their Majesty's sent the Marquess
de Guitry to congratulate the Court of Vienna, who notwithstanding enjoyed not
long that happiness.

The Estates and People of Portugal about this time forced their King to
renounce the Government, which they conferred on D. Pedro his Brother; also
Commissaries are appointed to examine the complaints of the Queen, as to a
Nullity of Marriage.

The Divertisements of Shrovetide began with a Masquerade, called the Carnaval,
consisting only of seven Entries. The first overture was performed by a
Speech; but the Dialogue between Carnaval and Gallantry, with an admirable
Consort of Music, gave wonderful satisfaction to the Spectators.

Anno 1668.
On the 21th of January, Madame was Baptized at the Tuilleries, and named by
the Duchess Dowager of Orleans and the Duke of Enguien, Maria-Theresa.

The same day was the Cardinal Duke of Vandome conducted to have Audience from
their Majesty's, by the Sieur de Saintot Master of the Ceremonies, with a very
great Train. The King having desired the Pope to be Godfather to Monseigneur
the Dauphin, the news appeared most agreeable to his Holiness, who therefore
preferred this Illustrious Cardinal to those of his own Blood, and Princes
extremely dear to him; conferring on him to that purpose, with much joy, his
Power and Authority, and that of the Holy Seat; which in truth he managed and
sustained with great Honor; giving the King to understand that it belonged to
his Holiness, represented in his person, to Name the Prince Dauphin; and to the
Bishops of France to pay to the Holy Seat, and to his dignity, all due respects
and submissions. In fine, the Dauphin was named Lewis, and the Ceremony
performed at St. Germains the 24th of March. The Baptismal Honors were carried
by the Bourbons, and the Duke of Vandome bore up the Train of the Prince's
Mantle-Royal, taking place immediately after the Princes of the Blood.

The Dispensation which Monsieur the Legate granted for a second Marriage of the
Queen of Portugal with that Prince, was an extraordinary piece of State, and
good Fortune. France and that Crown have as much cause to praise the Conduct of
that action, as the Council of Spain just occasion to appear troubled, who
under color of giving to that Prince a Daughter of the House of Austria, would
by that means, very subtly, have made themselves Masters of that Kingdom.

The Duke of Beaufort, and the Chevalier de Vandome in the thirteenth year of
his age, embarked themselves with intentions to make a descent into Spain; but
the ensuing Peace, and a violent Tempest concurring, put a stop to the designs
of our great Admiral; who notwithstanding could not but admire the assurance
and courage of this young Prince.

At the same time, the Hollanders apprehending some fears from the progress of
the King's Arms into their neighborhood, and forgetting all the benefits they
have received from France, endeavor with too much heat and precipitation a
League Defensive with all the Potentates of Europe.

The King's Voyage into the Franche-Comte, and Conquest of that Province during
the Carnaval, was a great action, and the most glorious Enterprise that any
Prince could possibly perform in less than 15 days.

The bare name and reputation of the Arms of this Monarch, forced Spain,
formerly resolved never to acknowledge the King of Portugal, to conclude a
Peace with him, and renounce the name and Arms of that Crown, the 25 of
February.

The meeting for Peace between the two Crowns of France and Spain being
appointed at Aix-la-Chapelle, the Treaty was concluded and signed the second of
April, though with a sensible regret from the French Army and Nation, who
desired nothing more, than a continuance of War with the Spaniards. But it was
at the request of Clement the 9th, that the King did yield to a suspention of
Arms during the month of April and May, in which he did more consider the good
of Christianity, than the Grandeur and Glory of his own person and Estates. By
this Treaty his Majesty kept his Conquests of the year past, leaving to Spain
that of the Franche Comte. This great Monarch, herein, sacrifizing one of the
bravest Conquests that ever shall be, to the repose of his Subjects; and this
it was which he procured them in all his Rencounters.

The Alliances which soon after were concluded between the Dukes Maximilian of
Bavaria Brother to the Elector, and Mademoiselle de Bouillon, and John Frederic
de Brunswic-Lunebourg Married to the Princess Benedicta Palatine de Bavaria,
were of no small glory to France and Germany.

The Estates of Portugal now press Dom Pedro to receive the Title of King on
the Abdication of his Brother Alphonso; but not able to persuade him to that,
they extend his power equal to that of Royalty, and in such condition he treats
with all the Potentates of the World.

The King seeking all occasions to oblige his Holiness and the Holy Sea, makes
it his own request to demolish the Piramide heretofore erected against the
Corses, by the Treaty of Pisa.

The Marquess de Crequy, de Bellesons, and d'Humieres, were created Mareschals
of France. And on the 19th of July was performed an extraordinary magnificence
at Versailles.

Great Honor was acquired by the Marquess Ville in the defense of Candy, the
Marquess de Saint Andre-Montbrun sharing with him the Glory of that Action.
These two gallant men have so signalized their valor in this Renowned
Expedition, that they have rendered their names Immortal.

The Nativity of the Duke of Anjou on the 5th of August, occasioned much joy to
the Court of France.

The ill Intelligence between the Queen of Spain and Dom John, begun soon after
the Peace; the occasion, that Prince's refusal to pass into Flanders, he
resolving to stay at Court as an obstacle to the Fortunes of Father Nitard.

The King judging the Letter circulary of the four Bishops, sent about to all
the others to unite them in resisting the Execution of the Pope's Breve which
had named several Prelates to proceed against those four, to be an irregular
action; did, by his Arrest in Council, and by the interposition of the Bishop
Duke of Laon, calm and assuage the greatest Storm which the Church of France
had perhaps ever seen, raised through the Virtues and Merits of some rare
Spirits, who with so much heat and obstinacy did oppose the Book of Jansenius;
from which approaching troubles this Illustrious Prelate found the way to
dis-engage them, with that sweetness and prudence wherewith he managed all
things, imprinting in their Hearts, at the same time, profound Sentiments of
respect and submission for the Holy Sea.

By virtue of the Emperor's Mandate brought by the Marquess de Bade, the
Electour Palatine, on the 14th of December, caused to be published a Suspention
of Arms, and Cessation of acts, of Hostility between him and the Duke of Lorain.

Anno 1669.
The Portugals were overjoyed at the Birth of the Infanta of Portugal, which
arrived the sixth of January. This Princess was named by the Ambassador of
France, after her Majesty, Elizabeth-Maria Louisa.

The Empress also was delivered of a Daughter the 18th following.

About the end of this month, the Elector Palatine, and the Duke of Lorain,
were obliged to disband their Forces, to which his Majesty's Arms under the
command of the Marshall de Crequy had compelled 'em.

And now it was that his Holiness invited all Christian Princes to succor
Candy, and to which he applied his utmost, as also to pacify the Kingdom of
Poland. He sent also a Breve to Lisbon in confirmation of that Queens Marriage
to Dom Pedro.

About this time, the Council of Spain resolved, and took some pains to raise a
Regiment of Guards, to be always near the person of his Catholic Majesty. This
Novelty was nothing pleasing to the Nobless and people; it was also one
pretense of the discontent of Dom John.

This Shrovetide was presented the Ballet of Flora, composed of fifteen
Majestic Entries. Winter made the Overture with a handsome Speech; the Sun,
who expelled him, changed the face of the Theater into a smiling Campaign. This
Glorious Planet accompanied with the Elements made the first Entry. All the
other parts were correspondent to this magnifique Spectacle; where the beauty
of the Machines, the richness of the Habits, and the Charms of the Ladies did
not a little contribute to render this Piece into the number of the most
glorious.

On the first of February, the Ministers of the Empire, Spain, England, Swede,
and the States, concluded at the Hague the Treaty of triple Alliance; the
Swedes being to receive of his Catholic Majesty nine hundred thousand Livres.

In the beginning of the Spring, the Duke of Beaufort, and the Chevalier de
Vandome departed for Toulon, there to hasten the Succors designed for Candy.

The Duke of Anjou was Baptized the fourth of March, and named Philip, by the
Duke of Orleans and Madame, representing the Emperor and Queen of Spain.

The Admiral Duke of Beaufort received from the Pope a Breve, declaring him
General of the Troops Ecclesiastic, going for Candy, to command in the absence
of Dom Vincenzo Rospigliosi. His Holiness having sent him the Standard of the
Holy Sea.

The King of Portugal demanding to go into the Isle of Terceres, he was
convoyed thither in the beginning of May, by the Comte de Prado.

Dom John, about this time, made no unhappy Agreement. He quitted Spain to
Father Nitard, reserving to himself the Title of perpetual Governor of the
Low Countries, with the Vice-Royalty and Vicariat-General of Arragon, Valancia,
and Catalonia; with power to provide to all Offices and Benefices in the said
places.

Prince Charles of Lorain, and the Duke of Newbourg, remain now the only
pretenders to the Crown of Poland. Their Partisans take Arms, and urge that
affair to so great an extremity, that they open the Eyes of the Polonois; and
the Prince Wiesnowiski being proposed to their election, he was universally
received: and thus he happily ascended the Throne of his own Nation, and of his
Fathers, the 19th of June.

Our Army having past from Toulon to Candy in fourteen days, that place being
now extremely pressed, and a fair occasion to charge the Enemy presenting it
self, Monsieur de Navailles sallied with the Army. The Duke of Beaufort would
assist with his own personal valor and courage in so brave an Enterprise. The
Chevalier de Vandome showed there his great Heart and resolution, and that he
was an accomplished Soldier and Captain. The Admiral having landed eighteen
hundred men from Shipboard, beat the Turks out of their Trenches; and no doubt
we had raised the Siege, had not a panique fear frighted our men from so
promising a Victory. The Chevalier called to several Officers by their Names;
but ineffectually. Fortune, with much happiness, and some difficulty, brought
off this young Mars from the Embarras of this sad Retreat. But the Duke of
Beaufort remained in the Field of Battle, which he had won, and which indeed he
could never be made to abandon, being there either slain or taken by the
Ottomans.

Those many great Services which the Cardinal Duke of Vandome had rendered to
the King and State, concluded with the pains he took to advance the Succors
for Candy. His Death arrived the sixth of August; a loss for which the Courts
of Rome, and France and all Provence were not easily comforted.

The Duchess of Vondome, who had been a perfect Example and Model of Virtue
and Piety, and the Queen of England youngest Daughter of Henry the great,
deceased the 8th, and the 10th of September.

And now it was that the Prince of Tuscany finished his Voyage of Europe, in
France; avowing that he had not seen a fairer Country than France, nor a more
admirable Heroes than her King.

To conclude the Events of this year, King Cazimir, after he had seen another
King Elected into his place, quitted Poland, and arrived in France, where he
was most splendidly regaled at Chantilly by Monsieur the Prince, and Monsieur
the Duke.

FINIS.

