Britannia Rediviva, Or A GRATVLATORY SERMON

For His MAJESTY'S safe Arrival and happy Restitution to the exercise of His
Royal GOVERNMENT.

Preached, at the desire of the Magistrates and Council of ABERDENE, on the XIX
of June, which they had designed to be a day of Solemn Rejoicing within the
City, for the Mercy above mentioned,

By JOHN MENZEIS, Professor of Divinity: and Preacher of the Gospel in
ABERDENE.

Psalm. 118. This is the day which the LORD has made: We will rejoice and be
glad in it.

TERTULL. ad Scapulam. Colimus IMPERATOREM sic quomodo et nobis licet, et ipsi
expedit, ut hominem a DEO secundum, et quicquid est a DEO consecutum, et solo
DEO minorem. Hoc et ipse volet. Sic omnibus major est, dum solo vero DEO minor
est.

ABERDENE, Printed by James Brown, Ann. 1660.

Unto The Right Honorable, JOHN JAFFRAY L. Provost. bailies. Patrick Moir
Gilbert Gray Alexander Alexander Gilbert Molysone
Thomas Mercer Dean of Gild. Thomas Mitchell Thesaurer:
And to the rest of the Honorable COUNCIL of the City of Aberdene.
Right Honorable,
UPon your call and invitation, this Sermon was preached, and now your command
has drawn it to the press. I cannot but observe a Divine overruling
Providence, that thong^ I have been often solicited, to publish other Papers,
both casuistique and Polemique, yet my first appearance in print, (if ever
there shall be a next,) most needs be on such a Royal Theme. I account it my
mercy, that the Lord has honored me, not only by the vocal delivery of this
ensuing discourse, to excite our hearers unto, but now also by the printing
thereof, to be (though the meanest, yet) among the standing Remembrancers, of
these two great duties, to which the LORD is signally calling these Nations,
viz. Thankfulness to the Most High God, for the late wounderfull deliverance of
Britain and Ireland; and (which is the root of the former) genuin Christian
Loyalty to our GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN, whom the Lord has with an outstretched arm
repossessed with his due rights.

Loyalty was the glory of the Primitive Christians, Confessors and Martyrs,
both under the heathen Persecutions in the first three centuries, and
afterward under Heretical Empero^rs: as CONSTANTIUS, VALENS, VALENTINIAN the
younger, Arrians: ANASTASIUS, an E^TYCHIAN: HERACLIUS, a Monothelite: yea under
JULIAN himself who from Christianity did shamefully apostatise, to gross
Heathenisme. Did not the body of JULIANS Army consist of Christians? did they
not in evidence hereof, instantly upon the death of JULIAN, proclaim IOVINIAN,
a zealous Christian, EMPEROR? When IOVINIAN, fearing lest the Army had been
ledvened with Heathenism, declyned the Empire, protesting that he would not be
an Emperor to Heathens; Did they not all with one voice, ( as witnesses
SOCRATES hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 19. and Theod. hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap.
1.) profess themselves Christians, some from the days of CONSTANTINE, Others
from the days of CONSTANTIUS? Lo a Christian Army, which retained their
allegiance under the worst of Princes, under that Heathenish Apostate JULIAN,
whom NAZIANZEN Orat. 1. adversus JULIAN. affirms to have been more pernicious,
in his Contrivances against the Church, then either DIOCLESIAN, or MAXIMINUS.
In the Army of VALENS an Arrian Emperor and bloody Persecutour were not many of
his commanders both sound in the faith and precious godly men, as Terentius,
Trajanus Arintheus and Victor; who not only publicly professed the truth; but
also with such humble freedom as became Loyal Subjects, did represent to the
Emperor ( as is recorded by Theod. hist. Eccl. lib. 4. capp. 28. 29.) his
heresis and opposition to a fundamental truth of Gul. Barclayus lib. de
potest. pape, cap. 7.
the Gospel? yet, as one says, In tam Religiosa liberate, manus abstinuerunt,
nec ultra admonitionem processit indignatio. They abstained from all violence,
and contained themselves within the bounds of Loyal freedom of admonition. Did
not Valentinian the younger, who also was Arrian, acknowledge that Ambrose had
such influence upon his Army, that if he would have given a word to the
Soldiers, they would have seized on the Emperor, and laid him fast: Hence
Ambrose LIB. 5. epist. 33. to Marcellina his sister, brings in the Emperor
speaking thus, Si vobis jusserit AMBROSIUS vinctum me tradetis. But precious
Ambrose was acted by another spirit. Of the heroic Loyalty of the more ancient
Christians under the heathen persecutions, even then when the Lord had so
exceedingly increased their numbers, that they wanted not strength to have
repulsed the injuries which they sustained from Heathens; Is not TERTULL. a
speaking witness, Apologet. cap. 37. Vel una nox etc. In one night (says he) we
could avenge our selves, if it were lawful with us to recompense evil with
evil, Si malum malo dispungi penes nos licerer: sed absit, ut aut igni humano
vindicetur divina secta, aut doleat pati, in quo probatur etc.

These and other pregnant instances of primitive Loyalty, we left upon record
sundry years ages, in our public Divinity Lectures in the famous College of
this City, founded by the Most Noble Lord, the Earl MARISCHALL; cherished by
the Honorable Council of this Burgh; authorized by that Most Illustrious
MONARCH, K. JAMES the VI. And further endowed and united with the Old College
into one CAROLINE UNIVERSITY, by K. CHARLES the FIRST, of ever Glorious
Memory. To theses now only I add the testimony of judicious CALVINE, (
though it were easy to muster up an Army, of testimonies, from Reformed
Divines, yielding a most harmonious Echo, to the Loyalty of these Ancient
Worthies.) in his Commentary on Romans 13. upon these words v. 3. Rulers, are
not a terror, unto good works; but to the evil: will thou then not be afraid
of the power? do that which is good. On which, learned Calvine commenteth thus.
Hic de vero, et quasi nativo Magistratus officio loquitur; a quo tametsi non
raro degenerant, qui Principatum tenent: nihil-ominus deferenda est illis
Obedientia, quae Prinicpib' debetur. Nam si malus Princeps, flagellum est ad
punienda populi delicta, illud fieri nostro vitio cogitemus; quod eximia Dei
benedictio nobis vertatur in maledictionem, ideoq, non desinamus bonam Dei
ordinationem revereri: and again, upon these words, v. 5. Wherefore ye must
needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Ergo (
says Calvin) etiamsi exarmatus esset Magistratus, quem impune lacessere and
contemnere liceret; nihilo magis esset id tentandum, quam si poenam statim
imminere cerneremus.

O how dissonant to the primitive Loyalty of Christians is the usurpation, of
the Bishop of Rome? who spared not to rob Leo Isaurus of a part of the Empire;
Henry the IV. of Germany, of the whole; Childerick of the Kingdom of France:
not to mention the horrid murder of the two Henry's, the III. and IV. Of Pope
Sixtus the V. his approbatio^ of the murder of Henry the III. Of the Jesuits
approbation of, and accessio^ to the murder of both the Henry's, see, beside
others, Burrhill pro Tortura Torti cont. Became. 18.. 3. p. 188. 189.
of France; the many treasonable contrivanses against Queen Elizabeth; the
Powder-plet against K. James etc.

Neither are these only the practices of Papists, but are also founded upon
their doctrinall principles, as may appear by these four.

The Four Jesuisish principles.
First is, That men in Church-orders to to whom they appropriat the title of
Clerici, cannot be punished by any Politic Magistrate, though they keep not
the Civil Laws. So expressly de Clericis cap. 28. prop. 3. Yea a little after,
he spares not to say, That their Clergiemen, are exempted by the Pope, a
subjectione Princip^m saecularium, from subjection to secular Princes. How can
these men be good subjects, who do not acknowledge themselves subjects at all?

Their Second Principle is, That what is revealed by confession to their
Priests, though it were a conspiracy, against the life of the KING, or safety
of the Kingdom; yet they ought not to discover it. Val de sac.
So commonly their Schoolmen, in their debates, De sigillo confessionis, poen.
disp. 7.
as Valentia, Valques, Suares, Lugo etc. Hence Garnet the Jesuits q. 13. pun. 4.
superior in England, who suffered, for his accession to the Powder Plot, Vas.
in 3. p. q. 93. art. 4. dub.
could pretend no other excuse, for concealing 10. Suar. in 3. p. Tom. 4. disp.
that treasonable design, but because, at 33. sect 1. n. 2. Lug. de sacr.
he alleged, (though the contrary was made out poen. disp. 23* sect. 4.
in the process,) it was revealed to him only by confession. And this is one
of the grounds upon which Suarez, made bold to condemue the Oath of Allegiance.
tendered to K. James as sacrilegious, Suar. l. 6. de defensione fidei
Catholicae cont. Anglican^ sect^ errores c. 3. n. 8. and 9.
because it required the discovery of Conspiracies, though only revealed under
their imaginary seal of Confession. I know Suarez in end, to wipe off, if
possible, the odium of this pernicious doctrine, yields that Conspirac^es
revealed by confession, may be discovered. But its with these Cautions Suar.
loc. cit. n. 11. 12
1 That the person guilty, be neither directly nor indirectly discovered. 2.
That it be done in favors of a Catholic, ( that is a Popish) and pious
Prince. Then Protestant Princes whom they hold for heretique's, are to expect
no such favor; yea nor popish Princes, whom they* upon any prejudi^e, shall
judge not to be pious. And 3. That they be so far from discovering the guil^y
person on persons, that they be not so much as exposed to a Moral or probable
hazard of being discovered by further enquiries. Is not this on the matter, to
retractat his for mer seeming concession?
Nay rather they will expose both the King and kingdom to certain ruin.
Whether this doctrine be consistent with the security of the State, let the
WORLD, but specially protestant Princes, judge.

Their third Principle is, That the Pope, by his illimited authority, can
absolve subjects from their obedience due to Princes, and ^ak void all oaths
of allegiance how solemnly so ever they be taken. This Suarez holds out to be
the received doctrine of the Church of Rome, in his sorecited treatise, de
Defensione fidei Catholicae, adversus Anglicanae which he wrote against K.
JAMES the Sixth, (...) Phoenix, for learning, at well as for other Royal
endowments, among the Princes of his age) in which Spalat. Ostens* error.
Suarez ii, c. 3. n. 58. calls this book of Suar^z, librum pestiferu^, seditionm
Magistru^, rebellionu^ buccinam.
the Jesuits grand scope, (as seems) is to teach subjects principles of
sedition and rebellion against Princes when they are not subservient to the
Popes interest* Hence l. ^. c. 22. he undertaks to prove this Position; Reges
Christianos non solum quoad personas, sed etia^ quoad regiam potesta^em, i. non
solum ut homines sed etiam ut Reges Christianos potestati Pontificis subjici.
The English of it is, That Kings not only as to their Persons, but also as to
their Royal Authority; not only as men, but also as Christian Kings are
subject to the Popes jurisdiction. Behold, the Jesuit with one blow* degrading
all the Monarchs of Europe and reducing them to the Order of Subjects. Neither
is this the private opinion, of this on Jesuit, for he declares. 2. of that
same cap. that this his assertion, communi Catholicorum consensu recepta est is
received by common consent of his pretended Catholics. But here he rests not.
In the next cap* which is the 23. he lays down this position as the received
doctrine of their Fathers, Pontificem Summum potestate coeroiva in Reges u^^
posse, usque ad depositionem, That is, That the Pope may exercise his c^ercive
power over kings even to the deposing of them. Yea this they have made an
Article of their Faith, in their fourth Lateran Council, Council. Later. ^.
cap. 3. Si Dominus temporalis requisitus et monitus ab Ecclesi^, terram suam
purgare neglexeri^ ab haeretica foe^itate -- significetur, hoc summo Pontifici
ut ex tunc vasallos ab ejus fidelitate denunciet absolutos, et terram exponat
catholicis occupandam qui eam sine ulla contradictione possideant. I know
Spalat. lib. 6. de repub. Eccl. cap. 10. n. 96 et seqq. labors to prove, That
albeit these Later a^ canons were exhibited by the Pope to the Council, yet no
sentence or definition past on them. But what ever be of this, our charge bolds
ad hominem against Bell. and the rest of that tribe: for they hold these
Canons, as the authentic decrees of a General Council.
under Innocent the Third. Suarez his drift through all his fixth book, is to
dispute against the giving or keeping of the O^^h of allegiance to protestant
Princes. Yea cap. 4. of that book. 18. he is not afraid to affirm, That the
pope may not only ^epose kings, but also take their lives; and that its law
full to any private person commissionated by the Pope to kill the KING. Si Papa
( says he] Regem deponat, ab illis tantum poterit expelli, et interfici,
quibus ipse ( Papa) id co^miserit, That is, If the Pope depose the King* he can
only be exp^s^d and killed by these whom the Pope commissionats for that
effect. Spalat. in ostens. errorum Suarez ii, cap. 6. n. 27. is so astonished
at these hell^sh tenets, orco digna, as his phrase is, that he breaks forth
into these words, Mihi dum haec lego, oculi stupent, dum haec transcribo manus
contremiscit: his eyes failed him and hands trembled etc.

I only add a fourth of their Principles, ( though they who took pleasure to
rake this dunghill, could easily fill a volume with such stuff from their
writtings) which Cardinal Bellarm. delyvers, lib 5. de Romano Pontifice, cap.
7. Rat. 3. Non licere Christianis tolerare Regem haereticum, si is conetur
subditos in suam haeresin pertrahere. That its not lawful for subjects, to
tolerat an Heretical King, if he labor to draw his subjects to his heresy.
It not this to blew a Trumpet for rebellion? because of these and such like
Popish principles, our gravest Divines, among the rest learned Davenant, in his
book entitled, Determinationes quarundam Quaestionum Theologicarum quaest. 17^
have most deservedly concluded, ^esuiticos Pontificios non posse esse bonos
subditos, That Iesuited Papists can never be good subjects; and worthy Master
Baxter in his Key for Catholics, part. 1. cap. 48. spares not to say, That
Kings are not Kings, where the Pope is folly Pope. What need we more? It not
Our Most Seren PRINCE of glorious memory K. James the VI. a Witness beyond
exception, Who in his Royal Apologi^ for the oath of Allegiance, pagg. 279.
and 280. inter opera Regia after a recital of twelve of Bellarmin's positions
destructive to Royalty, such as That O impudent and prodigious tenets
Kings, are rather servants then Lords: that they are subject not only to
Popes, but also to Bishops and Presbyters, yea and to Deacons: That Emperors,
must not take it ill, to drink, not only after the Bishop, but also after the
Presbyter. That Ecclesiastic persons, are as far above Princes, as the soul in
dignity is beyond the body: That the function and authority of Kings, is not
immediately of God or of Divine right: That Kings may be deposed by their
subjects: That Popes have deposed Emperors, but never did an Emperor depose a
Pope etc. Who, I say, after a large recital of these and other of the Jesuits
pernicious tenets, most judiciously concludes. Non magis opponi Christum
Beliali, aut lucem tenebris, aut Coelum Inferno, quam Roberti Bellarmini, de
Regibus opinio, Divinis Oraculis adversatur, That is, That the Devil is no
more opposite to Christ, nor light to darkness, nor hell to Heaven, then the
Jesuit Bellarmine's opinion of Kings is repugnant to the divine Oracles of
holy Scripture.

But Alas! What shall I say? Is it not to be lamented, if it were possible with
tears of blood? That so much advantage should have been given to the Iesuited
party for recrimination, to retort a charge of disloyal^^^^

A GRATULATORY SERMON for His Majesty's safe ARRIVAL and happy restitution to
the Exercise of His Royal Government^.
PSALM. LXXI. Verse. 20. Thou which have showed me great and sore troubles, shall
quicken me again, and shall bring me up again from the depths of the earth.

Verse. 21. Thou shall increase my greatness, and comfort me ^n every side.

Verse. 22. I will also praise thee with the psaltery, even thy truth O my GOD,
unto thee will I sing with the harp, O th^^ Holy One of Israel.


IN the words read, (leaving to preface upon the The text divided.
Psalm in general) we have these three things. First, A Great and a gracious
King, David, the Royal Psalmist and sweet finger of Israel, expressing his
sense of the deep troubles under which he^ had groaned. Thou have showed me
great and s^re troubles. II. The same David from a well grounded persuasion of
faith, promi^ing to himself, from the Lord, as signal mercies, for the future,
as his former afflictions had been bitter. Thou shall quicken me again, and
bring me up again from the depths of the earth. Thou shall increase my
greatness, and comfort me on every side. We have him III. as one who well knew
how to improve both rods and deliverances, solemnly engaging to be forthcoming
for the Lords praise, I will The first branch subdivided.
also praise thee with the Psalteri^ even thy truth O my GOD. etc.

I return, intending by a few short hints to pass through the words. In the
first branch David, holds out 1. The principal Author of all his sad
exercises: not Saul, not Doeg, not Absalom, (in time of whose unnatural
conspiracy this psalm is thought to have been penned) But Thou O Lord, (says
he,) Thou O holy Angustias multas et malas, Tremell. Magnas and malas, Pagnin
et Mont.
One of Israel, 2. He gives a touch of the bitterness of his exercises, he
calls them, great and sore troubles, that is, depth distresses. But 3. w^e have
fai^hs undervaluing prospect of all these evils. Sense had called them great
and sore troubles; but faith in a manner correcting sense, says, Thou have
sue^^ed me great and sore troubles fecisti ut experirer, Iun. et Tremell. But
they acknowledge according to the hebrew, its Fecisti ut viderem, and hence
Pagnin. Ostendisti, Thou have made me to see or showed me, as if David had
said, albeit sense do aggravate my afflictions, as great and sore troubles; yet
faith gives me another estimat of them. Its but a transient view and show of
trouble, which I have had, Thou who have showed me great and sore trouble. The
words of this branch are so plain, that they need not further explication, then
what has been insinuated in the division, Therefore I proceed to some
doctrines.

Great ones and good ones may be exercised with great and sore troubles. David,
was both a great Prince and a good man; yet was he exercised with great and
sore troubles. Ye will find the truth of this, if ye read the History of
Sa^ls persecution, and of Absolems usurpation, i^ the books of Samuel. Was not
Joseph an eminent Worthy? yet was he also exercised with great and sore
troubles, The archers sorely grieved him, shot at him, and wounded him GENESIS 49.
23. He was thrown into a pit, sold to Ishmaelits, after cast into a dungeon,
and laid in the irons in a strange Land. But what speak I of David or of
Joseph? Was there ever so great an One as our LORD CHRIST, the Son of the
Highest? or so good an One, The holy and just One. Yet behold and see^ if ever
there was any sorrow like to His sorrow!

The 1. reason of the Doctrine.
A first reason of the point may be this, Great and heinous ^ins, bring on great
and sore afflictions; I never knew any rational creature afflicted, but were
sinners, either formally or by imputation. I add this caution, because of Our
Lord Jesus who never knew sin, II. Cor. 5. 21. as to His own Person, He was
conscious to himself of no wickedness, nor ever was guile found in his mouth,
I. Pet. 2. 22. yet one spared not to say, (I pray mistake not the word,) that
He was the greatest of sinners, namely by imputation: because all the sins of
the Elect were imputed to Him and charged on Him, Isai. 53. 6. He laid on him
the iniquities of us all. Dominus fecit occurrere in ^um ARR. MONT. he made all
our iniquities to meet on Him, as so many violent streams of water meeting in
one channel, and this imputed guiltiness of the Elect, was the ground of His
unspeakable sufferings; But alas, All the ^est of Mankind beside our LORD, are
inherently sinful, even this holy Prince David, so much renowned for his
holiness, had his own spots, and these very foul. Indeed if I should say, that
the greatest sufferers, are always the greatest sinners; I should sin against
the generation of the righteous; for the Lord sometimes afflicts his own, more
for the trial of their graces, then for the punishment of their
transgressions, as is clear in the case of Job; Yet it is sin which renders us
subjects capable of affliction: So that Eliphaz* word holds true, JOB. 5. 6.
Affliction springs not out of the dust. Sin is the bitter root on which
affliction grows.

Joseph with these many and bitter afflictions, even to prepare him, for the
great trust he was to put upon him; for He had appointed him to be a Prince and
Governor next to Pharaoch, in that mighty kingdom of Egypt. Wherefore GENESIS 50.
20. As for you, said he, to his brethren) ye thought evil against me, but God
meant it unto good. Before the LORD set David upon the Throne, He would have
him schooled by the cross, hunted like a Partridge, and chased from Nation to
Nation; Thus the LORD fitted him for the trust to which he was designed. Hence
ye^ find him resolving in Psalm. 101. when he comes to his Government, to
cloth himself with the z^ale of God for cleansing, both Court and Nation of
evil doers, A sweet fruit of a sanctified affliction. I desire confidently to
believe, that this has been the designs of God, in these great and sore
troubles, wherewith He has been pleased to exercise our GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN,
to fit him for the Government, and to prepare him to be an eminent instrument
of His Glory, in advancing the Reformed and Protestant Religion, both at home
and abroad. And surly a sanctified affliction is a special mean of God, to
fit men, either for Civil or Ecclesiastic capacities. Schola crucis, sch^la
lucis; The school of the cross is a school of light and instruction; Yea is
it not said of our LORD (...) Heb. 5. 8. (...) He learned by what he suffered

say, Its good being here. But our Lord looks upon an Imperial Crown on earth
as too low a Portion for a Saint. Therefore the Lord is pleased to mix water
among their wine, that they may look and pant after that Crown of righteousness
and Glory, that fades not away. The Lord had provided a better portion for
David, then the Crown of Israel. I trust also for our LATE SOVEREIGN of ever
blessed Memory, though bloody hands did rob him of his life and of an earthly
Crown, yet could they not rob him of that incorruptible Crown of Glory; Nay by
that horrid and inhumane parricide they did hasten him, to the possession
thereof. I verily believe, It was the lively expectation of, and earnest
breathings of his most precious soul after that Crown of Righteousness, which
did so strengthen him to possess his soul with such admirable, heroic, and
invincible patience, under so long (...), supra mo^^ in sublimitate vulg. lat.
Secundu^ excellentiam in excellentiam, ARR. MONT. mire supra modum Eras. In
incredibilem modum, Aug. in Psalm. 93. per supergressu^ insuper. Tertull. in
Scorp. cap. 13. Glori^ excellenter excellentis. Beza.
a tract of such barbarous and unheard of cruelties. According to that, II.
Cor. 4. 17. 18. Our light affliction (so faith calls sharpest afflictions, when
it eyes that hoped for Glory) which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, While we look not at the things
which are seen; but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are
seen, are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. Whom would
not the lively hope of this glory, animat to undergo any trials with patience?

Dear People, take heed ye provoke not the Lord. If He spare neither the
greatest nor the best of men, when they sin against him* how shall we escape?
If He smite Cedars like David, with great and sore troubles; shall shrubs like
us expect impunitie? The Lord by the rodes, wherewith he exercises great Ones
and good ones demonstrates how hatfull sin is to him in all persons. Yea let
Christ the Son of his love charge himself but with the trespasses of other men,
He shall not escape the Cross, Rom, 8. 32. He spared not his own Son. Were
this considered, and seriously believed: would we da^e to offend this
sin-revenging Majesty of God? Surely when the Judgments of God are on the
land, (especially when he smyts great Ones and good ones) The inhabitants ought
to learn righteousness. Is. 26. 8.

David, who was a darling, with great and sore troubles, yet the Lord had a
design of love in all David's afflictions; and made it out so convincingly to
David's spirit, that he professes to the praise of the Lords goodness. Psalm.
119. 71. It was good for him he was afflicted, and v. 57. That the Lord in
faithfulness had afflicted him. Luther was wont to say, Ecclesia est haeres
crucis, and again, Omnis Christianus est crucianus, and again, I have not
(said he) a greater argument against the Popes kingdom, Quam quod sine cruce
regnat, then that he reigns without a cross. The holy man was so far from
looking upon outward prosperity as a Mark of the Church, that he rather
looked on it as a badge of Antichrist. It has pleased the Lord so to order,
that our SOVEREIGN is come to his Crown by the cross. This should be so far
from stumbling us, that it ought rather to raise both our prayers to God for
him, and our expectations of him, the higher. Our earnest desire to the Lord
ought to be, that it may more and more appear, that the Lord had a special
design of love to him in all his sufferings, to make him the more
isntrumental for his own glory, and for the good of these Nations. What an
hard beginning had illustrious QUEEN ELIZABETH? clapped up in the tower of
London, carried from prison to prison, how often was she in fears, either to be
brought forth to public execution or to be secretly cut off? One day in her
prison at Wood-stock, hearing a poor milk-maid singing cheerfully: O, said she,
that my lot were exchanged with the condition of that poor milk-maid! Yea her
sufferings were such, that as one says, she well deserved the tittle of
Elizabeth the confessor, yet afterward, what a glorious Princess did the Lord
make her? What an eminent instrument was she for the establishment and
propagation of the Gospel, both at home and abroad? with what a long and
prosperous reign did the Lord bless her? so that the event did answer to
that word, where with often she propheticallie solaced her self, in time of her
afflictions: Flebile Principium, melior fortuna sequetur. Reverend Mr. Clark in
her life says of her Her very afflictions through Gods goodness did her so much
good, that it is hard to say, whether she were more happy in having a Crown so
soon, or in having it no sooner, till affliction had first laid in her a low
and therefore sure foundation of humility, for highness to be afterward built
upon, by which means she was ripned for the future rule and sovereignty. Let
our prayers to the Lord to day be, that the late sufferings of his MAJESTY who
now reigns, may have the like blessed issue. And for a door of hope, we have
his constant adherence to the Protestant Religion, in midst of so many
temptations, and that most Christian Proclamation against profannes and
debauchrie emitted shortly after his solemn reception in the city, which
deserves to be printed in letters of gold. Such gracious beginnings are very
promising.

Its a good sign of a sanctified affliction, when the hand of God is
principally and religiously eyed in the rod. David had instruments and these
most wicked to have looked after; as furious Saul, bloody D^eg, unnatural
ambitious and treacherous Absalom, that fox Achitophel, that barking dog Shimei
etc. But he looks above all these, THOU, says he, who have showed me great and
sore troubles. What a THOU is this? look to v. 22. the last of my text, THOU O
my God, THOU O holy One of Israel, he eyes God principally in all. Jobs
carriage is very remarkable as to this, Job. 1. 21. Job does not charge
Caldeans, nor Sabeans, nor the Devil with his calamities, though they were most
wickedly isntrumental in them. He does not say, the Lord gave, but the Devil
and his instruments have taken away: Nay as he acknowledges the Lord to be the
giver, so also he eyes the hand of his Sovereign providence in taking away. The
Lord, says he, gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the
Lord. As remarkable is that of Joseph Genesis 45. 3. 4. 5. When he had revealed
himself to his brethren, saying, I am Joseph whom ye sold into Egypt. They were
so troubled, and as the margin varies it, terrified at his presence, through
the conscience of their trespass against him, that they could not speak, nor I
believe well look to him: But behold holy and precious Joseph his carriage,
Come near, said he, my brethren, and be not grieved, for God did send me
before you to preserve life. He looks more to the overuling hand of providence,
then to them, in that wonderful dispensation. Ye know also David's mortified
and heroic carriage, in the matter of Shimei, II. Sam. 16. 10. When Abishai
would have executed justice on him, the King would not suffer him, For, said
he, God has said to Shimei, curse David. The religious eying of the hand of
providence in the dispensation made David so moderate in executing just
vengeance on such a Traitor.

sad rods these late years upon this land, upon our Kings, upon our Nobles,
upon our Cities; who have not had a share in the stroke? Would ye know if the
sanctified use be obtained, either of these common national rods, as each of us
have been concerned in them, or of particular and personal exercises? look if
ye have learned purely to eye the hand of divine providence in afflicting
dispensations; THOU have showed ^e great and sore troubles, said this Royal
Psalmist. When the afflicting hand of God is purelie eyed, the soul will first
humble it self genuinly, and submissivelie under his mighty hand. I. Pet. 5. 6.
It will secondly be very studious of a saving discovery of the sin, which has
provoked him, Job 34. 31. 32. The ear thirdly will be opened to discipline. Job
36. 8. 9, 10. There will be a listening to the voice of the rod: the duties will
be observed to which the Lord calls, O that this may be BRITAINS mercy! O but
that is a dreadful scripture, Isai 42. 24. 25. Who gav^ Jacob for a spoil,
and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord against wh^^^ we have sinned? for
they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law.
Therefore he has poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of
battle, and it ^ath set him on fire round about, yet he knew it not* and it
burned him, yet he laid is not to heart. The Lord keep these lands from such a
spiritual lethargy. I close the point with this word, A sanctified
remembrance of the afflictions under which we have lately been, eying
principally in them the hand of divine Providence, and and our own trespasses,
which have provoked the Lord against ^s, were a notable ballast to our spirits,
in such a day of rejoicing, for so fignall a delyverance. The day wherein the
Lord brought Israel out of Egypt, was sure a joyful day to the people of God;
yet the Lord, in the anniversarie commemoration of it, would have them to eat
the passover, which as it did c^memorat their deliverance, so also their
bondage and affliction in Egypt. Hence the Jewish rituals tell us, that at the
distribution of the paschall bread, they used these words, This is the bread of
affliction, which our fathers suffered in Egypt. A sanctified remembrance of
Gods afflicting Hand, is very useful, for tempering spirits, in a day of
delyverance.

It is but a transient view of affliction which the Lord gives to his own. The
word of the text is very remarkable as to this, Th^^ have S^EWED me great and
sore troubles David had been under very sharp troubles, if sense may be judge:
but faith corrects sense. Its but a show, but a view of trouble, which I have
had, says believing David I shall clear the point by a few reasons. As dying,
yet behold we live: as chastned, and not killed, as sorrowful, yet always
rejoyeing: as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, yet possessing all
things. He puts, as one says, a tanqua^, an as, upon all his and the people of
God their afflictions, as if they were more in seeming, then in reali^ie. He
is with them in fire and water, Isai 43. 2. The refreshing influence of his
gracious presence made some, call their prison, an Orchard of delights, and
others to sing at the stake. Hence said one, Tua prasentia Domine, Laurentio
ipsam craticula^ ^ulcem fecit. Thy gracious presence O Lord, made the burning
gridiron sweet to Laurence, when he was roasted alive upon it. Julians
persecution. but a passing clond. What were all the hardships which David met
with from Saul, after he was peaceably settled on the thron, but as the
remembrance of a show upon a stage? When Absoloms conspiracy was discussed,
what was the remembrance thereof, but like a dream when it past? Royal family
have been hitherto exercised, may be swallowed up, with such a blessed and
sanctified prosperity for the future, that all their former sufferings may be
as a dream when its past, as a show upon a stage, when its withdrawn. And this
for the 1. branch of the text, Thou have showed me great and sore troubles.

The second branch of the text.
I come to the second branch, wherein faith promises a glorious out-gate to David
from all his troubles. Thou shall quicken me again, and shall bring me up
again, from the deepths of the earth. As if he had said, I am like a man dead
and buried; I am laid in the explication of the second branch.
deepths of the earth. In abyssis says Tremell. In voraginibus ^erra, says
Pagnin. Swallowed up in the g^^s of the earth. I am civilly dead and buried,
laid by as a broken vessel in the thoughts of the people, whereof can be no
more use. So spoke sense: O but says Faith, there shall be a resurrection.
Thou O Lord wilt return and quicken me, yea Thou will bring me up from the
depths of the earth. Though I be low, yet thou will exalt me. This was much;
yet David's faith rests not here, it goes on, Thou shall increase my greatness;
multiplicabis magnitudinem meam says Montanus, thou shall multiply my
greatness, thou shall make my state, grandour and dignity more eminent then
ever, and far beyond my predecessors, and so indeed it was. And yet more, says
he, Thou shall comfort me on every side, circuibis, consolaberis me, so Montan.
thou shall compass me and comfort me, that is, thou shall surround me with
comfort: as my afflictions have abounded, so shall my comforts. Thus ye have a
short explication of this branch, I only give two short doctrines from it that
I may pass through the text.

Doct. first. Its a very dark clo^d, through which faith will not see an
out-gate. Its deep trouble indeed, wherein faith will not see a vision of peace.
David now was under great and sore trouble, yet behold what his faith says;
Thou shall quicken me again, and bring me up from the depths of the earth,
thou shall increase my greatness, and comfort me on every side. First reason may
be, Faith is the evidence of things not seen, H^b. 11. 1. when sense says, It
will not be* when reason says, It cannot be, then faith says, It shall be; I
see it, says faith, Though I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto
me, Micah, 7. 8. Yea it realizes things absent, Trem. reads these prophecies
of faith in my text, in the present. Pagnin in the pret. imperfect.
Vivificabas, faci^bas ascendere, multiplicabas, consolabaris. Faith assures the
heart as much of promised mercies, as if they were already enjoyed. Secondly,
When faith acts upon a promise, it contemns all difficulties. I see, says
faith, these and the other difficulties in the way, but faithful is he who
has promised; the mouth of the Lord has spoken, and he will perform.
Thirdly, Faith saileth in a room sea. It improveth infinite Omnipotency, the
almighty power of God. Romans 4. 20. 21. Abraham staggered not at the promise,
through unbelief being fully persuaded that what he had promised, he was able
to perform. Hence it is said, All things are possible to him that believes
Mark 9. 23.

faith; it will prove a brave supporter in a day of strait: when sense and
reason are miserable comforters, and ready to say, there is no help for thee in
God, now thou art fallen and shall never rise again: then faith will prophecy
good things as in my text; Yet God will quicken me again, and bring me up from
the depths of the ^arth. O happy they! who know by experience, what this jewel
^^^faith is. Surely I know nothing, which could have upheld, either our late
gracious SOVEREIGN, or his MAJESTY who now is, under their incomparable
sufferings, but this heavenly grace of faith. The just lives by faith, Hab. 2.
4. faith makes the believing sufferer, more then Conquero^r.

It is not unusual with our Lord to raise these eminently, whom he has laid
once very low. How low was David brought under Saul's persecution, when he was
forced to flee among heathens; and once had no other way to save his life, but
by feigning himself mad? How low was he brought by Absolem, when he is put to
flee barefooted from Jerusalem; when a dog like Shimei durst come and throw
stones at him? yet after all this, the Lord did honor him exceedingly, and as
my text speaks, The Lord did increase his greatness and comfort him on every
side. I give but another instance. How low was Job brought? stripped of all his
estate, and bereaved of all his children in one day: moreover smitten with
loathsome diseases in his person, the arrows of God, in the mean while,
drinking up his spirit: yea, and under such temptations, that as he speaks
cap. 7. 15. he was ready to choice strangling and death rather then life, yet
as you read, c. 42. 10. 12. The Lord ^urned ^ask the captivity of Job, and his
latter end was more prosperons ^hen the first; at first, he had 7000 sheep cap.
1. v. 3. at last, be had 14000 cap. 43. v. 12. at first, he had 3000 camels,
cap. 1. v. 3. at list, he had 6000 cap. 42. v. 12. and so the spirit of God
goes on cap. 42. doubling his estate in his latter days, beyond what it was
before.

For reasons take these few hints, The Lords does so, First, to show his
Almighty power that he can help at a dead lift; even when creatures are laid in
the depths of the earth. Secondly, to manifest his faithfulness, that he is a
God who keeps promise. Providence may seem to cross promises for a season;
yet the Lord is ever myndfull of his promise, and therefore in end will suffer
nothing to fall to the ground of all the good word which he has spoken.
Thirdly, To engage those whom he thus signally exalts, to tune up a song of
praise to him, Psalm 40, 2. The Lord brought me up out of an horrible pit, and
out of the myrie clay, and set my feet upon a rock and established my goings.
Now what was the result of his deliverance, is subjoined v. 3. He put a new
song in my mouth, even praise to our God. Fourthly, to engage them to be
zealous for him and his interests. Sure it becomes them, ^^^ whom the Lord has
done great things, to say, Quid retribuam Demino? What shall I render to the
Lord, Psalm 116. 12.

Our SOVERAI^N Lord the KINGS MAJESTY, to the throne of his ROYAL FATHER of
eternal memory, as either David, or any Prince mentioned in sacred or profane
history, did ever meet with. If ye consider first the low and lamentable
condition, to which his Sacred MAJESTY was brought, these diverse years
^bygone. Secondly, The manifold attempts with great and potent Armies for his
deliverance, all which were blasted. Thirdly, The unexpectednes of this
revolution: surely, When the Lord turned our captivity we were as those who
dreamed, Psalm 126. 1. Fourthly, the point of time, when the Lord appeared,
namely, when our confusions were like to be greater, and our yoke heavier then
ever. So that at evening time (as Z^ch. speaks c. 14. 7.) when all were
fearing midnight darkness, The Lord has made light to arise. And Fifthly,
which is no less admirable then any of the former, that so great a change,
should be carried on without blood. There have been many strange changes in
Britain within these twenty years, but surely none like to this, wherein the
gracious hand of divine providence has so signally appeared. Verily we may
sing and say with our Royal Psalmist, Psalm. 118. 22. 23. 24. The stone which
the builders refused, is become the head of the corner. This is the Lords
doing, it is mavelous in our eyes. This is the day which the Lord has made,
we will be glad and rejoice in it.

Now that I may close this doctrine, and withal the second Three hopeful
desires.
branch of the text, there are three things which from my heart I both wish and
hope from the Lord, to his MAJESTY: and they ought to be all our desires and
hope, in his behalf. The first is, That the Lord would increase his greatness
and confort him on every side; that he may be the most glorious, renowned and
truly blessed KING, that ever Britain enjoyed. I wish, that Patriarchall
Blessing to him which Jacoh Propheticallie pronounced upon Joseph Genesis 49. 25.
26. The Blessings of heaven above, The Blessings of the depth that lies under,
The Blessings of the breasts and of the womb, Blessings, beyond all the
blessings of his progenitors, unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills, be
upon the head of our Joseph, upon the Sacred head of our Gracious SOVEREIGN,
whom the Lord has separated to rule ever TERTUL. Apolog c. 30. Denique sine
monitore, quia de pectore oramus, (Note here, that from this phrase, sine
Monitore quia de pectore, some learned men have observed, that CHRISTIAN'S in
Tertullians time, did not wholly tie themselves, to stinted liturgicall forms
in prayer,) precantes su^us semper pro omnibus Imperatoribus, vitam illis
prolixam, Imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem,
populum probum, orbem quietum, quecunque hominis et CAESARIS vota sunt.
his people in these Nations. Blessed be he in his Royal Person, In his
Counsels and Government, in his Allies abroad, in his Subjects of all ranks at
home, in his Parliaments, Armies, Navies, Nobility, Gentry, Borroughs,
Ministers of the Gospel etc. Let him be blessed Bonis Throni et Scabelli, Poliet
Soli: both with Blessings of the throne and of the footstool, with an eminent
measure, both of Saving graces, and Kingly graces with length of days, a
flourishing Crown, with Loyal subjects, with a thriving Gospel and Church,
with pure and spiritual ordinances throughout his Dominions. Thus shall the
promise of the text be accomplished, His greatness shall be increased, and he
comforted on every side.

My second wish, (which also I hope) is, that with David in my Text, He may
look on the Lord, as the God of all his mercies, and first Fountain of them.
DAVID does not attribute these great things, which here he expects, either to
Joabs gallantry or Hushai's policy; though both were greatly isntrumental in
this delivera^ce of David, and in overturning this co^spiracy of Absalom; But
he looks above all unto God, as the first Spring, the first wheel, the first
Mover: THOU O Lord (said he) shall quicken me again, THOU shall raise me up,
THOU shall inerease my greatness THOU shall comfort me on every side. GOD was
all in all to him. IT is far from my purpose, to undervalue the atchievments of
Instruments, or to derogate in the least, from the high respect, that is due to
them. Succeeding Generations will bless that truly Noble, Valorous and Loyal
GENERAL MONCK: Whom God has chiefly honored, as an Instrument in the work;
Neither should Hushas's be forgotten, who by counsel have been assisting; I
hope these who have been most isntrumental, have learned Christ better, then
to offend, that I say, The Lord should be looked to, as the first Author of
all. Nay, themselves must, and will acknowledge, all their instrumentality to
be of Him. O so signally as the Lords hand has appeared, therefore let Him
above all be looked to: and this will help, through his blessing, to the
sanctified improvement of these late mercies.

But my third desire, (which I likewise wait and hope for) is That OUR
SOVEREIGN like another DAVID, may be Zealous for God, and the precious
interests of the Gospel. O how zealous was David for the Lord, psalm. 69. 9.
The zeal of thy House, said he, has eaten me up. O what zeal witnessed he in
dancing before the Ark, when he brought it up to mount Zion,? II. Sam. 6. 14.
15. and II. Sam. 7. What, said he, shall I dwell in Cedar, and the Ark of God
abide in Courtains? And thereupon resolves to build a Temple to the Lord. Rich
preparations made he for the Work, as may be seen, I. Chron. chapters 28. 29.
Yea, and would also have accomplished it, if the Lord had not stopped him, and
told him by the mouth of Nathan, That he would have the Hieron. in Titum. c. 1.
Episcopinoverint, se co^suetudine magis, quam dispositionis dominica veritate,
Presbiteris esse majores.
Temple built by a Solomon. The Lord was so well pleased with David's purpose,
That II. Sam. 7. 11. and 16. he promises to build David an house, and to
establish his Throne for ever. The Lord honors those who honor him, I. Sam.
2. 30. The surest way Princes can take for establishment of their Throns, is to
be zealous for, and tender of the Interests of JESUS CHRIST, his Truth, his
Ordinances, his Servants and People. We have therefore to day, earnestly to
pray, That OUR GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN may be a zealous Defender of the Protestant
CAUSE, and Ordinances of Christ in their purity, That Prelacy, superstition,
and Ordinances which at not of Divine institution, may not creep in into the
Worship of GOD within our Church. Whittak. ad ratione^^ 10. Campiani. Si preces
pro mortuis damnare and Episcopo presbiterum aequare, sit hareticum, nihil
Catholicum esse potest. Cum AERIO Hieronymus de presbiteris omnino senfit.
illos cuim jure divine Episcopis aquales esse statuit.


Yet am I not of the judgment, That Princes rights to their Crowns, depends
upon their erthodoxie in judgment; I cordially subscrive to the pure Primitive
Loyalitie of ancient Christians, See Confess. of Faith, c. 23, art. 4.
who retained their allegiance, under Heathen and Arrian Emperors; under
Infidel and Heretic Princes, as well as under these who were sound and orthodox
in their judgments: for as AUGUST. said, Qui regnare dedit CONSTANTINO
Christians, ipse dedit Apostatae IVLIANO. He who gave the Imperial Crown to
CONSTANTINE a Christian, gave it also to IVLIAN the Apostate: But blessed be
the Lord, we have not an Heathen Prince: we have not an Arrian Prince: we have
not a Popish Prince: but a PRINCE, Who has constantly adhered to the
Protestant Religion, in the furnace of affliction, notwithstanding Defensor
almae qui fidei clues, Vnius idem tu fidei, Dei Vnius, uniusque Christi Semper
er^^, es, eri^ professor. O perge (pergens tu perages) manu Forti, and secundis
usque laboribus Rem Christianam promovere, Romuleo gravis Antichristo.
Decachordon concinens liberationem Britannicam Autore. T. G.
he was compassed with as many temptations, as ever any Prince was assaulted
with. We have a PRINCE Who by his Royal Authority, has confirmed to us the
Protestant Religion in its purity: without the mixture of these humane
inventions. This is a Mercy for which we are to magnify the Lord to day, that
we have such a PRINCE under whom we may enjoy the Ordinances of Christ in
their Purity: And though it were otherwise, (which God forbid) yet Loyalty is
still our duty as subjects; But let us be earnest with the Lord by prayer; That
our GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN may be kept in the way of truth, that he may be a
zealous Defender thereof and of the Ordinances of JESUS CHRIST in their purity,
according to their first Institution; This will make Him an Eminent BLESSING to
his people: and his people truly blessed in him, and will give strong ground of
confidence of fulfilling the Promise in my Text; That God will increase his
greatness, and comfort him on every side.

I come to the third and last branch of the Text, in verse. 22. Wherein David
solemnly engages to be forthcoming to the The third branch of the Text.
Lords praise. I also will praise thee, etc. Ye have heard David expressing
his sense of his afflictions; ye heard how his Faith and hope did prophecy of
an Out-gat^; Now ye have David's heart; enflamed with love to God, upon the
confidence of this hoped for deliverance, engaging to tune up a Song of praise,
yea antidating a song of Thanksgiving. The words are exceeding sweet, but time
will not permit me to insist on them. I intend only after I have run through
them, by a few explicatory hints, to propose one doctrine from them.

There are five observable words in the verse. Which we would Five observable
words in it.
notice* THE FIRST, I will also praise thee, as if he had said, I have prayed
and poured out my soul, by supplication before Faith has brought me in a
gracious return of Prayer: That there shall be a comfortable Out-gat* therefore
I ALSO will praise thee. Prayer is a very fruitfufull duty. Its the womb, if I
may so speak, wherein the Praises of God are conceived. Would ye have your
Praises accepted to day? let them not be disjoined Prayer. Its sweet when these
two, Prayer and Praise, go together. I ALSO will praise thee* The second word
is, Even thy truth, that is, Thy true and faithful Promise. O so precious as
Promises are to them who improve them, and especially to those, who by a
believing improvement, find them made good! Such will magnify promises indeed,
even thy truth. But then thirdly, O my GOD, Its sweet, when faith in a dark
hour, can plead its interest in God. David was under great and sore trouble,
yet Faith pleads its interest. He is my God. I will not say, but faith in an
hour of temptation may be sore shaken. Saves not David himself, Psalm. 31. 22.
I said in my haste, I am cut off* and I. Sam. 27. 1. I shall now perish one
day by the hand of SAUL. But these were only swooning fits of faith: his faith
recovered strength again,

The fourth word is, I will praise thee with the Psaltery, I will sing praise
to thee with the harp. IT was the custom of old in the Jewish Church, to make
use of these and other Musical Instruments in the Worship of God, as appears
almost everie-where in this book of the Psalms, Of the form of these
Instruments, see Joseph. lib. 7. Antiq. IUD. cap. 10. POLYD. VERGIL de
inventoribus rerum, lib. 1. cap. 15. HOSPIN. de Temlis, lib. 2. cap. 23.
English annot. on I. Chron. 13. 8. Also the epist, to Dardanus, de Musicis
instrumentis, among Hieroms works.
and from I. Chron. 13. 8. Though Procopius Gazaeus cited by HOSPINIAN de
templis, lib. 2. cap. 23. spares not to say, Cultum hunc non a Deo traditum,
sed a Davide excogitatum fuisse. That this Worship was an humane invention of
David's, not a Divine Institution. Too bold an affertion, and very reflexive
upon so holy a Prophet as w^a our Royal Psalmist.

QUEST. Whether organicall Music may be used in the GospelChurch?
But if any ask, whether it be lawful to make use of organical Music in Justin
Mar. quest 107. after he had moved this question; cur cantu etia^num utatur
Ecclesiae Christiana (...). he answers, (...), etc. Hoc est, Interpret IOANNE
LANGIO, simpliciter canere insipientibus non convenit; sed instrumentis
inanimatis et crotalis cum saltatione canere; quo circa in Ecclesiis non us^^^
carminum, (...), per ejus generis instrumenta and alia insipientibus
congruentia receptu^ est. Sed simplex Cantio in iis manet* (...).
the Worship of God now under the Gospel? ITS long ago answered by an Ancient
Author in these questions ad Orthodoxos, which are attributed to Justin Martyr.
QUAEST. 107. where he says, That the Ancient Christian Church abandoned that
Pedagogicall custom: as rather beseeming Children and the infant-state of the
Church: then the Church under the Gospel, and retained only vocal singing.
Which says HOSPINIAN. ibid, was doubtless done by these Worthies, according to
the pattern of the Apostolic Church. Chrysostom, on Psalm. 150. (...). etc.
CHRYSOSTOM, on psalm. 150. says, That this Instrumental Music was permitted to
the Jews, (...), because of their weakness. And makes only this Moral
improvement thereof for us under the Gospel: As (said he,) The Jews praised God
with all Instruments of Music: so Christians are commanded to praise with all
the members of their bodies, with eyes, ears tongue, hands etc. The like
Moral application is made thereof by his disciple Isidor. Peleus. lib. 1.
Epist. 457. and lib. 2. Epist. 176. He puts the Jewish isntrumental music by
harp and psaltery in the same rank with their sacrifices; which al acknowledge
to have been typical. His words Isidor. Peleus. lib. 2. Epistl. 176. (...).
as tendered by BILLIUS in latin, are those; Quum (says he) Divinu^ Numen
victimas and cruores ob puerilitatem in qua tum homines versabantar tolerarit;
Quid miraris quod eam quoque qua per Cytharam and Psalterium celebratur musicam
tolerarit? The meaning is, Seeing the Lord permitted to the Jews their bloody
sacrifices because of the infancy of the Church State in those days; Why
should thou wonder that he permitted to them also the use of Isntrumental
Music by harp and psaltery? August. is very frequent in drawing that Jewish
custom to anagogicall allusions, in his Enarrations on the Psalms;
particularly on Psalm 57. and 68. which to him are 56. and 67. Yea the Papists
great Annalist Casar Barronius ad annum Christi, 60. page 666. a. 37. is
constrained to acknowledge, partly because of that forecited testimony of
Justin Martyr, partly because of another, which he cites out of Augustine, on
Psalm. 32. to us psalm. 33. That Organicall Music had no place in the Church
either in Justin Martyr or Augustin's days. I like well Barronius own phrase,
ab ecclesie modulatione fuisse proscriptam; That this Isntrumental Music was
banished out of the Church religious Melody. The testimony of Augustine cited
by Barronius is this. Nonne id egit instituti^ in nomine Christi vigiliarum
istarum, ut ex isto loco cytharae pellerentur? But Augustine has as express a
testimony a little after, which I thought good to add; Nemo (says he) se
convertat ad ergana theatrica, quod ei jubetur in se habet, sicut alibi
dicitur. In me Deus vota tua, quae reddam, laudationes tibi. That is, Let no
man betake himself to theatricall organs, thou have within thy self, O man,
what God requires of thee, according to that which is elsewhere said, Thy v^wes
are upon me O God, I will render praises ^nt^ thee, psalm. 56. 12. But what need
I more? seeing Bellarm. lib. 1. de honis operibus, cap. 17. Confesses; That
Organicall Music got first entry into the Christian Church only in the days
of Pope Vitalian, ann. Christi, 660. according to Platina: or, says he, if
we will credit Almoynus, lib. 4. de gestis Francorum, not until the days of
Lodovicus Pius 820 years after our Lords Incarnation. Nota secundo ( says
Cajeta^ in 2. 2. q 91. in art. 1. et 2.) quod tempore D. Thoma eccle ^^a non
utebatur organis.
And, which is yet more, Aquinas in secunda se^undae quast. 91. art. 2. spares
not to say; That the Christian Church mak^t^ not use of Psalters, harps or such
like instruments in praising the Lord, lest she should seem to Judaize. And
Cajetan commenting on that place of Thomas observes, That the Church did not
use Organicall Music in the days of Aquinas. That doctrine of Aquinas, and
Cajetan's observe thereupon netles exceedingly the later and more superstitious
schoolmen. But the more sober sort of papists themselves: as Erasmus, Caj^tan,
Lindanus and others, have lamented the profanation of the worship of God, by
their Organicall and Theatricall Music, as serving more to tickle vidi ego (
sait es Hosp. U. S.) aliquoties magna cum admiratio^e, plurim^s e ^emplis
exeuntes, quamprimu^ dulcis Organ^rum sonus cessasset: ta^tam devotionem in
animis homini^^^ concitarat.
the senses with carnal delight, then to edify the soul: In so much that
Suarez. the Jesuit, a violent defender of this superstition in his second tom.
de virtute et s^atu religionis lib. 4. cap. 8. confesses, That it is not used
in the Popes Chapel, Quia non tam gravis judicatur, because it savours not of
such gravity. If it savor not gravity, why use they it in their Cathedral
Churches? why is it at all permitted in the Worship of God, under the Gospel?
I can commend no better pattern, to Christians under the Gospel, then the
example of Christ and his Apostles, I find them singing Hymns and Psalms Math.
26. 30. Acts 16. 25. and recommending vocal praises to Christians. That place
is remarkable and apposite to the work of the day, Ephesians. 5. 18. 19. Be not drunk
with wyue wherein there is excess (a head distempered with wine is more fit to
sacrifice to Bacchus, then to praise the most High God) But be filled with the
Spirit. (sure they have need of rich supplies and influences of the Spirit, who
would be about this heavenly (...). Interpreters do vary in expounding these
three words. But generally they agree, that by them the Apostle understands
all manner of spiritual songs, whether Eucharistick, Didascalique,
Prophetique, Threnetique, etc. see Gomar and Bodius on the place.
and Angelical duty of praise) Then he adds, Speaking to your selves in
Psalms and Hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your
hearts to the Lord. A parallel exhortation to this, Col. 3. 16. Neither is that
unlike, Jam. 5. 13. Is any man afflicted among you, let him pray. Is any man
merry let him sing songs. But no where does Christ or his Apostles, in the
Gospel, commend Organicall Music. Ancient Christians, abounded in vocal
praises, as witnesses Tertull. Apologet. cap. 2. and 39. Hierom. in his epist.
4. to Rusticus, In epist. 17. to Hierom. in Epist. 17. under the names of Paula
and Eustochium to Marcella; In Christi villula tota rusticitas, et extra
Psalmos silentium est, quocunque te verteris arator stivam teneus Allelujah
decant^^. Suda^s messor psalmis so avocat. et curva attendens vitem faloe
vinitor, aliquid Davidicum canit. Heo sunt in hac Provincia carmina: he ut
vulgo dicitur amatori^ cantiones: hic pastorum sibilus. Much singing here, but
no word of Organ, Harp or Psaltery.
Marcella. August. in his Confessions, lib. 9. cap. 6. et 7. lib. 10. cap. 33.
When Plinse the Second, was giving an account to the Emperor Trajan of the
exercises of Christians, he tells, they had Ante-lucanos coetus, ad canendum
Christo et Dee: They did meet betymes in the morning, preventing the rising of
the Sun, to sing praises to the Lord and to his Christ. But no where find we
them making use of Organicall Music in the Church and Worship of God.

See Hospinian. U. S. Para' in I. Cor. 14. 7. Gualier I. cor. 14. 7. 8.
From all this, it appears, That our soundest Divines have traced the footsteps
of Christ, his Apostles and of pure Antiquity, in disallowing Organicall Music
in the public Worship of God, as appertaining to the old Leviticall pedagogie.

But to close the point, The best Instrument wherewith any 8. Zepper de polit.
Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 13. Mollerus praefat. ad comment.. in psalmos. Musculus
epist. dedicat. ante comment. in psalmos. Rivet. in Exodus c. 15. v. 21. Bodi^^
in Ephesians cap. 5. verse. 18. 19. and. c. 6. 18. Douglasius tract. de Psalmodia,
part. 1. cap. 10. Beside many more both British and foreign Divines.
can praise the Lord, is a believing and spirit^ally enlarged heart, Making
Melody in your heart, Ephesians. 5. 18. Singing, with grace in your hearts to the
Lord, Col. 3. 16. Non vox sed votu^* non chordula musica sedcor: Non clamans
sed amans, cantat in aure Dei.
Hade this been wanting; all the Music which David made with Harp and
Psalterie, had not found acceptance. I remember, Augustine in his Confessions,
makes mention of very lively impressions, which he found on his spirit, in this
precious Ordinance of praising, in the Church. Quantum fleui (says he lib. 9.
Confess. cap. 6*) in hymnis et cant^cis tuis. suave sonantis Ecclesiae tuae
vocibus, commotus acr^ter? voces illae, influebant auribus meis, et eliquabatur
veritas tua in cor meum, et ex ea astuabat affectus AUGUST. lib. 10. Confess.
cap. 33. Quum mihi accidit ut me amplius cantus qua^ res quae canitur moveat,
poenaliter me pe^^are confiteor.
pietatis, currebant lachrymae; et been mihi erat cum iis. Which I English
thus, how did I weep at the hymns and songs, at the sweet melodious voices of
thy Church? These voices, did influence my ears; and thy truth was melted and
dissolved into my heart: thereupon holy affections did boil within me, and
tears did run down, O how well was it with me then? The experience of this
melting of heart, which he had found in this divine Ordinance at his first
Conversion, kept him afterward upon his feet, when he was under a temptation,
to have altogether dissallowed vocal praises; hence* lib. 10. Confess. cap.
33. Cum (says he) reminiscor lachrimas meas, quas fudi ad cantus Ecclesiae tu^
in primerdus recuperationis meae, magnam instituts hujus vtilitatem agnosco.
That is, When I call to mind the tears which I shed at the Praises of thy
Church, about the time of my first recovery to the faith, I am made to
acknowledge the exceeding advantage of this Ordinance. May not this reprove our
spiritlesse, liflesse and formal way in setting about this heavenly duty of
praising? Ah have we not oftentimes vocem in Choro and mentem in foro? Our
voice in the duty, when our hearts are abroad, after a thousand vanities. But I
must restrain my self; I am affrayed I have been to large on this fourth word,
I will praise thee with the Psalterie, unte thee will I sing with the harp.

I come therefore to the fifth and last word, namely the Compellation, which
the Psalmist gives to God: O Thou HOLY ONE of Israel, etc. Where, what ever
had been his afflictions either by Saull before his settlment in the kingdom,
or afterward by Abselom, yet he vindicats the Lord and his holiness; O Thou
HOLY ONE of Israel, As if he had said, What ever have been my sufferings and
how wickedly soever men have carried, yet Thou O Lord art HOLY in all thy
ways, and righteous in all thy judgments. ITS the Lords peculiar Title, to
be called either absolutely The HOLY ONE, or with addition, as in my text,
Isreal's HOLY ONE. He is holy 1. essentially; Holiness is but a supervenient
quality in Men and Angels, but holiness is the Essence of God, every divine
attribute is his Essence. He is 2. holy causally, All holiness in the creature
springs from him as the Fountain. He is 3. holy exemplarlie, He is the Pattern
and Rule of all true holiness, Be ye holy, as I am holy I. Pet. 1. 16. He is
4. holy objectively, He ought to be served in holiness. He is 5. holy
emimentlie, Exodus 15. 11. He is glorious in holiness. He is so holy, that he
cannot look on sin, except with an vindictive eye, Hab. 1. 13. Sin never got a
good look from God, nor ever shall: fitly therefore is he called, The HOLY ONE,
and Isreal's HOLY ONE, because he sanctified all Israel, even the whole Nation
federally, to be a Church to himself: therefore, Exodus 19. 6. they are called an
Holy Nation, and among them he had many Jewels, Choice Ones, internally,
inherently, and savingly sanctified; Among whom, David was an eminent one: well
therefore was he styled by David, The HOLY ONE of Israel.

Doct. from 3. branch. I have run through the words of this verse in an
explicatory way, Time will not permit me to insist on the particulars, take
therefore this general doctrine from the wholl. It is not only lawful, but
also duty, whou the Lord bestows signal mercies, on a person, or nation, to
abound in praises to him. T he Holy ONE of Israel, should inhabit Isreal's
praises. If David, upon the foresight of a hoped for Deliverance, engaged so
solemnly to bless the Name of the Lord, how much more is it duty to praise
him, when the Deliverance is already wrought. We have many precedents of the
people of God in this: of Moses and Miriam, Exodus 15. of Praising the duty of
the day.
Deborah and Barak, Judge. 5. of Anna I. Sam. 2. and many others. Surely these
Lands have as much matter to bless the Lord, as ever a people; if we had
hearts to be about the duty aright, After that Athaliah, 2. King. 11. had cut
off the Royal seed, and usurped the Crown of Judah, for the space of seven
years, one only young child, upon the breasts of the Nurse, having through the
mercy of God, escaped the fury of that Bloody Usurper: When at length, by the
means of Jehojada the High Priest, Joas is Crowned, and the usurpng Queen,
received the deserved stroke of justice, its said, v. 14. The whole Land
rejoiced and Blew with Trumpets. How much more have these Lands cause to
rejoice in the Lord? who after such a barbarous and unparalleled Regicide,
after such a labyrinth and maze of confusions, which within these few days, to
humane reason appeared inextricable: who, I say, after all this, is settling
the government of the Nations, upon the ancient foundations: and has reduced
our Native and Gracious SOVEREIGN to sit upon the Throne of his ANCESTORS IT is
promised as a great mercy, Jer. 30. 21. Their Nobles shall be of themselves,
and their Governors shall proceed from the midst of them. ITS a mercy, to have
a native Prince, to rule over a people, and not strangers. They have not
natural affiction, who do not with it and rejoice in it. Were not the
fundamentals of Christianity stricken at, in time of these late Confusions; and
a standing Ministry together with Gospel Ordinances like to be overturned? And
is it not a mercy, so to have the Civil Government settled, as all interests,
both sacred and civil, may be secured? Who then can deny, but there is matter
of rejoicing in the Lord? if we had hearts, to do it Christianly. But we have
cause to be jealous of our own hearts, lest the Lord be provoked, by our
carnal deportment on such a day. Its my earnest exhortation to you, in the
name of the LORD, (I have also warrant, to speak it, in Our SOVEREIGNS name,
from his MAJESTY'S Late Declaration,) that ye neither offend GOD, nor dishonor
your SOVEREIGN, by debauching your selves to day. Dear People, be afraid to
draw on wrath to day, on the Lands, or on your SOVEREIGN, there is such a near
relation betwixt Prince and People: that the one smarts often for the others
sin. As the Apostle says Ephesians. 4. 26. Be angry, but sin not: So I today.
Rejoice, but sin not. Let forth your hearts, as much in rejoicing as you can,
providing, ye guard against sin: As there is no small difficulty, so to be
angry, as not to go beyond bounds; so I believe, it has its own difficulty,
to get the heart rightly ordered in such days of rejoicing; that we be not
carn^ll, but holy and spiritual, in the performance of the duty. Wherefore,
That your hearts may be the better ballasted in Praising and Rejoicing, I
desire you to join with it, that other necessary duty of Praying.

Reasons why earnest pray er should be joined with our praises.
There be many Considerations to move us, to be much in holding up the condition
of our Gracious SOVEREIGN before the Lord by prayer. This is 1. A duty laid
upon all subjects by the Apostle I. Tim. 2. 1. 2. I exhort, that Supplications,
Prayers Intercessions and Giving of Thanks; be made for all men, and
particularly, for Kings and for all that are in authority. Ancient Christians
were much in this duty, even under Heathen Princes, as wi^nesseth Tertull. Apol
cap. 39 Oramus pro Imperatoribus, pro Ministris little and potestatibus, pro
statu saeculi, pro rerum quiet^, pro mora finis. On this lait clause, pro mora
finis: Tertull. himself co^menteth, cap 32. (as is well observed by Pameliu^)
Dum says TERTULL. clausulam saeculs precam^r differri, Romanae diuturnitati
favemus. Were they so eatnest, for the continuance of the Roman Empire, how
much more ought we to plead with God for the perpetuity of the British Empire
in his MAJESTY'S Royal line. 2. A spirit of Government, is a special blessing
from God; Therefore we ought to be much in praying for it. SOLOMON was a very
hopfull Prince, to whom many Promises were entailed; Yet O so earnest as DAVID
is in prayer, for a spirit of Government to him, Psalm 72. 1. Give the King thy
judgments O God, and thy righteousness to the Kings son. 3. No men are
compassed with greater temptations, then Princes and Great Ones* And therefore,
They have the more need of Remembrancers before the Thron of God. 4. Who can
be such Instruments of public good, as zealous and godly Princes? And
therefore we ought to be much in prayer for them. And the rather 5. Seeing the
Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water, He turns it
whethersoever he will, prove. 21. 1. A believing Supplicant can have more
influence on the heart of a Prince, though many hundredth miles from Cour^, then
Courtiers, who are daily admitted to his Presence. When that wicked Haman was
suggesting bad counsel to that great King Asuerus, against the people of God;
Mordeeai's prayers defeated all Haman's contrivments: they influenced Ahasuerus
more then Haman's Court-sollicitations. Believing supplicants have power with
God, Isai. 45. 11. Ask of me of things concerning my sons, and concerning the
works of my hands, command ye me, Blessed be God, he who hears Prayer, has
hearts of Princes, in his hand.

6. O what an unvaluable mercy is it, when Prince and People, concur
harmoniously, each in there own sphere, to maintain and promove the public
interests of Jesus Christ in the Nations? O how sweet is it, when a Prince
rules not only over the bodies, but also in the hearts of subjects? Divines
observe Rob. Abbo^ lib. de suprema potestate Regia Praelect. 3.. 2. Animae
vocabulo requirere videtur Apos^olus, ut non corporie tantuns obsequium, sed
animae queque voluntatem et affectum Principibus accommodemus.
upon that word, Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers:
that subjects obedience to their Prince, should be affectionat and cordial,
from the Heart and Soul. Ought we not then be much at the Throne of grace;
That the Lord would bless Britain and Ireland with these rich mercies, and
that thoughts of disloyalty may be had in everlasting abhorrency by all his
Majesty's subjects. Lastly, Has not the Lord been pleading a very bitter and
long Controversy, with these Lands, and that in the view of the Nations round
about? have we not then cause, to plead with MOSES, Psalm. 90. (...) 15. 16. 17.
That the LORD, would make us glad according to the days wherein he has
afflicted us, and the years, wherein we have seen evil. That the Lord, would
make his WORK, appear unto his Servants: and his GLORY, unto their children,
that the BEAUTY, OF THE LORD OUR GOD, may be upon us. and that as Isaiah
Prophecieth, cap. 60. 18. Violence may no more be heard in our Land, nor
wasting or destruction within our borders, but our walls may be called
SALVATION, and our gates PRAISE. For these things the Lord will be enquired by
us, to do them for us. Ezekiel, 36. 37. O that a spirit of Prayer and Praise
were poured out on hearts to day* Only let me again obtest you in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, to beware of ranting, debauching and of what ever may indispose
you to these two great duties of the day, Prayer and Praise.

I close all with that word of Benajah, concerning King SOLOMON, A Gratulatory
Conclusion.
I. King. 1. 36. 37. After that Ado^ijah had taken the Throne by usurpation.
Bathsheba and Nathan came unto David, who lay a dying, regrating the matter;
Whereupon David commanded Nathan and Zadok to anoint King SOLOMON: for said he,
Solomon shall sit on my throne: him have I appointed to be R^ler over Israel
and Judah. Then said Benajah the son of Iehojada, Amen. The Lord God of My Lord
the King say s^ too. As the Lord has been with my Lord the King, so be he with
SOLOMON; and make his Throne greater then the Throne of my Lord King David. So
say I. As the Lord was with King David, so be he with our Gracious SOVEREIGN.
The Lord make the Throne of KING CHARLES THE SECOND, greater then the Throne of
either David or Solomon: greater then ever was the Throne of King CHARLES the
I. or King JAMES the VI. then ever was the Throne of any Scottish, English, or
British king. Let him be CAROLO MAGNO major, greater the^ CHARLES the great.
Now to Him who is able to do abundantly above all that we can think, To the
King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only Wise GOD, be honor and glory
for ever and ever, Amen.

Grata DEO ac REGI, nullique libentius unquam Responsura sono, Britonum Gens
accinat Amen. Et Reboaturis geminetur vocibus AMEN. T. G. V. S.


