THE Fidelity, Obedience, and Valor Of the ENGLISH-NATION, DECLARED, By way of
Pacification of His Majesty, and desire of a reunion between His Majesty and
the Parliament.

As also, That the present Forces now ready to bicker here in England may be
turned to revenge the loss of the Protestants blood in Ireland, shed by those
barbarous Irish Rebels.

Written by Walter Meredith. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin. 1642.

The Fidelity, Obedience, and Valor of the English NATION.
I Drew my breath first in the happy reign of that most famous and unparaleld
Queen Elizabeth, between whom and her people there was so sweet a harmony of
Concord (above four and forty years together) as well by the peoples obedience
to Her in admitting of Her just Prerogatives, and she again not trampling on
their Liberties and Privileges, that the whole World admired at their unity.

Out of that heavenly unity, the English Nation, who were naturally valiant and
active, (and indeed her times produced great and Noble Actions) were kept from
sloth and idleness, for what with her Majesty's assisting the French King in
his Civil war, her releeving the States of Holland against Spaines tyranny,
Her wrestling in Ireland, to civilize and suppress those notorious and
barbarous Rebels, and the many voyages made out of this Kingdom to unknown
parts of the world, the English were so employed (and so well they managed
their employment) that they brought home to their Prince Glory and Honor, and
to themselves Renown and Riches.

It pleased God I lived to see the period of Her Reign, after whose death some
great change (because it was not vulgarly known who should be her Successor)
was much feared, and expected. But see the mercy of God, a bright Star from
the North appeared, that enlghtned this Kingdom, and dried up the Tears of
sorrow, which were shed for Her loss, and filled our hearts with joy, by
sending us a King for a Queen, nay, a King of the Protestant Religion, a
Solomon for Wisdom, King James the blessed father of our now Royal
Sovereign Lord King Charles, He brought with Him another Kingdom, Scotland,
and so had his temples circumferenced with three Crowns, and as Henry the
seventh His grandfather joined the Roses, so this James joined the Kingdoms in
union.

At such time, as it pleased God to call Queen Elizabeth, to the resignation of
Her Crowns here, and to receive a Crown of Immortality in Heaven, an English
Gentleman and friend of mine was then in Paris, and accidently happend to be in
the French Kings Court, when news was brought of Her Majesty's death the King
being at dinner* one of His Gentle^^^ (...) waited at His Table, told His
Majesty, he had received Letters out of England, that Queen Elizabeth had
finished her days; at which the King (...) and demanded who succeeded Her? the
Gentleman told him, that James the sixth King of Scotland was proclaimed King,
and settled in Her Throane, and with that produced the Proclamation; which the
French King reading, and musing thereupon, suddenly brake forth into a passion
of admiration, and clapping his hand on the Table said, Is it possible that the
King of Scotland should come to the Crown of England, and not one box of the
ear given for it? The Gentleman made him this answer, Yes sir, His access to
the Crown was with so sweet and general applause, that it might well have been
thought, there had never been enmity between the two Kingdoms; whereupon the
King advancing himself from his Chair, swore a great oath, That King James
was the happiest King in the World, for that he was become King of a people
(meaning the English) who were the most faithful and obedient in the time of
Peace, and the most valiant in time of War.

These virtues Henry the fourth, that magnanimous French King was pleased to
attribute to the English Nation, out of gratitude to them who had assisted him
in his war, and had shown themselves brave men on his part. Certainly, he
himself was a valiant man, and therefore loved valor in others; and as he
commended their valor, he forgot not their fidelity and obedience to their
Prince, the Queen, in preserving Her (under God) often, from the hands of those
bloody ministers, whom the Pope and Spain had appointed, and corrupted to
destroy Her. Great pity it was so brave a Prince as he was, had not the like
obedience and fidelity in His Subjects, the want whereof brought him to an
untimely end, for he was by that paracide Raviliack murdered, by a stab at his
heart, passing in his Coach through a street in Paris at noonday.

Our good King James much lamented his death, and so did all good men of the
Protestant Religion, of which it was thought he was one, but for some worldly
respects durst not profess it openly, which some attribute an error in him,
of dessembling with God, who therefore suffered him to end his days by
violence.

King James was no dissembler, for he professed the true protestant Religion,
and maintained it with His Pen, witness His Apology to all Christian Princes,
and other excellent books of His, which are His living Monuments, He was a
peaceable Prince, He kept war out of His Dominions, when all the Princes of
the World besides were in Combustion; such was His gentle nature, that he chose
rather to spend a mass of money in Embassies and treaties for peace amongst
foreign Princes (to save the effusion of Christian blood) then with His Sword
to side with any of them.

This kept him from having enemies abroad, and He is to be accounted famous for
it; but had He drawn His sword in some actions (as without scruple of
Conscience, he might justly have done, in that of the Palatinate) the English
Nation had not so long (like blades still kept sheathed) rusted in their
scabberds; for to say truth, they were grown weak and effeminat for lack of
employment, but that was not altogether the peoples fault, for had they been
permitted (as in Queen Elizabeth's time they were) freely to make voyages into
all foreign parts of the World where they list, upon discoveries, or to trade,
both they had preserved their vigor and strength, and this Island had been
enriched more than it is, but they were prevented of this good by a late trick
of binding up the trade and trafique into foreign parts in parchment, the free
subject cannot trade beyond seas for himself, unless he be free of such and
such a Company, which has been a means that Noblemen and Gentlemen's younger
sons have kept home, lived idly and effeminately, and so ruined their
fortunes, when they might have done their Prince and Country good service, and
gotten to themselves honor, knowledge and wealth.

Queen Elizabeth and King James both had the wisdoms and happiness to keep
the Woolfe from their own doors, and to live in great peace and tranquillity,
within themselves. Next to the blessing of God, I must attribute that
happiness to the Accord of Sovereign and Subject, (woe be to them that have
now caused a discord.) And that blessing God gave for the great care both
Princes and people had to Religion, and clearing the true light of the Gospel
out of the mists and dark clouds of popery and superstition. And in those
times, I must tell you, I observed those Venerable and Reverend Fathers of the
Church whose Name and Title is now despised, (I mean the Bishops) were great
actors and instruments in the practice of piety and preaching.

It was then frequent with the Bishops to preach at the Court, Pauls-Crosse,
Spittle, nay and in private Parish-Churches, at such time, as either they were
called to Parliaments, or had other business in London; and from their lips
the people sucked both Milk and Honey, so that then there was as much running
and crowding to hear a Bishop preach, as now there is to hear such as would
abolish our Common-prayer-booke, and make men believe the Lords Prayer is not
to be used. Some of those reverend Fathers are still living, and those that are
dead, live in their works which they have left to posterity, as monuments of
their learning and virtues.

England then received much delight and comfort by their sound and orthodox
doctrine, for as then I must tell you those Bishops did not in Pulpits either
blow up the Princes Prerogative, nor infringe the Subjects privileges, neither
did they teach any seditious doctrine, no, their Sermons were instructions of a
good life and conversation, to do good and eschew evil, mingling mercy with
justice, and setting forth the rewards of righteousness, and the punishments
of vices and wickedness. They spared not at Court to teach good government,
and abroad to instruct the people in obedience to that government. They were
valiant Champions for Christ, and stood stoutly out for the maintenance of the
truth of the holy Gospel, and as their Texts served, they never came out of
(their stand) the Pulpit, before they had given Popish doctrine such wounds, as
all their papisticall Holy Water mixed with the Milk of Mary, could never yet
cure, nor will so long as the Pope claims the supremacy Ecclesiastical out of
his own Dioces. But of late (with grief of heart I speak it) some of that
venerable and holy calling, by participating too much with temporal affairs
of state, as too ambitious of Lordly titles and dignities, which withdrew them
from the true exercise of their pastoral Calling, and in their Prelaticall
government used too much austerity, introducing abolisht ceremonies, and
pressing the use of them too hard upon nice consciences, and so failing to
pursue the good presidents of their predecessors, have drawn upon themselves,
and that holy Calling, scandal and contempt.

And since by chance I have touched upon the word Ceremony, I cannot but grieve,
that now, some so strive to have no Ceremonies used about the service of God,
that they would also banish all decency and seemly gesture of reverence and
honor in the performance of our duty and service to the Majesty of Heaven.
These men look for reverence to be done to themselves, and yet they will deny
it unto God; for which of them would not think his servant a saucy companion to
wait at his Table, or come to require something at his hands with his cap on
his head? shall we then be ruled by such? No, let others do as they will, the
saving Name of Jesus shall have my reverence, whilst I have an Ear to hear,
and a Knee to bow. And as at the rehearsal of the Creed (in ancient times) the
people stood up, and every man drew his Sword, intimating thereby they would
defend their faith with their lives, I hold that standing up so excellent a
posture that I will use it also whenever I hear, Glory be to the Father, and
to the Son, and to the holy Ghost pronounced.

The present troubles of the times with us here in England do much amaze me,
and those troubles have brought to my memory the attributes given to the
English Nation (by Henry the fourth of France) of valiant, faithful and
obedient people; there was never a more fit time to show these virtues then
now. For consider well between whom the present distractions in England are, Is
it not between Sovereign and Subject? What Is the cause? a misunderstanding
between His Majesty and the Parliament. Is the fault in His Majesty, or the
Parliament? I say in neither, for under Heaven there is not a sweeter Prince of
nature and disposition; nor ever was there a more faithful and wise Council
assembled in Parliament. Sure there are some Achitophels in England, that under
hand have incenced His Majesty and made him angry, it behooves us Subjects to
beware, for the anger of a King is like the roaring of a Lion, and the raging
of many waters. But I hope my Lord the King will neither show the fury of the
one, nor the mercilesnesse of the other upon His Subjects; and that His Majesty
may be the better appeased let us all like true hearted English men (as we are)
show our obedience and fidelity to His Majesty and Parliament, they cannot,
must not, ought not to be separated; for they that profess themselves singly
for the King, with an intention to set a separation between Him and His
Parliament, are but mere Sycophants, and for the time do but flatter for
their own ends; let the King come to any distress (which God forbid) he shall
soon find them like vermin steal from him. And they that are only for the
Parliament exempting the King are fools that dote upon a body without a head;
God has joynd them, let no man separate them.

But woe is me, what do I see? great preparation for battle: with whom? even
with our selves; if God prevent it not, our English Nation is at the point of
destroying one another, when all the force of foreign Princes from abroad
could never prevail to do it.

Oh where are our reverend Divines to stand in the gap for us? Have we not one
Father of the Church left to intercede between the King and us his Subjects, as
Abraham did with God for sinful Sodom and Gomorah, and say, will thou slay the
righteous with the wicked?

Let not my Lord the King be angry if I put Him in mind of the day of His
return from Spain, I remember it was a day of much rain, but I conceive the
Heavens wept for joy; however I am sure, there was such an expression of love
to him, by all true English Protestants, man woman and child, that I have never
seen heard or read of the like in England; the Bells in steeples chaunted, the
flames of Bonfires ascended even to the region of fire, and the people so
feasted themselves, that I can witness for one little Village within five
miles of London, where I then was, there was not any from the age of ten to
threescore, but at night after their mirth and jovialty all the day in the wet
without, that went to bed dry within for very joy, the then Prince, our hopes,
and now our Sovereign Lord the King, was safely returned amongst us. And as
for the Cities of London and Westminster, and the places adjacent thereunto,
they began their Chrismas then, and never ended their mirth and joy for having
their Prince again, till Lent came that they must make themselves apt by prayer
and fasting to condole the sorrows of our Saviors sufferings for our sins.

All this joy (I confess) was but our duties, and I hope my gracious Lord the
King, like to Almighty God (whose Vicegerent over us here on earth he is) will
accept it graciously, though it were our duties, and remember it proceeded out
of a faithful and cordial love to him, and remembering it now in his greatest
anger, may alay his wrath, and move him to love and embrace us like a loving
and gracious Sovereign. And then he shall see the fidelity and obedience of
the English Nation toward him is not one jot abated, but much increased for
His honor and safety. Oh royal Sovereign try, and if it prove not so, hang
me up for a liar.

And let not my Lord the King be angry with me for speaking this one time, for
I speak out of the abundant desire of my heart to preserve my King and
Country from destruction. I have hitherto observed Gods wonderful
preservation of His Majesty and this Kingdom, and that God has done by us as
our Savior did in the Gospel, when he cured the blind man, by applying that
to restore his sight, which (to man's sense) would have put out his eyes, Spitle
and Clay; so by contrary means, God has wrought honor to our King, and
happiness to our Nation. I thus apply it, the Kingdom of Scotland lately
issued forth an Army upon us, and His Majesty (offended at it) raised a
Counter-Army here against them, there wanted nothing but to charge the onset:
then see the wonders of the Lord, the English continuing still their love and
obedience, petitions the King for admittance of a treaty, He heard them, and by
Gods blessing an everlasting peace (we hope) between us and that Nation was
confirmed. So that as it is truly said, Henry joynd the Roses, and James the
Kingdoms, I may justly say that Charles has joynd the hearts; So that what was
left unperfected by His Royal Father, is now perfected by him. Glory be to
God, and honor to His Majesty for the same.

Here are now our weapons drawn, shall we sheath them in our own bowels (God
forbid) upon the bended knees of my heart, I beseech God His Majesty will
daigne to accord and hearken to His Council the Parliament in this contest, as
he did to his English Lords in that; and no doubt but another great addition of
fame and honor, will thereby redound to His Majesty. Speedy love and peace
here in England will do it, otherwise not: Let my Lord the King, and
Parliament consider, there is now ready in the North a great Army, and
preparation for other force here in the South, if they clash, they cannot long
continue, but as was well observed, by an Honorable person in this Kingdom,
that the one must suddenly ruin the other, or both destroy the Kingdom: If
King and people join here in peace, the cost of those preparations need not be
lost, for God has given us an opportunity to turn the points of our Swords
another way, I mean toward Ireland, the safety whereof much concerns all His
Majesty's other Kingdoms. There is just cause of revenge for the blood of so
many poor Christian Protestants of this our English Nation, spilt by those
barbarous and cruel Rebels, whose savage cruelties cannot be paralleld; So may
my Lord the King perfect that work there which his Noble Progenitors left
unperfect, that is, to root out that hollow-hearted people, the popish Irish
(who as long as they adheare to the Popes supremacy, can never be loyal
subjects to their King) and plant good men there, that truly fear God, who may
serve his Majesty with all fidelity and obedience in times of peace, and
valourously in time of war, as his loyal Subjects the English have done and
ever will do to the worlds end. And so God save the King and Parliament.

FINIS.

