THE MERCENARY SOVLDIER.


I
NO money yet, why then let us pawn our swords,
And drink an health to their confusion,
Who do instead of money send us words?
Let Us not be subject to the vain delusion
Of those would have us fight without our pay,
While money chinks my Captain 'Ile obey.
II
'Ile not be slave to any servile Groom,
Let Us to the Sutlers and there drink and sing,
My Captain for a while shall have my room,
Come hither Tom, of Ale two douzen bring,
Placed Rank and File, Tobacco bring us store,
And as the pots do empty, fill us more.
III
Let the Drum cease, and never murmr more,
Until it beat, warning us to repair,
Each man for to receive of Cash good store,
Let not the Trumpet shril, ere rend the air,
Until it cite us to the place where we
May heaps of silver for our payment see.
IV
I came not forth to do my Country good,
I came to rob; and take my fill of pleasure,
Let fools repel their foes with angry mood,
Let those do service while I share the treasure:
I do not mean my body ere shall swing
Between a pare of crutches, tottering,
V
Let thousands fall, it never shall trouble me,
Those puling fools deserve no better fate,
They mirths Apposers were, and still would be,
Did they survive, let me participate,
Of pleasures, gifts, while here I live, and I
Care not, although I mourn eternally.
VI
I laugh to think how many times I have
Whiles others fighting were against the foe,
Within some Thicket croucht my self to save,
Yet taken for a valiant Soldier tho,
When I amongst them come, for I with words
Can terrify, as others can with swords.
VII
Damn me you Rogue, if thou provoke my wrath,
Canes qui multum latrant raro mordent.
'Ile carve thee up, and spit thee, joint by joint,
There Is none that tasted of my fury has,
But fear and tremble least I should appoint
A second penance for them, when my brow
Is bent, mark how the rascals to me bow.
VIII
Thus menacing I Am taken for to be
A man indeed, when I should fear to fight
With coward Thersites, and if that he
Were my Antagonist, but I delight
To fight, and to pash dame All manner of Victuals.
Ceres treasure,
To quaffe Wine
Lyens blood I take great pleasure.
IX
Proceed ye brethren, do each other hate,
And fight it to the last, I wish the Wars
May ever until doomsday properate,
And time never see a period of the jars:
For I before like to a slave did live,
Now like unto a An ignominious name given the Danes, by English men, for their
slothful and lasic living.
Lurdain do I thrive.
X
Fill us more Alc, me thinks thy lazy gate
Is slower then the Tortoise, make more speed,
An tha'st a Female of an easy rate
Let Us see her, for my flesh does tumults breed:
Run on, thou wilt wish when that day comes thou must
Give an account, that thou had been more just.

