TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealths Of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
The humble Petition of Edward Earl of Mead in the Dominion of Ireland.
Humbly Showing,
THat the Inhabitants of the Territory of the Birnes Country in the County of
Wickloe, and those under whom they derive their Estates, were for above 300.
years seized thereof, as of their Freehold and Inheritance, doing the service
of Freeholders; Yet for further confirmation of their Estates, King James 26
Junii, 1611. by his Letters under the Privy Signet, directed to the then
Deputy of Ireland to accept Surrenders from the said Inhabitants, and to agree
with them at such Rent as they would give. In pursuance whereof they compounded
for two hundred pounds yearly rent during the lives of Sir Henry and Sir
William Harrington, and after their deceases for one hundred and fifty pounds
per annum, to be paid for ever, which has been duly paid ever since: And
Surrenders were to be accepted, and Patents granted accordingly, As by an Act
of Council in Ireland dated the 11 of November 1611. may appear, which Act of
Council was approved of by King James, as by his Letters may appear. And most
of them did surrender and accept of Letters Patents.

That the late King Charles taking into his consideration the Intention of King
James for settling the Estates of all the Inhabitants, by his Letters of the 24
Maii 1628. directed that effectual grants should be made to the Inhabitants
and their heirs, and declared his express Will, that by occasion of no new
doubts that might be raised, the said Inhabitants be not again molested or
disquieted; And in the same year the said late King in consideration of
120000. li. did grant certain graces to the people of Ireland; Of which one
was, that at the next Parliament there to be holden, there should pass the
like Act for limitation of the Kings Title as passed here 21 Jacob.

The Inhabitants of the Birnes Country, paid their share of the 120000. li.
but the late Earl of Strafford in the next Parliament, being in the tenth year
of the late King, would not suffer any such Act to pass.

That your Petitioners father upon the many engagements aforesaid, sold five
hundred pounds land per annum in England, and seated himself in the County of
Wickloe, where he laid out near 10000. li.

That about April 1638. by the power and procurement of Thomas late Earl of
Strafford then Deputy of Ireland, and others of his Adherents, a Commission
issued to persons of their nomination, and unindifferent to enquire what title
the late King had to the said Territory: And the said Earl being present, none
daring to oppose him without pregnant Evidence, It was found that King Richard
the second was seized in Fee of the said Territory, and that it immediately
descended to the late King.

And whereas upon former Commissions of intituling only a fourth part was
seized, and that planted with English Protestants, yet was your Petitioners
father being of English extraction, and a Protestant, by direction of the said
Earl and his Council dated the 9th of July 1639. by the Sheriff of the
County of Wickloe dispossessed of all his Estate in the Birnes Country (viz.)
Tyne Park, Kilne Park, Galligoure, Garriduff, and two Ballihorses, and a
fair stone built house. a Moety of the town of Leybegge, two third parts of
Ballinehone, and his certain share in the towns of Gurten, le moore,
Ballinotin, Killorter, Garricho, and Rodonaghmoore, worth above three hundred
pounds per annum, whilst he was offered in liew thereof Lands not worth above
sixty or eighty pounds per annum.

All which premises (except two parts of Ballinehone granted to Sir William
Parsons, and one other part granted to Master John Usher) were by the late
Kings Letters of the fifth of June 1639. granted to Sir Adam Loftus, Sir Robert
Meredith, and Sir Philip Percival Knights, at such rents as the Deputy should
think fit, and a Patent passed accordingly at the yearly rent of 212 li. 8 s. 3
d. ob. q. So that though many were ruined by this Plantation, the late King
gained but 62 li. 8 s. 3 d. ob. q.

That the said Deputy, and other his Accomplices, knowing the weakness of the
Title, a Bill was certified hither to be passed in Parliament there, wherein
the premises amongst diverse old Plantations of that Country were inserted,
and other lands called Towerboy and Shelelagh, which were no Plantation lands,
nor contained in the said Inquisition (as your Petitioner is informed) were for
the private ends of the said Earl of Strafford incerted in the said Bill; And
the said Bill passed the houses of Parliament in that Country, not
understanding of the engagements, either of the late King James or King
Charles, or of the weakness of the grounds whereupon the Office was found, or
of the extreme inequality of the several distributions; And was an Act only
intended for securing the Estates of the Freeholders and reputed Inheritors.

That upon your Petitioners Fathers Petition to the Parliament of England, the
said late Earl of Strafford knowing the said proceedings, must needs come to
light, and how small an increase of rent came to the late King by this
plantation; It was devised that all the said lands should be passed to George
Carre, William Billingsly, and others in trust for the Earl of Strafford, and
to be passed upon the Commission of Grace for remedy of defective Titles at the
rent of two thousand pounds, which was accordingly passed by the late Kings
Letters of the nineteenth of January 16 Car. Although your Petitioners Father
did exhibit his Complaint against the proceedings in Ireland: And his Cause
then depended in the Parliament of England.

That your Petitioners Father was denied the Copy of the Inquisition, though
he petitioned for it, intending to Traverse it.

That the Commissioners for Plantation demanded sight of his Writings, and kept
them from him, till your Petitioners Father petitioned to the Parliament of
England for them, and then they were delivered.

That the like Inquisition to several Counties in Conaught and Munster were
vacated by the late Kings Order, dated 3. Apr. 17. Car.

Your Petitioners Father in November 1640. petitioned the late Parliament for
relief, who referred the same to a Committee, where his Cause was heard in
February following. And upon Master Pyms Report the 19. of March following. It
was resolved the Cause should be transmitted to the Lords; yet Master Speaker
by direction of the House by his Letter of the ninth of September 1641.
recommended the Case to the Commons in Ireland to be righted, But before any
thing done therein, the Rebellion broke out.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays, That out of your love to Justice and
Zeal to Equity, you would vouchsafe to look upon the oppression your
Petitioners Father suffered by being wrested out of his Estate by the Potency
of the late Earl of Strafford, It being the fitter Object of your Care in
regard of the former Applications to Parliaments. And that no other Court of
Justice can do your Petitioner right; And that injustice may not prevail above
one Age together: And that your Petitioner may be restored unto that which his
Father was so unjustly deprived of, with damages and costs.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray.

