Good Company: BEING A COLLECTION Of Various, Serious, Pious Meditations;

Christian Experiences, Sayings, Sentences; useful for Instruction, Consolation
and Confirmation.

By JOHN MELVIN, M. A. Preacher of the Word at Vdimer in Sussex.

Job 5.27. Lo this, we have searched it, so it is, hear it, and know thou it
for thy good.

Erubescit quisque pravam mutare sententiam, ne aut inconstans putetur, aut diu
errasse seipso Judice teneatur,

August. Nullum majus malum liberate errandi.

Id. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, and sold at his shop over against the
great Conduit, at the lower end of Cheapside, 1659.

To my beloved Parishioners, the Inhabitants of Udimer: such sufficiency of
Grace, as may bring them to fullness of Glory.
Gentlemen and Neighbors!
IN Athens was a Law called, (...), or (...), whereby all strangers were
compelled to get them Patrons: and the custom of Dedicating Books in ancient
and warrantable. If therefore bountiful charity, good esteem of Gospel truths,
entire love to the Author, be inducements to choos a Patron, I need not go
far, for in my own Parish are all these; besides, the Gentleman lives amongst
you who presented me, and has hitherto been as good as his promise to me, and
I hope he will continue so; besides many other civil courtesies from him in
particular, and you in general, for all which I acknowledge my self much
engaged. To you therefore I dedicate these my poor pains, to testify the
equal duty which I owe, and the impartial respect I bear to all, to make you
all as one Patron. I had a far and free Call to this place, and I have spent
almost one full Apprenticeship amongst you, who have ever accepted my labors,
and respected my person, though a stranger. When you were pleased to make
choice of me there was probability of a competent subsistence, in reference to
the present allowance, and the obtained augmentation, but this shortly passed
over as a cloud without water, and was never enjoied: the charitable
contribution of well-affected people has been much lessened also by their
death, which as it is my loss, so I hope it is their gain. But O the misery of
this place beyond others, which is no small grief to many of you, that out of
one Impropriation of 200 l. per annum, only 30 l. should be the painful
incumbents allowance, and but 8 l. of that pretended to be due, the rest looked
upon as a gratuity: This is harder measure, then the most rigid Sequestrators
use to their most supposed enemies; allowing them the fifth part, and tying them
to no duty. I refer all Impropriators to the serious and timely consideration
of these places, Mal. 3.8, 9, 10. Act. 19 37. not only the light of the Word,
but the light of Nature condemns it. And let men remember, that the ancient and
best Laws of this Nation so: and though a toleration at present, yet we shall
be judged at last by God's Law, not man's.

Adrichomious reports, that Ahaz Dial was made of the Brazen Altar of whole
burnt Offerings: Fecit ex Altari holocausti aeneo; 2 King. 16, 17. it was but
poor reparation, to set up a Dial with 12 hours, in lieu of the 12 brazen
Oxen, which was under the great sea. Thus carnal men conceive, Out of Mr.
Fullers Pisgah, page 400.
they may safely steal God's Dove, and stick down a feather in the room thereof.

Nature will be content with little, and Grace with less; for the just live by
faith, and comfortably too. We must look upon the Apostle 1 Timothy 6.6, 7, 8, 9.
I shall only remember you who are as a remnant left of this sharp but short
Visitation, of the same Apostles precept, Gal. 6.9. this is the main end of my
calling, and the mark I aim at in publishing and dedicating this to you, that
by a conscionable observance, and kind acceptance, you may gain much profit,
and I much comfort: In it you have the variety of many, not the prolixity of
few points. Multum loqui est rem superfluis agere verbis, Aug. Ep. 121.

In presenting you with this Tract, I will put you in mind of the charge of
noble Alexander, who conquered a great part of the world: (...); To esteem the
whole world as their Country, good men as their Countrymen, the bad as
strangers. Upon presumption of which I shall not fear to expose my brood as the
Eagles do theirs, to the rays of the open Sun. Give me leave therefore, as
your loving Monitor to commend unto you, the constant reading of the Scripture
(which may be called your Husbands Jesus Christ's Love-letter) all other books
being but scribbling and pamphlets in comparison of that: and to read it all
pari pietatis affectu, with the same holy reverence and affection; yea to
translate Scripture into your life, that your working and walking may be
Scripture explication; for as David says, Psalm. 119.96. I have seen an end of
all perfection: but thy Commandment is exceeding broad. And you have lived in
an age to see a glorious King, outlive his own, and Kingdoms earthly glory,
besides many other great alterations. O that your heart may be a repository! to
lay up carefully, and treasure this broad Commandment, when all earthly
perfections prove false and fading, your souls may be furnished with holiness
here, and happiness hereafter: and that you may be sensible, that nothing can
satisfy but grace, or glory, or God him self. The way to heaven is not strewed
with Roses, but like the crown of Christ here on earth, set with Thorns: not
smiles and loving embracements from the world, but wounds and strokes do await
all those who have received the press-money of the Spirit, and are enrolled for
the Christian warfare: and every soul must expect that of Jacob to Joseph, Genesis
49.23. Therefore the Scriptures not only makes us wise to salvation, 2 lim. 3.
ver. 15, 16. and valiant for the truth, Jer. 9.3. in these sceptick times: but
they present us with sundry platforms of the righteous conflicting with many
troubles: and in all your trials support and anchor your souls with these
Scriptures, Psalm. 34, 19. Romans 8.28 whatsoever God takes away from us, if he
give us a new heart, we may conclude he is upon the giving hand; and that he
has somewhat else to give when he has given a love unto, and a longing after
his truth: in the mean time these meditations may be a help to you in bearing
all affliction, a help to patience in suffering, to faith in believing, to hope
in waiting for the salvation of the Lord. Here are Cordials for the reviving of
spirits, and medicine for the cure of distempers, Antidotes against the
infection of spreading and soul-destroying errors, caveats against Hell-damning
drowning sins. Exhorting you to glorify God in every condition, and to have
good thoughts, and to speak good Words of God, who minds us nothing but good;
and though he should strip you naked, yet cleave to him, who orders all his
providence, and may use you as he pleases, and ye must be quiet under his
hand, his judgments being always just, though often secret. In, these evil
times, I from my heart recommend to your hearts that exhortation Heb. 12 verse
14. The sight of as many Kingdoms and their glory as Satan showed our Savior
is but vanity and vexation, without seeing of God. The Omnipotent and
Omniscient GOD, undertake the guarding and protecting of you all, and make a
hedge about all you have: and let the blessing of the Psalmist, 128.6. in its
highest performance be upon you. To conclude, in recompense of all my pains, I
heartily pray you all to pray for him who daily prays for you, and Preaches
himself

June 24. 1658 Your servant for Jesus sake, J.M.
Macte, and sic fileo: men's sana in corpore sano,

Summa libri, voti est and tibi summa mei.

J. M.



TO THE READER.
It Is the observation of judicious men, that speech is made more piercing by
taking away that which is superfluous: and instructions pointed with delight,
and brevity, pierce the more sharply, and stick the more steadfastly: for this
and some following reasons, I have here presented thee some loose pearls, filled
upon a string: or skeins of fine silk wound up in bottoms, which perhaps with a
good needle and an expert hand might have been flourished into a far larger
Work. I have more heeded the weight and benefit of of the matter, then the
order and handling of the subject: (which is the cream of many Sermons, and the
result of public observance and private reading) for words and matter close
and well couched, should not be meanlyer but better esteemed: my desire is,
only to derive instruction and consolation to tender hearts, that the love of
God in Christ, and of the Church for Christ, may be so strong in thee, as to
prevail against all other affections, and set and keep thee in the way of truth
and holiness. As also for my self to pass away some pensive hours by change of
Study, as Seneca says Ep. 85. Nec scribere tantum, nec tantum legere debemus:
altera res contristabit, and vires exhauriet; altera solvet ac diluet. Invicem
hoc iilo commutandum est. and alterum altero temperandum, ut quicquid lectione
collectum est, stilus redigat in corpus: And we should imitate the Bees, who as
Virgil says, Liquentia mella stipant, and dulci distendunt nectare cellas;
disposing of their honey with art and industry in several cells.

My work is now to bring my mind to my condition; for hitherto to I have had
but small encouragement and much opposition in the world, for my poor travels
in the Church; for it is true in our age what Ovid said, Si nil attuleris ibis
homere for as. Spiritual promotions are slow of foot, and come for the most part
halting, or in a by-way: the patrimony of the Church is leased to faction and
party, and her honors upon golden ignorants are heaped; when others of Christ's
followers are sent abroad with their Ite and praedicate, barefooted: but their
Commission large, omnicreaturae, the wide world is their place of residence.
Yet I know my reward is with my Master Jesus, who has hitherto seasonably
provided for me, and powerfully protected me in his work, beyond my desert or
expectation. It shall be my glory to be thought worthy of invidencie, whose
ignorance is not so great, but ever knows some will bite in secret, with
private reproaches. But such malignant tongues I will counterpoise with the
wind, and set as lightly by as they are vain: for there is a generation, whose
labor is to seek new fashions and Religions, and have but two posts to keep
them from the ground, Novelty and Confidence; the one rots, and the other
breaks suddenly of it self. Praevalebit veritas, truth will outlive it is
enemies; though some enemies of truth may outlive us in the flesh: they
resemble the ^uit beast, of which Cicero; Ad id solum quod adest quodque
praesens est se accommodat, paulum admodum sentiens praeteritum; not caring
what is past. But wise men weigh well the excellency of talking with those
champions of learning hundred of years since, gathered to their former dust.
Truly it is not the thirst of empty glory that makes me run the hazard of thy
censure: Non liberi quam libri pluribus exponi periculis solent, cum primum
prodeant in lucem. My comfort is, it is truth I speak; and nihil veritas
erubescit nisi solummo do abscondi, Truth fears no trial: if any thing afford
a scruple to any, he shall engage me who will require satisfaction. If any
thing seem amiss, it shall be taken as favor to hear of it from any; for I am
not of those, whose ears are stopped, when their errors are told told them. And
as Tertul. Res bona neminem offendit nisi malam mentem; Good things offend no
man but an evil mind. I am sensible also, that many have their ears open to
detractions, and he lives not who is hot hated by some. To answer these by
recriminations (the weapons of the vulgar) I disdain: and ultio haec homini
Christiano maxim indecora; or by Apologies, which as wise men observe, leave
suspicions in the Readers minds; and plures sermones provocant and plurium. The
best answer is, convitiatores sactis refellere, 1 Pet. 3.16. no confutation
like a holy life: and with the other great Apostle we may comfort our selves, 1
Cor. 4 3. I have ever declined meddling with Controversies, though sometimes
forced to oral disputes in these sceptick days, with a generation, whose
insolency is such, as to pretend gifts to justle out the Ministry and truths of
Christ: but dabit Deus his quoque sinem; these clouds without water will soon
be blown over: Ataxie was never yet long-lived. They think none live more idly
then Scholars, and that Ministers may preach without study, as the Apostles
did; and live by miracle, as John Baptist, and are so drunk with an opinion of
the Spirit, and such enemies to Learning, that they barrowcado their hearts
against common sense. Truly if I could hear a Cobbler, Tinker, or Tradesman
write and preach like the Apostles, and likewise speak all Languages by the
Spirit as they did: who of no Scholars were suddenly changed into greater
Scholars and better Orators, then ever the world bred in the best Universities,
I would see if I could prevail with my understanding to submit to their
judgments. In the mean time, I mean not to meddle with them, and I should be as
sorry to have them meddle with me. Saint Paul was brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel, wise in all the Learning of the Grecians (as Moses in the wisdom of
the Egyptians) a great Artist and good Linguist, who labored more then all.
Humane learning may be made very serviceable to divine imploiment. It may be
objected also, that these few sheets are but Collections out of other men's
Works; well, Sumpsi non surripui, and as Varro speaks of Bees de re rust. lib.
6. Minime maleficae nullius opus vellicantes faciunt deterius: what wrong have
I done; Si apparet unde sumptum sit, aliud tamen quam unde sumptum sit apparet.
And as nature does with the aliment of our bodies, so do I, concoquere quod
hausi: dispose of what I take: Thou findst fault with Barbarism, Tautologie,
Dialect, Method, being without Art, Invention, or Judgment: I will confess
thou can not think worse of me then I do of my self --

Nasutus fis usque licet? fis denique nasus,
Non potes in nugas dicere plura meas
Ipse ego quam dixi --
Yet let me tell thee, Primus vestrum non sum, nec imus; I must abide the
censure; for Pro captu lectoris ha bent sua fata libelli:

Opinion alters: so in humane race,
She makes the fancy various as the face.
Some come as Bees to suck honey, others as Spiders are for poison: And as the
Dutch-host says, in a surly manner; Aliud tibi quaeras diversorium, betake thy
self to some other Book, if this please not. And to conclude, I humbly submit
my self to the truly judicious, and thoroughly learned, appealing to their
candor, entreating them to lay aside the persons of Judges for that of friends,
this being but a Pamphlet, whether the bulk or worth be considered. And though
in this learned and knowing age, wherein so many things are written by those,
with whom lam not worthy to be named, and that I might have spared my pains,
the world already being under such a glut of Books: I am encouraged by a saying
of Saint Austins; That it is good and profitable to the Church of Christ, that
the same things be written of by diverse men in diverse books: because those
books which come to the view of some, will not come to the sight of others, and
by this means the truths of Christ will be the sooner and easier spread and
propagated. And therefore to testify my love to the truth, that the sun of
righteousness may not go down in our days, I shall exhort all to, stick close
to the interest of Christ: For Christians have agood Master, and God's work is
such, as will improve and crown it self.

From my Cottage in Vdimer near Rye in Sussex, 1658. Macte,

Good Company: BEING A Collection of various, serious, pious Meditations:
useful for instruction, consolation, and confirmation.
[ Assistente Deo: Mart. 18. 1657.]
CENTURY I.
1. BAd times amongst Christians should have a Christian construction: that the
changes of the time make us not Changelings.

2. It Is a glory to behold, amongst men of several opinions, one heart, and one
spirit of grace and heavenliness in them all.

3. Bodily misery is to make us sensible of soul-misery: God pulling the rope
without, to make the bell speak within.

4. He that lifts his soul out of sin by halfs, lifts and lets fall again,
sinking the soul lower; and so the Devil a little stirred, and not cast out,
takes stronger hold.

5. So long as we are sinful, we must be sorrowful: and to be entertained at
David's Ordinary is no dishonor: his tears were his meat day and night.

6 As salt water upon sweet wax, extingusiheth the tapour: So brackish tears
upon the broken heart, puts out the blaze of sin.

7. Grief without cause is madness; and without moderation is hopeless.

8. God is upon the giving hand, when he gives a new heart.

9. The tear which flows from the soul of a faithful man, out of the sense of
evil, purifieth the conscience, and makes it quiet.

10. Since man's fall, it has been his sin not to weep, yet too much weeping
may be turned into sin: For tears as they are the effects of sin, so they may
be the actors of sin.

11. Christ alone, who wept in the Garden, can plead our atonement, and by the
power of his Passion restore us to comfort.

12. Sin brings in sorrow, but let not sorrow bring in more sin, by causing us
to murmr or charge God foolishly.

13. God never delivered any man for his repentance, and yet never any in mercy
without repentance, either giving repentance before or with the deliverance.

14. Better troubles then sin continue: to have peace return, and hearts
unturned, is worse then war.

15. Better know five words of Scripture by our own experience, then five
thousand by another Exposition.

16. Such is Gods Sovereignty over us, that he may use us as he pleases, and
we must be quiet under his hand.

17. There Is no trusting to any creature comforts they be so uncertain.

18. No man is without sin, yet the afflictions of many are not for their fins.

19. True faith is often assaulted, but never finally overthrown.

20. God's judgments are often secret, but never unjust.

21. It Is not safe judging of our spiritual estate, by God's dealing in our
outward estate.

22. No condition so low, but Gods hand can reach us, and save us.

23. A choice blessings, to have a healthful mind in a healthful body: and of
the two it is better that the body be sick then the soul.

24. From one sin, there is but a short and easy passage to another.

25. Men who are too greedy to know others, are too careless to know themselves.

26. True reformation is in abhorring, not absteining, loathing not leaving of
sin.

27. A good trial of a sincere heart, when there is sweet proportion and godly
harmony betwixt our actions justifying one another.

28. That is a man's God and treasure, wherewith his heart is most affected.

29 And as affection shows the heart, so affliction discovers both corruption
and grace.

30. In sin man's deceitful heart abstracts the pain from the pleasure: and in
godliness it severs the crown of glory from the crown of thorns.

31. That any thing is coeternal with the Creator, is repugnant both to
Religion and Reason.

32. God from all eternity had the same power of Creation, which in the
beginning he put in execution.

33. No man has cause to brag of himself, his beginning was of nothing.

34. Man was created to do the will of the Lord, not his own.

35. God's gradual proceeding in the creation, should occasion man's deliberate
meditation.

36. The creature was only made had by sin, and proves bad to sinners.

37. Man has no cause to be proud, being made of that element, on which every
creature may set his foot, and lay his dung.

38. Man's rebellion against the Creator, is often punished with the creatures
rebellion against himself.

39. God is so far from allowing man to live lawless in any estate, that he
put him under law in the state of innocence.

40. The fruit we reap of the tree of knowledge, is not too much to desire
forbidden knowledge.

41. It Is the sign of a base mind, to think he can win more credit by his
garments then his graces: for a sanctified soul is better then a silken suit.

42. He does not God's will but his own, who does no more then himself will:
yea, such a man takes pains to go to hell.

43. God will find flaws in that for which we look for thanks.

44. If to do well cause discontent: we then offend not against men, but their
errors.

45. He that does no more then he is bound to do, is rather wary then good.

46. Adam, notwithstanding the dignity of his condition, variety and plenty of
provision, was set to work in Paradise.

47. He that strikes deadly, chooses a sharp weapon: so Satan chooses the
sharpest wits for instruments of mischief and seducement.

48. It Is not company simply, but good company which is good for man or woman.

49. As it is not safe to be at Satan's mess, though our spoon be never so
long: so it is not safe to lend an ear to a seducer.

50. A sinful conscience which seeks to shun Gods presence, discovers as much
folly as faultiness: and is like the fish which swims to the length of the line
with the hook in the mouth.

51. Satan can hurt a Saint but in the heel, which is far from the head; and
though painful, yet it is not mortal.

52. Sin is the wicket that let death into the world.

53. Fine apparel is a reproach to him that wears it: being as a scarf to the
arm put out of joint.

54. They are profane Niggards, who think any thing too good for the servants
and service of God.

55. We are loath with Cain to confess our selves our brothers keeper, and too
willing to be his executioner.

56. They that cannot forbear to sin, cannot bear what is due to them for their
sin: becoming injurious to God's Mercy by diffidence, and to his Justice by
impatience.

57. Self-guiltiness in some, is the chief motive to suspicion in others.

58. Wicked men turn divine patience into humane presumption.

59. Generation in the flesh, and regeneration in the Spirit, proceed from
different principles.

60. Man's head is a mint of evil imaginations, his heart a sink of inordinate
affections, his memory a closet of sin, full of fancies and impressures.

61. God many times wills a change, yet never changes his will.

62. God who made man without his help, will not destroy him without his fault.

63. As the Carpenters who built Noah's Ark were not saved in it: so some preach
others into the Church, and live themselves out of it.

64. It Is as proper for sin to raise fears in the soul: as for rotten flesh and
wood to breed worms.

65. Christians must labor as well to see God in his works, as to believe him
in the Scriptures.

66. To break the bruised reed, to trouble the grieved spirit, to strike the
breath out of a man's body who is giving up the ghost, is cruelty upon cruelty.

67. It Is the duty, piety and humanity of the living, to see their friends and
relations fairly interred.

68. Sincerity and safety go together.

69. Gods commands are just in themselves, and justly commanded unto men:
nothing so great but we are bound to do it, nothing so small that we may be
allowed to slight it.

70. Whatsoever God commands, there is weight and worth in it, to make it
regarded.

71. He that obeys not God in all things, but with choice and exception, obeys
him not at all.

72. Gods promises how fair or fierce soever, never fail of an answerable
effect: he being immutable in his counsel, unresistable in his power.

73. It Is safer to go against the stream with godliness, then to be carried
along with ungodliness, and overwhelmed in it.

74. Every sin casts another shovel of brimstone upon the sinners soul in hell.

75. The Saints in heaven only keep holy day.

76. Every cessation from sin, is not a resurrection from sin.

77. They that forget God in their life, forget themselves in death.

78. He that watches not his first in clinations to sin, but feeds them with
the honey and milk of Gods mercy, shall be drawn from presumption to
desperation in God's mercy.

79. Sin which comes in forma pauperis, or pretends reason, is very dangerous.

80. Every man has so many Gods, as he has habitual sins.

81. Grace is no grace to me, till I know I have, and would have more of it.

82. It Is strange God should think man enough for himself, and man should not
be satisfied with God.

83. That man's heart is not sincere, who loves God by the proportion of
temporal blessing.

84. It Is sin to distrust God in necessary things, and to press him in
superfluous things.

85. No man ever lost his faith, but he that thought it not worth the keeping.

86. It Is a powerful Sermon, to see a man leave his ill-gotten goods, and cast
off his beloved sin.

87. He that has least of this world, has enough to weigh him down from
heaven, by an inordinate love of that little: and he that has most, has not
too much to give for heaven and happiness.

88. Heaven will cost a rich man more then a poor man, because he has more to
give for it.

89. Rich and poor are alike in this, that they must leave all which retard
their present and constan^ following of Christ.

90. True repentance is, when the sad soul weeps more blood at more pores, then
the weak body sweats drops of water, and that more for the displeasure of God,
then the stripes of his displeasure.

91. Not at all to be punished is a great affliction; better be called Satan
with Peter, then friend with Judas.

92. He is an imprudent man, who disposes of years to come, when he is not lord
of to morrow.

93. If any thing quenches the heat of sin, the desire of money, or the rise of
sin, it is the consideration of death present.

94. In the raging fits of sin, and in the midst of their madness, some have
physic from God, and are reclaimed.

95. He that defers his repentance because of the thiefs example, deludes his
own soul: for he was called at the first call, not at the last; and it is not
for our imitation, but to keep us from desperation.

96. If there be any defect of joy in heaven it is this, that we cannot longer
express our love by suffering for God.

97. Faith in Christ is a full evidence, yet suffering is a new seal upon that
faith.

98. They that neglect the good opinion of others, neglect those virtues which
should produce that good opinion.

99. All the world never joined to deceive one man: nor was ever any one man
able to deceive the whole world.

100. Better have no being then be without Jesus.

CENTURY 2.
1. Accustom thy self to affliction before it comes, and it will be no
stranger when it comes.

2. As long as I have God by the hand, and feel his loving care of me, I can
admit any weight of his hand, any furnace of his heating.

3. To flatter our selves in any licentiousness, with an opinion of natural
corrupt weakness, is a spreading deceit.

4. If God at any time, by any means restore thee to bodily health: he can as
easily give thee spiritual physic, and soul-health.

5. Prayer has the nature of violence in besieging God, and taking him
prisoner, and bringing him to our conditions, and God is as it were glad to be
straightened by us in that siege.

6. Little knows the Devil how much good he does us when he tempts us: exciting
us to go to God, who gives the issue with the temptation.

7. God has as many Antidotes as the Devil has poisons, as much mercy as the
Devil has malice.

8. God is glorified in those victories which we by his grace gain over the
Devil.

9. An afflicted spirit and wounded soul dwell at the gates of atonement and
restitution.

10. A delicate and prosperous life is highly contrary to the hopes of a
blessed eternity.

11. He that considers himself well, will find that for a secular joy and
wantonness of spirit, there are not left many void spaces of his life.

12. Never any charitable man died an evil death; for when other graces shall
be useless, this will bear up the soul upon the wings of Cherubims unto eternal
bliss.

13. Death to the Godly is the best of all evils, and the end of all troubles.

14. Impatience with a disease does mischief by its self, and mischief by the
disease.

15. They that bear the yoke with indignation and murmr, gall their spirits,
fret the skin, and hurt nothing but themselves.

16. Faith is the life of just men, the restitution of dead men; the
justification of sinners; the support of the weak; the confidence of the
strong; the magazine of promises, and the title to eternal happiness.

17. Faith will trust God's goodness, and believe him to be a Father, when the
storm rises, and the keels toss till the cordage crack.

18. In all sufferings the cause makes it noble or ignoble, tolerable or
intolerable.

19. Ignorant believers are soon swallowed up and rid over, standing in an open
field; but understanding believers are in a fenced Town, and have outworks
(reasons) to lose before the Town be taken.

20. No soul has so prostituted her self, but God can make her a Virgin again.

21. In every sin we become prodigals, but in the habit of sin we become
bankrupts.

22. He that knows not, or takes no knowledge of an injury, has no injury.

23. They that are too inquisitive what other men say of them, disquiet
themselves.

24. God warns before he wounds, coming seldom to that dispatch, a word and a
blow, but to a blow without a word, to an execution without warning, never.

25. How many sell heaven and happiness for grains of dust.

26. We are born in the last age of the world, and died in the first.

27. No meditation more serious then the worlds vanity: no consideration more
seasonable, then the brevity of life, and uncertainty of time; no knowledge
more wholesome then the diseases of the mind; no contemplation more heavenly,
then humane misery.

28. Poor Infants newly born, not able to speak, yet prophecy; and the
contents are lamentations, mournings, and woes by the tears they shed, to fill
up the vale of tears they enter.

29. It Is a sign of one nobly bred, who first learns to hold his peace, and
afterward to speak.

30. Wise is that man that sets forth toward heaven in the morning of his
days; giving God the first and best part of his time.

31. Many old men at the instant of their dissolution, desire the continuance
of life; their flesh being like the Peacocks, which being sod grows raw again;
so after mortification by diseases and age, desire to enthral themselves in
earthly pleasures.

32. No distinction in the grave; all have hollow eier, flat noses, and ghastly
looks; and all is but dust.

33. Seeing the fashion of the body is only to be altered, and the body to be
worn again, it is fit we carefully lay it up in deaths Wardrobe, the grave.

34. On earth we labor for rest, in heaven we rest from our labor.

35. Water your plants at the departure of your dearest friends, but drown them
not: for whatsoever we complain of here, they are freed of in heaven.

36. Never any died at London who never lived there: so no man ever died in
Christ, who never lived in him.

37. God seldom or never makes use of a godly man to be the scourge of his
people.

38. As water is powered into a garden-pot at one place, but runs out at an
hundred holes: so one coming into the world, but an hundred ways of going out.

39. It was a wise man's complaint, that every man thought himself qualified
either for Magistracy or Ministry (two weighty burdens) but now though in the
declining age too many are undertakers of both.

40. Ambition will to the pinnacle of the temple, for the glory of the world,
though it tumble for it to eternal ruin.

41. Eminency is seldom sudden and permanent: for they which in the dawn of
fortune break so gloriously, meet with a storm at noon, or else a cloud at
night.

42. If destruction dog us, we are to thank our corrupt affections, not blame
our Maker; he does but leave us, and they harden us.

43. A busy prying into the Ark of Gods Predestination is accompanied with
insolence, and with danger: to enquire the the cause of Gods will, why this man
is elected and not that, is an act of lunacie, not of judgment, and the
question is as guilty of reproof as the author.

44. Make not curiosity the pick-lock of divine secrets, knowing that such
mysteries are doubly barred in the Coffers of the Almighty.

45. Man's work is to contemplate God's works, not to sift his mysteries; to
admire his goodness, not blur his justice.

46. In God's dark mysteries he that can see no reason; if he see his own
infirmity, sees a sufficient reason why he should not see.

47. Worm and no man take heed how thou struglest with thy Maker: let it be thy
happiness to be made his Steward, though not his Secretary.

48. O blessed Jesu! though I have committed those transgressions, for which
thou may condemn me, yet thou have not lost those compassions by which thou
may save me.

49. Never a tear dropping in sincerity, is unpitied or unpreserved.

50. Outward percussion of the breast, without inward remorse of conscience, is
rather an aggravation of sin, then release.

51. Study to be truly that what we seem to be, and not seem what we are not.

52. Meteors and false fires of Religion by-path the soul into blinded zeal,
and leads others into steps of error.

53. We may expect a blessing and an acceptance, when God's ordinances are used
in his order.

54. God fills the hearts of his people according to the size and capacity of
their vessels.

55. As the Water which made the clean woman fruitful, made the unclean swell
and rot: so as the receivers are, so Sacraments prove either for good or hurt.

66. For a man to be stupid and senseless under spiritual afflictions, argues a
very ill temper.

57. As all flowers wither when the Sun withdraws his influence: so do all
graces when Christ departs.

58. Conscience kindles a fire upon the breach of integrity, that burns
inwardly, and consumes the marrow, and drinks up the spirits.

59. Envy is an everlasting burning, which nothing will satisfy but its own
blood.

60. It makes heavy afflictions light, and long short, to look where they end:
for the sight of the end shortens the way.

61. Not to be warned by others is a sure presage of ruin: for storms begin in
one place, and end in another.

62. The greatest part of ourknowledge is the least part of our ignorance.

63. The more worth is in any man, the less self-conceitednesse: and the lower
in our own eyes, the higher in God's sight.

64. The fire of heaven turns men into Saints, and separates them from sinners.

65. If bread fail, feed on faith, and thou may make a good living of it: for
when meat is taken away God will take away the stomach, and faith fears no
famine; it keeps us from diffidence in Gods promises, and makes us possess our
souls in patience.

66. Our self-accusations in our confessions take out the sting and poison of
Satan's malicious accusations.

67. O! the deep sorrow our hearts should be filled withal, when we see Christ
bleeding upon the Cross.

68. What soul-wound's so deadly, that cannot or may not be healed, by the
death and healing wounds of Christ.

69. The wo^k of faith is to make the soul betake it self to the wounds of
Christ, as the Dote to the clefts of the rock for shelter and security against
all fears and distresses that wrath and guilt may put the Considence to.

70. Our whole life is a continual warfare, and we must look for the continual
hail-shot, of Satanical assaults and suggestions.

71. Christians fight and faint not, your reward is sure, your armor is of
proof, the old serpent has his head bruised.

72. Many tempt Satan to tempt them by venturing on the occasion of sin, or by
inconsideration and security.

73. A full belly and a foul heart seldom go uncoupled: for in the Anatomy of
our bodies the parts of gluttony and lust are linked together, and so are the
sins themselves.

74. Too much eating quite takes away our stomachs from all holy duties.

75. Holiness becoms all men, but best of all public persons; both for example
of good, and liberty of controlling evil.

76. It Is a gross dull capacity that cannot or will not distinguish betwixt the
work and the instrument; the weakness of the person, and the power of the
function.

77. The glory of Israel the Ark was no ways lessened by coming from the
Philistines.

78. Far be it from us to think if the sacrificer be unclean, that the offering
is so.

79. Elias was a holy wise man, yet he rejected not his meat, because Ravens
brought it.

80. Learning will pine away, if forced to officiate at the Tables end for the
trencher.

81. The Pulpit is a place that requires both learning and industry: for Saint
Paul found as great want of his books, as his Cloak in winter.

82. He gives twice who gives speedily; for the more speed the more comfort.

83 Many a man's Executor proves the Executioner of his Will and Estate.

84. It Is a general complaint, that the end of our days out runs the beginning
of good works.

85. The poor most times may thank the death or disease of rich men, not their
charity.

86. Happy is he who makes his candle go before him, not behind him: for early
beneficence has no danger, many joies.

87. The use of riches is great, if there be qualification in our desires.

88 It Is as impossible to express the joies of heaven, as put the sea into a
bottle.

89. It Is but justice, that he who has sinned out his own eternity, should
suffer out God's eternity.

90. The object of repenting sorrow is sin, not punishment: and a good man
fears more the committing of the one, then suffering of the other.

91. Pardoned sin disquiets a repenting heart: and grievs him to have been such
a beast, to offend so gracious a God, remembering the sins God has forgotten.

92. He that sheds a sea o^ tears, and drowns not his sins in that sea, is
never the better.

93. He that sighs, prays, and begs for mercy, and lives in sin, deceives
himself, having no truth in that repentance.

94. Every grace which brings to heaven, must be a tried grace.

95. A man's wealth and will must both be good: for if his hands be full and
the heart empty, he deserves pity more then commendation, having riches, but
neither goods nor blessings.

96. It Is said of the Devil, he abode not in the truth, because no truth is in
him: so Sectaries abide not in Religion, because no Religion is in them.

97. Truth once in the heart, will dwell and rule there.

98. A man may preach soundly, and discourse judiciously, and yet be unsound at
heart.

99. A Christian must be careful to avoid all blemishes, but especially
covetousness, as being most contrary to his profession whose hope is in heaven.

100. God's children have variety of conditions, some more comfortable then
others.

CENTURY 3.
1. THe love of God is constant in the variety of conditions, and there is no
shadow of change in God, howsoever the changes of our life be.

2. How rugged the way to heaven be it is no matter, so we come there.

3. A prudent Christian in the variety of conditions, knows how to avoid the
sins incident to that condition.

4. Grace is above all conditions, making a man patient in a mean estate, and
not proud when he does abound.

5. He that has an inheritance in another world, sets a light esteem upon all
things below.

6. Self-denial is the first lesson in Christ's school; learn this, and thou
shall be content in any condition.

7. He that has God to be his Father, has a large portion in any estate.

8. There Is poison in every thing without grace, and grace pulls out the sting,
and finds good in the worst things.

9. The best things of a Christian are not at the mercy of the world, nor at
the mercy of his several conditions.

10. Rising and murmuring of corrupt nature in any condition, becomes not a
true Christian.

11. The right use of our daily infirmities, is to make them the subject of
humiliation, and the object of mortification.

12. Customary sins are not sins of infirmity; except the ground of the
infirmity be rooted in the heart (as an inclination to be angry) which holy men
repent of, and get victory over it at last.

13. He that pleads for sin discovers a false heart; for this is an enormity,
not an infirmity.

14. Universality of obedience is the trial of a sincere Christian: being a
good man in all his relations.

15. Let us not think the good we do in some things, will excuse the bad we do
in others.

16. The Gospel requires truth and not perfection: for sincerity is a
Christians perfection.

17. The want of wisdom and wariness is the cause of many a Christians fall.

18. A Christian may go very high upwards in good works; only with this
exception, that he never look to be justified by them.

19. The Devil is busy at every good work, either in the beginning to hinder
it, or in the end to defile it.

20. No grace stronger then humility: none weaker then the proud.

21. So much faith as a man carries to Christ; so much grace he brings from him.

22. Wicked men may be freed from trouble: only the godly man has grace to
carry himself well in trouble.

23. Holy men should know the strength of grace in their souls, for
confirmation of faith, and bettering their obedience.

24. The more grace, the more a man is sensible of spiritual crosses.

25. The life of grace is known by our spiritual appetites after the means of
grace.

26. God will set light by that man's salvation, who sets light by his honor.

27. Grace only qualifies a man's actions and affections.

28. Where there is no grace there is either all joy, or all sorrow.

29. Sorrow exceeds when it hinders in our callings, as Christians, and as men.

30. Quietness is the stay of the soul to do or receive.

31. Sorrow and sin agree in this, to bring the soul of a poor man downward.

32. The Devil since he cast himself down labors to cast all down.

33. It'^ no wisdom to go to the highest step of the la^de^, to our election,
before we come to the f^ults of it in our sanctification.

34. Some seek too much for comfort in sanctification, when it should be looked
for in justification.

35. It Is vain to trouble our selves with the issue of things for the future,
and neglect the means for the present.

36. Vanity at one time or another brings vexation of spirit.

37. A godly man in the greatest trouble recovers himself.

38. A godly man who has laid up store of grace before hand, can remove
solitariness, having God and himself to speak to.

39. Set thy soul in a right frame when trouble comes, and nothing shall hurt
thee.

40. Every man has a Court in himself, to cite, try and condemn himself.

41. He that cites and condemns himself, puts the Devil and tormenting
conscience out of office.

42. It Is a miserable thing, to desire to know all things, and yet not to know
our selves: to look always abroad, and never at home.

43. The best work of the new creature is within, which the world cannot see.

44. Ask sin the reason of this or that: and thou shall find it most
unreasonable.

45. He that believes God will give him everlasting life, will trust him for his
daily bread.

46. Faith has a quieting and comforting power with it.

47. It Is a shame to see Christians live so unquiet and discontented, as if
there were no Father in heaven, or providence on earth.

48. A Christian may mourn like a Dove, but not roar like a beast under
affliction.

49. It Is no matter what the disease be, if God be the Physician.

50. As in a City men account more of their own house, then of all the City
biside; so more comfort in this word [My God] then in all the world.

51. He that makes God his God, makes all other things his also.

53. Mercy flows naturally from God, as water flows from a fountain.

54. God shoot's not his judgments as children arrows at random, but
wheresoever they light he has his aim.

55. Happy man who has God's mind with his rod: instruction with correction.

56. It Is neither wisdom nor holiness to allow or defend the least infirmity.

57. It Is folly to venture upon fin at any time, for we shall at one time or
another hear of it.

58. They that come not to the Father in Christ by the Sacraments, know not his
goodness: and they that come irreverently, know not his greatness.

59. God the wise Physician, who loves his patients alike, does not administer
potions to all, but according to the nature of the disease, and exigent of the
party.

60. Sick souls make sick bodies, God aiming at the cure of the soul in the
touching of the body.

61. It Is better to be God's prisoner on the bed of sickness, then sinfully to
use health.

62. He that sins with company, must look to be tormented with company.

63. Every stubborn wilful sinner, is a double murderer of soul and body.

64. Every man is naturally willing to deceive and be deceived in the state of
his soul.

65. Judging of our selves, prevents God's judging: for things done in one Court
cannot be judged in another by equity.

66. As they who have a Plant which bears venomous fruit, dig it at the root:
So if thou would kill sin, go to the heart.

67. It Is not the having of corruption which damns men: but the affections they
carry to their corruptions.

68. It Is our comfort to groan under infirmities, looking upon them as enemies
and objects of mortification.

69. He that makes no conscience of secret sins, shall fall into open sins.

70. Poison is dangerously taken in sweet gloves, so corruption mingles it self
with our best duties.

71. When men regard not the manner of doing holy things: God regards not the
matter.

72. The want of sound judgment in some men, makes them lay a plaster on a
sound place, and condemn a true man for a traitor.

73. Bless that soul, who labors by good counsel to hinder thee from any
sinful course.

74. It Is the character of a good heart, to desire to converse with better then
it self.

75. It Is wisdom to prevent the trouble of sickness, with the trouble of
Physic: so to judge our sins by conscience here, that they be not judged by
God hereafter.

76. Christ is very sweet to that soul, who is excercised in the search of his
own heart.

77. It Is an ill time to get grace when we should use it.

78. Pardoning mercy and healing mercy go always from God to the godly
together.

79. When man spares no sin, God spares all.

80. They that are taken from the evil of the world, have aims and ends above
the world.

81. Inward affections, where our joy or delight is, are the best discoveries
of the state of our souls.

82. There Is a concatenation betwixt grace and glory: grace is the gate, and
glory is the reward.

83. All the time a carnal man lives, is but the time betwixt the sentence and
execution.

84. It overcomes many tentations many times, to have a good conceit of God.

85. No flesh without its scum, no garden without its weeds, no Christian
without his failings.

86. There Is a vaste difference betwixt the broacher and drinker of Error: the
one is possessed with obstinacy, the other with facility, lenity, and credulity.

87. Errors are so dangerous and infectious, that the least error entertained,
prepares the heart for greater, and disposes it to reject all truth at last.

88. Seducers arguments are not settling, but startling; keeping men in a
wavering condition.

89. Piety and verity, truth and godliness are like Hippocrates twins, living
and dying together.

90. Sectaries lay out their time in examination of opinions, and not of
conscience; looking after the notions of the brain; not the bettering of the
heart.

91. The endeavor of the erroneus are for party, not piety, faction, not
faith; not considering so much now a man lives, but what does he hold.

92. Seducers may be known by their crooked expression, uttering truth and
error in one sentence; shadowing their opinions with the Veil of godliness,
and their mistakes with the flowers of truth.

93. As Physicians give bitter pills in sugar sops; so Seducers vent damnable
errors in fine expressions.

94. It Is no small tentation when men in high esteem for piety and ability,
fall into error.

95. The Seducer changes his opinions as often as he can get customers for his
new ones.

96. The Polypus by changing his color hunts and takes the fishes: so Seducers
serve their followers.

97. Seducers arguments are like Spiders webs, catching little flies, simple
Christians.

98. Where there is curiosity and wantonness of brain, old truths are rejected
as stale meat.

99. It Is the Devils policy to reproach true Religion, by sending many false
ones into the world.

100. Men's outward conversation should be no protection to their errors; for
we are to judge of persons by their faith, and not faith by persons.

Century 4.
1. AS dead Fish are carried along by the stream, so are dead Christians by the
times.

2. The new creature is nursed and born under the Ordinances: for faith comes
by hearing, and grows by the same.

3. Men commonly who cast off Ordinances, cast off also godliness; for
Ordinances awe men's consciences, and keep them in a sober modesty, and modest
sobriety.

4. He is but a bad Christian that is so by fits and girds, in public
assemblies and not in closets, in hearing and not in practicing.

5. All secondary causes are but the rods of affliction in God's hand:
therefore we should make our peace with the Judge, and not go to the Sergeant.

6. Error spreads much, by the strangeness of people to their spiritual guides.

7. It behoovs us to be wary and circumspect: seeing all men may deceive and be
deceived, and some errors are so like truths.

8. The clearer the water is, the deeper we see: so where there is least
passion, there is most judgment; for passion muds the understanding.

9. Scripture is the great Standard of truth, unto which all opinions must be
brought.

10. A man may attain much literal scriptural knowledge, and yet the mind of
God in the Bible not in the man's heart.

11. Religion at some times without profession may be profitable: but
profession without Religion is always execrable.

12. Whatsoever a man receivs upon the account of dispute or argument, he is
bound to disown when he meets with a more subtle argument or Sophister.

13. Every head is not big enough to grapple with the depth of some arguments.

14. The arguing of every truth, disputes men out of truth into Atheism.

15. There Is a holy sympathy betwixt a regenerate heart, and a precious truth.

16. As Oil mixeth not with other liquors, nor incorporates into no body: so
the divine unction like a wellspring of water, works out all the filth that is
cast into the soul.

17. He that has light in his understanding, and no honesty in heart; is like
a ship with no ballast and a great Sail, lying open to every wind.

18. Comfort when not found on earth, is very sweet to thy soul from heaven.

19. There Is more mercy in God, then can be sin or evil in us.

20. God who requires rather truth of heart then length of time: makes sick
souls by a sharp repentance shoot out suddenly, that if taken out of the world,
they may be eternally saved.

21. He that is good only under the Cross is never good, doing it from the
fear of punishment, not hatred of sin.

22. It Is hypocrisy when in sickness we desire our recovery, not the grace of
God.

23. It Is the hell of hell to damned souls that they brought themselves thither.

24. God in bringing his children home, sees the furthest way about, is
nearest: suffering them to fall in sin, and by sin to shorten their days, and
so occasion their repentance.

25. A Child of God at the worst, is better then a Worldling at the best.

26. We have often more occasion to bless God for crosses, then for comforts.

27. There Is a blessing to the godly hidden in the very worst things.

28. It argues neither grace nor wit, for a man to take occasion to sin,
because God will save him: for though God save such a man's soul, he will take
such a course with him, as to make him deeply repent of trying conclusions with
God.

29. It requires much wisdom, to manage our profession, to our own comfort and
God's glory.

30. Education may civilize but not subdue, only grace makes the new change on
the heart.

31. He who has tasted of heavenly comforts, cannot but show pity to others,
which he has felt from God himself.

32. Deliverance shall come, when we are fit to receive the greatest comfort,
and to render God the greatest glory.

33. Never despair of the Church, for rather then it shall fail, it shall breed
in a Lion's den.

34. That which is not enjoied with overmuch pleasure, is parted withal
without overmuch grief.

35. In great distress, the Spirit of Prayer will difference a sincere heart
from an hypocrite.

36. Such is our own inclination, and Satan's temptation; that no less then an
Almighty power can deliver us from evil.

37. A true Christians desire is, not only to clear his conscience from the
guilt of sin past, but to avoid for it the future.

38. Grief no further yields comfort, then it has care of prevention.

39. The trial of repentance is when we turn not only from sin, but to the
contrary good.

40. We wrong both the goodness and greatness of God, in not trusting him for
the time to come by the experience of former favors.

41. Old Christians ought to be strong in faith upon this account: that their
old favors should help them to set upon new.

42. Wicked men have not any bettering deliverance, no preservation, but a
reservation to a worse.

43. Doing ill is the cause of all ills: and we may thank our ill in doing, for
ill in suffering.

44. The Cross neither daunts the godly man's courage, nor stains his
conscience.

45. A purpose to live in one sin, is enough for the Devil to hold his
possession, and in death to claim us for his own.

46. He that has not a care to prevent sin, never yet truly did repent for sin.

47. It Is ridiculous for Duelists to go to prayers, when they intend to fall
one upon another.

48. To every good work, we had need of renewed assisting grace.

49 Against every evil we are tempted to we had need of delivering grace.

50. O! how a sudden wind of temptations trips up the heels of a strong man
sometimes.

51. He that is privy to his own soul of good intentions to abstain from evil
may presume God will assist him against evil.

52. God not only delivers from ill, and out of ill, but many times from a
greater ill by a lesser.

53. Rather then a man shall miscarry when God has any work for him to do, he
will work a miracle.

54. Death is sometimes a preservation it self, sending a man to heaven, his
harbor and rest.

55. It Is the fate of Kings many times to out live their glory and Kingdoms.

56. He that keeps heaven for us, keeps us also for heaven.

57. The firm belief and hope of heaven, are effectual for a holy life and
conversation.

58. We must one time or another have those graces on earth, which fits us for
heaven.

59. An humble soul is ever thankful for the least measure of grace.

60. Man's imploiment in heaven is singing of Psalms: and so much as we are
given to this exercise are we in heaven.

61. The extent of our desires to God's glory, should be carried to all
eternity.

62. A beggarly maintenance makes a contemptible Ministry.

63. A Christians care is, that there be no breaches made upon the Doctrine,
sealed by the blood of the Martyrs.

64. An evil Governor is not only a poison to the State and Church whilst he
he lives, but the mischief of it afterward.

65. All the good actions of the life meet together, and comfort a man in death.

66. As men cast seed upon seed where the ground is fruitful: so the more good
we do, the more opportunities of doing good are still offered.

67. As we are in a perpetual Proficiency in this life, so there is a perpetual
necessity of means and Ministry.

68. We may enter upon all the means of saving knowledge, upon this ground,
because Christ our teacher is able and willing to lead us from one degree to
another.

69. Christ not only brings doctrine, but wit and grace to the inward man.

70. After Christ, the Father loves all in Christ, with the same love wherewith
he loves Christ.

71. As all heat in the creature is from the Sun: so all piety and goodness
flows from God above.

72. The love of God is the spring of all duties and graces, making us not
only good but comfortable, as birds in the Spring.

73. Faith is nothing but the act whereby we apprehend the love of God to us in
Christ.

74. They that have Christ for their Redeemer, shall have heaven for their
inheritance, the Spirit for their guide, the Angels for their attendance.

75. God fills the bellies of many men with inward things, whose hearts he
never filled with his love.

76. The sooner a sinner comes into God, it is the easier, and his comfort will
be the stronger.

77. To thrive in a course of sin, is a sign of reprobation.

78. The way to keep God's love in us is to be careful to keep our selves under
th, means of salvation, and to look on God as he is presented in the Gospel.

79. Some are kept a little longer under the Law, before they come under Grace.

80. Seasonable afflictions sanctified, are evidences of God's love.

81. Our love to God is sincere, when it comes from the Word and the Spirit,
and from good things there manifested to the soul.

82. If we have God's love, no matter what we want, or in what condition we be.

83. As the Sun does not always shine out, so the love of God is not always
manifested.

84. Rejoice in thy portion less or more, whosoever thou be, who finds the
love of God in the best things.

85. The want of feeling of God's love to us; causes the defect of our love to
pity, piety, charity, duty.

86. He has need of much reverence, watchfulness, and humility, who will
preserve himself in the love of God.

87. God's love is better then life it self: and if we have not this, no matter
what we have.

88. All is love and mercy to those who are in Christ the beloved.

89. Christ by his Spirit dwells in all believers, therefore they should labor
all to be one.

90. How excellent were it, if all men had the same thoughts, the same
religion, the same aims and affections to good things, a thing to be desired,
but not hoped for.

91. If Christ be in the soul, then tumults and fightings also; for nature is
long yielding to grace.

92. They that are in Christ, must not think it strange, or be much troubled
with inward oppositions.

93. Into whatsoever soul Christ comes, he will scourge out the lusts, and
sweep out the filth of that soul.

94. They who entertain Christ only in the brain; give him as bad
entertainment, as they who forced him in a manger.

95. It Is to no purpose or comfort, to have Christ in our tongues, and the
world in our hearts.

96. If Christ take up the heart and affection for his rooms: then there flows
a base esteem of all worldly excellencies.

97. Christ was in Zacheus's heart before he was in his house: else he had
never been so charitable.

98. Sometimes it is needful we trust the judgment of others better then our own
to know who dwells in us.

99. As the Sunbeams are pure still, though shining upon dunghills: so is
Christ's Spirit, not joining, but wasting and consuming corruption.

100. Christ dwells largely in that soul, where the Word is its reason, the
Commandments its will, God's glory its joy.

CENTURY 5.
1. A Heart having once entertained Christ, is never content, till it be with
Christ in heaven.

2. It Is dangerous thrusting our selves into such company, whom we know to
grieve the Spirit of God.

3. If the soul apprehend Christ to be gone, let it observe how it lost him,
and recover him by the contrary.

4. Discouragements proceed from carnal outward things: but comforts proceed
from the presence of divine things.

5. Afflictions amongst the wise heathens could not hinder the life of reason:
and can they among Christians hinder the life of grace.

6. God fits Prophets for persons: giving them teachers suitable to their
desires.

7. Where grace is, there will be without doubt mercy.

8. It Is sign of life, when a Christian is sensible of inconveniences.

9. God first makes us fit, and then makes use of us for to work.

10. It Is a true disposition of a child of God to have a heart tender, soft,
and pliable.

11. Nothing so hard as the heart of man: if wrought upon, it must be by an
Almighty power.

12. The Adamant is only melted by blood: so is the heart of man by Christ
crucified.

13. As water beginning to freez, will bear nothing almost, but after a while
any thing: so a tender heart at first does tremble at the least sin or error,
but through custom and continuance will bear up any sin or error.

14. The more sensible the soul is of outward things, the less it is of
spiritual things.

15. He that sets his love upon the creature, loses the very strength of his
soul.

16. Wise men when they go about spiritual duties, cut themselves short of the
use of the creatures.

17. Conscience hardened in some great sin, makes no stop in fin.

18. A heart will not easily be kept tender that is not under the means of
grace.

19. A Reprobate has joined with his heart security, insensibleness,
obstinacy, and contempt of the means.

20. A Christian may have hardness of heart, and yet feels it: as a man that
has the stone, and know it.

21. If God take away the grace a man has, he becoms worse of himself, then he
was by nature.

22. They that are not bettered by Religion under the means, are so much worse
by their use of the means.

23. Spiritual grief for sin, though it be not so vehement as outward grief for
losses, yet it is more constant.

24. If there were no weakness in us, what need Christ continue making peace
for us in heaven.

25. They that have a tender heart from God, have also a tender heart for God.

26. A tender heart is fit to run any errand of God's sending, because its
pliable.

27. Tender hearts lay to heart other men's estates: weeping over the misery of
the wicked, rejoicing at the good of the godly.

28. A cerimonial hypocrite is more hard to be wrought upon, then Turk or Pagan.

29. It Is a disposition not unbefitting the greatest Monarch, to humble himself
before the great God.

30. It Is the glory of a Christian that he has got grace to humble himself.

31. Many are humbled who are not humble, and cast down, who have proud hearts.

32. True sorrow cannot speak distinctly: for broken hearts speak but broken
words.

33. Justification of God, and self-condemnation, go with true humiliation.

34. He that thinks highly of himself; robs God of his glory, and makes
himself an Idol.

35. An humble heart is a vessel of grace: for so much humility, so much grace.

33. After the measure we empty our selves, in that measure we are filled with
the fullness of God.

37. All grace flows in upon the humble soul, as water from the hills into the
valleys, making the soul rich in God.

38. Seeing humble fouls are only safe and secure, we must either humble our
selves, or God will.

39. God works many times by graceless persons, but he does not work in them.

40. Thunderclaps over our heads are feared, but not those which are far off:
so wicked men fear judgment near, but regardless if far off.

41. If humiliation have not faith and hope to raise the soul to some comfort,
it turns to desperation.

42. True humility makes a man nothing, and yet fills the soul in God.

43. A wicked man may be sensible of his judgment, but not of the cause.

44. Adversity will never hurt, where there is no iniquity.

45. Outward expressions of sorrow are no further good, then when they come
from inward grief and affection: for God must have inward affections, or else
he abhors outward actions.

46. It Is an easy matter to force tears, but it is hard to afflict the soul.

47. It Is the sin of many, in stead of renting their clothes in coming before
God, come to show their bravery, and to be seen.

48. That man is falsely humble, and truly proud, who while he afflicts the
body, omits the soul.

49. Tears for sin, proceeding from inward grief, is a temper becoming any
Christian.

50. All expression and manifestation of devotion is little enough, so it be
without hypocrisy.

51. Magistrates who are tenderly affected with the condition of the people:
shall have a people carry a tender affection to them.

52. It Is great cause of weeping to a gracious heart, that it cannot weep.

53. It Is a bad sign when we itch to hear of another man's fall: thinking
thereby to hide our own wickedness.

54. Prayer begs blessing from God, and thankfulness continues them with man.

55. Many times there is most grief, where there are fewest tears.

56. Spiritual sorrow is a great deal better then natural; for it fats the
soul.

57. God puts all his children's tears in a bottle: But wicked men spare him a
labor: for they seldom weep, though they have most cause.

58. A broken heart expresses it self more in sighs and groans, then in words,
which the Spirit only understands.

59. It Is our wisdom to observe how God hears our prayert, that so we may be
suitably thankful.

60. He that prays with a resolution to fin; goes to God with a petition in
one hand, and a dagger in another.

61. Whatsoever the crosses of a good man be, his last end shall be assuredly
blessed.

62. God takes notice of every good word and work the godly do, and will reward
it.

63. Hypocrites are recompensed, because God will not be in their debt, and
it is all their desire.

64. When a Christian looks only on the ill that is in him: he robs God of his
glory, and himself of comfort.

65. The good are scattered amongst the bad in their life, but in death they
shall be gathered to God.

66. He that joins himself in love and affection to wicked men on earth: shall
be also joined in torment and destruction in hell.

67. God sometimes reservs men in this life to worse miseries then death it
self.

68. One death is better then many, and a sudden sometimes better then a
lingering.

69. A man may outlive his happiness, so that life it self may prove a
judgment.

70. Sight of misery works deeper on the soul, then the hearing of it.

71. Death indeed is the King of fears, very terrible: but that which is at the
back of death is more terrible, hell and damnation.

72. Some men's death is like Josiahs; a mercy, and a correction.

73. Many times good parents are taken away, that they may not see the ruin of
their children.

74. Good Christians like good corn, will sooner be ground to powder; then
yield either to the rough blasts of persecution, or the smooth flattering gales
of error and heresy

75. The chief care of the chief Magistrate, is for the good of Church and
State.

76. Man is freed from the Law as it is his Judge, but not as it is his
Counselor.

77. If a godly man go out of the way he shall smart for it, and be whipped home
again.

78. He that has stuck long in the mire of sin, must be haled and pulled out
by violence: and must not look for peace and comfort presently.

79. We walk by faith in this world: sense and sight is reserved for another
world.

80. No good is to be done to the soul by prayers and cries: so long as we are
careless of purifying the heart.

81. Despise not the outward Ministry of the Word; for it is accompanied with
the internal power of the Spirit.

82. Let not thy affections rove, and the world or Devil can do thee no hurt.

83. He that suppresseth sin at the first motion: shall assuredly find comfort.

84. If we mean to come to heaven, we must not live in any known sin: for it
wastes grace.

85. A Christian must mend his pace every day: that grace may shine more and
more to the perfect day.

86. Every poor map is not a blessed man; except his bodily poverty bring him
to spiritual poverty.

87. He that has spiritual comforts, has them cheap, if they cost him many a
tear.

88. The heart is never so cheerful, as when it powrs out it self in tears and
sighs to God.

89. Spiritual mourning secures the soul from hell-mourning.

90. The way to divert too much bleeding, is to open a vein: and the only way
to stop unseasonable grief, Is to turn our tears against our sins.

91. All worldly sorrow must be sorrowed against, but sorrow for sin is a
sorrow never to be repented of.

92. The adventure and the return of the stock of Prayer is most certain to
increase more and more.

93. God forfeits not his Word, but we our Prayers: when we seek things which
cross God's nature, or will; or are hurtful, or not necessary in themselves.

94. He that knocks at heavens door only in death: deserves to have the door
knocked against his head.

95. He that would speed in temporal things, must first seek spiritual.

96. He that desires to speed in prayer, must go to God with a knowledge and
sense of his own insufficiency to succor himself.

97. Cold prayers have cold answers, for how should God hear us, when we hear
not our selves.

98. They must look to be denied in their prayers, who deny Christ in his
members.

99. The forgetfulness of received mercies, makes God to forget us.

100. He that will be sure to have his prayers heard, must make a trade of
prayer, being constant in it.

CENTURY 6.
1. WE must lay our hand on the plow, and then pray that our endeavors may
second our devotion.

2. To ask grace and not to use the meant; is to knock at heavens gate, and
pull it to us that it do not open.

3. He that says, Lord, forgive me my sins, without a desire to leave them;
cannot be heard, except God forfeit his Word.

4. Things inconvenient and unnecessary, are profitably denied us.

5. If heavenly things were soon obtained, they would be soon forgotten.

6. He that puts in his petition at one door, may willingly go about to another
door to have an answer: so let God appoint the way and means, and deliverance
shall be the more speedy.

7. Nothing more humbls the child of God, then to be buffeted with base
temptations.

8. When God lays a plaster to our wound, we cry, take it off: when by
holding it on the cure is done.

9. He has not lost his prayers, but is doubly paid: who with the crosses of
the world, has his heart driven off from the world.

10. He that has most grace, bath most work to do, and greatest trials to
buckle with.

11. He that lets himself loose to any gross sin, shall be sure to find it in
his prayer.

12. Some are as unfit to pray, as ever David was to march in Readiness armor.

13. The bringing forth of a right prayer, is in a manner like the bringing
forth of a child with many throws, yet when the child is born there is joy.

14. He that sees not the print of his imperfections, is neither humble,
patient, nor pitiful; not knowing himself, brother, or God.

15. A Verbal confession of frailty, without humility, mercy, and use of the
means, is mere hypocrisy.

16. Man's body in the grace is free from pain, but not dishonor.

17. Uprightness may stand with imperfection, beauty with deformity, some
light, some darkness in the best.

18. Our infirmities should be matter of humiliation, not desperation.

19. He that studies not to know himself, will soon grow proud.

20. Though the glory of a Saint be not obvious to every eye: yet they have an
excellency in them in the midst of all deformities.

21. He that see's not a true Christian to be a glorious creature, has but a
fleshly eye.

22. It neither comes from good; nor works any good, to delight in speaking and
hearing other men's enormities.

23. Some people come to the means at first, as children to the School very
eagerly: but afterward very hardly drawn to it at all.

24 No company or comfort should put off the thoughts of death.

25. Death will be very terrible to that man, who dies not in his thoughts
daily.

26. It Is an easy matter to speak of death, but to bring it home to the heart
is very hard.

27. Sin unrepented, will bring a sting in the time of death: filling the heart
with sorrow, the soul with amazement, the conscience with horror.

28. Our eyes should be casements to let in fresh air, not corruption.

29. He that lays much upon natures back, will break it: and he that trusts to
natural parts shall be disappointed.

30. All carnal pleasures and delights are but poison: if grace in the heart be
not an antidote.

31. Peace of conscience makes a man rejoice in sorrow, and live in death.

32. He that sees his own wants and weakness, will often desire to communicate.

33. An hypocrite shows sometimes a greater measure of profession, then a
Christian: but is like corn on the house tops, that quickly grows, and is
quickly down.

34. All the hands and hearts on earth, will do no good upon a resolute sinner.

35. A child of God coming to Christ's Table, eats judgment to avoid
condemnation.

36. He that would profit by heavenly mysteries, must be knit to them; not by
the brain, but by affection.

37. Christ's prepared medicines minister no comfort, unless applied to our
soul.

38. We cannot have Christ's benefits, unless we have himself.

39. The signs seal no grace to the soul, where there is no faith.

40. We are very sensible of bodily hunger, but soul hunger is hardly felt.

41. He that will not be broken from sin, shall have no portion in Christ's
body broken.

42. Gentlemen-like qualities (pride, pleasure, intemperance) bring souls apace
to hell.

43. He that makes a divorce betwixt his soul and corruption, is in the state
of grace.

44. It Is no presumption but duty, to judge by our calling of our election.

45. To know there is a Christ, and not our interest in him, is rather, a
punishment then a comfort.

46. Faith and hope may be distinguished, but not separated: for faith has
ever hope.

47. A fearful doubting soul lives vexed in the suburbs of of hell.

48. A weak and dumb evidence may be true as the strongest.

49. As grace and glory, so sin and shame go always together.

50. The more sanctified affliction on earth, the more weight of glory in
heaven.

51. It Is all one to Christ thy surety, to pay thy great debts as thy small
ones.

52. Upon whom God bestows much cost, there he looks for some answerable fruits.

53. Sin may draw down judgment on a godly man, but it shall not rest on him.

54. The Church has evermore received more hurt by discord, then open enemies.

55. In all diseases take away the proud and dead flesh, and the plaster will
fall off.

56. When the fuel of sin is taken away, Gods fiery wrath cease.

57. Saints by their great falls lose their communion, but not their union with
God.

58. Of all burdens, the absence of God's favor is most intolerable.

59. Except healing and pardoning mercy go together, man has no comfort, and
God no glory.

60. It Is very ill when small temptations makes us question the truth of God's
promises.

61. It Is sad to see carnal men contriving other ways of coming to Christ,
then ever he ordained or revealed.

62. We must go to the promises for enlargement to duty: our service requiring
no portion, but mere poverty and emptiness.

63. He that is content Christ should take all from him, and dispose altogether
of him: has a holy frame of heart.

64. It Is Satan's policy, either to let us see no sin, or nothing but sin.

65. Never any saved but rebels; nor received mercy, but such as opposed mercy.

66. No Scripture says the greatness of man's sin, hinders the greatness of
God's mercy.

67. It Is not properly some men's unworthiness, but their pride, which hinders
them from Christ: desiring something in themselves, and not to have all from
him.

68. There Is no limitation of the riches of God's free grace, but only in the
sin against the Holy Ghost.

69. God shows mercy not because we please him, but because mercy pleases him.

70. Whatsoever sight of sin unfits a man for mercy, that sight is sinful.

71. He that depends upon the power and mercy of God in his Ordinances, shall
find proportionable succor and success.

72. When all means fail, let the soul look up to God, and out from it self:
being the fittest time to meet God, and disappoint Satan.

73. As a tree may want leaves and fruit, not wanting sap or moisture: so a
Christian may want sense and feeling, when there is faith.

74. Sometimes some men's souls are like sullen children, refusing their meat,
because they have not what they would.

75. It Is a bad custom some men have, never to be well, but when judging
rashly of their eternal being.

76. Some men in hearing study how to find answers to put by their comforts.

77. He that listens to carnal pleas, sins deeply, and wounds his soul
dangerously.

78. He that enters the lists with Satan concerning God's Decrees, will be
carried into a wood where no body comes, and no comfort to be had.

79. We must not measure the riches of God's love, nor sweetness of his grace
by our own conceits.

80. In self-judging observe the good as well as the bad, and do not lie at the
catch with thine own soul, to take it at the worst.

81. There Is a great deal of evil in that self-willed proud heart, who has all
his objections answered, yet renews them afresh.

82. It Is a sin to reject mercy when God offers it, as to kill a man, which he
has forbidden.

83. It Is better cross our own humors, then cross God's Spirit.

84. Stubborn peevish souls, if saved in the end: yet they are as it were in
hell upon earth.

85. Let souls hold to the Word in their dispute with Satan, and he will be
weary, and go away.

86. Look from one end of the heavens to the other: and see if ever any man
leaning upon God was disappointed.

87. A soul leaves all other things for that which is chief with the soul.

88. Faith gives a kind of being to whatsoever we do or speak.

89. We must not think to bring any good to the promises, but go to them for
all good.

90. We must not look for sanctification till we come to the Lord in vocation.

91. O precious faith! which brings all goodness with it, grace here,
happiness hereafter.

92. There would be a sweet mutual peace in God's holy mountain, if every one
kept in his own limits, knowing his duty.

93. It Is an eminent and infallible mark of regeneration, to have the violence
and fierceness of our nature taken away.

94. He that, refuses works of mercy to those in need, is a murderer.

95. The doctrine of Christ is preached to many, but the power thereof extended
but to few.

96. That man is holy and harmless, who when opportunity of doing evil is
offered, can abstain.

97. It Is a blessed thing when we are provoked to forbear to revenge our selves.

98. It Is a sign of a woeful state, when our tongues fly out in words, and our
hearts are set on mischief in small matters.

99 No man can love a saint as a saint, but a saint.

100. Religion and Rebellion are inconsistent.

CENTURY 7.
1 NO man is turned unto God, but he loves the society he formerly hated.

2. It Is dangerous too much to admire fleshly excellency, for those gifts of
goodness which are in the same.

3. As there is a cruel justice many times, so there may be a cruel mercy.

4. A heart set upon chafing, brawling, and raging, is void of comfort.

5. He may be assured of the remission of sin, who is released from the bondage
of sin.

6. No sin so small, but there is an enmity against God in it, and a dishonor
to God.

7. He that would make all comfort sure to himself, let him make this sure
first, that his sins are forgiven him.

8. The only way to quiet our hearts is to hearken what God says.

9. All God's children must be plowed, and have the clods of their corruption
broken.

10. Misery to the righteous is as a sojourner: but it rests on the back of the
wicked man.

11. The means, time, and measure of afflictions, is of God's own appointment.

12. The wounds of a friend with holy reproof are precious: but his wounds by
sinful counsel are pernicious.

13. There Is another life besides the natural life, and the root of it is
Christ our life.

14. That nothing can suffice man, coms from a divine instinct, to make him
seek out another life, wherein consists happiness.

15. He that finds such an antipathy betwixt his spirit and sin, as betwixt him
and poison, has true grace in his heart.

16. We must hate the conversations of such, who hinder us in the growth of
spiritual life.

17. As without shedding of blood no forgiveness of sin: so without the Spirit
sealing the promises to our souls, we have no comfort.

18. Christ is the fountain of spiritual life, but faith is the pipe conveying
it to us.

19. Better for us to sleep in a house full of Adders and Serpents, then in a
state of sin.

20. Happy practice, when with the day we clear the sins of the day, fitting
our selves for life or death.

21. Though pardon of sin be pronounced, yet God has the keeping of joy in his
own hand.

22. Every falling into sin is not upon all four, a quite falling away.

23. Samson's strength was in his locks, but our strength against sin and
error is in Christ.

24. A believing spirit trembles at any thing which hinders or grievs the
Spirits working.

25. Sense of God's love is sometimes withdrawn, to make us mourn for it the
more.

26. When afflictions are doubled, it is time to pray hard, believe and apply
the promises: and then deliverance will come.

27. In the use of means run always to Christ, that he may work, virtue being
only in him.

28. God's time of helping the poor and needy, is when all other help is at a
stand.

29. After faith ends on earth, comes the life of vision in heaven.

30. Redemption in regard of efficacy is no larger then God's Election: for
those which the Father gave in Election, Christ by Redemption saves.

31. God's general call in the Church, is to call out his own.

32. God rains the showers of his Ordinances upon all, but Believers have only
the benefit of it.

33. It Is no matter what cavills wicked men raise of God's intention and
election, seeing more grace and means are offered, then they are willing to
entertain.

34. Christ is our husband, faith yields consent, and consent makes the match.

35. Many are in the state of grace relying on mercy, and wanting the assurance
of pardon.

36. Satan applying himself to the distemper of a melancholy spirit, keeps it
in darkness.

37. Sincerity is the holy man's perfection in the use of all means.

38. A man may have excellent parts, and no grace at all, which are given for
the good of others: because such neglect faith, humility, and a broken spirit,
which are more then gifts.

39. Parents show their love most to the weakest child: so God manifests his
comforts most to weak Christians.

40. Where there is faith, there is prayer: for faith is the parent of prayer,
and prayer is the breath of faith.

41. The living of a happy life consists in the assurance of God's love to our
souls.

42. The sense of Christ's love in pardoning sin: constrains us to an holy
violence in performing of duty.

43. Look upon the love of God, and it will cut the sinews of sin, and distrust
in providence.

44. Come in and stoop to Christ, in doing thy duty: and thou puts this
question out of question, that thou art one of God's Elect.

45. They who have no conflict in their spirit, and no interruption in their
estate: may greatly fear their condition.

46. In cases of desertion, and seeming deadness, try which way soul the goes
in its desires.

47. Complain of thy self and sins to Christ, and let sin have no quiet
possession.

48. He is a true Christian who lives in no gross sin, nor allows of no small
sin.

49. That man dies comfortably, who believes Christ will have a care of his soul.

50. Some Scriptures are become hard to understand, because of so many,
diversities of understanding.

51. Little Scripture is so sincere and indemnified, as to please all
conjectures, and satisfy all interests and spirits that inquire into them.

52. It Is a wilful error to choose to be solitary, where there is one Catholic
consent and harmony.

53. It Is dangerous to take bypath, where the open road is free and safe.

54. He that chooses singularity, will fall into many absurdities and
implications.

55. He that dotes upon his own invention, and proposes to himself a separate
notion, will ravish and wrest the Word by an audacious force.

56. Many things lie yet hid in the Scripture, as full of darkness as wonder.

57. Some undo a great deal of learning by an extreme ingredient of
superstition or novelty.

58. They that are most void of learning and experience, dabble most in dark
places.

59. Though many things in Scripture be obscure and profound, yet nothing
superfluous.

60. He reads the Scripture with danger of infection: who brings the Plague
with him.

61 Carnal pleasures sour and wither by using: but spiritual become fresh and
delightful.

62. That heart is worse then iron, whom Christ's loadstone cannot attract.

63. The graces of Christ are like the eternal springs of the earth, that
cannot dry up, but are and shall be diffused, until his whole house be filled.

64. The love of Christians to Christ is no blind precipitate passion, but
guided by reason and election.

65. Grace destroies not nature, but perfects her by supernatural reliefs.

66. There Is special intimacie and kindness betwixt Christ and those that fear
him.

67. Joy breeds from love to its root, and where one is shed abroad, the other
trickls after it.

68. The more we mind God by contemplation, the more we admire and seek him.

69. Many souls are black through the night of persecution: yet comely in hope
and patience.

70. False teachers have many follo^^, as wasps have combs, but no honey.

71. Some are Kite-eied, to espy the filthiness and carrion cast out of their
brethren, passing over their graces.

72. Affliction may discolor the Church for a season. but her proper and
constant complexion will be beauty for ashes.

73. None so implacable and bitter, as heretics and Schismatics; sons of the
same mother, the Church; but not of the same Father, God.

74. Get under Christ's protection and Government, and he will not suffer thee
to lack.

75. He is in greatest danger of erring, who travels alone.

76. Babylon holds many of God's people, yet let them not make such places
their refuge: much less their election.

77. It Is truly Christian, for a man to love those who hate him, and do him
wrong.

78. It aggravates a man's sinfulness to be unholy: wilst he converseth with
such as are holy.

79. It brings honor to God and man, to be upright amongst those who are
unjust.

80. Perfect holiness is the aim of Saints on earth, it is their reward in
heaven.

81. As the salt Sea makes not the fish salt; so no filthiness destroies true
grace.

82. Some men can personate Religion: but are not religious persons.

83. He who has a plain heart, has also square dealings.

84. If God has given thee grace, thou have the best and choicest blessing can
be given.

85. Grace may be more eminent in some then in others: yet every man has every
grace, who has any grace at all.

86. It Is a great dishonor to our profession, not to be upright in our dealings
and conversation.

87. Fear being all duty and every grace, if uprightness of dealing be not from
it, it is a heathenish virtue, not a Christian grace.

88. The fear of the Lord sweeps the heart, and keeps the life clean.

89. Holy enmity against sin, is the temper of a godly man's heart.

90. He that will avoid sin, must avoid the occasion of sin: and he that will
keep from the act, must keep from the way of sin.

91. Children must not be counted bills of changes: for they are greater
blessings then any outward thing else.

92. Woe to those parents, whose gain for their children, is the loss of their
own souls.

93. Emptiness and poverty presses hose most, who once were full and rich.

94. Great and good, rich and holy, are happy but rare conjunctions.

95. To be extreme poor, or rich, is one extreme temptation.

96. That man is rich in grace, who is very poor, but very holy.

97. Temptations are greater and stronger upon the full and rich, then the poor
and empty.

98. God never gives any thing evil in it self to those who are good, nor the
chief good to those chat are evil.

99. There Is fire in all estates ill gotten, which at last will consume them

100. The time we spend in spiritual duties is the time gained for secular:
therefore to turn poor, if thou turn godly, fear not.

CENTURY 8.
1. MUtual agreement amongst children is a comfortable blessing to parents.

2. Nothing more uncomely, and unnatural, as rents divisions, and brawlings in
a family.

3. Prodigality of time is the worst and most dangerous prodigality.

4. Faith is a glutinous monopolizing grace, possessing Christ, and by a close
application making him wholly the soul's.

5. The faithful soul takes sure hold of Christ in the time of darkness and
temptation.

6. Christ lodged in the heart is as a bundle of myrrh, sweet and bitter at
once preserving joy and trembling together.

7. If thy heart swell too high and grow proud, taste and chaw the bitter plant
of Christ's death, and it will break the imposthume.

8. If thy heart fail thee in any conditon, smell at the sweetness of Christ,
and he will transmit life and comfort.

9. The virtue of Christ's death never dies, but flows down to ail ages for
ever.

10. God has appointed that where the cross is, there also is the cordial
against it.

11. Divine love is the cause of divine beauty, and rejoices in it is own work.

12. The beauty of the soul is the holiness of it, being God's Image.

13. Christ has the truth and essence of beauty, whereas earthly things have
it only in estimation.

14. The unquiet brains of men tossed with opinions, rest in the scripture as
in a bed.

15. Our sins are thorns, and so are temptations to sin, and afflictions for
sin.

16. Heresies and schisms are worser then the sharpest stings and thorns to the
Church.

17. Women lose their good name, not only by keeping ill company, but by
keeping none.

18. As weary travelers seek cool arbours, and delight in them; so does the
weary soul after, and in Christ.

19. Some men carry a thin shadow of piety and zeal, but no more.

20. It Is neither loss nor dishonor to be vanquished in the field, where
Christ is General: for at last we shall be conquerors.

21. A holy soul is sick and weary, and lives not in her self, but in Christ,
in whom her life is hid.

22. They are happy beyond expression, who are transfixed with the wounds of
Christ's love.

23. It Is no ways befitting Christians, to lie down and stretch themselves in
sinful pleasures.

24. It Is our duty and comfort to draw near to Christ in affection and
conversation.

25. Holy practice makes grace visible, and brings out from the heart to the
life.

26. A parent may put money in a child's purse, but he cannot put grace in his
heart.

27. Prayer which requires a holy heart, many times makes a holy heart.

28. None can come at the spirit of another, but the Spirit of God.

29. Moderate refreshing and recreation may well become holy men.

30. The care of parents ought to live as long as they and their children live
together.

31. Children when grown in years, must not think they have out-grown obedience
and honor to their parents.

32. The special care of a holy father is for the soul of his child.

33. Such parents whose care is only to make their children great, not good in
this world, are themselves the Devils children.

34. Grace is very attractive, it desires to draw others into fellowship.

35. He that does ill by thy advice, the ill shall be reckoned unto thee.

36. All holy duties call upon us all for a holy preparation.

37. It Is seldom the duty sanctifies us, unless we be sanctified for the duty.

38. It Is very bad to make a preparation, and then to put off or neglect the
duty.

39. It Is God's due, and our duty to give God the morning, the first and best
part of the day.

40. As the morning is a friend to the Muses, so to the Graces, it being the
best praying time.

41. It Is not safe to let sin lie upon our consciences unrepented.

42. He that has guilt upon his soul, has a fire in his soul.

43. Prayer is a lifting up of the soul, and elevation of the spirit unto God.

44. By distinguishing the times, many Scrptures are made to agree.

45. He that sacrificed, offered up a beast; but he that obeys offers up
himself.

46. God in the Sacrament sees the death of his Son, and that satisfies him:
and man sees the death of his Savior, and that justifies him.

47 Actings of faith, powering, out of prayer, makes Sacraments effectual to
man, acceptable to God.

48. Christ was ever, and is, and shall be the only remedy and cure of sin.

49. Every one is saved by particular actings of his own faith: and therefore
every soul must believe for it self.

50. We cannot converse in this unclean and dirty world, but some uncleanness
will fasten upon us.

51. To be without gross sin is our holiness on earth, to be without any sin,
is the holiness of heaven.

52. A good heart turns suspicious of others sinning, into intercession that
they may be pardoned: not in accusations that they may be defamed.

53. He that repents of those sins which he only fears he has committed, shall
be sure to repent of those he does commit.

54. It Is too easy a matter to sin about holy things: lawful things often
being the occasion of unlawful.

55. For a man to bless God in his sin, is a very high strain of wickedness.

56. Every sin is a turning from God, but few sins are a farewell to God.

57. The heart is to be kept with all manner of keeping, for sinful thoughts
are dangerous sins.

58. The heart of man is so wicked as to sin over one sin a thousand times.

59. Renewed sin, require renewed repentance; and we must give over repenting,
when we have don sining.

60. That which men do out of conscience, they will do it out of peresverance:
for nature may have good moods, but grace is steady.

61. Usually where God gives much grace, he tries grace much.

62. All things in heaven and earth are disposed by the unerring wisdom, and
limited by the Almighty power of God.

63. Sleep is a short death, and death is a long sleep.

64. It should be the voice of every soul: Lord what will thou have me do.

65. No creature but left to it self, but will quickly undo it self.

66. There Is no trusting to any estate whatsoever out of Christ.

67. Sin despoils every creature of honor and comfort at once.

68. He that is wicked will be an adversary, no sooner a sinner but a Satan.

69. All opposition of goodness is a spice of the Devil.

70 The height of holiness is, not only to do good, but oppose evil.

71, To be a Satan against Satan, is the glory of every Christian.

72. The intention of one spirit is as plain to another, as the voice of one
man to another.

73. Though the Devil go up and down, he is in a double chain, of Justice and
Providence: Being under the wrath and eye of God.

74. Satan is as full of discontent now as he can be: but not so full of
torments as he shall be.

75. They who once depart from God, can never find rest in any creature.

76. It Is a joy to some to have companions in sin and sorrow.

77. Cloisters are as open to Satan's temptations, as the open fields.

78. Wicked men though never so great, are scarce worth looking upon.

79. Let those look for the hottest assaults, who are most eminent in grace.

80. There Is a kind of joy in hell and wicked men, when the godly man sins.

81. As it is our honor to be God's servant, so he has servants of all
statures and degrees.

82. It Is a holy ambition, to labor to exceed all others in grace and goodness.

83. God will give to every man a testimony according to his utmost worth.

84. No matter if all the world be silent, or slander: if God speak well of us.

85. It Is man's duty when God enlightneth and gives joy, to warble his praises.

86. The great and grievous groanings of a contrite heart, are music in Gods
ears, and sweet evidences of his spirit in us.

87. There are secure trenches and fortifications to desend Gods doves when
hunted and persecuted.

88. God is never more troubled, then as that good Emperor was said to be,
when his servant will ask him nothing.

89. The incense of a wicked man is dung, his sweet canes from a far country
are unsavory.

90. Never did the Church suffer more from the blindest and maddest heathens,
then from heretics, and schismatics.

91. Every faithful soul is Gods garden, and every grace an immarcessible
Lilly.

92. Places of rest and sleep are unquiet, without Christ's divine presence.

93. The first and last work and whole business of a convert, is to seek Christ.

94. The conversation of saints is in heaven before themselves.

95. Church men should be valiant for the faith: not like the sword-fish, which
carries a weapon but no heart.

96. The sweet peace and tranquillity of a calm and pacified conscience
excels all treasures.

97. The application and tincture of Christ's blood, is not only our glory, but
also our protection.

98. It Is a most pregnant testimony of folly and idlness; to consume estate and
time in dressing the hair of the head.

99. A faithful Minister is white and innocent in his reproof; and purged from
all blood-thirstiness and ferocity.

100. A Ministers speech must not swell with vain and empty words: nor yet be
loose or negligent: but prepared with care and purity.

CENTURY 9.
1. FAith like the neck knits the head and body together, and upholds the soul
in persecution.

2. Regeneration is an in tire work of the whole man, and renders him all fair.

3. The purest Christians have some scars and stains, inevitable failings,
which do not deface or disessence them.

4. A bashful blush in a woman, is not only her ornament, but defense also.

5. The wound of love toward us, which Christ had from all eternity, made him
neglect all the wounds and reproaches of the Cro^s.

6. A good name is like colors drawn and laid in oil; not fading, but
enduring for ever.

7. A laborious Minister travels through all the gardens of learning, to fill
his vessels full of joy and comfort.

8. A lewd woman has honey in her lips, but no milk: pleasure, but ho profit:
and that pleasure short and dangerous.

9. All the world is a wilderness, but the Church a garden full of flowers and
fruits.

10. No outward blessing can change the heart, or bring it about to God.

11. the excellencyes of God, and the sweetness of his ways, are the ways of
his dear servants.

12. God makes many promises to his people, but no bargains, his obey him
freely.

13. Politicians serve God for the gain of godliness, not for any delight in
godliness.

14. It Is no small wickedness to accuse a man's intentions, when his actions are
fair.

15. Love excuses what is ill done, and malice accuses what it well done.

16. The more outward blessings we receive, the more service God looks for at
our hands.

17. Satan the father of lies, and seducers, sometimes speak truth for their
own advantage.

18. It Is very seldom to see any industrious hand, and not a blessing upon it.

19. He that brings up an evil name upon any of Gods ordinances, is a
blasphemer.

20. He that quarrels and is angry with providence, reproacheth the wise God.

21. Satan knows not what is in a man's heart, It Is God's peculiar Cabinet.

22. Affliction is the touch stone and great discoverer of sincerity.

23. Some go a fishing with holiness, and when they have their ends, there is
an end of their profession.

24. When religion and prosperity go together, It Is hard to say which a man
follows; but when separated, professors show their metal.

25. It Is not always an argument of God's love, to have our desires granted.

26. Satan, nor none of his instruments, can meddle with the persons or estates
of men without God's permission.

27. It stills the soul with unspeakable joy to remember whilst it suffers, the
will of God is doing.

28. That which evil men desire sinfully, God may grant holily, there being a
vast disproportion betwixt his end and our intention.

29. It Is limited how far every affection shall go, and how far every
instrument shall prevail.

30. When a man is brought from extreme joy to extreme comfort suddenly, it
rather amazeth then comfort the spirit.

31. The clearest day of outward comfort may be clouded before the evening.

32 Riches makes themselves wings to flee away, when we are making doors and
locks to keep them in.

33. A judgment sometimes takers us in the midst of our best and honest
endeavors.

34. A wicked man is Sa^ans captive at his will: whilst he rides tryumphing,
doing his own will.

35. Whilst the sword is making itself fat, it has famine in the belly of it.

36. Sad and grievous are those afflictions, wherein God appears to be against
us.

37. In the worship of God whilst men are upon the knee, their minds ought to
be upon the wing.

38. To mourn in our deaths, and laugh in our sleeves, is both sinful and base.

39. In our straits, consider what we were and shall be ere long, and it will
work the soul to contentation.

40. wicked men thrive often, but they are never blessed: their prosperity is
their curse.

41 He that blesses God in his affliction, his affliction shall be a blessing
to him.

42. That man is full of grace, who is composed in word and thought under
affliction.

43. To be good when we suffer evil, is the height of goodness.

44. Nature teaches a man to value his life above the world: and grace
teaches to value the soul above the life.

45. It Is a woeful thing to put off repentance to a pained body: which pain is
powerful of it self to disquiet the mind.

46. He lives miserably who lives by medicines: and most miserable who is
beyond the help of Physic.

47 It Is an holy man's comfort to be alone: and yet they are never alone,
having an invisible friend to visit them.

48. Wicked men think by Satan's persuasions, that death is an end of outward
trouble.

49. Satan makes Duellists most willing, when they are most unfit to die.

50. Look upon evil as coming from the hand of God, and it will quiet thy heart
in bearing evil.

51. If men did consider, that the milk of the Word is the food of the soul;
they would rather their bodies be without souls, then their Churches without
Preachers.

52. They who carry away the principal Tithes from the Church, had rather lose
their inheritance in heaven, then let Christ have his inheritance on earth:

53: If the buyers and sellers in the Temple deserved whipping: the buyers and
sellers of the Temple deserve hanging.

54. Church-robbers on their deathbeds or in hell, will see that sacrilege is
the worst of thefts and murders.

55. Church-goods prove as unfortunate to many, as the gold of Tholossae to the
followers of Scipio.

56. Some men think to go to heaven by giving their Ministers the hearing:
which is all they give them.

57. Wit and poverty seldom make up an honest man.

58. That man is never truly thankful to God: who is unthankful to the means.

59. God's glory will make a good man speak, when terror it self has
commanded silence.

60. Our Pharisees are worse then the Pharisees of old: for they paid Tithes of
all they had.

61. Some men's shoo-ties cost them more in a year then their souls.

62. Great is the affection of a Convert to a Minister, who has been the means
of his conversion.

63. The Lord has committed the souls of Magistrates to their Ministers, but
the bodies of Ministers to the Magistrates.

64. Our love to God is best known by our respect to his messengers, and usage
of his members.

65. If persons were prized according to what is in them, the world would be
rightly ranked.

66. The favor of God goes out for nothing in man: but the wrath of God goes
forth always for something in man.

67. The sins and afflictions of men are swiftly carried upon the wings of
same, and posted about by reports.

68. A man then sets his seal to it, that he is a friend, when he willingly
shares in his friends affliction.

69. Some friends are like the swallow, to come and sit and sing with us in
summer, but when winter comes, they seek for a hotter climate.

70. To visit the sick is not a complement, but a commanded duty.

71. It Is good manners to be an unbidden guest at the house of mourning.

72. A suitable end is the grace and beauty of all our undertakings.

73. No sickness or affliction can wear out the marks by which Christ knows us.

74. Silent mournings are the sorest, when lifting up the voice vents the
sorrow.

75. In great sorrows, the mind is unfit to take in comfort.

76. A talkative comforter is another disease to a sick man.

77. Let sorrow have it is way a while, and it will make way for comfort.

78. Cursing is now made the common weapon of anger: and wrath wishes the evil
it cannot work.

79. Eternity the day of glory is one continued triumph for our birthday in
grace.

80 Grace does not take away sense: it heightens nature, and does not abolish
it.

81. The comfort of every day depends only upon the blessing of God.

82. Honor is but an higher unhappiness: ^^ches are golden thorns: and strength
ability to bear a heavier burden.

83. The same creature comfort may prove to us a curse, or a blessing.

84. No man on earth in so sad condition, but he may be in a worse.

85. Much of the comfort of our lives is brought in by the society of good
friend.

86. They who have no treasure in heaven, cannot but be enraged when the hope
of their gain is gone upon earth.

87. He that is a knowing christian, can hardly sin without a smart upon
conscience.

88. To commit sin against light, is not so great an argument of an evil
heart, as to be troubled at the light which rebukes them.

89. That man's damnation sleeps not, who awakes the Devil to show him sinning
opportunities.

90. He that loves wages, will not stick to do that work which brings in wages.

91. In sad times small comforts pass for great merits: and in such times the
removing of small comforts is a great affliction.

92. Disappointment of expectation is no small provocation in the day of
trouble.

93. That hell is such a night as never shall see the dawning of the day, has
more torment and pain, then all the pains of hell.

94. If God turn not the key of the womb, the poor infant must lie in prison,
making his mothers womb his grave.

95. We should consider there is more of God's power in bringing us into the
world, then in bringing us out of any trouble in the world.

96. Every step of life stands in need of a step of mercy.

97. Life is a tempestuous sea-voiage: and death brings us to our harbor.

98. Paul had an ear to hear those word, which his body had no tongue to
express.

99. To wish things otherwise out of tenderness that God should be offended, is
both lawful and commendable.

100. Secretly to surmise, or openly to complain that the world is not well
governed, is plain blasphemy.

CENTURY 10.
1. IN things which we cannot understand let us adore God's secret Justice and
unsearchable wisdom.

2 Power out your complaints into God's bosom: and let second causes be looked
upon but in the second place.

3. To bear our cross is the patience of necessity: but to love to bear it,
has in it the height of affection, and the depth of subjection to Christ.

4. Men may put riches with them in the grave, but they cannot keep them one
moment out of the grave.

5. They who fall from God by impiety, will quickly fall upon man by cruelty.

6. It Is the character of an extreme wicked man, to be a troubler of the place
and peopl where he lives.

7. He that follows sin, and serves pride and ambition, serves a hard
master, who will make him toil and sweat, and pay him at last with death.

8. It Is no small trouble to possess good things, when we cannot enjoy them.

9. Many afflictions to our sense are sometimes worse then death.

10. As death finds many before they look for it, so some look for death, and
cannot find it.

11. It Is a great deal better for a man to expect death when it comes not,
then to have death come, when he expects it not.

12. The darkness of affliction it a great increase of our affliction.

13. Holy wisdom and prudence bids us prepare for evil in our good days.

14. They can ill bear any trouble, who look for nothing but comfort.

15. The more our hearts are loosened from the creatures, the more assurance
we have of enjoying the creatures.

16. The best way of teaching, is out of our own experience and exact
disquisition.

17. Largness of gifts and helps from God, should quicken us unto a more
cheerful and vigorous study of our duties.

18. It Is a great blessing for men to have helps and comforts answerable to
their employments and hearts also to use them.

19 The study of the creature is of excellent use to lead us to the knowledge of
the Creator.

20. The more knowledge a man has, the more ignorance he discovers in himself.

21. The good which satisfies a man, must bear proportion to his heart, and
inward man.

22. The right use of pleasure is not to take up the whole man: but to mitigate
the bitterness of severer studies.

23. In things of this world, sometimes they who have least wisdom or goodness,
have greatest success.

24. The wise and circumspect are many times frustrated in those courses which
were contrived with greatest skill and cunning.

25. It Is dangerous Judging of men's wisdom or folly, goodness or badness, by
outward events.

26. As a little cloud darkens the light of the sun: So a little trouble
darkens the content of all our enjoyments.

27. It Is the love of God which puts sweetness in all our outward mercies.

28. Power without piety is very apt to degenerate into cruelty.

29. It Is the height of impiety, to fetch any power or advantage from any
ordinance of God to commit it.

30. Faith looks on the pride and power of wicked men, as a very vain thing,
even in the height of their greatness.

31. It Is matter of comfort to the oppressed, that their cause shall be judged
over again, and themselves righted.

32. It Is a vain conceit to think contentment tied co a small estate, and
vexation to a greater: whereas true content knows as well how to abound, as how
to want.

33. It Is woeful, when men have enough for back and belly, calling and decency
of state, but not enough for the eye.

34. Wealth is a great ornament to wisdom, and the sinews of action.

35. The more sensible any man is of sin in himself, the more meek and
charitable he will be to others.

36. As a little fly corrupts much precious perfume: so a little folly
blemisheth much a wise man's reputation.

37. To a man made up of pride and folly: other men much wiser then himself,
appear but fools.

38. They who are impatient of rule over them, have mine very near them.

39. Where wisdom is wanting to direct our actions, labor will prove endless.

40. The Politician's pretense may be fine and spiritual, but his ultimate end
is gold and greatness.

41. It Is very sad to see men quoting Scripture, to palliate their impious
actions.

42. Woe to that man who sacrifices the public peace to private interest.

43. Nothing so much conceals deformity, and pretends beauty; as the mask of
Religion on the face of Rebellion.

44. It Is policy to say grace to our designs be they never so wicked: and to
give thanks for the success, be it never so bad or bloody.

45. No man is more hated of God then an hypocrite: for a counterfeit Religion
shall find a real hell.

46. It Is common amongst Rebels and Heretics, to mention old Traitors for new
Martyrs.

47. The will of a wicked man is often an offender, when his hands are
innocent, the sin being out of his reach.

48. For learned men to have turbulent spirits, is the dishonor of the Gown,
and shame of the Pulpit, and sometimes the ruin of their Country.

49. A Politician when he has made his best use of a seditious Preacher, leaves
him to his own wild distemper, directing his thoughts to another end.

50. Few men are able or willing to distinguish God's permission from his
approbation.

51. Christ's Kingdom was not of this world, nor yet is a Christian's
happiness.

52. He that asserts temporal happiness to be a true Index of divine favor:
must not say Mahomet is an Imposter.

53. Fortunate sins are very dangerous temptations.

54. A mere Professor is always of the prevailing Religion, harboring a room
in his heart if occasion be, to lodge the contrary.

55. The Magistrate who has no voluntary room in the hearts of his people,
must use all means to gain a coercive.

56. It Is great pity such slender evasions in breaking Oaths, should satisfy
Christians, which have been scorned by Heathens.

57. It Is no heresy to say, many have been saved by their infidelity, in not
believing Politicians pretenses.

58. Some men cover wrong with wrong; as if the the commission of a second sin,
were enough to justify the first.

60. Necessity is the common sanctuary for tyrants sinful actions.

61. They who study to be great by any means, must by all means forget to be
good.

62. If all the gay things which men fondly fancy in a Crown, were really to be
found, he pays too dear that pawns his soul for it.

63. It Is the humor of many, when they have once rushed into a party or opinion
implicitly; to prosecute it as desperately, as if they were under demonstrative
convictions of equity.

64. Soon angry when small injuries are done to our selves; and still patience
in great wrongs done to God, show our hearts to be naught.

65. Our hearts cunningly trip up our heels, when we are to run the race set
before us.

66. There Is a mystery of sin lying in the folds of the heart; which we shall
never see, except God's Spirit enlighten us.

67. When a Seducer speaks a truth: he does set a snare to catch the truth in.

68. Policy in wicked men is more powerful sometimes to restrain their
corruption; then grace in others who are truly religious.

69. An hypocrite speaks not out of, but contrary to the abundance of the heart.

70. No greater thief then a slanderer, for he robs his brother of his good
name, which is above gold or silvers.

71 What a mockery it is when men are careful to pay their servants their due;
and yet rob God and his Church of their due.

72. Sectaries cry out against Papists persecution in Queen Mary's time: and
yet cease not to vent their malice against the Ministers, in whom the piety and
zeal of those holy Martyrs are revived, and doctrine continued.

73. No man's calling must call him from God, or godliness: for particular
callings must give place to the general.

74. The power, command, or example of great men, is no warrant to sin.

75. An unsound conscience is large, and can swallow any thing: but a sincere
conscience is strait, and the least thing sticks in her throat.

76. He that takes custom for a safe rule of his actions: takes a crooked rule,
and a blind guide by the hand.

77. The falls of holy men in Scripture, should teach us rather fear, then
boldness to sin.

78. It denotes a sincere heart, when it grievs for another man's sin.

79". Adversity unites those many times whom prosperity divides.

80. Sectaries cry, Come out of Babylon, and in the mean time fall into her
substantial errors, which are both her foundation and frame.

81. It Is better many ways to swallow a Ceremony, then rend a Church.

82. Though Sectaries intend it not, yet Antichrist and Hell have no better
Agents.

83. Death many times borders upon birth, and the cradle stands in the grave.

84. All the contentments of this life, are as far from sincerity as
contentment.

85. O death! if thy pangs be grievous, yet the rest which follows thee is
sweet.

86. Let no Christian despise the means of his salvation: when he knows the
Author.

87. The bread of the Sacrament was once the Bakers, now it is God's: the water
was once every man's, now it is the Laver of Regeneration.

88. It is to thee, O God, we must power out our hearts, who only can make our
bitter waters sweet.

89. Contentation is a rare blessing, because it arises from a full fruition
of all comforts, or a not-desiring of some which we have not.

90 No man so bare, as not to have some benefits: none so full, as to want
nothing: yea, as not to be full of wants.

91 It is our faithlesness, that in visible means, we see not him who is
invisible.

92 Our greatest pleasures on earth, are but pains in their loss.

93 To whine in the midst of abundant riches, is a shameful unthankfulness.

94 When a heart is hardened with passion, it will endure much e're it will
yield to relent.

95 God will be waited on, and will give the consummation of his blessings at
his own leisure.

96 Let salvation be never so plentiful, if we bring it not home, and make it
ours by faith, we are no whit the better.

97 Nothing so sovereign, which being perverted, may not annoy instead of
benefitting us.

98 Man would forget at whose cost he lives, if he wanted nothing.

99 Lenity is ill-bestowed upon stubborn natures; and it is an injurious
senslesness not to feel the wounds of our reputation.

100 I care not how little or unpleasant a potion I find in this wilderness, if
the power and benefit of Christ's precious death season it to my soul.

Trino-uni-soli-Deo gloria.
FINIS.
Books lately printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Sign of the three Crowns,
over against the great Conduit, at the lower end of Cheap side, 1659.
A Learned Commentary, or Exposition upon the first Chapter of the second
Epistle to the Corinthians, by Dr. Richard Sibbs, published for public good by
Thomas Manton, Folio.

The Dead Saint speaking to Saints and Sinners living, in several Treatises;
viz. The sinfulness, and greatest evil that is in sin, on 2 Samuel 24.10 The love
of Christ to his Spouse, on cant. 4.9. Nature and Roialties of Faith, on John
3.15. The slowness of heart to believe, on John 1.50. The cause, signs, and
cure of Hypocrisy, with motives and helps to sincerity, on Isaiah 58.2. The
wonderful workings of God for his Church and people, on Exodus 15.11. Never
before published: by Samuel Bolton, D. D. late Mr of Christ College in
Cambridge. Folio.

Four profitable Treatises, very useful for Christian practice, viz. The
killing power of the Law: The Spiritual Watch; the New Birth: Of the Sabbath.
by the reverend William Fenner, late Minister of Rochford in Essex. Folio.

There are going to the Press some new pieces of Mr. William Fenners, late of
Rochford in Essex, never yet printed, preserved by a special Providence, one of
which is a second part of his Wilful Impenitencie; being five Sermons more that
he preached upon the 18 of Ezekiel, and the 32 Verse.

(...); or Divine characters in two parts, acutely distinguishing the more
secret and undiscerned differences between 1. The Hypocrite in his best dress
of seeming virtue, and formal duties: And the true Christian in his real
graces, and sincere obedience. As also between 2. The blackest weeds of daily
infirmities of the truly godly, eclipsing saving grace; and the reigning sins
of the Unregenerate, that pretend unto that godliness they never had. By that
late burning and shining Lamp, Mr Samuel Crook B D. late Pastor of Wrington in
Somerset. Folio.

Mr. John Cotton his practical Exposition on the first Epistle to John, second
Edition, corrected and enlarged. in Folio,

A Theater of flying Insects, wherein especially the manner of right ordering
the Be is excellently described; with discourses Historical and Physical
concerning them; with a second part of Meditations and Observations,
Theological and Moral, in 3 Centuries upon the same subject, by Samuel Purchase
M. A. in 40.

Catechizing God's Ordinance, in sundry Sermons, by Mr. Zachary Crofton,
Minister of Buitolphs Aldgate, London, the second Edition corrected and
augmented.

The Godly man's Ark in the day of his distress, discovered in Diverse Sermons,
the first of which was preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Elisabeth Moore.
Whereunto is annexed Mrs. Elisabeth Moors Evidences for heaven, composed and
collected by her in the time of health, for her comfort in the time of
sickness, by Edm. Calamy, B. D. and Pastor of the Church at Aldermanbury. 8.

Peoples need of a living Pastor, at the Funeral of Mr. John Frost, M. A. by
Mr. Zach. Crofton.

The Gale of Opportunity, and the Beloved Disciple, by Thomas Froysel, in 80.

The Wedding Ring fit for the finger, in a sermon at a Wedding at Edmonton, by
Will: Secker.

Enchiridion Judicum, o^ Jehosaphats charge to his Judges, opened in a sermon
before the right honorable, the Judges, and the right worshipful the Sheriff
of the County Palatine of Lancast. Together with Catastrophe magnatum; or King
David's lamentation, at Prince Abner's Incineration, by John Livesey, minister
of the Gospel at Atherton. 80.

The Journal or Diary of a thankful Christian: a Day-book of National and
public, personal and private passages of Gods providence, to help Christians
to thankfulness, and experience. By John Beadle, Minister of the Gopsel at
Barnstone in Essex, large 8.

Mr Robinsons Christians Armor, in large 8.

Book of Emblems, with Latin and English verses upon (Lights) By Robert Farly,
small 8.

A most Excellent Treatise containing the way to seek Heavens Glory, to fly
Earths vanity, to sear Hells horror, with godly prayers, and the Bell-mans
summons. 12.

Johnsons Essays expressed in sundry Exquisite Fancies.

Sion in the house of mourning, because of Sin and Suffering; being an
exposition upon the fifth Chapter of the Lementations, by D S. Pastor of
Vpingham, in the County of Rutland.

Groans of the Spirit, or a Trial of the truth of Prayer.

A Handkercher for Parnets Wet-eyes, upon the death of their Children or
Friends.

The one thing necessary; By Mr. Thomas Watson, Minister of Stephens Walbrook,
8.

A Plea for Alms; delivered in a Sermon at the 'Spital, before a solemn
Assembly of the City, on Tuesday in Easter week, April 13, 1658. By Mr. Thomas
Watson, Minister of Stephens Walbrook, Land. 80.

Moses Unveiled; or those figures which served unto the pattern and shadow of
heavenly things, Pointing out the Messiah Christ Jesus, briefly explained;
whereunto is added, the Harmony of all the Prophets, breathing with one mouth,
the mystery of his coming, and of that redemption which by his death he was to
accomplish. To confirm the Christian, and convince the Jew; very profitable and
full of comfort. By Willam Guild, Minister of God's Word at King-Edward in
Scotland.

Holy things for holy men; or the Lawyers Plea nonsuited, etc. In some
Christian reproof and pity expressed toward Mr. Prynn's book, entitled, The
Lord's Supper briefly vindicated, etc. By S. S. Minister of the Gospel.

Divine Principles, or a Scripture Catechism, etc.

Good Company; being a collection of various, serious pious meditations; useful
for instruction, consolation, and confirmation. By J. Melvin, minister of the
Gospel at Vdimer in Sussex.

A Religious Treatise upon Simeon's song; or instructions how to live holily,
and die happily: by Timothy Woodroffe, B. D. Pastor at Kingsla^d in
Herefordshire.

An Antidote against Henry Hagga^s poisonous Pamphlet, entitled, The
Foundation of the Font discovered: or a Reply, wherein his audaciousness and
sophistry in arguing against Infant Baptism, discipleship, Church Membership,
etc. is detected, his cavi^s against Mr. Cook, Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Hall, are
answered, etc. by Aylmar Houghton, minister of the Gospel at Prees in Salop ^.

Five sermon, in five several styles, or ways of preaching; the first in
Bishop Andrews's way, the second in Bishop Hall's way, the third in Dr Mayns
and Mr. Cartwrights way, the fourth in the Presbyterian way, and the fift^ in
the Independent way of preaching: by A. Wright, minister of the Gospel.

The Reformation, in which is reconciliation with God and his people: or, 1.
Subjection to the State remonstrated: viz. that all that receive protection,
ought to yield subjection to this present power: (the old Protestant's
Doctrine) opposite to that of the Fift-Monarchy, etc. 2. Church Government
reformed* showing, that the Church should be governed by Scripture-Bishops,
Presbyters, Pastors, all unitedly subordinated under the supreme Magistrate. 3.
Faith, in which all should be Baptized is cleared: or a Catechism unvei^ing the
Apostles Creed, with Annotations; in which Faith, Ordinances, and Government
are professed as in the Primitive times, in opposition to all Errors and
Heresies. by W. K. Minist.

FINIS.

