Curse not the King.

A SERMON Preached at St. Martin's in the Fields, On the 30th of January, 1660.

BEING THE Anniversary Day OF HUMILIATION For the Horrid Murder of our late
Gracious Sovereign Charles the I.

By JOHN MERITON, M. A. Rector of the Church of St. Nicholas Acons, London, and
Lecturer to that Congregation.

My son fear thou God, and the King, and meddle not with those that are given
to change, Prove. 24. 21.

(...). Marc. Anton. lib. 6.

London, Printed by J. Macock for Henry Herringman; and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Sign of the Blew Anchor in the LowerWalk in the New Exchange, 1660.

To the Right Honorable Algernoon, Earl of Northumberland; William Earl of
Salisbury; John Earl of Mulgrave; Francis Lord Seymour; With others, Right
Honorable, Right Worshipful; And the rest of my Worthy Honored Friends,
Inhabitants in the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields.
Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, And Well-beloved,
I Cannot but reckon it as one amongst the many remarkable Mercies, that God
has undeservedly and unexpectedly, with a liberal Hand heaped upon us, in our
late wonderful Revolutions; That a Day of solemn Fasting and Humiliation, was
set apart by Restored Authority, for the lamenting that Barbarous and bloody
Regicide, which man's Injustice, and Heaven-daring Impiety acted, And Divine
Justice, and incensed Severity inflicted, as an heavy Judgment upon the three
Kingdoms: And that the many thousands, who then abhorred, but could not hinder
it, might in a public manner, with freedom and safety, wash away that
blood-guiltiness with their tears, the springs of heretofore restrained griefs
rising up, (as Rohoboth without any Genesis 26. 22.
stoppage of Philistines) and running along the Channel of a Religious and
Penitential Mourning. Craesus his Son seeing some bloody Assassinates offering
violence to his Father, in a sudden vehemence of passion cried out, (though
dumb before) It is Craesus, O do not kill him: We have with sorrow seen the
death of our Civil Father, Amo 5. 13.
And the prudent kept silence in that time, for it was an evil time, (though
there were that spoke with more Loyalty, then safety) but God has now opened
our mouths, to express before himself, and the world, our sad resentment of
that prodigious and unnatural Paricide, after a twelve years tongue-tyed
silence. How much inclined, rather then enforced I was, to contribute my poor
help in the work of that Day, (in submission to this Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake) 1 Pet. 3. 13.
needs not be declared; Nor will your cheerful concurrence need further
evidence, then your ready, diligent attendance upon, and earnest attention to
(as other holy exercises so,) this plain, unpolished Sermon, which, upon the
joint importunity of many of your selves (whom I could not well gratify with
the grant, but much worse disoblige with a denial of their Request) is now
exposed to public view.

The Argument I still judge, as I then did, fit for the Pulpit on that, and
necessary for your practice upon every day; And further Apology I make none,
for sending abroad these blotted Papers: I am so fully satisfied in the truth
and Scripture evidence of the matter herein handled, and so justly charitable
to my Christian Hearers, as to presume none were dis-sat is fied with the
hearing of themselves pressed to a long discountenanced Loyalty: And Did we not
live in an age, wherein for a Minister of the Gospel to indemnify himself from
the Ordeal of a captious and over-critical ear, and calumniating Tongue, were
next to an impossibility, I might with more security rest satisfied, that
though possibly I had profited but a few, yet that I had at least displeased
none. If any unapt and mis-becoming expressions shall occur, (which would
better bear the slight and transient touch of the ear, then the more fixed and
deliberate scrutiny of the eye) I therein beg your candid and charitable
indulgence, being desirous, that the Sermon might now appear in the same dress
of Phrase (so near as the frailty and slipperiness of my Memory would permit)
as when at the first delivered.

I cannot let slip this Opportunity without a public and grateful
acknowledgement of your many and great Favors conferred upon, and continued
unto my unworthy self, and particularly your acceptance and encouragement of my
weak Endeavors, for the space of eight years fully finished on the very day of
my Preaching this Sermon. And if God has used a worthless Instrument for the
spiritual good of any souls among you (the highest Honor of a Gospel Minister,
and I hope, my greatest ambition) I desire that he who has been the principal
Agent in the work, may be the sole Object of the Praise. I have herein pressed
you to an Honorable esteem of, and Loyal, dutiful Affections toward the Kings
Majesty, And am not apt to distrust some measure of Fruit answering the cost of
Seed and Plowing: And if by the pains of eight years Preaching, I have
persivaded any of you to take an Oath of Alleagiance to Christ the King of
Kings, I cannot but judge, (had the time been longer, and my diligence greater)
both employed to good purpose.

May the Kings Majesty (whom God has Mercifully, and Miraculously restored to
the Ancient and Glorious Throne of His Progenitors,) be blessed from Heaven
with a Long, Pious, Peaceable, and Prosperous Reign, till at length he changes
an earthly, corruptible Crown of Gold, for an Heavenly, Incorruptible Crown of
Glory.

May the Nobility be further Ennobled with true Zeal and Sanctity, Never
accounting Honor and Greatness, disobligations from Religion, which are then
only wisely and faithfully improved, when they are made Incentives to, and
Vtensils of Religion.

May we all live in Purity and Piety to God, as it becomes Christians, In
Loyalty and Fidelity to our King, as it becomes Subjects; In Unity and Charity
one with, and toward another, as it becomes Brethren. It is the hearty Prayer
of

Your Honors Humbly Devoted, Your Worships Thankfully Obliged, And Your
Affectionately Engaged Servant in the Lord, JOHN MERITON.

Curse not the KING.
Eccles. 10. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought; and curse not the
Rich in thy Bedchamber; for a Bird of the Air shall carry the voice, and that
which has Wing shall tell the matter.


THat thought is free, is one of our profane Proverbs, not more common then
Atheistical; as good say in ones heart (with the fool) there is no Psalm. 14. 1.
God, as demolish his Throne, or exclude and extirpate his Sovereignty from the
hearts of Men; to think that God does not know, has not bounded, will not
judge the thoughts, were to make him an Idol God; and we 1 Gor. 8. 4.
know that an Idol is nothing in the world. God is himself most manifest, and
for the evidence of his soul supremacy, has given check to those sins that are
least manifest, prohibiting thoughts of pride, envy, malice, covetousness,
hypocrisy, Atheism, blasphemy both against himself and his Deputy; and has in
this Text charged us, that we charge not out hearts with the white Powder of
disloyal thoughts, sec^etly, and without noise to murder and make away the
Honor and Esteem of his Anointed; Curse not the King, no not in thy thought.

Some three or four verses before the Text, Solomon insinuates and bewails the
misery of a Nation by the mis-government of its Princes; which may come to pass
diverse ways.

1. By ignorance and unskilfulness, ver. 16. Woe to thee O Land, when thy King
is a child; A child not in Age, so much as in Experience; A sad Pilot to be set
at the Stern that knows not his right hand from his left; such a child 1 Kings
14. 21.
was Rehoboam, a child of one and forty years old; almost twice at age, before
once at years of discretion.

2. By a Riotous intemperance, and sensuality; When thy Princes eat in the
morning, devoting the flower of their time, that should be bestowed upon God,
and the Public, to excess and luxury.

3. By stothfulness, and a careless supine oscitancy, ver. 18. By much
slothfulness the Building decaieth, and through idleness of the hands the house
droppeth through: That Kingdom must needs run apace to ruin, where the master
Builder lets it rain through, and rot the principals, and never minds
reparations. And for this State-ill-husbandry Domitian stands upon Record, who
spent his time in making fly-traps.

4. By an over-lavish and profase expensiveness, verse. 19. A Feast is made for
laughter, and Wine makes merry; but Money answers all things. q. d. Feasting
and wine make merry; but money makes the Feast, and that must come out of the
peoples purses.

Now let God have the praise, that England subscribes not this woe by its
present experience, but may pity other Lands, whose Princes are in some or more
of these respects masters of mis* rule, as a man upon shore is a sad spectator
of a wrack at Sea.

But when it is thus, and people over-burdened may be apt to kick and winse,
(as the mad metall'd Horse would cast the Rider from off his galled back) God
has in this Text senced in Princes, as sacred Persons, from the most secret
projections of disloyalty, setting their Subjects thoughts and consciences of
their Lifeguard, and driving away the busy flies from sucking too much upon
the sore place. And much more; when the King is Wise, Temperate, Diligent, and
Thristy. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought.

In the words we have a Prohibition, And Reason.

1. A Prohibition; Curse not the King in thy thought, Curse not the Rich in thy
Bedchamber. Where we may observe Three,

1. An Act, together with its prohibition reduplicated, Curse not, Curse not.

2. This prohibited Act restrained, and limited, Not in thy Bedchamber, nay
not in that which is more secret, and secure from Eves-dropping then thy
bedchamber, Not in thy thought.

3. The Persons against whom curses may not be levelled, that are (as by virtue
of this sacred Charm) to go free from this Gunshot, The King, The Rich, which
are both one; for by the Rich we must here understand the Ruler.

2. A Reason taken from the certainty of discovery: A Bird of the air shall
carry the voice, and that which has wing shall tell the matter: not only
conscience, the bird in the bosom will be disquieted, and affright thee like a
Scriech-Owl; but the birds of the air shall tell tales of thy Treason, and
publish that upon the Housetop, which was hatched in a corner,

Which may be understood Literally, Or Metaphorically.

1. Literally, Rather then Treason shall go undiscovered, bruit creatures shall
turn Intelligencers; as its storied of Bessus, that having murdered his
Father, he overthrew a Nest of Swallows that sat chattering by him, because,
says he, they accuse me for killing my Father: as Christ answered the
Pharisees that would have had his Disciples checked for praising God, If these
should have Luke 19. 40.
held their peace, the stones would immediately cry out. That which has wing,
it was a quill, a piece of a wing, that brought to light the hellish
Powder Plot, and has been a pick-look to open the close Cabinet of many
clancular and treasonable Conspiracies.

2. It may be taken Metaphorically, and so by the birds of the air some
understand the Angels, who like winged Eagles shall make report of thy secret
wickedness; and (...)
this sense is favored by the Chaldec Paraphrase, that runs thus, Raziel the
Angel cries continually out of Heaven, upon Mount Horeb, etc. Others by these
Birds of the air understand Fame, a swift-winged Messenger, as of reports we
sometimes say, I heard a Bird sing: as if Targ^. Quid est* Catilin^, quo^ jam
amplius exp^ctes, si neque N^x tenebris obs^urare coetus nefarios, nec privata
Domus continere vocem conjurationis tuae potest, si illustrantur, si erumpant
omnia. Cicero. in Catil. orat. 1.
the Wise Man had said, Take heed of treasonable disloyal Designs, l^st thou
hear of them again through fames Trumpet, and that will report them with a
shrill and f^ightful Echo.

I purpose to insist upon the first Clause, Curse not the King, no not in thy
thought; And after a short Explication of the words, I shall add the
Observations.

[ Curse not] The word properly signifies to vilify and dis-esteem, it comes
from a word that signifies Light; as on the contrary, Glory, and Renown, from a
root that imports weight and heaviness. It may here very properly (...)
b^ rendered, Make not light of the King; the same word is used, Genesis 16. 5.
when Sarah made her complaint to (...)
Abraham, that upon Hagars conception She was despised in her eyes* and so 1 Samuel 2. 30. Them that honor me, I (...)
will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. That which
this Text forbids is a slighting and irreverend dis-esteem of the King; this
God calls Cursing, as its said of Michal, that she despised David in her heart:
And those filthy Dreamers, of whom it is said, they despise Dominion, 2 Samuel 6.
16.
(...), which signifies the dis-placing a thing Jude 8.
with contempt and disdain, as that which is unworthy to abide there any longer.

[ The King] Neither his Person, nor his Authority.

[ In thy thought] In thy Conscience, place no powder Barrels in thy inward
parts, tamper not with such fireworks as those, which no creature can be privy
to but thine own conscience: the Law makes it Treason to falsify the Kings
Coin; It is Treason (says God) to keep a Mint of disloyal thoughts going under
ground.

I shall now sum up the words in two Propositions; The one Implied; The other
Expressed.

1. People are too apt to commit Treason in their thoughts. 2. God allows not
in Subjects a dishonorable dis-esteem of Princes.
1. People are too apt to commit Treason in their thoughts. This is strongly
implied, for God would never so carefully have raised a sense, and fitted a
Ring and Yoke, had he not seen men ready (like swine) to break into, and root
up this enclosure. It were easy to confirm and fortify this truth, by drawing
up a Chain of Scripture Instances: Moses a meek and excellent Prince, to whose
conduct the Israelites were (under God) beholding for their Deliverance out of
Egypt, yet at every turn they took pet, and upon a want of bread or water in
the wilderness, in a Mutinous discontent they charge him as a Exodus 17. 3.
Murderer; and when at any time they smarted under those Rods that their own
sin had tied up, Moses bears the blame: As when a man is transported with fury
and passion, though possibly it be the offense of his hand, or foot that vexes
him, yet his head must be scratched. Thus Gideon, when with an happy success he
had subdued the Midianites, the Ephramites, who one would have thought should
rather have applauded his valor, and promoted his Triumph, presently pick a
new quarrel with him; as though their intent had been to sound an Alarm to a
fresh skirmish, upon the rout of the open enemy; They did Jud. 8. 1.
chide with him sharply, and met him like so many wild Bulls, rather to gore
him then draw the Conquerors Chariot. David, a man after Gods own heart, whose
blackm^uth'd enemies could charge but little upon him unless it were his fault
to be almost fault-less, must run the Gant-lope too: Shime^ Curses him; Sheba
blows the 2 Samuel 16. 7.
T^umpet as the Ringleader of faction and sedition: Nay 2 Samuel 20. 7.
his son Absalom attempts to undermine his Throne, and unnaturally embrew his
blood-thirsty fingers in his Fathers Royal blood. And it fared little better
with Solomon, his Son, and Successor, in whose Reign silver and gold was as
plentiful as stones in the street, (which are the 2 Chronicles. 1. 15.
great make-peace of peoples discontents) yet then we find some tainted with
this fretting Leprosy, Say not thou, what is the cause that the former days
were better then Eccles. 7. 10.
these; there were some morose and repining spirits, who maligned and murmured
at the present state of affairs, reflecting upon the Prince, as if it were only
by his mis-government; but the wise Man holds in the mouths of these Horses
and Mules, that have no understanding, as Psalm. 32. 9.
with bit and bridle, telling them, it is the fools bolt that is shot so
suddenly, Thou do not enquire wisely (and that being a (...), it is as much as
very foolishly) concerning this thing.

This evil fruit of cursing the King, grows, for the most part, from this
Threefold root of bitterness.

1. Unreasonable Envy. 2. Proud Aspiring Ambition. 3. Unbridled Licentiousness.
1. Unreasonable Envy, Thus the Ephraimites would blast and fly-blow Gideons
Victory, only because themselves had no hand in it; the ground of their chiding
was, because Judge. 8. 1.
they were not called, and if they had been called, Dum cernit in Honoribus
quis auctiorem, Zelo excaecante, sensus nostros, atque in ditionem suam mentis
arcana redigente, Dei timor Spernitur, Magisterium Christi Negligitur, judicii
dies non provi letur. Cyprian.
its like they would have quarrelled as much, if they had not been every one
File-leaders in the Army; they had as live upon the matter he should have lost
the day, as themselves to lose the credit of it. Envious minds are like weak
eyes, that weep when they behold the Sun in the glory of its Meridian; or like
Dogs, that bark at the Moon, only because it is bright, and above them. Spite
and Malice is a Canker that eats most into the finest and brightest gold, and
where this takes place, a Princes great fault is his Greatness. Recalcitrat
rebellat de zelo superbus, de aemulatione perversus, animositate, and livore,
non hominis sed honoris inimicus. Idem.


Secondly, It arises from a proud aspiring ambition: Numb. 16. 3.
Thus was it with Corah and his Confederates, They gathered Hominum genus est,
qui quanquam premuntur aere alieno, Dominationem tamen expetunt, rerum p^tiri
volunt, honores quos quieta repub. desperant, perturbata Consequi se posse
arbitrantur, Cicer. in Catil.
themselves together against Moses, and against Aaron, and said unto them, Ye
take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are holy, every one of
them, and the Lord is among them; wherefore then lift you up your selves above
the Congregation of the Lord? They were leavened with Levelling Principles, and
an external Sanctity puffed them up to an aspiring after Superiority; and then
Moses and Aaron are but Hail fellow, every one thought himself as good as they.
And it was this ambition that lay at the bottom of Absaloms Treason; O that I
(says he) O at. 2.
were made a Judge in the Land! Oh if State matters were 2 Samuel 15. 4.
committed to my mannagement, the best end should go forwards, and every Saddle
should (no doubt) be set upon the right Horse; and thus he begins Quid aliud
homo appetit nisi solus esse si sieri possit, cui cuncta subject. sint,
perversa seilicet imitatione omnipotentis Dei? Aug. de vera Relig.
his Mine to blow up his Fathers Throne. Many men bear no good mind to Kings,
because they have a good mind to be Kings themselves. An heart swelled with the
tympany of proud aspiring thoughts, is a drum ready braced, whereon to beat an
Allarm to treasonable disloyalty: And no wonder that they that would be as Gods
over men, be as Devils to them that are Gods.

3. This undervaluing disesteem of Kings arises from an unbridled
licentiousness. Regal Dignity and Authority is appointed and conferred to
restrain and give checkmate to those lusts that are boundless and boisterous;
Now unruly sinners can no more abide restraint, then wild beasts to be put in a
Pound. When Moses gave check (though but a gentle one) to that Hebrew that
wrongfully smote his brother, he flew in his face, Who made E^od. 2. 14.
thee a Prince and a Judge over us* and by a malicious spiteful discovery of
the concealed slaughter of the Egyptian, made him glad to fly for his life;
his rebuke, though Impii exleges existimant qui cos reprehendunt, aliquid
usurpare contra suam libertatem. Rivet in Lec.
just and reasonable, was like knocking the flint against the steel, that
struck out the sparks of discontented passion. When Lot would have restrained
the lusts of the Sodomites, it was taking a Bear by the tooth, or binding a mad
man in his bed, they were the more exasperated: This one fellow came in to
sojourn (say they) and he will Genesis 19. 9.
needs be a Judge; Now will we deal worse with thee then with them. These are
filthy dreamers that desile the flesh; Jude 8.
Now Kings and Magistrates bearing the Sword, to regulate and correct such
exorbitant impurities, They despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities.
Libertines vent their foolish and froward discontent at Kings, as the mad Dog
bites the Chain that ties him to a post: And the Sea with its salt and foaming
waves undermines, and washes away those banks that bound its rage. And so I
pass on from the First, to the Second Observation, viz.

That God allows not in Subjects, distoyal, dishonorable Obser^^t. 2.
thoughts of Princes: This Text alone were sufficient proof; but I shall
further evidence the evil of Cursing the King in thought, in four Particulars.

1. It is a ^in against a Divine Ordinance: By him Kings Prove. 8. 15.
Reign, and Princes decree Justice: Whosoever resists the Romans 13. 12.
Power, resists the Ordinance of God, (says the Apostle) He is the Minister
of God; and again* They are Gods Ministers; the Kings Coronation is on earth,
his Commission from Heaven. It is true, had man stood fast in his primitive
integrity, there had been no Superiority or subjection among the sons of men,
no distinction Conditio Servitutis intelligitur imposita peccatori, proinde
nusquam Scripturarum Legimus servum, antequam peecatum filii Noe justus
vindicaret, Nomen itaque istud culpa meruit, non Natura. Aug. de Civit. Del,
lib. 19. cap. 15.
between Prince and people; then alone would the (now absurd) levelling
Principles of some have taken place without incongruity; Man was to have ruled
over the Creatures, which God had put under his feet; but one man was not to
have ruled over another: but in our lapsed Apostate condition, every sinner
being a Master of mis-rule, God has set up Rulers to regulate, restrain,
amend, correct, and keep in compass, those exorbitant passions, and unbridled,
brutish affections, that would (...) Agapetus. Justini^no.
otherwise suddenly set all on fire, and (as it were) throw the world out at
the windows. Kings and Princes are Constituted and Commissioned, the
Vicegerents, and Lord D^putics of Jesus Christ, who has taken the Government
upon his Shoulder, and to whom all power is given in Heaven, and in earth: He
says they are Gods, though Isai. 9. 6.
they dye like men, though they are flesh and blood, and Matthew. ^8. 18.
their bodies are from earth, and therefore mortal; their Psalm. 82. 6.
Power, Dignity and Authority, is from Heaven, and Inde est imperator, Unde and
homo antequam imperator; inde p^testas illi, unde and spiritus. Tertul. Apol.
Cujus jussu ho mines, ejus jussu Reges. Irenaeus.
therefore the Persons vested with that Power are to be Reverenced, as
Representatives of Divine Majesty: The Rain bow is, as to the matter of it, but
an ordinary Vapor, a common Cloud, but being gilded and enameled by the
Sunbeams, it is more beautiful and glorious then any other part of the
Heavens; Kingly Dignity is a Ray and bright reflection of Gods Sovereign
Authority, and therefore disloyal and undutiful projections, are an affront to
God in Effig^e, a contempt of an higher Majesty then theirs. And as under the
Law God forbad cruelty to beasts, viz. not to destroy the dam from the young;
nor Deuteronomy. 22. 6.
sees a Kid in the mothers milk, that such inhibitions might Exodus 23. 19.
be as a sense and rail about the life of man; so has he ordered respect to
Magistracy, as a kind of fence about his own Dignity and Divine Glory: In
Adonijah's asking 1 King. 2. 23.
Abishag, the Kings, Concubine, Solomon smelt out Treason against himself: A
contempt of Princes, that have so immediate relation to, and dependence upon
God, can be interpreted no other then a Project and Design against his Crown
and Dignity. When Adam had tasted the Tree of Knowledge, God turned him out of
Genesis 3. 12.
Paradise, to keep his itching fingers from plucking the Tree of Life. A
disdain of Dominion and Royal Dignity, is as it were, an Allarm to God, to
secure and guard his own Throne.

2. Cursing the King in thought, is a sin against a man's own welfare; He is
(says the Apostle) the Minister of God Romans 13. 4. Faciet nos mitiores si
cogitaverimus quid nobis prefuerit ille, cui irascimur, and meritis offensam
redemerit. Seneca.
to thee for good, showing at once the original and end of his Authority: Its
original, Gods Minister; Its end, thy good: And were but men content with a
quiet, comfortable enjoyment of their liberties, peace and privileges, it
would much abate and take down the swelling of the spleen against Authority. It
is prophesied of the last times, that men shall be disobedient to Parents,
unthankful; 2. Tim. 2. 3.
two evils, that were they alone, were enough to make perilous times; and
disobedience is therefore worse because rooted in ingratitude, and men being
insensible of the real benefit by Governors, have too quick a sense of supposed
mischiefs. Men possibly fancy to themselves great good by a removal of Kings
and Magistrates, alas, it is as the silly child desires the death of his
Father, that it may have a new pair of gloves at his Funeral: This Solomon sets
out very elegantly in this Chapter, He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it,
and who so breaks an Hedge, a Serpent shall bite him; who so removes stones
shall be hurt Eccles. 10. ^8. 9.
therewith, and he that cleaves wood shall be endangered thereby; as if he had
said, a desire and endeavor to see Princes go as servants a foot, and to set
servants on horse back, is like a man's digging a pit for his own grave, or
breaking an hedge to be stung with a snake that lurks at the bottom of it; like
a man's removing of stones to be crushed with their weight, or cut with their
sharpness, or the cleaving of wood, to be wounded with the splinters. That
passenger in a ship that wishes the Pilot cast overboard, seeks not the
preservation of his own Cabin. An evil man Prove. 17. 11.
seeks only Rebellion, therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him.
It is observed that they whom the Scripture has stigmatized as opposers of
Magistrates, have still been punished with a violent and untimely death, as
Corah and his confederates, Athaliah, Zimri, Joab, Shimei, Adonijah, Absalom,
whose Mule going from under 2 Samuel 18. 9.
him, hung him up in the Oak as a Traitor; the beast would be laden with such a
beast no longer, but left him hanging as a public spectacle of a treacherous
and unnatural disloyalty: And to omit foreign Histories, our own English
Chronicles give abundant evidence, That pursuing vengeance has still been at
the heels of the rebellious. Who has not heard of Becket, Moniford, Mortimer,
Wyat, Cade, Tyler, Warbeck, and the Powder Traitors: Nay, in this very Parish
you had a late memorable instance, God allowed them not the respit and
reprieval of a deathbed; nay, the bones of some (who to a wonder, have died
quietly in their beds) have not rested quietly in their graves; Divine
vengeance has set them up as Sea-marks, for others to avoid, whose sin was the
removal of ancient Landmarks.

Thirdly, Cursing the King in thought is a sin against public Peace and
Happiness: Society is the guardian of man, Peace the guardian of Society,
Justice the guardian of Peace, the Law the guardian of Justice, and the (...)
King the Guardian of the Law; and were not he a God to man, one man would soon
prove a Wolf, nay, a Devil to another; were there no Ruler, every one would be
a Ruler, and every Ruler a Tyrant. Life, liberty, and estate would be exposed
to the violence, lust and rapine of every one that had but an heart and hand to
assault them. Should such as wish evil to Kings, be taken at their words, and
have their desires granted, and gratified by Gods taking them them away in
wrath, the issue should be the same, that followed Phaetons overturning his
Chariot (and let our experience speak the sad fruit of Magistratus est illud
vinculum per quod Respublica cohaeret, est spiritus ille vitalis quem haec ^ot
Millia trahunt, nihil ipsa per se futura nisi onus, and praeda, s^ men's illa
imperii subtrahatur. Sen. l. 1. de Cl^m.
this days sin) a general combustion, and we should be reduced to that sad
complaint of the Prophet, being as the fishes of the Sea, and creeping things,
where the great ones cat up the little ones, because they have no Ruler over
them, Hab. 1. 14. Murder would be valor, Robbery equity, Fraud and Couzenage,
ingenuity, exaction exactness, every one would give out a measuring yard of
Justice, as King Henry the First did by the length of his own arm, and all
right would be tried (as it is amongst Dogs) by the teeth only.

Were not the Magistrate maintained in his Power and Dignity, every man would
be President of an High Court of Justice, to speak Axes and Halters without
(...). Theodoret. Ora^. 7. deprovid.
control, and shoot Bullets (as boys do pease) by his breath, or with Cain,
scorn to be his brothers Keeper, and not fear to be his Brothers Butcher.

Fourthly, Cursing the King in thought is a sin that many times breaks out into
open R^bellion, it begins underground, but ends not there, They despise
Dominion, and Jude 8.
speak evil of Dignities. Evil surmisings of the King Tuned up in the heart,
frequently ferment, rise up, and run over in treasonable words and practices.
Michal despises 2 Samuel 6.
David in her heart, and then falls into a downright railing upon him; a
yiedling to such unworthy thoughts is like firing the priming-powder in the
Pan, its a wonder if it proceeds not to further mischief; or like wildefire
upon a Rope, lighted at one end it runs to the other. Corah's Conspiracy,
Absaloms Rebellion, the Horrid Powder Treason, and that execrable Fact that we
this day lament before the Lord, were branched Trees that began in this small
covered Mustard seed, and fiery flying Serpents, hatched out of this Cockatrice
Egg.

Thus much for the Doctrinal part, I proceed now to Application.

viz. These five following.

1. Hence we may fetch an Argument for the Divine original, and Authority of
Scripture; it being a Law given to the thoughts, whereof humane Laws can take
no cognizance Though (it is true) the Law of England makes it Treason to
imagine the death of the King, yet it annexeth no punishment, unless when those
imaginations appear above ground, but the Scripture prohibits treasonable
thoughts, and that under a penalty, a convincing Argument that it comes from
God, the Searcher, and Supervisor of thoughts; for the obligation of no Law can
extend further then the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Legislator. Now the
holy Scriptures, both here, and elsewhere, fixing bounds to our thoughts,
(which can no more be confined or kept in compass by Laws of man's making, then
a Pigeon can be hedged in a Pinfold) It is an unanswerable evidence, that they
are from him, thoughts being only open to his knowledge, and under his
judicature; the Apostle doubts not to call it Gods Word, which is (...), a
discerner of Heb. 4. 12.
the thoughts.

2. Hence I infer the Wise and wonderful Providence of God for man's welfare,
who has set up, and secured Kings, in order to our security. No creature wants
so much a Ruler as man, other creatures come into the world Cooks, Physicians,
Tailors, Carpenters, Soldiers to themselves, armed, apparelled, and otherwise
accouter'd by nature, they bring (as it were) a train of Artillery along with
them; only poor man comes naked, without Factum est ^ut non sine Dei
providentia, quidam essent regnis praediti, quidam regnantibus subditi. Aug. de
Civ. Dei lib. 18.
skill, strength, or weapon; And Oh, how good is God that provides protectors
for us, and protection for them? violent, bloody, and unreasonable men fear not
Hell, so much as the Halter, the terrous of the Magistrate is more dreadful to
them then the wrath and curse of God, like some silly and timorous children,
that quake and tremble at the flash of lightning, or roaring noise of the
Thunder, cop. 2.
more then at the killing stroke of the bolt. Now how does God manifest his
Mercy, and express a tender compassionate care for our quiet, comfortable
passage, through a transitory troublesome world, that defends us with Rulers,
and by such prohibitions, as that of the Text is himself the defense of Rulers:
as when the husbandman sets a quick hedge to preserve his pastures from the
intrusions of beasts from without, and compasses it with a Rail, or covers it
with Bushes, that it be not bitten, or trodden down by beasts within. And it is
most righteous with God, that they should feel the Curse and smart of confused
headless Anarchy, who are not sensible of, and thankful for, the multiplied
blessings of Regular, well modeled Monarchy.

3. Christianity destroys not, but strengthens Magistracy; One Ordinance of
God does not interfere with, or abolish another. The taking an Oath of
Allegiance unto Christ, does not at all weaken, but knit the sinews of our
Allegiance to such as Rule by derived Authority from, and in subordination unto
Christ. He makes Rev. 1. 6.
his Saints Kings and Priests, but in a spiritual sense; and as their being
Priests does not clash with the Office of Evangelical Ministry, so their being
Kings does not in the least justle with lawful Magistracy, they are Kings to
God his Father, and that is no ground of opposing or despising Kings that are
Civil Fathers. The Scepter of our Lord Christ swallows not up (as Aarons Rod
did the other) the Scepters of earthly Monarchs; Nor does he that came to
purchase and bestow Heavenly, batter and break in pieces earthly Crowns.
Loyalty to the King will not excuse from Piety to God, and Piety to God
excludes not Loyalty to the King. Never was man the worse Subject for being a
good Christian: It may, without any great breach of charity, be concluded, that
they have no Religion, that by a pretense thereof are encouraged to Rebellion,
and they have as little, who by a mere pretense, and clamor of Rebellion, go
about to discourage any from Religion. It is one of Satan's
Masterpeice-policies, to persuade Princes that Christ's Kingdom is opposite to
their Dominion; thus the Jews enemies obstructed the building of the Wall by
aspersing Ezekiel. 4. 12, 13.
Jerusalem to Artaxerxes, as a rebellious and bad City, and that if the Walls
were once set up, they would deny the payment of Toll, Tribute and Custom, and
so diminish and endamage the Kings Revenue. David was cashiered 1 Samuel 29. 4.
the Army of Achish upon a suggestion and suspicion of Treason. Thus the
Chaldean Courtiers blemished those three resolute Champions with refractoriness
and Dan. 3. 12.
rebellion against the Kings Proclamation.

And by the same fetch Haman attempted the overthrow Est. 3. 8.
and extirpation of the Jews, falsely insinuating their non-observance of the
Kings Laws. The subtle and malicious Devil would not have holy and good men
watered and refreshed at the root, by the dew and benign influences of
Government, and thereupon traduceth them, as men that would root up Government.
Some observe, That not one godly man is recorded in Scripture, as an opposer of
Magistracy; and if any such can be found there, or elsewhere, this sure is no
part of his godliness. King Jesus has indeed been represented and reproached
by some persons of furious and frantic Principles, as an overturner of secular
Dignities; but this is an abuse of him now in heaven, like that the Jews
offered when he was upon earth, who accused and executed him as an enemy to
Caesar. Joh. 19. 12.


Fourthly, It is a much greater evil, and more inexcusable to speak of Princes
reproachfully, and yet greater to offer violence to their persons: The first is
that sin wherewith Shimei stands branded upon Record, who cursed David, not in
thought only, but word, and the pestilential blasphemy of his heart broke out
at his lips, Come out, come out thou bloody man, and thou man of Belial: and 2 Samuel 16. 7.
so Michal, when she saw him dancing before the Ark, tauntingly scoffed at
him, How glorious was the King of 2 Samuel 6. 20.
Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of his servants, as
one of the vain fellows shamelesly uncovereth himself? upbraiding his zeal with
the unbeseeming levity and wanton carriage of a Morrice-dancer; whereupon 2 Samuel 6. 23.
she was cursed with barrenness, God taking order that no daughter of hers
should give the like language to her husband. God has restrained the
licentiousness of our tongues, not only by the natural fence of teeth and lips,
(whereby he has put the wild beast in a double railed Exodus 22. 28.
pownd) but an express prohibition, Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse
the Ruler of thy people. When Miriam and Aaron were taken tardy as to some
intemperancy of speech against Moses, God himself tartly rebukes that Numb. 12.
8.
extravagancy, Wherefore were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses:
And when the Apostle Paul had called Acts 23 3.
Ananias Whited Wall, and thereby run himself into this praemunire, and some by
standers taxed him for it, he was glad to fetch himself off with an (...), I
wist not verse. 5.
that he was the High Priest: the meaning whereof some make to be this, I wist
not, I considered, I heeded not, though I did know, yet I had then no such
thing in my thoughts; others, (as Beza and Heinsius out of Josephus) and (I
conceive) more probably, suppose, that there being at that time such a
confusion and disturbed succession of High Priests, one to day, and another to
morrow, he did not know who was then High Priest; had he known, and considered
it, he would rather have bitten his tongue, then it should have black'd and
smutted his honor, by calling him Whited Wall, and he renders this reason,
Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people.

And as Princes may not be struck with the sword of the mouth, so much less
with the mouth of the sword. Its Xenoph. Hellenicon, lib. 11.
noted of the Persians when they came into the presence of their Prince, they
drew their hands into their sleeves, in token both of reverence and Loyalty,
they would not have an hand stirring while Majesty was in presence. 1 Samuel 24.
4, 5
When David cut off Saul's skirt (and it was but his skirt) he made a deeper
gash in his own heart, than the Kings Garment; and when at another time he
found him fast asleep, and was advised to dispatch him for ever waking more, he
thought a Kingdom dear bought with contracting the guilt of Royal blood upon
him, and resolves better, Destroy him not; for who ca^^ stretch forth his hand
1 Samuel 26 9.
against the Lords Anointed and be guililess? And it was not his particular
practice only, but he has passed it into a rule, Touch not mine Anointed. It
was an ancient custom Psalm. 10^. 15.
among Wrestlers to anoint themselves, that their Antagonists might take no
hold of them. God has written Rex crat, ergo alium prater Deum non timebat.
Hieron ad Eustach. In solius Dei potestate sunt, a quo sunt secundi post quem
primi, antcomnes, and super omnes Dees. Ter^a^.
upon his Anointed a Noli me tangere; and if any shall think fit to fight
against Kings under the Shield of the foregoing words, Hereproved Kings for
their sakes, this is no armor of proof, in as much as that reproof of Kings is
there mentioned as his Act, that is, King of Kings; they must, its true, be
accountable to him, but upon earth their Sacred Persons cannot be judged and
sentenced by their Peers.

Fifthly, Princes should hence be instructed to improve their Power for God,
who has made such ample provision for their Protection; The Prayer of David,
and the Foelices imperatoresdicimus, si suam pot statem ad Dei cultum maxim
dilatandum, Majest^ti c^us famul^m faclunt.
Aug. de Civit.
Dei. l. 5. c. 24.
Psalm. 17. 8.
Prove. 7. 2.
Advice of Solomon (who were both Kings) compared together, may excite and
quicken to a zealous and diligent faithfulness. Keep me as the Apple of the
eye. Keep my Commandments and live, and my Law as the Apple of thine Eye; God
keeping them as the apple of his eye, expects (and it is but reason, one good
turn requiring another) that they should keep his Law, and lay out their
interest to have it kept by others as the apple of their eye; and especially
obedience to the will of God, being not so much Religion is the best reason of
S^^^. L. B^co Essay of a Kin^
kindness as duty, nor so much duty as honor and p^iviledge; and their
conformity unto God being a ^r^it of higher grace and favor than either
dignity or security received In hoc Reges Deo serviunt, in quantum Reges sunt,
si in suo Regno bona jubeant mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad
Humanam societatem, verum etiam quae ad Divinam Religionem.
from him. Princes are called Gods; Now it were a contradiction to their Title,
no less then a black Swan, or an earthly Angel, for them not to promote
Godliness in themselves and others: Herodotus reports of the Egyptians, that
living in Fens, and by reason thereof vexed with Gnats, they used to sleep in
high Towers, whereby those faint and feeble creatures being not able to fly so
high, they were delivered from the sting and smart of their troublesome
bitings; a rare Project this for Princes, To have their Aug. cont.
Conversation in Heaven, and so get above the virulency Creseon, lib. 3.
of disloyal thoughts, and the biting blasphemies of reproachful cap. 51.
tongues; God has taken care that none Curse (...)
them in their thought, in their Bedchamber, and thereby engaged them to take
care, so far as in them lies, that none be about them who Curse God in their
Bedchamber. What can be more just and equitable, then that all Christian
Aristor. polit.
and Pious Princes should with utmost care secure lib. 5. c. 11.
and keep Gods Honor as he keeps theirs, secvetly in a Psalm. 31. 20.
(...). Bahl. Commentar. in cap. 3. Isaiae.
Pavilion from the strife of tongues. Non datur officium nisi propt^r
beneficium.
Sciat Princeps peti aliquid a populis, Sciat Mandari a Deo, Sciat fortunam
suam nou esse Naturam, sed munus, sed onus. Nierember. Theopol.


Humiliation, and particularly for that sin which we are come to lament before
the Lord this day, where cursing the King in thought vented it self in an open
and abominable Regicide: a Fact, the sin whereof is not easily bewailed enough
before God, nor detested enough before the world. A Jer. 5. 30.
wonderful and horrible thing has been committed in the Land, such as no
Chronicle has recorded the like, nor Age can parallel; for though Kings have
heretofore been secretly Murdered, yet never was such a bare-face't
Heaven-challenging Treason (set aside only that violence that was offered to
the Lord of Glory) beheld by the Sun, and that acted under a pretense of
Justice. I Totius injustitiae null* capitalior est quam little, qui tum cum
Maxim fallunt, id tamen agunt, ut viri boni esse videantur.
shall not here meddle with its civil Concern, which has already been
canvassed in Parliament, and a Subordinate Court of Judicature, and is indeed
most proper for their cognizance: Nor shall I prosecute the Actors in this
bloody Tragedy, with Sarcastical revilings, the Action is it self a greater
Reproach then words can lay upon them; and there needs no soot for the blacking
of Cicer. de offic.
a Cual. lib. 1.


I shall only mind you of it as a

1. Dishonor to God.

2. Reproach to the Gospel.

3. Blemish to the Protestant Profession.

1. A Dishonor to God, before whom all manner of Obligations were profanely
violated; that fatal stroke that cut off a Royal Head Crowned with Majesty, cut
asunder therewith all Oaths and Covenants, and God was called upon as the
Witness and Avenger of a Treasonable Perjury.

2. A Reproach to the Gospel, Oh that ever the Sun should behold the horrid
Murder of a Christian Prince, where the Sun of righteousness had so long and so
brightly displayed his Beams! Oh that England should ever be polluted with the
blood of its King, which the Gospel had besprinkled with the Blood of Christ!

3. A blemish to the Protestant Profession: brave sport at Rome this! where
they serve up the Head of our late Gracious Sovereign (as the Baptists Head in
a Charger) at their Festivals; As Jacob complained of Simeon and Levi's
butchering the circumvented Sechemites: Ye have troubled me, to make me to
stink among the Inhabitants Genesis 34. 30.
of the Land, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites; in like manner may
reformed Protestancy sadly bemoan this barbarous and inhumane violence, as that
which has made it more offensive, and unsavory to the Critical and
quick-scented Romanists. We justly tax Jesuits with King-killing Principles;
and Oh that ever they should have occasion to retort upon Protestants
King-killing His Majesty's Proclamation.
practices, ( Who yet were as far from being true Protestants, as they were
from being true Subjects,) they will need no more Powder plots, for why should
Popish Treason creep into the Cellar, when some among our selves have Acted it
upon the Scaffold?

David lamented over the death of Saul, though a wicked Prince, though mortally
wounded in battle, and afterward slain outright (as he supposed) by the hand
of 2 Samuel 1. 19. 20.
one single Amalektte, The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places, tell
it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon, Lest the daughters of
the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph; Much
more, that the Beauty of our Israel has been slain, and its published in Gath
and Askelon, to the joy and triumph of the uncircumcised, It is a Lamentation,
and shall be for a Lamentation.

Advice and Direction, That all persons may keep themselves within due limits
of Loyalty, and maintain a Reverend and Honorable esteem of the Lords
Anointed, Let these following Rules be Observed, Remembered, and Practiced.

Beware of giving way to Discontent; the Israelites when Rule 1.
displeased with their condition, in a froward and waspish petulancy fly upon
Moses, the dregs of a discontented humor at the bottom often boiled up into
this scum. To a mind that is grieved and fretful, every thing is a grievance,
the Horse that has a galled back flinches and kicks with a fly upon it, no
less then if down laden with an heavy burden: They shall fret themselves, and
curse Isai. 8. 21.
their King and their God, and look upward. Sparks of peevish Hominibus injuria
affectis, aut pro merito minime evectis promptum est in viros principes
debacchari, and animi sui accr^itatem expuere. River.
and fretful passion should fire the mouth-granadoes of blasphemy against the
god on earth, and the God of Heaven. When the House is on fire, and the tyles
fly, they spare neither friend nor foe, but whosoever stands in the way smarts
for it; they shall fret themselves with their hunger and other hardships, and
when that sit is upon them, be it God, or the King, that comes next, Jude 8. 16.
they know no difference. Those whom the Apostle (...), Marc. Anton.
Jude in one place calls Despisers of Dominion, in another he calls
Murmurers; a sharp corroding humor breeds that Cancer in the breast. The Be
never stings when surrounded in its wax hole with honey of its own gathering,
were but men conscientiously industrious in their callings, and contentedly
satisfied with the blessing of God upon their honest endeavors, they might
live like Bees in an Hive, and would not so often put out the sting against
their Governors.

Take heed of Self-conceit, Disloyal affections are Meteors made of gross
earthly Vapors, and for the most Rule 2.
part in the upper Region of a conceited fancy-full selfopinion, the i^ch and
titillation of a self-applauding ambition, ordinarily rises up into the botch
of Rebellion. In the last times (it is said) They shall be Traitors, heady, 2 Timothy 3. 3.
high-minded, (...), when the bladder is full-blown, the lest pin is enough to
make it puff in his face that pricked it; a swelling impetuous land-flood of
pride breaks down, and bears away all Banks of duty and Allegiance to those
whom God has set over us. When Micah had made himself an House of Gods, he
never cared Jud. 17.
for a Priest according to gods Method and prescription; That man whose
self-admiring heart is as an house of Idol-gods, is in as probable a way
lightly to esteem a King of Gods appointment; self-denial and humility makes
not good Christians only, but good Subjects; and unworthy thoughts of our
Rulers would cease, were but this our Rule, Without ceasing to think of our own
unworthiness.

Rule 3.
Frequently and Impartially examine your own miscarriages: (...).
We should see fewer moats in the eyes of our Superiors, did we but more
seriously mind pulling out the beams in our own: Did we oftener, and in good
earnest, throw stones at our own naughty hearts, we should not be so busy to
pelt, and throw stones at David; by descending into the deep and dark pit of
our own souls, we Marc. Anton.
should see and admire the brightness of those stars in the Prove. 17. 24.
highest Sphere, which not seen by others, (whose fools Exodus 5. 8.
eyes are in the ends of the earth) is disregarded. The Israelites are idle
(says Pharaoh) and they cry, Let us go and Sacrifice, they that are most bufie
in sacrificing their Princes Honor by an undutiful disloyalty, are (it is to
be feared) most idle as to their own business: Exigo inqui^t poenas ab homine
iracundo, oblitus servi, quia alium, quem potius castigarem, inveni.
Plato standing over a servant that had angered him, as ready to strike, being
asked by his friend, what he was doing, I am (replled he) punishining my self
for being angry. Sen. de Ira.


Keep not an ear open to every flying and frivolous Rumor; Rule 4.
you will take heed that you be not cheated of your money by a fair story, and
let none rob you of that honorable Esteem you owe to the King upon so Fama
Malum, quo non aliud veloeius illum; cur Malum fama? quia velox? quia index? an
quia plurimum mendax? quae ne tunc quidem, cum aliquid very affert, sine
Mendacii vitio est, detrahens adjiciens, demutans de veritate, and ab uno
principe exorta, in traduces linguarum, and aurium Serpit. Tertul.
easy terms, try before you trust any with this Jewel; Naturalists speak of a
poison, that dropped into the ear suddenly goes to the heart, and kills, such are
malicious and mischievous reports of Princes, if too credulously entertained,
they derive a venomous influence; the Wasp first buzzes upon the outside of the
glass, and then creeps in, keep the cork tied down, and there is danger. The
Receiver (it is commonly said) is as bad as the Thief; whosoever readily
receives every Report of his Princes miscarriages, is an accessory to his
stolen Reputation. Reports of good we should embrace readily, thankfully, but
rumors of detraction and disparagement, warily, leisurely: and it is part of
that Honor you owe to the King, to deal with such aspersing suggestions, as
you would do with infected garments, let them lie by a while, and be well
aired, before they come too near you. Lend no hand (...). Chrysoft. (...)
for the laying brain-begotten Brats of malicious mis-reports at your P^inces
door, as the Apostle of his Corinthians, 1 Gor. 11. 18.
I hear that there be divisions among you, and I partly believe it; When you
hear any speaking evil, do not take it in the lump, or swallow it down whole
without chewing, but (...), take it in by small parcels; be as cautious of
consenting to them that clip the Kings Credit, as you would be of joy^ing with
others that clip his Coin. Kings have long ears (says the Proverb) but we
should have short ones: When one officiously told Simonides how ill people
generally spoke of him, he bade him be gone, and be sure that he slandered him
not with his ears too; our tongues should rather be Spunges to suck out, then
our ears Spunges to suck in the spots and stains of Rumor.

Take heed of Mis-judging the Kings Actions, Rumor Rule 5.
often mis-representeth, and prejudice mis-judgeeth, without any foreign and
extrinsick mis-representation. Michal despised and reviled David, and upon what
iscore? Why, she misconstrued that for Levity, which indeed was Piety. Banish
prejudice, all look's red to him that has blood-shotten eyes, and therefore he
cannot discern the beautiful variety of colors. The King himself cannot judge
out of his own Territories; to carp at his carriage with censorious severity is
to try a Cause, coram non judice, and determine in a matter beyond our
Cognizance; the King may not be judged by us, as another Servant, much less as
our Master and Ruler; the truth is, we are no competent Judges of the Princes
Mis-actings: Who is so far above us, no man standing in the valley can tell
what prospect he has that is on the top of the hill, and not one in ten
thousand has a Galilaeus his glass, to take a right account of the spots in
the Moon. How frequently a^e Princes censured for the exorbitancies of their
Ministers? and what Master of a private family would not judge it hard measure,
for him to bear the blame of his servants miscarriages?

That neither disloyal words, nor thoughts, may be Rule 6.
shot as poisoned darts against the King, Let us have other Arrows in the
quiver, and ready upon the string, viz. Hearty Prayers. He is but a man, though
a titular God, a Man of great burdens, a Man of great temptations, a Man of
great Cares, and let him be a man of many and fervent Prayers. The larger the
Ship, and the deeper the Lading, there is required the stronger gale of wind to
fill the Sails, and force it through the rough and boisterous waves. Pray we
should for their Persons, their Lives, their Crowns, their Victories, their
Prosperity, their Peace, their Posterity Exodus 17. 12.
their Salvation. When Moses was upon the Hill, and his hands grew heavy, Aaron
and Hur held them up; Kings have that work upon their hands that may make them
Heavy: Let us then neither be so unchristianly uncharitable to them, nor so
unreasonably injurious to our selves, as to deny, or withdraw the support, and
bolsterings of Prayer. This was the practice of the primitive Christians,
though their Princes were Pagan, yet they shut them out of their Prayers; and
Sinc monitore quia de pectore eramus pro omnibus imperatoribus, vitam illis
prolixam, imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes Senatum fidelem
populum probum, orbem quietum, and quaecunque homink and Caesark vota sunt
Tertul. Apol.
Tertuilian makes it part of his Apology on their behalf, and before his days,
this was a duty enforced by Apostolical Exhortation. I Exhort therefore, That
first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, be
made for all men, for Kings, and for all that are in Authority, That we may
lead a quiet, and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty. Amen.

(...).
FINIS.

