A MEMORIAL TO PRESERVE Unspotted to Posterity the Name and Memory of Doctor
CRISPE.
YOu that know what truth is, and do now fear,
You shall no more her pleasing doctrines hear,
Since Doctor Crispe is dead, unless it be
From unglos'd Scripture, truth's pure treasury.
You that were lately pressed with sin, and found
A hell in your own hearts, you that were bound
In errors, fetters, and could never see,
Though you were Christians called, your liberty
Wherein Christ made you free, till this man drew
Your veil of darkness off, and formed you new.
You all know how to prise his worth, and can
Bear witness with me that he was a man
That best deserved the Pulpit, that his breast
Was full of what he spoke, and did digest
His Doctrines first in his own heart, his brain
Labored with no devices or forced strain
To please the easy people, or beget
An audience basely by delighting it.
He scorned that truth should stoop, or be made stale
To vicious ends, he hated more to veil
Her glorious luster, or eclipse her light
By mingling false lights with her, 'cause men's sight
Is weak and dazzled at her brightness; no
He might men's common errors foster so.
Such as do use such arts do rather aim
To Advance themselves then truth, to get a name,
And so a living: But this Doctor strove
Rather to draw men up to truth and love.
To allure them with her sweetness, for no by-
Respect, but their own Souls felicity.
He knew the power of truth, and therefore used
No artificial baits, but rather chus'd
Instead of words, and the deceitful dress
Of popular Eloquence, her own nakedness.
'Twas from his Soul he spoke, and not because
He might obtain a Legacy, or applause,
Not to enhaunce his tithes or quarter-gifts,
Nor that he might seem learned: such vile shifts
And mercenary arts he did despise
(Though much in fashion now) as a fit guise
For holy seeming Hypocrites, who have made
Religion not their practice, but their trade.
Truth was his end, and each man's good his aim,
Men's persons he respected not, but came
Freely t'impart glad tidings unto all,
The love of God he knew was general.
The man in Plush and braver was no more
In his esteem then whom the world calls poor;
He looked upon men's Souls, for their array,
It Is no part of the man whether't be gay
Or for necessity, virtue may lie
And oftener under rags then Taffety.
He was compo'd of love, meek as a Lamb,
Without all affectation still the same.
Mild in discourse, impassionate, and free
From wild contentions of Philosophy,
And other nice disputes; 'bout what is vain,
He troubled not his own or others brain.
He knew the Apostles no such customs used,
And therefore only useful Subjects chus'd;
Such as had greatest vigor to remove
Long settled errors, and beget true love,
To God and man: All his abilities,
His Labor, study, health, and faculties,
He did employ to do his brethren good,
'Twas chief of his delight, his Souls best food
To make men real Christians not in name,
But in belief and practice, to the shame
Of what most men that bear that title are.
His Doctrines (though since scandal'd) were so far
From giving raines to vice, or Liberty
To a loose life and all obscenity,
As some that fear their trade will down, object,
Whose teaching on their profits still reflect:
That there is no precepts, no instructions can
Beget a godly life, and make a man
An honor to that faith he does profess,
To abandon lust and all ungodliness,
But those firm truths he preached; for what can more
Persuade with men to live well and give over
What ever misbeseemes them or beget
Our Saviors own mind in them, then to set
Before their eyes what he for them has done,
His boundless love and his Compassion;
How he did pay their desperate debts and free
Their Souls from Deaths, hells, conscience, Tyranny;
How he did dye that death they should have dyed,
Cleared the law, Gods justice satisfied,
Atoned us with his Father, all our fears
Dispeld, adopted us his Sons, Coheires
With Christ himself, cast all our proud foes down,
Purchased a Kingdom for us, and a Crown;
And all this too not when we were his friends,
Obedient to his sacred laws, and ends;
But when we were his foes, ye when we lay
Weltring in blood and sin, and did betray
Our only friend, when we did crucisie
Our Master, and more wicked yet deny
The Lord that bought us, that his grace might be
Above our wonder, and our eyes might see
That he was goodness self, and that his love
To man, was all his other works, above,
Even in this state he dyed for us, and paid
His precious blood our ransom, then he laid
His life down for us and his dignity,
That we might live to all eternity.
This having done, and knowing 'twas above
Us men to comprehend this devine love,
(Naught being within our reach but what does lie
In reasons circumscribed capacity)
Gods love extended further, knowing well
Without the knowledge of his love, a Hell
Would still possesseus, and a thousand fears
Distract our minds, and drown us in sad tears,
Our sins being ever present before our eyes,
Our sad Souls frighted at our conscience cries,
That we might not be left thus comfortless,
And ignorant of all our happiness.
He sent his blessed Spirit to declare
Peace to our Souls, and what our comforts are.
Which the same Spirit has done, to those were sent
To tell the same to all, to the intent
All tears might be wiped off from our sad eyes,
And we left fearelesse of hells miseries.
These were his Doctrines, thus he preached, the same
Glad tidings from Gods blessed Spirit came.
That Christ has purchasd our Redemption
Without our aid, without condition,
That'tis already done, and freely too,
Wants no addition from what we can do.
Therefore let us please our lusts: Perverse man, no,
He nor the Scripture did not conclude so.
What wast constrained The Apostles to deny
All worldly lusts and to live soberly,
To abound in all good works? What wast say you?
The love of God constrained him so to do.
Why should the same love then by us be thought
The ready way to make us vile and naught?
The holy Scriptures motive for to tie
Our Souls and bodies, God to glorify,
Is because he has bought us with a price,
And for us paid himself a Sacrifice.
The greatest bond on earth is love, if so
What greater love then this did man ere know?
Look on his Auditors, see their lives, and say
Who have more virtue or more love then they.
This was his way to allure men's Souls with sight
Of the most glorious comfortable light
Of Gods eternal truth, and not to aw
Their sadned Souls, with terrors of the law,
Or keep 'em down that so he might subject
Their purses and obedience, and erect
Their spirits as their contributions rose,
He loathed such Tyrannous practices, and chose
To make men wise and good for their own sake,
Strict against Vice, chiefly against such as make
Their liberty a cloak to wickedness,
And turn the grace of God to wantonness;
Against such as these, the shame of men, he would
Express an anger great as good men should,
They were the chiefest foes Religion had,
No enemies so great as they, so bad,
Although he knew none of them but by fame
Of their ill life, and rumors of their shame.
For such however that thus abuse the free
Goodness of God he knew this remedy.
See what good Counsel first will do, and when
They Will not return, publicly shame'em, then
If they shall still persist, let justice draw
Forth her correcting rod to overaw
Their stubborn hearts with fear of punishment;
If then they shall consider and relent
With arms of love embrace them, let them see
The difference twixt good life and vanity.
If when all this is done they shall remain
Vicious men still, or shall return again
To their loose life and manners, let them be
Excluded quite from all society.
Thus discipline should meet with vice, and free
The Church from slander, vice, and Calumny.
After this brief express of what is true
Of my dead Friend, and short of what is his due,
Let no man's forward malice strive to cast
Dirt on his fame, or with false rumors blast
His honest life or Doctrines, because they
Perceive some of their audience drop away;
If they shall yet persist and vainly show
They fear truth will yet thrive, let such men know
I do denounce 'em mine and plain truths foes:
He that can bite in verse, can sting in prose.
FINIS.
Printed at London for John Sweeting. 1643.


