July, 25. 1643.
A MEMENTO TO THE LONDONERS, To put them in mind how near their destruction
is, and what means is left to prevent it.
IT much concerns you (my Brethren) to sit still one quarter of an hour, and
consider the perishing condition you are in, for then I persuade my self, you
will see your selves so surrounded with approaching miseries, that you will
think it more then time that you were all in arms, and no longer endure to
remain in so naked and despicable condition as you now are in. Will you not
be awakened till you hear your Enemies are at your Out-workes? cannot the
noise of dangers on all sides, and in the midst of you, rouse you out of that
destructive Lethargy that has possessed you; but you will continue dreaming
about your Trades, till the outrageous hand of your implacable enemies seize
upon you, your Wives and Children? I wrote to you before to this purpose, but
it made no impression in you, and therefore I had thought never to have wrote
unto you again, but that I have some hopes left, that now you are ready to
perish, you will look about you, and hear good Counsel: and assure your
selves that if this Letter be not an alarm to rouse you, it will prove a
passing Bell, rung before your destruction. Never were a People in such
necessities as you are in. The Kings Forces are grown strong and powerful,
and will in short time, if you prevent it not, be as able to execute their
malice upon you as they are willing; from whom you of all the People in the
Kingdom, can expect no more favor than from the Turk or Spaniard, were he
come amongst you. The Earl of Essex, you hear, is unprovided in many
respects, and what opportunities that will administer to your Enemies, let your
fears suggest. Hopton and Newcastle, the Queen and Marquess Hartford, are
all potent and resolved to destroy you. The hopes they have swallowed, and
brags they have made of pillaging and ransacking this City, may sufficiently
inform you what mercy you are like to find when they come amongst you. The
Malignants in Kent are in Arms already. A Proclamation is gone out already,
forbidding all Trade and traffic with the Londoners. Have you dangers enough
think you, or will you stay till you are more miserable? Perhaps you expect to
be saved by a Miracle. Alas! inconsiderate men! It Is true indeed there is
nothing too hard for the Omnipotent and Almighty God. But is it to be expected
that his omnipotency should preserve us, when he has given us understanding,
strength and opportunity to preserve our selves, and we out of base fear or
other poor respects dare not set about it? Why, what would you have us to do,
you will say? Ask your own hearts what you have to do; is there any thing
else to be done, but for every man that is able of body to list himself
immediately for the wars, and every man contribute to the utmost for the
maintenance thereof; A Committee of Parliament are appointed you know for the
service, and where they fit, such as have been trusted by thousands, and
approved by those from among whom they were chosen, who will no doubt take care
for the choice of such men only into Office as are of known faithfulness and
integrity, not a suspected or unknown man to be admitted: Your moneys shall be
employed to the proper end you intend them; make use of this opportunity to
preserve your selves, or expect suddenly to be destroyed. You do but ruin
your selves, your best Friends, and chief Commanders, by venturing in small
bodies to subdue your Enemies: what can you hope thereby, but only a
prolongation of the War, and deferring your destruction for a season, when in
the mean time you waste and consume your selves away to nothing? No, you must
all rise, or nothing can be done to any purpose. The poor will shortly want
bread, and what their wants will necessitate them to, let the rich consider.
You have talked a great while that nothing can preserve you but a general
rising, and in private discourses every man concludes that it is the only
thing necessary; now show that you are not mere Talkers, the Countries will
come in to you, who long to be up and doing, they awaite but your leading them
the way, let no ceremonies nor excuses hinder you, let not your wife and
children withold you, this is the only way to preserve them: I know you may
be furnished with excuses, and that they who are unwilling may have much to say
for themselves; But think all of you what lies at the stake, your Religion,
Laws, Liberties, your Lives, Wives, Children, Estates, all is lost if you do
not now bestirre your selves. Be courageous, and God will bless you; Lie
still, and perish.

Farewell. Your Friend, and plaine-dealing Remembrancer*
This is licensed and entered into the Hall Book according to Order.




