OLO-AIA. OR THE PEOPLES WAR, EXAMINED According to the Principles of SCRIPTURE
and REASON, IN Two of the most Plausible Pretenses of it.

IN ANSWER To a LETTER sent by a Person of Quality, who desired satisfaction.

By JASPER MAIN D.D. one of the Students of Chapter Chapter Oxon.

Romans 13.2. (...).

Printed in the Year, 1647.

Honored Sir,
I Have in my time seen certain Pictures with two faces. Beheld one way, they
have presented the shape and figure of a Man. Beheld another, they have
presented the shape and figure of a Serpent. Me thinks, Sir, for some years,
whatever Letters the King wrote either to the Queen, or his friends, or what
ever Declarations he publish in the defense of his Rights and Cause, had the
ill fortune to undergo the fate of such a Picture. To us who read them
impartially, by their own true, genuine light, they appeared so many clear,
transparent Copies of a sincere and Gallant Mind. Looked upon by the People,
(of whom you know who said populus iste (...) decipi, decipiatur) through the
Answers and Observations, and venomous Comments, which some men made upon them,
a fallacy in judgment followed very like the fallacy of the sight; where an
Object beheld through a false deceitful medium, partakes of the cosenage of
the conveyance, and way, and puts on a false Resemblance. As squara, bright,
angular things through a mist show dark and round; and straight things seen
through water show broken and distorted.

It seems, Sir, by your Letter to me, that your Friend, with whom you say, you
have lately had a dispute about the Kings Supremacy, and the Subjects Rights,
is one of those who has had the ill luck to be thus depeived. Which I do not
wonder at, when I consider how much he is concerned in his fortunes that the
Parliament should all this while be in the right. Besides, Sir, Having looked
upon the Cause of that Side merely in that plausible dress with which some
pens have attired it, And having entertained a strong prejudice against
whatever shall be said to prove that a Parliament may err, it ought to be no
marvel to you, if he be rather of M. Prinnes then Judge Jenkins's Opinion;
And persuade himself, that the Parliament having, if not a superior, yet a
coordinate power with the King, in which the People is interessed, where ever
their Religion or Liberty is invaded, may take up Arms against Him, for the
defense of either. But then, Sir, finding by my reading of the public writings
of both sides, that both sides challenged to themselves the Defense of one and
the same Cause, I must confess to you, That for a while the many Battles,
which so often colored our fields with Blood, appeared to me like Battails
fought in Dreams. Where the person combaring in his sleep, imagines he has an
Adversary, but awake perceives his error that he held conflict with himself.
To speak a little more freely to you, Sir, the Kings Declarations, and the
Parliaments Remonstrances equally pretending to the maintenance of the same
Protestant Religion, and the same Liberty of the Subject. I wondered a while
how they could make two opposite sides, or could so frequently come into the
field without a Quarrel.

But since your Friend is pleased to let me no longer remain a Sceptick, but
clearly to state the Quarrel; by suffering the two great words of Charm,
Liberty, and Religion, (from whence both sides have so often made their
Recruits) to stand no longer as a Salamis, or controverted Hand between two
equal Challengers; And since he is pleased to espouse the defense of them so
wholly to the Parliament, as to call the War made by the King the Invasion of
them; Both for his and your satisfaction, who have laid this task upon me,
give me leave to propose this reasonable Dilemma to you. Either it is true what
your Friend says, that the Parliament has all this while fought for the
defense of their Liberty, and Religion, or it is only a pretense, and has hid
some darker secret under it. If it have been only a pretense, there being not a
third word in all the World which can afford so good Color to make an unjust
War pass for a just, the first discovery of it, will be the fall, and ruin
of it; And the People who have been misled with so much holy Imposture, will
not only hate it for the Hypocrisy, but the Injustice too. If it be true, yet
I cannot see how they are hereby advantaged, or how, either or both these
joined can legitimate their Arms.

For first, Sir, I would fain know of your friend, what he means by the Liberty
of the Subject. I presume he does not mean a Releasement from servitude. Since
amongst all their other complaints, delivered in Petitions to the Parliament,
they never yet adventured to say that they were governed as Servants by a hard
Master, not as Subjects by a Prince. Nor do I find that the King was such a
Pharaoh to them, that they were able to say, that he changed a Kingdom of
Freemen into a House of Bondage. Some Acts of his Government, I confess, some
have called Illegal; namely the exaction of Ship-mony. But this certainly, was
a grievance which if it had not been redrest, deserved not to be reckoned among
the Brick kills of Egypt, or to denominate his Government despoticall too.

Next then, does your friend, by Liberty, mean a Releasement from Tyranny, as
Tyranny allows men to be Subjects, but not much removed from slaves? Had the
King indeed, made his Will the Rule of his Government, and had his Will
revealed it self in nineteen years of Injustice, had he like Caligula, worn a
Table Book in his pocket, with the names of the Nobility in it designed and
Marks for slaughter; Had he without any Trialls of Law made his pleasure pass
for sentence, and lopt off Senators heads as Tarquin did Poppeys; Had he in his
oppressions of the People made them feel Times like those which Tacitus
describes; where no man durst be virtuous, least he should be thought to
upbrayd his Prince; where to complain of hard usage was capital; and where
men had not only their words, but their very looks and sighs proscribed; his
Reign would bear that Name. But alas, Sir, you your self know, that these
are Acts of Tyranny, which were so sarre from being practiced, that they have
not yet been feigned among us. It Is true, indeed, certain dark Jealousies were
cast among the people, as if some Evil Counselors about the King had had it
in their design to introduce an Arbitrary Government. But these were but
Jealousies, blown by those, whose plot 'twas to make the popular hatred their
engine to remove those Counselors, that by their ruin they might raise a
Ladder to their own Ambitions. For if the Calamity of these times have not
quite blotted out the memory of former, people cannot but remember, that no
Nation under Heaven, more freely enjoyed the Blessing of the Scripture then we;
every one secure under the shade of his own Vine, perhaps a grape or two
extraordinary was gathered for the public. But if any did refuse to
contribute, I do not find that like Naboth, they were stoned for their
Vineyard. If therefore, the Gentleman your friend understand Liberty in this
sense, the most he can say for the Parliament, is, that they have taken up
Arms against their King, not because he was, but because he possibly might be
a Tyrant. Which fear of theirs being in it self altogether unreasonable, and
therefore not to be satisfied, could not but naturally endeavor (as we find by
sad experience it has done) to secure it self by removing out right the
formidable Object which caused it. which being not to be done but by the
Removal of Monarchical Government it self, could not but cast them at length
upon a new form of State, or such a confusion or no Form of state, as, we
see, has almost drawn ruin upon themselves and their Country.

Once more therefore, I must ask your Friend what he means by Liberty. I hope
he does not mean an Exemption from all Government; Nor is fallen upon their
wild Opinion, who held that there ought to be no Magistrate, or superior among
Christians. But that in a freedom of condition we are to live together like men
standing in a Ring, or Circle, where Roundnesse takes away Distinction, and
Order; And where every one beginning and ending the Circle, as none is before,
so none is after another. This Opinion, as 'twould quickly reduce the House of
Lords to the House of Commons; so 'twould in time reduce the House of Commons
to the same level with the Common people, who being once taught that
Inequality is unlawful, would quickly be made Docile in the entertainment of
the other Arguments, upon which the Anabaptists did heretofore set all Germany
in a flame. Namely, that Christ has not only bequeathed to Men, the liberty of
his Gospel, but that this liberty consists in one not being greater then
another. It being an Oracle in Nature, that we are all borne Equal; That these
words of Higher, and Lower, Superior, and Inferior, are fitter for Hills, and
Vales, then for men of a Kind; That the names also of Prince and Subject,
Magistrate and People, Governors and Governed, are but so many styles Usurp.
Since in Nature for one Man to be borne Subject to another, is as much against
Kind, as if men should come into the World with chains about them; or as if
Women should bring forth Children with Gyves, and shakles on. Which Doctrine as
'twould naturally tend to a Parity, so that Parity would as naturally end in a
Confusion.

Lastly, therefore, I will understand your Friend in the most favorable sense
I can. That by the Parliaments defense of the Peoples Liberty, he means the
maintenance of some Eminent Rights belonging to the Subject, which being in
manifest danger to be invaded, and taken from them, could not possibly be
preserved but by Arms taken up against the invader. But then, granting this to
be true, (as I shall in fit place show it to be false) yet the King being this
invader (unless by such an Jnvasion He could cease to be their King, or they
to be his subjects.) I cannot see how such Rights could make their Defense
lawful.

For the clearer Demonstration of this, I shall desire you; Sir, not to think
it a digression in me, if I deduce things some what higher then I at first
intended, or then your Letter requires me; Or, if to cure the stream, I take
the Prophets course, and cast salt into the spring; And examine first, How
far the Power of a King, (who is truly a King, and not one only in Name)
extends it self over Subjects. Next, whether any such Power do belong to our
King; Thirdly if there do, How far it is to be obeyed, and not resisted.

As for the first, you shall in the Scripture, Sir, find two Originalls of
Kings, One immediately springing from the Election and choice of God himself.
The other from the choice and election of the People; But so, as that it
resolves it self into a Divine Institution. The History of Regal power, as it
took Original from God himself, is set down at large in the eight Chapter of
the first Book of Samuel, where, when the Israelites, weary of the Government
by Judges (who had the same power that the Dictators had at Rome, and differed
nothing from the most absolute Monarchs but only in their Name, and the
temporary use of their power) required of Samuel to set a King over them, God
bid him hearken to their voice. But withal v. 9.
Solemnly to protest and show them the manner (or as one translates it more to
the mind of the Original, J^^ Regis, the Right, or power) of the King that
should reign over them. That he would take their sons, and appoint them for
his Charets; And their Daughters, to be Confectionaries, and Cooks for his
Kitchen. That he would also take their fields, their Vine-yards, and their
Olive-yards, even the best of them and give them to his Officers; Lastly, That
he would take the Tenth of their seed, and sheep, And ye, says the Prophet
(which is a very characteristicall mark of subjection) v. 17.
shall be his servants.

All which particulars, with many others there specified, (which I forbear to
repeat to you, because they rise but to the same height) may in other terms be
briefly summed up into these (...) Generals. That the Jews by requiring a King
to be set over them, (such a King as was to Reign over them, like the Kings of
other V. 5.
Nations) divested themselves of two of the greatest Immunities which can
belong to Freemen, Liberty of person, and propriety of Estates. And both these
in such an unlimited measure, as left them not power, if their Prince pleased,
to call either themselves, or Children, or any thing else their own.

To this if either you, or your friend shall reply, that this was but a
Prophetical Character of Saul, and a mere prediction to the people what He
made King would do, noe true Draught of his Commission, what He in Justice
might, (since a Prince who shall assume to Himself the exercise of such a
boundless power, does but verify the Fable, a Stork set over a Commonwealth of
Froggs, They to be his prey, not He to be their King) To the first I answer
negatively. That what is said in the forementioned Chapter by Samuel, cannot
be meant only of Saul, since nothing is there said to confine the description
to this Reign. Nor does any part of his History charge him with such a
Government. Next, I shall grant you, that no Prince ruling by the strict Laws
of naturall-equity, or Justice, can exercise all the Acts of power there
mentioned. Nor can his being a King so legitimate all his Actions, or so
outright exempt him from the common condition of men, that what ever he shall
do shall be right. Most of the Acts there recorded are not only repugnant to
the Laws of socrable Nature, or just Rule (which forbids One to have All; and
binds Printes themselves in chains of Reason) but to the Deuter. 17. v. 16, 17,
18, 19.
Law of God in another place; which allows not the King of his own chovce, to
Reign as he list, but assigns him the Law of Moses for his Rule. From which
as often as he broke loose, he sinned like one of the People. yet so, as that
upon any such breach of the Law 'twas not left in the power of the People to
correct him, or to force him by a War, like ours, to return back again to
his duly. His commission toward them (if you mark it well) (...) in such an
uncontroleable style, that his best Actions and his worst, toward them, wore
the same warrant of Authority. However therefore, Regal power, in the
forementioned place of Samuel, be called the manner of what a King would do,
yet that Manner, (as I told you before) carried a Jus or power with it
unquestionable by the Subject, to do if he pleased things unlawful. And hence
it is that the Prophet tells the Jews at the 18. verse of that Chapter; That in
the Day they found them. selves oppressed by their King, they should cry out for
redress to the Lord; As the only Arbiter, and Judge, of the Deeds, and Actions
of Princes.

The Original of Regal power as it took beginning from the People, you have
most lively expressed to you by S. Peter in the 13. v. of the 2. Chapter of his
1. Epist. Where exhorting those to whom he wrote to order their Obedience
according to the several Orbs, and Regions of power of the States wherein
they lived, he bids them submit themselves to every Ordinance of Man; whether
it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them who are sent by
him etc.

In which words I shall desire you to observe. First, that Monarchy as well as
other Forms of Government, is there called (...), a Human Creature, or thing
of Humane Creation. From whence some, such as your Friend, (who, I perceive by
his Arguments against Monarchy in your Letter has read Iunius Brutus, and
Buchanan) have inferred, That as to avoid Disorder and Confusion, people did at
first paste over the Rule and Government of themselves to a Prince, so the
Prince being but an (...), or Derivative from them, does still retain a
Dependence on his first Creators. And as in Nature it is observed that waters
naturally cannot rise higher then their Springhead; so Princes, they say, have
their Spring head too. Above which as often as they exalt themselves, it is in
the power of the Fountain to recall it is stream, and to bring it to a plain,
and level with it self. For though, say they, it be to be granted, that a King
thus chosen is Major singulis, superior to any One, yet he is Minor vneversis,
Inferior to the whole. Since all the Dignity and power which makes him shine
before the People, being but their Rays contracted into his Body, they cannot
reasonably be presumed so to give them away from themselves, as that in no case
it shall be lawful to call for them back again.

For answer to which Opinion (taken in by your Friend from his misunderstanding
of that Text) I will go no farther then the place of Scripture on which it is
built, where (without any critical strife about the signification of the
Words) I will grant that not only Monarchy, (which is the Government of a
People by a Prince) But Aristocracy, (which is the Government of a People by
States) and Democracy (which is the Government of the people by the people)
has next, and immediately in all States but the Jewish been (...) of Humane
Creation. But then that it is not so purely humane, as not to be of Gods
Creation, and Institution too, is evident by the words next in Contexture,
where the Apostle bids them, to whom he wrote, to submit themselves to every
such Ordinance of man, (...), For the Lords sake, who by putting his Se^^^ of
Approbation foment (...) and chay^^, has not only authorized a Humane (...)
pass into a Divine Ordinance; But toward it has imprinted even in Nature it
self such a Necessity of Government, and of Superiority of one man over
another, that men without any other Teacher, but their own inbredde (...),
(...) which have always whispered to them that Anarchy is the Mother of
Confusion) have naturally fallen into Kingdoms, and Commonwealths. And however
such a state, or condition of life under a Prince or Magistate be some thing
(...) free then not to be subject at all, (since men's Actions have hereby (...)
the Wills of Superiors, whose Laws have been certain chained and shackles
clapped upon them,) yet a subjection with (...) has always, by wise men, been
preferred before Liberty with danger, and men have bin compelled to enter into
those Ronds, as the only way, and means to avoid a greater Thraldom. Since
without such a subordination of one man to another, to hold them together in
just society, the Times of the Nomades would return, where, (...), the weaker
served only to be made a prey to the stronger.

The next thing which I shall desire you to observe from that Text, is, that
the Kings though chosen, and created by the People, is there styled (...)
Supreme. Now Sir, you know that to be Supreme, is so to be over others, as to
have no Superior above him. That is, to be so Judependently the Lord of his
own Actions, of what sort soever, whether unjust or just, as not to be
accountable to any but God. If he were, that other, to whom he is accountable,
would be Supreme, not He. Since in all things wherein he is Questionable. He is
no longer the King, or (...) there described, (...) but a more spacious
Subject. Whereupon will either follow this contradiction in Power, That the
same Person at the same Time may be a King, and no King; or we must admit of an
Absurdity as great; which is, That a Supreme may have a Supreme; which to grant
were to cast our selves upon an Infinite progress.

For that there must be a Non-ultra, or Resolution of power either into one,
(as in a perfect Monareby) or into some Few, (as in the Government by a Senate)
or into the Mayor part of the People joining suffrages, (as in a pure
Democracy; All three Forms agreeing in this, That some body must be Supreme
and unquestionable in their Actions,) the nature of Rule, and Business, and
Government it self demonstrates to us. Which would not else be able to obtain
it is ends, or decide controversies otherwise undeterminable. And however this
power may sometimes be abused, and strained beyond it is Just limits, yet this
not being the fault of the power, but of the Persons whose power it is, it makes
much more for the Peace of the public, that one, or Few, should in some
things be allowed to be unjust, then that they should be liable to be
Questioned by an Ill. Judgeing-Multitude in All.

The third thing which you may please to observe from that piece of Scripture,
is, The Creation of Magistrates, or Governors, who are there said to be sent
(...) By Him. Where a Modern Writer applies the (...) or By Him, to God. As if
all other Governors were sent by Him, not by the King. Which Interpretation of
the place I would admit for current, if by the (...) or Governors, so sent, he
did understand the Rulers in an Aristocracie, or Free State, which being a
Species of Government, Contradistinct to Monarchy, cannot be denied to have
God, as well as the other for it a Founder. But then the word (...) the
peculiar Epithet of Monarchy, will bear another sense then I have hitherto
given it; And will not only signify the King to be Supreme, (for so the Rulers
of a Free State are within their own Territories) but compared with other
Forms of Supremacy to be the most excellent. Monarchy being in it self least
subject to Disunion, or civil Disturbance. And for that Reason pronounced by
the wisest Stateists to be that Form of Government, into which all other
incline naturally to resolve themselves for their perfection. But by
Governors, in that place, understanding as he does, not the Senate in a
Free State, but the Subordinate Magistrates, under a Prince, the (...) most
certainly belongs to the King. To whom the Apostle there assigns the Mission
of Governors as one of the Essential Marks, and Notes, that He is, in His
own Realm Supreme.

And thus Sir, having drawn the portraiture of Regal Power to you, by the
best Light in the world, but with the meanest Pencill; I know you expect that
in the next place I should show you what Rays, or Beams, of this power are
Jnherent in our King. Which being a task fitter for one of our greatest Sages
of the Law, then for me, (who, being One who do not pretend to any exact
knowledge in the Fundamental Laws, or Customs, of this Kingdom, which are to
stand the Landmarks and marks of partition between the Kings Prerogative, and
the Liberty of the Subject, may perhaps be thought by drawing a line or eircle
about either, to limne Figures in the Dust, whose fate hangs on the Mercy of
the next Wind that blows) the steps by which I will proceed, (leaving you to
the late writings of that most learned and honest Judge Ienkins for your fuller
satisfaction in this point) shall be briefly these two. First I will show you
what are the Genuine marks, and properties of Supreme power; Next, how many of
them have been challenged by the King, and have not hitherto been denied Him by
any Public Declaration of the Parliament.

Sir if you have read Aristotle's Politics (as I presume you have) you may
please to remember that he * there divides the Supreme Powere of a State, Lib.
4. c. 4.
into three general parts. The Ordering of Things for the public, the
Creation of Magistrates, and the Final resolution of Judgment upon Appeals;
To which he afterward adds the power of Levying War, or concluding of
Peace, of making or breaking Leagues with foreign Nations, of enacting or
abrogating Laws, of Pardoning, or Punishing Offenders, with Banishment,
Confiscation, Imprisonment or Death. To which Dyonisius Halicarnassensis adds,
the power to call or dissolve Comitia, or public Assemblies; As well Synods
and Counsels in Deliberations concerning Religion; as Parliaments, or Senates,
in Deliberations secular concerning the State. To all which marks of Supreme
power, a * Modern Lawyer (who only wants their Age to be of as great Authority
as either) adds the power to exact Tribute, Great. lib. 1. c. 3. de Jure Belli
and pacis.
and to press Soldiers. It the exercise of which two Acts consists that
Dominium Eminens, or Dominion Rara mount, which the State, (when ever it stands
in need, And that too, to be the Judge of its own Necessity) has not only
over the Fortunes, but the Persons of the Subject; In a measure so much greater
then they have over themselves, as the public poole is to be preferred before
the private Cisterne.

Now Sir, if you please to apply this to the King, though good Lawyers will
tell you that the power of making or repealing Laws be not solely in Him, but
that the two Houses have a concurrent right in their production, and
Abolishment: yet they will tell you too, that His power extends thus far,
that no Law can be made or repealed without Him. Since for either, or both
Houses to produce a Statute Law by themselves, has always, in this State,
been thought a Birth as Monstrous as if a Child should be begotten by a Mother
upon her self. They usually are the Matrice and Womb, where Laws receive
their first Impregnation, and are shaped and formed for the public; But
(besides the opinion of all present Lawyers of this Kingdom, who, like that
great Judge Ienkins.
example of Loyalty, dare speak their knowledge) it has always been
acknowledged by the Law made 2. H. 5. By the sentence of Refusal, Le Roy S'
Avisera and indeed by all Parliaments of former Ages, That the King is thus
far Pater Patria: that these Laws are but abortive unless his Consent pass
upon them. A Negative power He has then, though not an out right Legislative.
And if it be here objected, by your Friend, that the two Houses severally have
so too, I shall perhaps grant it, if in this particular, they will be modest,
and content to go sharers in this Power, And no longer challenge to their
Ordinances the legality and force of Acts of Parliament.

As for the other parts of Royalty, which I reckoned up to you; As the Creation
of Officers, and Counselors of State, of Judges for Law, and Commanders for
War, the Ordering of the Militia by Sea and Land, The Benefit of
Confiscations, and Escheats where Families want an Heir; The power to absolve
and pardon, where the Law has Condemned; The power to call and disolve
Parliaments, As also the Receipt of Custom and Tribute, with many other
particulars, which you are able to suggest to your self. They have always
been held to be such undoubted Flowers of this Crown, that every one of them
like his Coin (which you know Sir, is by the Law of this Land Treason to
counterfeit, which is an other mark of Royalty) has in all Ages but Ours,
worn the Kings Image, and superscription upon it. Not to be invaded by any,
without the crime of Rebellion.

And though (as your Friend says,) this be but a regulated power, and rise no
higher in the just exercise of these Acts, then a Trust committed by the Laws
of this Kingdom, for the Government of it, to the King, (for I never yet
perceived by any of His Declarations, That His Majesty claimed these as due to
Him by Right of Conquest, or any other of those Absolute, and Unlimited ways,
which might tender His Crown Patrimoniall to Him, or such an outright
Allodium that He mi ht Alienate it, or choose His Successor, or Rule as He
pleased Himself) yet as in the making of these Laws He holds the first place,
so none of these Rights which he derives from them, can without His own
Consent, be taken from Him.

For proof hereof, I will only instance in three particulars to you, (for I
must remember that I am now writing a Letter to you, not penning a Treatise,)
which will carry the greater force of persuasion, because confessed by this
Parliament. The first was an Act presented to the King for the settling of the
Militia, for a limited time in such Hands as they might confide in. A clear
Argument, that without such an Act past by the King, the two Houses had nothing
to do with the Ordering of it. Another was one of the Nineteen Propofitions,
where it was desired that the Nomination of all Officers, and Counselors of
State, might, for the future go by the Mayor part of Voices of both Houses.
Another Argument, That the King has hitherto in all such Nominations, been the
only Fountain of Honor. The third was, the passing of the Act for the
Continuation of this Parliament; Another Argument, that nothing but the Kings
consent could ever have made it thus Perpetual as it is. Many other Instances
might be given, but foundoubtedly acknowledged by Bracton, By Him that wrote
the Book called The Prerogative of Parliaments, (who is thought to be Sir
Walter Raleigh) By Sir Edward Cook, by the styles and Forms of all the Acts
of Parliament, which have been made in this Kingdom, and by that learned Sir
John Banks.
Judge who wrote the Examination of such particulars in the Solemn League and
Covenant as concern the Law; And who in a continued Line of Quotation, and
Proof, derives along these and the other parts of Supreme power in the King,
from Edward the Confessor, to our present Sovereign King Charles, that to
prove them to you, were to add beams to the Sun.

Here then, For the better stating of the Third thing I pro osed to you, (which
was, That granting the King to be Supreme in this Kingdom, (at least so far
as I have described him) how far He is to be Obeyed, and not resisted) Two
things will fall under Inquiry. First, supposing the King not to have kept
Himself to that Circle of power which the Laws have drawn about Him, but
desirous to walk in a more Absolute compass, That He has in somethings
invaded the Liberty of his People, whither such an Jncroachment can justify
their Arms. Next, If it be proved that He has kept within his Life, and only
made the Law the Rule of His Government, whether a bare Fear or Jealousy,
That when ever he should be able, He would change this Rule, (which is the most
that can be pretended) could be a Just cause for an Anticipating War.

The Decision of the first of these Inquiries will depend wholly upon the
Tenure by which he holds His Crown. If it were puerly Elective, or were at
first set upon His Head by the Suffrages of the people; And if in that
Election, His power had been limited; Or if by way of paction, it had been
said, Thus far the King shall be Supreme, thus far the people shall be
Free; If there had been certain Express conditions assigned Him, with his
Scepter, that if he transgrest not his limits He should be Obeyed, if He did,
it should be lawful for the people to resist Him; Lastly, if to hinder such
Exorbitances, there had been certain Ephori, or Inspectours, or a Coordinate
Senate, placed, as Mounds, and Cliffes about Him, with warrant from the
Electours, that when ever he should attempt to overflow his Banks, it should
be their part to reinforce Him back into his Channel; I must confess to you
being no better then a Duke of Venice, or a King of Sparta; In truth no King,
but a more splendid Subject, I think such a Resistance might be Lawful. Since,
such a Conveyance of Empire being but a conditional contract, as in all other
Elections, the chusers may reserve to themselves, or give away so much of their
Liberty as they please. And where the part reserved is invaded, It Is no
Rebellion to defend. But where the Crown is not Elective, but has so
Hereditarily descended in an ancient line of succession from King to King, that
to find out the Original of it, would be a task as difficult, as to find out
the Head of Nilus; where the Tenure is not conditional, nor hangs upon any
contract made at first with the people, nor is such a reciprocal Creature of
their Breath, as to be blown from them, and recalled, like the fleeting Air
they draw, as often as they shall say it returns to them, worse then as first
they sent it forth; In short, Sir, Where the only Obligation, or Tie upon the
Prince is the Oath which He takes at his Ceronation, to rule according to the
known Laws of the place; Though every Breach of such an Oath be an Offense
against God, (to whom alone a Prince thus independent is accountable for his
Actions) yet 'twill never pass for more then perjury in the Prince; No Warrant
for Subjects to take up Arms against Him.

Here then, Sir, should I suppose the worst that can be supposed, that there
was a time when the King, misled (as your Friend says) by Evil Counselors,
did actually trample upon the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Liberty of his
Subjects, derived to them by those Laws; yet unless some Original compact
can be produced where it is agreed, That upon every such Incroachment it shall
be lawful for them to stand upon their Defense; unless some Fundamental
Contract can be shown where it is clearly said, that where the King cease to
govern according to Law, He shall for such misgovernment cease to be King; To
urge (as your Friend does) such unfortunate precedents as a Deposed Richard, or
a Dethroned Edward, (Two disproportioned examples of popular Fury; The one
forced to part with his Crown by Resignation, the other as never having had
legal Title to it,) may show the Injustice of former Parliaments grown
strong, never justify the Pitcht-feilds which have been fought by this. Since,
(If this supposition were true) the King being bound to make the Law His Rule
by no other Obligation but His Oath at His Coronation (Then which there cannot
be a greater, I confess, and where it is violated never, without Repentance
scapes vnpunish't) yet it is a trespass of which Subjects can only complain,
but as long as they are Subjects can never innocently revenge.

But this, all this while, Sir, is but only supposition; And you now, Sir, what
the Logician says, suppositie nihil p^nit in esse, what ever may be supposed
is not presently true. If Calumny her self would turn Informer, let her leave
out Ship Money (a greivance which being fairly laid a fleepe by an Act of
Parliament, deserved not to be awakened to bear a part in the present Tragedy
of this almost ruined Kingdom) she must confess that the King through the
whole course of His Reign was so far from the Invasion of His Subjects
Rights, that no King of England before Him, (unless it were Henry the first,
and King John, whom, being Usurpers it concerned to comply with the People, the
one having supplanted his Eldest Brother Robers Duke of Normandy, the other his
Nephew, Arthur Prince of Britain) ever imparted to them so many Rights of his
own. To that Degree of Infranchisment that I may almost say He exchanged
Liberties with them. Witness the Petition of Right. An Act of such Royal
Grace, that when He past that Bill, He almost dealt with His people, as Traian
did with the Pratorian prefect, put his sword into their Hands, and bid them
use it for Him if he ruled well, if not, against Him. In short, Sir, Magna
Charta was a Vine, I confess, cast over the People, but this Act enabled them
to call the shade of it their own, An Act which (if your friend will please to
forget Ship money) being in no one particular violated, so far as to be
instanced in by those, whose present Engagements would never suffer such
Breaches of Privilege to pass unclamour'd, will oblige posterity to be
grateful, as often as they remember themselves to be Freemen.

This then being so, the next inquiry will be, whether a bare Jealousy that the
King would in time have recalled this Grace, and would have invaded the Liberty
of his Subjects, by the change of the Fundamental Laws, could be a just cause
for such a preventive War as this. To which I answer, that such a Fair,
though built upon strong presumptions cannot possibly be a just cause for one
Nation to make War upon another; much less for Subjects to make War
against their Prince. The Reason is, because nothing can legitimate such a
War, but either an Injury already offered, or so visibly imminent, that it
may pass for the first Dart or Spear hurled. Where the Injury or Invasion, is
only contingent and conjecturall, and wrapped up in the womb of dark Counsels,
no way discoverable but by their own revelation of themselves in some outward
Acts of Hostility, or usurpation, to anticipate is to be first injurious; and
every Act of prevention, which has only Jealousy for its foundation, will
add new justice to the enemies Cause. who, as He cannot in reason be
pronounced guilty of another Fears so he will come into the Field with this
great advantage on his side, That his real wrong will join Battle with the
others weak suspicion.

But alas, Sir, Time, (the best interpreter of Men's Intentions) has at length
unsee'ld our eyes, and taught us that this has been a War of a quite
opposite Nature. The Gentleman who wrote the Defense of M. Chaloners Speech,
and M. Chaloner himself, if you mark his Speech well, will tell you, that the
quarrel has not been whether the subject of England shall be Free, but
whether this Freedom shall not consist in being no longer Subject to the King.
If you mark, Sir, How the face of things has altered with success, How the
scene of things is shifted; And in what a New style they, who called themselves
the Invaded, have spoken, ever since their Victories have secured them against
the power of any that shall invade; If you consider what a politic use has
been made of those words of Enchantment, Law, Liberty, and Propriety of the
Subject, by which the People have been musically enticed into their Thraldom;
If you yet farther consider the more then Decemvirall power which this
Parliament has assumed to it self, by repealing old Laws, and making
Ordinances pass for new; If you yet farther will please to consider How much
Heavyer that which some call Privilege of Parliament, has been to the
Subject, then that which they so much complained of. The Kings Prerogative, so
much heavyer, that if one deserved to be called a Little finger, the other has
swollen it self into a Loyne, Lastly, if you compare Ship, money with the
Excise, and the many other Taxes laid upon the Kingdom, you will not only
find that a whippe then, has been heightened into a Scorpion now; but you will
perceive, that as these are not the first Subjects who, under pretense of
Liberty, have invaded their Princes Crown, (so far as the Cleaving of Him
asunder by a State Distinction, which separates the Power of the King from his
Person) so ours, as long as he was able to lead an Army into the Field, has
been the first King that ever took up Arms for the Liberty of his Subjects.
Upon all which premises, Sir, I hope you will not think it false Logic if I
build this Conclusion so agreeable to the Laws of the Kingdom, as well as the
Laws of God; That supoosing the Parliament all this while to have fought, (as
was at first pretended) for the Defense of their assailed Liberty; yet fighting
against the King whose Subjects they are, it can never before a Christian
Judge, make their Armies pass for just. But being no way necessitated to make
such a Defense (their Liberty having in no one particular been assaulted, which
has not been redrest) if S. Paul were now on earth again, and were the Judge
of this Controversy between them and their Lawful Sovereign, I fear he would
call their Defense by a Name, which we in our Modern Cases of Conscience do
call Rebellion.

And thus, Sir, having as compendiously as the Laws of a Letter will permit,
given you, I hope, some satisfaction concerning the first part of your zealous
Friends dispute with you; which was, whether the Two Houses (which he calls the
Parliament) have not a Legal power, in Defense of their Liberty, to take up
Arms against the King, I will with the like brevity, proceed as well as I can,
to give you satisfaction in the second part of his Dispute also; which was,
whether Religion may not be a just Cause for a War. The Terms of which
Question being very general, and not restrained to any kind of Religion, or
any kind of War, whether offensive or defensive, or whether of one Nation
against another, or of a Prince against his Subjects, or of the Subjects back
again against their Prince, allow me a very large space to walk in. In which,
least I be thought to wander, and not to prove, It will first be necessary,
that I define to you what Religion in general is; And next, that I examine,
whether every Religion which falls within the Truth of that Definition may for
the propagation of it self be a just cause of a War; and so whether all they
who either are of no Religion, or a false, may not be forced to be of the true.
Lastly, what the Duty of Subjects is toward their Prince, in case he should
endeavor by force to impose a Religion upon them which they think to be false;
and can probably make it appear to be so by proofs taken from the Scripture;

Religion then, (to define it in the nearest Terms) is says 1. 2^. q. 60.^.3.
Aquinas, Virtus reddens debitum Honorem Deo, A virtue which renders to God his
just Honor. This payment of Honor to God as it is built and founded upon his
Creation of us, by which he has a Right to our Service and Worship of him, so
in the contemplative part of it, it consists in these four Notions or
Apprehensions of him. First, that there is a God, and that there is but One.
Next, that he is not any part of this Visible World, but something Higher and
more excellent, then any Thing we see. Thirdly, that he has a providence going
in the World, and takes care of Humane affairs. Lastly, that he made and
created the World. To every one of which four, answers a Commandment in the
First. Table of the Decalogue. Where the first describes His Unity, by
forbidding the Worship of other Gods. The next his Invisibility, by forbidding
any Image, or Resemblance to be made of Him. The third his providonce,
described there by two eminent parts of it. His Omniscience, by which he knows
the Thoughts of men's Hearts; and his Justice, by which he inflicts punishments
on those whose Thoughts are disproportioned to their Oaths and Words. The
Fourth declares his Omnipotence, by which he created the World, and appointed
the Sabbath to be the Feast and Memorial of that great Work. From which
speculative apprehensions of him do spring these practical, That being such a
God thus known, He is to be Honored, Loved, Feared, Worshipped, and Obeyed.

Now since men's Religion, or Worship of God, cannot in reason be required to
reach higher then their Knowledge of Him, (for Manifestation is so necessary to
Obligation and Duty, that if 'twere impossible to know that there is a God,
'twould be no sin to be an Atheist) so if God had never made any second
Revelation of Himself by the Scripture, but had left Mankind to their own
Natural seareh of Him, and to those Discourses of their Minds, by which they
inferred that such an orderly frame and systeme of thing, where every one
works to the good and End of another, is too rationally contrived to arise from
a concourse of Atoms, or to be the Creature of Chance, and therefore must have
some Efficient Cause higher, and nobler then it self, (since it implies a
Contradiction, that any thing should be it is own producer) yet his bare
Creation of the World represents so much of him, that without any other Book
or Teacher, all Ages have believed that there is a God who made the World; and
that He has a Rule, and providence going in it.

This then being so, It Is the Opinion of a very Grot. l. 2. de Jure Bell li ac
pacis c. 20.
Learned Modern Writer, That if there should be found a Country of Atheists,
or a People of Diagoras Melius s Opinion, or of the opinion of Theodorus the
Cyrenian, whose Doctrine 'twas, Nullos esse Dees, inane coelum, That there is
no God nor a habitable Heaven, But that such Names of Emptiness have been the
Creatures of superstitious fancies, whose fears first prompted them to make
Gods, and then to worship them; or if there should be a People found of
Epicurus his opinion, who held that there were Gods, but that they were Idle,
careless, vacant Gods, who troubled not themselves with the Government of the
World, but past their time away in an undisturbed Tranquillity and exemption
from such inferior businesses as the Actions of Men such opinions (supposing
them to be National) as they are contradictory not only to the Dictates of
Natural Reason,) upon which God has built the forementioned precepts of the
Decalogue) but to that universally received Tradition, That there is a Divine
power; whose providence holds the scales to men's actions, and first or last
sides with afflicted Innocence against succesfull Oppression, so they would be
just Causes for a reforming War, Not only because they are contumelious and
reproachful to God himself, but because being directly destructive to all
Religion, They are by necessary consequence destructive to Humane society too.
For let it once be granted that there is no God, or (which, with reference to
States, and Commonwealths, will produce the same irregular effects) that he
regards not men's Actions, nor troubles himself with the Dispensation of
Rewards and Punishments, and the Doctrine of Carneades will presently pass for
reasonable; That Vtility is the measure of Right; And that he is most in the
wrong who is least able to defend himself. That Justice in the virtue of
Fools; and serves only to betray the simple and phlegmatic, to the more
active and daring. In short, Take away providence, especially the two great
parts of it, which reign in the Hearts of men, hope of Reward, and fear of
Punishment, and men's worst Actions, and their best will presently be thought
equal. Whereupon Laws, the Bonds of Humane Society, wanting their just
Principle, which upholds them in their Reverence, will inevitably loose their
force, and fall asunder; and Men will be Men to each other in nothing but their
mutual injustice and Oppressions of one another. 'Twas therefore the politic
observation of an Atheist in Adv. Mathemat. p. 3.8.
Sextus Empiricus, That, to keep men orderly, and regular in a Commonwealth,
wise men at first invented Laws, But perceiving that these, reaching only to
their outward Actions, would never be well kept, unless they could find a way
to a we their Minds within too, as a means conducing to that end, (...), one
more wise, and subtle then the rest, invented Gods too. Well knowing that
Religion, though but fained, is a conservative of States. upon consideration of
which harmefull consequences, which naturally follow Atheism, and the denial
of Gods providence, it is the opinion of that Author, that as 'twas no Injustice
in those Grecian Cities, which banished Philosophers, who were of this Opinion,
out of their Commonwealth, so if there should be found a Nation of such implous
persuasions, 'twould be no Injustice in any other People, who are not Atheists,
by way of punishment, to banish them out of the World.

Though this, Sir, were the opinion of one, whose works have deservedly made
him so Famous to the whole Christion World (besides the peaceablenesse of his
Writings which decline all the ways of quarrel) that to err with him would
be no disreputation to me, yet I must confess to you, that I am so far from
thinking any War made for the propagation of Religion, how true soever it be,
is warrantable, that in this particular, I persuade my self I have some reason
to dissent from Him; and to think it a Problem very disputable, if his
supposition were true, that there were such a Country of Atheists, or
Epicureans, who should deny that there is a God, or that he has a providence
going in the World; whether for that reason only another Nation might
justifiably make War upon them. For first, what should give them Authority to
do so? Is It because men of this desperate persuasion do sin very grievously
against God? Granting this to be true, to the utmost aggravation of their
offense, that this speculative error in their Minds, draws a practical
error after it in their lives, which is, not to pay Worship to a God, which
either they think not to be, or not at all to regard them, yet this being but a
crime against God, the same Author has answered himself in another Paragraph,
where he says, Deorum in^uria Deis curae. That God is able to revenge the
injuries committed against Himself. Next then, is it because such an Opinion is
destructive of Humane Society? Truly, Sir, though I shall grant that saying of
Plutarch to be true, that Religion (which Atheism, and the denial of
providence do destroy) is, (...), one, (nay one of the firmest) Bonds of
Society, and supperters of Laws, yet I have not met with any demonstrative
Argument, which has proved to me, that there is such a necessary dependence of
Humane society upon Religion, that the Absence of the One must inevitably be
the Destruction of the other. If it be, this is most likely to come to pass in
the State, or Commonwealth, which is of this opinion among themselves; Not in a
foreign State, or Commonwealth which is not. But since it is possible that a
Country of Atheists may yet have so much Morality among them, seconded by
Laws made by common agreement among themselves, as to be a People, and to hold
the society of Citizens among themselves. And as it is possible for them,
without Religion, so far, for mere utility and safeties sake, to observe the
Law of Nations, as not to wrong or injure a People different from themselves,
so where no civil wrong, or enjury is offered by them to another People, but
where the moral Bonds of Society, and commerce, though not the Religious, of
Opinion, and Worship, are unbroken by them, for the People not injured to make
War upon them, for a feared, imaginary consequence, or because, being
Atheists, it is possible that their example may spread, is an Act of Hostility
which I confess I am not able to defend.

For thirdly, Sir, such a War must either have for it is end, their
punishment, or their Correction. Their punishment can be no true warrantable
end, because toward those who shall thus make War upon them, they have not
offended. Nor can their Correction Legitimate such a War. Because all
Correction, as well as Punishment, requires Jurisdiction in the Correctors, and
Inflictors of the punishment. Which one People cannot reasonably be presumed to
have over another People independent, and no way subject to them. unless we
will allow, with that Lib. 2. de jure belli and pacis c. 20.
Author, that because Natural reason does dictate that Atheism is punishable,
therefore they, who are not Atheists have a right to punish those that are;
which Coverruvias the Spaniard, who has learnedly disputed this point, and
others, as learned as he, have not thought fit to grant.

It has been a Question ask't, whether Idolatry be not a Crime of this
punishable nature in one People by another, who are not guilty of that Crime.
To which the best Divines, which I have yet read upon that Subject do answer
negatively, that it is not. For though it be to be granted that among the
several sorts and kinds of Idolatry, One is more Ignoble and irrational then
Another; And so the offense toward God is greater or less as the Objects, to
which men terminate their Idolatry, are more vile, or honorable; As in those
old Heathens, 'twas a more faulty Idolatry to worship a Dog or Crocodile, or
Serpent, then to worship things of a Sublimer kind, namely the Sun, or
heavenly bodies, or Souls of famous men departed; And though all such
Idolatries have deservedly been thought to be so many Affronts, and Robberies
of the true God, whose worship is thereby misplaced, and spent upon false, yet
having left behind him in his whole Globe of Creation no exact figure or
Character of Himself, to be known or distinguished by, nor any plain Teacher
but his Scripture to inform men of vulgar understandings, that there is but
one God, and that that one God is only an Intelligible spirit, and no part of
this gross material World which we see, wherever the Scripture has not been
heard of, if men (unable by the light of a Natural discourse to apprehend him
as He is) have fancied to themselves a plurality of False Gods, or made to
themselves false representations of the true, S. Paul tells us that Act. 17.30.
God connived at it, as a piece of unaffected ignorance. which can never be a
cause meritorious of a War to correct it. First, because being only an
Offense against God, and the Offenders being (as I said before) free, and no
way subject to any People but themselves, Any foreign Nation (unless they
can show the like Commission from God to punish them, as the Jews had to
punish and root out the Canaanites) will want Jurisdiction, and Authority to
their Arms. Next, because Idolatry, though it be a false Religion, is yet as
conservant of Society (which distinguishes it very much from Atheism, and the
denial of Providence) as if 'twere true. Nor can I see why He who worships
many Gods, if he believe them to be Gods, should less fear punishment for his
perjuries, or other Crimes, then He who only worships, and believes there is
but one. Lastly, because though Idolatry be an Error in men, yet being an
Error, without the light of Scripture to rectify it, hardly vincible in
themselves, and no way criminal toward others of a more rectified Reason,
It Is to be reformed by Argument, and persuasion, not violence, or force. Since
a War made upon the Errors of men's minds, is as unreasonable, as a War
made upon the Freedom of their Wills.

And for this last reason, I conceive that the propagation of Christian
Religion, cannot be a just cause for a War upon those who will refuse to
embrace it. First, because such a Refusal may possibly spring from an Error
in the understanding, which even in a Preaching, and persuasive way would
scarce be in the power of S. Paul himself, if he were on earth again (unless
he would join Miracles to his Sermons) to dislodge. For though some parts of
the New Law do carry such a Music and consent to the Law of Nature, that they
answer one another like two strings wound up to the same tune; yet there be
other parts, which though they do not contradict it. are yet so unillustrable
from the principles of Reason, that they cannot in a nature all way of
Argumentation force assent. And you know, Sir, 'twould be unreasonable to make
War upon men's persons for the reception of a Doctrine, which cannot convince
their Minds. I must needs confess to you, should Christ now live in our days,
and Preach much harder Doctrines then those in the Gospel, and should confirm
every Dectrine with a Miracle, as he did then, 'twould be an inexcusable piece
of Infidelity in all those who should so his Miracles not presently to
consent, and yield belief to his Sermons. But somethings in his Doctrine
appearing new and strange to the World, and depending for the probability of
their Truth upon the Authority of his Miracles, And those Miracles being
Matters of Fact, wrought so many Ages since, and therefore not possibly able to
represent themselves to our times upon greater Authority and proof, then the
Faith, and general Report of Tradition and story; If any shall think they have
reason not to believe such a report, they may also think they have no reason
to believe such Miracles, and by consequence the Doctrine said to be confirmed
by them. In short, Sir, the Gospel, at that very time when the Preaching of it
was accompanied with Mivacles, obtained not always that success which the
saving Doctrine of it deserved. The Jews says S. Paul 1. Cor. 1.22. Require a
sign; that is, they would believe it no farther then they saw Miracle for it;
And the Greeks (That is, the learned Gentiles) seek after wisdom; that is,
They would believe no more of it then could be proved to them by Demonstration.
Nay, notwithstanding all those great Miracles which were wrought by Christ, and
his Apostles after him, S. Paul tells us at the 23. verse of that Chapter, that
the vileness of Christ's death did so diminish the Anthority of his Doctrine,
though confirmed by Miracles, that the Preaching of Him crucified, was a
stumbling block to the Jews, and Foolishness to the Greeks. Next, Sir, As
Christ has no where commanded that men should be compelled to receive the
Gospel by any Terrors or Inflictions of Temporal punishments, so I find that
all such endeavors are very unsuitable to his practice. You know what his
answer was to his two zealous Disciples, who would have called for Luke 9.54.
fire from heaven, to consume those Samaritans who would not receive him. v.
55, 56.
ye know not, says he, of what spirit ye are of. The son of man is not come
to destroy men's lives but to save them. Which Answer of his was like the
Commission which he gave to his Apostles, when he sent them forth to Preach the
Gospel to several Cities. which extended no farther then this. Luke 9.5.
If they will not receive you, shake off the dust of your feet against them,
for a Testimony that you have been there. Agreeable to this practice of Christ
is that Canon which past in the Council of C. de Iudiciis did. 45.
Toledo, which says, pracipit sancta Synodus Nemini deinceps ad credendum vim
infer, It Is ordered by this holy Syned, that no man be henceforth compelled
to believe the Gospel. A Canon, which I wish the men of the Country where
'twas made had worn in their Ensigns when they made War upon the Indians.
And agreeable to this Canon, is the saying of Tertullian, Lex nova non se (...)
ultore gladio; The new Law allows not it is Apostles to revenge the contempt of
it by the Sword. And agreeable to this saying of Tertullian is that passage in
In Arcana Historia.
Procopius; where one tells Justinian the Emperor, that in striving to force
the Samaritans to be Christians by the Sword, he made himself successor to the
two over zealous Apostles, who, because they would not receive their Master,
would have destroyed them by fire. This then being so, to deal freely, Sir,
both with you and your Friend, as often as I read the writings of some of our
hot Reformers, who think all others Infidells who are not of their Opinions,
And whose usual language it is toward all those who differ from them in
Points, though in themselves indifferent, and no way necessary to Salvation,
Luke 14.28.
(...), make Covenants, raise Armies, strip them of their Estates, and compel
them to come in, me thinks a piece of the Alcoran is before me; and the
Preachers of such unchristian Doctrines, though they walk our English streets
in the shape of Assembly, Protestant Divines, seem to me to be a Constantinople
College of Mahomets Priests. To speak yet more plainly to you, Sir, I am so
far from thinking it a piece of Christian Doctrine, to Preach that it is
lawful (if it may not be done by persuasion) to take from men the Liberty,
even of their erring Conscience, that the new Army which shall be raised (which
I hope never to see) for the prosecution and advancement of such an End,
however they may be Scots or Englishmen by their Birth, will seem to me an
Army of Mussell-men: and to come into the field with Scymitars by their sides,
and Tulipants, and Turbants on their Heads.

How far Defensive Arms may be taken up for Religion, cannot well be
resolved without a Distinction. I conceive Sir, that if such a war fall out
between Two Independent Nations, That which makes the Assaylants to be in the
wrong will necessarily make the Defendants to be in the Right, which is (as I
have proved to you) a want of rightful power to plant Religion by the Sword.
For in all such Resistances, not only They who fight to preserve a true, but
They who fight because they would not be compelled to part with a false
Religion, which they believe to be a true, are innocent alike. The Reason is,
(which I have intimated to you before) because All Religion, being built up. on
Faith, and Faith being only Opinion built upon Authority, and Opinion built upon
Authority, having so much of the Liberty of men's wills in it, that they may
choose how far they will, or will not believe that Authority, No man has Right
to take the Liberty of another man's will from him, or to prescribe to him what
he shall, or shall not believe, though in all outward things that other have
sold his Liberty to him, and made his Will his Subject. where both parties,
therefore, are Independent, and One no way Subject to the Other, Religion it
self, though for the propagation of it self, cannot warrant the One to invade
the Others Freedom. But it is permitted to the Invaded, by both the Laws of
God, that of Nature, and Scripture too, (unless they be guilty of some
preceedent Injury, which is to be repaired by Satisfaction, not seconded by
Resistance) to repel Force with Force. And if the Army now in Conduct under
Sir Thomas Fairefax be of this persuasion thus stated, I shall not think it any
slander from the Mouth of a Presbiterian, who thinks otherwise, to be called an
Judependent.

If a Prince who is confessedly a Prince, and has Supreme power, make War
upon his Subjects for the propagation of Religion, the Nature of the Defense is
much altered. For though sucha War (whether made for the Imposition of a
false Religion or a true) be as unjust as if 'twere made upon a foreign
Nation, yet this injustice in the Prince cannot warrant the taking up of Arms
against Him, in the Subject. Because being the Apostles (...) or Supreme within
his own Kingdom, As all power concerning the public, secular Government of it
resolveait self into Him, so does the ordering of the Outward exercise of
Religion too. In both Cases he is the Judge of Controversies. Not so unerring
or Infallible, as that all his Determinations must be received for Oracles, or
that his Subjects are so obliged to be of his Religion, that if the Prince be
an Idolater, a Mahumetan, or Papist, 'twould be disobedience in them not to be
so too. But let his Religion be what it will; let him be a Jeroboam, or one of
such an unreasonable Idolatry, as to command his people to worship Calves, and
Burn Incense to Gods scarce fit to be made the Sacrifice, Though he be not to
be obeyed, yet he is not to be resisted. Since such a Resistance, would not
only change the Relation of inequality, and Distance between the Prince, and
People, and so destroy the Supremacy here given him by S. Peter, but 'twould
actually enter duel with the Ordinance of God; which cease not to be sacred
as often as it is wickedly employed. Irresistibility being a Ray and Beam of
the Divine Image, which resides in the Function, not in the Religion of the
Prince. Who may for his Person, perhaps, be a Caligula, or Nere, yet in his
Office still remain Gods Deputy and Vicegerent. And therefore to be obeyed,
even in his unjust commands, though not actively by our compliance, yet
passively by our sufferings. This Doctrins as it is agreeable to the Scripture,
and the practice of the purest, and most primitive times of the Church, so I
find it illustrated by the famous example of a Christian Soldier, and the
censure of a Father upon the paslage. This Soldier being bid to burn Inconse
to an Idol, rcfused; But yielded himself to be cast into the fire. Had he,
when his Emperor bid him worship an Idol, mutinied, or turned his spear upon
him (says that Father) he bad broken the fifth Commandment in defense of the
second. But submitting his Body to be burnt, (the only thing in him, which
could be compelled) in stead of committing Idolatry he became himself a
Sacrifice. I could, Sir, second this with many other Examples, but they would
all tend to this one pious, Christian Result, that Martyrdom is to be
presetred before Rebellion.

Here then, if I should suppose your Presbyterian Friends charge to be true, (a
very heavy one I confesle) that the King miscounselled by a Prelaticall Court
Faction, when he first Marched into the field against the Armies raised by the
two Houses of Parliament had an intent to subvert the Protestant Religion, and
to plant the Religion of the Church of Rome in it is stead, yet unless he can
prove to me, that from that time he actually ceast to be King, or the two
Houses to be his Subjects, or (notwithstanding their two Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance) that in so doing he forfeited his Crown, and was no longer
over all persons, and in all Causes as well Civil as Ecclesiastical within
the circuit of his three Kingdoms supreme Head and Governor, I know no Arms
which could lawfully be used against Him; but those which S. Ambrose used
against an Arian Emperor, Lachrymas and Suspiri^, Sighs and Tears, and
Prayers to God to turn his heart. And therefore, Sir, when your Friond does
next ask you, How it could stand with the safe conscience of any English
Protestant, to stand an idle spectator, whilst Queen Marus days were so ready
to break in upon him, that He was almost reduced to this hard choice, either to
follow the Times in the new ^rected fashion of Religion, or live in danger of
the stake, and Faggot, if he persisted in the old, you may please to let him
know from me, That as I have no unruly Thirst, or irregular Ambition in me to
dye a Martyr, Nor am so much a Circumcelleo, as to court, or woo, or (in case
it fled from me) enthusiastically to call upon me my own Death and Execution;
So, if it had been my Let to live in the fiery times He speaks of, when a
Protestant was put to death for an Heretic, as I should not have quarreld with
the Pawer that condemned me, so I should have kissed my funeral pile; And should
have thought it a high piece of Gods favor to me, to call me to Heaven by a
way so like that of his Angel in the Book of c. 13.20.
Judges, who ascended thither in the Flame, and air, and persume of a
Sacrifies.

But what if this be only a Jealousy and suspicion in your Friend? Nay what if
it have been the Disguise, and paint to some Ambitious men's designs, who, to
walk the more securely to their dark and politic ends, have styled
themselves the Defendours, when they have all this while been the Invadors; And
have called the King the subverter, who has all this while (to his power) been
the Defender of this Religion? This certainly if it be proved, will very much
Inflame and aggravate their sin, and dye it in a deep scarlet, through all
the progress of it. But because I rather desire to cast a mantle over their
strange proceedings, then to add to their Nakedness, which has at length
discovered it self to all the World, all that I shall say, to deliver so much
Goodness from so much misrepresentation is this. That the report, (which at
first poisoned the minds of so many Thousand well minded people) That the King
had an intent, by this war, to destroy the Protestant Religion, could at most
have no other parent but some men's either crafty Malice, or needless Fear,
appears clearly in this, that after all their great Discoveries, they have not
yet instanced in one considerable Ground fit to build more then a vulgar
Jealousy upon. The Kings affection to the Queen, His Alliance and confederacy
with Popish Princes abroad, and the Gentleness of his Reign toward his
Popish Subjects at home, being premises as unfit to build this Inference and
conclusion upon, that, Therefore He took up Arms that he might introduce their
Religion, as his in Aristotle were; who because it lightued when Socrates took
the Air, thought that his walking caused that commotion in the skies. For that
the Root and Spring of such a report, could be nothing but their own deluded
fancy, they must at length confess, unless with their Faith they have cast
off their Charity too. Let your Friend, Sir, read over any one of His Majesty's
Declarations, and what sacred Thing is there by which he has not freely and
uncompelled, obliged and bound Himself to live, and dye a Protestant? By what
one Act have these many Vows been broken? Who made that Court Faction, which
would have miscounselled him to bring in Popery? Or let your Friend if he can,
name, who those Miterd Prelates were, who lodged a Papist under their Rotchet.
If he cannot, let him forbear to hold an Opinion of his Prince and Clergy,
which Time (the mother of Truth) has so demonstratively confuted; And let him
no longer suffer himself to be seduced by the malicious writings of those,
who, for so many years, and from so many Pulpits have breathed Rebellion, and
Slander with such an uncontrouled Boldness and Sting, that I cannot compare
them to any thing so fitly as to the Locusts in the Revel, 9.
Revelation, which crept forth of the Bottomless pit; every one of which wore
the Crown of a King, and had the Tail of a Scorpion. In short, Sir, If he
have not so deeply drunk of the Enchanted cup, as to forget himself to be a
Subject, let him no longer endanger himself to taste of their Ruin too, who,
for so many years, have dealt with the best King that this Nation ever had, as
Witches are said to deal with those whom they would by piece meal destroy,
first shaped to themselves his Image in wax, then pricks, and stabbed it with
needles, striving by their many Reproaches of his Government, and Defamations
of the Bishops, to reduce his Honor by degrees to a consumption, and to make
it Languish, and pine, and wither away in the Hatred, and Disaffection of his
People.

But, perhaps Sir, your Friend, and I, are not well agreed upon our Terms: If
therefore he do once more strive to persuade you, that (notwithstanding all
this which I have said to the contrary) the King would, if he had not been
hindered, have destroyed the Protestant Religion, pray desire him to let me
know what he mean by the Religion which he calls Protestant. Does he mean that
Religion which succeeded Popery at the Reformation, and has ever since
distinguished us from the Church of Rome? Does he mean that Religion which so
many Holy Martyrs sealed with their Blood, that for which Queen Mary is so
odious and Queen Elizabeth so precious to our memories? Lastly. Does he mean
that Religion which is comprised in the 39. Articles, and confessed to be
Protestant by an Act of Parliament? If these be the Marks, these the
Characters of it, let him tell me whether this be not the Religion which the
King in one of his Cabinet Opened.
Letters to the Queen calls the only Thing of difference between Him and Her,
that is dearest to Him. whether this also, be not the Religion, in which, if
there be yet any of the old Ore, and Dross, from whence 'twas extracted, Any
thing either essentially, or accidentally evil, which requires yet more
sifting, or a more through Reformation. Any thing of Doctrine to offend the
strong, or of Discipline, or Ceremony, to offend the wenke, His Majesty have
not long since offered to have it pass the fiery Trial and Disputes of a
Synod legally called. To all which questions, 'till He and his Com presbyters,
give a satisfying Answer, however they may think to hide themselves under their
old Tortoise-shell, and cry out, Templum Domini, the Temple of the Lord, They
must not take it ill if I ask them one question more, and desire them to tell
me, whether this be not the Religion which they long since compelled to take
flight with the King, and which has scarce been to be found in this Kingdom,
ever since the time it was deprived of the Sanctuary it had taken under the
Kings Standard

This then, being so, has your Friend, or his fellow Assemblers, yet a purer,
or more primitive Notion of the Protestant Religion, which compared with the
Religion which we and our Fathers have been of, will prove it to be Idolatrous,
and no better then a hundred years superstition? Let them in Charity (as they
are bound not to let us perish in our Ignorance) show us their Model. If it be
more agreeable to the Scripture then Ours, have more of the white Robe, and not
of the new invention; we may, perhaps, be their Converts; And their
Righteousness meeting with out Peace may mutually Kiss each other. In the
mean time, Sir, I hope they will not define the Protestant Religion so by
Negatives, as to make it consist wholly in No Bishops, No Liturgy, or No
Common Prayer Book. These we, (not yet convinced to the contrary) do hold to
be good Conservatives, but not Essentialls, of that which we call the
Pretostant Religion of our Side; Their Negation then, can be no true Essential
Constituent of the same Religion on theirs.

There is but One positive Notion more in all the world, under which I can
possibly understand Them, when They say, They have all this while Fought for
the Defense of the Protestant Religion; That is, that by the Defense of the
Protestant Religion, (if they mean any Thing, or if this have not bin the
Disguise to a more dangerous secret) They mean the Defense of their New
Directory, and their at length concluded Government of the Church by
Presbyters. If this be their Meaning, (And truly if I should rack my
Invention, I cannot make it find another) The Second part of that most Holy,
and Glorious Cause, which has drawn the eyes of Europe upon it, and renderd
the Name of a Protestant, a Proverb to express Disloyalty by, That Pure,
Chaste, Virgin, without spott or wrinkle-Cause, which like the Scythian Diana
has been fed with so many Humane Sacrifices, And to which, as to another
Moloch, so many Men as well as Children, have been compelled to pass through
the Fire, resolves it self into this Unchristian Bloody conclusion, That an
Assembly of professed Protestant Divines, have advised the Two Parliaments of
England and Scotland, confessed Subjects, to take up Arms against the King,
their Lawful Sovereign, Have thereby set Three Kingdoms in a Flame, been the
Authors of more Protestants slain in a Civil, then would have served to
recover the Palatinate by a Foreign War, for nothing but this unnecessary
novell, accidental Consideration, That the King (unless compelled by Forces)
would never consent ((...) indeed without Perjury could) to the Change of an
Ancient, Primitive, Apostolic, Universally received Government of this Church
by Bishops, for a new, vpstart, Mushrome, Calvinisticall Government, by a
Motley Presbytery, of Spiritual and Lay Elders. Which being (As I have hither
to by Principles taken both from Reason, and Scripture proved to you) in the
most favorable sense, a Resistance, if not an Jnvasion of the Higher Power,
and that Higher Power being Romans 13.2.
(...), Gods Ordinance must needs be (...). or a War made against God
Himself. And the Authors of it (unlesle they repent, and betake themselves to
a timely return to their Obedience) in danger to draw upon themselves this
other, sad, tragical irresistible Conclusion, which St V. 2.
Paul tells us is the inevitable Catastrophe of Disobedience, which is, (...),
you may English it, swift Destruction.

And thus, Sir (Though all weak Defenses have something of the Nature of
prevarication in them, and he may in part be thought to betray a Cause, who
feebly argues for it) I have returned you a large Answer to the two Quere's in
your sh^^^ Letter, which if you shall you (...) to call Satisfaction you will
very much assist my (...), which will not suffer me to think that I, in this
(...), have said more then Others. Only being so fairly invited by you to say
something, to have remained silent, had been to have confessed my self
convinced; And my Negligence, in a Time so seasonable to speak Truth in, might
perhaps, in the Opinion of the Gentleman, your Friend, have seemed to take part
with those of his side, against whose Cause, though not their Persons, I have
thus freely armed my Pen. Sir I should think my self fortunate, if Any Thing
which I have said in this Letter might make him a Proselyte. But this being
rather my wish then my Hope, all the Success which this Paper aspires to is
this, that you will accept it as a Creature borne at your Command; And that you
will place it among your other Records, as a Testimony how much greater my
Desires, then my Abilities are to deserve the style of being thought worthy to
be

From my Chamber June 7. 1647. Your affectionate servant JASPER MAIN.


