A SERMON PREACHED Some Years since, BY AVGVSTIN MEDCALF, DECEASED. Master of
Art, Prebend of Chichester, and Minister of Berwick in Sussex.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1679.

PHIL. IV. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always: and again, I say rejoice.


MY Text presents us not only with the duty, but the incomparable privilege of
every faithful, obedient Christian, who is here enjoined a service so
satisfactory, pleasing, and advantageous, that as no man in the world besides
can have half the reason to do it at all; so every good Christian has all the
reason in the world to perform it always.

To be pleased and satisfied, to be merry and joyful, one would think were a
service so natural and delightful to all the world, that the very commanding of
it would appear one of the vainest and most needless injunctions imaginable;
and to do all this upon the justest score, and upon a never-failing account; to
entertain and accept, preserve and always keep in ones possession an
inexhausted Fountain of joy, such as will supply all our wants, serve all our
necessities, gratify and please us in all conditions; to place this joy of
ours in God, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there
are pleasures for evermore: To command a Christian to do this, one would fancy
(at first hearing it) were a very superfluous Precept; it looks all one as if a
man should be desired not to be a stock, or stone, or swine; for if he were but
a man, much less a Christian man, he cannot but do it of his own accord,
without commands or entreaties: And yet Heaven knows, such degenerate creatures
are we grown, that God is fain to oblige us to that by positive express command
which (did we behave our selves in the least like Christian people) we could
not but perform by a mere inclination of nature. Nay, did but a man observe the
general dejectedness, sullenness, murmurings and repinings that are to be met
with in the conversation of most Christians, against the dealings and
disposings of God himself, 'twould let us see sufficient reason why St. Paul
should in this very Epistle so often inculcate and impress this one duty. He
thought it not enough to say, My brethren, rejoice in the Lord; Cap. 3.1.
but as if people were apt to forget nothing more than what they should and
cannot (when they truly understand it) but delight in most, he repeats his
Injunction in the words of the Text, Rejoice in the Lord always: Nay, as if
this bare repetition were not sufficient, but that people would sill persist to
neglect it, though they both know it, and remember it too, he does redouble and
impress it over again, hereby intimating it to be a duty of that concern, that
it can never be too much repeated, because after all the insisting upon it,
it is every where amongst all sorts of persons too little practiced; and
therefore says he in the next words, and again I say, Rejoice.

Now to rejoice in God always, is evermore to have a heart and mind so disposed
and ordered, that it can in an humble waiting, constant depending, and faithful
serving of God, derive and continue to its self an inexpressible comfort,
satisfaction, and delight, from this one consideration, that the Lord is her
God; this secures, that in all conditions whatsoever, she is certainly under
the protection of his Providence, and the care of his love, and in the arms of
his mercy. And this happy assurance does beget and break open such a fountain
of joy in the soul, as does never, or at least never need leave streaming,
until it empty it self into those Rivers of joy that are at Gods right hand;
for we shall find that the consideration of having the Lord for his God, does
furnish the obedient humble Christian (for of such only I would have this whole
Discourse understood) with two such mighty arguments of joy, that the due
weighing of them cannot choose but make him in all conditions to rejoice in this
Lord, yea and again I say to rejoice. 1. The obedient good Christian may very
justly rejoice in God always, because he is secure; the Lord will so order and
govern the concernments of this temporal life as shall be most for his benefit
and advantage. 2. He may again rejoice in the fame God, and that always too,
because he is secured by him that he shall be prepared for and hereafter put in
possession of a better, even a heavenly life with himfelf in his glorious
Kingdom.


1. The obedient good Christian may very justly rejoice in God always, etc. for
the performance of this he has the express promise of the God of mercy and
truth, with whom is no variableness nor shadow of turning. For St. Paul having
laid down this as a Proposition of unquestionable truth, We know that all
things work together for good to them that love God: Romans 8.28
He triumphantly proceeds to conclude, That none of the miseries of this
inferior world can do us the least hurt, because they cannot separate us from
the protection of Gods Providence, nor the gracious disposals of his mercy, and
the overruling beneficialness of his love: It Is not, says he, Verse. 35.
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril,
or sword, that shall separate us from the love of Christ. And therefore none of
these can hinder his mercy from doing us good, in and by our afflictions. Nay
(says he Verse. 37.
) in all these things we are more than conquerours through him that loved us.
There are few indeed but will readily grant men may justly rejoice in God when
the world smiles upon them, and their contrivances are seconded with success;
so that by this means they prosper in the world, have riches in possession,
flourish like a green bay tree, and do even what they list; who is he so
wretched but has gladness in his heart in the time that his corn, and wine,
and oil increases? when their oxen are strong to labor, when their barns are
full of corn, when there is no leading into captivity, no want nor complaining
in their houses, when their sheep bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in
their streets, then men can be content to thank God for his goodness, and
rejoice in him for the great bounty he bestows upon the children of men. But if
this very God should by his wise and gracious Providence change the scene of
their affairs, give their fruits to the caterpiller, and their labor to the
grasshopper, blast the work of their hands, strike their flocks with hot
thunderbolts, and bring an evil disease amongst their herds; should he make
them poor in their estates, sick in their persons, unprosperous in their
undertakings, forsaken of their friends, and a reproach and derision to them
that are round about them, how ready would they then be to forget the joy of
their heart, and the rock of their Salvation, and think themselves sufficiently
excused and justified too, if they now murmur, repine, and are angry at the
dealings of Heaven; And in the height of their discontent and indignation not
only quarrel with, but some of them curse God to his face: This men are
naturally ordinarily the more apt to do upon this great mistake, because they
believe God then only loves and does them good when he prospers them in their
temporal concerns; and that when he stretches out his hand and blasts their
expectation in those particulars, he then only hates them, and does them
mischief; but how gross an error this is, that prosperity should be an
infallible sign of Gods love, and adversity of his hatred, will in a good
degree appear hereafter. Nay I hope 'twill be made out, that as few men do
truly rejoice in God in either condition, so none but the obedient, humble
Christian, has the highest inducements to rejoice in God in both conditions,
yea and again I say to rejoice.

1. It Is the obedient humble Christian who has the truest reason to rejoice in
God in the time of prosperity, and that upon this account, because he is well
assured, so long as he continues his faithful service to God, he will bless his
fortune, and make his prosperity do him good. But most people will be ready to
reply, This seems to make a question of what is generally taken for granted;
whoever doubted Gods blessing to go along with a great Estate? for prosperity
(say they) is that, and every thing else that is desirable. Did ever a large
Fortune do any man hurt? who was ever the worse for wearing soft clothing? for
faring deliciously every day? for lying at ease, taking his pleasure, and
commanding round about him? Alas! sensual sottish Creatures that we are! that
can think a Swine happy because she has her Trough full of wash, which she
swills up greedily, and grunts over for joy, and having filled her belly, lies
down and snorts without care or thought for the next days provision. But if we
will give our selves the leisure to hearken to Gods instruction, we shall find
our selves taught by the Wisdom from above, that it is not the greatest Temporal
affluence without true Godliness can make any man happy; if a man be wicked,
though he be never so rich, he is but in the 'worse condition for his wealth;
such a man's riches are kept for the owner to his hurt, says Solomon. Eccles.
5.13.
And therefore when the Prophet Jeremiah undertook to argue with God concerning
his Judgments, viz. Wherefore the way of the wicked prospered? And wherefore
all they were temporally happy that dealt very treacherously? In the conclusion
of the debate he makes this resolution, Jer. 12.1,2,3.
Though thou have planted them, so that they have taken root, grow and bring
forth fruit, yet thou O Lord, shall pull them out like sheep for the slaughter,
for thou do prepare them for the day of slaughter. Intimating hereby, that
all the good thing of this world which God sometimes so liberally heaps upon
wicked men, is intended as no greater a kindness to them than the variety of
fresh Pasture, and plenty of the purest Hay, is designed by the Grasier upon
one of his fatting Bullocks; which he does not bestow upon him only that the
beast may grow fat and shine, and wallow in the enjoyment of his ease, and the
abundance of his Provinder, but only that he may the more certainly and quickly
become fit ware for the market and the shambles. And therefore how much soever
wicked men may think themselves beholden to any man that wishes them
prosperity, yet when they consider of it better, perhaps they may see good
cause to give them little thanks for so mischievous an Imprecation (rather than
a Prayer); for it is all one as if in other words he prayed to God to take such
a course with them as should certainly ruin them. So says Solomon, Prove. 1.32.
The turning away (or the ease, as it is in the Margent) of the simple shall
slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them. As if there were no
more certain way only to undo and irrecoverably to ruin wicked men (for such
are meant by fools and simple in the language of Solomon, than the enjoyment of
prosperity, and the permitting them to live according to their own hearts,
lusts. For indeed, so many and great are the temptations which a prosperous
condition does bring along with it, that none but a very good man can use it
with any tolerable innocence. Let but Nabal live in ease and plenty, and the
wicked fool presently tarns a Drunkard, and a Churl; for though himself kept a
feast in his house like the feast of a King, and his heart within him was merry
and drunk, yet would he not part with one morsel to David and his Soldiers who
had preserved him and his in the Wilderness. 1 Samuel 25.10,36.
So also that wretched rich man in our Saviors Parable, when he grew so
wealthy that he was fain to pull down his Barns, and build greater, because he
wanted room to lay his fruits; when he had thus done, the next thing he sets
about was to resolve upon a life of ease and sensuality, for so he bespeaks his
Soul (hugging himself in the enjoyment of his beloved Goods), Soul, take thine
ease, eat, drink, and be merry, for thou have goods laid up for many years.
Luke 12.18,19.
Nor was the case otherwise with Gods own people of old: Deuteronomy. 32.15.
When Jesurun waxed fat, he presently fell a kicking against Heaven, and quite
forgot the God that made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his Salvation.
And we are told concerning the same Israel in another place, Psalm. 78.24,30.
that when God rained Manna upon his people, and gave them all that they
desired, then they were not estranged from their lusts. And because it is so
natural for a man to be transported with prosperity, for this reason Moses
could not admit his people to the delights of Canaan before he had given them
this extraordinary Caveat to warn them against the poisonous insinuations of
that plentiful and delightful place: Deuteronomy. 6.10,11,12.
When the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the land, to give thee
great and goodly cities, and houses full of all good, things, then beware that
thou forget not the Lord who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and out of
the house of Bondage. And as if this one Caution were not sufficient, he
doubles it, Chap. 8. from v. 10, to v. 18.
When thou have eaten and art full, and have built goodly houses and dwelt
therein, then beware lest thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord
thy God who brought thee out of the house of bondage, and say in thy heart, My
power and the might of my hand has gotten me this wealth: But thou shall
remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that gives thee power to get wealth.
By all which it is very easy to collect how prone the heart of man is to abuse
the riches and good things of this world to the dishonor of that God who
graciously bestowed them upon him; and instead of returning him the sacrifice
of praise and thanksgiving who has blessed their endeavors in the getting all
they have, to imitate those wicked men in the Prophet Habbakkuk, Chapter 1.16.
In sacrificing to their net, and burning incense to their drag, because by
them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous. Nay the man after Gods own
heart, holy David himself, began to boast of himself, and say in his prosperity
he should never be moved; Psalm. 36.
when yet 'twas this very prosperity which betrayed him to those two reproaches
of his Piety, viz. the murder of Vriah, and the adultery of Bathsheba; for so
the Text tells us, 2 Samuel 11.1,2.
when his Armies were victorious abroad, and himself lived in plenty and ease
at home, then was the time he was tempted, by the commission of these very
Sins. And indeed Agurs Prayer will sufficiently instruct us, Prove. 38.9.
how much more dangerous a prosperous condition is than an adverse one; and
therefore how much reason we have to petition God to deliver us from the Sins
which the one tempts us to as well as the other. Poverty indeed, he tells us,
does naturally tempt men to steal; but riches, he assures us, invite and
incline men to the commission of a sin of a much higher nature, even downright
Atheism; for when once men are full, they are then in the likeliest condition
to deny God, and say, who is the Lord? So that upon the whole, since Prosperity
is attended with such manifold danger, and such variety of temptations, then
certainly no man has equal reason to prize and rejoice in it, that the humble
obedient Christian has; for he it is that has the greatest security, it shall
do him the least hurt. He has not only a gracious promise from the mouth of
his blessed Savior, that the comforts of this life shall be added to him, (if
the Allwise God sees they will do him good) upon his seeking first of all, and
most of all, the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof. Mat. 6.33.
But he is secured (that if God vouchsafes to bestow the good things of this
life upon him) he shall (upon his humble walking with God, and meek behavior
toward men) have Gods blessing go along with him in the enjoyment of them.
Mat. 5.5.
And this is that that gives a value to them, and makes them good things
indeed. Prosperity in fects wicked men with such a rust and corruption, that
eats into their soul as a canker does into their flesh: But all this is a good
man preserved from, by virtue of Christ's Incarnation, (one end whereof was that
he might deliver us from this present evil world,) Gal. 1.4.
and the prevalency of his Saviors Intercession, who still continues to
petition God his Father to keep all his obedient servants from the evil of this
world. Joh. 17.15.
He has Gods Spirit going along with him to lead him into the ways of Truth,
Piety, and Peace; he has the graces thereof to assist him in the subduing his
corruptions, and enabling him to resist temptations. Nay, he has no less than
the Almighty God of Heaven and Earth to stablish, strengthen and settle him. 1
Pet. 5.16.
This God is his Sun to cheer and comfort him; his shield to defend and protect
him; one who has promised to withhold no good thing from them that walk
uprightly, and lead a godly life. Ps. 84.11.
And hereby we may collect whether we have Gods blessing in our prosperity,
when our riches don't make us a jot the more proud, or the less devout; so that
we are neither high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living
God. Nay more, when we practice the advice of the Son of Syrach. Eccl. 3.18.
And the greater we are, can humble our selves so much the more, when we can
find our selves more fervent in Prayers, and more frequent in Alms-deeds, and
more obedient to all Gods Commandments; when we can observe our selves
endeavoring to be rich in good works as well as in money; being ready to
distribute, and willing to communicate to the distresses of our poor brethren;
keeping our selves unspotted from the world, and doing good to the poor and
needy; when we are thus laying up in store for our selves a good foundation
against the time to come, that we may lay hold on eternal life; when we thus
make our selves friends of the unrighteous Mammon; putting our money out to
usury in Gods bank; lending to the Lord by giving to his poor; hoping for
nothing again but his gracious acceptance here, and his merciful reward
hereafter: whosoever finds his heart thus wrought upon by prosperity, he may
well conclude he has the blessing of Gods right hand as well as his left; that
he has Gods favor and love as well as his bounty and benefaction; and this is
that that administers life, comfort, and sweetness to all his possessions, and
makes them desirable enjoyments; such a man as this may not only justly be
allowed to use the Prayer of David, Psalm. 118.25.
O Lord, I beseech thee send me now prosperity; and that because he has Gods
blessing going along with him in it, and is made the better by it, and makes
other people the better for it. But when God is pleased to vouchsafe it him,
may in that day according to Solomon's advice, Eccles. 7.14.
Be joyful. Nay in the language of David, he may shout for joy and be glad, and
may continually say, Let the Lord be magnified, who is pleased not only to
grant me prosperity, but moreover, which is the crowning joy of all, has
pleasure in the posterity of his servant: Ps. 35.27.
For this cause shall my tongue speak of his righteousness, and of his praise
all the day long.

2. The obedient humble Christian has just reason to rejoice in God in time of
Affliction: For being well satisfied that Affliction comes not forth of the
dust, nor troubles spring out of the ground, but that man is born unto trouble
(is appointed thereunto by the God that made him) as the sparks fly upwards.
Therefore in such a time does he (with comfort) seek unto God, and (with
contentment) does he commit his cause unto him, to use the words of Eliphaz.
Job 5.6,7,8.
He is not now to learn that all the miseries of this life come from an higher
hand than created weakness is able to grapple with or control; and therefore
knowing it to be the Lords doing, he presently lifts his eyes unto Heaven from
whence comes his help, casting his burden upon the Lord, (who first laid it
upon his back) who also has promised to sustain him, whilst he does with
faith, patience and cheerfulness set his shoulders to the bearing it; and who
has expressly said, Ps. 55.22.
That he will never suffer the righteous to he moved. He looks upon Affliction
as a messenger sent from God, and thereupon receives it joyfully, hearkens to
it attentively, and obeys it with all submission. For he is well assured that
our Heavenly Father (unlike to our fleshly Parents) chastens not his Children,
as they sometimes do, for his pleasure, but altogether for their profit; and he
does it for this blessed end, that they may be partakers of his Holiness. Heb.
12.10
Every one of Gods rods has a voice as well as a lash, and was sent to
instruct as well as to correct the extravagant. So that when once God lays his
rod upon the back of an humble obedient Soul, he presently answers the call of
Gods chastisement; Speak Lord, for thy servant hears. Strike on, Father, for
thy child attends. O Lord, my heart is fixed, my heart is fixed. I will sing
and give praise, I will thankfully receive thy corrections, and am steadfastly
purposed to obey thy righteous judgments: it is true indeed, that no chastening
for the present seems to be joyous but grievous; nevertheless afterward it
yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to them that are exercised thereby.
Heb. 12.11.
It Is the consideration of the blessed fruits that affliction brings along with
it, and springs out of it that makes a good man rejoice in tribulation, and
heartily thank God for his chastisement; he sees how useful it is to reclaim
him from some sin he was too much addicted to; and to instigate him to the
practice of some duties he was too forgetful of, or negligent in: So that upon
the survey of the spiritual benefit he receives by it, he cannot but express
himself in the language of holy David, Psalm. 109.67.
Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now (since I was afflicted) have I
kept thy word. I now am able to say by my own experience (upon the observing
the happy reformation of my naughty life) that it is good for me that I have
been afflicted, because thereby have I learned thy statutes. And therefore, O
Lord, since thou have dealt so well with thy servant in this seasonable
afflicting of me, continue, I beseech thee, such thy loving kindness unto me
according to thy word. Verse. 65.
And indeed God has passed his word that he will in much mercy to their souls
afflict his dearest servants in their Bodies and Estates, in all the
concernments I mean of this temporal life, that his Wisdom sees will do them
most good. And should he not do so, he would fail in two main Articles of his
Divinity (which are the great supporters and encouragement of his most beloved
Childrens obedience) and that is his truth and his love toward them. Thus
David acquaints us, Psalm. 199.75.
I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are rights and thou in thy faithfulness
have afflicted me. Intimating, that if God had not afflicted him, he would have
forfeited his Justice and Veracity by so doing; nor would his love be less
questionable than his truth, if he should utterly leave off correcting his
dearest children. For this is that the Writer to the Hebrews lays down as a
proposition of everlasting verity: Heb. 12.6.
Whom the Lord loves he chastens, and scourges every Son whom he receives. God,
indeed, the Apostle tells us, expresses his Fatherly love in correcting of his
Children, by instructing, chiding, and scourging of them, for so the Original
does signify. And lest we should think that affliction alone is enough to
entitle us to the relation of Gods Children, or should argue with our selves,
because God scourges every son which he receives, therefore every one whom he
scourges, he receives for his son; The Apostle to rectify this mistake,
acquaints us, that though indeed it is true that our being without chastisement
(whereof all are partakers would) certainly evince us to be Bastards and not
Sons: Yet our bare having chastisement, is not sufficient to conclude us to be
Sons and not Bastards. For says he, Verse. 7.
If ye endure (not barely if you have chastening), God deals with you, etc. if
ye endure, if you humbly receive, patiently bear, thankfully employ, and
fruitfully improve Gods word, and Gods rod, Gods chidings, and Gods scourgings
to your own amendment; if they yield the peaceable fruits of righteousness in a
conversation of holiness, then you may reasonably conclude your selves to be
Gods children: And for being so related, and in this sort afflicted, whereby
that relation is so clearly discovered, you have good cause to rejoice with joy
unspeakable and glorious. How are men transported, and with what exuberances of
exultation do they ordinarily entertain an adoption into Caesar's Family, which
puts them in hopes they shall one day sway a Scepter, and govern and triumph
over the Kingdoms of the Earth? And yet what a trivial petit Preferment is
this, if it be but compared to that inexpressible advancement, of being
received into the number of Gods Children, and admitted to be an heir and a
coheir with the Eternal Son of his love, Jesus Christ the righteous, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords! And then how much more reason have they not only more
exceedingly to rejoice, but themselves to be turned as 'twere who have the
surest evidence of the King of Heavens love and protection; who are able as
'twere to produce his gracious Letters Patent under his broad Authentic Seal
of Affliction, and to show in their Bodies and Estates these undeniable marks
of their Heavenly Fathers love! They who find themselves thus sealed to the day
of Redemption, cannot choose certainly but keep a perpetual Jubilee all their
lives long, and in the overflowing exultation of their souls amidst all their
crosses and calamities, must needs lift up their heads with joy and
thanksgiving to that God who has vouchsafed them one of the most certain and
infallible signs of his love and goodness to them, whilst he has been
graciously pleased to exercise them with affliction; and not only so, but to
complete and crown his mercy and loving kindness to them, has moreover given
them patience to bear, courage to endure, constancy to persevere, and wisdom to
improve all the crosses he lays upon them, to his honor and their own comfort;
so that methinks if ever a man could be allowed to be a competent Judge of his
own felicity, he has the surest grounds to conclude and pronounce himself a
happy man, when the world possibly thinks him poor, and miserable, and the most
wretched person, piteous upon earth. See the man whom Eliphaz brings in with a
note of admiration, as if he had a mind to pick out and show you that
particular person whom all the world so much court and admire, and endeavor to
make themselves like, Behold the happy man, says he! Job 5.17.
Behold him, will most people say; but alas! where shall we ever see him; a
happy man indeed were a sight worth our beholding, we should never think our
eyes better employed than in viewing and admiring so rare an object: why says
he, I Will show you the man whom you so mightily long to see and glut your eyes,
and bless your selves upon, your surveying a man whose condition is altogether
blessed and desirable: Behold him therefore whose Estate the wicked envy, the
good admire, all men hope for, and the best only enjoy. Would you now, in a
word know who this man is? Behold, happy is the man (says Eliphaz) whom God
corrects. See how most people are disappointed, they generally expect a happy
man should be described at the rate that Asaph characters a wicked one; Ps.
73.12.
viz. that he is one that prospers in the world, has riches in possession, and
can even do what he list; who is in no peril of death, but is always lusty and
strong; who comes into no misfortune like other folk, neither is plagued like
other men. Verse. 4, 5.
Who has his belly full of treasure, children at his desire, and leaves the
rest of his substance to his babes. Ps. 17.14, 85.
And yet the very men but now described, notwithstanding their prosperity, are
the most unhappy miserable men upon earth; for they are but a company of
ungodly wicked wretches, all this while, men abhorred by God, and whose
condition and company is avoided and prayed against by good men. Verse. 13.
But now Asaph (who was a man of a clean heart and innocent hands, one whom God
loved; who had no less than God for the strength of his heart and his portion
for ever; and therefore one whom we may justly conclude happy. For certainly of
all men happy is he who is in such a case, yea happy is the man who has the
Lord for his God. Psalm. 144.15.
This holy, this happy Prophet, I say, gives this account of his condition. All
the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning. Ps. 73.14.
Nay he intimates this to be the condition of all Gods children too, as well as
of himself; and that if he should say otherwise, he should condemn the whole
generation of his Heavenly Fathers household. Verse. 15.
And therefore they who are the most happy of all men, have the greatest reason
to rejoice always in the Lord, who is the gracious bestower of this their
happiness, yea and again I say to rejoice. Let us a while cast our eyes upon
some few afflictions which the world is apt to esteem the most deplorable of
miseries, and see how a good Christian can live above the sadness of them all,
and in the words of Samson's riddle, draw forth meat out of the eater; and out
of the strong and the bitter, to derive inexpressible sweetness. Judge. 14.14.
Let but a worldly man, one of the sons of Mammon, lose his Estate, let him any
way be reduced to want and beggary, and you will see his content and joy as soon
departed as his money; he is so far from having a cheerful heart or merry
countenance, that he scarce has the look or the soul of a man left him; his
heart is dead within him, and he is become like a stone, utterly insensible and
incapable of all comfort, not a word comes out of his mouth but undone, undone,
ruined, and for ever miserable; all which argue the height of disconsolateness
and despair. And let a man attempt to appease his passion and show the
unreasonableness of his sorrow, and he presently replys in a foaming rage, and
in a language not unlike that of Micah: Judge. 18.24
My Gold, my God, all that I esteem precious, is ravished from me and carried
away, and what have I more? and then, why do you ask me what I ail, or persuade
me to be comforted? But now an obedient, humble, faithful, good Christian, who
has learned in whatsoever estate he is, therewith to be content, he knows both
how to be abased, as well as how to abound; every where, and in all things he
is instructed, both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and suffer
need, to use the words of St. Paul. Phil. 4.11,12.
He looks upon poverty when it is sent from God, (and when that is, we shall see
by and by) as no such frightful sad condition; he can receive it without tears,
entertain it without grudging, nay give it a hearty cheerful welcome. For
having the same heart, he may very well be allowed to use the language of St.
Paul whenever he is in his estate; In all things I will approve my self to
God in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses. Though the
meanness I am reduced to, makes me looked upon as sorrowful; yet in God can I
always rejoice; and though I am poor and have nothing, yet can I by the benefit
of my good example and heavenly instruction, make many rich; and by the
contentment of my mind, and the satisfaction I receive in the inner man, my
self possess all things. 2 Cor. 6.4,10. Verse. 11.
Though I am reduced by Gods wise Providence to mean raiment, thin diet, and
hard lodging; yet I am well assured that a bare morsel of bread and a cup of
water, was thought by the Father of the Faithful a treatment not unbecoming the
glorious Angels themselves to be invited to, when they vouchsafed to converse
amongst mortals. Genesis 18.3,4,5.
And certainly Gods blessing can still make bare bread and clear water comfort
their hearts for whom his Providence has provided no more plentiful provision;
he can make it not only keep them alive, but in health too. Nay, with this can
he preserve them fat, flourishing, and cheerful also. I can derive as much
warmth by Gods blessing from a coarse coat, and sleep as sweetly upon a hard
bed, when God in his wisdom allows me no better, as they who are most
gorgeously apparelled, fare deliciously every day, and lie upon their beds of
Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and are lulled to sleep with
a consort of music. Amos. 6.4,5.
Nay, should my gracious Father think fit to bring me yet lower, and not
vouchsafe me so much as one garment of my own to clothe me, not one morsel of
bread to feed me, nor the least cottage of my own to harbor and rest my weary
decaying body; however I am not hitherto made comfortless, but have great
reason to say, Whilst I live will I praise the Lord; yea, as long as I have
any being will I sing praise unto my God, who though he has stripped me of many
useful outward accommodations, yet has continued to me this never-failing
comfort, that he still vouchsafes me his mercy to pray to, his promises to
trust in, and his good Providence to rely upon, which he has assured me shall
preserve and provide for me, as he knows will be most for my advantage. And
being thus brought by God himself to be one of his family, to live in a more
especial manner by the pure provision of his Providence; To be fed out of his
storehouse, and to be clothed out of his Wardrobe, and take my rest where he
shall provide me a lodging; Certainly he who has so bountiful, so
compassionate, and so powerful a Master, cannot choose but be sufficiently
accommodated and comforted during the whole discharge of his faithful service.
And therefore why should I take thought, torment and vex my self about what I
should eat, and what I should drink, and wherewithal I shall be clothed, when I
very well know that the God whose I am, and whom I serve, liberally provides
all these for the lillies of the field, and the fowl of the air, without the
least of their care and contrivance. Math. 6.25,26.
Nay, the Holy Book informs me, that the Son of his love, in whom the Father
was always well pleased, was little better provided for; he had neither house,
nor land, nor revenues to furnish him with a subsistence in the days of his
flesh, but lived all along for above thirty years, especially the three last of
them, purely upon Gods Providence, and good men's charity. Though he has often
created food for his followers, yet he has been sometimes fain to beg it for
himself; and for all that, never harbored the least repining or
dissatisfaction at the meanness of his quality or entertainment. And most of
those renowned Heroes (both before and after our Saviors Incarnation) men so
famous for their Piety in their several generations, that the ungrateful wicked
world was not worthy of their continuance in it, trod the very same steps: They
wandered about in sheepskins, and goatskins, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented. Heb. 11.17.
And yet all these by their faith in God, by their dependence upon his
Providence, by their thankfulness for his protection, and their obedience to
his will, obtained a good report; Verse. 39.
very highly favored by God, and worthily reputed of amongst men, their names
and their virtues being had in everlasting remembrance. And now if to complete
the scene of my Poverty, it should please God to bring me to such a pass, that
neither my own endeavors, nor men's charity, nor any extraordinary
dispensation, should help me with bread to eat, nor clothes to put on (which
hardly yet ever came to pass); however it should never come to pass, but that
the Lord should be my God, him only would I serve, and on him alone would I
place all my joy. And I should think I had great reason to do so, if upon no
other account, yet for this, that he would be pleased amongst all the children
of men to make choice of me to witness to the world, that man lives not by
bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God; Mat.
4.4.
And in a word, I should neither have bread nor flesh to sustain me withal, I
should notwithstanding have one sort of meat to eat which the world knows not
of, and can never take from me, and that is the refreshment of a good
conscience; this would afford me many a delicious meal when every thing else is
wanting; and the joy that does arise from the consideration and prospect of a
well-led life, will furnish me with a perpetual Gaudie, which will do more than
administer health to my navil, and marrow to my bones; Prove. 3.8.
being able to strengthen then a fainting spirit, and to enliven and cheer a
dejected Soul. This will make ones heart merry, and that will without further
care or trouble give a continual feast. Prove. 15.15.
And when after all this ravishing treatment, I shall find nature to decay, and
no longer able to support my fading-tabernacle of clay, I would in all humility
and contentment of mind resign up my soul into the hands of my gracious Father,
breathing out my last breath in the accents of fainting Elijah, 1 King. 19.4.
It is enough now, O Lord, take away my life, for I am not better than my
fathers. And I would not doubt but that God would in pity to my extreme want
and unreliev'd hunger, either mercifully take my Soul into his bosom of
blessedness, or else (were I as good a man, and as useful a person to Gods
Church as Elijah was) would as miraculously provide me with food to sustain my
feeble fainting nature, as he did for that his distressed languishing Prophet.
But besides this of Poverty, a good Christian can bear up his heart, and lift
up his head with joy, amidst all the misery, pain and vexation of a long
tormenting sickness. Many people, it is true, are in this particular of Satan's
opinion; they think they could easily grapple with all the hardships of
poverty, and the utmost mischief this world can bring upon them, so long as
they enjoy their health; but if once God stretches out his hand upon their
bodies, and smites them with a sore disease, they can then no longer hold their
integrity, their hearts repine, and their tongues blaspheme, and their whole
life is nothing but a scene of quarrellings, and defying of the Almighty. Skin
for skin, and all that they have, they could be content to give for their life,
and the preservation of their health; but if once God puts forth his hand, and
touches but their bone and their flesh, they presently set their mouths against
Heaven, and let fly against God himself, and in this condition adventure to
curse him to his face. Job 2.4,5.
But now a good Christian when he once finds that God has laid a sore disease
upon his loins, and cast him upon his sickbed, he does in all humility quietly
submit to his stroke, heartily implore his mercy, and patiently attend his
pleasure, and with a joyful confidence commits his body and his soul into the
hands of his gracious Father. For this indeed is the never failing comfort and
principal cordial of his afflicted heart, That it is the merciful Physician of
the Universe who brought this sickness upon him; that the same good God makes
the sore, and binds it up, and that he has wounded him whose hands make whole.
Job 5.18.
So that though by reason of the infirmity of his flesh he may possibly express
his uneasy sad condition in the language of holy Job, saying, Chap. 7.3,4.
I am made to possess months of vanity, and wearisome nights are appointed to
me: When I lie down, I say, when shall I arise and the night he gone? I am full
of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day. Nay though he may continue
his complaint to God in the words of holy David, Psalm. 38.
O Lord, thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hands presses me sore; there
is no soundness in my flesh, neither is there any rest in my bones, my wounds
stink and are corrupt, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long.
Yet can he cheer up his heart, and refresh his soul with the comfortable
language of the same holy Prophet, saying, Verse. 9.
Lord, all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee.
Verse. 15.
And in thee do I hope, for thou will hear, O Lord my God. Nay, should the same
God bring him so low that he might truly say, The sorrows of death compass me
about, and the pains of hell get hold upon me: However he would have cause to
say still with the same David, Psalm. 1.2,3.
I will love the Lord my strength, and I will call upon the Lord, who (though
he has humbled me to the very dust of death, yet) is he still worthy to be
praised. And herein will appear how worthy God is of praise, even when he does
afflict his servant in this sad manner, and therefore how just cause such an
one has even then to rejoice in the God that smites him; Because as the same
David tells us, Psalm. 23.4.
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none
evil, for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff comfort me. It Is the
consideration and assurance of Gods presence with them in their affliction,
that bears up their hearts, and comforts the souls of Gods servants in the most
dismal calamity, enabling them to rejoice in the worst of tribulations. And yet
it is not bare being with them, but the love and kindness he discovers to them,
that makes them thus satisfied and joyful. He makes his very rod comfort them
as well as his staff. Ordinary rods indeed are dry insipid things, fit for
nothing but to give blows, and create a smart; but Gods rod has a Prerogative
beyond all others, in that, like Aaron's Rod, Numb. 17.8.
laid up by Gods appointment in the Ark, it blooms, blossoms, such as by their
sweetness refresh the spirits; and yields almonds, a fruit that delights and
comforts the Soul. Nay, when the strokes of his rod seem most to weaken and
strike them to the ground, then does God put his staff into their hands, and
that bears them up, and keeps them from falling; and therefore both together
cannot choose but afford an inexpressible comfort to those good souls that are
exercised thereby. And it is for the continual supply of this comfort, and the
frequent refreshment of this cordial, that a devout soul is raised to such a
degree of satisfaction and exultation amidst the very agonies of death, as
enables her in that dire conflict triumphantly to cry out in the language of
afflicted Job, Chap. 3.15,16.
Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. He also shall be my Salvation. And
it is the same overflowing comfort that God vouchsafes a good Christian that
bears up his heart, and lifts up his head above all the disgraces and calumnies
that the unjust ungrateful world throws upon him. He knows a blessing goes
along with him when men revile him, and persecute him, and say all manner of
evil against him falsely upon account of his constant adhering to Christ and
his Gospel. And it is the assurance of this, that enables him to rejoice and be
exceeding glad; answerable to our Saviors encouragement in that particular
affliction. Math. 8.11,12.
Nay it is the same merciful God that supplys them with an exuberant joy in
recompense for all the unkindness they meet with at the hands of cruel
relations and unfaithful friends. David indeed acquaints us, Ps. 27.13.
That he had certainly fainted but that he believed to see the goodness of the
Lord in the land of the living. And herein God expressed his goodness to him,
that when his father and his mother forsook him, the Lord took him up. Verse. 10.
And 'twas his receiving this seasonable comfortable mercy that made him
resolutely wait on the Lord, and be of good courage, knowing that he did and
would strengthen his heart. Verse. 14.
Nay further, when he was brought to that sad condition that his own familiar
friend in whom he trusted, who also eat of his bread, had lift up his heel
against him, an affliction that of all others seems to go nearest to his heart,
and which he was least able to bear: For if it had been an enemy that
reproached him, then he could have born it; by whom he implies the
perfidiousness of a friend to be almost insupportable. Ps. 55.12.
And yet even in the worst of miseries was he not destitute of a satisfactory
comfort: Thou, O Lord, says he, upholdest me in my integrity, and set me
before thy face for ever. And for this reason says he, Psalm. 41.9,12,13.
blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting. Amen and
Amen. We have the clearest instance of what was but now delivered, in the
person and practice of holy Job, a man afflicted beyond compare, and yet
satisfied and joyful beyond all example. Let us but observe how of the richest
man of the East, he was in a few hours reduced to be one of the poorest persons
upon earth. His servants we find slain, and his cattle carried away by the
hands of thieves and murderers; his sheep and his shepherds were consumed by
fire from heaven; his sons and his daughters killed by the fall of the house
blown down upon their heads: And yet all the discontent that Job expresses at
these sad tidings, was only his worshipping and praising God, so says the Text,
Job 1.20,21,22.
Then Job arose and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon
the ground and worshipped, and said, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and
naked shall I return thither. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the name of the Lord.

Nay, when God allowed the Devil to execute so much of his malice upon him as
to smite his body with sore boils from the soal of his foot to his crown;
whereby we may easily guess that the noisomeness and the pain made his life a
burden to himself and his friends; and when the wife of his bosom had persuaded
him to end his days with Blasphemy against God, at once as 'twere to defy and
revenge himself upon the Author of his Misery; He was so far from doing so,
that rebuking her for her wicked advice, Thou speak (says he Job 2.9,10.
) as one of the foolish women speaks. He there acquaints her with his
contentment and satisfaction in his present povertous painful condition; What?
shall we receive good at the hand of God (says he) and shall we not receive
evil? It Is unreasonable we should covet the one, and not accept the other, when
they both come from the same gracious hand.

Nay, when his three friends had made an appointment together to come to mourn
with him and comfort him, as we are told, Job 2.11.
and yet instead of doing so, made it their great business to reproach him, and
accuse him as some notorious sinner or vile Hypocrite; for so says Eliphaz in
the name of the rest, Chap. 47.
Remember, I pray thee, whoever perished being innocent, or where were the
righteous cut off? All the answer Job returns to their uncharitable character,
calumny, is in that meek but smart reply, Job 6.14,15.
To him that is afflicted, pity should be showed from his friend: How forcibly
are right words? but what does your arguing reprove? Endeavoring all along in
his whole dispute with them, at once to clear Gods Justice, and to vindicate
his own Innocence; and upon the whole to discover his matchless Patience, his
high content, and uninterrupted joy, through the whole scene of his dismal
wretched condition; the main foundation you see of Job's comfort in his
affliction, was his assurance that his poverty and sickness came from Gods own
hand. The Lord, says he, has taken away. His own wickedness, riot, or idleness
had contributed nothing to it: But he saw 'twas purely the Lords doing, and
that was the reason that he opened not his mouth.

And indeed, whenever a good Christian upon the impartial searching of his
heart, can find that 'twas neither his gluttony, nor his drunkenness, neither
his idleness, extortion, defrauding, overreaching; his worldly-mindedness,
covetousness, or unthankfulness, that have provoked God to withhold his
blessing from him in the management of his affairs, so that notwithstanding all
his honest studious endeavors, his diligence in his calling, his devotion to
God, his entire dependence upon him for success, it still pleases the Majesty
on high to lessen his Estate, and by variety of sad Providence to bring him to
beggary; He has now the justest cause of satisfaction in his Poverty that can
be desired. He may pronounce with truth in the language of old Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. And he may assure himself
(and rejoice in the very thought of it) that Psalm. 116.5.
gracious is the Lord and righteous, yea our God is merciful. Psalm. 103.13,14.
And that as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear
him; he knows our frame, he remembers that we are but dust.

So likewise when a good Christian observes his sickness to come from God, his
disease arising from no act of intemperance or luxury, from no greedy incessant
prosecution of his business, nor from any bold presuming upon his strength, or
slighting the severities of wind, air and weather, much less from the perpetual
following his pleasure, and his eager addictedness to his sport; He may then
with an humble confidence repose himself upon Gods goodness for ease and cure;
not doubting but that God will strengthen him upon his bed of languishing, and
will make all his bed in his sickness; Psalm. 41.3.
enable him with strength to go thorough with his distemper if it be great; or
else lessen the disease if he be too weak to bear it at its height. And
whereas others in their fits of sickness, lie like so many wild bulls in a net
raving and tumbling in a most impatient manner, and refuse to be comforted,
because they are full of the fury of the Lord; Isa. 41.20
An humble good Christian does with all quietness resign up himself to his
heavenly Physicians ordering, looking upon Gods dealing with him in the whole
course of his sickness, as a procedure full of mercy and goodness, such as aims
at nothing but the Patients health and soundness; designed so to make him
whole, that he sins no more. And therefore though Gods handling him be never so
irksome to flesh and blood, yet does he look upon it, and rejoice in it, as a
necessary method for the curing the tumors and ulcers of his diseased soul. And
this strengthens his feeble knees, and enables him to lift up the hands that
hang down, and to praise God even when he has brought him to the brink of the
grave. For though no chastisement at the present seems to be joyous but
grievous; yet it is worth observing, that it is only said it seems so, and not
that it is so, for it has indeed an inconceivable joy wrapped and coucht in it,
for them that are exercised thereby, though there are few eyes so piercing that
can discern it. Yea, affliction affords an infinite satisfaction and comfort to
them that are so far exercised thereby, that they seem (like wrestlers in the
Olympic Games) quite stripped by, and for their encountering with it; for so the
Original signifies, reduced to that condition that have not clothes to cover
their nakedness, nor an house to hide their head in. And this is the chief
cause that they faint not in the worst of tribulations; because though their
outward man does perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day, to use St.
Paul's words. 2 Cor. 4.16.


Now the comforts of a Soul are really so great, that they are above all
description, none being able sufficiently to know them but he that has them.
St. Paul gives us to understand something of them (by which I shall leave you
to guess at their inexpressible excellency and sweetness) in that account he
gives of himself to the Corinthians, where he says, 2 Cor. 1.
That though he was troubled out of measure above strength, insomuch that he
despaired even of life; Verse. 8.
Yet could he in that hopeless and almost helpless condition pour out his heart
to God in that joyful Thanksgiving, Verse. 3.
Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies, and the God of all comforts, who comfort us in all our tribulation.
Verse. 5.
For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us so our consolation also abounds
by Christ. And hence it was that he that became capable of all this comfort,
viz. for the consideration of his well-led-life, the remembrance whereof must
needs refresh not only him but all such as he was; Verse. 12.
For our rejoicing is this (says he) the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, by the grace of God, we have had our
conversation in this world; keeping a conscience void of offense both toward
Gods and toward all men. He that does this, has just cause (whatsoever his
condition in this world may happen to be) to rejoice in the Lord always, and
again I say to rejoice. Being able to defy his last grim enemy in that Triumph
of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15.55.
O death, where is thy sting! O grave, where is thy victory! And in that great
day of darkness to give thanks to God who gives us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

I shall conclude all in the following words, Therefore my beloved Brethren be
ye steadfast, unmovable in this thanksgiving, praising and rejoicing in him,
always abounding in this work of the Lord; forasmuch as you know that your
labor, yea and your leisure too, your suffering and your joy, are not in vain
in the Lord.

To which God, the only bestower of all true comfort and consolation be
ascribed all Honor and Glory, Might, Majesty, Praise and Thanksgiving, in
Saecula.

FINIS.

