AN EXACT RELATION OF ALL SVCH occurrences as have happened in the several
Counties of Donegall, Londonderry, Tyrone, and Fermanagh in the North of
Ireland, since the beginning of this horid, bloody, and unparaleld Rebellion
there, begun in October last.

In all humility presented to the Honorable House of COMMONS in England.

By Lieutenant Collonell AVDELEY MERVYN, the 4 of June, 1642.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Downs and William Bladen, and are to be sold at the
Irish-Ware-house in Stationers' Hall. 1642.

Die Sabbathi, 4 Junij, 1642.
A Relation of such Concurrences as happened in the several Counties of
Donnegale, Tyrone, Fermanagh, and Londonderry (since the beginning of the
Rebellion in Ireland in October last) presented to this House by Lieutenant
Colonel Audley Mervyn, was this day read. And it is ordered, that he be
desired to print it, And that no man shall reprint it but such as he shall
appoint, without the particular Order of this House.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint William Bladen to print this News.



A Relation of such occurences as have happened in the several Counties of
Donegall, Tyrone, Fermanagh, and Londonderry since the beginning of the
Rebellion in Ireland, in October last; in humility presented to the Honorable
House of Commons in England, by Lieutenant Colonel Audely Mervin, June the
fourth, 1642.
Master Speaker,
IF my wishes could prevail against the necessity of the times, or if by
hieroglyphics I could express the sense of that trust, in which by a sympathy
with my Country, and request of my friends I stand now engaged, I should be
most unwilling to salute this Scene with a Tragedy, or to present unto the
continued, yet unwearied labors of this Honorable Assembly, any out-bred
discontents, since too too many are unfortunately hatched and nourished within
your own climate; whilst the Ship saild upon smooth waters, the Disciples luld
their Master asleep, but when the thunder broke forth, the lightnings flashed,
the waves crowded on heaps, then their fears pleaded an apology for their
want of faith and manners to awaken him.

Master Speaker, the times were when the Kingdom of Ireland saild upon smooth
waters; Leinster and Munster never disquieted in their estates: Connagh
stretched forth it self in the happy assurance of its legal settlement;
Vlster, though wounded and in Capite by alteration of her tenures, yet was
salved and recovered by the Royal promise for its reparation.

National grievances were ready for the sickle (in which let me never forget
the great assistance and respect our Committee received from this Honorable
House) and by a favorable digression excuse our Kingdom from a suspicious
Lethargy that such a horrid monster, as this present Rebellion, should be
conceived among us, and yet never felt to kick in the womb, nor struggle in
the birth: Since that discontent in the Subject, which is the forerunner of
Rebellion, was so fully banished, that the rest of our life would be to leave
off prayer, and fall to praise; to lay down our requests, and take up (...)

But now (Master Speaker) the thunder roares from the Rebels Cannons, the
lightning flashes from their fire-workes, the waves of innocent blood crowds up
in heaps, then pardon our just fears if they address themselves to this
House in these words, si deseris tu, perimus, only in this I must contradict
the application; you have wanted no vigilancie, nor we sense thereof, nor faith
therein.

Master Speaker, the rolation I shall trouble your patience withal, will be of
such particulars as are confined within the limits of the County of Tyrone, the
County of Londonderry, the County of Fermanagh, and the County of Donegall,
the greater part of the Province of Vister; to all which my eyes have been the
witnesses, or else balanced with equal credit: for as for such passages that
are grounded upon here-saies, I esteem an unwarrantable discourse for the
gravity of this audience: besides all ways of intelligence from our friends
have received such obstructions by our enemies, that from the ninth of
November, until the third of May, we never received one syllable from Dublin,
in what condition those parts stood, which I doubt not, though uncertain to us
in the same Kingdom, is but stale and common in this: and by the self-same
rule I conceive the state in Ireland are as doubtful of our condition in those
parts, and not able to know where our shoe pinches us, except they can say
that it wrings the whole foot, which is too manifestly true.

Though the poison of this Rebellion was diffused through the veins of the
whole Kingdom, yet it broke the skin with its plaguetokens in the County of
Tyrone, and Fermanagh first.

The suddenness of our surprisall, and the nature of it, was so unexpected,
that the Inhabitants could scarcely believe themselves prisoners, though in
their chains, and the Irish servant which overnight was undressing his Master
in duty, the next morning was stripping Master and Mistress with a too-officious
tyranny.

Here in the twinkling of an eye, the Corporations, Towns and Villages
proclaimed their situation a far off by their fire and smoke; here you
might see hundreds of men, women, children, of all conditions and estates, that
had lived in most plentiful and secure habitations, exposed to the rock for
shelter, to the Heavens for clothing, so that many hundreds in a few days
starved upon the mountains.

Where was here any expectation of relief? the husband could not relieve the
wife, nor both, or either of them their children: the Master could not provide
for his family, neither was there any reciprocal duty or service from these to
be performed to the advantage of the other: one and the selfsame face of
misery, was unequally, equally set upon all, one and the selfsame black
complexion of famine stained every visage; The Landlords Paramount title over
the Tenant, was with himself out of doors, and they which formerly were, and
now should have been most beneficial to the distressed, were most burdensome
to themselves, and others, as being less read, in this hard, and untutored
Chapter, of personal and most necessary wants.

Who can remember without grief, the general burden of each expression, Give
us bread, or else we perish? and their famishing demands only satisfied with a
comfortless Echo of the same words?

But this nakedness and famine, and their male and female issue (variety of
diseases) were adjudged overflow executioners, of the surviving British. Then
entered the sword, destroying at the first, with the Scabbard on. The Rebels
under a fair and colorable pretense of a Convoy inviting the hidden and
scattered Protestants into a body, that so they might (as they most
perfidiously did) make each surviving man, an Executor to the last murdered in
his presence, and so the whole line one by one extinguished, the Irish Priest
as Ordinary, administered for all.

This the Sword acted in a Fox-skinne scabberd, and then flourished in one of a
Lions skin, seeking whom it might devour, and devouring all that it sought
after; for I can confidently affirm, that out of the County of Fermanagh one
of the best planted Counties with English, I could never give an account of 20
men escaped, except, which. is most improbable, they should fly to Dublin; as
for the chiefest (my own estate meering upon the Marches of that County)
having inquired from prisoners, by name for such and such, they have informed
me they were all massacred.

The Blackwater in the County of Tyrone, a most fertile soil, and inhabited
with the English, had its streams dyed in blood, there being at one time above
200. souls murdered upon the Bridge, and flung down the River. I could
instance alike in many places, but that we are to allow buried misery too
timely a resurrection.

Master Speaker, in these two last instances, I have only named the English,
not but that I please my self better in concluding both Enlish and Scotch,
under the title of British, but that there seems to be some reason; for in
the Infancy of this Rebellion, the Rebels made open Proclamations upon pain of
death that no Scotch man should be stirred in body, goods, or Lands, and that
they should to this purpose write over the Lyntels of their doors, that they
were Scotch men, and so destruction might pass over their families; nay, I
read a Letter that was sent by two of the Rebels titulary Colonels, Colonel
Nugent, and Colonel O Gallogher, a quarter of an hour before my Colonel Sir
Ralph Gore* encountered with their forces at Ballyshannon, and there slew
outright 180. of their men, without loss of one man on our side, (praised be
God) which was directed to our Honorable Friends, the Gentlemen of the never
conquered Scotch-Nation, it expressed, that they were both of one extraction in
former times, joynt-assistants, that their quarrel, if aright understood by
them, as by the best of Scotland, they would be otherwise advised, then to
join with us, and many other passages that I may seasonably forget here; I
only touch this, not as judging where there is smoke, there is some fire, but
to observe their policy, which, though to some that were suddenly surprised,
might afford security to retreat into some place of safety, yet it was
ridiculously entertained, and as resolutely scorned by the Scottish Nation.

Hitherto (with your patience) is rough drawn the general estate, and
condition of the British, who were now betaking themselves to better
resolutions, in opposition to the enemies fury.

I shall begin with the County of Fermanagh, where those that had escaped the
fire and sword of Rory Mac Guyre, the Arch-Rebell in that County, brother to
the Lord of Eniskellen, drew themselves into Eniskillen, a place fortifyed by
nature, under the Command of Sir William Cole, Colonel. The Inhabitants of
that County of the other side of the L^ughearne, resorted to Master Catheart,
then High Sheriff of the County, and Garrisoned in the Castle of Moneigh,
Lilgold, and Tullagh, Mac Guire having without any opposition in that Country,
wasted, burnt, killed, and pillaged, betook himself, with the united forces
thereof to beleagre Eniskillen, which diverse times with great bodies, and
threats equal, but with fictions exceeding them both, as that all Ireland was
taken, which for a great while we might all of us easily, but with grief,
believe. Howsoever ^t pleased God, that Colonel Cole, with great resolution
and valor maintained the same, and made diverse fallyes in the night, upon his
Quarter, doing very good execution, Insomuch that Mac Guirc, thought it an
unseasonable air to Quarter so near Eniskillen, and then began to adventure
his fortunes upon the other side of the Lough, where Master Catbcart, and many
brave Scotch Cavillieres, against so great a body, though not able to maintain
a field, by diverse resolute and discreet Sallies, chased, and slaughtered the
enemy.

One I will particularize, though not crowned with success of execution,
equal to the former, where 800. of the enemies, being drawn up into three
bodies, before their Quarter, they Sallyed out with 60. Horse, routed their
Battalions, and killed 35. of their men, further execution being prevented by a
contiguous wood.

There was two Castles called Tullagh, and Lisgold, which by an over-weaning
affiance in the enemies promises, yet indeed very much pressed by personal
wants, delivered themselves upon composition, which taught succeeding Garrisons
to stick unto their old Creed, for after the surrender, they were all
massacred.

Master Speaker, Having no notes of remembrance, and much pressed by my Friends
unto this disorderly Discourse, or were it not that the reverence of the place
countenanced it, I should esteem it like a tale, beginning (once upon a time.)
I shall a while leave the County of Fermanagh, because these are passages
precedent, to the Commission for raising its Regiment of 500, foot, and
recollect my memory, in what posture the County of Tyrone stood; most part of
the British, of the Barony of Omagh, made their escape toward Newtowne, and
Strebane, both places being of the Barony of Strebane, in the same County. The
Barony of Clogher resorted to the Agber, The remaining Barrony being the Barony
of Dongannon, were marched up by Sir Thomas Staples, and Lieutenant Colonel
Saunderson, forth of that Barony to New-Towne, nigh twenty miles, through the
barbarous Mountains of Monterlynny, one of the greatest fastnesses of Jreland,
to join with Sir William Stewarts forces there, where they were joyfully
entertained, and after 2 or 3 days stay there, in a very unseasonable time of
the year marched to Agber, being 600. in number, but contrary to the
persuasions of that Noble Liev. Colonel, and the High Sheriff, Captain
Maxwell, a Gent. of singular forwardness, were divided by one Master William
Stewart, of Fiagh, a man of good parts, but very unfortunately applied into
Dongannon, back again, where the greatest part of them were slain by two and
three, without satisfaction of one drop of Rebels blood, in requital of
theirs, and those Gentlemen that remained with Lieutenant Colonel Saunderson,
this unfortunate division happening in the face of Sir Phelomy O Neill,
encouraged the numerous Rebel so far, that he and his Company was forced to
retreat toward the Omagh, and so to New-towne, the Town of Agher being
entered by the Rebels, and burnt immediately: Yet I must not here forget the
resolute attempt, and manfull defending of the Agber Castle by Master Archibald
Aerskin, Clarke, Son and Heir to Sir James Aerskin, a Gentleman of 1000.
pound per annum, of temporal estate; who being beleagred a few days before by
2000. men, with the assistance of Archibald Hamilton, Esquire, and his Tenants,
Sallyed out with 80. Horse, and twelve Musketeers upon a body of the Rebels,
being about 600. and routed them with the execution of above 100. of which some
were considerable as any in those parts, with the loss only of Captain
Barkley a young Gentleman, much lamented. Master Archibald Hamilton afterward,
a zealous Gentleman, both before and during his continuance in the Kingdom
wounded with some others of note.

About two days after, some twenty horse with Master Archibald Hamilton, a
bold Soldier, forraged into the County of Monaghan, where they encountered with
a strong party commanded by the great Mac Kenna, which they encountered very
fiercely, and at last routed the Rebel, killed one of the special Commanders
that had been a Commander in Spain, slew about 30 horsemen, and 20 foot, and
recovered many of the British cattle having received wounds, and dismounted in
the skirmish, but recovered both life and horse.

Some three days before this, Sir William Stewart marched out with some foot
and horse from Newtowne, pursued the Rebel, and so marched to the Agher, and
after some stay, retired home with great sto^e of cattle; though both he and
we could have wished (if we had the spirit of prophecy) to have kept the
fields longer: for the O Neils and Mac Gwires who were then with their forces
the leaders of the rebellion, discomfited by former service, sought for
protections, but animated by Master William Stewarts division, (and this
retiring march though grounded upon warrantable discipline) beleagred the Agher
Castle, Sir Phelomy O Neill, and Collonell Rory Mac Gwire being personally
present with 4000 men; and though they seconded their attempts by promises of
honorable quarter, reinforced it by bloody threats in case of refusal:
planted a small field piece to batter, and in a dark night stormd the gate and
bawne upon all parts. Yet by the resolution of Master Erskin, and the ready
fire of Sir Henry Titchbourns old company beat them from their walls and
scaling ladders with the loss of 200 of their resolutest men.

Sir Phelomy O Neill retired his journey, burning along to Dongannon. Mac Gwire
in his retreat assaulted Agbatyan Castle, commanded by Captain Maxwell, who
upon sight of Mac Gwires drawing up, issued out some few musketeers into the
ditches, and beat him off from any further attempt, who in his march burnt all
Fermanagh toward Eniskillen. About that time Captain Thomas Newburgh with a
few men he raised in great hazard of his own person, took in Castle Derrick,
a place of great consequence and strength, killed the men, possessed their arms:
in his absence being gone for ammunition, left the Castle to a young Gentleman
Master Durdo; when Sir Phylomy O Neill immediately besieged it with 3000 men,
but Master Durdo with great courage having only 16 men to man the Castle and
Bawne, beat him off, and slew more than 80 of his men, and 9 days after
sallyed out and killed out one prime Gentleman of the O Neils, and ten more,
and took two Colors and a Drum, with loss of three of his own men; all
which and himself afterward for want of ammunition were forced to leave the
Castle in a dark night, and every one shift for himself, where some misled
upon the mountains happened upon the enemies quarters instead of ours and were
killed. Master Durdo with great hazard lying two nights upon the mountains
escaped unto us.

Sir William Stewart understanding of a party of the O Neils in the Kerrilrs
woods, sent out Captain Balfour a deserving soldier, with 100 men, who
skirmisht with them, killed 50 Rebels, lost four of his own men, and brought
home 400 cowes.

Some four days after Sir William Stewart desired Lieutenant Collonell
Sanderson, my self, and Sergeant Major James Galbraith to march from Newtowne
to relieve Agher and Aghatyan, with 500 foot and 100 horse, the second night
in extremity of weather, we marched to the Agher, and quartered in Clogher a
mile and a half distant; the enemy fell that night into one part of our
quarters, but upon the alarm of the Sentinels, the maine guard issued out,
killed some and chased the rest. The next morning we marched out into Fermanagh,
where in taking 500 cowes, as many sheep, and 300 horses, we killed 70 Rebels:
upon our return we besieged Collonell Donnogh, Mac Gwires Castle, being
strongly imbattaild and flanckt, after many shot past on both sides, the wind
turning upon the forepart of the house, we fired some outhouses, in the
smoke whereof we approached the gate, set it on fire, entered the Castle, put
the men to the sword: and indeed I shall never expect to see more resolution
either in Commanders or Soldiers: but I shall never insist upon that in this
particular, let their acts speak for themselves; in which march we relieved
6000 women and children, which otherwise had perished.

In this service Ensign Long behaved himself as if he had been bullet
proof: at hand whilst we were employed in this service, the Rebels drew down
upon Sir Wi^^iam Stewarts Newtowne, and the Castle played off and killed 50 of
their men in the streets, and preserved the town, except one house or two at
the furthermost end.

M^ster Speaker be pleased I may put you in remembrance these are the
particulars that occurred in Fermanagh and Tyrone before we received any
Commissions. I shall now present unto you in the same method the occurrences of
Donegall County.

Collonell Nugent a most seditious instrument, that married the Lord of
Eniskillens mother, drew about 600 men about Ballyshannon Castle, a place of
great strength and importance, against whom my Collonell Sir Ralph Gore, and
Captain Maxwell a forward Gentleman drew out some 200 men and 60 horse, who
encountered them, routed them, killed upwards of 180 Rebels, took Collonell
Nugents horse who left it and his boots ripped off behind him, besides many
that came down the river by dozens and tennes which were killed by the foot,
and not one men lost upon our side. Diverse sallies were made by Captain John
Follyot a Gentleman deserving much commendations for his courage and
discretion, as also by his Lieutenant William Ancktill Esquire, a bold
Comrade, sometime killing 20. 30. in which Captain Follyot received a sore
wound in his hand, being at the sword entered and beset with the Rebels.

About a fortnight after their defeat at Ballyshannon, the Rebels mustered new
forces, and with assistance of Colonel Manus O Donnell, and Colonel Turlogh,
Mac Caffrye O Donnell, they besieged my Colonels Castle, he being gone over the
mountains for Ammunition, the Rebels fired some outhouses, but were beaten
off with loss of twenty men, who attempted to burn the gate.

In the Barony of Boylagh about two days after the Mac Swynes, and the O
Boyles, were encountered about Kilbegge by Master Andrew Knox a Minister, who
though very unequal in number to the Rebels held them up at push a pike, and
killed about 80. of their men, and put the whole body to flight, and brought
home a great prey. In which skirmish the best Mac Swyne was killed.

These, Master Speaker, are the Occurrences in those three Counties, that were
precedent unto any Commission granted for raising of Regiments, and now I shall
according to the rule I propounded unto my self, first relate the exploites of
every Regiment apart, and then of such service as was done jointly, and as I
began with Fermanagh, in what was performed before any Commission, so I shall
endeavor the same in these subsequent Occurrences.

Tullagh and Lisgold Castles, being formerly surrendered upon promise of
quarters, which was performed in this manner, they stripped old and young, and
bound them, exposing them all night to the frost and snow, and next day killed
them, Moneigh Castle joined to Sir William Cole, and marched out into the fields
to Lowthers-towne, where they had intelligence, they were drinking upon their
march toward Eniskilling, and surprised them unawares, and pursued them some
four miles with slaughter of above 200. men, took four Colors, some Drums,
two Captains, one Mac Mahoun, another Mac Guire, with store of Arms.

After this he marched out with 400. men, and having burnt the corn and the
enemies garrisons, was met in his march homewards, by Mac Guire, with 800. men,
with great violence charging his Vanne, and unexpectedly 400. more of the Mac
Mahouns, charged him on the Rear, he put them all to flight, killed upwards of a
100 men, got 60. Muskets, and many Pikes, he has taken all their boats upon
Loughearne, sunk their Cotts, and both by Land and water made himself a very
good passage, though I conceive he is now in much distress. This is what I can
certainly aver, though we heard many other passages of much credit, but I am
certain he is not a sleep, when any opportunity shall require.

I shall now leave Fermanagh in this Discourse, and remember it in my prayers,
and pass to Sir William Stewarts Regiment and Sir Robert Stewarts, whom though
I but now name, have given most brave testimonies of Commanders every way well
qualified. After the unfortunate and unworthy loss of Strebane, these
Regiments garrisoned upon such frontier places, as might secure the Barrony of
Rapho, in which the safety of the City of London-dery was highly concerned, as
also the Barrony of Enishoen, in which 2000. able fighting men of the Irish
ready then (though we conceive better of them now) to have fallen upon our
backs upon the least invitation of any defeat unto us. Sir Ralph Gores Regiment
being but 500. foot marched into the Barronies of Boylagh and Bannagh and
Tirhugh, being Barronies that had bin wholly wasted by the Rebels, where for 13
weeks we had no sustenance, but what we pulled out of the Rebels mouths. These
two Regiments were for the most part mingled in service, and having so great a
scope as 36. long Irish miles to guard in the long winter nights, and every way
passable for the enemies entrance, and the charge of so many souls there
residing and following their vocations, as in the time of peace, besides the
conflux of thousand of plundered Families, I believe in a serious construction
it will deserve the title of miraculous service; for few nights, but the enemy
attempted in several places with light horse to burn the Country, which they
never in the least way prevailed in, but many times returned with a weaker
master then they went forth. Yet Mr. Speaker, they spared no labor or
industry, Sir Robert Stewart marched to New-Towne and relieved it, but the
Enemy saved all their heads by their heels, but six men; afterward marched up
to Castle-derge, burnt all the Enemies Country and killed diverse, brought 400.
Cowes, then marched up over against Gla^fin, burnt that Country and killed
diverse, afterward fell over in the night upon the Rebels Quarters above
Strebane, and killed about 80. men. Sir William Stewart in the mean time was as
busy in the Barrony of Kilmackrenan firing and burning.

Captain Maxwell, and Captain George Stewart marched toward Ramalton with 150
men, and killed 90. of the Rebels, and brought home 1800. Cowes. Captain
Basil about the same time being New-yeares day marched over into the enemies
Country with 60. men, and encountered 400. men, and killed 36.

M. Speaker, I will not trouble you with retailing of News thus in small
parcels, but I am sure so equally vigilant and difficult was the preserving of
their own quarters, and scowring the neighboring quarters of the enemies,
that our Regiment on the other side of the mountains at that present having no
intelligence of their continual defeats, having marched 7. days and nights
upon mountains, where never horsemen rode in a deep snow, 13. miles the least
days march, where and when the best Commander never tasted bread, beer, wine,
salt, or Aqua-vitae, and at every night fought with the Rebels for his
bed-cloathes (God be praised with strange success) and being in the sight of
the enemy, and for the most part upon the Ice (notwithstanding the weather
stripped in our shirts, upon our marching homewards met such a pack of them
drawn out by the other two Regiments, that they beset us in our quarter at
night, which we expecting, appointed a near Fort for our Alarm place for two
Companies to draw unto, and the other two Companies into a wood, where if by
Gods mercy we should have the better of them; we were assured they should
pass, all happened accordingly; for our Sentenels giving a timely Alarm, the
two Companies took the Fort, beat them off until they fled the right way,
where the two Companies unexpectedly met them with sharp fire, and the other
two sallyed out of the Fort upon their Reares, and did very terrible execution:
Immediately after which we marched away in the night, and surprised many in the
neighboring houses, and lastly, burnt the quarters, and all the corn in the
whole march, which was out of command. And truly Sir Ralph Gore his zeal was
very earnest, for the most tempestuous nights he would always choose to fall
upon their quarters, which at last were upon every hand of our garrison; for he
having placed for the safety of those parts one Company at Kilbegge, another at
Castle Rabin, and one being left to maintain our own quarters, we had but two
Companies for the Field; yet at diverse times we would march out to them, being
at the least 13. Colors, and overnight having taken the ditches with
Musketeers, drew them in with counterfeit retreats, until we had discharged at
40. yards distance, sometimes a 100. Musketeers, sometimes more, every Musket
charged with 10. Pistol Bullets.

But M. Speaker, our good success ended with our Ammunition, for all being
spent to one Roll of Match, and sending a Letter for some supply, the traitor
run to the Rebels, delivered my Letter, and what I had but modestly put into
the Text concerning our wants, he being a soldier in the Regiment made a large
Comment upon, which heartened the Rebels so much that we were like to perish
for want of food, and certainly had, if Sir Robert Stewart with his Regiment,
and three of Sir Will. Stewarts Companies had not marched over to our relief,
who in his march over Barnesmore was assaulted by some loose Files of the
enemies shot, which he beat off, and so without much danger secured the march
of the entire Body.

But now M. Speaker, the Country being wasted by the enemy, and our selves,
the days beginning ^o grow longer, we thought best to join all three
Regiments, leaving Ballishannon, Castle of Donegall, and Castle Rahin well
manned, and as well as we could provided otherwise, and so betook our selves
with what strength we could spare unto the Fields. And now M. Speaker, if I can
borrow your patience, I presume I shall acquaint you with very good service. In
our march over the mountains of Barnesmore homewards to the Barrony of Rapho,
this Barnesmore being known to every Inhabitant in Ireland to be as dangerous
a place as Art and Nature could devise. When the Vanguard of our Army entered
the wood, we sent 60. loose shot upon each of our flanks, half Calliver shot
from our Body through the woods, where they skirmisht with the enemy, having
taken the wood overnight, in very hot service upon both sides. The Rebels had
placed 13. Colors in a hollow, half a mile above us, who when they heard our
shot showed themselves, thinking as they confessed to draw us out whilst 13.
Colors more lay hidden in another hollow, that should suddenly fall in upon
the remaining party, and had likewise placed 9. Colors below to fall in upon
the baggage, which was at least 3000. souls, who traveled below almost a mile
off, in a narrow pass. We drew out (suspecting the worst) only some commanded
Musketeers skirmisht and beat away their first body that appeared, when
immediately the other 9. Colors fell in upon the baggage, to which we assigned
48. Musketeers, who held them up courageously in a strait pass. We that were
with the maine body perceiving it, having a wood and bogge under us, drew with
more haste then order (as requisite it was) to their relief, so that we
likewise put them to flight. In the mean time the 13. Colors in ambush all
this while fell into our Rear, and all their forces in the twinkling of an eye
fell round upon us, which we with countercommanded Musketeers opposed, and
during the space of 7. hours and a half (by a watch) fought and killed 400. of
their men, besides what fell in our march of six miles, where having
conveyed our baggage between two divisions, were still charged in our Rear,
and the extremities of our flanks that had thick shot returned by 200.
Musketeers of ours, so that as by a prisoner of theirs taken the next day that
was present at the battle, 700. was confessed to be slain, in which we lost but
nine men, and some hurt. That night we marched into our quarters in the Barrony
of Rapho. This occurrence happened about eight weeks since.

Now M. Speaker, omitting the issuing of several parties both of horse and
foot into the enemies Country, returning home both with the prey and slaughter
of the enemy, I shall only trouble you with what occurrences since the 17th of
May, until the 27th, when I left Londonderry.

Sir Philim O Nele drew down to Strebane about 5000. men besides horse,
intending to burn Rapho, and to raise Enishoen, and we being as he absolutely
conceived deseated, to draw the other forces on the contrary side of Loghfoyle,
and to assault the Derry. Our Regiments assisted with two strong Companies of
Captain Pitts and Captain Lawsons of the City of Londonderry drew over
before day into the Rebels Country, where presently the battles were ordered
upon both sides, and so stood about a quarter of a miles distance, we drew out
to them one Battalion, and a ^00. commanded Musketeers to try how they would
answer them. The Rebels left their ground, and drew out to a wood, which they
filled with their Musketeers, we likewise by the carnest entreaty of our
soldiers, were contented to lose the advantage of our present embattelling,
and marched over to them, beat their Musketeers out of the wood, and to omit
circumstances killed about 500. of their men, and put them to their flight, in
which day was great circumspection and discipline used by the Commanders, and
as much obedience and resolution by the soldiers, M Cathcart Cornett to Sir
Robert Stewarts troop, and Lieutenant Colase one of his Lieutenants, and
Lieutenant Galbraith one of our Regiment about 17. years of age, doing very
strange service with their commanded Musketeers.

In pursuance (by Gods mercy) of this victory, though we returned weary unto
our quarters, yet by break of day the Regiments were upon march, an unusual
way to Strebane, thinking to have beset him and his forces which quartered
there visibly. To this purpose horse and foot entered the Town upon all
quarters; but Sir Phelomy was newly departed with his forces, only the Castle
he committed to Captain Hugh Murragh O Devyn a bloody fellow, and one hundred
of his choice Musketeers, and a 100 Pikes to guard much of his own baggage,
and my Lady Strebanes goods; but we easily forced the Castle, put the men to
the sword, only Captain O Devins life respited, who is now in the Derry
Jail. The Castle we left-a garrison in, commanded by Captain Wisher a
discreet Gentleman under the command of St. Will. Hammilton, who though formerly
a strong rooted Papist (if any root can be in that titular Religion) has
renounced the same, and conforming himself unto the Protestant Church, judging
upon this reason (as I have heard from himself) that neither faith, civil
conversation, secure commerce, found loyalty, much more Religion ought to be
expected where such bloody, traitorous and inhumane designs are, or must be
the propagators of it.

From Strebane we having left 500. men to guard the Barrony of Rapho, we
marched up on the o Canes country on the other side of Loghfoyle, and coming
over against Derry, quartered in the fields that night, four Companies of the
Derry joining with us to relieve Lymmavaddy Castle and Bally Castle, which had
been ten weeks before strongly beleager'd by great forces, and yet had
sallied forth and killed many hundred of the enemies, being commanded by a
resolute young Gentleman Captain Thomas Philips, his Elder brother M. Dudly
Philips in the mean time being gone about with 3. Botes for to carry their
provision from Derry. That night we were welcome guests to the two Castles, who
dispaired of all succor, and having conducted their provision in, the next
Morning assisted with very resolute Horse out of the two Castles, we advanced
our march into the Enemies country, where at Magiligan we encountered the
Enemy, the o Canes, the Magilligans, the o Hagans and the o Neales being joined
together for our utter ruin, (God be praised) we killed upwards of 500 of
them, and scattered the rest.

Though we were now too far in discretion engaged from our own Quarters, yet
having received late Letters from Colrane of their miserable wants and narrow
beleagure, we continued our march up toward the Mountains to find some prey,
that we might be the welcomer to almost famished Colrane; we met with 3000.
Cowes, but with thrice as many men; the Rebel having strengthened himself
from the Army that beleagured Colrane and other parts: Our Commanders cherished
the Soldier, and the Soldier the Commander; but the Rebels having that
Morning (moved by the valiant preaching of a Friar) bound themselves by Oath of
their Sacrament received thereupon, to fight this Battle to the last man, and
to hunt us out of their Country, gave us a warm charge and forced our Horse
and commanded Musketters to retreat upon the wings of our Battalions, yet after
our short, yet earnest Prayers, we advanced toward them, and slaughtered above
800. of them, which being an unusual sight to them, they forgot the Friars
Doctrine and their own application and fled, our Horse and Foot chasing them a
hundred ways with great slaughter: From thence with our prey and abundance of
Horse, etc. we marched to Dungevin Castle, one of the Kings Houses, which was
kept by Collonell Manus mac quy ballagh, Mac Richard o Cane, who (though in
this battle) had fled thither to his charge, upon parley he delivered up the
Castle, and desired the Kings mercy, which upon conditions was afforded; the
Arms and Pillage were quickly divided. From thence we marched to Colrane,
every Regiment bestowed some upon the Town, the soldiers at easy rates sold
the rest, but such as were delivered to the right owners.

At Castle Roe a mile from Colrane were lodged seven Colors of the Enemies to
secure the band fishing to themselves; we took the Colors, put many to the
Sword, and the Town of Colrane has a Garrison there now, and enjoyes the
fishing to themselves, being the greatest Salmon-fishing in Christendom.

From thence we made our speedy march home, where our Horse killed about a
hundred straglers, and found our own Quarters invaded with above 2000. men,
which our remaining party had with good resolution and success kept off, upon
advertisement of our return, they deputed no longer stay.

In all these particulars (all honor to God Almighty who fought our battles)
amongst the three Regiments we lost not a hundred men since the first
Rebellion to the last hoare.

We have at the present these Garrisons, Castle of Strebane, Lifford, Rapho,
Dromboe Castle, Litterkenny, Ramalton, Lymavaddy, Bally Castle, Ballyshannon,
Donagall, Castle Rahin, being places of great consequence by situation and
strength.

Mr. Speaker, this is a brief Relation of so many passages in such a tract of
time; an Epitome of that which was a large volume in our own sufferings and
the construction of our Enemies, which in duty I suppose I was bound to present
unto this Honorable Assembly, in the Port and Haven of whose unparalleled
labors we anchor our safety. You may be pleased (Master Speaker) to remember
our sudden surprisall, our wants of all manner of supplies for preservation of
our lives, much more for the defense of a Country, and such places of
importance; you may consider the Resolution of men encouraged by exercise of
their Arms fleshed in the blood of their enemies, imboldened by knowledge of
the Country, provoked by the loss of their dearest pledges, wives, children
and all; the hazard in transporting men saved, the charges in raising, levying,
shipping, demurrage upon wind, and the like prevented; the great expenses of
the Commanders amounting to above 3000^b. for arms, victuals, clothes, etc.
their offensive service without loss of a 100 men, their defensive vigilance
of so much ground, the several Garrisons of consequence maintained, the weak
instruments by which the service was effected, and the great Mercy of God by
which we were protected; then we doubt not, but the Justice of this House will
continue us in our Resolutions, encourage others to attempt better; all which
we shall in our humble Petition more seasonably present.

Finis.

