A MEMORIAL Given in to the Senate of the City of Hamburgh in French faithfully
Translated into English
To their Magnificences the Burgo-Masters, and to the Gentlemen-Counsellors of
this City of Hamburgh.

WE, the Under-Subscribers, Ministers of His Majsty, The King of Great Britain,
have upon the Arrival of Commissioners from an Indian-Company in SCOTLAND,
Represented at two several Times, to your Magnificences and Lordships from the
King Our Master, that his Majesty understanding that the said Commissioners
Endeavored to open to Themselves, a Commerce and Trade in these Parts, by
making some Convention or Treaty with this City, had Commanded us most Expressly
to Notify to your Magnificences and Lordships, that if you enter into such
Conventions with private Men His Subjects, who have neither Credential Letters,
nor are any other ways Authorized by His Majesty; That His Majesty would
Regard such Proceedings as an Affront to His Royal Authority, and that He would
not fail to Resent it. Your Magnificences and Lordships had the Goodness to
Answer us thereto by your Deputy, that you would no way enter into Commerce
with the aforementioned Commissioners, nor Encourage them in any sort.
Notwithstanding whereof, We the Subscribers do see with Displeasure, that
without any regard to the Remonstrances made by Us in the Name of His Majesty;
The Inhabitants of this City forbear not to make Conventions and Treaties with
the said Comissioners, who dare even Erect a Publick-Office to receive
Subscriptions as appears by the annexed Print. And it is not very Credible that
Strangers could so openly Enterprise Matters of such Importance without being
Supported by this Government: Wherefore, We make Our just Complaints thereof to
Your Magnificences and Lordships; Beseeching you in the Name of the King Our
Master to remedy in time that which is begun, and to do it so Effectually as to
prevent any Consequences it may have, capable to disturb the Freindship and
good Correspondence which We would Cultivate between England and the City of
Hamburgh. We wait Your Magnificences and Lordships Aaswer in Writing to be
transmitted to His Majesty Our Master. And We are.

Your Magnificences and Lordships most humble Servants, The Knight RYCAUT
Resident for His Majesty the King of Great-Britan in the City of Hamburgh.
CRESSETT, His Britannick Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary at the Courts of
Lunenburgh, and his Plenipotentiary at the Treaty of Pinenberg.
Done at Hamburgh the 7th of April 1697.

