MERCVRIVS PACIFICVS, OR, VOX TVRTVRIS. A Dove in this Deluge of Division Sent
from GOD'S ARK, TO Present a Peace Offering upon the Altar of JEHOVAH SHALOM,
Humbly Proposing A Divine Direction for Composing of Controversies according to
Gods Revealed will.

Prove. 18. 18. Contentiones submovet sors and inter Robustos dirimit.

By E. M. Gent.

Psalm. 85. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak
peace unto his people.

Psalm. 29. 12. Jehovah in diluvio. The Lord sits upon the flood; The Lord
sits King for ever; The Lord will bless his people with peace.

Psalm. 34. 14. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1644.

MERCVRIVS PACIFICVS; OR, VOX TVRTVRIS, etc.
EVery week produces new Mercuries, bringing no better News then merely
Messages of the Kingdoms increase of Miseries, relating nothing but the sad
Rumors of a bloody unnatural War, and the fearful fruits and effects
thereof, rapine, ruin, death and destruction. This Mercury presents you with a
sovereign Medicine to help and heaale these your miserable Maladies,
prescribed by the Great Physician of both soul and body, and picked and fetched
out of that Garden of his, where the most precious and choice herbs of Grace,
and plants of goodness grow.

Under the Law, he that was not able to bring a Lamb for Sacrifice, was
permitted to offer a Turtle-Dove or young Pigeon: In the Gospel a mite freely
given, renders a poor Widow liberal; Though Almighty God has not lent me an
hand so large, yet he has vouchsafed me an heart enlarged with as much
faithful loyalty to my Sovereign, and true love to my Country, as any
subject in the Kingdom, which I shall ever be ready really to express even
with the sacrifice of my life, and all that is mine.

In this deplorable time of distraction, what good subject, true Christian, and
hearty well wisher to the happiness of the Commonwealth, can enjoy an heart
not desiring, an head not devising, and an hand not endeavoring to produce
something which may conduce to an happy conclusion of these unhappy
dissentions. Every hand has brought some sticks of sin to increase this
flame; Let every heart and soul send sighs and groans to Heaven, and wish
with Jeremiah their heads Fountains, and their eyes Rivers to pour out the
tears of true contrition; For the quenching and extinguishing the consuming
fire of these Controversies, that the voice of the Turtle may again be heard
in our land, that the Alarmes of war may no longer sound in our ears, that
there be no more leading into captivity, no more complaining in our streets,
but the Lord may give us beauty for ashes, and the garments of gladness for
the spirit of heaviness.

In publishing this ensuing tract, I desire the integrity of my meaning may not
be mis-interpreted, I presume not to advise or direct, but humbly present to
the serious consideration of the learned and grave Sages and prudent Pillars of
the state of this disjoynted Kingdom, such Texts of holy truth as it has
pleased God by his Spirit to direct me unto, and to point out unto me, and such
propositions as by assistance of the same Spirit I have deduced thence,
conceiving them materially conducing to an Accomplishment of an happy
conclusion of the unhappy and destructive differences now depending between his
Majesty and the Parliament I trust none will be so uncharitable as to contemn
or condemn my purpose herein, as too presumptuous for tendering propositions
tending to so great a blessing as peace; nor any so maliciously impious as to
deride or despise so divine a direction because presented by a weak and
sinful instrument, God is pleased oftentimes by men and means, in humane
imagination, most unworthy and infirm to bring to pass weighty and wonderful
matters, out of the mouth of Babes he ordeyneth strength, and reveals to
such, what he concealeth from the worldly wise and prudent. It Is as easy with
God to work without means, as with and against them, as by either, it is all
one to God be clean or go wash; yet we are not so much to depend on his will
hidden, as to neglect to practice his will revealed; so to do is rather a
badge of rash presuming then any notable courage of faith. Again good Counsel
is not to be valued by the person, saepe etiam holitor valde opportuna locutas,
the proverb tells us. And surely he is sick to the ruin of himself that
refuses a Cordial, because presented in a spoon of wood, we think not the
worse of Gold because presented in a bag of leather; Good wine is as wholesome
taken in an earthen cup, as a Goblet of gold. God to whom the hearts of all men
are open, knows that my sole, and principal intention herein, is only his
glory, and the good and Peace of His Majesty, His Parliament and Kingdoms.

And thus much I do with sincerity of heart protest, and to use the words of
Saint Paul, Romans 9. I say the truth in Christ I ly not, my conscience bearing
me witness in the Holy Ghost, that I have great heaviness and continual
sorrow in my heart, For these disconsolate divisions in the Kingdom, and could
wish my self sacrificed for the accomplishment of an happy union between his
Majesty and Parliament, and without ceasing always have made mention thereof
in my prayers, beseeching the God of Peace, who makes men to be of one mind
in an house, by such means as to his omniscient wisdom shall seem most meet
to unite them, and to work a speedy reconciliation between them; And that
after often fasting, Humiliation, and hearty prayers for an happy
Accommodation, I was directed unto these texts of Holy Scripture herein
specified, as it were by the immediate finger of God, and have received since
Revelations hereunto conducing, dictated (if I may so speak) by Gods good
Spirit unto me, which I never yet disclosed to any person, nor do I think fit
at this time to publish, but shall hereafter (God directing me) being required,
declare them. Now these things which I write concerning Lotts, before God I lie
not, I neither received them of man, nor ever till now imparted them to any
man, neither was I taught them but by the revelation of God, the Father of
lights, who has continually incited me by the motions of his holy Spirit, to
publish the same, touching and checking my conscience for concealing, and not
sooner divulging thereof: God is my witness, my aim is not vainglory, or any
other reculiar end for mine own purposes, but the Peace and the happiness of
the Kingdom, and his alone glory, to whom only all honor, power, and praise,
is to be ascribed as most justly due. I will bless the Lord who has given me
counsel, my reins also instruct me in the night season, Psa. 16. 7. Dominus
portio partis meae, and calicis mei, tu sustent as sortem mea^. The Lord is the
portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup; Thou shall maintain my Lot.

The first Text of holy Writ which Almighty God was pleased to point out unto
me, is recorded by the Pen of the Holy Ghost, in the hand of a Prince, whose
wisdom is warranted by Gods word to be the only gift of God.

Proverbs 18. 18. Contradictiones comprimit sors, and inter potentes dijudicat

The Lot causes Contentions to cease, and makes a partition among the mighty,
On which the marginall note in the Bible has this observation; If a
controversy cannot otherwise be decided, it is best to cast Lotts; for that
appeaseth their controversy, which are so stout, that otherwise they cannot be
pacified.

The 2. text pointed out unto me was this;

Prove. 16. 33. In Grenium coniicitur Sors a Iehova autem est tota ratio ejus,

The lot is cast into the lapp, but the whole disposition thereof is of the
Lord.

Hence we may learn by what power Lotts are governed and disposed. To say or
believe they are ordered by fortune is a vain imagination, by spirits or
devils a superstitious supposition, by the heaven or the stars a ridiculous
cogitation, A Deo solum temperantur, They are wholly, and only governed by
God. Hence Saint Augustine the most learned, and most orthodox of the Fathers,
preventing an objection which might arise concerning the use of Lotts, that it
may seem to be a tempting of God: says Neque vero periculum est ne videamur
tentare Deum, is enim est, qui sorts dirigit.

Now three things are principally considerably in Lotts. 1. The nature of them
according to their description. in Scripture, the Fathers and other writers. 2.
The lawfulness of them set forth by the Antiquity, Authority and Institution
thereof. Proved by presidents in the old and new Testament by Gods direction,
command and approbation. 3. The use thereof 1. The thing, matter, or cause,
about or concerning which they are to be used. 2. The time when to be used. 3.
The manner how to be used.



Concerning the nature of Lotts, ab effectu, They cause contentions to cease,
and determine differences between the mighty, Prove. 18. 18. Saint Augustine
upon psalm. 30. says, Sorts nihil aliud esse, qua^ in dubitatione humana,
divinae voluntatis indicium. Lotts are nothing else but a declaration of Gods
divine pleasure in humane dubitation: a divine resolution of humane doubts.
Peter Martyr to the same purpose says, Sortiri nihil aliud esse, qnam aliquid
agere, ex cujus even tu rem incognita^ possumus deprehendere, Casting lotts is
the means from whose event, we discover unknown and hidden things. Aretius
and other Interpretors upon the first of the Acts, affirm the election of
Matthias into the place of an Apostle by lot, to be a divine voice, and a
divine choice; Quod sors cecidit super Matthiam divinae vocis instar est, ut
ille non minus a Deo electus haberetur quam reliqui undecem.

Secondly, concerning the lawfulness of the using of Lots.

The world is a circle, God as it were the center of that circle; The ways of
men are lines deduced from this center; If the event of Lotts be not expected
of devils nor of stars, nor of any force of Fortune, but looked and prayed for
to be directed by God, as before is showed, and by God iustituted and
appointed, as herein hereafter will appear; Certainly it is lawful to use
Lotts; That God has appointed the use of Lotts to be a means of consulting
his sacred Majesty for determining of differences of in explicable difficulty
in humane understanding, appears not only by those places in the 18. and 16.
of the Proverbs, but it is presidented by many special Examples practiced and
used by Gods express direction and command in his holy Word, Iudaei jubbente
Domino Pet. Mart. de Sort. cap. 7.
in rebus gravissimis usi sunt sortibus; The land of promise was divided to the
children of Israel by Lot, Numb. 26. 55. Ios. 14. and 15. chapt. and Achan
thereby discovered with the accursed thing to be the troubler of Israel, Ios.
7. The escape Goat discerned and dismissed by lot, Levit. 16. The offices of
Priesthood placed by lot; Zachary his lot was to burn Incense, Luke 1. 9.
Jonathan and Jonas deprehended by lot. Saul the first King of the Jews
elected by lot, 1 Samuel 10. and Matthias elected to his Apostleship by lot, 1
Act. 1. That God has appointed the deciding of deep and doubtful differences
by lot, is not Solomon's sole or single position we see, but a truth confirmed
by many weighty and worthy presidents in holy Writ, And that the use of lotts
is a divine direction instituted by God himself, and accordingly made use of
by the greatest, gravest, and wisest Kings, Princes, Prophets and Apostles, in
matters both spiritual and temporal of much importance, and cases of greatest
consequence.

The authority of lotts being confirmed, it remains that the manner of using
thereof be in some part explained, and application made according to the
present purpose, For although this manner of consulting, and desiring Gods
direction for concluding of Controversies may lawfully, yet it is not hastily,
rashly, or unadvisedly to be undertaken but with great reverence, singular
piety, and most fervent prayers.

We may not use Lotts in affairs ordinary, but in cases of necessity, when as
the business cannot otherwise be transacted; then man's extremity is Gods
opportunity, Cum Ratio ac consilium humanum non amplius locum habent, nec
longius progredi possent tunc sorts adhibere, etc. When humane Counsels are
puzzled, humane reason non plust, and all humane endeavors prove fruitless;
Tunc modus hic consulendi Deum adhibendus est, then to commit the cause to Gods
determination by Lot, will doubtless prove most profitable. Necessitas autem
judicanda est si quid occurrat, etc. That Peter Mart. cap. 7. de sortibus.
is to be adjudged necessity where any difference arising, the composing
whereof may much conduce to the glory of God, the edification of the Church,
and the prevention of some great evil, which by humane Prudence cannot be
otherwise composed, or if it might, yet wherein veterate malice, envy, and
other evils and inconveniences cannot otherwise be declined, then the Lords
divine direction by lot is most proper to be used for determination thereof.

God had appointed, and anointed Saul by the hand of Samuel to be King of
Israel, yet to take off the suspicion of partiality, or affection, which might
have been supposed by the people to be in Samuel toward Saul, and also to
prevent the sedition, and dissension which might have arisen among the tribes
if the election had been left to the suffrages of the people, (each it is
probable would have been willing to have exalted his own tribe, and Saul who
though the loftiest in stature yet of the lowest tribe and family, should not
have been sent for from seeking his Fathers Asses to sit as supreme, and sway
the scepter over so proud and potent a people) God performs his own purpose,
prevents division among the tribes, and cleeres Samuel of that aspertion,
which the people might have cast on him, and directs the election to be made by
Lot, which the Prophet accordingly performs, wherein we may note the
excellent faith of the prophet, who after he had anointed Saul to be King, yet
fears not to commit the election to lot; and admire the riches of the wisdom
of the only wise God, who directed such a way to avoid contention.

To bring my discourse nearer home, from Israel to England, how doleful are
our dissentions? how lamentable our divisions? and how much a determination
thereof is to be desired? how great a necessity there is of a speedy
reconciliation between the King and Parliament, I wish woeful experience did
not too plainly manifest. Have not all humane endeavors hitherto been
frustrated? how many Petitions, Propositions, Messages, Answers, Declarations,
Remonstrances, and Protestations, have passed, to beget a right understanding
between the King and his Parliament? Yet all have rather exasperated then
appeased, rather increased then any way extinguished the flame of this
contention; How many days and months of humiliation, have been solemnized?
how heartily and earnestly has the Lord of Heaven been solicited, and
importuned, by prayer fasting and mourning? and which is most deplorable, how
much blood, unnaturally spilt? how many barbarous tragedies acted? how many
thousands (many of them not of the meanest) miserably massacred and murdered?
and yet the raging sword not sheathed, nor these destructive divisions
determined, no Balm is found in Gilead, no Physician to heal the gasping
wounds of this bleeding Kingdom.

Now the Lord has sent his word to heal us, he makes wars to cease in all
the earth, why should not then this pacificall proverb and salutiferous
sentence of wise Solomon be now seasonably received into consideration? why
should not that divine direction delivered, devised. and disposed by God
himself, and practiced by his servants, Kings, Princes, prophets, and Apostles
be now used, for the ceasing of these consuming contentions between the King
and his parliament?

Forces are continually raised on both sides, and stratagems daily devised for
ruin and destruction, whereas both policy and power, might be better employed
to procure a comfortable reconciliation. For the happy accomplishment, whereof,
God has prescribed this way of his own institution, whereby he may give the
Judgment according to the justice of the cause without respect of persons;
cast your burden upon Him, devolve Psa: 37. 3. 6.
super Iehovam viam tuam: Committ your ways unto the lord, and trust in him
and he shall bring it to pass, he shall bring forth your righteousness as the
light, and your Judgment as the noone day.

2. We must expect the event of the lotts from God alone, Proverbs. 16. 33. the
lot is cast into the lapp, but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord.
So then he that does not fear the justice of his cause, needs not doubt the
judgment of his God in disposing thereof by lotts, non enim re quiescet virga
improbitatis super sortem Iustorum, the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon
the lot of the righteous Psalm. 125. v. 3.

3 We must abandon all uncharitable conceits, and all dishonorable deceites
Psalm. 5. 6. The lord will abhor the deceitful man and such as speak
leasing, no mental reservation of malice must be retained, no rancorous core
of revenge must remain, nor any preceding passages of malevolence or envy,
continue in the mind or memory.

4. We must withal possible piety, religion, and reverence call upon God in
hearty prayer for his direction in, and his blessing on, our endeavors; At the
election of Saul, the people ('it is said) stood all before the Lord, xpopositors
render it, praying. At the election of Matthias to his Apostleship, the
Apostles joined in prayer.

If a solemn day of humiliation, fasting and prayer might be set apart
throught the whole Kingdom, humble and hearty supplications sent to heaven, if
the Kings Majesty, the Parliament, Prophets, Ministers, and People, (howsoever
dis-jointed at this present in their opinions and actions) would all join in
their prayers and affections to the Lord of hosts (...), the searcher and
knower of all hearts; and although they distrust each other, yet would trust
the only just God, and commit the judgment of their great cause to his hands,
who only can and must determine it, implore his merciful and powerful aid and
assistance, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working to decide
this most unhappy dissension according to his own divine direction by Lot,
why should it be doubted, but that our good Lord would show his paternal pity
and mercy to this Nation, and vouchsafe an happy union. God has not forgotten
to be gracious, his mercy is not gone for ever, his compassions never fail.
He that feeds the Ravens, clothes the Lillyes, takes care even for Sparrowes,
shall he not be entreated to magnify his mercy in taking this matter of such
weighty importance into his own hands, in delivering his people by his
wisdom and omnipotency from destruction otherwise inevitable. The Lord will
arise and have mercy upon Sion, for the time to have mercy thereon is come,
that he may hear the mourning of the prisoner, and deliver the children
appointed for death.

He will bring to pass his own work in his own way, and declare by casting
of Lotts which part he has chosen, and whose propositions and purposes most
conduce to his glory, the honor and happiness of the Kings Majesty and his
Posterity, the establishment of Truth and Peace in the Church and
Commonwealth. Jehovah Iireh, the Genesis 22. 14.
Lord will be seen in the Mount of his mercy, and provide his people a
gracious way of deliverance from destruction and desolation; He will prevent
the King with the blessings Psalm. 21. 3.
of Peace, and set a Crown of pure gold upon his head; And though his people
Psalm. 68. 13.
and Church have lain among the pots of black darkness and affliction, yet
shall they shine as the wings of a Dove covered with silver, and her feathers
with yellow Gold, And all men to Gods eternal glory will confess this to be
only the Lords doing, and a most wonderful work of his infinite mercy.

The trial by Lotts is 1. the most proper way, 1. because both parts have
appealed to God. and made it his cause, both profess the maintenance of the
same matters, therefore God is the most competent Judge. 2. This way is Gods
own direction, other means hitherto used have failed and been frustrate,
many devices are in the heart of man, but the counsel of the Lord that shall
stand.
2. the cleerest way, and most infallible, 1. Because Almighty God is a most
just Judge, there can be no collusion or corruption in his judgment: All
partial and deceitful siding and dealing, will be prevented and excluded. 2.
Because God is the searcher of all hearts, and cannot be deceived, and most
upright in Judgment, and he will give to Caser the things that are Caesar's,
but will not endure his own glory should be eclipsed, but will have his truth
still maintained, and all Christian duties to his sacred Majesty performed.
3. The happiest way, 1. Because the further effusion of blood will hereby be
prevented, a thing much to be desired, labored and prayed for. 2. God on all
sides will by this means be glorified, and a blessed Peace hereby produced,
which the God of Peace for his Son our Saviors sake, the Prince of Peace, by
his holy Spirit of Peace vouchsafe to grant, Amen.



In Bellis civillibus omnia sunt misera, sed nihil miserius quam ipsa victoria,
quoe etiamsi ad meliores venit, eos tamen ferociores reddit,

Tull. ad M. Marc. Sapientis non est velle certare, and periculo se velle
committere, quia and vincere non est in potestate nostra and anceps est omne
certamen,

Lact. lib. 6. Tale bonum est bonum Pacis, ut in rebus creatis nil gratiosius
soleat audiri, nil delectabilius concupisci, and nihil utilius possideri:
Spiritus enim humanus nunquam vivificat membra nisi fuerint unita: Sic spiritus
sanctus nunquam vivificat membra Ecclesiae, nifi fuerint in pace unita,

Augustine de Civitat. Dei. I shall conclude with these Texts of holy Writ,

God is not the God of Confusion, but of Peace,

1 Cor. 14. 33. God has called us to Peace,

1 Cor. 7. 15. Let us therefore follow after the things that make for peace,
and things wherewith we may edify one another, Romans 14. 19. not ruin and
destroy one another.

Follow peace, etc. without which no man shall see God,

Heb. 12. 14. Live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you,

2 Cor. 13. 11, FINIS.

