THE DECLARATION Of the Cardinal MAZARINI Touching His departure out of France,
justifying himself from all those things laid to his charge by the Princes and
Parliament: with the Princes and Parliaments message to the King of France,
touching his return to Paris, and their Declaration of submission to his
Majesty.

Also, A perfect Narrative of the last great and terrible fight between the
English Fleet under Sir George Ascue, and the Dutch Navy under Admiral de
Wit, and the loss on both sides impartially related, and the recruiting of
the English Fleet with 500 fresh men.

Likewise, Great numbers of the Dutchmen of war and Fishermen gone Northwards,
and their taking of diverse English Fishermen, and Barks coming from Iseland.

August-24

London, Printed for M. M. 1652.

THE DECLARATION Of the Cardinal MAZARINE, Touching His departure out of
France, justifying himself from all those things laid to his charge by the
Princes and Parliament. With the Princes and Parliaments Message to the King.
SIR,
THat which this Kingdom, and in especial this City have much desired and long
expected, is now come to pass, viz. the Cardinals departure, with the Kings
consent; yet before he went, he caused his new Parliament at Ponthoise to
approve and register a Declaration wherein he Declares, That his coming into
France was only out of Love to his Majesty, and desire to do him service, and
to procure the peace and tranquillity of the People, being not guilty in the
least of those things which the Princes and Parliament charge him withal. The
registring of this Declaration is not well resented by the Princes and
Parliament of Paris, but fills their head with jealousies, making them very
suspicious of an after Game to be played.

They have notwithstanding sent two Commissioners to his Majesty, with a
Message of Thanks for his giving consent to the removal of the Cardinal, and
withal promise that they will submit themselves to his Majesty, and be ready to
expose their Lives, Fortunes, and Estates to all dangers and hazards whatsoever
in his Royal Majesty's service; desiring his Majesty, that he will be pleased
in the mean season to return to Paris.

His Majesty has promised to return so soon as may be with convenience: They
have thereupon passed a large Declaration to the aforesaid purpose, which has
been registered. The Cardinal is now on his way to go for the Borders, but
whether he will remain at Metz, is very dubious, but it is thought he will
rather go to the Castle of Bovillon, which is near, but not within the French
dominions. There is a confirmation come from Rochel of the overthrow given by
the Duke of Vendosm High Admiral of France, to the Spanish Navy near the Town
of Brouage; The Spanish General lays the fault thereof to the Count of
Daugnon, who having a small Fleet, had so much honesty as to see his friends
engaged, and not to go out to their assistance, whereby the Spanish fleet was
forced to relire to S. Sebastians in Biscaya, with the loss of the Admiral
burned, one ship of about forty Guns sunk, and another of a lesser burden.

The French having called a Council of War to consult what was most fit to be
done, whether they should pursue the Spanish fleet or not, the Duke of Vendosm
in the interim received a packet, wherein was contained the most sad and
u^welcome news of the death of the valiant Duke of Nemours his son in Law, who
was slain by his younger son the Duke of Beaufort, which tidings struck so near
his heart. that waving all public affairs he retired privately to himself for
that day, and thus the design of pursuing their victory was impeded and laid
aside, and the Fleet is come back again to Rochel, which is now wholly set at
liberty both by sea and land. The Count du Daugnon lies still at Brouage, but
not in a capacity of undertaking any thing against the King party.

Marshal de la Mesleray has been of late at Angiers, where he has placed a
Garrison of two thousand men, and has set upon them very heavy Taxations, which
does much distract them, and they are not a little grieved that they left their
old Governor for a new. The Count de H^rcou^t does still continue his Siege
before Villanova, but does gain but little: the place has had some reliei from
the General Marcin of three hundred Volunteers, besides thirty Officers.

The Kings Army is still about S. Cloud, and the Princes about their old
quarters, but both of them at the present lie still. The Court is at
Champaigne, but it is not probable that it should continue there long, by
reason that there are no provisions for their subsistence. The town of Dunkirk
is still closely blocked up by sea and land, and great discontent is among the
Officers and soldiers, which is like to be very prejudicial to that town.

Paris, Aug. 25. Yours, etc. R.H.

A Letter from Plymouth containing the full relation of the last great and
bloody fight between Sir George Ascue, and the Dutch Fleet.
SIR,
I Know that you cannot but have heard of the late great fight on these Coasts
between the English and Dutch Fleets, but not knowing how things may be
represented to you, I thought good to present you with the most particular
relation of the fight which I could gather, which is as follows: Upon
discovery of the Dutch Fleet yesterday about one of the clock, a Council of war
was presently called, and it was resolved to fight them if they would stand,
and accordingly, Sir George Ascue sailed and put up toward them and about 4 a
clock that night came up to them and engaged, and the fight was very hot, we
had loss of some precious men, but without doubt the Dutch sustained a very
considerable loss. The fight continued about four hours, so that about 8 a
clock it growing dark, they were forced to leave off. The George and the
Bonaventure, being much shattered and ready to sink came in hither, and are
mending, Capt. Packs leg is shot off in the fight, he was brought hither in a
Ketch from the Fleet, and Capt. Lisle has a wound in his shoulder, that we
fear will prove mortal. The Admiral and the rest fought with great valor and
gallantry. The Admiral lost in her 12 men and received 60 shot in her hull, and
so diverse others have received loss, and we have many wounded men. Sir George
Ascue kept as much as he could in ken of them all night, and is resolved if
possible to engage them this day.

The number of the Dutch that engaged were 55 men of war, and 25 Merchant men,
we were but 41. Our Vice Admiral, and Rear-Admiral, with about five or six
others, broke through their whole Fleet, so as the five and twenty Merchant men
ran away to the Coasts of France.

Their men of war notwithstanding, have been in continual fight Monday,
Tuesday, and Wednesday, and it is conceived might so continue until this time,
so that the particulars cannot be fully certified as yet, there have come about
100 wounded men to Plymouth from Sir George Ascue, but this has been supplied
with 500 stout men from Plymouth to recruit his Fleet.

For further particulars, I can not certainly inform you, only it is said Sir
George has taken seventeen, sunk five, fired two, with the loss before
mentioned, to this agree the relation of most men here, I have no more at
present but rest,

Plymouth August, 19. Your assured friend, R. B.
Postscript.
Just now I had intelligence, that the five hundred men sent from this Town to
Sir George, deported themselves with singular dexterity and courage, but many
of them are slain, and about sixty wounded. This has been the bloudiest
conflict that ever happened between the two Republics.



A Letter from Yarmouth, dated August the 11th 1652.
SIR,
SInce the coming of General Blake from the North, the Hollanders are very
busy to the Northward, with a great number of Busses, and many men of war for
their Convoy, who are most of them Pinks, and have spread themselves all
abroad. Diverse of our English fishshermen they have taken, as they were
returning home fully laden, they have also taken some of our Barks that were
coming from Iseland, and some that appertained to Ailesborough: One of these
being taken, and carried to Rotterdam, after they had detained it three or four
days, was cleared by a sentence of the Admiralty, both ship and goods, and sent
away, and came home safe. Another being taken, was also carried thither, and
cleared likewise; but in her return homewards was met by a private Man of
War, and by him brought to Zealand. Our coast is much infested by Dutch
Pickeroons, so that we are very fearful we shall lose our whole fishing trade
for this year.

FINIS.

