THE DIFFERENCE ABOUT CHURCH GOVERNMENT ENDED: By taking away the Distinction
of Government into Ecclesiastical and Civil: and proving the Government of
the Civil Magistrate only sufficient in a Christian Kingdom.

Written by one that by making peace, prefers to be called a blessed child of
God, before preiminence in this world.

J. M. D. D.

Published according to Order.

LONDON. Printed, by R. L. for William Leake, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Crown in Fleet street between the two Temple gates. 1646.

To the High and Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT.
HAving penned my Meditations about Church Government, I had some thoughts to
commend them (right Christian and Honorable Senate) to your consideration and
protection. But being conscious to my self of my own weakness, I was sometime
in suspense, as thinking it too high presumption for me so to do. But for so
much as that which I have here written, is, as I am persuaded the Truth of God,
and tends to the entituling of you to that power which of right belongs unto
you, as I doubt not, but ye out of your own profound wisdom are inclinable to
think and hold: (whereby if ye do not speedily set this power aworke,
Divisions and Errors and Contentions are likely to increase amongst us more
and more, and so for want of a timely provision made, Iniquity and Heresy to
abound more, to the blemishing of our Church and Gods high dishonor) I have
made bold, as a feeling member of Christ's mystical body, to present it to your
honorable view. And if upon perusal ye shall think it to be the Truth, I
beseech you embrace it, and knowing what the power is, which in a Christian
Kingdom ought to bear sway both in Church and Commonwealth, for the curbing
and punishing of all evil doers, delay not to set it up. And eadem opera,
quell the division so dangerous, which arises from the groundless
distinction, as I conceive, betwixt Government Civil and Ecclesiastical
amongst us, and let the sword of the Magistrate be regularly sharpened against
those new upstart blasphemous Seducers, upon whom it shall appear that the
sword of the spirit can do no good, and in this so necessary a work the God*
of Heaven direct and bless your pious endeavors, that (...) already he has
done great and mighty acts by you for the (...) of the Church and Commonwealth,
so he may make you instruments of this good to his Church also. And so (...)
ving pardon for my presumption, and that it may be (...) to a good desire, I
rest ready whether approved or reproved, to submit to your censures.

J. M.

The difference about Church Government ended.
THe great controversy of these times being about the government of the
Church, whereby we may come into as great danger of cruel discontion, when the
present shall by Gods blessing be ended, and diverse Books being written, pro
and contra, by Presbyterians and Independants here about, whereby the
difference is not likely to be composed, but increased more and more* Give me
leave, though the least and unworthiest of them all, in brief to declare what
I conceive, and I think can solidly prove to be the only true and right way
wherein we ought to go. And that God whom I have sought unto for light herein,
make my pure endeavors succesfull, that this way being discovered, we may all
with one consent walk and persevere in the same: and this is not the way by me
first discovered, but being stood for by some others before, that which upon
serious study and consideration I am confirmed in more and more. And it is that
in a Christian Kingdom the destinction betwixt Ecclesiastical and Secular
power and rule in respect of the exterior exercise, by censuring and punishing
offenders cease, all this power being in the same persons, viz. the higher
powers, who are Gods Vicegerents upon earth, to manage all Rule and Government
over all causes and persons under their Dominion, whether Secular or
Ecclesiastical, and that Ecclesiastical persons ought not to have any share
or part in this power, but only to dispense the mysteries of salvation, the
Word and Sacraments, to put up the petitions of the congregation in public, or
of any particulars, as need shall require, to ordain new Presbyters, and to
join man and woman in marriage and in case of variance in opinion arising in
the Church to have the chief stroke in determining the truth in a Council, and
the determination by them so made all ought, so far as conscience can possibly
give leave, to stand to, of what estate or degree soever they be, and to be
subject and obedient to them, or anyone of them in their ordinary administering
of the Word, the higher powers compelling their Subjects in all lawf^ll ways by
penalties, who will not otherwise, to obey and receive their wholesome Doctrine
in all things.

For proof of all this, and first, that all power in a Christian Kingdom is in
the same persons, the higher powers, See Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject
to the higher powers, and as Bernard has it to Pope Engenius, Si omnis anima,
etiam vestra, here by higher Powers are meant the civil Magistracy, as 1 Pet.
2. 13. is further explained where it is s^id, Obey every humane Ordinance for
the Lords sake, whether the King as supreme, or those that are set in authority
under him. Wherefore all power is primitively in the King, where the Country
is under a King, and derivatively insuch as have commission from him, and these
are only Secular men, not Ecclesiastics, according to that of the Apostle, If
ye have judgments in things pertaining to this life, set up them that are
least esteemed, in the Church, 1 Cor. 6. 4. That is, some common Christians,
no^ Ministers of the Gospel. And wherein the Magistrates power is, he shows
saying, He bears not the Sword in vain, but for the punishment of evil
doers. From hence I argue thus.

They only ought to rule and govern by censures and punishments that have this
power given them of God: Arg. 1.
but the civil Magistrates only have this power given them of God, ergo, they
only ought to rule this way. The Major here cannot be doubted of, because all
power is of God: Nor the Minor, because it is the express assertion of the
Apostle.

Again, Arg. 2.
that Government only ought to be in a Christian Kingdom, which is necessary
for the welbeing thereof, and any other is superfluous: but the government of
the Civil Magistrate here is only necessary, Ergo, none else ought to be. Here
the Minor only can be doubted (for frustra fit per plura* quod potest fieri per
pauciora) but the truth hereof will appear if we consider, that there is no
sin or error in any sort of men, but the sword of the Civil Magistrate cuts
it down so soon as he has notice thereof. Against murder, adultery and
perjury. Magistrates even in Heathen Nations have bin from time to time very
severe, as it is necessary they should, And against Witches, Idolaters,
Drunkards, Theives, common Swearers and Sabbath Breakers, the sword is sharpened
in this land, and against Cheators, Forgeries and all other notoriotyes, yea,
and against Blasphemers, and Sorcerers, to Liars, and those that believing them
make disturbance of the peace of the Kingdom, and where the Laws are not
sufficiently penal, the penalties may be aggravated. Our Laws also have
provided, that persons scandalous in their lives living in variance and hatred,
railing and cursing and not reconciled should be kept from the holy Communion,
and now by Ordinance of Parliament it is provided, that ignorant persons shall
be likewise hereby suspended here from. And what then remayns, for which there
is need for any other power to come in for, the well governing of the Church of
Christ amongst us, but only to authorize Ministers, to whom it properly
belongs to try and find out, and suspend the ignorant, some short Catechism
being first compiled of the Principles necessary by every Christian to be
know^, beyond the bounds whereof no Minister may go in his examinations, or
having tried admit of any through partiality, that shall come short of this
knowledge, and in his trial putting difference betwixt the ancient and the
younger, as Saint Paul directs, 1 Timothy 5. 1. dealing with them as fathers with
these, as brethren. And if the Minister through envy, pride, or enmity shall
proceed otherwise with any, then is prescribed, he may be made liable to give
account thereof to the Magistrate; and if he be found guilty, to punishment
therefore, but if not, the party complaining to be soundly punished for his
false accusation. As for scandalous livers, let such officers, as the
Magistrate shall think fit, be appointed in every Parish, but let them be of
the most religious and conscionable, who may be tied by (...) to present them
unto him, and as he shall find cause, let him direct his precept to the
Minister to suspend him, till he be reformed. If Officers so appointed be
negligent, let it be commended to the care of any in the Congregotion, who have
the spirit of (...) in them, to complain of them to the Magistrate, that upon
proof he may be soundly (...) for his negligence in a matter (...) to his
(...): of so great importance.

If none, Arg. 3.
but Magistrates be capable of rule and dominion in respect of censures and
punishments, then they only ought to have the rule: but none else are capable
hereof, Ergo, none else ought to have this rule. The Minor which only can be
doubted of is thus proved. The Minister of the Gospel is not capable of it
Ergo, none else. That he is not, appears, because Christ opposes the order of
Preachers to Rulers, saying, The Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over
them, but it shall not be so with you, Matthew. 20. 25. that is, ye shall not rule
over your brethren, and the most faithful Apostle Peter exhorting Presbyters
to feed the flock of Christ committed to them, when he comes to speak of
ruling, does it with this negative (...), not ruling over them, 1 Pet. 5. 1.

If it be here objected, Ob.
Elders are described by ruling, 1 Timothy 5. 17. The Elders that rule well, are
worthy of double honor, Heb. 13. 7. 17, 24. they are three times likewise
described, and such other additions made, as that it cannot be understood of
any other Elders, but Preachers, as namely, Verse 7. that have the rule over
you, who have spoken unto you the Word of God. Verse 17. that rule over you,
for they watch for your souls. Therefore any Presbyter, quatenus a Presbyter
preaching the Word of God, and a Watchman over souls is and ought to be a
Ruler, and have power to censure.

I answer that the words rendered by ruling are in two of these places (...),
Sol.
signifies not Rulers, but leaders, but because leaders, as Captains, are
Rulers, it is rendered Rulers, though all leaders or guides in a way be not
Rulers in the sense here spoken of. In the third place (...) signifies also
such as go before, not properly Rulers or Governors, therefore from hence
nothing can be evinced to the purpose.

If it be further objected, Ob.
the Keys are given to Peter, and by Keys according to the Scripture phrase
government is always understood, as Esaias 22. 22. The key of the house of David
I will lay upon his shoulder, and he shall open and none shall shut, compared
with Chap. 9. 6. The government shall be upon his shoulder, Revel. 3. 7. He
that has the key of David. Here by the key of David is plainly set forth
sovereigne power in all things, therefore are the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven given to Peter, Matthew. 16. the power of governing in things partayning
to the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the Church, and what power was here given to
Peter, is showed to be given to all the Apostles, Matthew. 18. 18. Whatsoever ye
bind upon earth shall be bound in heaven etc: because herein the power of the
keys is showed to lie by the words noted in the place before named, Whatsoever
thou bindest upon earth, shall be bound in heaven, and John 20. 23. the same
power is given to all the Apostles in words to the same effect, Whose sins you
remit they are remitted, etc: and Saint Paul accordingly exercised this power,
1 Timothy 1. 20. by delivering Hymenens and Alexander to Satan, and touching the
incestuous person as Corinth, says he, I have judged, to deliver him to Satan,
1 Cor. 5. 3. but this he could not have done, unless he had had such power.
And as having power to commit the like to other Preachers, he gave Timothy a
charge over the Church at Ephesus, 1 Timothy 1. 1. 18. and by virtue hereof he was
to charge some not to preach any other doctrine, Implying a ruling power
committed unto him, and to Titus to order things in Creet, Titus 1. 5. and
Timothy is bidden to receive none accusation against an Elder under two or
three witnesses, Chap. 5 19. And what is he that orders things in the Church,
but a Ruler, or he before whom accusations are brought.

To all this I answer, that Peter, Sol.
and the rest of the Apostles forgave sins, and loosed by preaching salvation
to the faithful and repentant and retained sins, and damned by preaching
damnation to the impenitent, and Paul accurseth those that teach any other
Doctrine, Gal. 1. Yea, and I doubt not, but by virtue of that donation, they
and other Preachers their successors, during the time that the Christian
Religion was embraced but by some, and those, of the mean: sort, the greatest,
as Emperors, Kings, and Princes withstanding it, had a ruling power by
excommunications and other censures spiritual to deter the wicked amongst
them, and Heretics and Schismatics, and to make them ashamed that they might
be brought to repentance, and to release them again. But it does not hence
follow that in a Christian Kingdom, where there is a sword sufficiently
sharpened against all notorious wickednesses in people and in Ministers, yea,
and Magistrates also doing unjustly, that this censuring power of binding and
loosing in particular Courts of Justice should be continued for the reason
before going. And thus the objection made from the power given to Timothy and
Titus is answered also, it was but pro tempore, when Kings should come on to be
Christians, the faithful as well as others being then subjected to this civil
coercive power, in all things as they were by Titus his teaching to be
prepared, Tit. 3. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and
Powers, and to obey Magistrates, and it is reckoned up as one of the black
brands of reprobate Christians, Jude ver. 8. To despise Dominions, and to
speak evil of dignities.

But it will not be granted, Arg. 3.
that if Preachers be not capable of this rule, that none else but Magistrates
are* for there be other governments distinct from Pastors and Teachers in the
Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. and Romans 12. 8. the same is plainly intimated, when
after these charges, Let him that ministers tend upon his ministering, and he
that teaches on teaching, etc. it is added, he that rules with diligence,
and agreeably to these places 1 Timothy 5. 17. It is said, The Elder that rules
well is worthy of double honor, therefore there ought to be other Rulers in
the Church besides the Magistrate, to whom it properly belongs to censure in
things Ecclesiastical. I answer, it is to be noted that the Ruler spoken of,
Romans 12. 8. and likewise the Governments. 1 Cor. 12. 28. are put after not
only Pastors and Teachers but Helps, set forth by (...) that is Deacons also,
as being the lowest order in the Church, whereby is plainly intimated, that
they had no power of censuring, for then they should as superiors have been
placed before them, over whom they had power, or amongst whom they had the
chief power. 2. In two of these places the same word is used, which has been
already showed, to signify nothing but leaders, or men set over others or
goers before, and therefore if there be some in each congregation set only
over the manners of men: to observe the irregular, and to admonish them, and if
(...) will not reform, to present them to the Magistrate, such (...) as the
Apostle means are not wanting in the Church, but (...) shall we say to the
governments spoken of in the third place, does not this word imply a power to
(...) ye^ it does, for Government is necessary to the well being of the Church
of God^ but because he say^^, not Governors, but Governments, the Office^^ and
(...) whereby the notorieties of men are brought to light that they might have
condign censure and punishment may well be understood by a Synechdoche,
because the Governors in whom the power is, are helped in their ruling by
them. For it is not credible either that any of the common people should have
power over their Teachers, or that by governments any other are meant, then such
as are otherwise called (...), as these Officers may well be, and yet not in so
high a degree as they that preach the Word of God, for which they are set so
low under them. The Government then goes right, according to the meaning of the
Apostle, when the higher powers having censured they see to the execution, as
are vigilant to examine privately, and to present the scandalous, and in the
primitive times when they did thus officiate to the Presbytery, consisting of
grave and learned teachers. If it should be otherwise, none, it is to be
feared, will be found fit in diverse congregations, for such authority, either
for want of knowledge or unblameablenesse of life. 2 If any be in these
respects, yet not because homines plebes, and so subject to contempt, amongst
their fellows who would never stoop but to their superiors in outward
respects, to be ruled by them. 3 If they would, yet such indignity should
hereby be offered to Teachers, as were intolerable, and discouraging to some,
either to enter the Ministry, or to continue in it.

Fourthly, Arg. 4.
no such government ought to be in a Christian Kingdom, but what has been by
Gods own direction or allowance amongst his ancient people, the Israelites: but
there was never any government Ecclesiastical distinct from the Civil. Ergo,
none such ought now to be in a Christian Kingdom. For the Major it appears to
be true, because neither Christ nor his Apostles taught any thing, but what
there was ground for in the Law and the Prophets. Caesar must have the things
of Caesar, the Minister that Preaches the Gospel must live upon the Gospel,
as they that waited upon the Altar, of the Altar. To preach and pray belongs to
his office, as to the Priests to teach and offer sacrifices for the people. And
as none might presume to do this Priestly office, but the Priest, so none may
preach, unless they be sent; that is, be ordained according to the ^^ection of
Gods holy Word, that is, being first proved, then having the imposition of the
hands of the Presbytery, consisting, not of Laym^n in part, but altogether of
Preachers, for as much as we no where read of the imposition of hands by any
other. For the Minor, Moses was first the sole Ruler, and when this burden was
thought to be too great for him alone, seventy two more were joined with him to
help to bear it, Numb. 11. being chosen by sixes out of every Tribe, of which
Tribes Levi was counted none, there being twelve Tribes besides to make up this
number. After this the Judge and the seventy two ruled in all things. Light and
direction to proceed according to Gods will, they were indeed to seek of the
high Priest and Priests, whose lips must preserve knowledge, and they must
enquire the Law at his mouth, Mal. 2. 7. So Joshuash must seek to Eleazer the
high Priest, Numb. 27. 21. and in any difficult case they must come to the
Priests, Deuteronomy. 17. 9. but the Judge and the Counsel of seventy two had all the
power. Afterward when Kings reigned in Israel, King Solomon put Abiather the
high Priest from his office, setting up Zadoe, and David distinguished the
courses of the Priests and other Godly Kings from time to time ruled in things
Ecclesiastical and Priests never, till that after their return from the
Babylonish captivity, Princes failing in the time of Antiochus, Epiphanes,
Mattathias the Priest, and his sons being necessitated to it took the
government upon them both in things secular and spiritual.

Matthew. Ob.
18. 17. Tell it to the Churches, and why to the Church, but because it was his
will that the Church should have power of censuring, and if so, then not the
Magistrate alone.

By the word (...) rendered Church, Sol.
is not always understood the Congregation of Christians, but sometime any
assembly, as Acts 19. 41. Here therefore may well be understood the judicatory,
that then was amongst the Jews before spoken of which yet continued, and
amongst them when any should afterward be set up, of what persons soever it
consisted, and not any whole congregation, that were such a government as was
never heard of in those times, or the times preceding neither is it necessary
that they should be Officers properly Ecclesiastical, but any of the more
honorable amongst people who have also power in the Commonwealth, may
constitute this judicatory, but for the power of binding and losing spoken of
Verse 18. it belongs not to them, but to Preachers for which he changes the
person, saying, What ye bind upon earth shall be bound in Heaven, hereby
giving them power pro tempore, that the inordinate might be awed till that
Magistrates being converted they might be otherwise curbed. To clear which the
more, take this for a paraphrase. If thy brother sin against thee by doing thee
any trespass or traducing thee, or detracting from thee, or offering thee any
violence, and neither by private telling him of it, nor by mediation of friends
he will be brought to acknowledge his fault, and ask thee forgiveness, tell
the Judges of it, who have authority to proceed against offenders that they
may, if it be possible by threatening him with punishment cause him to repent*
but if not so, give him over for an heathen incorrigible and no true Christian,
and let the Ministers of the Church exclude him from the Sacrament or Communion
of Christians and consequently from life, neither let him contemn, because
they that exclude him are but two or three d^spicable Ministers of the Gospel,
who have none authority or power in this world. For whatsoever ye thus
proceeding bind shall be bound, etc. Yea, if there be not two but only one in
that Church, for as it is here said, Whatsoever ye bind in the plural number,
so Matthew. 16. It is said, Whatsoever thou bindest. And by virtue of this
Commission Paul alone delivered Hymeneus and Alexander to Satan, 1 Timothy 1. 20.
If it be demanded, shall he not be bound from coming to the Congregation also?
Ans. By no means, because even Heathens came into the Congregations, as may be
gathered, Jam. 2. and if not, how should they be converted? wherefore (...)
excommunicating wholly our of the Church for any sin is lawful.

1 Cor. Object.
5. Paul requires the Corinth: Church to put the incestuous man from amongst
them, which argues authority to censure in the Church.

I deny not, Sol.
but in those times, there being yet no Christian Magistracy it was necessary,
that there should be some authority in the (...), who preached the word to
sentence gross offenders, who would other wise have (...) to the greater
blemishing of Christianity. But this (...) that it ought still (...) be in a
Christian Kingdom, (...) can be suffered, although there be no Church
Government to animadvert against him.

Having this proved, that the Government in all things in a Christian Kingdom
is and ought to be in the Civil Magistrate, let us now consider the other part
of my general Proposition concerning the Ministers of the Gospel. That to
them it is committed to Preach and Baptize, and administer the Supper of the
Lord is plain from the last words of Christ, Go teach all Nations baptizing
them, etc. Matthew. 28. and from the charge at the Institution of the Lords
Supper. Do this in remembrance of me. And they only may do these things, in any
other it is pride and presumption highly displeasing to God to do the^, as in
Saul to sacrifice and in Uzziak to burn Incense. 2 That to them also it belongs
to put up the Petitions of the Congregation and of particular persons in
distress, we may gather from Gods Ordinance that the Priests should offer
Sacrifice for the Congregation, and for any person having trespassed, but now
troubled for it, of the Prophets, praying also in the Congregation, etc. 1 Cor.
14. and for the sick, Jam. 5. 16. Kings have sometimes prayed publicly also,
though they might not Sacrifice, as Solomon at the Dedication of the Temple,
and Hezekiah, when many kept the Passover, who were not cl^nsed, piety putting
them on to it, and no prohibition lying against it. But these were rare and
extraordinary acts and not be ordinarily drawn into imitation, as neither that
of Phineas a Priest killing Cosby and Zimri, and afterward going as a Captain
against the Midianites. For not Moses but Aaron must bless or pray publikly
for the Congregation, Numb. 6. 23. And when the plague was in the Host, he, not
Moses must go up with his Censor by offering incense to stay it. 3 For
ordayning Elders or Bishops it is committed to Titus and Timothy not to others,
who were not Preachers, or Elders themselves, and Acts 14. 23. Paul and
Barnabas ordained Elders in every Church. 4 For joining man and wise together,
because it ought not to be without prayer, blessing and instructing, and that
in public, who is so fit to do it as a Minister. 5 For obedience and
submission unto them, though they have no power by censure in judiciary
proceeding to compel, yet considerig the command, obey them that go before you
in doctrine, and life, and are your Leaders, and submit your selves to them, as
to them, that watch for your sonis, Heb. 13. 17. There is no good Christian* of
what estate or degree soever, but for conscience toward him that commands
this, will readily do it. For when Zedekiah and the Princes of Judah would not
obey Jeremiah. speaking to them in the name and word of the Lord, what grievous
things did they suffer by the Caldees. 6 For the Ministers or Presbyters power
in Council, to manage controversies in point of Religion, and to determine,
that which was done in the first famous Council at Jerusalem, Act. 15. speaks
plainly, and therefore it has been followed as a president in the purest
times, by all the Christian World, and that not without good success in many
ages, to the suppressing of monstrous errors, and to the keeping up of the
unity of faith. Thus I have, by Gods assistance, made good my whole
proposition, which if it might in all parts be subscribed to, Oh! what great
good would ensue to us all thereby? The great controversy touching Church
Government so greatly troubling and disturbing the whole Kingdom would be
sopi^ed, the difference betwixt Presbyterians and Independants ended, the many
strange and mons^^ous errors lately sprung up, extirpated, clashing and
enterfeeing betwixt two sorts of Governments removed, wicked men and Heretics,
who fear not the word, nor regard Church censures, terrified, and peace
throughout the whole Kingdom settled. Now that I may yet more effectually move
the minds of all my brethren who shall read this, I shall add, that as it is
lawful for the civil Magistrate to take all the government into his hands,
even in things Eclesiasticall, as has been said, so it is most expedient for
us of the Ministry that they should so do, because being exempt from this
trouble, we shall be the more free to prayer, reading, meditation, preaching,
and other holy offices properly belonging to our function, That thus we ought
to be, appears from the reason given by the Apostles, why they would have
Deacons chosen to be over matters concerning the poor, viz. that they might
wholly give themselves to prayer, and the ministry of the Word, Act. 6. 4. For
if the preacher must not be troubled about matters of charity, to gather and to
distribute collections amongst the poor, but some others of the congregation
must have this office, how much less ought he to be troubled by keeping Cour^s
at set times, and hearing and censuring sins complained of there, 1 Timothy 4. 13,
15. he must give himself wh^ly to reading, prayer, exhortation and Doctrine,
and in so doing he shall save himself and those that hear him.

2* We shall be less liable to the emnity of the wicked, who cannot be without
a grudge against such as punish them, as experience has taught in some other
Church, wherein a ruling power is committed to Ministers amongst others. It is
true indeed, that a faithful Preacher cannot avoid the hatred of the wicked,
for they hated Christ aad therefore will hate them: yet because they can less
end^re to be censured by them, whom they know by birth to be meaner then
themselves, especially some of them, it is more convenient that for this they
should be dealt with by men of eminency in outward respects, that their
prejudice against the Preacher may be the less, and so he may be in more
possibility, by his teaching, to do their souls good. And for the like reason,
no godly man of mean quality in any congregation can conveniently be set up as
a Ruler over others* because so he shall become more subject to conterupt and
derision, and be made less able to do good amongst his neighbors in private
by stirring them up to love and good works, as has been already said.

3* We are Ambassadors of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 20. and therefore not to exercise
power by censuring in another Kingdom, such as the world of the wicked is: for
they are under the Prince of the Air, and therefore by us to be dealt with,
not by punishment, but by entreaty.

4* The Preacher being but a man, and yesterday as it were, but, a Boy, and the
contemptible son of a man of low degree, and every Preacher not having grace,
judgment and gravity fit for government if he be invested with power, is apt
hereby to be puffed up, and in using it, not to serve Christ, but his own lusts
and passions, and therefore to avoid this inconvenience, it is better for us to
be without this power, then to have it, that we may be kept humble, and so the
more gracious, and have our Auditors the more ready to hearken to us. For
being in this ruling office, the best shall hardly escape the imputation of
pride and although it be falsely, yet the power of our teaching will be much
hereby weakened, since pride is contemptible both to God and man. And here do
not, I beseeth you, my Brethren, (...) out upon me and say, I deal unnaturally
thus to seek to pull down, and bring under all my fellow servants, and to
transfer the honor of dominion from them to the Magistrate even in things
pertaining to their calling. For ye shall still have the highest honor in the
world higher then Judges, for all men shall be judged according to your Gospel,
then Nobles, for their greatest honor is to be sent Ambassadors by earthly
Kings but yours that ye are Ambassadors of Christ, theirs that they may be the
Kings Privy Counselors, yours, that God makes you of his counsel, for the
Lord will do nothing but he reveals it to his servants the Prophets, and again
theirs* that they are Generals of Armies to subdue Rebels, and to quell
Enemies, yours that ye have weapons and strength committed to you to overthrow
strong holds, 2 Cor. 10. 4. and to root out and destroy Kingdoms and Nations,
that be rebellious against God, Jer. 1. 10. Lastly, higher then Kings, for
their greatest honor is that they rule over the outward man, yours that ye
rule and have power in the conscience in such as have a conscience, theirs that
they bear the secular sword, yours that ye manage the spiritual, which is
sharper then any two-edged sword, theirs that they can terrify by threatening
corporal death yours that ye threaten eternal, and lastly theirs that they are
over all other men in things pertaining to men, yours that ye are over all
other men, and them also in things pertaining to God, and to their everlasting
welfare to teach, guide and direct them, and to bless them, whereby they may
be furthered thereunto, and if yet ye would have more, take this as the
greatest perfection of blessedness, that in the regeneration ye shall sit upon
thrones, and so come to the honor of judging and reigning with Christ for
ever. And if this be your honor, though no rulling power be given unto you
here, complain not of being trodden down, but rather joy, that the government
should be in such hands as in whose of right it ought to be, and it is most
expedient for you that it be, and help what ye are able to bring it to this, as
every one, that prefers the truth before his own advancement ought to do. And
ye Magistrates and Rulers of the world be entreated to use this your power
aright, in Gods way to beat down errors and notorious sins in every place, and
as the seminary of errors, private preachings by such as intrude themselves
into this office, beig never called thereunto, as was Aaron, and to encourage
to learning and piety, and to constancy in the truth, as being set up to rule
in all things, not for your selves, but for God, who has of singular mercy
thus highly honored you. If any shalthink this to be written for slattery and
not in syncerity, he shall do me great wrong, who as God knows, have none other
end, but to bring the truth, of which I am persuaded to light, as seeing none
other way to appease the terrible tempest of contrary winds of doctrine, so
dangerously tossing the ship of the Church, that it is ready otherwise to sink
in this State, which God forbid and therefore make every Brother, that shall
read me, not an high-spirited Diotrephes who loves preeminence, but a lowly
minded Apollo, who submitted himself to learn the truth more perfectly, even
of Priscilla and Aquila although he were a man mighty in the Word, and they but
Tentmakers, how-ever more versed at that time then he in the doctrine of the
Gospel. But if any one being unsatisfied with that which has (...) said shall
have a mind to contend, let me entreat him not to do it with words coming from
a pen dipped in gall and vinegar, but with solid Argument according to that of
Augustine, Sacrae Scripturae authoritate res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum
ratione concer^et.

FINIS.

