THE COMBAT OF Love and Friendship, A Comedy, As it has formerly been
presented by the Gentlemen of Chapter Chapter in OXFORD.

By ROBERT MEAD, sometimes of the same College.



LONDON, Printed for M. M. G. Bedell, and T. Collins, at the Middle Temple
Gate, Fleetstreet. 1654.

The Stationer to the Reader.
THe Scene is vanished, and with it, all encouragement to this musical part of
humane Learning. I murmur not against any that sit at the helm, though Policy
of State have formerly allowed the exercise of these Recreations in time of
Troubles, as a means to divert Tumultuary and Turbulent spirits, whose
otherwise uncorrected heat would be employed to the distraction of the most
considerable Affairs, and Persons of the Common Wealth.

My business is not to vindicate the Stage, but to present thee Reader with a
Play, without swelling thy expectation, for it comes forth ushered only with
the name of the Author in the Title Page, in which, it has more ornament, then
all the Silken Fillets of our Time can bestow upon it, he having been a Person,
whose eminent and general Abilities have left him a character, precious and
honorable to our Nation.

Look not therefore upon this composition, but as at a stoop, when his youth
was willing to descend from his then higher Contemplations.

I could say more in his honor, but he was so great a Lover of Humility in his
life, that I almost fear, being dead, he may be displeased to hear his own
worth remembered.

I have done; Reader, peruse at thy opportunity, this pasthume, and know, as
the Author would disdain to be angry with thy dislike if he were alive, so he
would not stain his ingenuity to Court thee into his praise; The Publisher
only has an ambition it may delight thee, whose design thou may easily
pardon.

Farewell.
The Actors Names.
LYsander servant to Artemone. Theocles his friend her brother, servant to
Ethusa. Philonax servant to Artemone, an admirer of himself. Melesippus Father
to Artemone, Diarchus his brother. Pisistratus a foolish Captain. Lamprias a
small Poet rivals, in love with Ethusa. Miserotos an Enemy of Love. Artemone a
Lady first in love with Lysander, after with Philonax. Panareta a Lady in love
with Lysander. Ethusa her sister a scornful Lady. Hyperia woman to Artemone.
Eudora woman to Ethusa. Theocles his Page. Attendants.
THE COMBAT OF Love and Friendship.
ACT. 1.
SCEN. 1.
Lysander. INstruct me some kind Power,
To which I may most Lawfully prove false;
My friend, or Mistress.
But what talk I of Law? as if that faith
Could ere be broke with Justice!
Rather, which
Can my heart suffer to be torn away,
And snatched from its own sinews?
Which of them can my soul part with upon easiest terms?
For thus stands my ambiguous fate, that one
Side of my heart must needs be ripped from the other,
For so these two had filled it; one side each:
My share was almost nothing; only that
Which knit the other two, I called my own.
Friendship, thou art a name, and nothing real,
A mere and empty word, and
Here I quit thee,
I Will not be fettered in fantastic chains,
To court Ideas, nothings, and adore
A strange Platonic Cupid. Give me Love,
That has some Life and vigor in it: Love
That shall delight our bloods as well as Fancies. --
But stay: Is this Lysander? No, some Feind,
Some false malicious spirit crept within me,
To poison all my Faith. Methinks
I am too earthy; and
I feel my clogged thoughts grovelling
To baseness. O my Theocles!
Pardon me friend; when I forget that name,
May I be-miserable; nay I need not wish it, for
It Is implied in that, and I may well
Now save my curse.
To him a Servant
Ser. Sir, here is a Messenger
With commendations from Artemone.

Lys. That Name again confounds me,
Startles all my Loyal thoughts,
And shakes my yielding Virtue
To a weak coldness. Can I part with thee
My Artemone? No; thee Theocles?
O my distracted heart! methinks I feel
The Nerves by several Engines, racked two ways,
And almost torn to -- --

Ser. -- Pray Sir,
What answer shall I return?

Lys. I had forgot thy business: say I come, -- Ex. Ser.
Yet sure there might be found a middle path,
Wherein I might observe an equal pace,
Of faith to both. I Will think on it -- -- --

Ex. Lysan. SCEN. II.
Artemone, Hyperia. Art. O Wench, never trust 'em, they are th'unconstans't
Things in all the world,
They still exclaim on us; tell us
We are more wavering then our feathers,
And that we change more often then the Moon,
With such like sickly Fancies. But if
'Twere so, in them the cause is;
Had but men a care, still to observe,
And please us as at first, we
Still should be the same; our fancies never change;
But the object alters, and then we
Out of our Constancy, are forced to choose
Another, which may please as that did first.

Hyp. But Madam,
I do hope you find no reason to apply
Ought of this to your Lysander.

Art. No? what think you then
Of his long absence?

Hyp. What some two days? I promise you
I know some Lovers, and those of the best file too,
That do presume more on their Mistress favors:
As there is your stalking Signior, he that comes
Hither a wooing still in state, that tells
Long stories of his Pedigrees, and Honors,
In stead of Amorous Passions.

Art. Who, Philonax?


Hyp. Yes, he that scorns to woo the common way,
But keeps his distance still, and courts by the Rule:
So much a day: observes a kind of diet
In all his wooing: Sooth were to me, I Would make
His stately hams to cringe before I had him,
And afterward let me alone.

Art. I prithee tell, how has Lysander bribed thee
That thou should thus exclaim on Philonax?

Hyp. True Madam,
I Have been bribed; but by his virtues,
His fair Respects to you* and noble Carriage.

Art. Ha, ha, ha. --


Hyp. Indeed I do confess, it is not usual
Amongst us Chamber-Creatures to be bribed
With such uncoyned metal.

Art. I believe thee;
But prithee tell me true, does he not use
To charm thy Tongue by some more powerful motive,
And chain it to himself in golden Links?
Come, come, I know he still does use thee kindly,
Cause Thou belong'st to me.

Hyp. Madam, I hope
You are not Jealous of me, yet I Will tell you
All that I know, though not as to Create
A good Opinion in you, but confirm
That which you do conceive already of Him.
He Is truly Generous, but far from Bribing:
For sure, I think, he cannot be so unjust
To his own Merits, as distrust 'em so
To think they want a mercenary Advocate.

Art. Nay, but, I prithee, haste to his Opinion Concerning me.


Hyp. He thinks, as all do else,
You are Perfections Storehouse, and does love
One only in the world as well as you.

Art. O Hyperia!
And can Thou call him faithful which dos pledge
His faith to more then one? That, That is it
Which I have* still suspected, and it cuts
My very heart strings.

Hyp. But Madam here he comes,
I hope will Cure 'em strait.

SCEN. 3.
To them Lysander. Lys. MAdam you might have spared your messenger,
My own distressed thoughts did prompt me to you,
As to my Tutelar Goddess.

Art. So perhaps
You use to Court your other Mistress too.

Lys. How Lady? what strange Language do I hear!
Yo'ue struck a damp into my soul, which but
So soon exhald by those quick beauteous rays,
Had stifled all my Spirits. Let that tongue
Be blasted, that has so infected yours.

Art. The witness is not far from hence, My woman,
Who can confirm from your own mouth so much.

Lys. My own mouth be accursed then* speak Thou monster,
Confess the truth, for that is it must clear me.

Hyp. That is, I know the Party, whom you love
As dear as this my mistress, and can prove it,
Out of your own confession.

Lys. O the Malice
Of faith-betraying Chambermaids! Nay sure
I cannot dare to outlive that cursed minute
Which gives my faith suspected to my Mistress; -- draws
Lady, unlock my Breast, and you shall find
A heart as undefild, as is your beauty,
Or if you will not, I can do it my self.

Hyp. Hold Sir* it is Theocles, her Brother.


Lys. See I pray the grounds
Of your strong Jealousy. Thy Pardon Virgin:
Yet thou did ill in holding us so long
In such a strange suspense.

Art. Beshrew Thee wench
For putting me to such a fright: yet still, -- aside
Pray heaven it be none other: I suspect
The sword unsheathed made her conceal the Truth.

Lys. But Madam I shall shake your faith I fear,
In craving but one favor at your hands.

Art. What ere it be I Will think the occasion happy
That may the more oblige you to me, speak it.

Lys. With much reluctance and fear to offend you,
I Am forced to ask it, and desire you would
Incompasse round your heart with a strong faith
That I can never really forsake you.
It Is that I may go court Another Mistress.

Art. Is this my Brother? Come you need not hide it,
What should you fear my anger, or Offense?
The thing you ask does free you from all Love,
And consequently fear of me: why should you
Care how I take it, having thus forsaken me?

Lys. O you are much mistaken Madam; Love,
Excessive love of you, does force me to it;
Your Bother (in whose bliss I know lies yours)
Is deep in love with fair Ethusa, who
Stoutly rejects all Entertainment of
His true affection, till her Sister shall
(To whose disposal she has given her self)
Freely consent, and wish her to it: now
She, more then I desire, affecting me;
Denies all help to Theocles, unless
He also use the self same power on me,
And by that power with me conform me to her;
Could you but now dispense with me a while,
(Without your leave I dare not) I could soon
Effect what he desires, and then return
With as much joy to you, as he that having
Forsaken for a while his native Country,
Friends, and his safty too; being come home
Kisses the Soil he left, and counts himself
For all his many dangers and more fears
Happy at least in this, that now he knows
To set a higher rate on the kind favor
Which Heaven at first bestowed.

Art. Nay Sir you may
Without all forced pretenses do your pleasure,
I am not, I thank Heaven, so fond to sue,
Or broke for Servants.

Lys. Think not, fairest Mistress,
That I can ever truly Love but you,
I can in any shape adore your Virtues,
And still reserving in my Constant heart
Your fair Idea, *Court another Beauty
With Amorous devotion; but such
As still must rest and point it self in you.

Art. Sir, that Devotion which adores the Image
May chance persuade It self, that through that Image
It worships the true Deity: but yet
Must Excuse others that do still suspect it
As very like Idolatry, if not It.

Lys. Madam that strength of Light, that does incircle
The Powers above, Admits no mortal gaze:
Yet by Reflection perhaps we may
Gather a glance, or so: As through a glass
We can outface the Sun, and by those weak
Nerves of our Sense collect those Scattered beams,
As they do guild some Wall or Turret, which
By an immediate view beheld, would dart
Flames in our Eyes to punish our Presumption.
So that sometime a Reverence may as well
Keep us from that we love, as Love invite us.

Art. But Sir, take heed least your Idolatrous love,
Pass not so truly through the fictitious object,
As still remain there: sure the jealous gods
Accept immediate worship, rather then
What Is done through the Image, and comes not to them
But by a Proxy: howso'ere the cause
Which you pretend, with your large promises,
May keep me still the same unto your love,
So that your frequent visits strengthen me
In my much shaken faith.

Lys. Madam, I leave
My heart with you in pawn, that you may know,
What speech so'ere I use to any other,
That still remains your own. -- -- -- --

Ex. Lysan. Art. Hyperia,
I did not think the had loved me, or the truth
So faintly, as for any threatening, to
Conceal ought, prejudicial unto either.
Come, come, I know, for all the cunning carriage,
There Is more in it then so; your first expressions
Could not well suit with any friend, but Mistress,
Till fear applied them: but it may be now,
That being over, thou wilt reveal the truth.
I do conjure thee here, by all my favors,
(Which I shall much repent, if thou confess not)
Tell me sincerely, what at first you meant.

Hyp. Madam, if all the carriage of my life
Have gained you this faith of me,
That I can speak any truth at all: believe me now;
If I or know, or think, but that Lysander
Among all women living, loves you only,
May I never find your mercy, no nor heavens.

Art. I cannot yet be confident, I much want
Some forcive Argument to re-establish
My doubtful thoughts.

To them Diarchus. Hyp. And here comes one, I Am sure
Will bring you none, your uncle Madam; this
Is he quite poisons all; Lysanders enemy:
Yet has no reason for it, but that he is
His fathers son.

Diar. I met Lysander here,
Now coming from you; Niece, I wonder much
You will give entertainment to a man
You know descended from the ancient enemy
To all our family.

Art. Pardon me uncle,
If that I be not yet of that opinion;
To think that hate must be successive, or
Malice hereditarie.

Diar. Yet believe me,
Though It runs not in a blood, I see no reason
Why the son ought not take the fathers part.
Come Niece, be wise; there is the Noble Count
That loves you well I Am sure: In him you may
Bring honor to your self, and you well know
He has your Fathers free consent.

Art. But Sir,
I hope I have a suffrage in this Business,
My voice too would be asked.

Diar. See, here they come
For the same purpose too, I think.

SCEN. 4.
To them Melesippus. Philonax. Attendants. MEl. Daughter,
Though in this matter here of weight I would not
Force you to any thing; yet I could wish
Your liking would concur with mine. I here
Present unto you him, who, in my esteem,
Deserves your love best, and I hope will find it.

Diar. For all that Sir, I think it very fit,
That children should be ruled.

Mel. Nay I esteem it
No Marriage; but a well named Rape, where friends
Force Love upon their Children; where the Virgin
Is not so truly given, as betrayed.
I would not have Betrothed people (for
I can by no means call them Lovers) do
Such Penance in their marriage sheets, and make
The Rites no Wedlock, but a Sacrifice.
Where like an Innocent Lamb, the passive Virgins
Heart is Torn from her Entrails, not Enticed:
Being condemned, not wedded to her Husband:
Wherefore I will not practice what I may,
But hope nerth'lesse to find my will performed.

Art. Sir, the continual carriage of my Life
Has been one Act of Duty and Obedience;
And that in this I may not stain the rest,
But steer my Thoughts by yours; I do desire
Some time of respite.

Mel. Take It, but have a care,
Your hoodwink't venurous Passion oversway not
Your Reason: Think whom here I have commended.

Art. I shall, Sir.


Mel. Now to you, thus having made
Your way, I wish success.

Diar. And Sir, I think
After your Merits have displayed themselves,
It may be our Presumption, not our Prayer. --

Exe. Mele. Diar. Phi. My thanks to both. Madam I make no question
But that you easily believe these friends,
And partly from your own experience know
How well I have deserved you; otherwise
I should relate my self, how much you are
Obliged for this observance which I show you,
By condescending thus to court a Lady
That sued not first to me.

Art. Sir, though I think
Most might be proud of such a favor from you,
And prize it high. -- --

Phi. Nay faith, I must confess
My threshold groans under the daily Clients,
And little Legs that come from Ladies to me:
And I receive so many Tickets from 'em,
That I am fain to hang them upon wires,
As *Pothecaries do their Physic Bills,
And serve them out as the bragging Captain did
His Challenges, so many to a day,
Each in his turn: I Have disappointed three now.

Art. -- Yet, as I was about to tell you Sir,
I am not of that fancy as to sue
To any man, that does not first appear
A Client unto me.

Phi. It seems so Lady:
And yet I am not of that general Tenet
That does admit no female wooers, surely
Your sex is not denied that Liberty of soul
To like what ere you apprehend as good.
Who does forbid the enamored wedge of Iron
To steal unto the Loadstone, and to knit
It self unto it in an amorous kiss,
Not but by violence to be disjoined? who e're
Censured the uxorious Ivy, that it Courts
The stout tall Oak, and twines it self about
Like to some passionate Lover? as if willing
To shroud the exposed bulk from threatening dangers,
And tell the hostile wind, or envious hand,
That heaves an Axe against it, you must pass
Through me to injure this, hoping to see
Fury at last appeased by the soft object;
Yet howsoere, till death, does not forsake him,
But falls in an Embrace, as if desiring
To be entombed together, and made one Pile.

Art. Sure were those dregs of Pride drained from his soul -- aside.
He would appear of most refined thoughts.
But Sir, what Nature may excuse in them,
Reason corrects in us.

Phi. Nay but the rather,
Knowing your souls indu'd with such a treasure
That can direct and guide your Passions, should you
Pursue the Object when by it approved.

Art. True Sir, if Reason did commend it to us,
Likely we should consent.

Phi. Believe't in this
Your Reason and your Will are much the same,
You can desire nothing but what that does
(First having weighed and pondered well each scruple,
That may object it self) commend as good;
For whatsoere bounds our affection,
Must first appear unto our Judgment lovely,
It standing Sentinel, questioning all
That pass unto the Closet of the will.

Art. Nay I shall easily grant that we can love,
And love with reason too, but still am Heretic
To your Position, that we ought to court
The object so beloved.

Phi. See Madam now,
Your thoughts are not denied to be as willing
And ready too, as ours, but the expression
You think unfit, and so will needs set up
A kind of Just Hypocrisy, nay Virtuous,
Whilst that which you style modesty, is only
A more allowable and fair dissembling.
For so it is in effect: you must appear
Unwilling when desiring nothing more:
You must seem backward, and be much entreated,
Nay sometimes scarce entreated unto that
Which should you miss of, you would curse your virtues,
And count your Modesty injurious: But
Madam, what only I discourse to you,
I practice among other Ladies: here
You see I break my use, and therefore will not
Ask what adventure I shall undertake
To gain your love; I think you will conceive
That the first act of wooing was a merit:
And that I moved my suit, deserved it.

Art. Nay,
It Is not enough to manifest a Love
In bare appearances; Each man perhaps
When ere his Blood runs high, can court a Mistress
With eager zeal and fervor; but it is he
Alone, whose Soul prompts him to purer Love,
Deserves reciprocal Affection.

Phi. As for my soul you may know that hereafter;
And for my Blood, you know, I Have told you often
It Is of the noblest strain, derived from such
Who were the glory of the Roman State:
And all I Am sure that ever heard me speak,
Know by Report it is not stained in me.
I have maintained still the Credit of
Our Family, and as I can remember
Never descended yet so low as now,
Which I trust you will consider.

Art. Sir I know
You would esteem it but a Lightness in me
To give away my heart almost at the first
Demand, and having had so small experience.
I have some thoughts that disaffect me now,
And hinder all Deliberation
Of Love: hereafter you may hear more from me.

Phi. Madam I wait upon you. -- --


Exe. Philo. Art. Hyp. Pray Heaven that all these storms thus coming on,
Like wave and waves one on another back,
Shake not her promised faith unto Lysander,
And ruin't quite: The Gods I think take part
Thus to disjoynt their loves. Her Jealousy
First backed with those appearing Reasons may
Be strengthened by these Motives, never decay.

The end of the first Act.
ACT. 2.
SCEN. 1.
Miserotos laughing. HA, ha, ha, I have even burst my self yonder with
laughing* and am now forced to retire for fear of my ribs; The most prodigious
Contention about a Mistress that e're I beheld: A Ballad-singer and a vexed
Constable I should take them for; but that I know the one to be a boysterously
valiant Captain, and the other a Gentleman abused into a Poet by his Mistress:
who, having for a long time courted her with verses only and Sonnets, is now
enjoined by Her to speak nothing but Rhyme. The Captain being his Rival has now
provoked the Quarrel, he has drawn his Faulchion, and wheeling about, lies at
his Guard most fiercely, whiles my Riming Gentleman makes at him with a pair of
Heroic Verses, which he again puts by with a warlike Oath or two: Such strange
Passadoes there are between them, such Hermaphroditical Play; short sword and
long verse, as I never saw the like. But here they come.

To him Pisistratus. Lamprias.
Pis. I say I Will fight what e're comes on it.


Lam. Why then have at you Sir; nay I Will assure ye,
There is no Poet but he has his Fury.

Mis. Nay good Captain be pacified; indeed it is not manly to challenge or beat
another whom you know resolved not to fight again: why you see he refuses your
weapon: Alas he combats in another way; if you will make Amorous Sonnets with
him, I know he will enter the Lists.


Pis. No! my Sword shall be my Pen, and I will print a bloody Tragic Poem
upon his flesh -- -- -- -- -- By this good steel I will.


Lam. By these good Verses thou shall have thy fill.
Nay, though with sword I fight not, yet will I
Hang thee in strong lines; make thee living die.

Pis. Strong lines? strong halters: I Will beat this riming spirit out of you,
and make you howl in pitiful prose. If ever I hear you pelting verses at my
Mistress window any more, I Will beat that inspired Pate: I will Sirrah, so that
the discharged Chamber Pot shall be a work of Charity, the urine being
med'cinal.


Lam. I do defy thee and thy threats, thou fellow,
That look so like a foaming angry Billow;
Crowned with my twig of Laurel I fear not
Thunder of rotten Eggs or Chamberpot.

Pis. Get you a Sword Changeling, and a good one too, or I Will crown your
Cockscomb with a hollie twig as big as my arm, I Will make your brains so fluent,
they shall be ready to fly out upon all occasions.


Lam. My Body shall with Poetry be charmed,
Thus to be naked is to be best armed.

Pis. I Will ee'ne try what Armor of proof you have.


offers to beat him. Mis. Hold, hold, shall I now tell you what you two are?


Pis. Yes, Mars, and Apollo.


Mis. A ridiculous pair of Cockscombs you are to quarrel, and violate all bonds
of friendship: thus for a white face, a coy, disdainful woman, who for ought
you know when you have done your best, will only laugh at your folly: I would
not have you expect to be so Generously miserable as to deserve Pity.


Pis. Come, come, you only speak this out of your own Averseness to all Love:
she has most affectionately engaged her self by several promises to one of us
two; but finding us both, so equally deserving, cannot as yet finally
determine the party.


Lam. Nay that is for certain none can husband be* To fair Ethusa, unless I or
He.


Pis. Here Is nothing to be done with my Sword, and I scorn to kill him as he
is, unarmed. Prithee Miserotos we should be much bound to the discovery of thy
Justice, if thou could chalk us out a fair way of Decision.


Mis. Faith I can imagine none, you are so disproportionably qualified; unless
putting it to the hazard of Lots. For you standing on terms of Chivalrie, He
of Poetry; you for the point of your Sword, he of his pen, can never meet in
fair Duel.


Pis. Why then I Will stand to Lots.


Lam. And shall I too? No; for I much do fear
To venture such fair hopes as now appear.

Pis. Nay then let her decide it; I know her judgment must prefer me,
therefore I Will stand to no other Lotterie but her liking.


Lam. It Is then agreed. -- -- --


Exe. Lamp. Pis. Mis. Did ever men run thus out of their wits with love? nay
and for one that gives them no Encouragement at all, the most contemptful
abusive woman that ere was sued to. She appoints them their days of visits, and
then sits in state like some great Princess about to decide grave matters
concerning the Commonwealth: They usually walk without in the Hall, and converse
with the Serving-men, till summoned by her Gentlewoman, who being the Clark of
the Court, presents their Petitions, their Amorous Papers of Verses, and takes
their several Enditements against the next appearing.

Well, give me Liberty of soul, who is will take Beauty.


Ex. Mis. SCEN. 2.
Panareta. Ethusa, at one door. Lysander, at the other. Lys. SAve you fairest
Ladies: I wish health
And your own wishes upon both.

Pan. But sure
He does not know how much h'has given away
In that one word. If I had my own wish,
He should bestow himself.

Eth. If that be all,
We thank you Sir.

Lys. But Lady I have business
Beyond a bare salute, and it is of Theocles,
His Service to you Lady.

Eth. Well! proceed;


Lys. He Is one, if faith can bear the stamp of Merit,
Deserves your love; he spends the day in tears,
And by his Sighs, with which he counts his hours,
He makes void Minutes. Thus he pines away,
And in a Sullen grief has lost himself
Only for love of you.

Pan. How well that tongue
Has learnt to woo! He need not fear repulse,
If he could spend a Suite in his own Name,
Smoothed with such language to my tender ears.

Eth. Alas I pity the poor Gentleman;
Bid him rise early, use good Company,
And know no other moisture but of wine,
'Twill cure his Melancholy.

Lys. If you return
But this slight Answer, know you then will draw
A new disease upon him, and your Cure
Will only thus grow to a deeper wound,
Whilst he shall die with Physic.

Pan. Still he moves
Like one that knew the Conquering Art to plead
For any but himself,

Eth. Indeed you urge
His suit so full, as if he had bequeathed
His soul into your bosom; But I pray you
Discourse it coolely; should I give my self
To every one that this way would deserve me
I should be married to a Troop of Men,
And grow a Lawful Strumpet; For my Face
Is not of that poor Clay, as to be courted
With one Flame only, there are more desires
Chained to my eyes then his.

Lys. There may be so,
And that Face does deserve it*

Pan. Pray heaven himself
Do not increase the Number.

Lys. But in all
That heap of Suitors, there are few can boast
A Flame so vigorous, as Theocles's;
All do not testify their rude Affections
With that best Complement of Gaudie Presents,
Nor woo in the costly language of rich gifts:
This is the style of Theocles firm love
Printed in Gold.

Eth. I grant indeed he sent*
Full choice of Presents, and the finest toys
As I could wish: But I returned my thanks,
And paid him still in a Civilitie:
If he expect more, I recall that too:
Else, call it what he will, he sends but wares,
And cheats my Cabinet with Merchandise,
Which I forsooth must think filled with his love,
And in Reward, bestow my self: alas
I have no price set on me, nor am sold
At the cheap rate of Jewels: I Will not pass
My self away by bargain.

Lys. Lady he scorns
To chaffer for affection: He desires
That you should recompense his Faith with yours,
And not his Gifts: when e're he sends a Jewel
Carved out into a heart, it is his own heart
Wounded and cut by your Disdain; each present
Carries a part of him that sent it too.
His Love is weaved through all his Gifts: Did he
Know that base Art how to send any thing
And leave himself out, you might easily then
Slight the poor single offer. Nor is he armed
Only with Gifts, he dare even challenge dangers
And provoke death, if he might thus avoid
The fate which he more fears of your Displeasure.
He dares fight for you and maintain your Beauty,
Whilst he shall lose his own, and paint your face
Fresh with his blood.

Eth. I, here is a way indeed,
A fine device thus to defend my beauty
That he might ruin it. That Ladies name
Whose worth must be decided by the Sword,
Suffers though in a Conquest; it is a stain
To honor, whilst it wants another force
Then its own Innocence to guard it.

Lys. Lady,
You Are too severe thus to despise all ways
That render Suitors lovely: if you doubt
His Constancy, invent your self a Trial;
Impose some harder task, whose cruel weight
Might shake a faith which was as firm as Rock,
Though more relenting. If gifts fraught with love
Cannot prevail, nor the Judgment of a Duel,
Then find out something heavier then war,
Enjoin his absence, and impose some years
Of tedious Pilgrimage, which only thu^
Shall grow a Sport and Recreation,
'Cause your Command.

Eth. Sister you are too heavy,
Come, be more cheerful.

Lys. This is a Contempt
Worse then the rest, will she not give an Answer? -- aside.
O the proud Insolence of a coy Lady!
But if that be the way, I can follow,
And shape my self to any thing to produce
A Comfort for my friend: Panareta
Let me entreat your help.

Pan. O do not wrong
The power you have in me to entreat any thing,
Be It a command, and it is already done.
Lys. What sweetness dwells in all her Answers? now aside.
I could forget my friend, and almost urge
A suit might bless my self; But I must through't:
My request is, that you would win your Sister
To glance some favors upon Theocles.
She is all stone yet, but that she will not
Be won upon by tears; No softness can
Supple her harder Bosom.

Eth. A good Character.


Pan. Ah Lysander! I did hope you would
Have urged a glad Suit of Another strain
When I did yield so far: I did believe
(How Credulous Love is) 'twas me you aimed at.

Lys. Did I forsake one shelve to split my hopes
Upon a New? I must still try Ethusa,
Since you are cruel too.

Pan. How should I plead?
Tell me what words will soonest win her love,
For sure you know the way to conquer hearts.

Eth. How gravely they consult together! only,
After more Policy to be denied still. -- --

aside. Lys. Tell her how great his Love is: let her know
She sits within his heart next to the Gods.

Pan. Sure that cannot win her, for even thus I love
You with a faith as great, as he does her.
You sit within my heart next to the Gods,
Pardon the Blasphemy, and are even placed
Above them too, and yet I am neglected.

Eth. I am glad I am released, since I can now
Gather more Breath, strong for a new repulse.

aside. Lys. If you love me, then show it in this grant.


SCEN. 3.
To them, Theocles. Pan. SEe he is come himself: let him now move
His own desires; for sure it is an Advantage
To any one, but me, to woo in Person.

The. Friend and Lady, pardon my hasty rudeness,
Which scarce permits this short salute:
I see a Beauty that can draw my Soul
Out through my Eyes, by whose exhaling virtue
I am dead every where, but in those parts
Which survive only that they may view her.

Eth. Now I must even become a Prodigy
To please his fancy; his strange Expressions
Seem not so much to court as fright a Lady.
And I applaud the strength of my conceit,
That I Am not startled yet: pray Sir tell me
What Show do you please to make Me? Am I turned
Into some Blazing Comet? Sure my hairs
Do all lie right, and they are still themselves,
They do not hiss nor spit out fire.

The. Lady,
You have the Beauty and the Majesty
Of any Star, you shine as bright as they,
But not so monstrous* and yet pray heaven that you
Do not portend a Death too. But since
You will not conceive the meaning of a Distance,
I will grow nearer to you, and address
My suit in the approach of a plain language,
My business then is humbly to implore
The Influence of your love.

Eth. Then you have performed
Your Business, you have implored it: Fare you well Sir.

Lys. Nay Lady bee'nt thus cruel to undo
A man whose only fault is too much Love:
His wish is not to beg, but to obtain.

Pan. And yet the whole reward of my Desire
Is but to beg, though I could wish t'obtain*

Eth. I must confess he still has shown himself
A careful wary Suitor. I Have received
Presents enough to tire my hand in the taking,
To which I only can return my thanks.
But he must pardon me if I withhold
My Love: H'hath bin a frequent Visitant,
And often has sent his Page to know how well
I took my Rest; nay, even how I dreamed:
H'hath been as Scrupulous as a Physician,
And knows my sleeps as perfect as my woman:
And yet for all this Care I can bestow
Only the Charity of thanks, and wish
That he would new place his love upon some Subject
That knew more how to yield.

Lys. See, Sh'hath given
An answer sucked out of my breast; I grant
You Have shown Affection great as are your merits,
For which I can but thank you, and entreat
That you would place your love upon some other,
Soft as your own Desires.

The. Your Answer, Lady,
Has only killed with Pity, all the relief
Which I can draw from so misplaced a kindness,
Is but to die.

Eth. Then I perhaps may shed
One tear upon your Funeral, and wish
That you had been more wise.

Pan. I was transported
With your unwelcome Answer, that I knew not
How to reply, had not the Charity
Of your friend helped, and taught me to confess
That all your pity only bids me die.

The. Recall your harsher sentence; Let me live
Only in the Comfort of one Smile.

Lys. Do not thus
Betray a man to sadness, who can joy
Only in the Services he does -- for you.

Pan. You plead well, if your self did not betray
A maid to sadness and the wild Company
Of her own tears, for want of the relief
Which you might pour out in one Smile.

Lys. Alas,
I should but counterfeit.

The. 'Twould appear
Some comfort yet if you would fain a Mirth.

Lys. Remit some of your hardness, and infuse
A soul into him quicker then his own.

Eth. I cannot blame the weight of his desires,
But wonder Sir at yours: I cannot see
With what hope you might urge his Suit, whilst thus
A Lady droops and pines for love of you,
One that deserves a Nobler Mate, if thus
She had not first betrayed her own desires:
Expect no other usage to your Theocles
(For I Will not call him mine) then what you cast
Upon Panareta.

Lys. If It be only this
That keeps your love in, and drives back your smiles,
My friend may yet discern some show of hope,
And I Am content that you should pattern out
Your entertainment unto Theocles
From mine to your Panareta; (for as yet
I cannot oth' sudden call her mine.)

Eth. I am content too, what thinks this sadder pair?


The. I bow to any thing you please to name.


Pan. And I to what Lysander does agree.


Eth. Be It then concluded; you are firm Lysander?
You Will not fly off?

Lys. I vow my faith t'observe it.


The. I see this comfort yet, that if I die,
'Tmust be a friend that kills me.

Pan. And I am glad
My life's enclosed within a Sisters Breath.

Eth. Enough, it is all agreed, hereafter we
Shall either know your Faith or Perjurie, -- Exe. Lys. The.
Nay Sister we expect some other Courtship, I Have appointed
My two other servants this day of Visit.

Pan. Is it a day of hearing then?


Eth. Yes; in troth this serious Courtship of Theocles had almost wrought a
distemper upon me (for such I count all sadness) I hold him somewhat too worthy
to be listed with that ridiculous Company, else I had thought upon some humor
for him too: But I Will lay no other punishment upon him besides a constant
absence, till he hear my pleasure.


Pan. O Sister, as thou regard'st my Comfort, prithee let nothing pass from
thee that may be at all distastful to him.


Eth. Well Sister, for your sake I Will study a Carriage.


To them Eudora. Eud. O Madam, yonder is your Brace of humors, as you call them,
in the midst of the street quarrelling, but hither I imagine their course is
bent.


Eth. When they come bring them in hither. Sister pray take your place, and
learn by me how to entertain Suitors. It is not fit that these Men should call
us Mistresses, and so confidently proffer their Services for nothing. I would
not have them so hypocritical.


SCEN. 4.
To them, Pisis. Lamp. Quarrelling at the door. Pis. SLave, Rascal, I Will beat
thy Brains out with the hilt of my Sword.


Lam. Sir I suppose it is my Mistress pleasure,
That I should first appear, you stay her Leisure.

Eth. How now? what Saucy companions raise this tumult so nigh me? what you
two? I did not think you had stood in so little awe.


Lam. Most fairest Lady, indeed and forsooth
He rudely has almost beat out my tooth.

Pis. And Lady I suppose he did deserve it, in offering to compare himself
with me; nay, and what is more, he did prefer his Poetry before my valor.


Eth. You Are both rude Fellows, get you to the door again, let me see whether
you can come in more civilly. Go I say.

They walk to the Door, then return hand in hand: Why this is well, now let me
hear what you can say for your selves.


Lam. Fairest of Ladies, hither I am come,
Out of my store of wit to show you some:
And if you please on this my Present Smile, Presents a Paper.
My self the happiest of Men I Will style.

Eth. What have we here, a Paper of Verses? Read them.


Lam. reads Madam, th'Vnwritten Paper I had brought
Fair as it was in the native hew,
Because it was a thing unfit I thought,
To give ought Blotted unlike you.
My weeping Pen with grief began to swell,
Sad that It should nothing send;
Whose Tears by chance to these few verses fell,
Doubtful lest they might offend.
Thus every thing fair Lady I enjoy,
Does court your Presence, mourns to find you coy.

Eth. And now, 'faith what Poet has hired you to put off his verses? you bring
nothing of your own besides the Tune, you would make an incomparable fellow, if you
had but a Raw arm, and a Partner, the structure of whose Body were built upon a
wooden leg, to bellow it out by turns in a most pitiful unsanctified Note.
Come, I know it is some Penny-Rimer or other has sold you a stock to set up
with, to save the delays of Printing: Take you out of this common way, and I
know you have no more Rhyme in you then a dying Swan, though less melody.


Lam. No, Madam? if for verses you thirst ever,
My Pen shall run, I say, as does a River.

Pis. Pox of all his Canting; This foolish thing called verse is a language as
bad as Barbarism to me: I can as soon turn honest as Rimer. -- Divinest Lady;
I fear me you will grow sick of this bad Poet; give me but leave to silence him,
I Will talk him dead. Speak nothing but Swords and bullets: Or dart a fire from
my Basilisks Eyes shall sindge and stifle all his Poetry: I will do this or any
thing, be it beyond the reach of Man or Thought, to do you service.


Eth. Has your Sauciness done yet? or do you want breath to conjure any
further? Sure you forgot your Circle, else we should have seen some darksome
Feind raised by your Charms, or heard a rattling Tempest louder then the tongue
that made it: know Sir, a Silence would better become those Swelling lips, till
you had known my pleasure. What if I like his Poetry and prefer it 'bove all
the Thunders of your puffed up valor? It Is no new thing to woo in Rhyme.


Pis. Lady, since it is your will, I Will be as silent as the Grave, which strait
should Swallow up that Bombast Poet, but that you please to ransom him: My lips
shall be sealed up as close as Cockles, and never divide Themselves till you
uncharm them.


Eth. Now as sure as the Death he talked of, he speaks all by the line, his
Tongue runs like some mad chained dog, thus far, and is then checked for want
of room and breath. 'Twere better you had obeyed without the tediousness of a
reply, and not have bin thus stubborn out of Duty. Well proceed Lamprias.


He bows Lam. I bless the Tongue that gives me leave, and shall
Thank you hereafter that he is not my Rival.

Eth. And yet 'twere not amiss to thank in present, if your Rhyme would bear
it. But pray Sir, whence grows this peremptory noise of yours? who has
informed you that Pisistratus is not the first in my Thoughts?


Lam. Lady your self has taught me this, for why
You Would not bid him be silent, unless I
Should be the Man, and since you deign this favor,
I shall still be your Creature, still and ever.

Eth. It Is true indeed, I bade him be silent, and see, he dares not so much as
whisper; but 'twas only that I might have leisure to deny you. Do you not see
how he is obedient? he dares not venture so near a disloyalty as but to breathe
at's mouth; he sucks in all the Air at his Nostrils only, and instead of
speaking does but merely shrug, and faintly nod his head, as if he feared this
were a Disobedience too: faith try him, and see how stubbornly he will hold his
peace.


Lam. Pisistratus! why Pisistratus, what has thy tongue
Forgot his Thunder? Is thy speech all gone?

Eth. You see he dares not trespass, and I would you durst not too. -- But did
I command you to breathe nothing but what was clad in verse, and yet forsooth
you dare utter your mind in Prose.


Lam. Lady 'twas verse I said, I say 'twas verse,
And if you please I will the same rehearse.

Eth. A very fine, smooth verse indeed, where the Music ends in Tongue and
Gone: 'twas well chim'd you think: but no matter, I shall find time to punish
these Enormities hereafter; mean while I Will tempt your Obedience a little
further, and command your Silence, yet it is one favor I have done you, that
you practice by Pisistratus, and hold your peace by Rule.


Lam. My Thanks and I could wish -- -- --


Eth. Stop there, and know, when I command a Silence, you must not promise but
perform it: for once I Will pardon you your Rhyme, and give you leave to break off
in the middle. Now Pisistratus I untye your tongue, and expect what you have to
say.


Pis. First let me humbly thank you, that I am still a Soldier, and may talk.


Eth. You say right indeed, for most of you are skilled at no other weapon.


Pis. But if you will give me leave to express my Thoughts, I Am none of those
weak counterfeit Warriors; no shadow but a Soldier; my Part is not to say,
but do: I disclaim these Trifles of Service, this talking way of Courtship:
Give me a danger such as would strike astonishment in the bold Alcides: Plant
me instead of Ordnance against the Walls of a besieged City, or let me enter on
a Grove of Pikes, which I will mow down like a crop in harvest.


Eth. Bless us! what a volley of words is here; you do not Speak methinks, but
Discharge, and make every sentence, a peal.


Pis. Madam, I bring no puling Elegies, no Poetry I, Bellona is my Muse, and
this bright Sword the only offering I can present: but such as when you please
shall sacrifice whole Hecatombes of your Enemies; (if yet among Mortals there
be any so profane as to injure so Divine a Beauty.)


Eth. You promise Liberally; but I fear when it should come to the Test, your
Sword will not be so nimble as the Tongue that brags on it; it shall be fastened
so close in the Scabbard that you cannot draw it out, or some such pretty toy
to delude a danger: Then instead of fighting you shall swear valiantly against
the Cutler, and give no Death but in your Curses.


Pis. Lady, your comment wrongs my worth, by your fair honor, and by those
many Victories, which yet sit warm and fresh upon my cumbred Sword, were he a
man, and such whom often Conquests had made great as my self, and to what
height my virtues have arrived, to be thought immortal; if such a man should
speak these words, I would strait confute the wild opinion of the loose world*
and leave this wonder dead before their Eyes.


Eth. Faith 'twould do well to have some proof of so untamed a valor. But yet
Sir, methinks you are much mistaken in the wooing way. Sister, what will you
say if I take down this Lyonlike Champion? this Spirit rampant? I Will undertake
with two words so to humble him, that of a boisterous Roarer, he shall become
as supple a Courtier as you would desire.


Pan. I should as much admire the miracle, as the power that effected it.


Eth. Mark then. Sir, as I told you, methinks you are mistaken in the way of
wooing: I would have a tame Suitor, you make too much noise in a Ladies
Chamber; pray let me have your Courtship in a softer Dialect.


Pis. Madam, the power of your love is so prevalent, that it can turn me to any
shape; I can submit my mounting soul to a most gentle Carriage and sweet
behavior only for your sake Lady.


Eth. As how Sir? I long for an experiment.


Pis. Why thus: Divinest Lady, my humble service being premised --


Eth. What? Do you repeat your Letters? Sure this was the last you writ to your
Country Mistress. Does it not follow -- Hoping you are as deep in love as I am
at the writing hereof -- and so forth?


Pis. Lady I do esteem't the greatest part of my Duty, still at the first
appearance to present my service to you.


Eth. What and give the same thing twenty times over? I thought you had
presented that sufficiently already, but now I begin to suspect it as at
another command, and none of your own, you are so free on it.


Pis. I hope you do not take me for a Serving-man, or Gentleman Usher, Lady?


Eth. And yet that laced Cloak being so near allied to a Livery, may breed a
foul suspicion.


Pis. Fair Madam you are mistaken.


Eth. What Sawcebox? tell me I lie. I Will make you more Obedient.


Pis. Would it would please you Lady to descend so low, as make me understand
your will, you should always find me as quick in the Execution, as
apprehension.


Eth. Bless me! my servant all this while, and now to seek in what pleases me?
I Will hear no more at this time, I care not what is your business.


Pan. Nay Sister, now you are too cruel.


Eth. My doome's irrevocable; be gone I say; I expect no reply.


Pis. Your Creature.


offers to go out. Eth. Come back again; my humor's altered; and now I think
on it, I Will put a further trial upon your Loyalty; you begin to complement
pretty well, I Will try the power of love, and see whether it can file you into a
more smooth garb; and to that purpose I command you (upon pain of my
displeasure) to appear never before me but as your Rival Lamprias is wont, in
Rhyme. I know you are not such an Enemy to the Muses, but that upon such an
occasion they may smile upon you. And then for you Lamprias, because I would
not have you un-imploy'd, you shall assume his fighting humor; I love a man
complete in all ways. Give him your Sword Pisistratus, he should have your
Buffe Coat, but that your Doublet I fear is Canvas on the back: I know you will
fight courageously; and for Pisistratus, I make no question, but in a short
space we shall have him as good a Poet as most at Court, and make verses on one
leg as well as the best of them. Come Sister, let us leave them to think on it,
when you are provided let me see you again. ( Exe. Pan. Eth. Eud.)


Pis. Make verses on one leg? I warrant they will halt to the purpose. Shall I
turn Poet and be feasted by the Players? well! I thank my stars I am not so far
to seek yet, but that I can drink, and take Tobacco, with some other initiating
qualities, in which we Poets and Soldiers are near allied.


Lam. In good faith I have not one quality of a Soldier, but running away; I
think we were best change habits, I could rhyme as well in thy Suit, and thou
fight as manfully in mine, could not?


Pis. I but do think she is no better sighted, then not to discern us by our
faces?


Lam. I had forgot that; but what then shall we do?


Pis. Nay that I know not, let us even to our friend Miserotos, and take his
Advice; A Looker on may see better ways in the game then a Party.


The end of the second Act.
ACT. 3.
SCEN. 1.
Artemone alone. I Do not doubt his Love, but I could wish
His Presence might confirm it: when I see
A fire well fed shoot up his wanton flame,
And dart it self into the face of heaven;
I grant that fire without a fresh supply
May for a while be still a fire; but yet
How does its luster languish, and it self
Grow dark, if it too long want the Embrace
Of its loved Pyle? how strait it buried lies
In its own ruins? Bless me my kinder Stars
From the bad Omen! Now methinks he wrongs
The tenderness of my Affection,
And plays the Tyrant with my easier Love,
He may perchance abuse the Liberty
He ravished from me; and when he has won
Panareta, urge my own Consent against me.
If his Love still be firm, O how he seems
Too like the God that struck him; whilst he can
Withold his Sight, too cruel! and himself.
It much afflicts me that my message was
Prevented by my Father, and my Uncle.
I Will sift the business out -- -- -- -- --
To her, Hyperia. -- How now my Girl?
Methinks there sits a Truth still in thy looks:
A Treachery upon that forehead placed,
May easily wrong a faith it self has lost.

Hyp. Madam, what unknown fault of mine has thus
Perplexed your Entertainment? heretofore
You were not wont to cast these frowns upon me,
As if you meant to bury all my joys
Within your wrinkled forehead.

Art. Whence has guilt
Borrowed this glorious shelter? how can vice
Become thus specious, hid within the shroud
Of an unfaulty look, and innocent tongue?
Thy pretty pleadings make me almost love
The Ruin thou throw'st on me.

Hyp. Madam, I dare
Pronounce my self still free; no guilt can stain
My Innocence; unless it be a fault
There to be guiltless where your Sacred Tongue
Imputes a Blot: how my grieved Eyes could weep
To wash that scandal off from my clear Face,
Which only your Suspicion makes a Crime.

Art. A vice thus painted out is the best Face
That virtue can put on: O that Lysander
Could thus dissemble too! I then were blessed
As much in his concealed Apostacy,
As in his better Faith.

Hyp. How I rejoice
To suffer with that Name: Then I perceive
It Is some uncertain Rumor has displac't
Your wonted cheerfulness.

Art. Were but the fame
Uncertain, I would then call back my Smiles,
And still shine in a free and generous Mirth.
But oh! the grave instructions of Age,
And the more lively Precepts of a bribe,
Whose Innocence will not these baits overthrow?

Hyp. Now Madam, since I have discovered thus
The poison of your sickness, give me leave
To cure the Malady with a present Ease.
You sent me to Lysander, as I went
Your Father and Diarchus met me, They,
I must confess, urged me with vehemence,
And a severity printed in frowns
Deeper then age had carved upon their brows:
They threatened to Reward my falsehood too.
(For even that whiles it would take away
My Faith from you were but a Punishment)
I should have told Lysander, that your flame
Cooled by his absence now did only aim
To seat it self within the prouder Circuit
Of Philonax rich bosom: I did then
Promise Obedience, which I performed
Only in not betraying your commands,
This is the only guilt my virtue feels
In disobeying Artemone's Father.

Art. Suspicion yield a little: how I fain
Would force my self to a belief that thou
Speak only Truth? but yet recall thy self,
Do not heap guilt on guilt in a Denial
Of what has passed; alas! thy tender years
Are too unripe for to delude the strong
And mature policy of subtle Age,
It Is but a slender fault to be overcome
By an experience such as theirs.

Hyp. Madam,
Could you persuade me that it were a virtue,
I would yet scorn to own it (Pardon Madam)
I am not rude, I ought in such a Cause
To be as bold as Innocence.

Art. Yet still methinks there heaves a Jealousy,
And will not out oth' sudden, I feel it beat
About my heart, O that I could believe
Thee faithful, and might yet suspect Lysander:
There Is something whispers me thou art not false,
And yet I must still doubt of him.

Hyp. This Madam is
But to distrust me in a fairer word,
You Gods that kept me Innocent, by the same Power
Make it appear so, else it is but vain
To worship whilst you are as blind as Love,
Virtue is worth your miracle; Create
Some new way which may blot this scandal out:
I can bring only Tears to plead my Faith,
And would I could weep Rivers to maintain
My secrecy to you, in the same way
As I would expiate some horrid Crime.

Art. Enough, The have won my Faith, and kept thy own:
Then pardon my best Girl the vain Surmise
The frailty of my love possessed me with.
Let Father threaten, and that next dear Name
Of Uncle plot against my happiness,
Let them contrive my Ruin, and infect
Their Care with Malice too, so I enjoy
Faithful Lysander, and Hyperia. --
Yet oh this Absence! -- --

She wa^lks melancholy. SCEN. 2.
To them, Theocles. The. O The strange subleties of a woman's love.
We must embrace our Punishment, and swear
We are rewarded when they torture us:
What Comfort dwells in that frail Sex, whose best
Of kindness proves a sting? have I for this
Consumed my heart in Passions? and through sighs
Breathed out my Soul to find a better dwelling
Within Ethusa's breast, and yet does she
Dislike my Presence, and pretend love too?
Alas I must not visit her; Though It be death
Not to enjoy that Face, I dare not see it.
Let those unpitied Lovers turn their plaints
Into glad Jubiles, whose constant suite
Meets a perpetual frown: I envy that
Which they esteem the worst of misery:
Would I might be denied still; They, at least
Enjoy this Comfort, to behold the hand
That strikes, whiles it is my Fate to dye in the dark.
The Tempest is then lessened whiles the Sun
Mingles his rays with the unruly showers,
But in the horror of a gloomy night
The Shipwreck multiplies, and the sad strokes
Fall double still. If I behold her face,
(That Face which hitherto has made me live)
I then must cease to be; for that is the doom
Of her displeasure; howsoere my Plot
Backed with success may soon dispel these clouds. --
-- What? Musing Sister? your looks seems to wear
A manly seriousness; all your Gestures
Should be as soft as an embrace.

Art. I confess
I did not dress my look, nor put it on,
As we do use our Gorgets, by the glass;
But if it brags no luster sprung from joy
Of your Arrival, it belies my heart.
But where is Lysander pray y'? for sure you will want
Part of your welcome, whilst that Name's forgot.

Hyp. Urge that way Theocles, it is the best Physic
To a melancholy virgin to hear talk
Of one that loves her, nay some say there is
A sickness which that Name can only cure,
Which the poor Doctor fain would undertake.

Art. Stop thy lascivious tongue, and do not dare
To think the rest. -- But brother, you tell me not
How fares Lysander.

The. How I see friendship thoroughly in that Name?
Men talk of Pylades, and I know not what
Strange Enterprises of rash Theseus;
But this Lysander, how he out-goes all story?
Give me a man made up of the Extractions
And quintessence of all whom ever yet
Fame with her lowdest Trumpet has proclaimed
For Men of Loyal Breasts, and this same Man,
This Man thus filled with Friendship, shall yet learn
A way to love from our Lysander.

Art. Sure
You Will strait commend him into some new God:
But I dare still wish after all this noise,
That he were yet complete in a firm love.

The. That were to loose a wish; I never yet
Could tell of any that had made a choice
To fix his love within the tender compass
Of a fair Virgins bosom, to which he thought
The heavens themselves were poor, and would contemn
The gaudy competition of the stars,
And yet one whom a friends request
Might tempt from all these joys, who for that Name
Durst leap from his Elysium: just such
A Miracle is our Lysander.

Art. And is the faith you bragged of come to this?
How all his Praises vanish! you do ill
To raise my hopes to such an height, and then
The only Argument of his Constancy
Is, that he is false to Me: It Is no such miracle
Of Love since you thus prize it, to betray
A Credulous Maid.

The. Heavens and Gods defend it!
He plyes my Suit, but no way leaves off you:
That love, which some say is begot by sight,
And born within the eye, yet does not perish
At every distance, nor yet die entombed
In a dark mournful wink, it is stronger weaved,
And grows more knotty then to be easily broke
At each small Absence. When you see two Irons
Receive an equal virtue from the Loadstone,
How they both stir at once, and though divided
By many envious miles, yet how they move
And dance one way still! Thus your Lysander's love
As near as your own heart, replies to yours,
And still is constant here, though still abroad:
Indeed he is grown unto that strength of love
Guarded with an unjealous Faith, he dares
In such a Cause be absent from your face,
And only meet you in a Constant heart.

Hyp. I always told her thus, whilst she replied
I was too young to know a Lovers heart.

Art. Heavens know, and the Gods witness, I Would allow
So long an absence as might even bring
My love in question, if ought thence should rise
To further your Desires: But pardon Brother,
If I esteem th'adventure of one visit
Less fatal then to cross your hopes: He might
Advance your flame, and not neglect his own.

The. Sister, he dares not dream of a neglect.


Hyp. Still for my faithfulness.


Art. He should much wrong
The love I bear his virtues to contemn it:
But though he fling no other Scorn upon me,
It Is one that he is absent.

The. How I grieve,
That Love should be thus blind.

aside. Art. What? troubled Brother?


The. Only I thought how ill Ethusa's Face
Did suit with a disdain*

Art. There Is something more
In the quick change, you were not wont so soon
To let Lysander vanish from your Thoughts,
When he is fixed there he, fills so great a space,
That Nothing else can enter, no not Ethusa;
Your looks inform that you unwilling hide
A truth which you are loath to utter: say,
What strange mishap dares vex your knowledge? is
Lysander safe?

The. Alas Sister know,
It Is one that is nearer then Lysander suffers.

Art. What still Ethusa?


The. Nay one nearer yet:
Know then it is your misfortune throws these clouds
Upon my darkened Face. -- And I could still
Suppress the Cause. Faith Sister let it pass.

Art. Nay then I will conjure you to reveal
Your Thoughts at full.

The. I can hold out no longer.
First then (with pardon that your self has scru'd
And wrung out the Relation which my promptness
Should freely offer) know that Lysander loves
Panareta; nay so as I could wish
His love as great to you: At first indeed
He did but fain Affection, and put on
Courtship, as if he thought you present still,
But won by her sweet ordered Carriage
And fair converse, he like the giddy Fly,
Long sporting with the pleasant light, at length
Embraced the cruel flame: He needs not strive
To vent an artificial Sigh or Tear,
He does not labor now to express a groan
Or doubtful accent, which may more betray
Skill then affection; Cupid uncompell'd
Sits in his Face, as proud to conquer him,
Whose Counterfeit seemed to upbraid his Power.
This sad discovery, to my troubled thoughts
Carries an equal irksomeness t'unfold,
As to suppress; for thus I lose a Friend,
Who else should wrong a Sister.

Art. Brother,
Is not the sum of all, Lysander's falsehood?
Methought I heard a Thing like this: That sense
Had but that discreet faculty to err!

The. O this villain Falsehood! That I might
Enjoy my own wish, and not murder his! aside.
How I repent my Sin ere it be done!
But I must through it, and yet bring it out
This new strange way by still denying it.
No Sister he is not false.

Art. What was it then
Your speech delivered to my trembling Ear?

The. 'Twas that Lysander was grown false: I cannot
With my best Art conceal't: Indeed he is false.

Hyp. What will become of me now? They Will believe
My treachery has wrought all this, and then
Where is that Faith I bragged of?

Art. Prithee Brother
Withdraw a while; heaven knows I love thee better
Then to enjoy thy company in tears.

The. I Will obey, and watch the progress of his Suite:
What though Lysander yet is my true friend,
(If that can be whilst he is my Sisters foe)
That Title shall not draw a wrong on you,
Hold then and I already clasp Ethusa.

Exit. The. Hyp. Fair Madam --


Art. Prithee I am not fair,
I was so when Lysander loved me; That
Was all my Beauty.

Hyp. I am glad yet she will not
Hear me; she has not leisure then to chide.

Art. And can Lysander thus forget his vows?
And cease to love? or place his unjust flame
In a new Bosom? He can; and may perhaps
Feel a Revenge high as his Injury.
It Is vain to shed a Tear: if he be false
He not deserves one Jewel from my eyes.
(For thus he once would flatter even my tears)
Grant me but this ye Gods, that he may feel
A cold repulse, and once more woo my love,
I would then trample on his base Devotions,
And joy in my revenge, which only thus
Would seem too Small that it comes after his;
And to his further Rage, I Would even woo
A flame hid in his Enemies breast.

SCEN. 3.
To them, Melesippus, Diarchus. Diar. PLy her strongly Brother, give her not
time
Merely to breathe: if her unguided answer
Would fain be clothed in a Denial, if
A discontent break from her forehead, then
Lay out your Power, stifle her speech in the birth,
And choke all passage up with the rehearsal
Of that loud Name of Father.

Mel. I am perfect
In your Instructions. Daughter you still appear
Wrapped up in Clouds, and whilst other Ladies
Study their boxes, and still practice helps
For to preserve their Beauty, you alone
Desire the ruin of your own Face: Fie!
Grow cheerful, I shall else perhaps conceive
That I am your Disease.

Art. Father, your presence
Is always welcome as of my Tutelar God,
And it must needs be some strange unheard of message
That makes your sight grow tedious.

Dia. Brother now.
Now for my counsel.

Mel. Nay then I have it:
Now Artemone by a Fathers plea,
By the unbounded limits of Sire --

Dia. And by the privilege an Uncle bears
In a reflection from that Sacred Name --

Hyp. Here are love Philtrums now; hey for Philonax.


Art. Do not thus wrong the virtue you have given me:
What need these charms? when even your fainter breath,
Though uttered in a more familiar sound,
Would prove a Spel unconquered.

Mel. We do not bring
Any severer Magic by whose art
Thou might be suppled to thy overthrow.

Dia. Love is our sole Enchantment, and a Care
For your continual welfare.

Art. Alas such News
Would challenge its own welcome, though not involved
In this mysterious Dialect: I Have not heard
Of any one so much his own bad friend
As to be wooed to a Good-fortune; know then
Father and Uncle, Styles of Providence,
What e're the message be your Cares have brought,
I will receive it with a Joy as great,
As much unlimited as I grant your Power,
And in acknowledgment shall still remain
Due to your free disposal.

Dia. Some hopes yet,
I see she is well prepared.

Mel. I, here is the sound
Of sweet Obedience! why should tender years
Fling off their Fortunes through an Appetite
And fit of liking: That Affection
Will prove most durable, where knowing Age
And a considerate choice confirm the match.

Dia. Well, I Will be silent yet, my lesser power
May but perchance hinder the good Event.

Art. Then I perceive that love will be the scope
Of this Authentic language; your discourse
Well seasoned with a grave discretion,
And the Authority of a Parents will
Have thus far won upon me: I confess
Though in the hastiness of my Desires
As far as my Affection is my own,
(Yet still reserving a due share for you)
I have in heart betroath'd it to Lysander,
Yet not so chained, but that your just displeasure
Might break the knot, or (what I Would rather wish)
Your mild advice untie it.

Hyp. A brave cunning Lady!
Her Father now must thank her, and be obliged
Because he will grant her wish.

Dia. Let but my Niece
Hold on this course, and by my better hopes
I will reward her as she were my Daughter:
And by the Dowry I will cast upon her,
It shall be thought she was Diarchus issue.

Art. Sir, though I did not hope for a Reward
Besides the naked Act of my clear duty,
I should not start from my obedience:
My thoughts are so Immaculate, that I
Could never mean to buy my Innocence,
And make a Trade of virtue.

Mel. Then my Girl,
I hope thou art prepared to entertain
Philonax's love, he, the Senator?

Art. I feel my Coldness melting! Sir, your breath
Has raised a heat in my Affections,
Which until then were frozen. I confess,
And now dare speak it; I love Philonax,
And were he present, could receive his Courtship
With more then formal kindness.

Dia. Hyperia,
Go and entreat him hither.

Exe. Hyp. Mel. Tell him we expect
His quick approach: I would not have him slip
This very punctual minute; Sure this Love
Has his set times; would he were here already.
How aguish her desires are! Now it is her fit
To like and to be well; now she grows hot
And zealous in her Love, which erst was cooled
And fanned by a chill Scorn: There is an hour
Lucky to Suitors, and it is fallen out now.
Let all young men hereafter woo by th'Clock,
Try how the pulse beats, and promote their Suite,
As we give Physic by the Almanac;
Search how the weather goes; such a day's fair,
For Lovers, fair as their own Mistress Face;
Such a day's clouded over with frowns, and brings
Foul weather, shed for her distorted looks. --
Is he not come yet? how I begin to fear
This good time will be over-straight? not yet? --
It is a wealthy Suitor. -- Here he comes. --

SCEN. 4.
To them, Philonax. Hyp. -- NOble Philonax, your quick arrival
Honors your Servants, and I hope shall meet
Their thanks in an Enjoyment of their wishes

Phi. Thanks Melesippus, if I should add Father,
'Twere but a while to antedate that Name,
I know she cannot stand out long against me.
Worthy Diarchus your Servant.

Dia. I embrace
Your love, and wish that we were nearer yet
By an Alliance.

Phi. You wrong your judgment, Sir,
To wish it, she is mine already.

Mel. Or else no child of mine,
We have only chaff'd the virgin wax,
To make her fit for your Impression.

Dia. I hope his Confidence will prevail,
We Will leave you to your stars, and courtship now.

Mel. Be plaint Girl.


Exe. Mele. Diar. Phi. Fair Lady, I am not like those that aim
Instead of a fair wife to steal a Portion,
But bring a Dowry with me; nor do I woo
With a set form of weary Complements,
But with a strong Enchanting Title: tell me,
Art thou the Senators Bride?

Art. Sir, the Confidence
Which your Deserts put on, would misbecome
My native modesty: 'twere Arrogance
TO accept proffers so beyond my state,
And I should thereby seem to grant some worth
^^ich caused your liking.

Phi. Strange, that we should be
Denied because we are too great; a Title
That other Ladies are ambitious of,
Whose queazy Conscience stands not on such points
To refuse honor. I have heard of some
Have bin with child merely with a deep thought
Of a great Title; I must needs confess
It was my Fate to be born high and noble,
Of proud Command; but yet I can vouchsafe
And deignt' accept your love.

Art. Worthy Sir,
Do not thus stoop below your self, alas!
When I shall sit circled within your Arms,
How shall I cast a blemish on your honor,
And appear only like some falser stone
Placed in a ring of gold, which grows a Jewel
But from the seat which holds it.

Phi. How I love
One that so well can read my swelling worth
At the first sight. Know then Artemone,
My Judgment chooses Thee; for so it will
Be styled what e're I do: our great Revenues
Would prove half fruitless if that we could err:
It is a main prerogative of honor
To be discreet whether we will or no;
We are infallible whilst we have thus much gold;
To be called Prudent and Judicious,
We challenge now as we would do our Rents:
Thou Art fair, and worthy, when thou art my Bride.

Art. But I could wish I Would somewhat of my own,
That my timorous consent might not wrong your merits.

Phi. Never talk oth' disproportion; I Would not wed
One whose estate already were as great,
But I would marry that we might be equal:
And even as far as love can make us so
We are already.

Art. Sir, if you understand a virgins Face
Painted with red whilst a true Lover's by,
You have my meaning.

Phi. I Have a divining guess,
And do conceive so well, that I could wish
You would pronounce my thoughts, and bless your self
With that rich word of being called my Bride.

Art. Then I assume the honor of your Bride.


Phi. And thus we seal the Contract. I knew always kisses her*
'Twas but the weakness of thy modesty
That kept thee off: though some to try my Faith,
Would often buzze in my incredulous Ears,
That 'twas the love of one Lysander.

Art. He
Once begged indeed that he might be my servant.

Phi. Thy Servant? 'faith handsomely urged, he sure
Observes the learned Roman Apothegmes,
And thinks it the best way to gain a Kingdom
By his obedience: Thus he will be your slave,
That he may rule and fetter you; thus he wooes
With language picked up from the Senate house:
The vanity of these Affected Lovers
Which hide their Suit in that submissive strain,
Were well rewarded not to be understood.

Art. With pardon Sir, it is but the common garb
And fashion of most Suitors. --

Phi. I, the common garb,
Give me a man that scorns that beaten way,
And owes his Passage to himself; It Is base,
And argues a low spirit, to be taught
By Custom, and to let the vulgar grow
To our example: It Is to betray a Virgin,
And urge the merit of a Treachery
To win Affection: I do not love
This ridling Dialect, and how ever grown
Above the pitch of any thing that is vulgar,
Am plain in my Demands: Tell me, art 'mine,
I add not Mistress, be that the fein'd voice
Of them who stretch their wits but to delude:
And cheat thy love.

Art. Sir, I am so far yours
As you shall please to style me, and embrace
The Name of any Thing your will puts on me*

Phi. It Is the discretion of thy modesty
Thus to rely on me; but prithee tell me,
Is there no rival-Name left in thy bosom?
Does no part of Lysander still rest there?
Is He quite vanished? for I would be loath
To mingle Faith, and to divide Affection;
Thou should be mine entire.

Art. I would not wrong
A Suitor of that bounteous worth which dwells
Within your prudent breast, with an half Marriage
I should be then but partly blessed, since all
My happiness is only thus confirmed
In being wholly yours. But I can bring
A stronger proof then my bare Testimony,
Thus to clear all suspicion of a love
Tied to some other; here I humbly offer,
And (though against the privilege of my Sex)
Beg your acceptance that we may be joined
As firm together as each of us are
Chained to our selv's; Let the Marriage knot
Combine our hands in witness of the league
Made by our twinn'd Souls.

Phi. Thus thou have removed
All scruple from my Thoughts, It Is not the voice
Of Hymen, nor his Priest can more confirm
My faith in Thee: But for that other knot
Which links our hands together, that a while
Must be deferred, to be attended on
By the magnificence of Ceremony.
It were a scandal to the height in which
My Dignity is sphear'd to have a wedding
With no more Celebration then the Priests:
I must not wound my Fame, nor let my state
Thus long held up now droop, and grow obscure,
They must be both kept whole, and my repute
Must flourish still unblemisht.

Art. My desires
Shall wait on yours, amd I Will no more pursue
The haste of Marriage, since it is your command
That we expect it still.

Phi. How I applaud
The obedience of thy love! A while farewell:
But stay; we must yet e're I leave thee, thus
Salute, else we have parted all this while:
I am not yet skilled in the Complements
Which love requires: no matter, I shall learn them.
Once more farewell: I Will hasten the dispatch
Of all fit Entertainments.

Exe. Philo. Art. Sir, farewell:
So; to my wish; Now whom Lysander hates
Shall reap the comfort of my Bridal bed:
I am not taken with this Philonax
For all his styles of honor: but no matter,
It is resolved, I Will love him; and perhaps
Wean him from those false pleasures, which his Pride
Has fastened on him; I see his vanity,
He courts, as if against all Cupids rules,
He would command upon the Marriage day,
And yet I sooth him in it, lest my Coyness
Should drive him back, and my revenge be lost:
Hereafter I Will reform him, and so gain
A praise to vengeance, which though it is a vice,
(If all hit right) yet shall produce a virtue.

Exe. Omnes. The end of the third Act.
ACT. 4.
SCEN. 1.
Panareta. Ethusa. Pan. SIster, you know how often you have professed
My word should be the Square of all your Actions.

Eth. I not deny the promise, and my deeds
Shall speak as much.

Pan. How I should hug thy kindness,
If this soft temper were but settled on Thee:
And Thou as yet knew'st not the rigorous Scorn
To hate a worthy Lover.

Eth. Such a one
Next to your self I Would cherish, but you then
Must give me leave with mine own eyes to see
And judge him worthy.

Pan. Ah Sister! do you thus
Observe what you professed? Is my word now
The square of all your actions?

Eth. Pardon Sister,
This is a matter of a higher Nature,
Then to be taken up on trust: In things
Of an indifferent strain I shall submit:
But on that base which props my Fate, I must
Call my own judgment unto Counsel there.

Pan. Where is that solemn Reverence then you will pay
To my experienced Discretion?
Is this the honor you bestow upon
A Judgment, to entrust it with mere Trifles?

Eth. Then you would have me to love Theocles?


Pan. It Is the Ambition of my best wishes: He Is
A man so well accomplished, that I should
Grow Envious, if he were once bestowed
On any but a Sister.

Eth. He Is a man
Sufficient, whose Suit I Would hear with pity,
If you will grant mine.

Pan. Speak, and thou have thy wish.


Eth. Then cease to love Lysander; one of that state
That he will be wooed forsooth; you must bespeak
And flatter his Affection; shortly I fear
He Will have you visit him and kiss his hand.

Pan. Ah cruel Sister! do thou thus reward
My best of wishes for thy unhappy self,
To rob me of mine own? Thou Have given a wound,
Only Lysander can inflict a greater:
When that Name's tortured then I feel a rack,
My fortunes are so woven into his,
(Like Phydia's Image in the Deity)
(And he is my God too) that what ere mishap
Strives to deface him, the same ruins me.
Not love him? prithee bid me not be Panareta,
Bid me confine the air within my hand,
And grasp a Thought: This were an easier task.

To them Theocles his Page. Page The only fair of Ladies!
My Master Theocles with his humblest service
Directs this Letter to kiss your white hands.

Pan. You mean my Sister sure.


Page It is indors'd
With your name to Panareta.

She takes the Letter. Eth. The Lad speaks well, had his Neat Complement
But left some beauty too for me: Did Theocles
Teach you these manners?

Page Madam within that Face
I see your Picture drawn so well, I may
Without a wrong to your divinest Feature,
Style that the only beauty.

Pan. Return our thanks, tell him h'hath shown a Skilful Friendship.


Page Madam, I Will bless his Ears with your acceptance.


Exe. Page. Pan. I must perus't again; such good News gathers Strength, and
grows in the Repetition.


She reads. Eth. See how she melts! with what delight she reads?
And dwells upon each syllable; as if
She had received a packet in one letter.
Sure it must needs be love! if Theocles
(Fool that I am, that I cannot call him mine)
But if my Theocles should bow his Flame,
And force it 'stoop unto Panareta's Love*
To what a pass then has my Coyness brought me?
I fear it is no vain guess; perhaps he thus
Shoots his disdain at me; and he may now
Love with Revenge more then Affection.
Now Sister; how do you like his Courtship?
Is it not full, as if there dropped a heart
From his swollen pen?

Pan. I like his Courtship?


Eth. Heavens! she is too honest to deny't,
H'hath learnt contempt from me.

Pan. How Sister, caught?


Eth. I am, and foolishly have caught my self;
I had not lost him, had I not bin too sure
That he was mine.

Pan. Sister, you have made me glad
In this discovery, News almost as good
As that the Letter brought me.

Eth. And can you then
Prize any thing as high as Theocles?
His love should be more then expression.

Pan. Still you increase my joys.


Eth. Nay let it not
Be sport that I am ruined, because thence
You gain a fortune.

Pan. Since it is gone thus far,
I hope it is past recall: Then you love Theocles!

Eth. As I do health or virtue: but do not mock
At my misfortune; sure he loved me once.

Pan. And does so still: if you desire a proof,
Read his own Letter.

Eth. Thus he that executes
Holds out the Axe which cuts away our life,
And we are first killed through the Eyes. I Will read,
But prithee Sister, if I chance to sigh
Or wet the paper with a Tear, as if
I Would drown the sad contents, prithee at least
Bestow a pity on me, and confess
My loss deserves this sadness. Now I die.
She reads. Artemone, through a Jealousy I wrought in her, has cast off
Lysander; my aim is; that despairing here, he may esteem your love as it
deserves -- -- But is it then no worse? I feel a Joy
Running through all my veins, and I conceive
That I may live still.

Pan. Nay but read on,
There Is somewhat else left that requires your notice.

Eth. Oh is the wound behind still! I had thought
There could no Poison follow such fair words:
But be it what it will, I Will taste it.
She reads on. -- -- I have my reward, if you further my suit to Ethusa.
Theocles. I Would thought I was in heaven before: but now
I Am past the reach of Envy.
If you further my suit to Ethusa. O what a relish
Flow from these words? I am thine Theocles,
Thine own without a mediators help:
But prithee Sister do not thou betray
The weakness of my passion; let me still
Hold out, and though you know my eageraesse,
Let me come slowly on; I would yield
Too soon, though I have yielded all already:
I cannot deny his suit, yet I Would be loath
To fly into his arms; I would retain
Some modesty in the height of passion.

Pan. As I would not desire you should woo,
So I would wish you would not be too stiff,
One stubbornness may lose us both.

Eth. I Will not wrong
The hopes of either, since to Tyrannize
Longer over him, were to torment my self.

SCEN. 2.
To them Lysander walking silently. Pan. MY dear Lysander,
Thou Art opportunely welcome; for no time
Is thought unfit when to enjoy thy presence.
It Is season at thy very Entrance.

He walks by. Eth. What? is he grown a Mummer?


Lys. One of your Making Lady.


Eth. 'Troth then you have forgot your vizard Sir,
My Maid shall fetch a mask.

Lys. No Lady, I can be content for once
To look upon you through one pair of eyes.

Pan. Come, do not thus revenge your self.


still he walks by. Eth. What? is Lysander come yet?


Lys. Yes, and with him the neglect you taught him.


Eth. Troth Sir,
I Would forgot the Mask, and was thinking to have
Sent for your self.

Lys. Prithee good Lady send: faith not worth a servant.


Eth. I have one Sir ready at call. Eudora.


To them Eudora. Eud. Madam.


Eth. Go call Lysander hither.


Eud. I go Madam. Lysander! Does not your Ladyship mean Theocles?


Eth. I tell thee Girl Lysander.


Eud. Madam he is there before you.


Eth. O I cry thee mercy, are you the man? well, leave us.


Ex. Eud. Lys. I was once, and there are some here could wish I were so still.


Pan. There is indeed Lysander. he walks by.
Still slighted? what a strange rage tears my divided breast?
See Sister, what a Monster your disdain has
Made me; I Am not worth the speaking to:
Prithee calm him, and yield a little, I know
It Is thy neglect to his friend Theocles,
That robs him thus of his Civility.

Eth. I will endeavor.
Pray Sir, from whence rise these strange
Postures?

Lys. You may inform your self.


Eth. My Ignorance will not Admit of a conjecture.


Lys. Know then,
It is your cruelty to that best of men,
The faithful Theocles.

Eth. This is stranger yet;
Suppose that true, yet how can this excuse
The fullennesse of your Temper?

Lys. Thus;
You know my vows are past so to regard
Panareta, as you do Theocles,
To whom your disrespect does bind my Faith
To show her this disguised behavior:
It Is you, her Sister, wrongs her.

Eth. I know not, but methinks I feel
Some yielding passions; if there be a name
Next under Love, That, he has won already,
I bear some good will toward Theocles.

Lys. If you expect no more from me, that task
Is soon performed: I bear some good will too
Toward Panareta.

Pan. Alas, that is a bounty
You have still granted me without a Suit;
I aim at somewhat higher.

Lys. Pardon Lady,
My vow that keeps me off.

Pan. Prithee Ethusa
Grow nearer in thy love to Theocles.
It Is one advantage yet, since it is my Fate
To woo, to beg help through a Sisters love.

Eth. Lysander then I challenge all your vow;
That you affect constant Panareta, since
I now begin to honor Theocles.

Lys. Then vanish hence all roughness; fairest Lady,
I now profess my self what I was forced to hide,
My self your humblest Creature.

Pan. Blessed change:
It Is Music all thou speak: this late disorder
Heightens my joy: thus we owe thanks toth' cloud
That robs us of our Sun, that after he
May show a face more washed and clean.

Lys. But yet*
I must needs grant there are some trifling vows
Made to another love, fair Artemone,
Which I would fain forget.

Pan. But dare you then
If she send back those vows, and remit all
Your kinder promises; if she renounce
And slight your former love, dare you then place
Those vows on me.

Lys. By all the faith of oaths
Then I will love none but Panareta.

Pan. Fixed in this confidence, I will no more
Be troubled with this torment Jealously.

Lys. Nor shall you find just cause: you freely now
Dare trust my absence; There Is a Passion burns
Struggling within my breast, which checks my love,
And tells me, I delay the news too long,
For want of which my Theocles does languish.

Eth. Confirm him strongly in my affection,
Leave him no scruple unresolved; tell him
I languish too, and shall expect his Visit.

Lys. Worthy Madam thanks for these brave employments*


Ex. Lys. Pan. I owe these joys all unto Thee; nor yet
Shall I appear ungrateful, since I have used
No other means for my own happiness,
But what may prove the readiest way to thine:
Thus thou enjoy'st Thy Theocles; thus thy love
Is like a virtuous Deed, it is own reward --

SCEN. 3.
To them Philonax.

-- NOw Noble Philonax.

Phi. It wrongs my Faith

To Artemone but to see that Face.

aside. Pan. Dare you not trust our Ears with what you whisper?
You were not wont to be alone with us.

Phi. I dare, though what I speak be my own poison.


Eth. If he talk venom, will not his discourse
Blister our Ears? 'Faith mine begin to tingle already.

Phi. Know then Panareta, since I left that Face
(In which resides my only happiness)
I thought I could forget it, and at length
I thought I might not love it: your disdain
Raised up these treasons, against the Majesty
Of your unequalled beauty; then I strove
To love fair Artemone, as the white
Which Cupids shaft might easier penetrate:
I wooed but with an ill success: for she
Straight granted, and bethought her presently
Upon the Marriage; she talked nothing but
Wedding solemnities, and with such eagerness
I thought her self would make the Bridal song:
It is agreed with all; Grave Melesippus
And sage Diarchus too have feal'd the Match
With their too free consents; my business here
Was to take back those vows, which yet your Scorn
Would never vouchsafe t'admit: but being uncharm'd
From Artemone, and again fettered
Within the glorious prison of your Face,
I must now beg that you deny my suite,
You Have struck a ray with those fair wounding Eyes
That chains my heart unto them.

Eth. O the tricks
That love deceives with, how it never goes
Abroad with his own Face.

Pan. But tell me, are you sure
That Artemone has bestowed her self
Freely on you? Do not mock my Fancy,
Which may be credulous against my self.

Phi. As sure as I shall hazard all my fortunes
In your just hate, whom my still ardent flame
Pursues with a strong Faith.

Pan. Then carry hence
This beam of comfort, if you dare affirm
She Is false to her Lysander, that I thus
May be revenged of his unjust disdain,
Whilst he shall lose all his best hopes in her,
You shall much please me, and soon meet my thanks.
Come Sister.

Exe. Pan. Ethu. Phi. Then happy Philonax who thus does woo
One Bride, that he may have the choice of two.

Ex. Phil. SCEN. 4.
Mise. Pis. Lamp. Pis. NAy, but I prithee good Miserotos, have thou thought on
the means whereby we might effect our Desires?


Lam. I, that is it we desire to know.


Mis. O you can speak plain language now.


Lam. Yes, 'faith, the power of love has reformed me, yet at first I was very
unweildy to be wrought into passable prose. But to the Plot you promised.


Mis. Then thus: You know your Mistress has enjoined you to change humors;
you Pisistratus to make Sonnets altogether, and speak nothing but rhyme: you
Lamprias to fight and swagger as he was wont.


Lam. Yes, this we know too well, but which way we may execute it, are
altogether ignorant.


Mis. I Will tell you: you Lamprias shall pen some verses which Pisistratus shall
deliver as his own.


Lam. I, but what then? he cannot lend me any of his valor, how shall he
requite me?


Mis. Be patient a while and mark; you shall make him besides some other verses
by way of common place, to furnish him with an answer in rhyme upon most
occasions. Now in lieu of this Courtesy, he shall let you in the presence of
his Mistress give him any opprobrious terms whatsoever, and with patience
receive 3. or 4. blows and kicks from you: which must needs give a sufficient
Testimony of your mutual change, and her power that effected it.


Lam. Thanks kind Miserotos; this plot is admirable: I Will pen some thundering
speech for my self, which if I have the grace to pronounce with a brave
courage, I am made for ever: But I much fear, I shall hardly find in my heart
to beat this Pisistratus, I have found him always so boisterous; and then I
have no skill at my weapon.


Mis. O it is but practicing a little, you may beat your man or so.


Lam. What if I practiced first upon one of my Landladies Maids?


Mis. That Is base and cowardly.


Lam. Or one of her little boys?


Mis. Well, do as you will; but see that you look and speak very courageously.


Pis. But what shall I do if he chance to ask me some questions, to which I
have no answer in verse?


Lam. Why I Will tell you the trick on it; It Is but thinking of two words that are
rhyme first; and I Will warrant you with a very little pain, you may screw some
other words to make up the verse: it is no great matter though one be sometimes
shorter then another; a cripple verse that halts upon crutches, sometimes does
very well, and moves compassion.


Pis. Why look you, let us hear you rhyme, here is two words, Armado, and
Lansprisado.


Lam. For your sake Madam, I fear not an Armado, For I would kill them all with
my Lansprisado.


Pis. Very well: here is two other; Musket and Helmet.


Lam. O Sir, that is no rhyme; you must by all means take a great care that your
verses fall in the like sound, or else you spoil all.


Pis. What if I read some of our late versifiers for exercise? for I think
there are none better to bring a man to a smooth familiar style of riming, then
some of our Modern Poems that treat of Executions, and Monsters born in other
Countries.


Mis. What Ballads?


Pis. So I think they call them.


Mis. Out upon them: treat of executions say you? it is one to read them; and for
Monsters, they can feign none so prodigious as themselves: I Will be judged by
your Friend Lamprias else.


Lam. Indeed I always esteemed them scarce fit for a Gentleman's survey; and
yet since Watermen, and such people have dabled in Poetry, I see no reason why
they may not be gathered into a Volume, and called Works: Howsoever I believe
it will not be amiss for a young Sucking Poet as you are to take all advantage
of imitation.


Pis. I, as if I had a mind to wish her happy, thus would I rhyme.

God save your beauty Lady fair,
And send it long to reign;
And eke your loyal Servants all
In health and wealth maintain.

Lam. Yes, yes, such may serve very well, being it is a way you never were
skilled in: But I Will furnish you as well as I can with verses and rimes to give
an Answer to most questions, or else stand by and prompt you. You Will keep
counsel, and never be discontented if it fall to my lot to enjoy her, as I
promise in the same case for you.


Pis. Never doubt me; but be you sure you do not kick too hard, for I shall be
my self again presently if you do. Come let us be gone, and prepare our selves.


Exe. Pis. Lam. Mis. I will by no means miss this sport, it will be excellent
mirth to hear the Captain thunder out his amorous soft strains, and my the other
friend whine out some bombast speech in a lamentable amorous tone: I Will be sure
to follow them.


Ex. Mis. SCEN. 5.
Lysander alone. I Do repent thy wrongs virtuous Panareta;
And will release the Injuries, and now strive
To love in earnest; I Will repeat her sighs
With a true groan, I Will mock her misery
No more with grief printed but forehead deep,
I know her love is as her virtues are,
Entire and constant: But what rebellion
Weighs down my soul? And can I spend a passion
In any besides Artemones Name?
She is all Faith and beauty, there my heart
Chained with the strength of vows has fixed it self.
Where I am equally beloved of two,
It Is not ingratitude but my destiny
To forsake one: I should love Artemone,
But must Panareta. O where is my Friend,
The News I carry will cheer him, though it wound
The Man that tells it: I have won Ethusa
Unto his bosom, but I Have lost my self.

To him Theocles. The. What Friend, alone?


Lys. No; for I Am never dispossessed of Thee,
And thy fair Sister.

The. It Is one of those good faults
We cannot quarrel at: but I could wish
That you were freer with Panareta.

Lys. And I, that I were quite released her sight!
I Have bin too free already, and so far
Have yielded though against my self,
That she has gained Ethusa to your love:
And I am now sadly employed from her
To tell you she is yours. Pardon Friend,
If I can spin a grief out from the web
Of your delights, suck poison from your Joy:
It Is not well done to put me on these snares
And thorns of Friendship, There are smoother ways
To show an unmolested courtesy,
And we might love at ease.

The. Though I am glad
At these good tidings; yet I cannot choose
But grieve you envy them: I hope you will not
Accuse my friendship as it were a burden.

Lys. Then let my tongue be blasted. But how e're
It Is in thy power to give a greater ease.
As I Have known men strong and healthful, yet
Admit of Physic, though I dare not say
I Am sick, yet certainly I should appear
More vigorous if thou would cease to love
Ethusa.

The. If a friends breath can poison,
There is a hot infection now taints thine.

Lys. Be not yet too rash: you have called me friend,
And would you then grow strong out of my Ruins?

The. Heavens forbid!


Lys. Then see the Labyrinth in which I tread,
I woo Panareta in this disguise,
Only to win her Sister to your love:
Whilst thus I sue, that great Man Philonax
Bends his Devotion toward my Goddess,
And is my dangerous Rival in your Sister,
Now if you would free me from this Vizard love,
Then were my Artemone free from him,
Who then would seize on fair Panareta,
From whom it is only my pretense has barred him.

The. And would you have me then not love Ethusa?
'Twas but a vain request, while my best Faith
Was answered with the violence of scorn:
But now being strengthened with a mutual Love
What fury can remove it?

Lys. How I Am made up
Only of wavering! I must not see
A Friend thus plunged whilst I within my Power
Can grasp the Remedy. Know then, friend Theocles,
Though through my own misfortune I Will maintain
Thy happiness in its due height, methinks
If Love to her must breed neglect to thee*
I now could cancel Artemones vows.

The. O ye wonder of what was e're styled friendship!
It were my Heaven if that thy Love to her
Did not make faint, and cool Ethusa's heat,
What now is warm'th might burn into a flame,
If thou could truly love Panareta.

Lys. I can, and shall not henceforth act thy love,
Nor woo as Proxy longer. I Will not be
Only a bare naked Interpreter,
Nor spend my Suit in a third person more,
I will profess my own vows, and implore
A medicine which may cure a malady
Fest'ring within this breast: I see her love
Settled, and though affronted with neglect,
Unshaken still; I meet no obstacles,
No threatening Father, nor too covetous Uncle,
The Reins are in her own hands; she enjoyes
A full command over her self, but that
Sh'hath given the power to me.

The. Being thus confirmed,
I Will rip my breast before thee, and uncase
A secret which till now I durst not utter.

Lys. A Secret! Heavens, how have I lost my Faith,
That ought between us two should be concealed?
I thought till now thy breast was made of glass,
And lay as open to my curious view,
As that Face does.

The. Call back thy former temper,
When you have heard more, you may perhaps confess
I ought to hide it.

Lys. Prithee then quickly speak,
That I may be thy Friend again: for sure
That name is lost whiles there remains a Secret.

The. Then since thou love Panareta, know my Sister
Believes as much, and first has cast thee off,
It was my Plot (pardon good Lysander,
Only that one word which ere yet stained my Friendship)
I workt her into this suspicion,
Told her she was forsaken, and Panareta
Become her Rival; then she left thee too.
Thus neither guilty, you have both cast off
Each other first; my end in this contrivance
Was to new plant thy Love, and make it firm
Where 'twas but counterfeit, that I might thus
Sooner Enjoy Ethusa.

Lys. Have you now
Vented your secret, is it quite out?

The. It is,
But I could wish that it were closed up still
Within the private Cabin of my breast,
Your frown has made me thus unloyal.

Lys. Sure
'Twas not well done then to be treacherous,
When I my best faith and my falsehood too
Bestowed upon thy safety -- But I Am grown
Too calm: If I should now consider Thee
In thy first love, that thou were once a friend,
This were to season Madness with Discretion;
And I should rave with Judgment: Balance all
Thy better deeds with this one Injury,
They cannot weigh down my Revenge: then draw,
That I may cut thee and thy false love off
From any Title to my wounded heart.

The. Sheath up your Sword and anger; let not thus
Your passion rule, that you may after say
You Have lost a friend.

Lys. Base villain draw.


The. If you are so rash not to consider me,
At least remember your own spotless honor,
The Nobleness with which you heretofore
Were wont to fight, would scorn to take advantage,
Know then your challenge aims at one that is
Already wounded; your severer tongue
Worse then the fiercest rage your Sword can bring,
Has almost slain me.

Lys. Fie, do not thus increase
The wrong thou have done me; let me not be forced
To kill the yiedling; for my own fames sake
At least do one good deed, and to redeem
The scandal which thus brands my Innocence,
Die with thy sword in hand.

The. Ify'are resolved
Upon my death, inflict it; be it never said,
(What ever the disgrace my tongue has done)
I took up arms against my friend.

Lys. I Will tear
That Name from thy false throat; to be thy friend
Is to be treacherous, a Sin which yet
Could never reach Lysander; which my sword
(A name to me almost as dear as faith)
Shall thus maintain.

The. Then since I needs must draw,
It Is with thy hand I do it.

Lys. Take my thanks
Yet for this latest Curtesy.

They fight. Theo. wounded. SCEN. 6.
To them Melesip. Diarchus. Philonax. Artem. Hypera. MEl. O my son Theocles!


Art. O my Brother, my
Dear Brother.

Diar. What sadness do we see? where is the Author?


Phi. Here, it is base Lysander.


Mel. You Artemone take care of Theocles; see the best Surgeons be quickly sent
for.


The. Be not thus tender, it is but a scratch h'hath given me.


Exe. The. Art. Hyp. Mel. O false Lysander! can thou pretend love
Born to our family, and yet thus wrong
The best part of it?

Diar. Brother, you are too mild,
It Is not discourse, but law must right us.

Phi. Let us strait tear a Satisfaction
Out of his Inmost bowels.

Mel. Noble Sir,
We must not heal one quarrel with a new one,
Here Is too much blood already.

Lys. I have not thus
Stood silent, that I might with leisure frame
Some Innocent Apology; I Have heard
And seen your griefs, which I my self have born:
The Amazement which is stuck in all your brows,
Is fixed within my heart too, this same hand
Wonders as much at what is done as you,
And I can scarce believe 'twas I that did it:
Let Melesippus and Diarchus know
I pity their misfortune as my own.

Diar. But pray Sir let us know what reason was it
That raised this Tumult.

Mel. You were wont to join
In close Embraces of another kind.
What should thus change your greeting?

Lys. Some few rash words too bad to be rehearst.


Diar. It Is now past hiding, you must show the cause To us, or to the rack.


Lys. I cannot utter it.


Mel. Lead on then, we must put you in the charge
Of a strong guard if the wound be dangerous.

Exe. Omnes. The end of the fourth Act.
ACT. 5.
SCEN. 1.
Theocles. Artemone. Hyperia. Art. I Would you had still kept the cause unknown
Of this your fatal Combat, sure I am,
'Thas bred a Mutiny within my soul,
Scattered Seditious wars through all my thoughts.
O Brother! you have made me break a faith
Firm as the Rock of Diamonds, and as precious*
I must confess continual waves of Fear
And Jealousy much dash't it, and endeavored
At least to overwhelm that which they could not
Shake from its firmer station; yet it stood
Unmoved, though not discovered. O Lysander!
What will thy Innocence conceive, when Thou
Shall find my heart thus altered, and my Faith,
(My Faith once given to Thee) plight to another,
To Philonax thy Enemy, and owe all this
Unto thy Friend, my Brother? yet I know
His softer Disposition cannot choose
But pardon, and still love you, call you still
His hearty, constant, loving -- Traitorous Friend,
And thus embrace you.
Closing with Theocles, she draws out his poniard, offering to stab him, but
is hindered by Hyperia.
Hyp. Hold Madam, what is your meaning?


The. Hyperia, thou did but ill to hinder
The wholesome wound, I have much blood still left me
Might well be spared, much bad corrupted blood
Which has infected, more then filled my veins,
That blood which prompted my unwilling thoughts
To value my desires above my Faith;
Would it were all exhausted, save so much
As might preserve a Blush for my past Folly.
Come beloved Enemy, unrip my bosom,
You need not wound my heart, for that already
Bleeds a Repentance in a shower of Tears,
Which like so many purpled Magistrates
Pass Sentence on my Guilty thoughts.

Art. Oh Sir,
You Have quite overcome my rage by this unfeigned,
This powerful Repentance, your hearty tears
Have quite extinguished all my Flames of Anger:
I now begin again to be your Sister,
Yet I could wish your thoughts had bin unspoken,
I would this had not happened.

weeps. The. Think not my Speech,
When first I did accuse your true Lysander,
Uttered the least Intention of my Thoughts:
My words did then as much belie my knowledge
As his unmoved Loyalty. Alas,
My own love tempted me to betray his,

Art. That again blows my zealous rage. I would
He had bin false indeed, (pardon Lysander)
Would he had broke his promise: but that he
Should then preserve so true, so strict a faith,
When credulous I upon a bare report,
Nay not so much but one Man's single word
Should cancel all my vows: And yet it was
My Brothers word, the friendly, virtuous Theocles.
For heavens sake take your poniard, and prevent
All outrage that my passion may suggest.

The. Nay do your pleasure, here I stand that would
Most willingly now fall a Sacrifice
To your offended goodness. Surely when
This cottage of my soul shall fall to earth
Crumbling to dust, your Fury will like that
Be blown away; when you shall find me ashes,
And think me made so by your Flames of Anger,
You will forgive me, nay will you not? pray speak.

Art. Sorrow thou come too thick upon me, and
My oppressed Soul sinks under the vast burden. --

SCEN. 2.
To them Lysander. -- O Brother hide me from that Deity
That is so much offended; I dare now
Not look on any thing that is not false
And like my self. And yet for ought I know,
There Is unexpected mercy. I have heard
That Noble power does as often appear
In lenity as just Revenge. O Sir,
If your breast harbor pity for that wretch
That could find none for you, here you may use it:
And this in all my misery shall be
The seasoning comfort that I shall supply
The object where you may employ a virtue.

Lys. Fairest, those knees were never meant to bow But to the Gods that made
them.


Art. Sir, let this Excuse
My former stiffnesse: I have broke my vows,
And given away my Faith, as if you first
By a recanting falsehood had provoked it;
But heaven knows you are true, and I as black
As sin can make me: yet methinks mistake
Might somewhat mollify the Censure of
My giddy passion. No, it was enough
That I could think ought true that might impair
Your virtuous Constancy.

Lys. I pray correct
Your erring thoughts, for I was false indeed,
And hither came for pardon.

Art. O the vastness
Of faithful love! undo me not I pray
By that Immensity of Favors, which
'Twill be impossible e're to deserve.
That love should force a Man t'accuse himself!
And lest I might well think I had done basely
Thus to pretend a falsehood. Come, I shall
Sooner suspect the sprightly fire should
Forget its natural wings, leave to mount upward,
And creep upon the sordid earth, then once
Your pure and elevated Thoughts could flag,
Or that your Faith could know so low an ebb
As to think foulely. O Sir, I am another,
And cannot now bestow my self upon you,
Nor dis-ingage my self from all that load
Of kindness you have heaped upon me, but thus --

offers to stab. Lys. Hold Lady, hear me out, and you will find
I Am not the man for whom you ought to die.
Know to my shame I speak it, I was false,
Nay truly false. My faith was counterfeit,
But not the breach of it: and that you may
Know so much to your self, hither I come
First t'implore a pardon, then desire
That you would render back my vows unto me,
Forget that e're you loved me, or I you.
And if the least Desert of mine remain
In your fair breast, that still might prompt Affection,
Tear it away; for I have blasted all
My former merits by this Act of baseness.

Art. How I embrace that falsehood! O it joys me
(As now my fortune stands) more then all Faith,
All love could ever. And I would fain know
The happy reason that first moved you to it.

Lys. Madam, when first I had the license from you
To court Panareta, I was all your own,
Yet somewhat doubtful through the Jealous fears,
Chiefly through that old hate your friends bore to me,
To which being added that fair Carriage, which
Panareta always studied, quite o'recame
My dallying thoughts, and turned them at length
To a true dotage. O she would often sit
And breathe a clowd of sighs, tell me how much
I should abuse a credulous virgin, if
I did but personate that love I made.
How if I did enjoy another Mistress,
Her Ghost (for sure she could not well outlive it)
Would fright my soul from this my body to her:
O she would cast such powerful glances on me,
Such charming Spirits danced in the bright rays
Of every view; They did draw up my soul,
And chained it fast to hers. Thus the fond Lark
Playing about the glittering snare does tempt
The Nets, and dares its prison, till at length
He finds his Liberty betrayed, and all
That pomp of brightness, but a glorious bayt.

The. Methinks in all the story you have forget
The principal main business, my Obligement,
The Cause of all these Troubles; yet I hope
You did it not in that neglected way
As to forget it strait: why tell you not
How you may thank your Friend for these Disasters?
How faithless Theocles wrought all this woe?
And to Reward you, studied to betray you.

Lys. O Friend! the rough behavior I last used
Has wiped off all your score; you now stand bound
To me for nothing: nay you shall oblige me
If you will sign my pardon, for which merit
I hope I shall e're some few minutes pass,
Make and pronounce you happy in your love.

The. Your goodness still o'recomes us, and your Favors
Flow in so high a strain they seem to scorn
All competition of Desert or Thanks.

SCEN. 3.
To them Melesippus. Diarchus. Philonax. Panareta. Ethusa. Mel. COme Lovers to
the Temple, you were best
Make all the Speed you can when once agreed:
There are so many tricks in love, I should
Never believe I had my wench until
The Ceremonies were all quite performed.

Diar. And therefore we think fit my Lord, if you
Can in your Judgment count it so, to pass
All Ceremonious pomp.

Phi. I Am yours,
And only do demand my Love here would
Make but a Repetition of the vows
Which formerly have past between us two.
It Is but to satisfy this Lady here,
Who otherwise requires my love.

Art. Nay sure
They are all registered in heaven ere this,
And only want that approbation which
The Church must soon allow.

Phi. And therefore Madam,
I here disclaim all right and title to you,
Panareta, come, you see I have performed
Your strict Injunction; I have wooed her so,
That you can witness now she disclaimes
All other interest.

Art. Now bless me heaven!
Shall I for ever be deluded?

Phi. Oh!
It cuts my very heartstrings thus to abuse
So fair a goodness: were I well quit here,
I could recant and claim her love again.

Mel. Sir, are you mad?


Dia. What mean you Lady?


Pan. Sir, I shall study to deserve this favor, to Phil.
But cannot now bestow my self upon you,
And therefore Madam here I deliver
What lawfully ought to be yours.

gives Philo. to Art. Lys. What strange
Mysterious clouds are these? Fair Mistress let us to Pan.
Not wander on in darkness still, I pray
What means this mad confusion?

Pan. Philonax,
I must confess you first did woo my love.
And court my thoughts, but still they were reserved
Unto this noble Gentleman; yet still
Finding him backward, in respect he had
Before expressed some love to Artemone,
I know no other means to dis-ingage him,
But this by sending you to court his Mistress,
Which you were willing then to undertake,
To please me in a Revenge I feigned,
And finding to my wish such vows between you
Not fit to be revoked, I much congratulate
Your happy suite. And now Lysander, being
You have here had experience how free
You are from all this Lady can claym from you,
I thus perform my promise unto Theocles, gives him Ethu.
And therefore challenge yours.

Lys. You cannot Madam
More fully crown my wishes, and I hope
Content dwells smooth on every brow.

Eth. Sir I hope you will pardon
All roughness that I heretofore have used,
It was but personated; now I freely
Do speak my self and my own thoughts, when I
Do say you are the man I only Love,

The. I am
So quite distracted with my happiness,
I know not well to whom I owe it, and
Therefore deferr my thanks.

Art. Nay Sir,
I hope you do not still repent you,
Why look you so disturbed in your thoughts?

Phi. I am studying what great merit I might do
To win your pardon Lady.

Art. Sir you have it.


Phi. I now
Begin to be awake my Artemone,
I find I have but dreamed all this while,
Now I can see your merit, and discern
Your real virtues much out-ballance all
My vanted Glories, and I here shake off
That personated pride I first took on me.
Merely to keep my self from such a blessing,
Which now I do account above the World,
Your Love; which I will study to deserve
By all the Courteous humble Carriage
That crowns a Genial bed.

Art. O Sir, you have
Redeemed my desperate thoughts by this discovery,
I ever loved you much, but yet I could not
Persuade my self to think your pride a virtue,
Which being thus shook off I do esteem you
Of more then humane worth.

To them a Servant. Ser. Here are some Gentlemen without desire admittance to
Madam Ethusa.


Eth. Bid the Trifles begone, I am now too serious.


Mel. O by no means, pray Lady let them enter.


Dia. If they bring mirth they will do well to season our past fears.


Eth. If they perform my Injunction, we shall have very good sport: one of them
is Pisistratus the quarrelling fighter by my command turned Poet, and the other
my riming Gentleman Lamprias thrust into his humor: pray interpose not, but
let me have* my will.


SCEN. 4.
To them, Pisistratus with a boy before him bearing a Laurel, Lamprias in some
Knight-like attire ushered by his Squire bearing a Shield and Lance, Miserotos.
Pisistratus takes his Laurel and makes toward Ethusa. Eth. What have we here
a prize? How now my Poet,
What Is the News with you?

Pis. Madam see here the power of your love,
Out of my proper sphere it makes me move.
I who whilome like Warrior thundered wildly,
Am melted to a Poet, and now speak mildly.

Eth. Most mildly delivered, sure you have spoke a speech in a Pageant: but
where is your Sonnet? have you brought me no papers of verses?


Pis. In sign I versifie by your command,
This to your feet I offer; these to your hand.

Laying his bays at her feet, offering his verses. Eth. Let your boy sing them.
--

Song.
Two-topt Parnassus I defy,
But that your swelling breasts supply,
If every Poet there mightly,
O who could choose but versify!
A quill that is snatched from Cupid's wing in spite
Of inbred Nature will compel to write.
Then for a Helicon I know
A purer far your lips do show,
What in your Cheeks before was snow,
Melted to Nectar there does flow.
I can out-vy Phoebus, whiles I enjoy
A Daphne far more fair then his was coy.
-- Very well, let me see them.
She reads. Two-topt Parnassus I defy,
But that your swelling breasts supply.
That I may know these are your own making, tell me what is Parnassus. Mis.
She Will put him out of his way and spoil his riming.


Lamp. prompts. The Poets Mountain. Pis. Fair Lady to give you an answer plain,
As I have heard some say, it was the Poets mountain.

Mis. Now he is forced to rhyme of himself, mark how he hacks the Kings language.


Eth. Well, and what can you say of Helicon?


Lam. prompts, The Muses spring. Pis. By Bellona Madam, the truth to tell ye,
The Muses spring heretofore was called Heli -- Con by the Poets.

Eth. Well Sir. (reads) I can out-vy Phoebus, whiles I enjoy
A Daphne far more fair then his was coy.

I pray Sir what Relation had Daphne to Phoebus?

Pis. She was -- she was -- what, what?


jogging him. Lamp. prompts. His Mistress turned to Laurel. Pis. She was his
Mistress not turned -- not turned --


Eth. Yes Sir, she was turned, but to what?


Pis. Now I have't) She was Phoebus Mistress not turned to rue or Sorrel,
But metamorphosed into a Laurel.

Eth. I see this sudden riming does somewhat perplex you; but I find by your
written verses which you have studied, That upon mature deliberation you write
very well, and are like to make a hopeful Poet. Well, so much for you: Now my
brave Knight let us hear you rant it.


Pis. I think I came off with credit: but she put me shrewdly to it at last, I
had no rimes provided for such answers.


Lamp. having stalked about, talks in his amorous tone. Through many craggy
cliffes of Mountains high and mighty, have I by the robustuous nerves of these
brawny arms sought out Bellonian Encounters, to testify the affection I have
conceived to the fairest of Fayres, Ethusa; In whose defense I here stand up a
Champion, and defy all Bradamants, all Knights of the burning pestle; by the
dreadful thunder of my tearing throat I will astonish and confound them; by the
Aetnean flashes which my bayting enraged blood shall evaporate, I will wrap
them in flakes of lightning, or by the Boreasian Tempest of my most strenuous
breath shake in pieces their limbs, and sweep their scattered relics into the
Sea-like Dust.


Eth. Most prodigiously valiant. Sir, your voice methinks is much changed since
last I saw you; you then spoke in a mild amorous key, but now you do so
thunder-thump it, heavens! how it pierced my Ears? but yet all this does not
confirm me that you are valiant, I should desire some better testimony of your
valor then this speech only.


Lam. Shall I then cut this Traiterous Giants head off, and laying it at my
feet (with a Non Curo for my Motto) look like the man that does contemn the
world, and plays at Football with the Globes of Earth. Worm I will trample on
Thee.


Kicks and beats Pisis. Pis. Hold, or I swear ere thou shall have the higher
hand* I Will rhyme thee to death as they do rats in Ireland. -- Not so hard you
Rascal.


privately Eth. Most killing verses I promise you. Hold, this is pretty well*
but I do not believe, but if I gave him Commission, he would return your blows
with some advantage. (I doubt there is some conspiracy betwixt them. I Will sift
them strait) I think I must choose Piststratus, for I like him as well for a
Poet, and better then you for a Soldier.


Lam. She Will choose him now, and then have I played the fool all this while to
very great purpose. I must prevent it. Lady, and if you please to breath a
vigor into my nerves by your command, I Will beat this Coward, till he shall
utterly disclaim all title to your favors.


Pis. ( privately) That Is more then I promised Sirrah: take heed you vaunt not
too much.


Eth. Nay that is unequal, you being armed, and he having no offensive weapon
but his tongue: He shall have another Sword, and then the Conqueror shall not
fear a Rival. What say you, will you agree to that?


Lam. Madam, I must confess although I kick him here or so, there have such
bonds of Friendship knit us together heretofore, that now they tie my hands
from drawing his blood. I would not fight with my Friend.


Eth. How say you Sir? are your hands tied too by the bonds of Friendship?
would not you accept the motion?


Pis. Madam my love to you so firmly tied is,
That for your sake I would not fear to fight with Alcides.

Eth. See you that Sir, he will venture if you dare.


Lam. Why Pisistratus, Friend Pisistratus, pri thee refuse it; I tell thee I
will by no means fight with my Friend.


Eth. Nay Sir, you see you have cast your self: he has made me here very good
verses, and then he is very valiant: I must choose him for --


Lam. Hold Lady, pray you forbear; suspend your choice a while, and I believe I
shall prevent it when I have told you all. Know then, he is no Poet, I made
those verses, this brain is the mint that coined em.


Pis. Which I will trample under my feet you Rascal, can you not keep
conditions? Nay seeing you have discovered. Lady, see here his fortitude, it is
only passive, he dares not advance a Sword against a mouse. I in charity, that
he might hereafter appear in some credit, lent him my back for a while to use
it as he pleased, but if you did observe, he struck me very heedfully, he durst
not let his arms flee with a free swinge thus, nor went his feet without
discretion, as if they kicked in earnest.


Mis. Hold Sir, you will kill the Gentleman; pray Lady end the strife.


Eth. Then thus my Friends; neither of you can challenge any reward from me,
neither having performed my Injunctions: however I will not be so severe as to
detain the guerdon I always intended, and you have taken such pains for: you
shall be laughed at.


Mis. Come, come, I told you at first what you might expect, never stand to
reply for fear of being worse abused.


Ex. Pis. Lam. Mis. Lys. Lady, these Trifles being gone, let us proceed to the
Consummation of your joys. I am glad yet you used Theocles better.


Eth. Nay Sir, I can easily distinguish betwixt realities and outsides.


The. Madam I thank your good opinion, and will study to continue it. Come
forward to the Temple.


Phi. Art. That is our general voice, pray Sir, lead on.


Mel. Why this is well, I thought 'twould come about at last.


Dia. Now Joy unto you all: Lysander, Friends, and that
I may comply with your now smiling Fate,
At these your weddings, I divorce my hate.

FINIS.

