THE BISHOP of CARLILE's SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT, Concerning Deposing of PRINCES.

Thought Seasonable to be Published to this Murmuring Age.

-- Nutrum modo mas modo Vulgus.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1679.

THE BISHOP of CARLILE's SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT, Concerning Deposing of PRINCES.
THis question ( Right Honorable Lords) concerns a matter of great
Consequence and Weight: The determining whereof will assuredly procure, either
Safe, Quiet, or dangerous disturbance, both to our particular Consciences, and
also to the common State. Therefore before you resolve upon it, I pray you call
to your considerations these two things: First, whether King Richard be
sufficiently deposed or no: Secondly, whether King Henry be with good Judgment
or Justice chosen in his place. For the first point we are first to examine,
whether a King, being lawfully and fully instituted by any Just Title, may upon
impution either of Negligence, or of Tyranny, be deposed by his Subjects:
Secondly, what King Richard has omitted in the one, or committed in the other,
for which he should deserve so heavy Judgment. I will not spoke what may be
done in a Popular State, or in a Consular; in which although one bears the
Name and Honor of a Prince, yet he has not Supreme Power of Majesty; but in
the one, the people have the highest Empire; in the other, the Nobility, and
chief Men of Estate; in neither, the Prince. Of the first sort was the
Commonwealth of the Lacedaemonians, who after the form of Government which
Lycurgus framed, oftentimes Tranquil, in Caligula. Tacitus in Proaemio.
Fined, oftentimes Fettered their Kings, and sometimes Condemned them to Death:
Such were also, in Caesar's time, the petty Kings of every City in France; who
were many times Arraigned upon life and death, and (as Ambiorix Prince of the
Leodienses consessed) had no greater Power over the People, than the People had
over them. Of the second condition were the Roman Emperors at first; of whom
some, namely, Nero and Maximinus were openly Condemned, others were suddenly
surprised by Judgment, and Authority of the Senate: and such are now the
Emperors of Germany, whom the other Princes by their Aristocratical Power, do
not only restrain, but sometimes also remove from their Imperial State: such
are also the Kings of Denmark, and Sweedland, who are many times by the
Nobility dejected, either into Prison, or into Exile: Such likewise are the
Dukes of Venice, and of some other free States in Italy: and the chiefest cause
for which Jews Earl of Flanders was lately expelled from his place, was for
drawing to himself cognizance in matters of Life and Death, which high Power
never pertained to his Dignity.

In these and such like Governments, the Prince has not regal Rights, but is
himself subject to that Power which is greater than his, whether it be in the
Nobility or in the Common People. But if the Sovereign Majesty be in the
Prince, as it was in the three first Empires, and in the Kingdom of Judea, and
Israel; and is now in the Kingdoms of England, France, Spain, Scotland,
Muscovia, Turkey, Tartaria, Persia, Ethiopia, and almost all the Kingdoms of
Asia, and Afric: Although for his Vites he be unprofitable to the Subjects,
yea Hurtful, yea Intolerable: Yet can they lawfully neither harm his Person,
nor hazard his Power, whether by Judgment, or else by Force: For neither one,
nor all Magistrates have any Authority over the Prince, from whom all Authority
is derived, and whose only presence does silence, and suspend all inferior
Jurisdiction and Power. As for Force, what Subject can Attempt, or Assist, or
Counsel, or Conceal Violence against his Prince, and not incurr the high and
Henious Crime of Treason?

It is a common saying, thought is free: Free indeed from Punishment of secular
Laws, except by Word or Deed it break forth into action: Yet the secret
thoughts against the sacred Majesty of a Prince, without attempt, without
endeavor, have been adjudged worthy of death: And some who in auricular
Confession, have discovered their Treacherous Devises against the Person of
their Prince, have afterward been Executed for the same. All Laws do exempt a
Mad Man from Punishment: Because their Actions are not governed by their will
and purpose: And the will of Man being set aside, all his doings are
indifferent, neither can the Body offend without a Corrupt or Erroneous mind:
Yet if a Mad Man draw his Sword upon his King, it has been adjudged to deserve
Death. And left any Man should surmise that Princes, for the maintenance of
their own safety and Sovereignty, are the only Authors of these Judgments: Let
us a little consider the Patterns and Precepts of Holy Scripture.
Nebuchadnezzar King of Assyria, wasted all Palestine with Fire and Sword,
oppugned Jerusalem a long time, and at the last expugned it: Slew the King:
Burnt the Temple: Took away the Holy Vessels and Treasure: The rest he
permitted to the Cruelty and Spoil of his unmerciful Soldiers: Who defiled all
places with Rape and Slaughter, and ruinated to the ground that flourishing
City: After the Glut of this bloody Butchery, the people which remained, he
led Captive into Chaldaea: And there erected his Golden Image; and commanded
that they which refused to Worship it, should be cast into a fiery Furnace.

What Cruelty, what Injustice, what Impiety is comparable to this? And yet God
calls Nebuchadnezzar his Servant, and promises Heir and Wages for his
Service: And the Prophets Jeremiah and Baruch did Write unto the Jews to pray
for the life of him, and of Baltazar his Son, that their days might be upon
Earth as the days of Heaven: And Ezechiel with bitter terms abhors the
disloyalty of Zedechia, because he revolted from Nebuchadnezzar, whose Homager
and Tributary he was. What shall we say of Saul? Did he not put all the Priests
to Execution, because one of them did revile Holy and harmless David? Did he
not violently Persecute that his most Faithful Servant and Dutiful Son in Law?
During which pursuit, he sell twice into the Power of David; who did not only
spare, but also protect the King, and reproved the Pretorian Soldiers for
their negligent Watch, and was touched in Heart for cutting away the Lap of his
Garment: And afterward caused the Messenger to be Slain, who upon Request and
for Pity, had lent his hand (as he said) to help forward the voluntary Death
of that Sacred King. As for the contrary Examples: As that of So did Domitian
put to death Epaphroditus, Neroes libertine, because he helped Nero (although
in love) to kill himself. So did Serverus kill all the killers of Pertinax his
Predecessor; and likewise Vitellius did put to death all the Murderers of
Galba Theophilus Emperor of Greciae caused all those to be Slain, who had made
his Father Emperor, by killing Leo Armanius. And Alexander the great put to
cruel Execution, those that had Slain Darius his Mighty and Mortal Enemy.
Jehu who Slew Jehoram and Ahazia, Kings of Israel and Juda: They were done by
express Oracle and Revelation from God, and are no more set down for our
imitation, than the robbing of the Egyptians, or any other particular and
privileged Commandment; but in the general Precept, which all Men must
ordinarily follow, not only our Actions, but our Speeches also, and our very
thoughts are strictly charged with Duty and Obedience unto Princes; whether
they be good or evil, the Law of God ordains: That he which does
presumptiously against the Ruler of the Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
people shall die: And the Prophet David forbids, to touch the Lords
Anointed Thou Psalm. 105. 15.
shall not (says the Lord) rail upon the Judges, neither speak evil against
the Ruler of the Exodus 22. 28.
People. And the Apostles do demand further, that even our thoughts and Souls
be obedient Act. 23. 5.
to higher Powers. And least any should imagine that they meant of good Princes
Romans 13. 1. 13.
only, they spoke generally of all; and further to take away all doubt, they
make express Tit. 3. 1.
mention of the evil. For the Power and Authority of wicked Princes is the
Ordinance 1. Pet. 2. 13, 14, 17.
of God; and therefore CHRIST told Pilate, that the Power which he had was
given 1 Timothy 2. 2.
him from above; and the Prophet Esaias calls Cyrus, being a Profane and
Heathen Romans 13. 2.
Prince, the Lords Anointed. For God stirred up the Spirit even of wicked
Princes to do John 19. 11.
his will; and (as Jehosaphat said to his Rulers) they Execute not the Judgment
of Man, Cap. 45. 1.
but of the Lord: In regard whereof David calls them Gods; because they have
their 2 Chronicles. 36. 2.
Rule and Authority immediately from God: Which if they abuse, they are not to
be 2 Chronicles. 19. 6.
adjudged by their Subjects, for no Power within their Dominion is superior to
theirs: Psalm. 28.
But God reserveth them to the forest Trial: Horribly and sudainly (says the
Wiseman) Sap. 6. 5.
will the Lord appear unto them, and a hard Judgment shall they have.

The Law of God commands that the Child should be put to death, for any
contumely done unto the Parents: But what if the Father be a Robber? If a
Murderer: If for all excess of Villainies, odious and execrable both to God and
Man? Surely he deserves the highest Degree of Punishment, and yet must not the
Son lift up his hand against him, for no offense is so great as to be Punished
by Parricide: But our Country is dearer unto Quintil in declam. Cic. offic.
lib. 1.
us than our Parents: and the Prince is Pater patriae, the Father of our
Country: And therefore more sacred and dear unto us, than our Parents by
nature, and must not be violated, how imperious, how impious so ever he be:
Does he command or demand, our Persons or our Purses, we must not shun for the
one, nor shrink for the other: For (as Nehem. 9. 37.
Nehemiah says,) Kings have Dominion over the Bodies and over the Caettel of
their Subjects at their pleasure. Does he enjoin those actions which are
contrary to the Laws of God? We must neither wholly Obey, nor violently Resist,
but with a constant Courage submit our selves to all manner of punishment, and
show our subjection by enduring, and not performing: Yea the Church has
declared it to be an Heresy, to hold that a Prince Alphons. a cast in lib. de
haeres. in verb. Tiran. Dom. Sot. lib. 5. de just. and jur. q. 1. artic. 3.
may be Slain or Deposed by his Subjects, for any disorder or default, either
in Life, or else in Government, there will be faults so long as there are Men:
And as we endure with Patience a Barren Year, if it happen, and unseasonable
Weather, and such other defects of nature, so must we tolerate the
imperfections of Rulers and quietly expect, either reformation, or else a
change.

But alas good King Richard, what such Cruelty? What such Impiety has he ever
committed? Examine rightly those Imputations which are laid against him,
without any false Circumstance of aggravation, and you shall find nothing
objected, either of any truth, or of great Moment. It may be that many errors
and oversights have escaped him, yet none so grievous to be termed Tyranny; As
proceeding rather from unexperienced Ignorance, or corrupt Counsel, than from
any natural and willful Malice. Oh, how shall the World be pestered with
Tyrants, if Subjects may Rebel upon every pretense of Tyranny? How many good
Princes shall daily be suppressed by those, by whom they ought to be supported?
If they leavy a Subsidy, or any other Taxation, it shall be claimed oppression:
If they put any to death for Traiterous Attempts against their Persons, it
shall be exclaimed Cruelty: If they do any thing against the Lust and liking of
the People, it shall be proclaimed Tyranny.

But let it be, that without Authority in us, or desert in him, King Richard
must be deposed: Yet what right had the Duke of Lancaster to the Crown? Or what
reason have we without his right to give it to him? If he make Title as Heir
unto King Richard, then must he yet stay until King Richards death: For no Man
can succeed as Heir to one that lives. But it is well know to all Men, who are
not either wilfully Blind or grossly Ignorant, that there are some now alive,
Lineally descended from Lionel Duke of Clarence, whose Offspring was by
Judgment of the High Court of Parliament holden the eight Year of the Reign of
King Richard, declared next Successor to the Crown, in case King Richard should
die without Issue. Concerning the Title from Edmund Chrouchback, I will pass it
over, seeing the Authors thereof are become ashamed of so absurd abuse, both of
their own knowledge, and our Credulity, and therefore all the claim is now
made, by right of Conquest; by the Session and grant of King Richard; and by
the general consent of all the people. It is a bad Wool that can take no
color: But what Conquest can a Subject pretend against his Sovereign, where
the War is insurrection, and the Victory high and Heinous Treason? As for the
resignation which King Richard made, being a pent Prisoner for the same cause;
it is an act exacted by force: And therefore of no force and validity to bind
him: And seeing that by the Laws of this Land, the King alone cannot alienate
the Ancient Jewels and Ornaments partaining to the Crown, surely he cannot give
away the Crown it self, and therewithal the Kingdom.

Neither have we any custom, that the people at pleasure should elect their
King: But they are always bound unto him, who by right of Blood is right
Successor; much less can they confirm and make good that Title, which is
before by violence usurped: For nothing can then be freely done, when liberty
is once restrained by fear. So did Scylla by terror of his Legions, obtain the
Law of Vellia to be made, whereby he was created Dictatour for fourscore Years:
And by like impression of fear, Casar caused the Law Servia to be promulged, by
which he was made perpetual Dictatour: But both these Laws were afterward
adjudged void. As for the Deposing of King Edward the second it is no more to
be urged, than the Poisoning of King John, or the Murdering of any other good
and lawful Prince: We must live according to Laws, and not to Examples: And yet
the Kingdom was not then taken from the lawful Successor. But if we look back
to times lately past, we shall find that these Titles were more strong in King
Stephen, than they are in the Duke of Lancaster. For King Henry the first being
at large liberty, neither restrained in body, nor constrained in mind, had
appointed him to succeed: (as it was upon good credit, certainly affirmed;) The
people assented to this designment; and thereupon without fear, and without
force, he was anointed King, and obtained full possession of the Realm. Yet
Henry (Son of the Earl of Anjowe) having a nearer right by his Mother to the
Crown, (notwithstanding his Father was a stranger, and himself born beyond the
Seas (raised such Rough Wars upon K ing Stephen, that there was no end of
spoiling the Goods and spilling the Blood of the unhappy people, besides the
ruins and deformities of many Cities and Holds; until his lawful inheritance
was to him assured. It terrifieth me to remember how many flourishing Empires,
and Kingdoms have been by means of such Contentions either torn in pieces with
detestive division, or subdued to foreign Princes, under pretense of
assistance and aid: And I need not repeat how fore this Realm has heretofore
been shaken with these several Mischieves: And yet neither the examples of
other Countries, nor the Miseries of our own, are sufficient to make us to
beware.

O English Men, worse Bewitched than the Foolish Galathians; our unstayed minds
and reftless resolutions, do nothing else but hunt after our own harms: No
people have more hatred abroad, and none less quiet at home: In other Countries
the Sword of Invasion has been shaken against us: In our own Land, the fire of
Insurrection has been kindled among us: And what are these innovasions, but
Whetstones to sharpen the one and Bellows to blow up the other.

Certainly, I fear that the same will happen unto us which AEsop fableth to
have been fallen unto the Froggs; who being desirous to have a King, a Beam was
given unto them: The first fall whereof did put them in some fear, but when
they saw it lie still in the Stream, they insulted thereon with great contempt,
and desired a King of quicker courage: Then was sent unto them a Storke, which
stalking among them with stately steps, continually devoured them. The mildness
of King Richard has bred in us this scorn, Interpreting it to be cowardice and
dullness of nature: The next Heir is likewise rejected: I will not say that with
greater Courage we shall find greater Cruelty; but if either of these shall
hereafter be able to set up their side, and bring the matter to Trial by arms,
I do assuredly say, that which part soever shall carry the Fortune of the
Field, the people both ways must go to wrack. And thus have I declared my mind
concerning this question, in more words than your Wisdom, yet fewer then the
weight of the Cause does require. And do boldly conclude, that we have neither
Power nor Policy, either to depose King Richard, or to elect Duke Henry in his
place; that King Richard remains still our Sovereign Prince, and therefore it
is not lawful for us to give Judgment upon him; that the Duke whom you call
King, has more offended against the King and the Realm, than the King has
done, either against him or us; for being Banished the Realm for ten Years by
the King and his Counsel (amongst whom his own Father was chief) and sworn not
to return again without special License, He has not only violated his Oath,
but with impious Arms disturbed the quiet of the Land, and dispossessed the
King from his Royal Estate, and now demands Judgment against his Person,
without Offense proved, or Defense heard. If this Injury and this Perjury does
nothing move us, yet let both our private and common dangers somewhat withdraw
us from these violent proceedings.

FINIS.
The Characteristie Description of this Stout and Renowned Champion of Fidelity
and Loyalty; the Reader may be pleased to take it Transcribed from the Learned
Francis Godwin Bishop of Hereford; In his Succession of the Bishops of England;
jisdem verbis, as he there relates it.
THomas Merks a Monk of Westminster, was likewise thrust into this Bishopric
by the Pope at the Kings Request, and Consecrated, 1397. Amongst many
unworthily preferred in those days, he undoubtedly was a Man well deserving
that Honor; for he was a Man Learned and Wise, but principally to be commended
First, for his constant and unmovable Fidelity unto his Patron, and Preferrer
King Richard the second, then, for his excellent courage in professing the
same, when he might safely, yea and honestly, also have concealed his
Affection. Some others there were (of the Nobility) that remembering their Duty
and Allegiance, when all the World beside forsook that unfortunate Prince,
followed him with their best assistance, even till the time of his Captivity.
This Man nothing regarding the danger might ensue, not only refused to forsake
him, when he had forsaken himself, but defended him and his cause the best he
could, when he might well perceive his endeavor might hurt himself much
without any possibility of helping the other. When the Furious and unstable
Multitude, not contented that King Richard had resigned his Crown to save the
Head that ware it, and their Darling Hen. 4. seated himself in his Royal
Throne, importuned the Parliament assembled to proceed yet further against him,
desiring no doubt, that to make all sure, his Life might be taken from him.
This Worthy and Memorable Prelate stepping forth, doubted not to tell them,
that there was none amongst them meet to give Judgment upon so Noble a Prince
as King Richard was, whom they had taken for their Sovereign and Liege Lord for
the space of 22 years and more. And proceeding further, I assure you, quoth he,
(I report his words as I find them in our Chronicles) there is not so rank a
Traitor, nor so errand a Thief, nor yet so cruel a Murderer. apprehended, or
detained in Prison for his offense, but he shall be brought before the Justice
to hear Judgment; and will you proceed to the Judgment of an Anointed King,
hearing neither his Answer nor Excuse? I say, and will avouch, that the Duke of
Lancaster (whom you call King) has more trespassed to King Richard and his
Realm, then King Richard has done either to him or us. For it is manifest and
well known, that the Duke was Banished the Realm by King Richard and his
Council, and by the Judgment of his own Father, for the space of ten years, for
what cause your remember well enough. This notwithstanding, without License of
King Richard he is returned again into the Realm, and that is worse, has taken
upon him the Name, Title, and Pre-eminence of King. And therefore I say that
you have done manifest wrong to proceed against King Richard in any sort,
without calling him openly to his Answer and Defense. This Speech scarcely
ended, he was attached by the Earl Marshal, and for a time committed to Ward in
the Abbey of St. Albanes. Continuing yet his Loyal Affection to his distressed
Master. Soon after his inlargment, he joined with the Hollands and others in a
Conspiracy against King Henry: Which being bewrayed to the Destruction of all
the rest, he only was pardoned. Peradventure in regard of his calling; For it
had never been seen hitherto that any Bishop was put to death by order of Law.
Peradventure in some kind of favor and admiration of his Faithful constancy
(for Virtue will be Honored even of her Enemies) Peradventure else to this
end, that by forcing him to live miserably, they might lay a Punishment upon
him more grievous then death, which they well saw he despised. The Pope (who
seldom denied the King any request that he might afford good cheap) was easily
entreated to translate forsooth this good Bishop from the Sea of Carlisle, that
yielded him Honorable maintenance, unto Samos in Greece, whence he knew he
should never receive one penny profit. He was so happy as neither to take
benefit of the gift of his Enemy, nor to be hurt by the masked Malice of his
Counterfeit Friends, disdaining as it were to take his Life by his Gift, who
took away from his Master both Life, and Kingdom, he died shortly after his
deliverance, so deluding also the morkery of his Translation, whereby (things
so falling out) he was nothing damnified.

Quicquid in Historia discribitur, vel ad imitandum indigitat, vel ad evitandum
instruit.
