Mistress PARLIAMENT Brought to Bed of a Monstrous Child of Reformation. With
her 7 Years Teeming, bitter Pangs, and hard Travail, that she has undergone
in bringing forth her firstborn, ( Being a Precious Babe of Grace.)

With the cruelty of Mistress London her Midwife; and great Affection of Mrs.
Synod her Nurse, Mrs. Schism, Mrs. Privilege, Mrs. Ordinance, Mrs. Universal
Toleration, and Mrs. Leveller her Gossips.

Ring the Bells backwards; lusty bonfires make
Of purest straw that from pist beds you take;
Your music be the screeking of a Cart,
And your shrill Songs, sound sweeter then a --
For joy that Mistress Parliament's brought a bed;
Pray see the Issue of her Maidenhead:
It Is but 3 halfpence in: The Sight will please ye.
And of your Grief and melancholy ease you.
BY Mercurius Melancholicus:

Printed in the Year of the Saints fear. 1648.

Mrs. PARLIAMENT BROUGHT TO BID Of the Precious Babe of REFORMATION.
The Parliament in strong labor is,
pray Women come away,
Least Reformation we do miss,
alack and well-aday.
Call Mistress London the Midwife,
call Mistress Lent-all too,
That if the First cannot save her life
the last may see her go.
Bid Rainsborough to Rigg his Sipps
with all convenient speed,
Lest Gregory do fit his slips,
and then we Saints must bleed.
Blow, blow strong Winds, lend one stiff blast,
and send her quick to hell,
Our miseries then shall soon be past,
and our sick land be well.
Enter Mrs. Synod, an old dry Nurse. RIde, run, go, with all celerity, and
fetch hither Mistress London the Midwife; tell her that Mrs. Parliament desires
her to come away presently, for she is in strong labor, and has most
miserable pangs and throws that come thick upon her; pray heavens she has not
taken some fright; I heard her the other day complain of a Scotchman, and of
an Irishman, and a Welchmen; Well, well, 'twas ill done, I Will besworne, to
fright a Gentlewoman of her quallity and breeding, one that came of so ancient
and Honorable a Family too, as the Parliaments of England? Who is it almost
that has not known the Parliaments to be as honorable as ever was any Family
in England (next the King, God bless him) and has done as much good for the
Kingdom: and now to be despised by every sause-boxe boy, and loose fellow to
make Rimes as they call them, and sing-songs of her, making of her a Whore, and
no better then the arrantest Strumpet that ever went upon two shoes, telling
her, that she has imprisoned her Husband, and prostituted her body to a very
Eunuch, that had nothing to help himself withal; and since, has followed the
Camp, and became an Amunition-W, and turned up her tail to every lowsy
Ill-dependent Rascal in the Army; Sir Thomas himself, and king Cromwall too, a
very Town-Bull, and committed flat fornication with Broom-men, Tinkers, and
Channell-rakers, and has learnt to murder, Rob, take Purses, pick pockets; but
she is not the first Woman that has done amiss, These are but slips occasioned
by the weakness of her sex; I Will in and make her a Spiritual Cawdle to comfort
her weak back; for I promise you, I doubt that she will have but an ill bargain
on it. Mrs. Parliament; why Mrs. Parliament I say; how do ye Mrs. Parliament;
Will ye have a little Strong Water, or a Cawdle to comfort ye?

Mr. Parl. Oh sick, sick; I must cast Nurse; pray reach me a bowl:)
hawe)hawe.)....


Nurse. Well said Mistress, fetch it up; up with it: Heaven bless me! What is it
that looks so red Mistress?


Mrs. Parl. Oh it is Blood, innocent blood, that has lain in clodds congealed
at my stomach this full 7 years; hark how loud it cries for vengeance? I never
felt it before I came to Strafford, only once since, at Canterbury; O Tomkins,
O Challoner, Burley, etc. too well I understand that you suffered by my cruelty
unjust deaths. ( awe.)


Nurse. It Is well it is up; cast again Mistress.


Mrs. Parl. J will Nurse. ( awe, awe.) Oh, Oh, my heart is burst.


Nurse. Lord Mistress, What is it that looks so yellow? is it Choler?


Mrs. Parl. No Nurse, it is Gold, accursed gold; For the love of this J sold my
God, my King, my Soul, committed Sacrilege, murder, and all manner of
mischief. Awe........


Nurse. What Is this Mrs. that looks like Paper?


Mrs. Par. Oh Nurse, those are Ordinances, Votes, and Declarations; Pray hold
my back hard Nurse, my heart will shiver to pieces else. awe, awe, sick sick.


Nurse. What Is this that comes so strongly up? Foh, how it stinks all the
Kingdom over.


Mrs. Parl. Oh Nurse! This is the accursed Declaration against my King, wherein
He is so falsely flandered and reproached; Pray fling some hot Embers on it, and
make all the haste you can to call Mrs. Sedition, Mrs. Schism, Mrs.
Toleration, and Mrs. Leveller, tell them, That if they come not presently, J
shall miscarry of the sweet Babe of Reformation, that has cost England so much
money, blood and sweat.


Nurs. J am gone: Here Is the Midwise forsooth, mistress London.


Mrs. Par. Oh mistress London, help me now or J die; never did Parliament
endure such bitter pangs; Oh, oh; J am ready to depart.


Mrs. Lon. Depart in the Devils Name if thou will; thou shall have no help of
mind; J come to laugh at thy sorrow, more then to help thee; thou have had too
much of my help already, and that has imboldened thee the more to play the
Strumpet with security, and to prostitute thy Members to all manner of
Wickedness and Uncleanness: No, languish still, till thou have brought forth
the bastard Jssue of thy own Lust thy own self, which was begot in obscenity,
and shall be brought forth in iniquity for me; and may it prove as monstrous in
its birth, and as fatal to it self, as it has been ominous to others.


As soon she had made an end of speaking, in came rushing Mrs. Privilege, Mrs.
Ordinance, Mrs. Schism, Mrs. Sedition, and Mrs. Toleration, who presently fell
about their business; one held her hands, another her back, and a third her
members* She being in this grievous agony (having no hopes to escape with life)
desired Mrs. Truth to indite a bill to have her prayed for; and that it be
speedily sent by the Lord Mayjor to the several Congregations within every
their respective Parishes for her safe Deliverance, which most accurately she
penned in form of a Declaration, in these word following.

The Declaration of Mrs. Parliament, lying very weak, and in most grievous
pangs of childbearing; and cannot be delivered.
WHatsoever dangers are threatened or feared, either by the great perplexity I
am at this present in (or by reason of my manyfold sins that now in my weakness
lie heavy upon my Conscience,) yet I have assurance, that if I confess and
forsake them, I shall find mercy;

Therefore I confess and acknowledge ( though not from the bottom of my heart)
that for the space of these 7. Years I have been a most cruel murderer, not
only of bodies but of souls; that I have perjured my self, first by my Oath
of Allegiance, and secondly by my Solemn Covenant, wherein ( as in Hos. 1. 9.)
I have spoken words swearing falsely in making a Covenant; And now Judgment
spingeth up (against me) like Hemlock in the furrows of the field; that I have
most traitorously betrayed, and imprisoned my lawful King, the Anointed of the
Lord; that I have corrupted his Laws, and turned judgment to wormwood; that I
have made Gods House and the Kings House a Den of thieves; that I have loved
wickedness, and practiced it; that no fear has dehorted me from doing any
thing ( but justice) that I have Robbed both God, and the King, and have not
feared the one, nor honored the other* that I have used all manner of
Jugglings, Cousenage, Contradictions, and Equivocations; that my Religion has
been Rebellion, Murder, and Rapine; that I have, not only coveted, but (by the
instigation of the Devil, and against the Laws of our Sovereign Lord King
CHARLES) taken Stole and forceably carried away the Goods and Chattells of many
thousands of his Majesty's Loyal and obedient subjects; that I have made this
Canaan of all happiness, a Golgotha, and field of Blood, and yoaked my fellow
subjects to the pride, tyranny and Opression of my own Lust, and Ambition; in
stead of Reforming J have Deformed, and in stead of repairing J have pulled
down; Which has occasioned all these miseries to fall upon me; My greatest
grief of all being, that I know J have committed all this, and much more, but
cannot Repent for the same; therefore the several Ministers within the Cities
of London and Westminster* and the late Lines of Communications, are desired
upon the seventh day of May, (being Rogation Sunday) if I shall not be
delivered before, to keep a Day of Humiliation, and Prating, that the heavy
judgments that so inevitably threaten me, may be diverted: That so I may still
Rule Reign and Tyrannise over you, Parliament everlasting, Impositions,
Assessments and Taxations without end.

Amen. Your despised Friend, Mrs. TRVTH.

But in the time this was witing, Mistress Parliament grew still worse and
worse, and the good Wives made account she hand been drawing on, therefore
Mistis Privilege stepped unto her and spoke as follows.

Mrs. Pri. Dear Daughter, I perceive by thy Pulse beating, and by so much blood
coming in thy face, that thou art not long lived; and it is a question whether
the child thou now art in travel with, ever come forth in its right shape, or
live to receive its Christendom; and although I have been the supporter and
upholder of thee this 7 years day, and Priviledg'd thee in all thy Actions,
though contrary to Truth* Religion, Law or Reason, yet I cannot privilege thee
from Dissolution; Therefore I desire thee to make thy Peace with God, and thy
Conscience, which I perceive is much troubled; next I advise thee to restore
all that thou have fraudulently taken away, either from God, thy King, or thy
Neighbor, and to repent of thy Perjury and blod-shed, and heartily bewail thy
self for the same, deliver thy Lord and Master out of Prison, and preserve him
from the treacherous designs of Fairfax, Cromell, Ireton, Hammond,
Rainsbrough, Joys, etc. (setting the first aside, who is neither fish, nor
flesh, nor good red herring) a company of Schismatticall, broaken, Rakehells,
Mechanics, and loose fellows, that will have no Rule for their lives or
Actions and yet must be Lords of Mis-rule, and have the Persons and Estates of
a freebron People at the mercy of their hellish wills; O Mrs. Parliament, here
is Mrs. Schism, and Mrs. Sedition has too much mislead thee, and has brought
thee to all this shame and ignominy that is now justly fallen upon thee, and
disgraced both thee, and thy Honorable House for ever, and how ugly will it
appear in the Chronicles of after times? The Commons House of Parliament (that
should be the Fountain of Justice) a Common Bawdy house, to prostitute her
members to all manner of uncleanness, Murder, Theft, Treason etc. that should
be the members of Christ, pure, holy and undefiled, and blameless before God
and man, which is now hateful and odious to both; that whosoever, (whether
Minister or other) does but speak truth, or tell you of your faults, must be
worried to the death by your Bloodhounds, and Walkers bitch Ione Ruggles, and
the rest of the damned crew of Jaylors, Pursuivants, Roagus and Judases, that
care not whom they betray for money: --

Whilst she was speaking* the room was strangely overspread with darkness, the
candles went out of themselves, and there was smelt noisome smells, and heard
terrible thunderings, intermixed with wawling of Catts, howling of Dogs, and
barking of Wolves against the windows flew ill-boading screetch-Owles, Ravens
and other ominous Birds of night, that struck a great terror to the hearers;
at the same time Mrs. Parliament, was miraculously delivered of a Monster of a
deformed shape, without a head great goggle eyes, bloody hands growing out of
both sides of its devouring panch, under the belly hung a large bag, and the
feet are like the feet of a Bear; if you purpose to see it, you must make
haste; for it is now ready to adjourn to a new Plantation.

God save the King.
FINIS.

