Of Education. To Master Samuel Hartlib.
Master Hartlib,
I Am long since persuaded, that to say, ot do ought worth memory, and
imitation, no purpose or respect should sooner move us, then simply the love of
God, and of mankind. Nevertheless to write now the reforming of Education,
though it be one of the greatest and noblest designs, that can be thought on,
and for the want whereof this nation perishes, I had not yet at this time been
induc't, but by your earnest entreaties, and serious conjurements; as having my
mind for the present half diverted in the persuance of some other assertions,
the knowledge and the use of which, cannot but be a great furtherance both to
the enlargement of truth, and honest living, with much more peace. Nor should
the laws of any private friendship have prevailed with me to divide thus, or
transpose my former thoughts, but that I see those aims, those actions which
have won you with me the esteem of a person sent hither by some good providence
from a far country to be the occasion and the incitement of great good to
this Island. And, as I hear, you have obtained the same repute with men of most
approved wisdom, and some of highest authority among us. Not to mention the
learned correspondence which you hold in foreign parts, and the extraordinary
pains and diligence which you have used in this matter both here, and beyond
the Seas; either by the definite will of God so ruling, or the peculiar sway of
nature, which also is Gods working. Neither can I think that so reputed, and
so valued as you are, you would to the forfeit of your own discerning ability,
impose upon me an unfit and over ponderous argument, but that the satisfaction
which you profess to have received from those incidentall discourses which we
have wandered into, has pressed and almost constrained you into a persuasion,
that what you require from me in this point, I neither ought, nor can in
conscience defer beyond this time both of so much need at once, and so much
opportunity to try what God has determined. I will not resist therefore, what
ever it is either of divine, or humane obligement that you lay upon me; but
will forthwith set down in writing, as you request me, that voluntary Idea,
which has long in silence presented it self to me, of a better Education, in
extent and comprehension far more large, and yet of time far shorter, and
of attainment far more certain, then has been yet in practice. Brief I
shall endeavor to be; for that which I have to say, assuredly this nation has
extreme need should be done sooner then spok'n. To tell you therefore what I
have benefited herein among old renowned Authors, I shall spare; and to search
what many modern Ianua's and Didactics more then ever I shall read, have
projected, my inclination leads me not. But if you can accept of these few
observations which have flowr'd off, and are as it were the burnishing of many
studious and contemplative years altogether spent in the search of religious
and civil knowledge, and such as pleased you so well in the relating, I here
give you them to dispose of.

The end then of learning is to repair the ruins of our first parents by
regaining to know God aright, and out of that knowledge to love him, to imitate
him, to be like him, as we may the nearest by possessing our souls of true
virtue* which being united to the heavenly grace of faith makes up the highest
perfection. But because our understanding cannot in this body found it self
but on sensible things, not arrive so clearly to the knowledge of God and
things invisible, as by orderly conning over the visible and inferior creature,
the same method is necessarily to be followed in all discreet teaching. And
seeing every nation affords not experience and tradition anough for all kind
of learning, therefore we are chiefly taught the languages of those people who
have at any time been most industrious after wisdom; So that language is but
the instrument convaying to us things useful to be known. And though a
linguist should pride himself to have all the tongues that Babel cleft the
world into, yet, if he have not studied the solid things in them as well as the
words and lexicons, he were nothing so much to be esteemed a learned man, as
any yeoman or tradesman competently wise in his mother dialect only. Hence
appear the many mistakes which have made learning generally so unpleasing and
so unsuccesfull; first we do amiss to spend seven or eight years merely in
scraping together so much miserable Latin, and Greek, as might be learnt
otherwise easily and delightfully in one year. And that which casts our
proficiency therein so much behind, is our time lost partly in too often idle
vacancies given both to schools and Universities, partly in a preposterous
exaction, forcing the empty wits of children to compose Theams, verses, and
Orations, which are the acts of ripest judgment and the final work of a head
filled by long reading, and observing, with elegant maxims, and copious
invention. These are not matters to be writing from poor striplings, like blood
out of the nose, or the plucking of untimely fruit: besides the all habit which
they get of wretched barbarizing against the Latin and Greek idiom, with their
untutored Anglicisms, odious to be read, yet not to be avoided without a well
continued and judicious conversing among pure Authors digested, which they
scarce taste, whereas if after some preparatory grounds of speech by their
certain forms got into memory, they were led to the praxis thereof in some
chosen short book lesson'd thoroughly to them, they might then forthwith proceed
to l^arn the substance of good things, and Arts in due order, which would bring
the whole language quickly into their power. This I take to be the most
rational and most profitable way of learning languages, and whereby we may
best hope to give account to God of our youth spent herein: And for the usual
method of teaching Arts, I deem it to be an old error of universities not yet
well recovered from the Scholastic grosnesse of barbarous ages, that in stead
of beginning with Arts most easy, and those be such as are most obvious to the
sense, they present their young unmatriculated novices at first coming with
the most intellective abstractions of Logic and metaphysics: So that they
having but newly left those Grammatick flats and shallows where they stuck
unreasonably to learn a few words with lamentable construction, and new on the
sudden transported under another climat to be tossed and turmoild with their
unb^llasted wits in fadomles and unquiet deeps of controversy, do for the most
part grow into hatred and contempt of learning, mocked and deluded all this
while with ragged notions and babblements, while they expected worthy and
delightful knowledge; till poverty or youthful years call them importunately
their several ways, and hasten them with the sway of friends either to an
ambitious and mercenary, or ignorantly zealous Divinity; Some assured to the
trade of Law, grounding their purposes not on the prudent, and heavenly
contemplation of justice and equity which was never taught them, but on the
promising and pleasing thoughts of litigious terms, fat contentions, and
flowing sees; others betake them to State affairs, with souls so unprincipl'd
in virtue, and true generous breeding, that flattery, and court shifts and
tyrannous aphorisms appear to them the highest points of wisdom; instilling
their barren hearts with a conscientious slavery, if, as, I rather think, it be
not feigned. Others lastly of a more delicious and airie spirit, retire
themselves knowing no better, to the enjoyments of ease and luxury, living out
their days in feast and jollity, which indeed is the wisest and the safest
course of all these, unless they were with more integrity undertak'n. And
these are the errors, and these are the fruits of mispending our prime youth
at the Schools and Universities as we do, either in learning mere words or
such things chiefly, as were better unlearnt.

I shall detain you now no longer in the demonstration of what we should not
do, but strait conduct ye to a hill side, where I will point ye out the right
path of a virtuous and noble Education; laborious indeed at the first ascent,
but else so smooth, so green, so full of goodly prospect, and melodious sounds
on every side, that the harp of Orpheus was not more charming. I doubt not but
ye shall have more ado to drive our dullest and laziest youth, our stocks and
stubbs from the infinite desire of such a happy nurture, then we have now to
hale and drag our choicest and hopefullest wits to that asinine feast of
sowthistles and brambles which is commonly set before them, as all the food and
entertainment of their tenderest and most docible age. I call therefore a
complete and generous Education that which fits a man to perform justly,
skilfully and magnanimously all the offices both private and public of peace
and war. And how all this may be done between twelve, and one and twenty, less
time then is now bestowed in pure trifling at Grammar and Sophistry, is to be
thus ordered.

First to find out a sp^tious house and ground about it fit for an Academy,
and big enough to lodge a hundred and fifty persons, whereof twenty or
thereabout may be attendants, all under the government of one, who shall be
thought of desert sufficient, and ability either to do all, or wisely to
direct, and oversee it done. This place should be at once both School and
University, not needing a remove to any other house of Schollership, except it
be some peculiar College of Law, or Physic where they mean to be
practitioners; but as for those general studies which take up all our time
from Lilly to the commencing, as they term it, Master of Art, it should be
absolute. After this pattern, as many edifices may be converted to this use, as
shall be needful in every City throughout this land, which would tend much to
the increase of learning and civility every where. This number, less or more
thus collected, to the convenience of a foot company, or interchangeably two
troops of cavalry, should divide their days work into three parts, as it lies
orderly. Their studies, their exercise, and their diet.

For their studies, First they should begin with the chief and necessary rules
of some good Grammar, either that now used, or any better: and while this is
doing, their speech is to be fashioned to a distinct and clear pronuntiation,
as near as may be to the Italian, especially in the vowels. For we Englishmen
being far northerly, do not open our mouthe^ in the cold air, wide enough to
grace a Southern tongue; but are observed by all other nations to speak
exceeding close and inward: So that to smatter Latin with an english mouth, is
as ill a hearing as law French. Next to make them expert in the usefullest
points of grammar, and withal to season them, and win them early to the love
of virtue and true labor, ere any flattering seducement, or ^^m principle
self them wandering, some easy and delightful book of Education would be
read to them; whereof the Greeks have store as (...), Plutarch, and other
Socratic discourses. But in Latin we have none of classic authority extant,
except the two or three first books of Quintilian, and some select pieces else
where. But here the main skill and groundwork will be, to temper them such
lectures and explanations upon every opportunity, as may lead and draw them in
willing obedience, enflamed with the study of learning, and the admiration of
virtue; stirred up with high hopes of living to be brave men, and worthy
patriots, dear to God, and famous to all ages. That they may despise and scorn
all their childish, and ill taught qualities, to delight in manly, and liberal
exercises: which he who has the Art, and proper eloquence to catch them with,
what with mild and effectual persuasions, and what with the intimation of some
fear, if need be, but chiefly by his own example, might in a short space gain
them to an incredible diligence and courage: infusing into their young breasts
such an ingenuous and noble ardor, as would not fail to make many of them
renowned and matchless men. At the same time, some other hour of the day,
might be taught them the rules of Arithmetic, and soon after the elements of
Geometry even playing, as the old manner was. After evening repast, till bed
time their thoughts will be best taken up in the easy grounds of Religion, and
the story of Scripture. The next step would be to the Authors of Agriculture,
Cato, Varro, and Columella, for the matter is most easy, and if the language
be difficult, so much the better, it is not a difficulty above their years.
And here will be an occasion of inciting and inabling them hereafter to improve
the tillage of their country, to recover the bad soil, and to remedy the wast
that is made of good: for this was one of Hercules praises. Ere half these
Authors be read, which will soon be with plying hard, and daily, they cannot
choose but be masters of any ordinary prose. So that it will be then seasonable
for them to learn in any modern Author, the use of the Globes, and all the maps
first with the old names; and then with the new: or they might be then capable
to read any compendious method of natural Philosophy. And at the same time
might be entering into the Greek tongue, after the same manner as was before
prescribed in the Latin; whereby the difficulties of Grammar being soon
overcome, all the Historical Physiology of Aristotle and Theophrastus are open
before them, and as I may say, under contribution. The like access will be to
Vitruvius, to Senecas natural questions, to Mela, Celsus, Pliny, or Solinus.
And having thus past the principles of Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, and
Geography with a general compact of Physics, they may descend in Mathematics
to the isntrumental science of Trigonometry, and from thence to Fortification,
Architecture, Enginry, or navigation. And in natural Philosophy they may
proceed leisurly from the History of Meteors, minerals, plants and living
creatures as far as Anatomy. Then also in course might be read to them out of
some not tedious writer the institution of Physic; that they may know the
tempers, the humors, the seasons, and how to manage a crudity: which he who can
wisely and timely do, is not only a great Physician to himself, and to his
friends, but also may at some time or other, save an Army by this frugall, and
expencelesse means only; and not let the healthy and stout bodies of young men
rot away under him for want of this discipline; which is a great pity, and no
less a shame to the commander. To set forward all these proceedings in nature
and mathematics, what hinders, but that they may procure, as often as shall be
needful, the helpful experiences of Hunters, fowlers, Fishermen, Shepherds,
Gardeners, Apothecaries; and in the other sciences, Architects Engineers,
Mariners, Anatomists; who doubtless would be ready some for reward, and some
to favor such a hopeful Seminary. And this will give them such a real
tincture of natural knowledge, as they shall never forget, but daily augment
with delight. Then also those Poets which are now counted most hard, will be
both facil and pleasant, Orpheus, Hesiod, Theocritus, Aratus, Nicander, Oppian,
Dionysius and in Latin Lucretius, Manilius, and the rural part of Virgil.

By this time, years and good general precepts will have furnished them more
distinctly with that act of reason which in Ethics is called Proa^resis: that
they may with some judgment contemplat upon moral good and evil. Then will
be required a special reinforcement of constant and sound endoctrinating to
set them right and firm, instructing them more amply in the knowledge of virtue
and the hatred of vice: while their young and pliant affections are led through
all the moral works of Plato, Xenophon, Cicero, Plutarch, Laertius, and those
Locrian remnants; but still to be reduced in their nightward studies wherewith
they close the days work, under the determinat sentence of David, or Solomon,
or the Evangels and Apostolic scriptures. Being perfect in the knowledge of
personal duty, they may then begin the study of Economies. And either now, or
before this, they may have easily learnt at any odd hour the Italian tongue.
And soon after, but with wariness, and good antidote, it would be wholesome
anough to let them taste some choice comedies Greek, Latin, or Italian: Those
tragedies also that treat of household matters, as Trachiniae, Alcestis and the
like. The next remove must be to the study of Politics; to know the beginning,
end, and reasons of political societies; that they may not in a dangerous fit
of the commonwealth be such poor, shaken, uncertain reeds, of such a tottering
conscience, as many of our great counselors have lately shown themselves, but
steadfast pillars of the State. After this they are to dive into the grounds of
law, and legal justice; delivered first, and with best warrant by Moses; and
as far as humane prudence can be trusted, in those extolled remains of
Grecian Lawgivers, Lycurgus, Solon, Zaleucus, Charondas, and thence to all the
Roman Edicts and tables with their ^ustinian; and so down to the Saxon and
common laws of England, and the Statutes. Sundays also and every evening may
be now understandingly spent in the highest matters of Theology, and Church
History ancient and modern: and ere this time the Hebrew tongue at a set hour
might have been gained, that the Scriptures may be now read in their own
original; whereto it would be no impossibility to add the Chaldey, and the
Syrian dialect. When all these employments are well conquered, then will the
choice Histories, heroic poems, and Attic tragedies of statliest, and most
regal argument, with all the famous Political orations offer themselves; which
if they were not only read; but some of them got by memory, and solemnly
pronounced with right accent, and grace, as might be taught, would endue them
even with the spirit, and vigor of Demosthenes or Cicere, Euripides, or
Sophocles. And now lastly will be the time to read with them those organic arts
which in able men to discourse and write perspicuously, elegantly, and
according to the fitted style of lofty, mean, or lowly. Logic therefore so much
as is useful, is to be referred to this due place withal her well coucht
heads and Topics, unt^ll it be time to open her contracted palm into a
graceful and ornate Rhetoric taught out of the rule of Plato, Aristotle,
Phalereus, Cicero, Hermogenes, Longinus. To which Poetry would be made
subsequent, or indeed rather precedent, as being less subtle and fine, but
more simple, sensuous and passionate. I mean not here the prosody of a verse,
which they could not but have hit* on before among the rudiments of grammar;
but that sublime art which in Aristotle's poetics, in Horace, and the Italian
commentaries of Castelvetro, Tasso, Mazzoni, and others, teaches what the laws
are of a true Epic poem, what of a Dramatic, what of a Lyric, what decorum is,
which is the grand master piece to observe. This would make them soon perceive
what despicable creatures our common timers and play writes be, and show them,
what Religious, what glorious and magnificent use might be made of Poetry both
in divine and humane things. From hence and not till now will be the right
season of forming them to be able writers and composers in every excellent
matter, when they shall be thus fraught with an universal insight into things.
Or whether they be to speak in Parliament or counsel, honor and attention
would be waiting on their lips. There would then also appear in Pulpits other
visages, other gestures, and stuff otherwise wrought then what we now sit
under, often times to as great a trial of our patience as any other that they
preach to us. These are the studies wherein our noble and our gentle youth
ought to bestow their time in a disciplinary way from twelve to one and twenty;
unless they rely more upon their ancestors dead, then upon themselves living.
In which methodicall course it is so supposed they must proceed by the steady
pace of learning onward, as at convenient times for memories sake to retire
back into the middle ward, and sometimes into the rear of what they have been
taught, until they have confirmed, and solidly united the whole body of their
perfited knowledge, like the last embattelling of a Roman legion. Now will be
worth the seeing what exercises, and what recreations may best agree, and
become these studies.

Their Exercise.
The course of study hitherto briefly described, is, what I can guess by
reading, likest to those ancient and famous schools of Pythagoras, Plato,
Isocrates, Aristotle and such others, out of which were bred up such a number
of renowned Philosophers, orators, Historians, Poets and Princes all over
Greece, Italy, and Asia, besides the flourishing studies of Cyrene and
Alexandria. But herein it shall exceed them, and supply a defect as great as
that which Plato noted in the commonwealth of Sparta; whereas that City
trained up their youth most for war, and these in their Academies and
Lycaeum, all for the gown, this institution of breeding which I here delineate,
shall be equally good both for Peace and war. Therefore about an hour and a
half ere they eat at noon should be allowed them for exercise and due rest
afterward: But the time for this may be enlarged at pleasure, according as
their rising in the morning shall be early. The exercise which I commend first,
is the exact use of their weapon; to guard and to strike safely with edge, or
point; this will keep them healthy nimble, strong, and well in breath, is also
the likeliest means to make them grow large, and tall, and to inspire them
with a gallant and fearlesse courage, which being tempered with seasonable
lectures and precepts to them of true fortitude, and patience, will turn into a
native and heroic valor, and make them hate the cowardice of doing wrong.
They must be also practiced in all the locks and gripes of wrestling, wherein
English men were wont to excel, as need may often be in fight to tugge, to
grapple, and to close. And this perhaps will be anough, wherein to prove and
heat their single strength. The interim of ^^swearing themselves regularly, and
convenient rest before meat may both with profit and delight be taken up in
recreating and composing their travailed spirits with the solemn and divine
harmonies of music heard, or learnt; other while the skillful Organist plies
his grave and fancied descant, in lofty fugues, or the whole Symphony with
artfull and unimaginable touches adorn and grace the well studied cords of some
choice composer; some times the Lute, or soft organ stop w^^ting on elegant
voices either to Religious, martial, or civil ditties; which if wise men and
prophets be not extremely out, have a great power over dispositions and
manners, to smooth and make them gentle from rustic harshnesse and distempered
passions. The like also would not be unexpedient after meat to assist and
cherish nature in her first concoction, and send their minds back to study in
good tune and satisfaction. Where having followed it close under vigilant eyes
till about two hours before supper, they are by a sudden alarm or watch word,
to be called out to their military motions, under sky or covert, according to
the season, as was the Roman wont; first on foot, then as their age permits,
on horse back, to all the art of cavalry; That having in sport, but with much
exactness, and daily muster, served out the rudiments of their Souldiership in
all the skill of embattailing, marching, encamping, fortifying, beseiging and
battering, with all the helps of ancient and modern stratagems, Tactiks and
warlike maxims, they may as it were out of a long war come forth renowned and
perfect Commanders in the service of their country. They would not then, if
they were trusted with fair and hopeful armies, suffer them for want of just
and wise discipline to shed away from about them like sick feathers, though
they be never so often supplied: they would not suffer their empty and
unrecrutible Colonells of twenty men in a company, to quafle out, or convay
into secret hoards, the wages of a delusive list, and a miserable remnant: yet
in the mean while to be overmaster'd with a score or two of drunkards, the only
soldiery left about them, or else to comply with all rapines and violences. no
certainly, if they knew ought of that knowledge that belongs to good men or
good governors, they would not suffer these things But to return to our own
in^tit^te, besides these constant exercises at home, there is another
opportunity of gaining experience to be won from pleasure it self abroad; In
those vernal seasons of the year, when the air is calm and pleasant, it were an
injury and sullenness against nature not to go out, and see her riches, and
partake in her rejoicing with heaven and earth. I should not therefore be a
perswader to them of studying much then, after two or three year that they have
well laid their grounds, but to ride out in companies with prudent and staid
guides, to all the quarters of the land: learning and observing all places of
strength, all commodities of building and of soil, for towns and tillage,
harbors and Ports for trade, Sometimes taking sea as far as to our Navy, to
learn there also what they can in the practical knowledge of sailing and of sea
fight. These waves would try all their peculiar gifts of nature, and if there
were any secret excellence among them, would fetch it out, and give it fair
opportunities to advance it self by, which could not but mightily redound to
the good of this nation, and bring into fashion again those old admired virtues
and excellencies, with far more advantage now in this purity of Christian
knowledge. Nor shall we then need the Mounsieurs of Paris to take our hopeful
youth into their slight and prodigal custodies and send them over back again
transformed into mimics, apes and Kicshoes. But if they desire to see other
countries at three or four and twenty years of age, not to learn principles,
but to enlarge experience, and make wise observation, they will by that time be
such as shall deserve the regard and honor of all men where they pass, and
the society and friendship of those in all places who are best and most
eminent. And perhaps then other Nations will be glad to visit us for their
breeding, or else to imitate us in their own Country.

Now lastly for their diet there cannot be much to say, save only that it would
be best in the same house; for much time else would be lost abroad, and many
ill habits got; and that it should be plain, healthful, and moderat I suppose
is out of controversy. Thus Master Hartlib, you have a general view in
writing, as your desire was, of that which at several times I had discourst
with you concerning the best and Noblest way of Education; not beginning, as
some have done from the cradle, which yet might be worth many considerations,
if brevity had not been my scope, many other circumstances also I could have
mentioned, but this to such as have the worth in them to make trial, for light
and direction may be anough. Only I believe that this is not a bow for every
man to shoot in that counts himself a teacher; but will require sinews almost
equal to those which Homer gave Ulysses, yet I am withal persuaded that it
may prove much more easy in the assay, then it now seems at distance, and much
more illustrious: howbeit not more difficult then I imagine, and that
imagination presents me with nothing but very happy and very possible according
to best wishes; if God have so decreed, and this age have spirit and capacity
anough to apprehend.

The end.

