The downfall of Babylon: OR, The Ruin of Antichrist: Being that mystery of
Iniquity, which begins to work in the children of disobedience, the
Independents.

By Alexander Mingzeis Minister of Gods Word.

Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking
after their own lusts. And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? For
since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the
beginning of the creation.

2. Pet. 3.3.4. Printed in the Year 1647.

To His Sacred Majesty CHARLES, By the grace of God, of England, Scotland,
Fance, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Dread Sovereign:
WHither should Faith have its refuge, but to Faiths Defender? If Apostates
dare abuse authority then surely truth may take sanctuary under your sacred
protection. There are a fry of Locusts (in these licentious times) smarmd out
of the bottomless pit, which have almost consumed our Vine. And while we have
gone about to drive out one Antichrist, a worse is come in his room. Help
therefore, O King, to drive out these Caterpillars. Let not those which deny
authority usurp authority. Your humble Subject takes God to witness that he
aims not at the godly or truly religious, but only at such, as whose
consciences accusing them may have time and leisure enough to repent, and
amend. The Lord turn them, and preserve and keep your Majesty from all danger
for ever, Amen.

Your Majesty's most humble and Loyal Subject, Alexander Mingzeis, Minister.

The Downfall of Babylon, etc.
Christian Reader:
ME thinks the very word sets forth and declares the odiousness of the
Sect: for it intimates in the first place, that as they depend of none, so they
are worthily called Independents, and may in time prove pendants, if not
dependants.

First, therefore they depend of none neither God nor man.

Of God they do not, because they have denied Christ, the truth and principles
of the Oracles of God.

As first the use of the moral law. 2. The use of Scripture in general. 3. In
special or particular. First, therefore they have and do deny Christ, by
their cursed and blasphemous detractions and calumniations.

First in giving forth that Christ did more hurt in teaching the Lords prayer,
As diverse both in Country and City.
and saving the Thief upon the cross, then ever he did good in all his life.
2 In giving forth that he was but illegitimate, As a Weaver in Kent, and a
woman in the City. A Gentleman in Hartfordshire, a I have been credibly
informed. 1. John. 2.12. 2. Pet. 2.1.
and a Carpenters Son. 3. And lastly there and have been some of them which
have and do flatly deny that ever there was such an one as a Christ in the
world, etc. John says that he is Antichrist which denies the Father and the
Son, that is, which denies Christ to be the Son of God, and have not our
adversaries done so? The Apostle Peter tells us, that there shall be false
Teachers among us in the last times, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction. And have not our adversaries done so? And St. Jude says,
that they were before of old ordained to this condemnation, Jude 4.
which should turn the grace of God into laciviousnesse, denying the only Lord
God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. The Jews deny Christ, but never accused him of
folly and ignorance, as some of our adversaries have done. The Turks confess
him to be the great Prophet and Messi as that should come into the world, Deuteronomy.
18.15. Dan. 9 25.
only they deny him to be the Son of God; but they never gave forth that he was
illegitimate, and a Bastard. Therefore Independents are worse then either Turks
or Jews, Heathens or Infidels. Rev. 13 4.
The Divine Evangelist makes mention of a beast that should arise out of the
Sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and speaking blasphemies, 5.6.
to whom the Dragon should give his power. ^. 2.
And what is this beast, but the pernicious sect of the Independents? for are
they not risen out of the sea of the promiscous and various multitude of
people? 2. Is not their power almost become infinite and boundless, noted by
the beasts seven heads and ten horns? 3. Has not the Dragon, or Devil given
them this power, (for sure I am) neither God nor man ever gave it them? 4. And
lastly, do they not in a most ample and large manner open their mouths to
blasphemy with the beast; yea in such a measure as was never heard of among
Jews or Gentiles, Turks or Barbarians, insomuch that it is a wonder the Land
does not sink under the burden of them. But to this it will be objected, that
this is but the error of a few, and is not known nor acknowledged by them all.
I answer, by a part we may judge of all, even as Apelles took Hercules length
and stature, by the measure of his foot. Besides (as our adversaries cannot
deny) but that those which have opened their mouths in such a measure of
blasphemy against Christ, are also those which are of their own sect and
opinion, neither have they been rebuked by them, or written or spoke against
so far as ever I have read or understood (by any of them) for the same.

Secondly, as these our adversaries have denied Christ; so they have, and do
deny the use of the moral Law, bearing us in hand, that it is of no force,
strength, or virtue. And indeed what can be better for lawless, people, then
to have the Law abrogated and abolished? Therefore (albeit there may seem to
be no dispute against those that deny the principles of faith and reason) yet
have I undertaken (for conscience sake, and their own good) to show unto them
the use and necessity of the Law, and that it is in as great force, strength,
and virtue (according to the inlightening, and directing power of it) as ever
it was. And that first by the testimony of Christ himself, who plainly
tells us, that he is not come to destroy the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 5.17.
but to fulfill them. Romans 3.31.
And the Apostle that he did not make void the Law, but did establish it. And
the reason is, because the Law is holy, 7.12.
and the commandment is holy, just, and good. Therefore David made it his
delight, Psalm. 119.70.
and the Prophet Isaiah concludes; Isay. 8.20.
To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word,
it is because there is no truth in them. I must confess, as many as are led by
the spirit of Christ, Gal. 5.18.
are not under the curse or rigor of the Law, by reason that in respect of our
selves, and our own weakness the Law can make nothing perfect; Heb. 7.1^
but that hinders not the Law to be still in force, and perfect in it self,
Ps. 19.7.
not only as it is a rule of righteousness, and a light unto us, but also as
it serves to convince the conscience, and to lay it open. And therefore David
used it as a lamp unto his feet, Psalm. 119.105.
and a light unto his paths. And the Apostle plainly concludes, that he had
not known sins, Romans 7.7.
but by the Law. Wherefore take away this light, this lamp, and this rule, and
our adversaries may do what they list, blow out this candle, and they may go
whether they please; but they must not think to escape in the dark or to go
away in a mist; for we shall be able (even by the very lantern of this Law)
to trace and find them out. And therefore they deny it lest they should be
found out, and ruld by it. Joh. 3.19.
For light is come into the world, and men love darkness, rather then light;
because their deeds are evil.

Thirdly, our adversaries (the Independents) do not only deny Christ, and the
use of the moral Law; but also the whole Canonical Scriptures, in calling
them a dead letter, and in comparing them to a fountain scaled up.
Notwithstanding the Prophet Isaiah proclaims unto all, Isay. 55.1.
to come freely to the waters, and to buy wine and milk without money, and
without price: And the Prophet Ezechiel compares them to the waters issuing
forth under the threshold of the Sanctuary, Ezech 47.5.
which grew into a river, and became impassible. David tells us, that the Law
of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; that the testimony of the Lord is
sure, Ps. 19 7.
making wise the simple, and that the statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing
the heart, the commandment of the Lord is pure, inlightning the eyes. And Paul
says in Timothy, that all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy ^3.
16.
and is profitable for doctrine, reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness. That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works. In the Epistle to the Hebrews, he tells us, that the word of
God is quick and powerful, Heb. 4.12
and sharper then any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing of soul
and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and that it is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart. And in the Epistle to the Romans he plainly
concludes the Gospel to be the power of God unto salvation. To. 1.16.
And therefore if our Gospel he did (says the Apostle) It is hid to them that
are lost, 2 Cor. 4. 34.
in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them that believe not,
lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ (who is the Image of God)
should shine unto them. I wonder what St. John means, whereas he says: Joh.
1.1.
In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was
God. I hope our adversaries will not say, that God is a dead letter.

But it is not the sense or scope of Scripture (will they object) which they
call the dead letter but the letter it self, which is the creature.

I answer, then the Creator (with the scapegoat) may pass free, but take away
the letter, I wonder what will become of the sense, and scope of Scripture.
Yes, our new Enthusiasts and speculative Divines have found out a way to come
by the sense and scope of Scripture, without the letter, and that is by
Revelation, and inditing of the spirit. But what spirit is that, which inditeth
without Scripture? Must not Gods word and spirit be one? 1 John 5.7.
And does not the Apostle say plainly, that if we or an Angel from Heaven
preach any other Gospel then that which has been preached, Gal. 1.8.
let him be accursed And is it not a new Gospel to deny Christ, to deny the
Scriptures, to deny Magistracy, to deny Ministry, and to deny the creature, or
that man has a reasonable soul?

But seeing I have proved Independents already to be worse then Jews, Turks
or Infidels; let us now see what difference there is between them and Papists.
Papists say that the Holy and Canonical Scriptures are imperfect and obscure;
therefore they restrain them from the Laiety. Independents say that they are
but a dead letter, and therefore useless, and unprofitable, and restrain them
from all men. The Pope arrogates the knowledge and interpretation of Scripture
only to himself, so do Independents. The Pope he says, that he is above and
without all Law, because he has the Law written in the table of his breast; so
do Independents. Only herein is the difference (if there be any) that the Pope
and Papists (in some nature) refuse not to be tried by Scripture; but our
adversaries do; for so much as they (notwithstanding Malechie says, Mal. 2.7.
the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at
his mouth) arrogate the key of knowledge, and of interpreting the Scriptures
only to themselves, A woman in Midlesex.
and plainly give forth that the Scriptures are to be tried by their spirit,
and not their spirit by the Scriptures. Being contrary to Saint John's rule, 1 John 4.1.
which advises us not to believe every spirit; but to try them, whether they
be of God, adding the reason, because many false spirits are gone forth into
the world. But how should we try them? whenas they have wrung the rule of
truth and touchstone of Gods word, out of our hands, in calling it a dead
letter, and useless creature. The Pope he says he cannot sin, only out of
Peter's chair, he confesses he may err; but our adversaries plainly tell us,
that they cannot sin at all; And why? Because God sees no sin in Jacob,
Number. 23.21.
nor transgression in Israel. And he that is borne of God sins not; Neither
indeed can he sin, because his seed abides in him. O happy people, a royal
Priesthood, and a holy Nation. 1 Pet. 2.9.
I wonder they do not also say, that the showte of a King is among them. How
has God sent them the spirit of delusion, 2 These. 2.11.
that they might believe a lie, 12.
to the end that they might all be damned, which believe not the truth? For are
they ignorant, or do they take no notice that Israel was even then committing
whooredome with the Daughters of Moab, Number. 25.1.
when Balaam did pronounce them without sin. And does not the same author
which says; 1 John 3.9.
he which is borne of God cannot sin; also to conclude, 1 John 1.8.
that he which says he is without sin, deceives himself, and the truth is
not in him. Ps. 32.1
I confess, the man is blessed, to whom the Lord does not impute sin. But that
hinders not, but that God seeeth sin in Jacob, and transgression in Israel.
1 Samuel 7. 32.33.
Yea, and that he will punish it with the rods of men; though he take not his
everlasting mercies from us. But here I shall entreat thee (Christian Reader)
to consider what will become of this doctrine of our adversaries. They say God
sees no sin in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel; therefore be secure, and
let us sin, that grace may abound. 2. Observe, that if there be no sin,
then the soul is made righteous; but a righteous soul needs no Savior;
therefore no wonder, that our adversaries deny Christ. Again, where there is
no sin there is perfection of grace; but where there is perfection of grace,
there must also be perfection of glory (for so much as glory is the reward of
grace) therefore by their own consequent they must, and do enjoy Heaven upon
earth, which has and does make some of them not only not ashamed to deny the
resurrection, and general judgment, but also plainly to give forth, The
F^milist, and the Millenatie.
that the resurrection is already past, that Heaven is upon earth, and that
they enjoy Christ here in the flesh: If this be not Apostasy, I know not what
is; I cannot but wonder therefore that our adversaries would separate
themselves from us, Jude 19
seeing we have more reason to separate our selves from them. But they are
gone from among us, because they were not of us, 1 John 2.19.
and herein they are far worse then the Pope, for albeit he have swarved in
some things; yet has he not denied the Articles of the Faith, as it is proved
our adversaries both have and do. And therefore also I must confess, I should
have taken the Pope to have been the Antichrist; but that I find a worse to
stand up in his room. It is said of that man of sin, and son of perdition:
^ These. 2.1.
That he opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that
is worshipped; so that as God he sits in the temple of God, showing himself
that he is God. And do not our adversaries so? For in the first place they
take themselves to be the only people of God, condemning all but themselves. 2.
They oppose and advance themselves above all that is called God: Above Christ,
above the Scriptures, above people, above Priest, above Magistrate, above
Minister, and above all the world: So that their power may well be compared
unto the Bears foot, spoken of in the Revelation, which in Daniel is said to
break in pieces, Rev. 13 2. Dan. 7.6.
to devour; yea, and to stamp all things under its feet. I read of a woman
(in the Revelations) that was clothed with the Sun, Rev. 12.1.
and had twelve Stars upon her head, and had the Moon under her feet; but I
never read of a woman that trampled both Sun, Moon and Stars, and all under her
feet.

Fourthly, our adversaries do not only deny Scripture in general, by
calumniating, and traducing it: But also in particular in flatly denying some
part of it. As first the book of Psalms, questioning the Author; because some
of the Psalms bear the Titles of others besides David. 2. They question the
first and second book of the Kings, because they are thought to contain no
other thing then what is expressed and set down in the first and second book
of the Chronicles. 3. They question some of the smaller Prophets (as Amos by
name) because he was a herds man. Amos 1.1.
4. In the new Testament, some of them question Saint Lukes Gospel, and the
Acts, because the Author was a Physician. The book of the Hebrews, because
the Author is uncertain. The Epistle of Saint Jude, because there was one of
Christ kinsmen of that name in Mathewes Gospel, because he was a Publican, and
the Revelation, because it was written in John's banishment, when he was in the
Isle of Patmos. Finally, and in a word, they make but little or no account of
the whole book of the old Testament; because they conceive old things are done
away, and all things are become new. 2 Cor. 5.17.
Not waying that the two Testaments are like twins, or the two Tables of
stone, in so much that whosoever embraces the one, must also make use of the
other; because what is contained in the one, is also concluded in the other.
For as the old Testament which contains the Law, does also include the
Gospel, by way of promise, and Revelation: So the new Testament, which
contains the Gospel, Joh. 13 34.35.
does also include the Law, by way of precept, which is love, To. 13.10.
being the fulfilling of the Law. Genesis 38.27.
So that (like Thamars twins) they seem to go hand in hand: What therefore
God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

Lastly, as our adversaries (the Independents) deny God, deny Christ, deny the
Scriptures: So likewise they deny all humane power and authority, whether it be
Ecclesiastical or Civil Government.

And first they deny humane authority in the Church; for they will have no
superior in the same, and their reason is, Mat. 23.8.
because they are brethren; forgetting that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, and
Titus Bishop of Crete. And that Paul gives charge to the Elders of the Church
of Ephesus, that they should take heed unto themselves, Act. 20.28.
and to all the flock over the which the holy Ghost had made them over seers:
And the Author to the Hebrews, plainly exhorts us, to obey them that have the
rule over us, Heb. 13.17.
seeing they watch for our souls, as they that must give account for them,
that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, seeing that is unprofitable
for us. And the Apostle in Timothy exhorts, that the Elders which rule well, 1 Timothy 5.17.
should be counted worthy of double honor; especially they who labor in the
word and doctrine; where we shall find 3 orders or degrees of Rulers in the
Church, in the Apostles time. First of Bishops (though they be now cried down)
which succeeded the Apostles. 2. Of Elders which were also preaching Ministers;
but had not so great a power as Bishops. 3. Of Deacons, or reading Ministers,
which had no power in the Church but only to serve the poor and administer the
sacraments, as appears by the 6 of the Acts, and 5 verse. I deny not, but
that there were also Lay Elders, whom we call Churchwardens; but they served
only to keep the treasury of the Church, and to see good order, and decorum
kept in it. And were joined with the preaching Elders; but might not meddle with
the dispensation of the word. Secondly, as Scripture does allow of
Ecclesiastical government; so of civil or political. And first whereas our
blessed Savior told Pilate that he could have no power ever him, Joh. 19.11.
but that it was given him from above.

Where observe that Christ was subject even to a heathen Prince, a Tyrant, and
an Infidel. And the Apostle exhorts us to be subject unto the higher powers,
To. 13.1.
declaring withal (as Christ had done before) that there is no power, but what
is ordained of God. And therefore Peter earnestly exhorts us, 1 Pet. 2.13.
that we should submit our selves to every very ordinance of man for the Lords
sake, etc. Act. 25.11.
This made Paul appeal from Festus to Caesar, though a Heathen and Infidel,
as Christ had done before to Pilate. What are these therefore that despise
dominion, Jude 8.
and speak evil of dignities? Saint Jude will tell us, that they are those
who separate themselves, 19.
sensually, having not the spirit; though they boast most of it. And the
Apostle Peter will tell us that they are presumptious, 1 Pet. 2.10.
and selfewilled, and such as promise others liberty, 19.
when themselves are the servants of corruption. Thirdly, Whose judgment
(says the Apostle) lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not. I wonder
therefore in the end what will become of this people; they will admit us no
Magistracy, they will admit us no Ministry, they will admit us no Government,
they will admit us no King, they will admit us no government, they will admit
us no Church, they will not admit us the Scriptures, The Millenary,
they will not admit us Christ: For have not some of them plainly given forth,
that we are no Church? Mr. Hollis by name.
nay, that our Church is no better then an house of office: That we have
neither Urim nor Thummim. A Maid.
Nay, that we are not a people, or at the least not the Lords people. I wonder
what they will make us believe at the last; surely, that we are not our
selves; but (blessed be God) we know both what and whom we have believed. 2 Timothy 1.2. The compassionate Samaritance. page 29.
Though they cry down King, cry down Parliament, cry down order, cry down
Bishops, cry down learning, cry down all; to the end that all things may be
brought into disorder, and confusion. Satan seems to be let loose among us,
Rev. 20 7.
and the bottomless pit to be set open; Rev. 9.2.
for of men or reasonable creatures, they would make us worse then stocks and
stones, or blockheaded asses; for have and do they not plainly give forth,
that a man has no soul, Mr. Darby by name.
and that stocks and stones have as much in them of God as man has? Nay that
God is in these dumb and senseless creatures, A Captain Mr. Bur by name.
and that they are God. What is or will become of thee, O England, as long as
thou intertainest such Doctors in the midst of thee? For sure I am, never
Atheist, Heathen, or Infidel ever durst or would speak like unto this people,
who change the glory of the uncorruptible God, To. 1.23.
into the Image of a corruptible creature, or of a calfe that eats hay. Psalm.
106.20.
And pity it were, but that we should case hay with a calfe, or be counted
worse then stocks or stones, or then Oxen or Asses; if we should believe all
what our adversaries teach and hold forth unto us. O England, thou wast once
the glory and mirror of Nations, the wonder of the world; but now thou art
become the scorn and derision of the people. The seat of Antichrist, a nest
of vipers, and a cage of unclean birds, even a place where Satan's Throne and
Kingdom is. Rev. 2.13.
Arise therefore, repair thy beauty, drive out those locusts and caterpillars,
which destroy the vine: Rid thy self of Atheism, blasphemy, Antichristianisme,
and profanesse, the which that thou may do, God grant, for Christ's sake,
Amen

Postscript.
OBserve (with me) Christian Reader, that as Independents are worse then either
Jew, Turk, Barbarian; so they are worse then that man of sin, and Son of
perdition, to wit the Pope. First, in restraining Scripture from all by their
calumniation and traducing of it. 2. In regard they challenge the knowledge of
it only to themselves. 3. In regard, they give forth, that they cannot sin.
4. In denying the Articles of the Christian Faith. 5. And lastly, in advancing
themselves above all that is called God, or that is worshipped. And as they
exceed Antichrist in these five things; so they are like him in two. First in
calumniating and traducing of Scripture. 2.In bringing in stocks and stones to
be worshipped, and acknowledging a divine power to be in them: So that instead
of Christ and of his word, they labor and endeavor to bring in Antichrist,
and their own brain sick fancies, and Atheistical whimsies, and opinions.
And instead of Christian and Civil Government in Church and State, they labor
and endeavor to bring in their own licentious liberty, which is nothing but
disorder and confusion. And instead of a Christian or reasonable soul, they
would make us believe that we are no better then an Ox or an Ass, or a Calfe
that eats hay. Finally, and in a word, for Christ, they would have
Antichrist, for the Scriptures, their own brain sick fancies and opinions;
for Christian Discipline, Order, and Government, they would have nothing but
disorder and confusion. For a Church they would have a Jake, for a
steeple-house a chimney-house, and for the immortal and everliving true God,
they would have us to embrace, and worship stocks and stones, and other dumb
and senseless creatures. But from such a people (good Lord) deliver us. Have a
care therefore (O England) and heed that while thou art excluding or banishing
one Antichrist, thou have and do not intertaine a worse in his room, which God
forbid, for Christ's sake, Amen.

FINIS.

