THE CHVRCHES TROUBLES AND DELIVERANCE, OR, Certain Sermons tending to show
the Reasons why the Lord does sometimes bring his People into extremities, with
the blessed issue and fruits thereof, on Genesis 22.14.

Also diverse Arguments giving good hope that yet God will be gracious to
ENGLAND, and not deliver us into our enemies hands.

Also somethings briefly on REV. 11.7. to 14.

BY THO. MOCKET, Mr. of Arts, and Preacher of Gods Word at Holt in
Denbigh-shire.

Prove. 22.3. A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself; but the
simple pass on and are punished.

Psalm 37. v. 12. The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth against him
with his teeth

v. 13. The Lord shall laugh at him; for he sees that his day is coming.

v. 24 Though the righteous fall, he shall not be utterly cast down; for the
Lord upholdeth him with his hand

v. 39. The salvation of the righteous is of the LORD; he is their strength in
time of trouble.

Quid mirandum si Sancti quoque viri malis premantur? sive ad limi quantumvis
exigui purgationem, sive ad virtutis explorationem, sive denique ad
imbecillorum cruditionem.

D. Nazianz. in Orat. 19. in funere Patris. LONDON. Printed for Christopher
Meredith, at the Sign of the Crane in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1642.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Sir Richard Newport, KNIGHT, the LADY Margaret
Bromly Relict to the Honorable Judge Baron Bromley, Sir Ed Broughton Knight,
and the Worshipful Mr Roll Barker of HAYMAN, Mr. Fra. Charleton, Justices of
the Peace, Mr Will. Stevinton, and Mr Ric. Davis, Esquires, Grace, Mercy and
Peace be multiplied.
Sirs,
YOu may wonder that such an obscure person as I am, and living in so remote a
corner of the Kingdom, should (in this learned age, wherein so many elaborate
Pieces of special worth have bin printed) publish any thing: Yet knowing the
subject to be very suitable to the times (and you know what the Wise man says
of a word spoken in it is season)* A word spoken in due season, how good is it?
it is like Apples of gold in Pictures of silver, pleasing and profitable, and
finding the matter handled in it comfortable and profitable to my self, and
well relished and desired by some others, being heartily desirous to further
the public good, and profit others, I have ventured to present it to the
public view and use. And be it so, that this slender Treatise (at first
intended only for a Country Auditory) be indeed but as the Goats hair among
the fine twined linen, silk, purple, silver, gold and precious stones, that
was offered toward the building of the Tabernacle; yet there is use of that
also. Be pleased therefore to accept of it, which I assure you is as rich in
affection as the most cho^se pieces are in worth; which I do humbly present
(as to the World in general so) in particular to you (My much honored and
worthy friends) for your particular favor and expressions toward me and mine.
If you or any others shall reap any good by it (which is my hearty desire) let
God have all the praise, and me your prayers.

And do you (I beseech you) labor more and more to lay out your selves every
way to the utmost, for the public good, and against the public enemies of
the King and Parliament, especially in your most hearty affections, and
fervent, frequent prayers for the peace and prosperity of our Jerusalem, and to
return praises some ways answerable for mercies received. Thankfulness for
benefits received is an holy kind of begging, and a preparative to more and
greater mercies and deliverances, which only he can give (and therefore will be
sought of us for them) whose Throne of grace we have still more cause and
encouragement to frequent. Ezekiel. 36 37.
The fire of civil dissension is broken out here at home, beside the great and
lamentable ruins it has made abroad in Ireland and Germany. Oh! cast on a few
tears to help quench it, and you shall so much the more engage him unto you,
who will remain,

The hearty desirer of the public, and your particular truest good, TH.
MOCKET.

IT is this day ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament
concerning printing, this one and twentieth day of July. 1642. that this book
entitled the Churches trouble and deliverance be printed.

John White.

THE CHVRCHES TROUBLES and Deliverance.
GENESIS 22.14. And Abraham called the name of the place Jehovah lireh, as it is
said unto this day, In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen.


WE have here an argument of praise for a great deliverance out of great
extremity, as we may see by the former verses. God having given Abraham a son
in his old age, and promised that in him all the Nations of the Earth should be
blessed, does in this Chapter command him to offer him up for a burnt offering
unto God, Abraham obeys, goes to the place that God had appointed, built
there an Altar, laid on the wood, bound his son Isack, laid him upon the Altar
and stretched forth his hand to slay his son, then God called unto him and bid
him stay his hand, and spare the child, and in his stead to offer up a Ram
there ready for him in a bush, hereupon Abraham (as is related in this verse)
sets up a monument of this great providence of God in sparing his son, And
Abraham called the name of the place Jehovah-ji^eh. That so eminent a mercy and
deliverance should not pass away with the time, but be for ever remembered;
therefore the Lord also delivered it in a Proverb, As it is said unto this
day, in the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen.

The words are a divine Record or Monument erected to perpetuate the memory of
this great deliverance out of a great extremity, into which Abraham and Isaac
(in whose house the Church of God then was) were brought, wherein we have,

1. The place where. 2. The reason why, And 3. The manner or means by which
the remembrance of this so great a mercy is perpetuated.
1. The place where it was. In the Mount, viz. Mount MoriJah, ver. 1.

2. Why he there erected this Monument, viz because God sees and does provide
an offering and deliver his son Isaac, Heb. 11.19.
Abraham received him as from the dead, an extraordinary favor, and therefore
Abraham was much affected with it, and reason he had to be so, affection in him
toward his son, natural as his son, spiritual as the Son of the promise.

1. Natural, he had a natural ^ffection to him, 1. as his son, 2. as the son
of his old age, 3. his only son, 4. beloved son, and 5. the last that he was
ever likely to have. Old Jacob would go mourning to the grave, because Joseph
was not, though he had many other sons and a Benjamin, a beloved son also. This
affection so far prevailed with David, that he for Absalom broke out into a
bitter and patheticall expression, 2 Samuel 18.31.
O Absalom, my son, my son, would God I had died for thee. How much more cause
had Abraham to have mourned for ^saac, had he been sacrificed, especially by
him his Father. What would all the world say? What is Abraham, the only
precise fellow in the world, become 1. a murderer, and that 2. of an innocent
child, 3. of his own child, 4. the child of his old age, 5. his only, 6.
beloved child? now fie upon such a fellow he is not worthy to live, these be
your Professors, these be the people of God, see what a Religion they have?
and therefore he had great cause to rejoice greatly ^t the preservation and
deliverance of Isaac from so near and imminent a death. But

2. Much more cause had he to rejoice, if we consider the spiritual ^^ound of
his affection, as it is likely he did, Genesis 12.3.
That he was the child of promise, the seed of the Church, in whom God had
promised that all the Nations of the E^rth should be blessed, and s^^^^
deli^erance was a pu^like deliverance and mercy to all the Church of ^od, Isaac
the seed of the faithful, and of whom the M^ssiah should come* is now
delivered, and that after a wonderful manner, in the very nick of time, when
there was l^^^ hope of so great a deliverance and mercy. Here is the grou^^ of
his ^ffection and occasion of erecting this Monument in token of than^fulnesse
for so great a mercy.

3. How and by what means, the remembrance of this great mercy and deliverance
is perpetuated, and that is two ways.

1. In the name of the place, Abraham called the name of the place
Jehovah-jireh. 2. In a Proverb, which is a short and pithy saying, which
therefore does make more impression in the mind then other sentences usually
do, and therefore is the better and more easily remembered, As it is said to
this day, In the Mount of the Jehovah.
LORD it shall be seen.
The scope of this place is to help the people of God against discouragement
when they see it go hard with the Church, that they are brought into great
straits and exigents, that there is no help for them in the world, yet they
must not distrust or be discouraged, flag and hang the wing as men out of hope,
for In the Mount of Jehovah it shall be seen (i. e.) in great straits or
extremities the Lord will show himself to be Jehovah, the God that gives
being to his promises for his peoples comfort, that will help them in the
fittest time. Whence observe 3. main points in order thus,

1. That God sometimes brings his people into the Mount, into some great
strait, into some great extremity or other. 2. That God will be seen in the
Mount, he will help and deliver his people in their extremities. 3. That such
mercies and deliverances should be specially noted, and the remembrance of them
perpetuated. Of these God willing severally and in order, and first of the
first.
That God does sometimes bring his People into the Mount (i.e.) into some great
strait or other, Doct. 1.
that they know not what to do, nor which way to turn themselves.

Examples there are very many, both in the sacred Scriptures and in
ecclesiastical Stories, of which take a few, which I will but mention (and not
largely relate) unto you.

Abraham here was come into the very top of the Mount, to the greatest
extremity, to the highest point before God called unto him and gave him a
dispensation, the Altar was made, the wood laid on, Isaac bound and laid on the
wood, and Abraham was putting forth his hand to slay his Son, there wanted but
a moment of time to do that which all the world could not undo, Isaac had
been slain and offered for a burnt offering unto God.

So Israel was in Egypt a land of affliction (not in Canaan a land of promise)
that was somewhat to humble them; Exo. 1 etc. 5.7.8.9. and 10.
the King was against them and oppressed them, that was more, he slew their
male-children and afterward drowned others, this was more grievous, this rises
high, after that their task was doubled, which still added to their misery.
Then again at the Red Sea, the enemies were armed behind them, the rocky
mountains on each side, and the Sea before them, nothing probable but death in
their eyes. In the wilderness the fiery Serpents, so great wants of water,
bread and flesh, that Moses himself did doubt whether it were possible that so
great a multitude could there be provided for, 1 Samuel 13.22.
unless all the flocks and herds be slain. All Israel in Saul's time was
brought to that extremity, that their mighty enemies the Philistines came
against them, they had neither Sword nor Spear, save only Saul and Jonathan.

So the Church of God, 2 Chr. 13, 14, 15.
all Judah in Abijahs time, were encompassed round about with their enemies, a
great army. So again in Asaes reign, when Zerah the Ethiopian came against
Judah and Jerusalem with an host of a thousand thousand and three hundred
Chariots. 2 Chr. 14.9.
In Iehoshaphats days by the children of Ammon, Moab and mount Seir, 2 Chr.
20.3, 10, ^^, 22.
against whom Judah had no might nor knew not what to do, their enemies were
so exceeding many and mighty. Under Hezekiah, 2 Chr. 32.
when Senacherib and railing Rabshakeh came against him and his people.

Again, In the Babylonian Captivity, Ezekiel 37.3, 4, 11.
they were all as dead b^nes, under a most potent enemy, and that near 70.
years, when they might have thought God had quite forgotten them. So in
Hosters days, Host 3.7, 12, 13, 14, 15.
the Decree was sealed to kill and destroy all the Jews in all the Provinces
under Ahashucrus.

Instances in particular persons, we have many, as in 1 Samuel 23 25.
David in the wilderness of Maon and sundry other times, as at 1 Samuel 30.6.
Ziglag, in Ion. c. 2. and 3.6
Jonas, Hest c 3. and 6.
Mordecai, Dan c. 3. and 6.16.
Daniel, the three Children, 2 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25.
Paul often, Act. 12.
Peter and many others.

So if need were we might out of the Histories of the Church bring many
instances to this purpose from the Primitive times hitherto, even a large
Volume of them, but what needs more instances to prove so evident a truth
which none denies? Now

The Reasons why the Lord will sometimes bring his people into great straits,
Reasons
may be taken from the ends of the Lords providence in afflicting his people
and bringing them into great ext^emities, which are these,

1. To humble his people the more, and so make them more fit for mercy; every
godly man is not fit for every mercy, fit for deliverance, much less others
that are not such, they would be proud, unthankful, abuse mercies. An humble
man is the only fit man for mercy, as an empty vessel is only fit to receive,
not the full vessel; all precious liquour is spilt that is powered on it, and
the seed lost that is cast on unplowed ground; as the honey comb to a full
stomach, so are mercies and deliverances to an unhumble people; therefore, it
is said, 1 Pet. 5.5.
God resists the proud and gives grace to the humble and meek, as the Baker
does not set his bread into the Oven (though it be handled and ready) till the
Oven be through hot, so neither does God bestow (especially great) mercies upon
a person or people till they be humbled, heated with desire after and prepared
for it: as a Husbandman does not cast his seed into the ground, till the time
and season of the year and the ground be plowed and fitted for it: so here.
And this is the first reason God does sometimes bring his people into
extremities to humble them and make them fit for mercy: So now to make them fit
for the mercies preparing: I do not say that all the people in the Land must
be prepared, that will never be, but a considerable number is needful, and all
should labor to be such.

2. The Lord does it to prove both the affection and obedience of his people.

1. Their Affection, their faith, patience and love to him, to see how they
will trust in him, and cleave to him in evil times, and how they will bear
evils, whether they will love their ease, liberty, profit, or any other thing,
or himself most, v. 1. it is said, God did prove Abraham, and therefore said
unto him, Genesis 22.1.
Take now thine only Son Isaac whom thou love and offer him up for a burnt
Offering, etc. Now Gods intent being to prove Abraham's faith and love to him,
to see whether he would cleave unto him, and did love his God or his son most,
therefore he lets him go on to the very point, he might have given him a
dispensation before he came out of his doors, when he saw him preparing, or in
the way, but he did not till it came to the uttermost, that he might fully try
him, and then God says, Lay not thine hand upon the child, V^^. 11, 12.
for now I know that thou fear me, seeing thou have not withheld thy son,
thine only son from me. As among men many friends promise fair, but when it
comes to the very point, then it appears what they are indeed: So here, such
as profess friendship unto God are known when they are tried at a pinch or
strait.

2, So likewise, to prove their Obedience, the Lord does sometimes put them on
it to the uttermost, sometimes he gives them such commands, that they are put
into many straits, So it w s with (...), and so with Daniel, D^. c. 3. (...) 6.
as here Abraham, if he should kill his son all the Heathen would cry out upon
him for it, if he should tell them that God commanded him so to do, what would
they think of the true God? How blasphemously would they think and speak of
him and of the true Religion? If neither of these, yet he should loose his
child, his only son whom he loved deerly, and the child of promise. If he
do it not, then he incurres Gods displeasure. This the Lord puts his children
upon it to see if they will obey him, when it comes to matter of great less or
suffering.

3. God does it to manifest to the whole world and to themselves the truth and
strength of that grace he has given them, and so will glorify himself in the
work of his own grace wrought in his people, v. 1. it is said, After these
things God tempted Abraham: So Christ after he was baptized, Mat. 4.1.
and had received extraordinary evidences of Gods favor from Heaven, He was
led into the wilderness to be tempted of the Devil, and so tried; And Paul
had a Messenger of Satan, a thorn in the flesh to buffet him long, though he
prayed earnestly to have it remooved, this to manifest the truth and strength
of grace he had given them, whereby he brings much glory to himself; 3 Cor.
12.7, 8, 9.
their cheerful going on through great streights, does arguestrength of
grace, and Gods great power in them.

All the while the godly are in prosperity, wicked men are apt, and often do
charge them with hypocrisy and call them hypocrites; but afflictions do
discover the truth of their graces. All the while Job was in prosperity, his
sincerity was not known to his enemies, therefore Satan challenged Job to God
for an hypocrite, Job 1.
but his great affliction did manifest him to be no hypocrite, but a sincere,
upright hearted man truly fearing God, Virtus magis conspicitur in adversis,
Virtue is most conspicuous in adverse times, as a Candle shines clearest and
gives the best light in the night, and so the stars which are not seen in
the day shine brightest in the darkest and coldest winter nights: So grace will
then most show it self, when a man is brought to the greatest exigent under
heaviest affliction. Paul's excellent graces, patience, wisdom, faith, courage,
etc. had never been so conspicuous, had it not been for his great afflictions
and troubles, nor Abraham's faith, nor Jobs patience, nor Moses meekness. If
there were none or no difficult diseases, there could be no trial of the
Physicians skill; the house builded on the sand, seemed to have as fair and
good a foundation, as that on the rock, till a great storm came and the
winds blew: Prosperity is as the grave that buries many excellent graces of
Gods children, but affliction like Christ's resurrection (as it were) opens the
graves and manifests them to the world, and so Gods g^^dnesse and power in them.

As to others so to themselves the truth and strength of their graces are
apparent, often times hereby they come to see that grace and strength (not of,
but) in themselves which they saw not before, hereby it appears they are
sons and not bastards, seeing their heavenly Father so tendering their souls
welfare that he will rather punish them, and that sharply, afflict them and
that sore sometimes, then let them go on in sin to their hurt and
destruction. See full to this purpose, Hebr. 12.6, 7, 8.

4. The Lord often brings his people into great straits, to quicken them to
duties, meditation, searching of the Promises and passages of Gods providence
to his people formerly, especially to fasting and prayer. Those that at other
times are negligent and superficial in duties, yea wholly neglect them;
profane persons will in their straits seek unto God, and others will be more
frequent and fervent in duties, I will go and return unto my place (says
God) In their affliction they will seek me early. Hos 5.15. Isa. 26.16.
Lord (says the Prophet) in trouble they have visited thee, they powered out a
prayer when thy chastening was upon them. All the while the Sea was calm the
Soldiers and Mariners were merry and thought not on God, but when in great
danger then every man is busy to call upon his God, Ion. 1.4, 5, 6.
Jonas was roused up with detestation of his sl^ggishnesse at such a time,
Awake what meanest thou o sleeper, arise, call upon thy God. When David was in
the mire, in the deep waters, in great danger and trouble; Jonas in the Whales
belly, when the Ship was in danger; and when Peter was ready to sink, then
they cry, Lord save us we perish; So Jacob when wrathful Esau came against
him, he wrestled all night with God, If God had delivered him at the first, he
would not have wrestled with God as he did, and so have missed the blessing
also, which he received with the name of Israel, so Iehoshaphat, Abijah and
Israel, and Judah often. As it is said of our blessed Savior, Lu. 22.44.
that being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly, so it is true in all his
members, though they pray at other times constantly, yet in their great straits
and extremities, they pray oftener and after another manner then at other times,
more feelingly and fervently, even the worst of men will in their extremities
seek unto God, In their affliction they will seek me early, because then,
when other means fa^le, there is none else to help, and therefore they must
go unto God, and seek help from him or perish. And so it puts them upon
other religious duties, which at other times, it may be, are wholly or much
neglected.

5. The Lord does it do exercise, and so brighten the graces of his Spirit in
his people, which otherwise will decline. The best pearls and adamants will
wax dusky with long lying in a close Cabinet, grow dull and loose their
color, though they retain their substance and virtue, but dyamonds the more
they are worn, the brighter they look and are more resplendent; iron with
long rest will gather rust, but the more it is used the brighter it is; hence
so many rusty Swords in this Kingdom, till these troubles give occasion to
brighten them: So all the graces of Gods sanctifying Spirit, though they will
not decay in respect of their substance and habits, yet they will (as it were)
grow dusky, but the more they are exercised, the brighter they are. Afflictions
are Gods file to burnish our spiritual armor, make it more bright and
serviceable.

6. By exercising the graces of Gods Spirit in times of trial, (some of which
have little or no use in times of prosperity as patience and some other) they
are also much increased, Mat. 7.17.
and the Saints made more fruitful, and therefore God brings them into
troubles and extremities many times. Afflictions are therefore compared to
waters, to rain; as the rain falling on the Earth makes it fruitful, the
seed to grow, the grass to spring, so afflictions sanctified will make barren
hearts and lives fruitful in grace and all good works. We are like rough,
hard, cloddy ground that is not fit to be manured till softened and broken, and
it is not every little shower that will do it, it must be a ground shower that
soakes through: so afflictions seem but as the rain to fasten us and make us
more pliable to his blessed will and more fruitful, which are sometimes in
such a temper, that it is not every small affliction that will do it.

Therefore it is that James says, My Brethren count it all joy when ye fall
into diverse temptations, Jam. 1, 2, 3, 4.
knowing this, that the trial of your faith, ( viz. by afflictions) works
patience (one grace begets another) and let patience have it is perfect
work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing If a man pull off a
plaster too soon, it will not work a perfect cure: so here, let patience (to
wit, in bearing afflictions) have it is perfect work, that, etc. Implying, that
if patience have it is perfect work, it will make a Christian perfect and
entire, wanting nothing. They (says the Apostle (namely) earthly fathers)
chastened us after their pleasure, Heb. 12.10.
but he (i. e. God) for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
holiness. 2 Cor. 4.16.
Paul says, speaking of afflictions, That as our outward man decays, our
inward man is renewed daily. As the waters that lifted up the Arc, the higher
the waters were the nearer the Arc was to Heaven: so afflictions, though they
seem to cast men low in the eye of the world, and their own eyes also, yet
they mount a man higher toward God and make him after a sort a complete
Christian, that you may be perfect, says the Apostle, and entire. There are 2.
parts of a Christians obedience, active and passive, doing and suffering and
both these together make a man a complete Christian, for parts, though not for
degrees of obedience.

That which the Poet said of virtue, Affl^ctiones forte^ reddu (...) fortioreus
Chrysostom Hon. 2. ad The* 2.
virescit vuluere virtus, virtue gets strength by wounds, so grace by
afflictions, and as in brave generous spirits, difficulties do heighten their
courage and resolution, so here great afflictions and great straits do raise a
Christians graces, his faith, etc. to a higher pitch, as Camomell the more it
is trodden, the more it spreads and the sweeter it smells, and so do spices the
more they are pounded, and a Pomander the more it is rubbed, and vines that are
often pruned, the better they bear; so the graces of the Saints, the more they
are exercised, the more they grow: as physic though it be bitter and sometimes
violent and churlish in the working, yet the body afterward is the stronger by
it, for it purges out the corrupt malignant humor that does weaken the body,
so do afflictions and troubles, though sometimes great and grievous, for the
present, yet they do good, they are a means to beget and increase spiritual
strength.

Thus Afflictions and trials do, as discover grace, so increase it by
exercising of it, Actus intendit habitum, says one, Bellar.
si nervose fit, the act does increase the habit if it be done with all a man's
might, so do strong afflictions, great trials, for they put a man's upon the
exercise of all the grace he has, to put it out to the uttermost.

7. The Lord often brings his people into great afflictions, as to try and
improve the graces of his Spirit in them, so likewise to discover corruption.
Great afflictions, great trials do discover much corruption: Peter thought
himself much better then he was, till the trial came, and then his unbelief
and cowardice in Christ's cause appeared. There were some who in Q. Mary's days
and other times of persecution made boast they would suffer much for Christ, as
Peter did, and went on far, but when it came to the pinch, to the point of
suffering, they drew back, we are generally like Hazael, 2 Kin. 8.12, 13
apt to think we have no such foul corruptions in us, such vile lusts, but
Schola crucis, Schola lucis is true also in this sense, it discovers much
corruption, and the greater the trial is, the more corruption will appear,
witness Jobs carriage in his sufferings. The flesh is like a cunning enemy,
that will not discover all his strength till he come to a pinch of need, and
then pulls out all he has.

Quest But you will say, what good will this do?

Answ. Much, for sin being discovered may more particularly be confessed,
bewailed, repented of, opposed and amended; but more of this in the next.

8. The Lord sometimes brings his people into great straits, as to discover,
Tunc anima purgatur, quum propter Deum premitur, Chrysostom. Is. 1.25. and 27.6.
so to purge out corruption and pur sie his people from the dross and filth of
sin. J will turn my hand upon thee (says God) i e. bring troubles upon thee
(and mark what follows) and purely purge away all thy dross, etc. And Cap.
27. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to
take away his sin, by this, that is by afflictions and troubles, as appears
by, v. 7. So in Daniel, Dan. 11.35.
Some of them of understanding (i. e.) of the godly (who only are truly wise)
shall fall, i. e. into afflictions and great troubles, not to break and
destroy them, Dan. 12.10.
but as it follows, to try and to purge them and make them white. And again,
Many shall be purified and made white, namely by the great troubles of the
Church. So godly Zechariah, I will bring the third part thorough the fi^e,
Zach. 13 9.
and will refine them as silver is refined, etc. now we know the end of the
Refiners casting his metal, be it of silver or gold, is not to waste and
consume it, but to purify, do a way the dross and make it more precious: and
so does God deal with his people, when he casts them into the fire of
affliction. Indeed afflictions and troubles in their own nature drive men from
God; if God follow a wicked man with grievous plagues and troubles, if they
have their own proper work and effect, they make him more impatient and
raging even to blaspheme sometimes, and the more grievous are their troubles,
Rev. 16.9, 11.
the more outrageous evil men are, They were scorched with great heat and
blasphemed the name of God, and repented not to give God the glory, but
blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their pains, -- but God makes them to
work this good e fect in his people, contrary to their own nature, therefore
(says Job) When he has tried me I shall come forth as gold. Job 23.10. Hos.
2.5, 7.
When Israel went a whoring after her Idols, God hedged up her way with
afflictions and troubles, there resembled to thorns and that made her to
return to God. 2 Chronicles 32.
All the while Manasses had his Kingdom and prosperity, he did multiply
transgression, but when God had stripped him of his honor and pleasure, and
carried him into Babylon, and bound him with chains, then he humbled himself
greatly and turned from all his evil ways to God. Luke 15.
So the Prodigal, while his money and credit lasted he swagger'd it out in
voluptuous courses, but great extremities of want drove him to consider his
ways, leave his evil courses, and return with tears in his eyes and sorrow
in his heart.

As of waters the running water is purest and wholes mest, but that which
stands st ll will gather mud and purify: so it is with the godly, and the way
to refine them is to drive them as men do their wines f om off the lees, from
vessel to vessel, from one trouble to another; that is the way to refine them
from the lees of sin, which otherwise they will be apt to settle upon, Ier 18
11.
as Moab did. Moab has bin at ease from his youth and he is settled on his
lees, and has not bin emptied from vessel to vessel, neither has he gone
into captivity therefore his taste remains in him, and his sent is not
changed.

9. The Lord does it to keep his people from committing many sins for the
future. If we had all things to our desire and lived in prosperity but a while,
we should wax wanton, go on securely in our own ways, D^ut 32.15. Ezekiel. 16
7. to 16 2 Chro. 12.1. 2 Chro. 26.16.
and be ready to lift up the heel against God, as J^jurun did when he waxed
fat. So also did Israel in Ezekiels time. So did Rehoboam when he had
established the Kingdom and strengthened himself, He forsook the Law of the
Lord and all Israel with him, and Vzziah when he was strong, his heart was
lified up to his destruction, and so Hezekiah: and what did Salomons great
peace and prosperi y, Isa. 39.2.
but beget in him abundance of lusts? Because they have no changes, Ps. 55.19.
therefore they fear not God, says David, Troubles, especially great straits
make men stand in awe of God, and so do prevent sin as well as purge out
sin; afflictions are like a hedge of thorns or wall by the way side, that
keep men from breaking out, and stepping a side as otherwise they would.
Afflictions are Gods rod, to keep wicked men and Gods own children in awe. As
the Wolf makes the Shepherd that before slept, to watch and stand upon his
guard to prevent the spoiling of his stock; so troubles make men to stand upon
their watch, and be more careful to avoid sin for the future.

10. The Lord does sometimes bring his people into the Mount of troubles, to
let them see the vanity and emptiness of the creatures, that they are but as a
broken cisterne that is empty and wanting, when there is most need of water;
like a hollow reed or a broken st^ffe, that will fail a man at a pinch of
need, and lay him in the dirt or midst of the ditch, when it should bear him
over. When a man is brought into great straits, even to extremity, then he sees
that there is no help in the creature, that vain is the help of man, that
Physicians, Friends and all leave him, because they can do him no good, and so
in other cases of extremity, when a man sees that other outward means will do
him no good, but like a broken Bow will start aside and fail him, when it is
hard drawn, then men see the vanity and nothingnesse of the creatures. We are
apt to think there are great matters in them, that much help and comfort is
to be had from them, and therefore eagerly desire them and dote on them, and
neglect God: therefore the wise God does sometimes bring his people into the
Mount, into such a condition that outward means and friends fail them, and
will do them no good, to let them see the vanity of all things under the Sun.

11. To weane us from the world, make us weary of it and long after Heaven:
Afflictions and troubles are good means to cure a man of love of the world:
sickness, poverty, persecution, and other great troubles, make men weary of
their lives. Elias when he fled from the wrath of Jezabel and Ahab, 1 (...). 19
4.
he sat under a Ju^iper tree, and requested for himself that he might dye;
not a word of dying before he was brought into this great strait, that he must
either fly for his life, or dye by the hand of wicked Iezabel. This made Paul
desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, that he was then in bloody Nero
his prison, though that was not the sole cause of that his desire. If we had
all things here at will, we should with Peter desire to build Tabernacles and
abide here; but afflictions and troubles, especially great ones, make us weary
of the world, like as wormwood on the mothers breast does imbitter it, and
makes the child out of love with the breast: So afflictions and troubles do
imbi t^r our worldly comforts, make us weary of the world, out of love with it
and to aspire and long after Heaven.

And both these tend much to draw his people to trust in him, and so to rely
and bottom themselves upon him, as to commit themselves to him, to roll
themselves and lean upon him alone. When a man is come so fa^te into such an
extremity* that all outward help and means fail him, and there is none to
rely upon but God, that either be must cast himself wholly upon God, or perish,
be undone, if God help him not he is undone, he has no hope elsewhere, it will
drive him to roll himself and rely upon God, if there be any faith and hope
in him that God can and will help; as a man shipwrackt at Sea, when he sees
there is no other way to be saved but such a rock or planke, Heb. 11.17, 18,
19.
then he casts himself on that and resolves to rest thereon. Here Abraham
was brought to a very great strait, he cast himself on God, he believed that
God was able to raise up his some again from the dead, and therefore he cast
himself upon God. So it wrought with Paul and others, they received the
sentence of death in themselves (i. e.) saw no way or means of life, all hope
from outward means failed, and therefore they cast themselves wholly on God,
hear his words. 2 Cor. 1.9, 10.
We received the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in
our selves, but in God, which raises the dead, who delivered us from so great
a death. It was a great extremity Paul and the rest were brought into, Act. 27.
Act. 27.20.
No small tempest lay on us (says the Apostle) all hope that we should he
saved was taken away. See how this drove him to trust in God, v. 25. Sirs be of
good cheer, I believe God, etc. When the storm was exceeding great, the Ship
split and all failed, nothing but the waves or pieces of plankes, yet then he
cast and committed himself to God, yea then he must do it or perish, no hope,
no help any other way. Thus the Lord would have his people to trust in him and
rely upon him alone, and this is a special means to drive men to it, to
unbottome them of the creature; necessity is a good argument, and it is well if
any thing will make a man truly and sincerely to cast himself on God.

12. Sometimes again, The Lord brings his people into troubles, to make his
Word and Promises sweeter unto them, and all his mercies to relish better. When
a man is tossed to and fro, and wearied with beating his brains and
endeavoring by all ways and means, yet in vain, and as it were against the
stream and wind, o how welcome then will a promise be to such a soul! Ps.
110.50. Contraria juxtase posita magis cluceseunt.
how sweet will the word to be to him that finds no help, no comfort in any
outward thin^^ This (said David) is my comfort in mine affliction, thy word
has quickened me, put life into his drooping, dying soul. Every mercy is sweet
to a gracious heart, but in case of extremity it is most sweet; contraries do
best discover one another, the bitterer the affliction is here, the more
grievous the trouble, the sweeter will the word be to a gracious heart, as
every thing is sweet to an hungry soul.

Also troubles, bitter afflictions will sweeten glory, they put a kind of
excellency and eminency on Heaven and glory it self, and make it more sweet
and glorious. Great afflictions and troubles here, make Heaven (if I may so
say) more heavenly: the haven is most pleasing to a weather-beaten Mariner,
sweet after bitter, health after sickness, ease after pain, meat after
hunger, the triumph after a sharp battle; so troubles here on Earth, do
after a sort swee^en the life to come and make it more excellent and
soul-ravishing.

13. The Lord deals thus with his people to increase thankfulness in them
for mercies. When he comes in the very neck of time, at the last pinch, when
all outward helps and hopes fail, then mercy will be welcome indeed and
thankfully received. Here when it was come to the uttermost, Abraham's hand was
lifted up to slay his son, then comes a dispensation from God, which much
affected Abraham, therefore he presently (as it were) erects a monument with
this inscription, In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen, and called the
name of the place Jehovah-jireh, i. e. the Lord will see or provide. So in
Hesters time when things were brought to a great height, Hest. c. 4. and 9.
a desperate pinch, then God works their deliverance and they were much
affected with it, when a man is brought to extremity then mercy affects much,
and accordingly the heart is enlarged in thankfulness. The more bitter the
affliction is, and the greater the extremity, the more welcome and
thanks-worthy mercy and deliverance will be. A hungry beggar will be thankful
for every small matter and course alms; but he that is full is ready to slight
every thing; A full stomach loathes the hony-combe, Pro. 27.7.
says Solomon.

14. Lastly, the Lord suffers the enemies of his people to prevail and bring
his people to an extremity, that he may have occasion to manifest his glorious
Power, Wisdom and Justice also.

1. His Power, Wisdom and Goodness in the manifest support of his people in
their troubles, holding them up (as it were by the chinne) in the midst of the
waters, that they sink not: So Gods admirable power and goodness did appear,
in making the Arc to float safe upon the waters, the bush to burn and not be
consumed, the Church to be brought into great straites, sometimes to the utter
most extremity, and yet not be quite dissolved and perish, likewise preserving
Daniel in the Lions den; the three children in the fiery furnace, Jonas in the
Whales belly.

Likewise in delivering them cut of extremities, that when it comes to that
pass, that point of extremity, that all helps and means fail, yet that he
can and will help at such a pinch of need, a dead lift, when none else can,
here appears his great care, wisdom, and goodness to his people, as in
delivering Israel out of Egypt, where they had been so many hundred years, and
under so powerful an enemy, and Judah out of Babylon, Peter out of prison,
Jonas out of the Whales belly.

2. His justice appears also in the destruction and confusion of the enemies
of his Church, as Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, proud and potent enemies,
Senacheribs great army. Exodus 9.16. Rom 9.17.
Of Pharaoh it is said, and may be of the rest of them: For this cause have I
raised thee up, to show in thee my power, and that my Name may be declared
throughout all the earth. God sometimes suffers his people to be brought into
great extremity, and their incorrigible enemies to go far and prevail much
for a time, but it is that his power and justice may be more clear and
remarkable in their destruction.

Beloved, his people into afflictions and troubles, Tantum admittitur D^^^olus
t^ n^^re ^n^mii (...) be pro^est. ut exe^^ ar^^, ut ^^^be^^^ u^^^ui ^e ^^se
^ba^^ teipso invemaris. (...). Aug. in Psalm. 61.
these are the reasons and ends why the Lord things even into the Mount
sometimes, to the uttermost extremity, to humble them the more, and make them
the more fit for mercy, to prove their faith, patience, love and obedience, to
manifest the truth and strength of his own grace in them, to quicken them to
duty, to exercise and brighten their graces, and increase grace, to discover
corruption, purge out sin, purify and prevent sin, to let them see the
vanity of the creatures; weane them from the world, and draw them to rely
wholly on him, to make his Word and Ordinances sweeter, to make them more
thankful, and to show his power, wisdom, providence, and goodness in
preserving and delivering his people, and his justice also in destroying his
and their stubborn enemies.

Now while I tell you what Gods end and aim is, I do also tell you what is
your duty, it is to put you on, to j yne with God, to accomplish his ends. Now
the Lord has brought us into the Mount, almost to the very top, I tru^t for
some great mercy to his people, do you now labor to answer Gods ends, to be
kindly and thoroughly humbled, and so fit for mercy, fit for deliverance, fit
for peace and reformation: The great mercy that God intends, therefore to
manifest your faith and obedience, your love and patience at this time of
trial, to manifest to the world the truth and strength of your graces, be
quickened to duties of falling and prayer; exercise grace, and let your
profiting appear: labor to find out your lurking corruptions, to be rid of
them, to be more careful to av yde sin for the time to come, to see the
vanity of all outward things, and be weaned from the world, long and labor
after Heaven, to rest wholly on God, find more sweetness in the Ordinances, be
more thankful for mercies when they come, and admire Gods pure wisdom and
goodness toward you, and ju^tice on his Churches enemies, when God shall take
vengeance on his adversaries, and deliver his Israel.

1. For terror to the enemies of Gods people. Use.
If his own people are subject to sufferings and troubles, and are sometimes
brought into such extremities, that they know not what to do, or which way to
turn themselves, what shall then the wicked, and the enemies of his people
suffer? If all that will live godly must suffer, and sometimes undergo hard
things, shall the wicked escape? Does God deal so with his children, what then
will he do with his servants, yea with his enemies, the slaves and vassals of
Satan? will he not spare them that make conscience of their ways, that
endeavor to live most holily, to walk uprightly with God in all their ways,
what will he do with them that live profanely, loosely, scandalously? If God
so lash them that sin out of infirmity, weakness, ignorance, want of
watchfulness, carelessness, whose hearts are bent to please the Lord, and
honor him, what will he do with them that wittingly and wilfully go on still
in their sins, after many fair warnings and admonitions? If sins of
infirmity be accompanied with crosses and troubles, and that in extremity
sometimes, what will be the end of bloodshed, of whoredom, drunkenness,
cursing, swearing, fearful imprecations, scorning and scoffing at goodness,
and envying purity and sincerity? If he deal so hardly (as it may seem) with
Abraham, Jacob, David, Jeremy, and other his dearest ones, what will he do
with profane Esau's, scoffing Ismaels, cursed Cams, and the rest of the rabble
of wicked men? Luke 23 31.
If it be thus with the green Tree, what shall be done to the dry? If God
deal thus with his own people, what will he do with his and their enemies?
the common enemies of his Church, bloodthirsty enemies, that seek the
suppression of his glorious Gospel, the ruin and destruction of his Church
and people? Prove. 11.^1.
Behold (says Solomon) the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth, much
more the wicked and the sinner. I conceive the place to be meant of suffering
for evill-doing, God will correct and punish his own people, therefore much
more the ungodly, and most of all the professed bloodthirsty enemies of his
Church: 1 Pet. 4.17, 18.
If Judgment begin at the house of God, where shall the sinner and ungodly
appear? yea where shall the professed and public enemies of the Church
appear? If Christ shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming fire, 2 These. 1.7,
8, 9
with his mighty Angels, to take vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and punish them with overlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power,
what shall be the end of these men that despise and spurn at the Gospel, and
seek to suppress it? suspend and silence the most able, faithful and
conscionable Preachers of it?

See Jer. 25. ver. 12, etc. where God by his Prophet Jeremy, after he had
threatened the Jews with 70 years captivity, he prophesies of the utter
destruction, and perpetual desolation of Babylon, and other Nations that were
the adversaries of his Church and people, and ver. 15. he causes the Prophet
to take the cup of Gods wrath, and make all the Nations drink of it, but
especially look upon and weigh well, ver. 28, 29. In case they refuse, says
the Lord, to take the cup at thy hand to drink, then shall thou say unto them,
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, ye shall certainly drink. For lo, mark the
reason, I bring evil on the City that is called by my Name, and should ye be
utterly unpunished? ye shall not be unpunished. This is the use wicked men,
especially the enemies of the Church should make of this point, to think of it
with dread and astonishment, to repent and amend; Phil. 1.28.
for to them that will still go on in their evil ways, this very thing that
they are enemies, is to them an evident token of perdition, says the Apostle.

For in common reason, If they that are Gods own peculiar people, who have the
spirit of God and Christ, who are the sons and daughters of the God of
Heaven, the dearly beloved of his soul, whom he loves next to himself in
Christ, who are all beautuous and lovely in his sight, being adorned with the
graces of his spirit, who are his jewels, as dear to him as the apple of his
eye, who do often bewail their sins against God, judge and condemn
themselves for them, have the Spirit of God and Christ to plead for them, who
do unfainedly desire to please God and honor him, and walk uprightly before
him: If his Abraham's, Johs, Jacobs, Da^iels, and other his Favorites suffer
grievous things, and are sometimes brought into great extremities, then I
appeal to thine own conscience) think what thy doom is like to be, that
never repentest, that seldom prayest in private, that never strivest against
sin, but rather strivest to exceed in sin, at least go on still in sin
and sinful courses, against all reproof, checks of conscience, admonitions,
etc.

And can it ever sink into the head of any reasonable man, that the
adversaries of his people, the malignant enemies of the Church shall go
unpunished, when his own dearest children escape not the rod? Believe it
Brethren, every disgrace, every dis^ase, every affliction that befalls the
righteous, is to the wicked* especially to the open enemies of his people a
pledge of that everlasting shame, and those everlasting woes, plagues, curses,
easelesse torments which shall seize upon them for evermore. If the Lord Christ
himself, when he stood in our room, and sustained the person of a sinner
(though he was in himself without sin, most holy, harmless, the Son of
God, and heir of all) suff^red such grievous things, had his blood shed, his
flesh rent, and his soul pou^ed forth, yea brought to that extremity, that
(though supported by his God-hea^) he cried out in the extreme bitterness of
his soul, lying under the sense of divine wrath, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? then surely nothing remains to wretched sinners, that
notwithstanding all warnings go on still in their evil ways, but a fearful
expectation of judgment. This is the first use of this point, terrou^ to
wick^d men, especially to such as are the professed enemies of his Church or
people.

Secondly, seeing the godly, Use 2.
even the most faithful servants of God are here subject to sufferings and
trials, and that of the greatest, then let us hence learn this point of
spiritual wisdom, to prepare for the worst. What has been the case of the
Church or people of God formerly, may be ours hereafter, yea it is already in a
great measure, things are grown very high, we are come to the top of the
Mount, and Isaac is even ready to be slame.

And be sure of this, while there is a Devil, and he at liberty, who is an
enemy to all mankind, but especially to the Church of Christ, and the godly in
it, against whom he has a most bitter enmity and implacable malice, the godly
must look for troubles, even the most grievous that he can procure.

2. Also while there are wicked men, the Devils instruments, Gen 3.15. 1 Pet.
5.8.
set on fire from Hell, heated with most bitter envy and rage against the
godly, seeking to hinder their welfare, and disturb their peace, partly out of
ignominy of God, Jesus Christ, Ioh. 16.2. 1 Pet. 4.4.
and the worth, and excellency, and uprightness of the Saints; partly out of
malice against the Saints whom they hate, and whose graces, goodness, and
outward prosperity they envy, Psalm 38.20. 1 Ioh. 3.12.
and specially this great happiness, which surely God intends his people by
this great and long desired work of reformation, so happily and hopefully
begun by the worthies of Israel, especially while the Papists, Priests and
J^suites, the Devils choice instruments do continue among us, we can look for
no settled peace and security, but the worst they can possibly do: As well may
the Lambs live safe among Wolves, the Calves among Lions, Hares among Hounds,
and the Dove among Kites, think to be quiet, secure and safe, as the godly
think to be quiet and secure, to enjoy prosperity and peace with wicked men,
especially with Rome, while Romes bastard brood of cursed Impes, the Priests
and Jesuits find harbor among us, besides other exigents and trials, that God
usually brings his people into for their good in the conclusion, as well as he
did Abraham here.

Yet such is our folly for the most part, that we never think of trouble till
it comes. When the Morning is fair, and the Sun shines, we fear not a storm,
and so are sometimes taken (as it were) without our cloak. We are wonderful
apt to promise peace, health and prosperity to our selves, and to put far from
us the evil day; but if neither Abraham, nor Jacob, nor Job, nor David, nor
others (though the friends of God, and very powerful with God, beloved and
approved of him, men of renown, Kings and Princes, for outward accommodation
in the world, learned, wise, great and honorable) could not be privileged in
this particular, but found many and great troubles and trials, and were brought
sometimes to the uttermost extremities, why should any of us (if we be indeed
such as we would be thought to be, the children and faithful servants of God)
think to escape such things?

Therefore we should do wisely to premeditate of evils, and prepare for them
beforehand, and the wise-hearted will do so. A prudent man foreseeth the
evil, and hides himself (says Solomon) but the simple pass on and are
punished. Prove. 22.3.
There is the benefit of premeditation and fore-arming our selves, we may more
easily escape evils, as a storm foreseen may be avoided by flying to a
shelter. And if troubles foreseen cannot be prevented or avoided, yet they may
be much more easily borne, by being fore-armed by expectation and preparation.
A blow foreseen may be kept off, at least from doing that hurt which otherwise
it would do. Great evils, yea small ones, when they come suddenly upon us,
unexpected and unprepared, they often strike deep, and afflict sore, more then
others that are far greater which we expected and prepared for.

The neglect of this preparation for evil times, is a maine reason why even
good men are so exceedingly perplexed when sudden evils befall them, so
unpatient and uncomfortable, and others fall off from the truth and the
profession thereof, like the house builded on the sand when a storm came,
because they did not beforehand lay a good foundation, think what they should
meet with in the way to Heaven, and prepare for the worst.

Quest. You will say what is to be done, that we may be prepared for troubles,
that whatsoever troubles may befall us, we may be able with comfort to undergo
them?

Answ. 1. First and above all, get God to be thy friend, Directions. Rom 8 31.
Isa. 54.17,
to be reconciled unto him, and have interest in him: For if God be with us
(says the Apostle) who can be against us? what enemy? what weapon can
prevail? If a man be brought into the Mount, into never so great troubles, to
the uttermost extremity, that all means, helps and hopes in the world fail
him; yet if he have assurance of Gods love and favor (who is all sufficient,
and all i^ all) all outward troubles and wants will seem little or nothing to
him. Therefore here Abraham went as willingly into the Mount, and did undergo
this great trial, with as composed and cheerful a spirit, and so has many a
faithful servant of God formerly, and of late years, went to prison, to the
Pillory, yea to the stake, as cheerful as many a man would go to his own
house. Therefore seek unto God betimes, make thy peace with him, confess and
bewail thy sins, humble thy self before him, entreat his favor in the Lord
Jesus, Act. 12.
as the Sydonians did Herod's favor, by the means of Blastus the Kings
Chamberlain. And this if we do, be at peace with him while we are in peace
and prosperity, he will know our souls in adversity, and we shall always have
a rock to sly unto, in the greatest waves and surges of affliction, and a sure
way to save all, Mat. 20.39.
even then when we lose all in the world for his sake.

2. Forecast the cost and charge of Religion, and likewise the rewards and
comforts. Fore-thinke the worst that may come, the greatest afflictions,
troubles, persecution, or other trials that can befall. And think also of the
rich reward and comforts of well doing here and hereafter, and then c^st up the
accounts, and see what a mighty disproportion there is betwixt the affliction*
and troubles here, and glory hereafter: As the Apostle did (says he) I reckon,
Rom 8.18.
that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with
the glory which shall be revealed in us. I reckon, He cast up all beforehand.
In vulgata Edit Roberti Stepha^i.
The word (...) signifies (not as the vulgar translation renders it, Existimo,
I think, implying only a probable conjecture, but) a certain weighing and
concluding upon sound consideration. As a man that casts up accounts, reckons
up all the small sums, and lays the particulars together, to see what the
product or total is: so the Apostle casts up all the particular sufferings
that he had or could suffer from the hands of God, Men, Devils, or any other
creatures, or any way for righteousness sake, and lays all together and then
compares that with glory and upon sound judgment concludes, I reckon that the
sufferings -- And so must we do, if we would comfortably undergo the worst
condition, as Paul did. This good advise our Savior gave to his followers,
when he saw great multitudes, he turned to them and said, Whosoever does not
bear his Cross and come after me, Luke 14 27.28, ^9, 30, 31.
he cannot be my Disciple. Also more clearly in the Parables of bu^lding a
Towes, and making war with another King; therefore forecast the cost,
consider beforehand what you may s^ff^r, and the great and incomparable reward
of well-doing and suffering in a good cause.

3. Settle in thy heart a full purpose and firm resolution in the Name of God,
to stand it out, to undergo the worst, come what will come; be it loss of
credit in the world, loss of liberty or wealth, yea, to dye, and to part with
all rather then Christ and his truth, or betray the peace of the Land, or do
any unrighteous action, res^lve to suffer rather then to sin. Such a
resolution Paul ^ad, when his friends told him that he must be bound at
Jerusalem, Act. 21 13.
and be delivered into the hands of the Gentiles, and besought him with tears
not to go up to Jerusalem, says he, What do ye mean to weep and to break
my heart? I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerus^lem for the
Name of the Lord J^^us. C. 20. v. 23, 24.
Likewise Cap. 20. The Holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying, That bonds
and afflictions abide me, but none of these things move me, neither count I my
life dear unto my self, so that (...) might finish my course with joy, and
the ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus. Resolution will carry a
man on far, and enable him to undergo much.

4* Labor for an habit of Self-denial. This will be of great use, and help us
much: Therefore our Lord Christ when he exhorted any to follow him in taking up
his Cross, (i.e.) by a willing submitting to suffer and undergo all troubles,
they should meet with in the way to Heaven, gives them this good counsel, and
commands them to observe it, to deny themselves. Mat. 16.24.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross,
and follow me. Mark the order of the words, and then this will follow, That he
that will bear all afflictions and trials comfortably, and follow Christ
sincerely, must first deny himself. When a thing is dead, you may do with it
what you will, prick it, or throw it into the fire, it is not moved: so it is
with the man, whose carnal will, reason and affections are mortified; when a
man is dead to the world, then whipping, buffering, or the fiery trial of
persecution, which strips a man of all outward things, troubles him not, or
very little. Let us therefore labor to mortify our lusts, to deny our selves,
take off our hearts and affections from the world, and the things of it, and
set them upon God, Christ, Heaven, and Life eternal, and so on the ways and
means that will bring us thither; for he that has learned to deny himself in
any thing, and has his heart weaned from them, will without trouble part with
an Isaac, with any thing at Gods command, suffer the loss of all with joy, as
the faithful Jews did, Heb. 10. and regard no bands, afflictions, Heb. 10.34.
Rev 12.11. Act. 20.23, 24.
or sufferings, They loved not their lives unto the death. None of these things
move me (says Paul, a self-denying Christian) neither count I my life dear
unto me, etc.

Oh this world is a mighty hinderance to suffering! When God calls into the
Mount, these earthly comforts and contentments are like a great clog on our
hearts, and hinder us much. We are wonderful unwilling to part with a dear
friend, especially an Isaac, a beloved son, or husband, or wife, or our
estates, preferment, reputation in the world, ease, liberty, or any carnal
contentments we affect; therefore get thy heart off from those, deny thy self
in those, or whatsoever worldly thing is dear unto thee, and then it will be
an easy matter with Abraham to follow God into the Mount, to do or suffer any
thing at his command, and for his sake.

5. That a man may undergo with comfort greater trials, he must begin and
exercise himself with smaller sufferings to bear them cheerfully. He must do
as men do for temporal skirmishes, to sight with men. First, they learn in
private Schools, and it may be with wooden swords, or with blunted points,
that will do little or no hurt. They that will be victorious in set-battles,
do first train themselves at home, and see how they can carry themselves,
learn their several postures for every sadden emergent occasion, shoot first
with powder at marks, etc. So a Christian that would behave himself bravely in
Christ's field, in Christ's cause with Abraham, Job, etc. must learn and
exercise himself at home and before hand; learn to suffer at home, and bear
the thrusts of wooden Swords: the persecutions of Protestants, the scoffs,
scorns, reproaches, and other vile carriages of carnal Protestants, before he
enter into the field to encounter the bloody perfections of Papists and their
Adherents: He that cannot endure the frowns, disgraces, threats, and such like
petty in juries from evil men; profane wretches though they be great persons
in the world, will never by any ordinary providence stand out to shed his blood
in the cause of God, for the Lord Christ and his Countries good.

So again, he that cannot bear petty losses, crosses or troubles, will hardly
ever great trials with more then ordinary assistance from God. It is therefore
good to begin betimes, to accustom our selves to bear and slight all scoffs,
scorns, and custom our selves to bear and slight all scoffs, scorns, and
frowns of men, cheerfully to undergo all small losses and troubles, and
sicitur ad magna, and so we shall in time be enabled t undergo great things
with little alteration in our affection, yea, with much patience,
cheerfulness, courage and constancy.

6. Labor to have a strong well rooted and well grounded faith and love of God
and Christ.

1. Faith, a well planted and well grounded faith, this will enable to cleave
unto God in the hardest times, to cast our selves, and rely wholly on his
providence, in hope, above hope, when all worldly means, helps and hopes fail.

2. Love, Ephesians. 3.17.
labor to be rooted and grounded in love, as the Apostle speaks; what is the
reason that many fall away in evil times, in times of suffering? is it not
because they have no true, sincere love to Jesus Christ and his Truth? Many
waters are not able to quench Love, neither can floods of water drown it. i.
e. no afflictions, Cant. 8.6, 7. Romans 8.37, 38
his cause and ways, but as he in the Story, if one hand be cut off, he will
hold by the other, if that also be cut off, he will catch hold with his teeth.
He will resolve with Ruth for Christ, and the cause of God and his Countries
good; Whither thou go I will go, Ruth 1.16, 17.
and where thou lodgest I will lodge, where thou die I will die, etc.

Therefore Beloved in the Lord, labor for a well grounded faith, and a sound,
unfeigned love to God, to Jesus Christ and your Countries peace and welfare;
sound love I say (not superficial, a lip-love, but) a deep rooted and well
grounded love. The reason why the good seed that was sown, and sprang up
quickly, withered when the Sun rose, was, because it had not sound rooting,
it wanted root; be careful therefore to have a well grounded love that has
good rooting, root of judgment and root of affection, to have such a love as
Christ has to us, even to dye for us, so do you love him so, as to be willing
to part with an Isaac, with any thing, be it life it self for his sake. Now
treasure up faith and patience and love, as Joseph did corn seeing a day of
utterance will come, a day of spending not of getting, a day wherein all we
have may be little enough.

7. To add one more (for we cannot say too much, we cannot be too well
prepared for the evil day) I say with the Apostle, Tut on the whole Armor of
God, Ephesians. 6.11, 12, 13.
that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to
stand: for we wrestle not with flesh and blood, but against principalities and
powers, etc. If a man be to fight with his enemy in the field, he will put on
his armor to defend himself in the best wise he can, and great reason he
should do so, his life is in danger. In like manner should the true Christian
do, we in our suff rings and trials, have to encounter, not only with outward
troubles, and inward corruptions, but also with Satan, who is not flesh and
blood, but a spirit mighty in power and policy, therefore called
Principalities, Powers, the Rulers of the darkness of this world, the god of
this world, etc. and therefore we have great need to buckle about us all the
pieces of our spiritual armor, and be well skilled in the use of them, and
they are these 7. The

1. Pecce of the Christians spiritual Armor, ver. 14.
is the girdle of Truth, that is, Uprightness, Sincerity and single
heartedness, to stick to the Truth for the Truths sake, to take Christ for
himself, Religion for Religions sake. A girdle is for use and ornament, it is
comely and profitable, and so is this, it will be of great use for a Christian
in evil times, as a girdle was in those days when men wore long garments, to
bind them together that they might better apply themselves to their work,
run, go, or do any thing which a long loose garment would hinder: Therefore
buckle on this piece of Armor, labor to be sincere, upright hearted in all
your ways and dealings with God and men, and to embrace Christ, the truth and
Religion for themselves, not for by-respects.

2. The Breast Plate of Righteousness or Justice, Ver. 14.
Put on the Breast Plate of Righteousness, says the Apostle, Righteousness or
Justice (I mean distributive Justice) whereby a man does carry himself
righteously and justly in all his ways toward God and men, giving unto God
that belief, love, fear, honor, praise and obedience that is due unto him,
and to men that love, respect, obedience, etc. that is due unto him, I mean in
respect of unfeigned desire and endeavor. This is a Breast Plate, what is the
use of a Breast Plate? to guard the heart, liver and other vital parts from
darts, arrows, shot and the thrusts of the enemies: so does Righteousness guard
a man against temptations in times of trial.

Therefore labor to manifest the truth and power of godliness, by an hearty
endeavor to walk in obedience to all the commands of God, to give unto God
that tribute of praise, love, etc. that to him appertains and is due, Render
to God the things that are Gods. 2 Cor. 1.12.
The Apostle tells us the benefit of it, when he says, This is our rejoicing,
(namely in times of affliction and trouble) the testimony of our conscience,
that in simpl^city and godly sincerity we have had our conversation in the
world; this will comfort and cheer the spirit in evil times. Psalm. 110 6.
(...). 4 6, 7, 8.
Then shall I not be ashamed (said David) when I have respect to all thy
commandments. So Paul, I am now ready to be offered up, ( i. e. to shed my
blood for the Gospel and Christ) henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
Righteousness, etc. But how came he by this comfort and confidence, that he
could with such willingness shed his blood in the cause of Christ? says he, J
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, the
doctrine and grace of faith. Oh what a comfort will it be to a man in evil
times, in all his troubles, that he can truly say, I have walked uprightly
before God, I have discharged a good conscience in all things, I have lived in
all good conscience toward God, and toward man. Ver. 15.


A 3^. Piece of spiritual armor are shoes of peace, shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace, i. e. when a man has true peace of
conscience and with God, arising from the knowledge of the Gospel, and what
God and Christ has done for him. Likewise, when he has true Christian
patience, a patient spirit to suffer any thing for Christ and the Gospel. This
will prepare and arm the soul against all troubles a man shall meet with in
the way to Heaven; as shoes do save the feet, and arm them against the
pricks and thorns. If a man have no shoes, though he may walk well on the
smooth ground, yet he cannot endure sharp gravel, pricks and thorns; but he
that is well shod can tread upon them, and make a sport of it: So many can
endure any reproaches, etc, by reason of patience and inward peace: Act. 5.41.
Heb. 10.34.
that is one maine reason why the Martyrs were not moved with persecution,
imprisonment, yea, rejoiced at the stake, in the midst of the flames; therefore
labor to be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, to be armed
with peace and Christian patience. This will arm a man against the pricks.

A 4h. Piece of spiritual armor is, Ephesians. 6.16.
The shield of faith. Above all (says the Apostle) take the field of faith.
There is a double faith, historical and justifying.

First a man must have historical faith, which is an assent to the truth
known. A man must be soundly principled and informed in the grounds of the
true Christian Religion, otherwise he shall never be able to suffer for the
Gospel of Christ, till well grounded in the truth of Christ, much less wholly
cast himself upon the goodness of God, and lay down his life for Christ. He
that would be able to s^ff^r for the Gospel, must first know and be ^ss^red
that that is the only true Religion, and that the true reformed Protestant
Religion, which by the goodness of God we enjoy and profess, is evidently
grounded upon the Gospel of Christ. A man will never suffer for that he does,
unless he has good ground for what he suffers; for what man will lay down
his life for he knows not what? An ignorant person is easily seduced and
d^awne from the true Protestant Religion to Popery, because he has no good
ground for his Religion, though there be clear ground enough for it in the
word of G d. a Tim. 1.11.
Paul did indeed valiantly stand to the truth of the Gospel: For which cause I
suffer these things, Nevertheless I am not ashamed, mark his reason, for I
know whom I have believed. So again, Romans 1.16.
I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for (says he) it is the power of
God unto salvation; therefore he was confident in it, and most willing to
suffer for it. Labor therefore to be well grounded in the knowledge of the
truth, that you may be able to answer the advers^ry, when he shall ask you,
why will you run your self into danger? why will you s^ff r? remember your
self, life is sweet* and the fire is terrible? you may answer, why should I
not? I know that it is the truth, I can give you good reason of my faith from
Gods own word; therefore do your pleasure, I will never deny it, or shrink
from it.

2. Saving or justifying faith, which we may properly call also divine faith,
which is a grace of God, whereby a man does rest himself on the promises of
the Gospel, waiting upon God, for the accomplishing of them to himself in
particular, in Gods due time, by which a man does shroud himself under the
wing of Gods protection, for help against all evil and evil ones, and for
strength in temptations and trials. This guards the soul as a shield and
buckler do the body: It makes God our shield and buckler, against all the
fiery darts of the Devil our advers^ry, who is most busy in times of
affliction and trials. Above all, take the shield of faith.

This will hold up the head in the midst of all s^fferings and trials. I had
fainted (said David) unl sse I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in
the Land of the living. P^ 17 13. Heb. 10 37. H^b. 2.4.
The just shall live by his faith (says the Apostle from the Prophet Habakkuk)
he speaks of evil times, when there is nothing to support but his faith in
God, as Abraham here. This inables the true Christian to overcome the world,
(...) J^h 5.4.
in all temptations and allurements from the world and evil men. This made
Paul and the Apostles, and all those worthies mentioned, Heb. 11. so courageous
in all afflictions and trials; therefore labor to have a firm faith, in the
undoubted accomplishment of all the gracious promises of God in due time.

5. Hope, The Helmet of salvation. Ephesians. 6.17.
Hope of Heaven and salvation arising from a true faith in Gods mercy through
Christ. This s^feguards a Christian against all assaults of Satan and trials in
affliction, as an helmet safeguards the head, Heb 10 34 and 11.35.
against all darts and blows of the adversary in the day of battle. What will
not a man do or undergo, that has some evidence and hope of s^lvation?
Therefore to faith join hope, that as by faith we lay hold on eternal
salvation, so we may by hope patiently wait for it.

6. The sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. When a man is well
versed in the word, and does make that the rule of his life, to be guided and
governed by it in all things, and does answer all temptations, carnal friends,
and their reasonings, as our Savior did Satan, with a Scriptum est, It is
written, thou shall not do this or that. This will first back temptations to
evil, as a sword held to the breast of a thief, will (if any thing will) keep
him from doing that mischief he intends. 2. It serves to direct a man in all
conditions how to carry himself, Psalm 119. Thy word is a light unto my paths,
and a lantern unto my feet, Ps. 119.105. and 99.104.
it gives understanding to the simple, etc. 3. It comfort the upright with
it is most gracious and most sweet promises: so it did David, In the multitude
of my thoughts within me, Ps. 94.19.
thy comforts delight my soul. When David was cast down with manifold straits
and troubles on every side, that he knew not what to do, the word afforded him
sweet comfort. Again, Ps. 119 92.
Unless thy Law had been my delight I should have perished in mine
afflictions. Again, Though I walk in the vall^y of the shadow of death, I
will fear none evil, for thy rod and thy staff they comfort me: The rod and
st^ff^ is the word of God, especial^y the promises that are as a st^ffe to
trust upon. It is of singular use, as always, so especially in evil times to
a gracious heart; therefore take to you this weapon also, labor to have the
word of God dwell in you richly, (i. e.) plentifully, to be well skilled and
versed in it, Col. 3.16.
that you may have it ready upon all occasions, to make use of it.

7. To the ^^st add Prayer. (...)
Praying (says the Apostle) al^ay^^ (...). We ^^y not at any time, much less
in times of trial, (...) bo^tomes, r^lye on our own strength, but (...) he
will enable us to undergo all suff rings and (...) ^^nnot see how the Martyr,
could possibly end^re (...) ^^ous flames, if they had not often and earnestly
b^sought (...) to prepare them for evil times, and enable them to undergo
them to his glory, and with comfort to themselves and others; therefore labor
to get and buckle on all those pieces of spiritual armor, and to use them,
and that with prayer; for to have this spiritual armor, and not to use it, is
like the fool in the Proverbs, P^. ^^.17.16.
that has a price in his hand, but has not the wit, or an heart to use it; to
have a sword and not draw it, when his enemy assaults him. Yet so it is, that
many Christians who have this rich and precious armor, that is more precious
then gold (as is said particularly of faith) do for want of a right use of it,
2 Pet. 1.1.
live uncomfortably, and carry themselves unevenly in evil times, are well
nigh overwhelmed sometimes; therefore I beseech you be careful to get and use
these graces and pieces of spiritual armor, that you may be able to stand,
and with comfort to hold up your heads in evil days. That is the second use
we should make of this point, to prepare for the Mount for evil and hard times.

Thirdly, Use 3.
This point should teach us not to marvel, much less murmr, if great
afflictions and troubles do come, whether personal or National. Think it
not strange (says the Apostle) concerning the fiery trial, which is to try
you, as though some strange thing h^ppened unto you. Though a man should be
brought to this exigent, That either he must part with his liberty, goods,
reput^ in the world, life and all, or deny the truth, and disobey God; yet he
should not think it strange, much less murmr, but cheerfully undergo it.
It is no strange thing to be brought into straits and troubles, to be
afflicted, yea sometimes to be brou^ht into great extremity: It is ordinary, it
has often been so with the Church of God, in all ages, as well as with
particular persons, as all those instances above mentioned, and this Nation can
witness by often experience, by reason of the many malicious designs of
malignant and bloodthirsty Papists, who of all enemies the Christian Church
has, are the most cruel, bloody, inhumane and barbarous, as bad or worse then
the Heathens and Pagans ever were to the Jews under the old, or Christians
under the New Testament.

Therefore let not us or any wonder at it, as if a strange thing happened to
us, such as never or rarely falls out to any, much less faint under it, and
murmr or repiue, but with cheerfulness, courage and constancy undergo it.

Motives not to murmr, but cheerfully undergo afflictions and trials, Ioh
16.33. 1 These. 3.3. 2 Timothy 3.12.
Therefore consider 1. That afflictions and troubles are the lot of the godly,
Psalm. 125.3. The rod ( i.e. affliction, troubles, persecutions) of the wicked
shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, lest the righteous put forth
their hands to iniquity. In the world ye shall have tribulation (said our
Savior) That no man be moved by these afflictions; for you your selves know
that we are appointed thereunto. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall
suffer persecution, if not of the hand, yet of the tongues of evil men, and
sometimes great straits and extremities. It is the common lot of all his
people. There is no temptation has befallen you, 1 Cor. 10.13.
but such as is common to man, says the Apostle, even the Prophets themselves,
those extraordinary servants of God, Abraham Gods faithful servant, friend and
favorite, likewise Jacob, Job, Daniel, David and others. David, though a King,
was the Song of the drunkards, and Job the greatest and godliest man in the
East, was laughed to scorn; Jeremy was had in derision daily: So the Apostles,
those immediate followers, and special Ambassadors of the Lord Jesus, and if
they suffered such things, and were subject to the rage of most malignant and
impetuous enemies, such as Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Rabshecah, Haman and their
adherents, shall we think it strange, marvel, much less murmr, if the like
condition from the like enemies befall us? or if we suffer other grievous
trials from the hand of our wise and good God?

Yea the Lord Jesus, the beloved of the Father, the first borne of God, the
first borne of all his sons, and the first borne of all creatures, the glory
of the Father escaped not, he drank of the cup of affliction, he took not a
sippe, but drank deep (deeper then ever any of his did, not of man's simply,
but of Gods divine wrath, not for himself, but for us, not by constraint, but
willingly. Joh. 18.11.
Shall I not drink (said he) of the cup my Father has given me? He suffered
the vials of Gods wrath, the extremity of his fu^y, Lam. 1.12.
never any suff^ring like his, and should we think it a strange thing to
su^fer? Should not the Soldiers follow their Captain and Leader? Is it not
well that we fare no worse then our Lord and Savior? Joh 15.18.19.20.
If the world hate you (said our Savior) you know it hated me, before it hated
you If ye were of the world? the world would love it is own. Remember the word
that I said unto you, The Servant is not greater then the Lord, If they have
persecuted me, they will also persecute you.

And therefore seeing it is common, that the very best, most faithful and
renowned servants of God, and the Lord Christ himself have su^fered much, bin
sometimes brought to great exigents, we should cheerfully undergo whatsoever
evils we meet with. A common lot no man shrugs at; who quarrels Summer for
heat, or Winter for cold, though it be sometimes more then ordinary, seeing it
is a common lot? who is angry, because he has as many fingers and toes, and
other members, as other men have, seeing there is use of all the members, an^
they serve to make the perfection of the whole man? so afflictions and troubles
wisely managed, do help to make a man a complete Christian, That ye may be
perfect (says the Apostle James) entire and wanting nothing, Jam 1.3, 4.
entire for parts, not for degrees of obedience; why then should any shrink,
much less murmurre at them?

2. Consider that afflictions and troubles come not out of the dust, but from
God: what or whosoever be the instruments, yet God, a good, wise and gracious
Father is the author of them. Is there any evil ( viz. of punishment) in the
City and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3 6 De^t 32 3^. 2 Chapter (...).13, 14.
says the Prophet. I kill and I make alive, I wound and I heal (says God)
therefore this should make us, not only patient, but cheerful also under
afflictions, as it did Job, when God had by the Sabeans and others taken away
all his Cattle, a mighty Estate, Servants and Children, says he, N^ked came I
out of my mothers womb, J^b. (...)
and naked shall I return thither: The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away, blessed be the name of the Lord. He did not cry out of misfortune or ill
luck, curse the Devil, rail at the Chaldeans, or others, but patiently
receives it as from God himself, and willingly submits to his will, The Lord
gave, etc. So did David, Psalm. 39 9.
I was dumb and held my peace, because thou Lord did dest it.

And the Lord does justly and in mercy to his.

1. Justly, though evil men do what they do against the godly, most unjustly
against all right and reason, yet God does it most justly. Righteous art thou o
Lord (says David) and righteous are thy judgments. Psalm. 1^9.117. and 45 17.
Romans 2.6, 11.
The Lord is righteous in all his ways and holy in all his works. For with
God is no respect of person. Therefore we should patiently bear all
afflictions and troubles whatsoever, because we suffer justly and most
deservedly, the Lord is righteous in afflicting us.

2. God afflicts his people in mercy, out of love to them, and for their good,
though their adversaries do it out of malice and rage against them, yet God
does it out of love and in mercy to them, that they may not perish. Hear what
Paul says, When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.32.
Heh. 12.5, etc.
that we should not be condemnea with the world. Again, My son, despise not
thou the chastening of the Lord, ver. 10.
nor faint when thou art rebuked of him, for he chasteneth us for our profit,
that we might be partakers of his holiness. The Lord uses afflictions and all
troubles that befall his children, as the wise Physician does physic, to cure
diseases, and as the Chyrurgian does lancing, scarifying and plasters, to let
out corrupt matter and heal his Patient.

3. Consider the necessity of suffering and trials, it cannot well be otherwise
in respect of our condition, in respect of our enemies, and the place where we
live.

First, in respect of our condition, both present and future in Heaven,

1. In respect of our present condition. The faithful, the godly are
Soldiers, Laborers, Sowers, etc. Now consider all these, and see if there be
not a kind of necessity, in respect of their condition of meeting with troubles.

1. The true Christian is a Soldier, and a Soldier must meet with straits,
hard services sometimes, fight hard before he gets the victory, endure blows
and dangerous wounds sometimes, run through the pikes (as we say) before he
gets the victory, so must a Christian. A Christians life is a warfare, and you
know, it is no new thing for Soldiers, to hear the Drum beat, Trumpets sound,
the Cannons roar and Bullets fly about their Ears and Heads, and sometimes
dangerously pierce their bodies; so it is not to be wondered at, much less
murmured at: If Satan and evil men let fly at us; if afflictions and troubles
come: Therefore if we be Christ's Soldiers, let us look for such things, make
a sure account of them, yea, and sometimes to have them thick and threefold
like Jobs Messengers.

2. A true Christian is a Labourer. A Labourer must work early and late, labor
hard, undergo much pain and travel: So the husbandman must not only work
hard, but endure many a cold blast, many a storm before he gets the crop into
the Barn; so the godly must look to undergo many a hard service, endure many
a storm of affliction, before he comes to the harvest, to triumph in Heaven.
This in respect of our present condition.

2. In respect of our future condition. Heaven is a time of rest, of triumph,
and reaping a harvest: Now rest is after motion, and there can be no triumph
before victory, and no victory with sitting still, Quies est finis motus.
without blows, Before a man can reap he must endure a great deal of labor,
wet and dry, heat and cold, hunger and thirst: a husbandmans life is a
laborious and painful life; and so it must be with the true Christian before
he comes to triumph and reap the fruits of a sound profession, and a wel-led
life in Heaven. Thus in respect of our condition both present and future.

Secondly, in respect of our enemies, it cannot be otherwise.

1. The Devil a most implacable enemy, who continually goes about like a
roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8.
seeking whom he may devour, by all ways and means, and at all times,
seeking to mar our peace, imbitter our lives, yea, to destroy our souls.

2. Wicked men have a most invenomed nature (all of them) against godliness
and an inveterate enmity against the righteous, though they do not always
equally show it; God restraines them all more or less, for the good of his
people, there should otherwise be no living for the righteous upon the earth
among evil men: and of all Sects and Religions, none are more cruel and
blood-thirsty then the Papists are, especially the Priests and Jesuits, and
therefore it cannot be expected, but that the godly should meet with troubles
in this world, in respect of our malignant enemies, even all the troubles they
can procure.

Thirdly, In respect of the place where we live, likened to a Wilderness, to
a Sea. As it was with Israel when they went out of Egypt to Canaan, they went
through the Wilderness: So must the faithful Israel of God do now, to go to
Heaven, pass through the Wilderness of this world. Now in a Wilderness there
are Briars and Thorns, Wolves, Bears, Lions, Serpents, etc. and it is not
strange for the honest Traveller to meet with such creatures there; even so the
godly meet with such kind of men in this world, who are ever and anon ready to
vex, trouble and devour them. David says, My soul dwells among Lions. Ps.
57.4. and 22.21.
Wicked men are in the sacred Scriptures, likened to, and called Lions, Dogs,
Wolves, Vipers, Serpents and almost all manner of savage beasts, because they
have the like evil dispositions, and do like actions, and the godly are
compared to Lambs, Doves, Sheep, and other such like harmless, profitable
creatures, no marvel then, if the godly be assaulted and put hard to it many
times by evil men.

The world is also likened to a Sea, and we sail (as it were) in the bark of
our frail bodies, now what is more usual then to have winds and storms at
Sea? to be tossed to and fro, to meet with foul weather? to hear the waves
roar and rage and dash into the ship, also sometimes to light on the rocks,
yea, to suffer shipwreck on the rocks and dangerous sands? So if (as we sail
in the bark of our frail body toward Heaven) the winds blow, and storms
arise, ready to sink our ship or split her on the rocks, is it any new or
strange thing that we should be much moved at it? It is therefore a point of
wisdom to prepare for, and patiently undergo what cannot be avoided; many
Heathens have on this consideration undergone much, and why should not
Christians much more make a virtue of necessity?

4. Consider the nature of these troubles, they are light and short.

1. Light, 2 Cor. 4 17
Take them at the worst they are but light afflictions, (...), light in
comparison of what we deserve, and what our Savior suffered for us, and what
wicked men must for ever suffer in hell; and light also in that they do but
touch the body, they cannot properly pierce into the soul, so as to destroy
it, they hurt but the outward m^n, and wound that at most and worst they can
do, they may annoy, yet they do not destroy the soul, prejudice it is
eternal welfare; but wicked men's troubles many times wound the soul, pierce
into the very soul, and destroy that, and though they be free from bodily
troubles, yet they have crazy consciences which sometimes wound them sore, and
a wounded spirit who can bear? Romans 8.28. Pro. 18.14.
or what can it bear, as the Original has it. So long as the spirit is
sound, conscience clear and good, it will sustain it is infirmity, i e.
whatsoever outward trouble may befall; as a sound shoulder will bear a great
weight with else and pleasure, whereas a broken, bruised or dis-joynted
shoulder, will cry out and shrink under every little thing. All the days of
the afflicted are evil, but he that is of a merry heart, has a continual
Feast. A clear and sound conscience is as a Feast in the midst of all
outward troubles, yea, and better then a Feast for it is continual.

The truth is, it is guiltiness of conscience that makes afflictions heavy; to
a sound and good conscience great afflictions and trials many times seem as
nothing, and are undergone with a great deal of cheerfulness and courage, but
when God plagues a wicked man, if conscience be not seared or a sleep, or
benumbed he has a double burden to bear, the weight of affliction and a
guilty conscience, which is most grievous.

2. As they are Light, so also short and momentary. The rod of the wicked shall
not rest on the lot of the righteous. Ps 125.3.
This light affliction (says the Apostle, which place also clearly proves the
former branch) which is but for a moment. The original differs some thing in
words from our translation, but nothing from the true sense and meaning. 2 Cor
4 17 (...). I^^. 54 7. Romans 8.18.
For a small moment have J forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather
thee, says the Lord to Israel The troubles of the godly are indeed (...),
sufferings, yet they are but (...), the sufferings of this present time, says
the Apostle to the Romans.

So that these afflictions, though they may be sharp, yet they are but short,
and if they continue to the uttermost they possibly c^n do, it is but till
death, they end with death. There the wicked cease from troubling Job 3.17, 18,
19.
and there the weary be at rest: there the prisoners rest together, they hear
not the voice of the Oppressor: The small and the great are there, and the
Servant is free from his Master, said Job long ago. Death though it do indeed
begin the wicked man's misery, yet it puts an end to all the godly man's
suffering, they end with his life and do increase his glory, makes Heaven more
sweet and welcome. Our bodies are but earthly Tabernacles, now a Tabernacle if
generally, yet it cannot last long, but if furious winds and storms blow, it
will quickly fall, and so it is with our bodies. The afflictions and troubles
of this world are visible, seen on the body, estate, etc. therefore not to be
regarded, because temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. 2
Cor. 4 18.
Therefore says the Apostle, Let them that weep, be as though they wept not,
but things that are invisible are to be regarded, 1 Cor. 7.30.
and seriously thought on, the wrath of God, the pains of hell; so Heaven, l^fe
and glory are eternal, these we should much think of, and labor to live
accordingly.

5. Consider this also, that it is a great honor to suffer for righteousness,
to be singled out to be the Lords Champion, to show forth Gods wisdom, power
and goodness in his servants. All the Saints have not the honor, to be
singled out with Abraham, that the world may see the truth and strength of
their faith, patience, love to God, etc. Gal 6 17.
To bear the marks of the Lord Jesus is a singular privilege; the Apostle
himself boasts of it, as a special honor to him, Gal. 6. To you it is given
in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for
his sake, says Paul. All his people are tried and suffer more or less, but
not very many are singled out to be the Lords champions as was Abraham, Job,
the Martyrs and some others; therefore the Apostles (though used as rogues,
whipped) went away from the counsel, Act. 5.4.
rejoicing that they were worthy to suffer shame for l^^ Name, not because they
were worthy to suffer, but becauss (mark it) they were counted worthy to
suffer -- It was a great honor for them to suffer for the Lord Jesus, and in
his cause: It is an honor to God, they honor him by suffering in his cause,
and for his sake, and they that honor him, he will honor, and have others
honor them. Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness (says the
Apostle) and have such in reputation, 1 Samuel 2.30 Phil. 2.29, 30.
the reason, because for the work of Christ, he was near unto death.

So God will honor them hereafter, If we suffer with him, we shall also be
glorified with him. Romans 8.17. Rev. 3 4. and 6.11.
They shall walk with me in white (says Christ) for they are worthy. They
shall have long white roabes given them, i.e an honorable name (as some do
expound it) and not amiss: So that God has his special honor and dignity
for such. Here Abraham's faith and obedience is recorded to his everlasting
praise. Therefore our Savior pronounces such blessed: Luk 6 22, 23. Mat.
5.11, 12.
Blessed are you when men shall hate you, and you and persecute you, and shall
say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my Name sake; Rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven.

Lastly by way of motive, consider the blessed fruit and issue of all
afflictions, troubles and trials to the godly, here and hereafter, how great
and grievous soever they be for the present.

1. All sufferings and trials make way for a greater good, to humble his
people, make them more fit for mercy, to manifest their sincerity, and the
strength of their graces to themselves and the world, to increase and brighten
their graces, and consequently their comforts, to purge out sin and
corruption, and make them more pure and precious like the refined gold, to wean
them from the world, Job 23.10.
make them more heavenly minded, etc.

Also the afflictions and troubles of the Church (as now in Germany, in
Ireland, and in England) tend to fit them for greater mercy, for Christ's
government and Ordinances in a more excellent manner (I trust) then ever we yet
enjoyed them, also to purge and cleanse his Church. I dare confidently affirm
it, That Reformation should never have been raised up to that blessed and
desired hight (which in all probability, it is likely through Gods goodness to
come unto) had not the malignant enemies of the Church, the Papists, and the
Prelates, and popish Party their Abettors, been so busy against the Church,
Christ's people, Ordinances and power of godliness, as they have been and daily
are. Blessed be God that does and will bring good out of evil, light out of
darkness, and turns the counsels of Achitophels into foolishness, and
mischievous plots of wicked Hamans, to their own hurt and his peoples good, and
makes the rage of men turn to his glory. This believe, wait, pray and praise
God for.

2. The troubles and trials of the faithful will likewise make much for our
future good, both in point of honor (as has bin showed) and of benefit it
will bring glory, especially suffering for righteousness sake, and the truths
sake. Romans 8.17. 2 Timothy 2.18. 2 Cor. 4.17.
If we suffer with him (says the Apostle) we shall also be glorified with him.
Again, This light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a for
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. The affliction is but short and
light, but the reward is exceeding great and lasting, no less then glory,
which is the highest pitch of all honor and felicity. Here is glory, and more,
a weight of glory, and if there were but an equal weight of glory to
suffering, the difference would be exceeding great, seeing as one dram of gold
is more worth then many pounds of lead: so here, where there is (if I may so
say) a pound of glory for a pound of suffering; yea exceeding much more (mark
the words) a far more exceeding weight of glory (the Original is) exceeding
full and expressive and which makes all complete, it is eternal. (...),
excel^enter excellent^^ gloriae Pondus. Beza.


This was it that did encourage the Martyrs most willingly to go to the
prison, to the stake, the Christians to cry out to the persecutors of their
brethren, when they carried them to the prison, to the stake, and places of
suffering, Sum and ^go Christianus, I also am a Christian, even longing to
suffer with them, and some have wept much, because through a mistake, they have
been sent back again from the stake to the prison, or kept from suffering. We
glory in tribulation, says the Apostle. This was it that made Moses when he
came to years, Romans 5.3.
refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season; esteeming there proach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of
Egypt, and the faithful Jews to suffer the spoiling of their goods with joy.
(...) 10.34
And the Lord Christ himself, for the joy that was set before him, endered the
cross, (...) 122.
and despised the shame. Let us consider those things to stay our hearts, make
us patient, and with cheerfulness and courage to hold up our heads in the
evil day.

All which may afford comfort to the people of God (it is the Scripture phrase)
Heb. 11 25. in the midst of all their sufferings, when they consider the
blessed ends, fruits and effects of afflictions and trials sanctified (as they
are to all the faithful) so far are afflictions and sefferings, even the
most grievous trials, from being a sign of Gods wrath, and an Argument that
they are none of his, because they suffer such things, that it is rather an
Argument of Gods special favor and love toward them: It was so with Abraham
here, Jacob, Job, David, Paul and others, and with the Church of God in Egypt,
in the Wilderness, in the land of Canaan, in the time of the Judges and of the
Kings, notwithstanding all their sufferings, yet were they still Gods peculiar
people; and so it was with the Apostles and primitive Christians, and so along
up hitherto: Yea this very thing to have bitter adversaries for righteousness
sake, and Religion sake, and to have troubles and trials in the world, is an
evident Argument of Gods special favor to such. Be in nothing terrified by
your adversaries, which is to them an evident token of perdition, (...) 1.28.
but to you of salvation. That the spirit and rage of Devils and wicked men, is
bent against none so much, as against the Church and godly in it, Luke 21.1^,
13.
and most against the most eminent of them, They shall lay their hands on you
(said our Savior to his Apostles) and they shall per ecute you, delivering you
up into the Synagogues, and into prisons, etc. If you were of the world, the
world would love it is own; Ioh 15.19
but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you.

There is a great controversy between us and Rome, whether theirs or ours be
the true Church of Christ, and they or we the true Christians; therefore they
produce a great Catalogue of Catholics (as they would be called) Kings,
Princes, and others of note, that have wonderfully flourished, victoriously
warred, and in their battles become victorious Conquerours. Bellarmine shows
how Abraham, Moses, Joshuah, Vlti^a Ecclesiae nota est faelicitas temporalu.
Bell. de notis Eccies.
and so along to the Macchabees, that very many, that feared God were
victorious and prosperous. And thence he goes to Ecclesiastical stories, and
all to prove that prosperity and outward felicity it a note of the true Church;
and indeed, so it may be of the true malignant Church, not of the true Church
simply, so called, not of the Church of Christ. It may be answered, That many
very wicked men have warred victoriously, and prospered, as did Saul, Ahab,
Senacherib, Nebuchadnezzar, and others: This is (as Solomon speaks) to answer a
fool according to his folly. 2. Nothing is more apparent then this, That the
true Church of God, both Jews and Christians, have often been put to the
worse, and grievovsly afflicted by the Pagans and Heathens, That the most
renowned servants of God have suffered great things, been brought to grievous
exigents diverse times, as Abraham, Job, David, etc. and yet were the dear
servants and children of God, the dearly beloved of his soul: Heb. 12.5. etc.
God scourges every son whom he receives, and lets none go without
afflictions but bastards. The Scripture runs much upon this, to show that
prosperity is a note of the wicked, and afflictions a note of the godly;
Wherefore comfort your selves with these things.

Fifthly and lastly, Seeing we are here subject to troubles, Use 5.
even the most grievous, to be brought into the Mount, into extremities, this
should make us to thirst and long after Heaven, to set our hearts upon, long
after, and labor for that happiness and security of the Church in Heaven,
where there is no trouble, no enemy that can approach or do any hurt, neither
man nor Devil; where there shall be no more any grieving thorn, or pricking
bryar, yea, where sin shall be no more. Here the godly are subject to
afflictions and troubles, even the most grievous, to the rage of malignant and
mighty enemies, proud, insolent adversaries, suffer many things from their
tongues, that are set on fire from Hell, are full of poison, and are as sharp
swords; and from their hands also, whose singers itch at the righteous, are
brought sometimes into great straits and exigents, even to the utmost
extremity, that if God set not in, they are gone and perish, or are undone in
the world, all outward comforts are lost, beside the inward troubles and
perplexities of conscience many times: Ba^ there all enemies shall be far off,
all evils removed, all tears wi^ed from the Saints eyes, all cause of sorrow
done away, yea sin it self shall be utterly abolished, there shall be an
absolute freedom from all evils both of sin and punishment, and all fears
of evil, with a blessed fruition of Gods face and glorious presence, with full
delight for evermore. And therefore it is called, The triumphant Church,
because the Saints shall triumph over all enemies and evils. This should make
us to long and labor after Heaven, with Paul, willing to be dissolved, and be
with Christ, Phil. 1 21. Psalm. 4^.2.
which is best of all, when divine providence shall see good and ca^l for us,
to say with David in his absence from the place of Gods special presence, When
shall I come and appear before God? and with them under the Altar, How long
Lord, holy and true, and with the Church, Rev. 22.10.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly! And here I desire to leave you awhile in your
most serious thoughts, longing desires, and laboring after Heaven, where there
is fullness of joy in the presence of God, Psalm. 16.11.
and pleasures for evermore.

And thus much on that first point or observation (which is much more then I at
first intended, Use 5.
but the work in the doing multiplied under my hand, like the widows oil)
now through the goodness of God, I come to the second Proposition or Point
observed (of which, as also of the third, more briefly) that I seem not to be
too long on this Subject,

That God will be seen in the Mount, He will help and deliver his people in
their extremities and troubles. Doct. 2.


In this point before I come to application, take notice of these 3. things:

1. The truth of the point, That God will help and deliver his people in their
extremi^ies. 2. How he usually does it, by what ways and means. And 3. Why he
will do so.
1. That God will be seen in the Mount. God does help and deliver his people in
their extremities, though the Text be most clear and full, yet see it made
good in a few instances instead of many.

1. Of particular persons, Therefore call to mind Gods great mercy to Abraham
here, when it was come to the very last minate of time; to Jacob, Genesis 32.3.6.
and 33.1.
when his brother Esau was come even to him with 400. men in a posture of
war; to Lot, when he was taken and carried away prisoner by the Kings; 14.12,
13, 14. 1 Sa 23.26, 17. Jonah 2.1, 10. H^st 6. ^, 4, 10. D^n. c 3 and 6. Act.
12.
to David when encompassed by Saul and his men in the Wilderness of Maon; to
Jonas, after he had been three days and three nights in the Whales belly; so
he delivered Mordecai, the very same day he should have been hanged by wicked
Haman; the three children out of the fiery furnace, and Daniel out of the Lions
den; Peter the very night before he should have been brought out to the
people, to be condemned and executed.

2. Of delivering the whole Church or great multitudes of his people together.
Exodus 6.7 and 7.45.13 3. v 14.10. Cap 16 2, 12.
We read of Gods delivering Israel out of Egypt in the height of their misery,
with a mighty hand. Again, at the red Sea, when they were in a mighty strait,
bringing them through the red Sea, relieving them extraordinarily in the
Wilderness, when in great want of bread, flesh and water: c In the time of the
Judges, and in the days of 2 Chr. 14 6.11
Asa, -- 13 13.
Abijah, -- 20.12.
Iehoshaphat, and in H^st. ^.12. and 7.5.
Hesters days. Many more Examples to this purpose may be given, but these may
suffice. This is the first, That God does help and deliver his people, God is
seen in the Mount. Now

Secondly, How God is seen in the Mount, how he shows himself in their
extremities, and that is two ways,

1. In supporting them in the Mount. And 2. In delivering them out of the
Mount.
1. God is seen in supporting his people in their troubles and extremities,
they sink not under them, but hold up their heads and resolve to cleave unto
him and wait upon him, as he did Job who resolved. Though the Lord slay me, yet
will I trust in him. Job 13.15. Ps. 37.17, 14.
The Lord upholdeth the righteous, though he fall ( viz. into great te^tations
and troubles) he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him
with his hand. Even in spiritual desertions there is still a secret hand of
God which does uphold them, that they do not wickedly depart from him, nor
frowardly behave themselves in his Covenant; but there is still a general
recumbency and relying upon God, till be have mercy upon them and deliver them:
And sometimes the Lord fills their hearts fullest of inward comfort, when their
outward condition is most grievous, as was to be seen in the Martyrs.

2. God is seen in the Mount of extremity in delivering his people out of
their troubles and straits, and that diverse ways, I shall mention the most and
principal of them, and they are these,

1. By weakening strong means against his Church or people God delivers them
and that especially 5. ways.

1. By striking sudden fears and dreadful apprehensions into them, like that
into the Canaanites, The terror of you is fallen upon us (said Rahab) and the
Inhabitants of the Land faint because of you. Josh 2.9.11.
As Soon as we heard of these things, our hearts did melt, neither did there
remain any more courage in any man, because of you. So the Midianites by a
casual dream of one of their company, Jud. 7.13, 17.
were so frighted, that though an innumerable Army, yet they were not able to
stand before 300. unarmed men. So the Moabites were strangely overcome and
Israel delivered from their designs, 2 Kin. 3.22, ^3.
by reason of the seeming color of blood on the water, occasioned by the
reflection of the Sun beams shining upon it. And thus he dealt with the Duke
of Ireland and his Army, Relation of the Parl. begun at West^min. 1386 p. 17.
when with the forces raised in Lancashire, Cheshire and Wales, he came up
toward London against the Parliament, their great spirits were so benumbed,
discouraged and amazed at the sight of the Appellants Army, that when they
should give the assault, (God not suffering the effusion of blood) they stood
still making no show of resisting, but without any fighting slung down their
arms, and yielded themselves to the mercy of the Lords Appellant. This is one
way.

Secondly, God sometimes weakens the Adversaries power, and delivers his
people, Exodus 14.25.
by spoiling them of their instruments, which are very helpefull to them: So
God took off the wheels of Pharaohs Chariots, and made them drive heavily, so
that they could not follow after Israel to hurt them.

Thirdly, sometimes by infatuating them and their counsels (a grievous
judgment and sad sign of their destruction approaching, when God smites men
in their wits.) So he dealt with Pharaoh king of Egypt. Isa. 19.11, 13.
The Princes of Zoan are become ^ooles, the council of the wise Counselors
of Pharaoh is become brutish; how say you unto Pharaoh? I am the son of the
wise, the sonn^ of ancient Kings. The Princes of Zoan are become fools, the
Princes of Noph are deceived, they have also seduced Egypt, even they that are
( i.e. should be) the stay of the Tribes thereof. They told him a fair tale,
and so miserably deluded him to the destruction of Egypt. 2 Samuel 17 7, 14
So God turned Ahitophels politic counsel (that would have been very
prejudicial to David and his men) into foolishness, 2 Chro. 10.
and Absalom to reject it, and follow the counsel of Hushai to his own
destruction. And Rehoboam to follow the advice of the young men, that were
brought up with him, and to reject the counsel of the grave men, to his own
great damage and dishonor. Thus God sometimes by infatuating the counsels of
the Adversaries of his people, and smiting them in their wits, does disable
them to pursue their designs against his people, and so delivers them as David
from Absalom, and petitioning Israel from Rehoboams intended cruelty, and so
make their own counsels and designs their own overthrow and fall, and the
rise of his people.

Fourthly, sometimes by taking away from the enemies of the Church, part of
their strength in which they trust, as he did from Rehoboam, by rending ten
Tribes, the far greater part of his Dominion from him, 2 Chr. 10.13.
when he would not be dissuaded from going on to oppress his petitioning
Subjects.

Fifthly, sometimes by restraining their malice, when it comes to the upshot,
and turning their hearts toward his people, and enclining them to peace; Genesis
32.6. with 33.4, 10.
as when Esau came against Jacob with 400. men, God overpowered his spirit,
and turned his heart to his brother Jacob, That Jacob saw his face, as the face
of an Angel of God. -- 31.24, ^9.
So he did restrain Laban and incline him to peace, that he had not an evil
word to say against Jacob, when he over-tooke him. And this is the first way by
which God does deliver his people, namely, by weakening strong means against
them, that the Adversaries cannot or will not hurt them. Thus the Lord h^th the
hearts, even of Kings in his hands, P^^^ 21.1.
and turns them as the rivers of waters, whithersoever he pleas^th.

First, by putting courage and strength into his people, making the weak and
feeble strong, and the faint-hearted valiant. So he did 1 Samuel 11.4, 5, 6.
Saul to deliver Israel out of the hands of the Philistines, Cap ^4. v. 6.
Jonathan to slay many of them, and route their army 2 Chronicles 13.1^, 15, 16, 17.
Abijah, and the men of Judah to slay 500000. of their enemies, 14 9. Acts and
M^^^^ents, p. 207 col ^. and 208. col 1 l 70.
Asia and his men to destroy and route Zerah the Aethyoptan, with an army of a
thousand thousand foot, and three hundred horse. So he put a Relation of the
Parliament begun at West-^enster. Anno 1^86. p 4, 5, ^, 7. and 12.
spirit of valor and magnanimity into the Waldenses, to defend themselves and
the true Religion against the Duke of Savoy, that sought to suppress and root
out the Protestant Religion, to do wonderfully, even to admiration. Likewise
into the Protestants in France, to defend the^^selves and Religion against them
that would destroy both. Likewise into the Appellants, The Duke of Gloucester,
the Earls of Arundell and Warwick in the reign of King Richard the second,
to preserve the King and Kingdom, and subdue the Conspirators, the Duke of
Ireland and others, that persuaded the King to desert his Parliament, and to
send to the King of France for counsel and help against his Parliament, and to
raise forces to destroy the loyal and faithful members of it, that sought the
good of the King and Kingdom, and so by Gods blessing preserved both King and
Kingdom. So he has put exceeding much courage and valor into the soldiers
in Ireland, to do very great things against the Rebels there, and obtain
wonderful victories almost incredible.

Secondly, Sometimes the Lord sends his people, wholly by unexpected ways,
which they thought not of, whereby they become victorious over their enemies,
and free themselves from them. So God raised up deliverance to his people in
Zachary, when there were 4. horns, that is, enemies of the Church on all
sides, that stood up to scatter his people Israel, Judah, and Jerusalem: The
Lord showed the Prophet 4 Carpenters, i. e. the Babylonians and Grecians, whom
God had raised up, as his instruments, to help his people, and break the
horns of the enemies against them. Here comes help by a way altogether
unexpected, which his people never so much as thought of.

3. The Lord sometimes delivers his people by discovering the enemies plots and
designs against them, before they take effect, though never so closely
contrived, and secretly carried, and a plot timely discovered is prevented, and
falls to nothing, but to the hurt of the plotters. Thus God saved Israel, not
once or twice, 2 Kin. 6.8. etc.
by discovering the counsels and designs of the King of Syria against them:
The Jews, by discovering the bloody plot of Haman against them: The Jews plot
against Saul, Hest 4.1. Act. 23.12.
to kill him in the way: So God has saved this Kingdom, not once nor twice,
but many times, from eminent dangers, especially from the Spanish Navy in 88.
the Gunpowder Treason in ^605, a few hours before it should have taken
effect, and from many destructive counsels and designs within these few years
last past, which are fresh in every man's memory, mercies never to be forgotten,
or thought of, without a thankful remembrance of them: Yea, as one well
observes, Eccles. 10.20.
God has promised, that rather then the rage of men shall take place to his
dishonor, a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings
shall tell the matter.

4. Sometimes God delivers his people by diverting the enemies power another
way. So when Saul came against David, and had almost compassed him about, and
taken him and his men in the wilderness of Maon, 1 Samuel 23.26, 27
a sudden unexpected invasion of the Philistines, enforced Saul to retire, and
turn his forces against the Philistines. 2 King. 19.1. to 10.
So when Senacherib intended in a mighty rage to fall upon Hezekiah and Judah,
he was constrained to bend his forces against Tirhakah. And thus God turns the
power even of the greatest enemies, whithersoever he will as a man may turn a
ship at his pleasure by the rudder, a very small thing, and so he does other
creatures also, restraining not only their voluntary, but even their natural
actions at his pleasure, Dan. 3.27. C. 6.22, 24.
as the fire from burning the 3. children, and the Lions from devouring Daniel.

5. By destroying the enemies of his people, and that three ways.

1. Sometimes immediately by his own hand, or some extraordinary way. So he
destroyed one hundred eighty five thousand of the Assyrians by an Angel, when
they came against Hezekiah, Judah, and Jerusalem. For particular persons,
diverse deliverances of this kind are noted in Master Fox his book of Acts and
Monuments, God strangely by sudden death, strange diseases, etc. takes away
their most cruel persecutors, and so delivers his servants that fear his
name, from them that are too mighty for them.

2. Sometimes by setting others against them, men and other creatures: Men, as
the Persians against Julian, when he was resolved to destroy all the
Christians, Saul to kill the Philistines, and s^ s^ved David, and brought him
to the Kingdom.

And other creatures, Judge 5 20, (...) ^5 and 14 ^9 ^7. Cap. 8, 9, 10.
as the Stars fought against Sisera, the River Ki^^^n s^ept away his men, the
hail to destroy the enemies, the water to drown them, as he did the
Egyptians; beside other creatures, as Frogs, Flies, Lice, the Locusts, etc.
which did mightily hamper and confound that proud King Pharaoh, and his
Princes, and whole Kingdom. Thus the Lord has all the creatures in the world
at his command, to destroy his and his Churches enemies, and can make the most
contemptible of them, to confound and destroy the greatest Princes, as the lice
did one of the Herod's, Act. 12.23.
and the worms another of that name.

3. Sometimes by causing division among the enemies themselves, and setting
their swords one against another. So the Lord delivered his people by
destroying the Midianites and Amalekites, the Lord set every man's sword against
his fellow, Judge. 7 23.
throughout all the Host. Thus also the Lord dealt with the enemy that came
against Ju^ah, in Jehosaphats days 2 Ch^ (...)
one destroyed another, The children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the
inhabitants of Mount ^eir, utterly to slay and destroy them, and when they had
ma^e an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another.

Thus in the general here, God is seen in the Mount, and by what ways and
means he shows himself, and delivers his people chiefly from public
enemies; for to speak how God delivers his people, from particular straites
and exigents, would be endless, because the kinds of troubles, and extremities
of his people are very many. And this is the second.

Now thirdly, the reasons why the Lord will do so, and they are these:

1. God lets the enemies of his Church go on, Reasons.
in their wicked ways, against his people to the height, almost to the very
utmost, till they are ready to strike the fatal stroke, that they may fill up
the measure of their sins, and so his justice may be more clear and
remarkable in their destruction. So God dealt with Pharaoh, he did not destroy
him at the first, when he slew and drowned the Israelites children, nor at his
first refusal to let Israel go, as he might justly have done; but lets him
go on so long, that his obstinacy and rebellion against him, was so manifest,
that all the world could not but say, yea, and Pharaoh himself confess, Exodus
9.27.
That the Lord was righteous and he and his people were wicked. And for this
reason God did not presently destroy the Canaanites, and settle his people in
that good land, which he had promised them, but tarried till the iniquity of
the Amorites was full, that his justice in their destruction might be more
apparent to all the world.

2. God will be seen in the Mount, and deliver his people in their extremities,
to manifest his glorious Attributes of knowledge, power, truth, faithfulness
and goodness.

1. For the glory of his omniscience. Ezekiel. 1.18.
In Ezekiels vision at Chebar, the living creatures had wheels, and the
wheels had four faces, and the rings of the wheels were full of eyes round
about them, was a type signifying the al-seeing eye of God, that sees and takes
notice of all things, especially of his own people. The eyes of the Lord are
over the righteous. P^al. 34.^5. 8^.1.121.3, 4.
He is therefore called the Shepherd of Israel, and the Keeper of Israel, that
does neither slumber nor sleep; When his sheep (the people of Israel) are among
the wolves (the enemies of the Church) he does see and watch them, as well,
yea, better then any shepherd can oversee his flock: For 1. a shepherd may
look well to his flock, but cannot at all times, he must have some times to
rest and sleep himself, but God does neither sleep nor slumber, he has ever a
waking eye upon his. 2. A shepherd cannot see all his flock in all places at
once, but God oversees all, as well them afar off, as them near home,
whatsoever they be in the valleys, or in the mountains, he is the God of both,
though the blasphemous Syrians said otherwise. Now that God can, and does
manifest his al-seeing eye over his people for good, every where, in all places
and parts of the world at once, and takes notice of their condition, and of
their enemies, to deliver his people, and plague their enemies, in the fittest
time, does work much for his glory.

2. His Almighty power is marvellously seen, and made glorious, by plucking the
prey out of the mouth of the Lion, even of the most mighty adversaries of his
people, when they think themselves most sure, as Israel out of Egypt, and
Judah out of Babylon, which was as dry bones. Ezekiel. 37.3, 4.
Son of man (said God to E^^kiel in the vision) can these bones live? O Lord
God (said the Prophet) thou know, I cannot see how it can be so, but thou
art omniscient and almighty thou know: God bade him prophecy, and he did
so, and the bones came together every one to his place, stood up and lived, and
became a mighty great army When this is done to dry bones, very dry bones,
scattered bones, i. e. to the house of Israel, Ver 11.
the Church of God, which were brought into so low a condition, that they said,
Our bones are dried, our hope is lost, we are cut off from our parts: It shows
there is an al-seeing and an almighty God, that they may see and give him the
glory of his omniscience, and of his almighty power. So his power was
wonderfully seen in restoring Hezekiah again, and raising up Lazarus four
days dead, Jairus daughter, Dorcas and others, and delivering his people, when
it is come to such a dead lift that no creature can.

3. For the manifestation of his truth and faithfulness he has promised his
people to hear their prayers, and deliver them: Call upon me (says God) in
the time of trouble, and I will deliver thee, Psalm 50 15.
and thou shall glorifi^ me, and he is faithful and true, abundant in truth.
Now if the Lord will help and make good his promise, he must then do it, or
not at all, and so break his promise, and sail them that trust in him. One
man will not fail another, that trusts in him, for that were treachery so to
do, much less will God fail his people that trust in him; and therefore he
will then help and deliver them, God promises to be seen in the Mount: Now if
he bring them into the Mount, to the very top, and do not there show himself
in due time to their comfort, then he will fail them, and break his promise,
which is impossible.

4. His glorious wisdom, goodness, providence, and care over his people (put
them altogether) is manifested in this, That be has ways and means, and can
and does provide for his people, and deliver them, when all means fail in
humane reason: Exo. 16.2, 4, 12 Numb 20.28. Judge. 15 18. 1 King 17 6, 10 14. 2
King 4.2.
As in providing Manna and Quails, and water for Israel in their wants, plenty
of food in the famine of Samaria, relieving Sampson when he was ready to perish
with thirst, feeding Elijah, lengthening the Widows meal, and increasing the
oil in the cruse: In all which, and the like, his wisdom, care, and
provident goodness is seen, as well as his power, and especially in restoring
lost man, fallen in Adam, Ephesians. 5.10.
by a most mysterious and unsearchable way, in respect of many things in it,
that the very Angels, those knowing creatures, desire to pry into, and wonder
at it.

Reas. 3. God will then deliver his people, that the world may know that he is
the Helper of Israel. Now, Isa 37.20.
O Lord our God (say the faithful in their great troubles) save us from his
hand, ^^at all the Kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the Lord, even
thou only. When it comes to an extremity, to such a point that all outward
helps and means fail, so that there is no help, or such as is not
considerable, it is so small and weak, then Gods arms, his divine power and
wisdom appears, then all men cannot but acknowledge, that it is the Lords
own doing, and so give him the praise. But so long as there are outward means
and helps, that in an ordinary providence can relieve, we are wonderful apt to
ascribe deliverance to the means, to second causes: But when there is no help
in the creature, then it must needs be the hand of God, and so acknowledged.

Therefore it was, that the Lord would not let Gideon fall upon the Midianites
and Amalekites, with his thirty two thousand men, lest the victory might be
thought to be from man, and not from God, but caused all to return save 300,
an inconsiderable number, to conquer such an innumerable army, and gives them
victory, without giving a blow, till the enemies themselves sled. The people
that are with thee (says God) are too many for me to give the Midianites into
their hands, lest Israel vant themselves against me, Iu^^ ^.2. (...) ^, ^ and
saying, mine ^w^^ hana has saved me. Therefore the Lord (...) to the Red Sea,
where there (...) way f^r them (...); and then again into the midst of (...),
that it might appear to all the world, that ^^ra^^^ liver ^^ce, and the
F^^ptians overthrow and destruction was from God, and so his right hand became
glorious in power. That is the third Reason, why the Lord will deliver his
people in their extremities, that the world may see, that deliverance is from
the Lord, and that it is he that is the Helper of Israel, that they might
ascribe it to him, and seek to him only in time of need.

4. The Lord will deliver his people in their extremity, that his people may
have an experimental knowledge of him, both to support themselves in evil
times, and be the better enabled to comfort others, and support the
feeble-minded. It is a great comfort, and will help much in evil times, when a
man can look back and say, Such a time I was brought to such a strait, and
the Lord delivered me; into such an extreme want, and God provided for me;
into such diseases and weakness, that all friends and Physicians forsook me,
and gave me over for a dead man; yet then the Lord did raise me up again,
beyond all expectation; into such and such a trouble, and the Lord carried me
through, or delivered me when there was no hope, as 1 Samuel 17.34. etc.
David, and 2 Cor. 1.9, 10
Paul did, and so 2 Cor. 1.4.
might be able to help others also.

The godly know by faith, that God is the supporter and helper of the Saints;
The word says it, and they believe it, but when God does indeed bring them
into the Mount, into some great trouble, extremity or other does awhile leave
them there, yet does support them in it, or deliver them out of it, then they
see and know God by experience to be such. That is observable to this purpose
in 2 C^ron. Then Manasses knew that the Lord he was God, 2 Chr. 32.13.^
i.e. then he kn^w it by experience in himself.

5. The Lord will be seen in the Mount, and then help and deliver his people,
that they may be truly thankful, more affected with his goodness, prize mercy
more, and be more thankful for it. O! how welcome is the Haven to a
weather-beaten Mariner, that every moment looked to be shipwrackt? bread to an
hungry man, that is even ready to perish? pardon to a condemned wretch, that is
upon the Gallows, ready to be turned of the ladder? how will he prize such a
mercy? how thankfully will he accept it? but let the Mariner be safely
batboured, so soon as the storm begins to arise, or the hungry man have
meat, so soon as his appetite craves it, or the malefactor have his pardon
given him, as soon as he is apprehended or imprisoned, it will be slighted,
he cannot be so affected with it, and thankful for it as otherwise he would.
How greatly Abraham here was ^ff^cted with this mercy, and thankful for it,
when God appeared to him in the Mount, this Chapter does testify, and this
verse is a divine record of it. He called the name of the place Jehovah^^ch.

6. And lastly, The Lord will be seen in the Mount, help and deliver his
people, that their faith fail not, and they behave themselves untowardly and
uncomely in his Covenant. If God bring his people into the Mount, into great
extremity, and they wait and wait still, and no help come, the feeble
Christians faith will be apt to fail, and he to faint and behave himself
uncomely, shame himself, stain his profession, and dishonor God, discourage
others, and open the mouths of evil men against the truth and ways of God.
Now the Lord will not break a bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax,
Isa. 42.3. 1 Cor. 10.13. Isa. 57.16.
not suffer a poor weak Christian to faint; and therefore will help in due
time, that he may not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed;
not quench, but increase grace; not destroy, but build un faith. I will not
contend for ever (says God) neither will I be always wroth; for the Spirit
should fail before me, and the souls which I have made. And these be the
Reasons why the Lord will be seen in the Mount, help and deliver his people in
their extremities and so we come to application.

And first, behold here this truth verified in our days, Vs^ 1.
and in these Realms of his Majesty! Was not God seen in the Mount to
Scotiand, our neighbour-Nation, given them a wounderfull deliverance, and a
happy peace, 1639. and 1640.
when nothing was before their eyes but ruin and destruction, intended and
threatened against them, by the public enemies of both Kingdoms, who thought
to raise and settle themselves by their ruin? Did not God appear in the Mount
to poor Ireland, 1641 Octo. ^3
in saving the head-City of the Kingdom (and consequently the Kingdom) the
very night before it should have been surprised? Was not this Nation bro^^ht
into the Mount? and did not God wonderfully deliver it in 88 from the Spanish
Armado, ^^8^. (...). 5.
styled invincible by the advers^^es themselves, in their vain boast of it? In
the year 1605. from the Gunpowder treason, that transcendent and most horrid
villainy, a few hours before it should have taken effect? In the year 1639.
from the Spanish Navy, 1639.
too little heeded, and too much forgotten by us? And many late desperate
designs of the enemies of Christ and his people, and particularly of this
Church and State in which we still live, by the goodness of the same God, who
showed mercy to Abraham, and Israel, and Judah in their extremities, and
delivered them out of the hands of their enemies, Pharaoh, Senacherib, Haman,
and others?

Secondly, Use 2.
if God be seen in the Mount, help and deliver his people in their extremities,
then hence (by considering withal, Gods usual dealings and carriage toward
his and their enemies, when he delivers his people) we may infer, That God
will destroy his and their enemies, the present and future enemies of the
Church of Christ. See a few instances; when God delivered Israel out of Egypt,
Exodus 1^.^9.14.23. and 15.1.
he at the same time (to make the more for their delivery and security) he
destroyed, first all the first borne of Egypt (beside the other destructions
that before did befall their cattle, corn, fish, etc) and then Pharaoh
himself, and all his Princes, and army in the Red Sea. So when God brought
Isra^l out of Babylon, ^er. 25.12.
he first by the Grecians destroyed the Babylonians Monarchy, that had wasted,
and grievously oppressed his people. 2 C^r 13 14.14 11.
When he delivered Ab^ah and Judah, he destroyed of their enemies 500000. When
he delivered Asa and his people, he destroyed Zerah the Ethyopian, and many of
his great army. 20.10 22.
When he saved Jehosaphat, Judah, and Jerusalem, he destroyed the Moabites,
Ammonites, and the inhabitants of Mount Seir. 32.1 21
When he saved Hezekiah, he destroyed 185000 of Senacheribs numerous army. When
he saved the Jews, he destroyed Haman the Jews enemy, H^st. c 7. and. 9.
and his sons, and all those that rose up against them. Likewise often when
he delivered Israel under the Judges, and in the time of the Kings, he
destroyed or grievously punished the proud enemies of his people. For God uses
wicked men but as rods to correct his children, and when they are corrected and
bettered, that he will use that rod no more, then he throws the rod into the
fire. The sacred Scriptures are clear and full to this purpose, and abundant
in examples of this kind.

And assuredly, he is still the same God, as powerful, as wise, as loving and
good as ever to his people, as faithful in his promises, and as just, and full
of indignation against his and their enemies, as ever he was, and therefore
will still show himself for his people, and against their enemies as much as
ever heretofore. So that the Turk, the great enemy of the Christians, and
Antichrist, the grand enemy of the true Church of Christ, must down, and fall,
and perish. It is prophesied long ago, in Saint John's time, and by him, Rev.
18.2.
Babylon the great ( viz. mystical Babylon, Rome) is fallen, is fallen, and in
truth also, in part already, and is declining in number, wealth, greatness,
power, glory, and credit every day more and more. It remarkeably began to fall,
when Luther that renowned servant of God, did so publickely set up the standard
of the Gospel, and so many thousands did resort unto it, and many thousands
fell off from the Pope to Christ, in Germany, France, the Low Countries, in
England and Scotland: And it was no small wound to the Antichristian beast,
that that Nation gave to it the other year. And surely (beloved) the downfall
of Antichrist, the Pope, that Man of sin, and his Adherents, the Papacy, and
Roman Hierarchy cannot (I conceive) be far off, if not very near at hand.

Thirdly, this may be of good use to suport and comfort us for the present, and
in future times, against all extremities and troubles whatsoever. God will be
as good still to his servants, all that walk in the steps of the faith and
obedience of Abraham, as to the faithful in former ages. For our greater
comfort, let us instance in 5. cases, namely, in case of extremity, of want or
danger, of loss, of violent temptations, of Gods seeming not to hear prayer,
and of spiritual desertion.

1. In case of extreme want or danger, we should seek unto God, and depend
upon him, the all-sufficient, and faithful God, as Abraham did here, He will be
seen in the Mount: As for instance, suppose thy ease should be like Elijahs or
Sampsons, that was ready to perish with thirst, or the poor Widow, that had
only a little oil in a cruse, and a little meal in a barrel, that thou
should be in want, have nothing to keep soul and body together, and
maintain life, no money in the purse, no bread in the en^bord, no meal in the
barrel, no friend in the world that thou know of, and it may be, greatly in
debt also, that thou sea^se dare show thy face, for fear of an Arrest, as
was the poor widow, 2 ^ing ^ 1.
All is gone, says she, and the Creditour is come to take unto him my two
sons to be bondmen: All is gone, nothing left to preserve life, nor affoard
me comfort, but my two sons, and now the Creditor is come to deprive me of
that also. Here is a sad complaint, ^ King. 17.6.
yet God did provide for Elijah bread and flesh in the Morning, and bread and
flesh in the Evening, by a Raven, which in reason would rather have robbed,
then relieved him. Judge. 15.^8. Na^^^. 20.7, 8, 11. 2 Kin. 4.3, 4, 7.
He provided drink for Sampson, even out of the jaw bone of an Aff^: for
Israel out of the stony rock, and the poor widow increased her oil, whereby
she was enabled, both to live comfortably, and pay her debts: so if thou can
by faith look up unto God, and depend upon him in the moderate use of lawful
means, if any be, he is able, and will surely provide, and do that which
shall be best for thee.

Therefore resolve with faithful Habakkuk, in the person of the Church, Hab.
3.17.
Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines;
the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the field shall bear no meat, the
flock shall be cut off from the field, and there shall be no herd in the
stalles, yet will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation,
The Lord God is my strength.

Again, suppose thou be in any great danger (as sometimes was David, 1 Samuel 23.
Act. 27.18. ^ Cor. 1.8, 9, 10
Jonas, or Paul, when the ship was broken, and when he and the rest of his
brethren with him, were pressed out of measure, above strength insomuch that
they despaired of life, and had the sentence of death in themselves, that they
should not trust in themselves, but in God, God did deliver them from so great
a death) Though I say it be thy ease, yet despair not, be not discouraged, why
should not thou hope in God, as well as they did? Oh! out they were most
eminent persons, for faith, humility, etc. but I am a poor, vile wretch, full
of unbeleefe, pride, etc. Well, be it so; Yet know that God (though he expect,
and command us to grow in grace, yet he looks not in the hearing of prayer) at
the measure of grace in the petitioner, but to the truth of grace, and the
sincerity of the heart: Yea, the rather will God help, because thou art a poor
weak soul, that can not wait long, or bear much. Isa. 60.2.
To him will I look (says God) even to him that is poor, and of a contrite
spirit, to such a soul as sees nothing in himself, but abundance of sin, and
emptiness of God. 32.3.
He will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed, says the
Prophet Isay.

Thus in respect of private, so also in respect of the public troubles and
straits of the Church, abroad in Germany, in Ireland, and here at home,
whatsoever, or how evil soever our condition seem to be, yet let not any
fathfull soul be discouraged, God will not destroy his people, he will not
deliver them up into the hands of their enemies, but will be seen in the Mount,
and will help and deliver them when it comes to the point, when outward means
fail.

1. All the former examples, and many more upon record, both in divine and
humane Histories (which might be mentioned) of Gods goodness toward his
people in their straits, are encouragements to us: Romans 15.4.
For whatsoever was written before time was written for our instruction, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scripture might have hope; And therefore
why should we be discouraged? humbled for our own and others sins, and Gods
dishonor, indeed we should be, but not discouraged, hang down the head as men
without hope. Therefore

2, Weigh also those 5. Reasons, which do overpower my spirit, dispell such
fears, and carry it on high, as it were above the Sun.

1. God spared England when it was at the worst, when Religion, Laws, and all
went down the wind, and s^^^se a man durst publickely show his face for God,
when profaneness, superstition, and idolatry increased greatly without
control, and no thoughts of Reformation; and therefore, much more will he
spare it now, Reformation is begun. If God should now suffer the enemies to
prevails, now England begins to reform, then it w^^^ be to his great
dishonor, the enemies of the Church would impute it to the Reformation, and
blasphemously say, That because ^^e go about, to reform things amiss in the
Church, and remove ev^ls, therefore God is angry with us, and has gi^^n us up
into their hands, and so impute our destruction to reformation, which is Gods
work, as the procuring cause of our ^^^sery and overthrow, and their victory
and triumph in our ruins, to their Popish prayers, and Idoll-Saints; but God
will not part with his glory, which he has purchased with a strong hand.

See a notable promise, and an example to this purpose.

1. A notable instance to this purpose in Jehosaphats days, 2 Chronicles. 19.
he seeing things greatly amiss in the Church, and Civil State, set upon the
work of Reformation, purged the house of God, and reformed much in the Church
and Commonwealth, presently upon that came the Moabites, Cap 20. v. 10, 11,
12. Ver. 25.
the Ammonites, and the inhabitants of Mount Seir against him, with so great an
army, that he professed, there was no might in him and his people to withstand
them, and that they knew not what to do; yet the enemies of Judah had a mighty
overthrow, and why? because Jehosaphat had put himself and his people into a
good posture of defense, in respect of their spiritual state toward God, by
their humiliation and reformation, they were returned again to the Lord, and
sought him; and therefore God would not now leave them, when they had most need
of his help: Jonah 3.10.
Yea, when Pagan Niniveh did begin to reform and turn away from their evil
ways, God did not destroy them as he had threatened, and otherwise had
undoubtedly done; and yet their reformation is generally supposed to be but
outward, and hypocritical, not inward, of the heart and sincere, much less
will God destroy a Christian Nation, when we begin to reform, and turn to him.

2. See also a notable promise to this purpose, Jer. 18. says God, At what
instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, Ier. 18.7, 8.
and concerning a Kingdom to pluck up, to pull down and destroy it; If that
Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of
the evil! thought to do unto them. God threatens destruction to England,
England begins to reform her evil ways, and p^^^ away her whoredoms and
abominations, and therefore surely God will spare, not destroy England,
whatsoever dangers seem to threaten us.

3. God has many mourners in England that sigh and groan, because of the
abominations and sins of the land, and do strive against them, and thirst
after a pure state of the Church with longing desire; Yea, the Parliament, the
representative body of this Kingdom, has ever in these declining times bin
against the evils, declared themselves against them, and labored what in them
lay to redress evils, and purge the Church, and God does not use to destroy a
Nation, or give them up into the hands of their enemies, so long as the Lots,
Jobs, Samuels, Daniels remain in it, and stand in the gap; much less when the
whole kingdom, as the Parliament is, by representation and deputation, stand
in the gap, and seek to turn away wrath from the people. So much is clearly
employed in that speech of God, Ezekiel, 22.30.
I sought for a man among them that should make up the hedge, and stand in the
gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none.
This Argument has given good hopes to many, even when things were at worst,
and no Parliament thought of, that God would yet be gracious to England.

4. England falls to Fasting and Pryaing throughout the Land, and God has put a
mighty spirit of prayer into the hearts of his people, generally throughout the
Kingdom; every good man's heart is enlarged toward God for the peace of
Jerusalem, even children in years, and young persons have eyes to see that
things are amiss, and their hearts open to go to the throne of grace, for
mercy and favor for England, and have their days of humiliation and prayer,
yea, scarce any that has the face of a Christian, or principle of common
honesty in him, but does as well as he can, pray for Englands peace and
happiness. And we do not any where read of any people, whom God destroyed,
when they fell generally throughout the Land to Fasting and Prayer, but ever
that God spared them; Ion. 3.5.
Israel and Judah often (yea and some out of the Church, as the Ninevites) and
very often when they have bin brought to a very low condition, yet, when they
sought unto God in their trouble, he delivered them. See one place instead of
many, namely, Psalm. 107. especially, v. 6, 13, 19, 28 Then they cried unto the
Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distresses. I will
trouble you with one public instance (...) that is in Hester, Host 2.4.7. and 3
and two instances in particular persons in Hesters time the Church of the Jews
was brought into a very low condition, and a most desperate strait, nothing was
before them in the eye of humane reason, but death and utter destruction, the
Deerbe was sealed never to be reversed, and the Posts hasted to publish it
every where, that all their enemies might be ready at the day appointed to
destroy them; the Jews fell to Fasting and Prayer, and God delivered them. For
particular instances, one is in Nebuchadnezzar, he was brought so low, that a
man would have thought, Dan. 4.31.
it had been impossible for him, ever to have been restored, he had lost his
Kingdom and wits also, which are (as a learned man said) the only way to
bring a man in again; he had lost all his beauty and was become as a Beast of
the field, Ver. 34.
not in substance, but in condition and carriage, yet when be looked up to
Heaven, God heard him and restored him to his senses, kingdom and honor
again, and so he did Jonah, when a man in all reason would have thought it
impossible, Jon ^.2.1.
being then in the middle of the Sea, covered over with waters, and in the
Whales belly, a creature whose stomach can digest any thing.

4. And surely this also has weight in it, and is a good argument of hope and
comfort, that God has set up many worthy lights, and put many faithful,
painful and profitable laborers into his Vineyard very lately, and many,
(especially young people) come in a^p^ce and submit to the Gospel, and begin
to show forth the power of Godliness in their lives.

5. Also it is very remarkable and comfortable, consider, that all the plots,
designs, and endeavors of the enemies have hitherto been so timely (through
Gods goodness and the Parliaments vigilance) discovered, prevented and
disappointed in a great part, that all has turned to their dis-advantage, and
the good of the Church, and furtherance of the work of God, that is upon the
wheels, and the whole carriage of all things (through Gods great goodness)
seems to me to give great ground of comfort to his people, blessed be God.

And therefore (Brethren) be not discouraged! do not fear, suffer not your
hearts to be cast down, whatsoever the present dangers seem to threaten: But
look up unto God and depend upon him. It is a great fault for a Christian to
let go his hold, when dangers are great and imminent, though we be too too apt
to do so upon all occasions: yet we should not. David did so, but when he had
recollected his thoughts, he did much blame himself for it, Why art thou cast
down o my soul, and why art thou disquieted in me? Ps. 43 5.
And therefore pluck up your spirits, prepare for the worst, yet look beyond
the cloud, and behold with an eye of Faith Gods great power, wisdom,
goodness, faithfulness and the like, and think upon what he has done for
his Church formerly, and of late years for our selves in particular, how he
has still discovered the Papists plots and designs, and preserved his people,
and then think of what Manoahs wife said to her distrustful timor us husband.
Jud. 13.22, 23.
If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not then have received a
burnt-offering and a meat offering at our hands, neither would he have showed
us all these things, nor would at this time have told us such things as these.
So if the Lord had a purpose to destroy this Nation, or give us up into the
hand of our enemies, he would not have done thus and thus for us as he has
done; for though the Lord does not, or very rarely work miracles now, yet he
works wonders, and is as able and willing to do as great things as ever he
was, yea, and does so too, when there is the like occasion, and has often
within these few years last past done very great things. However let us do our
duty, look up unto God and depend upon him, and resolve every one of us with
Ioh, Though the Lord slay me, yet, Job 13.15.
will I trust in him.

I will not deny but risings may be, and some blood be shed; God will surely
repay blood with blood, and if not by the Sword, yet at least by the execution
of Justice on such, as have shed the blood of his Saints, and bin the grand
enemies of his Church, but I cannot conceive our trouble will be much or long,
I hope, but a brunt: Indeed, when I look upon our many, great, crying sins,
Gods Justice, Purity and Holiness, and the unwillingnes of many to be healed,
yea, obstinacy in their evil ways, etc. I can look for no mercy, but rather
wonder we were not destroyed long ago, but when again I look upon the
considerations above mentioned, the whole course of Gods providence all along
to this day, laying open persons and things, discovering and preventing most
dangerous plots and designs, and bringing on his work still notwithstanding,
yea, by the adversaries plots (though full sore against their minds) and when I
also look upon the intolerable insolency, impiety, blasphemies and confidence
of victory in many of that party, I cannot conceive they shall go on long or
do much hurt.

Is not (I will only move the Question, but determine nothing) Is not, or may
not this be thought to be the time, when the witn^sses, the godly Ministers
slain by the Prelacy and their procuring, in respect of their office, thrust
out of their livings and calling, wherein they might have bin useful in the
Church of God, and so dead in respect of office, are risen again from the
dead, restored to their Ministry, to the wonder of all that see it, and knew
what havocke was made of them (when fifty able and godly Ministers within two
years space, were excommunicated, deprived, silenced, and suspended by one
man) but the other day, A^ti^les against B Wr^n.
and so upward, for diverse years together?

Observe what is said by Saint John, of the witnesses, v. 12. And they ascended
up to Heaven in a cloud, Rev. 11.12, 13
and their enemies beheld them, of the Churches enemies, v. 13. And the same
hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the City fell, and in
the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand, and the remnant were
affrighted, and gave glory to the God of Heaven. At the same hour (mark it)
namely when the faithful witnesses were raised up, restored to life, to their
offices and places in the ministry again, there was a great earthquake, i.e.
a great alteration and change in the Church, and it must needs be here from the
worse to the better, and a tenth part of the City fell: By City, some
understand Rome it self, which say some, is but a tenth part of that which once
was, others rather of the Roman Hierarchy and power of Antichrist, in his
Adherents, Abettors, and Supporters, and in the earthquake were slain of men,
7000. of men, in the Greek, (...) not of men, but of the names of men. Names
are sometimes taken for Titles and Offices: were slain, viz. in this
earthquake, alteration and reformation of the Church. Now if there be found
about 7000 of the Prelates, Chancellors, Archdeacons, Officials, with an Et
caetera, suppose what may be the issue of this earthquake, that now shakes in
these Kingdoms of his Majesty, especially in this of England. But the thing I
chiefly note this place for, is this, to show (as I conceive) that our troubles
cannot be long, nor great, in respect of the downfall of our adversaries, the
enemies of the Church, and who can tell whether the Lord will not by such a way
take occasion to single out the enemies of his Church, which he has appointed
to be the objects of justice, which otherwise could not be so obnoxious to
justice, as by such a way they may be? But I affirm nothing positively, times
and means are in Gods hand, but do assure my self, that the issue whenever
it be, will be the Churches greater good, and the enemies downfall. That is
the first case of extreme want or danger.

Secondly, In case of loss, as it was with the worthies, Heb 11. that suffered
the loss of all, and the faithful Jews, Heb. 10 34. 1 Samuel 30.6.
that took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, and David, who when all was
gone, and the people also talked of stoning of him, he comforted himself in
God, and Moses, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26.
who refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin,
that last but for a season. You know also how it was with Job, he lost all he
had, Job 1.2, 3.
that he had not an Ox, or Ass, or Sheep left him, his servants and children
also, and his friends left him; yea, his own wife and servants that remained
were against him, he was brought even to the top of the Mount, into suchan
extremity, what with outward and inward losses and troubles that he could
scarce go any further: Yet when Job humbled himself, and sought unto God, he
was heard, and obtained mercy; God restored to him his health, and honor
again, prosperity, friends, beauty, and all returned to him again, and he was
greater then ever before, also he had sons and daughters. Likewise God provided
for Moses and the rest. See Mat. 6.25.20 3^.
So be thy case like theirs, yet God will provide or support, without means,
or take thee away to a better state of life, where we shall have better and
more durable riches, where there will be no need of outward comforts. Jesus
said to his Disciples, Verily I say unto you, Mat. 19 27, 28 29.
that every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters or father,
or mother, or Wife, or children, or land for my Names sake, shall receive a
hundred fold and shall inherit eternal life.

3. In case of violent temptations, look upon Saul, he was buffeted
grievously, he prayed often that God would free him from it, notwithstanding
^od still continued his affliction, though very heavy, yet at last, after
diverse fervent prayers, God gave him this comfortable answer, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9
My grace is sufficient for thee. If God lay on weight, he will give shoulders,
and strength to bear it. 1 Cor. 1^.13.
God is faithful (says the Apostle) who will not suffer you to be tempted
above that you are able. See it also in Heman, Asaph, David, Job and others.

4. In case of Gods not hearing prayer. It may be thou prayest for some
special good, or removal of some special evil, and prayest and prayest
again and again, yet God hears not (I speak of hearing of testification)
but seems to turn the deaf ear, There is (...) 3 fold he^ing of pray^r, viz
(...) observation of approbation, and of testification, Mat. 5^ ^^. ^ Cor.
12.8, 9.
and it may be to deny thee, yet be of good comfor: It was so with the woman of
Canaan, she begged hard, he denied her, she went to him again and again,
would take no denial, at last he gave her a gracious answer, Be it unto thee
even as thou will. So Paul rayed again and again, God answered not till the
third time, i. e. till he prayed often. It may be thou art not humbled enough,
thou art not yet fit for mercy; and therefore search and humble thy self, pray
still, and wait upon God, He will be seen in the Mo^at.

5. In case of spiritual desertion, when God hides his face, withdrawes the
light of his countenance from a soul that lies conflicting under great
trouble: If this be thy case, yet faint not, be not east down, look up unto
God still. So says the Prophet Isaiah, (...) ^0.1^.
Who is among you that fears the Lord, that walks in darkness, and has no
light, that is in great and deep desertions and troubles, and has no light of
comfort, Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. It is a
great comfort to a stranger that is in a wide Forest in a dark night, to have
a sure guide with him, to direct him the way that will certainly bring him
where he would be; And so it may be to a deserted soul, that walks in
darkness, and has no light of comfort to have such a sure guide as this to
direct him a sore way, to find comfort in the end, Let him trust in the Name of
the Lord, etc. This God will be seen in the Mount. It may be thou a^^ not yet
come to the top of the Mount, and therefore patiently go on still, God will be
seen in the Mount. Thus (brethren) when we consider what a God we have in
Covenant, and what a promise he has made, we have good ground to comfort our
selves in him in all extremities.

Fourthly, will God be seen in the Mount, Vss 4.
then this may serve to teach, incite, and encourage all in general, and
particularly the honorable Houses of Parliament.

First, All in general, and that to a double duty.

1. To go unto God by prayer in all cases of extremity, yea in all troubles
and afflictions whatsoever. God himself directs us to this, Call upon me in
the time of trouble, and I will deliver thee. Psalm. 50.15.
And it is the constant practice of the Saints, yea of wicked men also, to go
to God in their troubles, yea very Pagans and Heathens do so; Io^ah 1.5.
Witness the rude Mariners that carried Jonas in their ship, and the soldiers
with him. And indeed this is a powerful and prevailing means, being rightly
performed, and cannot be otherwise, if we consider that such prayers are,

1. The act of Gods Spirit in the soul, and according to his will. The Spirit
makes intercession for the Saints, Romans 8.27.
according to the will of God; and therefore being the work of Gods own
Spirit, and according to his will, it cannot but be accepted and prevailing.

2. It is grounded on Gods own promises, Ask and have, Whatsoever ye shall
ask the Father in my Name he will give it you, Call upon me in the time of
trouble, and I will deliver thee, and God cannot deny himself.

3. Such prayers are put up by the hand of Jesus Christ, the beloved of the
Father, in whom he is well pleased, and whom he cannot deny any thing, so that
though he may and will deny as when we go in our own name, yet he will not
deny those that go unto him in his Sons name, the humble, faithful requests
of his poor servants put up in the name of Jesus Christ.

4. I may add also, that it tends much to his glory to hear the prayers of
his servants, and help them in their extremities, it proclaims his
omniscience, almighty power, wisdom, goodness, faithfulness and care over
his people.

Therefore pray, and pray fervently and faithfully, and pray constantly, give
not over praying whatsoever extremity thou seem to thy self to be brought
into; yea, the greater the extremity, pray more earnestly, and hope most. A
ship has most use of an Ankor when the waves are roughest, and the storm
greatest: so here most need to pray, and put out the Ankor of hope in greatest
troubles, and there is ground for it, then to be fullest of hope, because
deliverance is nearest, the nearer to the top of the Mount, to the uttermost
extremity, the nearer to mercy, for God will be seen in the Mount, he will help
and deliver in extremity.

2. It should teach us all patiently to rely upon God in every case, in every
place and condition cast thy self upon him. He was with Daniel in the Lions
den to stop the Lions mouths, with the 3. children in the fiery furnace, to
restrain the force of the fire that it hurt them not, and so with others in
their troubles and trials, Isa. 43 2.
and has promised to be with all his. When thou passest through the waters, I
will be with thee, and through the rivers they shall not overflow thee; and
when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, Josh 1 5, 8. Heb.
13.5.
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee. In what condition or extremity soever thou be, yet still wait patiently
upon God, he will help in the most seasonable time.

Oh, but my sins are great, I am a vile unworthy creature, he will not regard
such a vile wretch as I am, beside all outward means fail.

Answ. But take heed, do not limit the Holy One of Israel, neither for the
thing, time, manner nor means, he is all-sufficient, his mercies are great and
free, and he knows the fittest time; therefore fear not, but rely wholly on
God, trust perfectly in him. There is in many a trusting in God, but (...) is
imperfect, they seek to, and trust in other things with God yea without God,
in themselves, friends, and other things and means. This ought not to be so,
we should trust w^^^^y and only in God, and wait patiently on him, he will be
s^en in due time. Consider the Husbandman, I am. 5.7, 8.
he waits for the fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it, be ye
also patient, stablish your heart, says James. If the Husbandman do with
patience undergo all weathers and casualties, and wait long for the fruit,
that he may have a joyful harvest, then much more ought they to wait that sow
seed in Heaven, gracious and precious seed, tears and prayers, and doubtless
they shall reap in due time, we have Gods own word for it, Psalm. 137.7, 8.
They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.

Secondly, as it may and ought to teach and encourage all to go on, and rest
perfectly and patiently on God, so particularly to You the Worthies of Israel,
who are now employed by God, the King and Country, in the great service of the
Kingdom. You have a great work before you, mighty Adversaries, and great
opposition, the Devil, the Pope, that Balaam of Rome, that curses the people
that will not adhere to him, and all the rabble of popish and profane
wretches, who are digging as deep as hell to undermine you, and your honorable
proceedings, and blow all up, their continual desperate designs, and hell
bred treasons, and bloody threatenings, witness to all the world the extreme
height of their malice, and your dangers. You seem to be now even in the very
top of the Mount of extreme dangers, and the whole Kingdom, our Religion,
Laws, liberties, and free Courts of Justice with you are upon the vertical
point; yet be not discouraged (much honored Patriots) God will be seen in the
Mount, do you continue daily to seek unto God, wholly deny your selves, and
depend upon him, walk with him, and seek him and the public good in all
your undertakings, and be assured God will ever protect, direct, preserve and
deliver you. Has he not preserved, directed, and protected you hitherto, even
to admiration, when there was but a step, but a word betwixt you and death? and
he will ever protect, and in due time deliver his Majesty, and the Kingdowe
with you, if you still walk with him; God will be seen in the Mount, when it
comes to the very point, when the enemies of Sion think to strike the fatal
blow.

But when God shows himself in the Mount, helps and delivery you, and the
Kingdom with you in our extremities, and tre^^s the enemies under the foot of
justice, then beware you do no forget to return all possible praise and
thankfulness to God, for so great a mercy; but with Abraham here, erect a
Monument to perpetuate the memory of such divine mercies to posterity: And in
the mean time you must set up your E^en-ezer, ^ Sam 7.12.
Hitherto has God helped us, as Samuel and all Israel did.

And so I come to the third and last point, observed in these words, which is
this,

That mercies and deliverances in our extremity or great troubles, Dect. 3.
ought especially to be noted, and the remembrance of them continued.

Here Abraham in memory of so great a mercy, that so eminent a passage of
divine providence might never be forgotten, he (as it were) sets up a pillar,
or Monument to all posterity, with this inscription, Jehovah-jirah, the Lord
will see and provide, with this proverbiall speech also, In the Mount of the
Lord it shall be seen. All the while Abraham was busied in making the Altar,
laying on the wod, etc. God saw, but was not seen, did not show himself, but
when it came to the act of striking the fatal stroke, which was even falling
down, then God was seen, i.e. did manifest his gracious pleasure in
preserving Isaac; and therefore Abraham labors to perpetuate the memory of
this great mercy, in the name of the place; He called the name of the place,
Iehovah-jirah.

And so should we do of special mercies and deliverances. Indeed we should be
thankful for all, even for the least mercy and deliverance, even nature,
common honesty, and equity require, that where we receive a benefit, Nihil est
aeque Deo gratu a ^^q, grati esse anime, Chrysostom. Orat. 2. ad Cor. 1.
we should return thanks; beside, it is a most excellent duty, more
displeasing to the Devil, but more acceptable to God then prayer; for prayer
argues want, and misery, which the Devil desires and rejoices at; but
thankfulness argues plenty, at least a comfortable condition, which the Devil
envies, Invitat al magna qui gratanter su^^^p^^ mudica Ca^siod. in Psalm. Grav
ssimum v^t^um (...) homine indig^um.
it does more argue sincerity of the heart then prayer does, and shall continue
when prayer shall cease. It is very advantageous to our selves, it conciliates
favor with God, is (as I may say) an encouragement to our heavenly Father to
go on to do us good, and to bestow better and greate^ mercies and deliverances.
But unthankfulness is a grievous fault in the opinion even of the very
Heathens, displeasing Spiritus gratiae contumeliam s^^^t, qui b^ne ficium
dantis grat^ mente non suscipit. Ber. Ex. 17.14.
to God, and seldom goes unpunished in this world, God takes notice of it,
though against man, much more if against himself, records it to their infamy;
instance in Pharaohs chief Butlers forgetfulness of Joseph, it hinders good
things from us, shuts up the fountain of Gods goodness, causes him to take
away or blast what he has already given a people, and often brings down
judgment upon the head of the unthankful, as the Scripture witnesses.

But especially hold we be thankful for, take special notice of, and record
to posterity special mercies and deliverances.

For 1. So we are commanded, after God had delivered Israel and disco^sited
Amalek. Genesis 35.1.
God commanded Moses saying, Write this for a memorial in a book. Likewise
when God had brought Jacob safe home again to his native country and delivered
him from the wrath of his brother Esau, God bad him go to Bethel, and make
there an Altar unto God, Josh. 4.^.
(namely, to offer sacrifice of thankesgiving unto God) who appeared unto him,
when he sled from the face of his brother Esau, and had now delivered him.
Likewise when God had delivered Israel, and brought them out of the wilderness
and through the river Jordan, he commanded Joshua to take twelve ^tones out of
the midst of Jordan, and set them up to be a memorial to future generations
of what God had that day done for them.

2. Therefore the people of God used to record special mercies and
deliverances in their Chronicles, in the names of their children, of places and
the like. Ex. 15.1. Jud. 5.1. Isa. 38.^.
Also in spiritual Songs and Psalms: So did Moses Isreal's deliverance out of
Egypt. Deborah and Baruk their great deliverance from, and victory over Sisera
and Iabin King of Canaan: And Hezekiah his Song of thanksgiving after his
recovery from so eminent a danger of death, Hest. 9 10. etc. and ver. 29, 30, 31
and the Jews feast of Purim.

And thirdly, there is great reason for it:

1. From the less to the great. I argue thus, If we must be thankful for
particular and smaller, even f^r the least mercy, as it is, Psalm. 103.2. Forget
not at all, i.e. any of his benefits, and there is good reason for it, then
much less may we forget or be unthankful for great and extraordinary mercies
and deliverances out of extremities, wherein Gods goodness, power, wisdom,
mercy, Reas. 1.
etc. are most remarkably seen.

2. From the equity of the duty 2. ways.

First, because Gods mercies to the fathers are mercies to their posterity,
future generations are the better for them; Here the mercy showed to Abraham in
saving Isaac was a mercy to all ages; He was to be the seed of the Church, In
him, i.e. in the Messiah that was to be borne of him, all Nations should be
blessed. So we this day reap the fruit of those great deliverances in 88. and
from the Gunpowder treason, and others since; if either of those, 1588 and
1605.
or these had taken effect, either we had not now been at all, or been
miserable slaves to Antichrist, both in our souls, bodies, and estates,
without the wonderful and extraordinary mercy of God; and therefore great
reason such great mercies and deliverances should be recorded, and the memory
of them perpetuated, that the generations to come after us, who have the
bene^it of them, should know them, and bless God for them. Psalm. 102 18.
This shall be written for the generation to come, and the people which shall
be created shall praise the Lord.

Secondly, It is equal also, that there should be some proportion between our
receipts and our returns; our mercies are great, extraordinary, lasting,
standing mercies for future times, and therefore great reason our returns of
praise should be more then ordinary, lasting, and continued in our posterity.

3. Such mercies and deliverances should be specially noted, and the
remembrance of them perpetuated to testify our love to God, desire of his
glory, and hearty thankfulness for his goodness, care and providence over
us, which appears in that we would have his goodness to be remembered, and his
praise to live when we are dead. So men do with benefactors, record their
kindness and bounty, set up a Monument with inscriptions, that after times may
read their kindness and bounty toward us, whom we love and desire to honor
for their beneficence toward us, especially if public, and much more should
we labor to perpetuate the mercies and praises of our good and bountiful God
and Savior, to testify our love to him, and desire of his glory. In this case
a gracious heart may use the words of Paul, who said, The love of Christ
constrains us. If we truly love God, 2 Cor. 5.14.
and desire to honor him, we shall endeavor to perpetuate his praises.

4. We should take special notice of, and labor to continue the remembrance
of special deliverances and mercies, for the benefit of future ages, for the
strengthening their faith, comfort and support in evil times. For this cause
(says David) shall every one that is godly pray unto thee. We have heard with
our ears, O God, Psalm 32.6.44.1. etc.
(say the faithful in evil times) Our fathers have told us what work, thou
did in their days, in the time of old, and mark what use the Church makes
of Gods former mercies and deliverances to his people. Thou art my King, O God,
v. 4, 5.
command deliverances for Jacob, through thee we will push down our enemies,
through thy name we will tread them under that rise up against us. The
remembrance of former mercies to his people, though long before, does
strengthen their faith, and put courage into them in their straites, makes them
confident in evil times, and to rest on God in their greatest exigents, and
this use we should ever make of former deliverances, as did also David, 1 Samuel
17.34. 2 Cor 1.10.
Paul and others.

Use of Reprehension.
This being a duty so apparent and necessary, it may serve to reprove and
condemn the great ingratitude and vile practice of most men, and of our selves
in particular, who are so far from perpetuating the remembrance of Gods mercies
and deliverances to our selves and the Land, That*

1. Many do not return thanks to God for them, no, scarce while they are
fresh and new, before our eyes, especially for smaller, more ordinary and
common mercies and deliverances.

We cannot look any way beside mercies: If we look into our selves, we have
our being, our souls and bodies, all our members, faculties and abilities from
God with the continuance of them: If we look without us, on the Heaven, the
Earth and Seas, meat, drink, clothing, houses, the fire, water, air we
breathe in, every creature is a mercy. There are also spiritual mercies, God
gave us his Son, a wonderful mercy and deliverance wrought by him for man,
the Gospel, the Word and Sacraments, great mercies, and these with many others
we do enjoy hitherto, with peace, plenty and liberty, no small blessings, God
has compassed us about with mercies, and delivers us every day from many
known, and more unknown dangers that might befall us.

If we look upon mercies in the Mount, in time of extremity, we may say much
both of public and private, of privative and positive mercies. If God had not
put in and helped us (may many of us say) I had certainly dyed in such a
sickness, in such a danger, I had been utterly undone in such a less, I had
been spoiled at such a time, etc. So for public mercies and deliverances, in
which every one has a share for the public good, is every man's private
benefit. Was not England brought into the Mount, to a very great exigent? and
was not God seen for Englands good in 88. in scattering and destroying that
invincible Navy, A^no 1588.
as the Adversaries themselves styled it? In November 5. 1605. when there
wanted but a very little time to be added to make our King (that then was) and
He that now is, 1605.
the Queen, Prince, Nobles, Commens in Parliment, and many thousands more,
together with the Houses, the Records of the Land, and of every man's particular
right, yea the whole Kingdom, our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and all to come
to nothing, and then God appeared, and wrought a great salvation for us before
we knew our selves to be in danger. So when the Churches in Germany were
brought to an exceeding low ebb, God raised up that renowned King of Sweden,
and others since, that have done great things, revived the dying hopes of
Germany, this was the mighty work of God. So God did wonderfully preserve
Ireland, especially the great City of that Kingdom, giving very great and
wonderful deliverances and victories to a few over many very often. God has
preserved and done great things for faithful loyal Scotland (sometimes
pronounced, and commonly called traitors, though misunderstanding, when they
stood for the defense of Religion, Laws and Liberties, against the public
enemies of the Church) when in the eye of earnall reason there was little or no
hopes of enjoying either. Again, for our selves at home, 1639. and 1640.
did not the Lord strangely and wonderfully preserve this Nation from the
Spanish Navy the other years, and from imbruing our hands in our neighbors
blood, who sought our welfare, and destroying one another till none remain, or
if we were conquered by them we must needs lose all, and if we did conquer
them, we were sure that both the victory and our selves should be a prey to the
malignant party for whom we fought. We have had many great mercies and
deliverances from many great and desperate designs, so that we do enjoy
peace, liberty and the Gospel to this very day, notwithstanding all our fears
and jealousies grounded upon most evident and imminent causes, threatening
destruction and loss of all, broken our yoaks, eased our shoulders and our
consciences also in a great put-off of many grievous burdens. The time would
fail me to tell of all the great things that God has done for us within these
few years bypast, and utter his mercies and our deliverances by while. There
is cause enough why we should stand even amazed with the Jews in Babylon,
Psalm. 126.1.
that after Proclamation of returning to Jerusalem, were so affected with it,
and wondered at it, that they were as men in an ecstasy, like unto them that
dream, they could scarce tell whether it were true which they heard and saw,
or but a dream.

But beloved, what thankfulness has been returned to God for all these great
mercies and deliverances? Surely little, and by too many in a manner none at
all, especially for common and ordinary mercies; Many are like the ungrateful
Tenant, that enjoyes the Lands and Houses of a good Landlord, but will pay no
Rent. Like the Husbandman in the Gospel that did receive the fruits of the
Vineyard, but return nothing: Mat. 21.34, 41.
The truth is many are like the Swine that do grouse up the Acorns, that fall
from the Tree, but never look up to the Tree whence they come: so many daily
taste of Gods blessings, receive his mercies and deliverances, and yet seldom
or never lift up the heart in thankfulness to God the Author and doner of
them. They were wont in the first Ages of the world, to think they had good
cause to praise God for the least mercies, Deuteronomy 3^.13.
as for the dew, etc. We, too many of us, can scarce find in our hearts to
praise God for great mercies, while fresh before our eyes, so far are we from
laboring to continue the remembrance of them.

2 Others there are that think not of them, though they take some notice of
them, and it may be are a little affected with some of them for the present,
yet quickly forget them, even while the things themselves are in their hands,
and before their eyes, Gen 49.23.
or newly received, as Pharaohs Butler forgot Joseph, and as Israel did Gods
goodness, They remembered not his hand, nor the day when he delivered them from
the enemy. Psalm ^8.42.10 21. Ingratus est qui di^s^^nutat. in gia ^or qui non
redd ^^ng^a^^ s^mus omni^i qui oblitus est. S^. de B^net.
They forgate God their Savior that had done great things for them in Egypt.
There are, says one, many sorts of unthankful men; Some deny they have
received a benefit, some dissemble it, some requite not; but most unthankful
are such as forget a kindness, shame, honesty and time may mend the former;
but what can amend the last sort, who do so willingly forget mercies?

3. Others, though they take some notice of, and remember mercies and
deliverances, yet ascribe them to other things, as the Heathens usually do to
their Idoll-gods. Judge 1623. 1 King. 5.18. Jer 44.17, 18.
The Philistines ascribed their victories to Dagon. The Syrians to their Idol
Rimmon and Remphan, and Israel to the Queen and Host of heaven, and too many
Christians to second causes and instruments, as wit, strength, policy,
vigilance, diligence, etc. yea to fortune and chance, a heathenish conceit,
very unbeseeming Christians, yea, impious and dishonorable to God, robbing him
of his glory in those things most commonly in which his wisdom, power and
providence is most seen, and giving that to the creature, second causes, and
instruments, or Idol-fortune, chance or luck that belongs to God only.

4. Many do slight and undervalue mercies and deliverances, accounting great
mercies small, and small none, or not worth the taking notice of them, 1 King.
9 1^, 13 Deu. 19.20. Psalm. ^6.24.
as Hiram did the Cities which Solomon gave him, and as Lot did Zoar, and
Israel the pleasant land, and are often murmuring and repining, because mercies
are not so great, and every way satisfying to our boundless, unsatiable
desires: This is a great fault to undervalue, and much more to repine and
murmr at Gods mercies, especially if great and extraordinary, as many of ours
of late have been.

5. There are some that are worse then any of these, who envy the mercies of
Gods people, repine at the goodness of the Church, are grieved to se^ such
great things done as of late have bin done for England and that other Nation
(blessed be God) and even gu^sh their teeth at it, speak contemptuously of
what God has done by the great Council of the Land, yea, oppose and hinder
what they can, seek to undermine it and undo all and buty the Churches
mercies and hopes in the ruins of destruction, and that curse when they should
bless, and blaspheme where they should set up monuments to perpetuate the
praises of God and the remembrance of his mercies: So especially does that
wicked Balaam of Rome by his Bulls and Excommunications, and his Abettou^s here.
Such are in a fearful condition, the good Lord open their eyes to see and
consider, and make use of that gracious and terrible speech of God, comfortable
to his people and terrible to their enemies, Cursed be he that curses you, Gen
27.20. Number. 24.9.
and blessed be he that blesses you, spoken indeed to Jacob, but in him to all
the Israel of God, as it is applied by him, whose eyes were open and saw the
vision of God.

Use of Exhortation.
Secondly, Whatsoever others do or our selves have formerly done, yet let us
now be hence convinced of our failings, be humbled for them, and excited to our
duty, and that is,

1. To give God the praise of all mercies and deliverances, and of all his
wondrous works. God gives deliverance to his people that he may fill their
hearts and mouths with Songs of praise, and gives us a charge so to do. Call
upon me in the time of trouble and I will deliver thee and thou shall glorify
me. Sing unto him, sing Psalms unto him, Isal 50.15.105 2.
and talk of all his wondrous works.

2. To praise (Gods due and our duty for all his goodness to us and his) join
prayer to God for our selves and the Church, that God would be pleased still to
go on to do us good, that God would accomplish his work and do good unto
Zion, and be favorable to Jerusalem, ever watch over it, preserve, support,
comfort it, and perfect his mercies, and evermore mightily defend it, that
Jerusalem may be the praise of the whole Earth, Cant 6.4.
Comely as Titz^h (in respect of pure order and ordinances) and terrible as an
Army with banners, to the enemies in respect of d^^me blessing and protection.

To move us to thankfulness, consider these Motives,

1. The number, Motives.
greatness, variety, sutablenesse and continuance of Gods mercies and
deliverances both personal and national, temporal and spiritual: of which a
touch has bin given before. And surely the more, the greater and more
excellent mercies are, the more they will a fect and stir the heart, if there
be but a principle of common honesty in it, and any notice taken of them.

2. Consider the affections of God the giver, which is to be preferred before a
Parents. Never was a Father nor a Mothers love (whose affections are usually
more tender) more to their child, then Gods is to his chosen. See Isa 49.15. It
is therefore set down by way of admiration, God so loved the world that he
gave his only begotten Son! Joh. 3.16. 1 John 3.1.
and Behold what love the Father has showed unto us! This consideration and
persuasion is very needful; for unless we be persuaded and do consider, that
what God does for his people and for our selves in particular is not in wrath,
as he sometime gave Israel a King in his anger, and Quails to murmuring
Israel, but in mercy, out of love and for our good, we cannot be truly
thankful, we are more thankful for a small kindness from him whom we know
loves us, then for a far greater matter from him, of whose good affection
toward us we have just cause to doubt: it is the persuasion of a kindness and
love in a benefactour that stirs up to thankfulness, and when these meet
together, that good turns are great, many, suitable to our condition and
desires, durable and out of love, and a man is persuaded of this, then they
affect the heart kindly.

3. Consider all so the freeness of God the giver, that all mercies and
deliverances are free and altogether undeserved: He is not bound to us by way
of desert and debt, but of free promise, Genesis 32.10.
We are all (as was Jacob) less then the least of all his mercies; all is of
mere grace and free favor. If we have but a bit of bread and cold water, it
is free mercy, if more, it is his bounty, if nothing at all, if he give
nothing, but take away all we have and punish us also for our sins, he does us
no wrong, we have no cause to complain, but to justify the Lord. This is very
considerable to move us to thankfulness.

4. Consider our miserable condition without these mercies, which we may know,
carendo magis quam fruendo, best by the want of them. Did we a while want
health, strength, liberty, meat, drink, apparel or the like, we should think
our case ill. Were we turmoyled a while with civil war (which God in mercy
avert) as in Germany and Ireland at this day, where very many thousands are
already slain, and they that survive most of them have their goods spoiled,
their houses burnt, themselves turned out naked very many of them; some have
their husbands, some their sons, barbarously murdered before their eyes; some
their wives or daughters or both desloured, shamefully abused, and afterward
butchered by rude Soldiers; some women (as I remember) ripped up alive; some
have their fruit drop from them as they hang on the gallows; some grievously
mangled, and many other miseries which they only can best know that feel
them, or are eye and ear-witnesses of them.

But it is much worse where a soul lies under an accusing, condemning,
tormenting conscience, wants and feels the want of pardon of sin and Gods
favor, this is the greatest misery. Think then what a piteous case you should
be in, were it thus with us, as undoubtedly it had bin before this, if our
proud enemies had prevailed as they hoped and believed they should do, and are
yet confident, yea if you want but outward mercies, as liberty, meat, drink,
etc. but a few days, and much more, if you want pardon of sin, for which a
conscious sinner would give all the world, and lie under a sore wounded
conscience, and let the consideration of the want of mercies make us truly
thankful for what we do enjoy.

5. Think also (on the other-side) what an happiness it is to enjoy these
m^r^rs and deliverances, which we by the goodness of God, and the wisdom and
care of the Parliament do enjoy. Oh how happy would many a thousand in Germany
and Ireland, that are in extreme want, ready to perish, think themselves, did
they enjoy the plenty we do, or the fourth part of it, if they had but bread
enough (though never so course) to put into their bellies: Or he that is
extreme heart-sicke, even ready to breathe out the last gasp, to have health:
I he poor wearied man with continual frights, fears, alarums, and great
dangers to enjoy peace: And so in other things, all which by the indulgent
goodness of God we do yet enjoy: We were happy if we had eyes to see our own
mercies, and hearts to be truly thankful for them: so a wounded conscience
that is grievously afflicted, if God would show mercy, and speak peace to the
soul how happy would he think himself. Let this consideration move us to
thankfulness for what we do enjoy.

6. Consider your future necessity, though you be now in a plentiful and
comfortable condition in all these respects, yet fore-think what may be, you
do not know how soon you may be in great want, Nescis quid serus ve^at ve^p^r.
or trouble or danger, in some extremity or other, what a day may bring forth;
we are all tenants at will to God, and much of our future happiness stands on
our present thankfulness. Unthankfulness, Exodus 14.21. Eccles 1.7.
as it were, dries up the channel of Gods mercy and bounty, as the East wind
did the Red Sea. All Rivers are from the Sea, and did they not pay their
tribute back again to the Sea, very likely they would in time be dried up,
but they return to the Sea again, and so are continually fed by it. The way
for us to have a continuance of Gods benefits, is to return continual praise
and thanksgiving for the mercies we do enjoy.

7. Look back and think (how it may be) thou did fast and pray (or if thou
did not, thou art greatly to blame, not to labor and pray) for those mercies
and deliverances: so for particular mercies before thou had them when thou
wast in want or in great fears. Well, were these mercies, this or that
deliverance worth the praying, wrestling and tugging for before, whilst thou
wast in want or danger, did thou feel or fear some grievous evil, and is
it not as worthy thanksgiving now thou have it? This is just the case of the 9.
Leapers, Luk 17 12, 17.
they cried aloud for help, but when they were cured, they returned not to give
thanks; and the Israelites that cried to God in their distress, Psalm. 107.
but were unthankful for his benefits when they had them. A great shame it is
we should be so earnest for a mercy or deliverance in our necessity, so open
handed to receive, Gratias agere Deo possu^^^^ reserre non po^sumus Aug in ^^l.
47.
and so close mouthed and strait-hearted, when we have them, to return
something in way of thankfulness.

8. This (namely Gods glory and praise) is the end of all his mercies, benefits
and deliverances, and should be the end of all our actions and services. Prove.
16.4. Romans 11.36.
God made all things (and does all things to) for himself. All Agents work ^o
some end, and therefore God much more. Now he is the beginning, from which, and
the utmost end to which all things tend, and shall God miss of his end, lose
his praise? assuredly if he do, he will be glorified, if not by us as active
instruments of his glory; yet in and upon us, Luke 1^.48.
as patients of his justice, for all our ingratitude, and the more and greater
mercies we enjoy, the greater will be our condemnation if unthankful.

Lastly (by way of motive, and which is specially applicable to public
mercies) Remember that public mercies are every man's private mercies, every
ones private good is wrapped up in the publik: If it go well with the public,
all fare the better for it, if evil, all share in it; as in the body natural,
if the whole body be out of order, all the members suffer with it, if sound and
well, all the members simpathize with it; and so it is in the body mystical
and politic, the Church and Commonwealth; therefore be thankull for public
mercies, as well, yea rather, and more then for private; because they do
concern both our own particular, and others good, whose welfare we ought
heartily to desire, pray for and rejoice in, as fellow members of the body
politic and mystical.

Q. But some say, What must I do that I may be kindly affected with mercies
and deliverances, and how may I continue the remembrance of them?

Answ. To the first, to be kindly affected with mercies and deliveces, do 4.
things:

1. Take notice of all, more especially of more remarkable, special and
extraordinary mercies, supportment in, and deliverance out of troubles; for
mercies that pass unobserved cannot be thankfully acknowledged, much less the
remembrance of them perpetuated. And do not only observe them, but take a
full view of them, how great, free, undeserved and suitable they are to our
condition: for these considerations help much to affect the heart with them.

2. Often meditate on them, well weigh and ponder them, as the faithful did,
Psalm 48. We have thought on thy loving kindness, O God. Psalm. 48.9.
The word signifies (as some have observed) as much as assimulavimus, we have
made an Image of it in our minds, by serious pondering it has made a deep
impression in our minds. The more a man does meditate and roll any thing in
his mind, the deeper impression it makes, and the longer it continues;
therefore labor to work and imprint it on the heart by meditation.

But look not too much on thy afflictions and wants, or what others have which
thou have not, but on Gods benefits and mercies received and promised, and on
what thou have more then many others: For if a man be much poring on his wants
and others fullness, or the greater mercies that some others have, this will
indispose a man to duty, dead the heart, beget discontent, and imbitter the
soul; but the often remembrance of mercies received and promised, and
specially of what himself has, which such and such a man, and many others
(far better) have not, will sweeten the spirit, rejoice the heart, quicken a
man and put life into him, make him more apt and active feelingly to praise God
for them, and perform any good duty; it is as oil to all holy actions.

3. Labor the heart to have a sense and feeling of the worth of them and to
have an high esteem and holy admiration of his mercies, Psalm. 45.7.
as David had, How great is thy goodness? by considering the greatness,
number, variety, the freeness of his mercies, and continuance of them, also
how happy we are with them, and how miserable without them; for it is not the
having, but the prizing and high esteeming of a benefit that affects the heart
and moves the will to thankfulness.

4 Labor to be still poor in spirit, and to be always conscious of thine
own unworthiness, that thou may know thy self to be less then the least
of all his mercies, as Jacob said; Genesis 32.10.
for hunger is the best sauce, it makes every thing relish well; every morsel
seems sweet to the hungry soul: so poverty of spirit makes the least mercy
seem great; The poor hungry beggar takes the least and worst scraps
thankfully, which a full soul rejects and scorneth: so a man that is poor
in spirit has a sense of his own unworthiness, mean conceits of himself,
is thankful for every mercy, thinks every thing more then he deserves, and all
thankfulness too little for what he has already, and therefore stands
admiring at great and extraordinary mercies.

To the second I answer, That to continue the remembrance of special mercies
and deliverances, it will help much, and the godly have used,

1. To write them down and set them upon record, that they which lived after
them might read them, and be affected with them, and thankful for them. To
this purpose were the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel and Judah of old, and
of the Christians under the New Testament; even Heathens have ever used to do
thus, record special mercies and deliverances, Hest. 6.1. Erza 4.15.
as we read of Ahasuerus his times in Hester, of the Medes and Persians, and
others.

2. Tell them to your children, and charge them to tell them to their children.
So we are commanded, Deuteronomy. 4, 9, 10.
Only take heed to thy self (says Moses to Israel) that thou forget not the
things which thine eyes have seen, but teach them thy children, specially the
day that thou stoodest before the Lord, etc. And David, Sing unto him, sing
Psalms, and talk of all his wondrous works; and so the faithful did, Psalm,
105.2.
Psalm 44.

3. They may be continued, and so the Saints have used to continue the
remembrance of special mercies. 1. In the names of their children. So was
Enoch, Moses, Samuel and many others named, and it was very usual to record
special pass^ges of Gods providence to his Church in the names of the r
children, that their very name might put them and their children, and others
also in mind of the thing.

2. In the names of places, where some notable mercy was received, or
deliverance given. So Abraham here called the name of the place. Jehovah-jirah,
i.e. God will see or provide: because God there so unexpectedly provided for
Isaa^s safety and deliverance, and a ram to be ^ffered in his room, and Jacob
called the place Bethel, the house or place of Gods special presence, because
God there appeared to him.

3. Py setting up some pillar, heap of stones, or mark on the place, as d d
Jacob and Laban J shuah and others; and therefore were Peniel, Genesis 32.20.^1,
^^, 49.
Galeed, M^zpah, and many other places so called.

4. Likw^e, by setting a mark on the time, and keeping a solemn anniversary
feast on that day, in memory of some special mercy, as was the Jews P ss
o^e^, days of Purim and others.

5. In Songs and Psa^mes, Exodus 12.11, 14 Hest. 9.26.
as Exodus 15. recording Isreal's deliverance from Egypt; and Judge. 5. Gods mercy
in saving and delivering them from Jabin King of Canaan.

6. In Proverbs, as here, In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen. So often
as this proverb is mentioned, it puts us in mind of that mavelous and
unexpected deliverance of Isaac, and provision of a Ram to be offered in his
stead.

Thus should we do upon like occasions. And thus by the good hand of God, we
have seen Gods dealing with his people; his providence and wisdom in bringing
them sometimes into troubles and extremities; his power and goodness in
supporting them in, and delivering them out of troubles and exigents in the
fittest time, and our duty that follows thereupon, and use we are to make of
such dealings and deliverances, which he good God eff^ctually bow our hearts to
perform upon all occasions, To whom be all honor, praise and dominion, in all
the Assemblies of the Saints, in all places from henceforth, and for evermore.
Amen.

FINIS.
COurteous Reader. I pray thee correct with thy pen these ^a^lt^ which have
escaped in the Printing in some copies. vs^ (...) for (...), read Isaac. p 9.
l. 30. for fa^^en 1. soften. p. ^0. l. ^. for ^eek (...) p ^1 1.21 for igno^^^y
r. ignor^nce. p 16. l 18. insert this word bear, and add out to with p. 30. l
38. for in r. ^e. p 31 l. 35. for trust r rest. p c 5 l. 3^ inter^ that ^tter
the word extremities p 48 l. 4. add this 2. As God weakens strong means against
his people, so he d^livereth his own people by strengthening them, and that
especially ^. ways p 48. l. 9. for Asia r ^sa, and l 30 for wholly r help p. 49
l 10. for Saul r. Paul p 50. l 11 r the Philistines to (...) S^ul. p. 53 l. 5
for arm r. arm. p. 74. l. 18. make: after share p. 75. l. 1. for through r.
though. l. 18, for put off r part, and l. 21 for while r. retaile.


