Englands Ioyalty, IN Joyful expressions, for the City of Londons safety,
being a true and real Relation of many most remarkable passages which have
been lately divulged by one D. Peake Vicar of Tenterden in Kent, and Parson of
Ancridge in the same County.

Who did speak dangerous words against the Parliament, the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen of this City of London, and now presented to the consideration of the
Honorable House of COMMONS in PARLIAMENT.

Discovered by Master Minis his late Curate there, and now under Master Matthew
Milward, of Great Saint Hellens in London.

LONDON, Printed by R.H. for I.H. at his house in the Old-Bayley. 1641.

THis Doctor Peake being ingrafted into my Lords Grace of Canterburies favor:
he was fortthwith advanced to promotion, being made one of his Majesty's
Chaplains in Ordinary, a Prebend of Canterbury, and two other spiritual
Promotions, the one being the Vicarage of Tenderden, in the County of Kent, and
the other the Parsonage of Ancridge, some seven miles from thence distant, and
both these of a very good yearly value, he himself very seldom preaching, and
then after the Arminian garb, he allowing but a small stipend to his Curate,
whose chance then to be, was Master Minis, till better promotion should befall
him.

About some fourteen weeks since the said Master Minis, being at dinner with
Doctor Peake and his Wife; Doctor Peakes Wives Father, and another
Widow-woman, by name Mistress Gee, the Wife of the late Minister of Tenterden,
when after dinner the Doctor falling into discouse with his Wives father,
uttered many base and scandalous speeches against the State, concerning the
death of the late Earl of Strafford, and then fell to discourse of the
Parliament, and the trained Bands of the City, his Wife said they were a
company of cowardly fellows, and he replied, that a Company of five hundred
good Soldiers out of Ireland would quickly vanquish them all, and put them to
flight, and said moreover, that it were a good deed to take the Lord Mayor, the
Sheriffs, and some of the Aldermen, with others of good rank and quality, and
hang them up at their own doors, the rest would soon be brought to
subjection.

O the inveterate, malicious, and cancred rotten heart of this ungodly Doctor!
so uncharitable, to wish evil to that honorable City, where he had his first
well-being, in supplying a Lecture in Saint Bartholomews Church behind the
Exchange in London, Doctor Grant being the now Minister thereof. I beseech
Almighty God to make this hollow-hearted, evill-thoughted Doctor to be brought
to deserved punishment.

His Wives father out of base disposition and venomous heart, wished with
great violence and passion, that the City of London were burnt, and some of
the Parliament taken and hanged: but mark the just judgment of God upon this
wicked miscreant, for that afternoon he went to his own house some seven
miles from thence and the next day died suddenly, the Doctor hearing of these
traitorous speeches never rebuked him therefore.

These and such like wicked and traitorous speeches were taken notice of by
Master Minis, and by him upon the faith of a Minister, are ready by oath to be
maintained against the said Doctor to the House of Commons in Parliament, who
no doubt will speedily send for the said Doctor, and according to his demerits
make him an example for all such ill-affected people to Church and State to
take warning by.

The said Master Minis does also testify, that formerly he has been an
instrument of the apprehension of diverse Priests and lesuites, which the Lords
Grace of Canterbury did under a color send his Warrant for, and they were the
next day released, which Master Minis taking notice of, he went to Croydon, the
Archbishop then lying there, and told his Grace of the same, who answered him,
they had the Queens protection, and that he could not stay any of them, that
were by her protected: this was all he had for his pains and care in seeking
to discover such; only his dinner there, and a twenty shillings piece to stop
his mouth as the Bishop then thought. But now thanks be given to the Almighty
God, the times are altered, and the honorable Parliament have made good and
wholesome orders, for the apprehending of Priests and Jesuits, with promises to
all such as shall be the means of discovering of them, or any such.

FINIS.
THe aforementioned Relation was exactly taken from Master Minos own mouth, by
the testification of many sufficient witnesses, and now published to the common
spectacle of the world, to demonstrate unto all the treacherous and
Antichristian exoptations of the Conterburian Doctor: but I hope the
Parliament will take these invective aspersions of such railing Rabshakehs into
their grave and judicious considerations; and I fear that the same curses which
they wish against this renowned City will light shortly on their own heads;
while my daily and continual prayers shall be, that God of his Almighty
Omnipotence would preserve and defend this City and noble Parliament, to the
extirpation of all such heretical Doctors, and the flourishing estate of this
whole Kingdom.


