A MESSAGE SENT From the City of London, to the King Majesty in the Isle of
Wight, Declaring their Resolutions touching the speedy bringing of His Majesty
to His Royal Palace at White Hall, and the manner thereof.

Subscribed by the Royall-hearted Citizens.

ALSO, The Declaration of the Queen of England, concerning Her Royal Consort
King Charles; and Her Letter to the Prince of Wales, touching the Earl of
WARWICK.

AGreed upon by the Queens Majesty, and Her Council a^ St. Jermins, and
published throughout the Kingdom of France.

M R
depiction of Queen Henrietta Maria, wife of King Charles I of England C R
depiction of King Charles I of England

Printed in the Year, 1648.

THE QUEEN OF ENGLANDS Declaration at Paris in France.
Concerning Her Royal Consort the King of Great Britain; Declaring her
Resolution touching the Treaty at Newport, and the Parliament at Westminster.
Endeared Sir,
Whereas (with much patience) I have long bedeld the miseries of your
distracted Kingdom, and finding nothing more isntrumental for the settling of a
firm and lasting peace, then the blessed Treaty now on foot, I therefore
thought requisite, to cast my thoughts thereon, and to make it the chiefest
Object of my affections, by endeavoring the propagating thereof in these
parts, and clearing all scruples that may arise from the adverse party, which I
find to be many. But ker Majesty the Queen of Great Britain, has declared the
sense of her Royal Breast, touching the present Work in dispute between the
King and Parliament, and is pleased to cast a favorable construction thereon;
and by reason of the many aspersons laid upon her Majesty, representing her as
an Enemy to the peace of England, after consultation with her Council at St.
Jermins, she resolved to declare her intentions and determinations to the view
of the World, and gave express command to her Secretary to draw up a
Declaration to be forthwith printed, the heads whereof are these. 1 That Her
Majesty desires nothing more then a composure of all differences between, Her
dread Sovereign Lord the King, and his two Houses of the Parliament of England
assembled at Westminster. 2 That Her Majesty shall endeavor the propagating of
this present Treaty, and desire a speedy agreement, between Her Sovereign and
His two Houses, that so peace may be established throughout His Realms and
Dominions. 3 That Her Majesty shall endeavor the removing of all Obstacles
that may retard or hinder this present work in hand; provided, that She may
enjoy the liberty of Her Conscience for Her Self and Her Family, according to
the Articles of both Kingdoms.


That Her Majesty may be admitted to come for England so soon as the Articles
of Agreement are signed and that She may be admitted to Her Royal Consort, in
honor, freedom, and safety.

These and many other particulars are contained in the said Declaration, which
is now extant amongst us, and are very satisfactory.

We hear that Her Majesty has sent a Letter to the Prince of Wales, dehorting
him from an Engagement with the Earl of Warwick, and to endeavor the settling
of a peace between the King and Parliament, and it is hoped he will much
incline to the said advice and council.

But here is a rumor, that his Highness has sent Propositions to the States
of Holland, purporting His Desires, for the Dutch Fleer to continue between
the two Navies, to hinder an Engagement, that so the stately Fabric of his
Fathers Shipping may be preserved and the mutual League and Covenant between
the States and the Crown of England firmly kept and maintained.

In a word, Great are our expectations for the Tidings of peace, whose hearts
thirst after unity and concord, which I desire may be communicated to him who
remains,

Your most obliged and devoted friend, L. VANDIEU.
Paris 26 October. 1648.
The last News from the Treaty.
SIR,
THE Commissioners proceed according to their Instructions, desiring His Maj.
to give His Royal Assent for the confirming of the Presbyterian Government, and
the abolishing of Bishops and Episcopacy for the future.

This motion causes some scruple to arise from His Majesty, but after mature
deliberation thereupon, returns a satisfactory Answer to the Commissioners,
insomuch that it is conceived, He will give His Royal Word for passing the
said Bill, according to the time and manner prefixed by both Houses of
Parliament; which causes a dismal frown to proceed from the adverse party.

And His Majestic being sensible of their present discontents and murmurings,
gave express Command, that proclamation should be made throughout the said
Island, for the preventing of all Insurrections and commotions during the time
of the Treaty, which was accordingly done.

So that there is great hopes that all Obstacles will be removed, which may
prove prejudicial to this Treaty, or frustrate the endeavors and consultation
of the great Council assembled, who are even upon the close of a final end
and Agreement.

His Majesty says, that He has some few things to propound to the
Commissioners, which will give great satisfaction to His two Houses, and remove
all jealousies and fears whatsoever from amongst His liege people of England;
the said Proposals are to be debated at the Council Table, so soon as his
Majesty has received the sense of His two Houses, to his last Concessions for
abolishing of Episcopacy.

His Majesty's Counsel has declared a great liking of this their Sovereigns
Resolution, and in particular, the Bishop of London, who this morning told the
King. That he had seriously meditated upon the Original Grounds of Presbytery,
and found them consonant to the Word of God, and agreeable to the sacred Rules
Ordained by the Apostles and Evangelists in the holy Scriptures, and therefore
conceived, that his Majesty might in honor and conscience give his Royal
Assent for the more fully and firm settling of the Directory, etc.

These condescensions from the pillars of Episcopacy, does betoken a happy
uniting and concurrence to Presbytery; which being once assented to, there is no
doubt but all other Obstacles will soon be removed, and the silver cords of
Amity firmly knit, and unite the hearts both of Prince and people, in peace and
tranquillity.

We hear that there has been a late Design complotting by the Enemies of
Religion, against the King and Kingdom, who had conspired to raise a great army
throughout the Kingdom of England, by tendering an Oath of Secrecy, a Party
whereof to gather to a head in the West, and several other parts of the
Kingdom for the rescuing his Majesty from the power of the Parliament, and to
bring him to London by force, if they do not condescend to his Desires, and to
put most of them to the sword. But by the divine providence of the All-seeing
Jehovah, their Plot is discovered, and by his omnipotency quite frustrated and
prevented.

Newport 30. October. 1648. Tuesday October. 31.
Letters from the West say, That it is conceived his Majesty will go near to
sign to all the propositions upon Friday next, notwithstanding what has
verbally past to the contrary. The Lord Duke of Richmond, and the Marquis of
Hartford, admire his Majesty's wisdom in carrying on this Treaty, and have
protested that they do not know by what Counsel the King governs his actions.

Diverse Agents are said to be sent from the Queen and the Prince to the King,
with Letters of great importance. As also a message from the City of London
subscribed by the Royal party, intimating, Their private design in listing of
new forces, for the advancement of his Majesty's Cause, and re-investing Him in
his Royal Throne; but by an unheard of stratageme their design is prevented,
and their plot revealed.



FINIS.

