THE CURE OF RUPTURES In Man's BODY, By Physical, and Chirurgical Means, and
Medicines.

Whereby any person under forty years of age, that is diseased in the Body,
with any kind of Rupture or Burstness whatsoever, may (by Gods assistance, be
perfectly, and unfailingly Cured.

And to those Persons who are above forty, of declining age, having passed
their natural vigor, maturitie and full strength, present help, and desired
ease, assuredly procured, for the whole term of their remaining life, even to
their dying day, by the careful use of some prescribed Means, and Medicines.

By LEWIS MILLVVATER, dwelling in Peterburgh, at the Minster Gate. VIDE and
FIDE, Try and Trust.

MATTHEW. 9.8. When the multitude saw it, they marvailed, and glorified God,
which had given such power unto Men.

feb: 28 1650 LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1651.

Christian Reader,
THou can not be ignorant, under this Noontide of the Gospel, that all
diseases, aches and pains, that befall man in this life, are the proper
Effects, and Fruits of man's own sin, we may thank our selves for any evils
that befall us. Our breach of obedience due from us to God, is the cause of all
breaches made by God upon us, in our bodies or estates. He has broken me with
breach upon breach, says Patient Job, Job 16.14. Sin brings sufferings and
sorrows upon us, Why then does living man complain? Lam. 3.39. Thy breach is
great like the Sea, who can heal thee? Lam. 2.13. Whereupon David prays to God
to heal the breaches, Psalm. 60.2. He alone is the repairer of our breaches.

Yet there be sundry second causes of these Ruptures or breaches in man's body,
and diverse things occasioning them. They befall some in their very cradles, and
infancy, sometimes by their fierce crying and frowardness: Sometimes again
they happen to some, through carelessness in their dressing, swaddling, and
attendance. Sometimes they come through some extreme cold and coughing. In some
that are bigger and elder, they are occasioned by vehement agitation or
stirring of the body in some violent motion of Riding, running, leaping,
ringing, lifting some great weight, or by some stroke or blow on the belly, or
sometimes by loud shouting with the voice, straining the body, and many such
like, whereby the inward rim of the belly, wherein the bowels lie wrapped up and
enclosed, being distended, rent or broken, the bowels fall down at such a
breach, swell, and cause grievous pains, swellings, inflammations of, and
torments in, those tender parts within, as Physicians more largely and
learnedly tell us.

My way of Cure is gentle, and ease-full, not causing the least pain or grief
to to the body, or the affected part: It Is such as the tenderest child may
endure without whinching, and therefore applyable unto, and easy to be used on
any other of riper years, and more discretion.

I lance not, cut not, pierce not the flesh or skin with any instrument, as
Chirurgions often do, for the stone in the Bladder, and sew the wound up
again, and yet we know some that for hope of future health and recovery, endure
all these torments (though the remedy oftentimes prove worse then the disease)
even willingly and patiently, and pay dearly for it too, in great sums of
money. Whereas I put my Patients to no pain at all, but procure and bring them
present ease, certain remedy, and relief, unfailing cure, through the help and
blessing of my Lord God, who is the chief closer up of breaches for his people,
and heals the stroke of their wound, whose helping and healing hand I have
hitherto always found graciously working with me, and by me, to whom
therefore be the Glory.

I arrogate not to my self any Apostolical or miraculous way of healing, or
giving soundness of body to the diseased: I do the cure by Chirurgicall and
Physical means, Medicines and Directions to be prepared, used and applied by
mine own hand, as I see need and find cause.

If thy self or any of thy friends, son or daughter, stand in need of my skill,
pains, or help, thou may find me, or hear of me at my House in Peterburgh,
at the entering into the Minster-yard. I am often sent for abroad, sometimes
unto places an hundred miles from my own dwelling. Thou may every week, send
from London to Peterburgh by the Lincoln Carriers, who pass and repasse
through our City, not far from my very door. And if it so fall out that I
should not then be at home, and therefore cannot come to thee at the instant of
thy sending, yet I will not fail to repair unto thee, and wait upon thee, at my
first leisure and opportunity, if it be not too troublesome or painful for
thy self, or thine, to come home to me.

I boast not of what (God has wrought and done by me already, though many
would not have believed what they themselves upon trial have found true, I tell
thee not crackingly of any great undertakings, I hang out no false Titles, nor
mountebank Tables of lying wonders, or imaginary cures. Many, where I have bin
employed, can and will bear me witness of my real performances, toward them
and theirs. And do often with thankful hearts bless God for me; and are
still glad upon any occasion to see me, and acknowledge Gods goodness toward
them, for prospering my pains in their desired recoverie, they bid me kindly
welcome, give me (during the time I can stay) courteous entertainment. So that
as Job 29.11. When the ear heard of me, then it blessed me, and when the eye
saw me, it gave witness to me.

My bodily presence or person promises not much, nor did it in S. Paul, 2 Cor.
10.10. no, nor yet in the Sacred Person of the Lord Jesus Christ himself, who
went up and down healing every disease and sickness among the people. For
Isai. 52.14. His visage was marred more then any man's, there was no form or
comeliness to move men to desire even Him.

I rufle not in silk or satin, I flaunt not in Scarlet, or gorgeous Apparel. I
tell thee therefore before hand, ere thou see me, what a one thou shall find
me, lest when thou see me, thou through pre-conceipt and mis-prision be
disappointed, and fall short of thy expectation: as Naaman, 2 Kin. 5.11. Was
wroth and went away, and said, Behold, I thought he will surely come out to me,
and stand, and call on the Name of the Lord his God, and strike his hand over
the place, and recover the Leper.

To undeceive thee therefore, know that I am as Jacob, a plain man, Gen 25.27.
and thou shall find honest and plain dealing at my hands.

I am verily persuaded, that there be a great many in this Nation, grievously
troubled with this kind of infirmity of Ruptures, and slipping down of their
bowels, into the lower parts of their body, who for lack of timely help, do
languish, droop, w^ar away, and their breach becomes daily bigger and bigger,
for when the Caul or Filme that should lap in the bowels, and bear them up from
sinking and settling downward, is rent and broken, how can the vessels within
but ever and anon slide down, and be with much pain, and difficulty lifted, or
kept up?

Many such I fear there be, who through too much modesty and shame hide their
weakness, or if some near friend know it, do yet utte^ly despair of cure or
mends in this world, and so lead miserable and uncomfortable lives.

For upon any more then ordinary motion and agitation of their body, yea upon
every small distemper through cold or wind the parts above, fall down into the
breach, fret and swell, and make the body very sore and fall of cruel torment,
yea it makes them stomach sick and to vomit, and they are so dis-abled hereby,
that they grow listlesse, unweldie, cannot, or care not to walk abroad, least
it should fall down and put them to pain, much less can they, or dare they,
work at any bodily labor, ride a journey, or exercise themselves, though it be
even with moderate, and more gentle movings, and stirrings of the body.

Now by Gods blessing, I can and shall so help them, that even those whose
infirmities and grievances in any kind of these Ruptures (whether Wind-rupture,
Gut-rupture, or Flesh rupture) be the greatest, painfullest, and most
tormenting, shall in very short time be able to walk, ride, work, bear
burdens, and cheerfully go about any stirring employment, And whereas some that
undertake to help persons diseased in this kind, do it by painful cures, and
are a long while in doing it, and many times enjoin their Patients to lie
continually in bed for thirty or forty days together, and apply Sear clothes,
Plasters, etc. My way is more easy, more speedy, and safe, and sooner then
thou thy self happily could expect or desire.

Good things the more common, the better; Wells, the more drawn the sweeter
water; my candle shines no worse because another is lighted by it, it now
grows toward evening with me, I am sixty years old and upwards, and therefore
desire before my Sunset, and it be past working-time, to do all the good I
can, that my Candle may blaze a little in the s^cket before it go out, and be
no more seen. Some of my good friends have seriously entreated me to make my
skill more common, not to bury my talent which God has given me for the good
of others, and indeed I sometimes check my self, as those hunger-starved men, 2
Kin. 7.8. and think, I do not well to conceal my experienced skill, but should
draw out my self (who indeed am now already on the tilt) that the best wine
may be at last, for public benefit in releiving the needful, not reserving it
(as Misers do) for any private ends or gain to my self.

Wherefore I have thus at last, thought good and resolved to publish in Print,
for the behoof of my Country, and to make known this particular disease of
Ruptures, what I dare undertake and profess to do, or to profess rather what
God has done, and I hope will yet do, by me.

I do verily think that some vainglorious and vapouring Mountebank, some
self-seeking greedy Emperick would have raked together a great estate, gotten
great sums of money, by less skill, less profitable, useful and easefull
cures then I (by Gods blessing) have done and can do.

For my part (though I be a man of mean estate and condition, yet) I seek no
great things to my self (not Balaams wages, Number. 24.13.) I desire only a
competent viaticum to maintain my self and family, in a comfortable
sufficiency, and to eat the labor of my hands, as Solomon concerning the
virtuous woman, bids, Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works
praise her in the gate, Prove. 31.31.

I have heard how that some learned and careful Lawyers have had lands, and
great Annuities given them during their life, in reward of their prosperous and
successful pains, in carrying some one cause, in some one great suit of Law.

And yet health is more worth then wealth, Skin for skin, yea all that a man
has will he give for his life, Job 2.4. what would not some diseased rich man
give to be made sound and whole, or find ease and remedy against some lingering
sickness or tormenting pain, which makes his life sad and uncomfortable?

Health is a jewel, which when men do buy
Physicians value it accordingly.
The Woman in the Gospel, that had the issue of blood twelve years, spent her
whole estate upon Physicians (so fain would she have had health) against that
languishing infirmity, and yet she was so far from being bettered, or getting
remedy, that she became rather worse, till she happily touched the great
Physician of soul and body, and then was made presently and perfectly whole,
Mar. 5.26.

I boast not of things beyond my line, I only tell thee what God has done by
me, I ascribe nothing to my self, mine own worth, or works, but (with that
Divine Poet, Du Bartas Quadr. of Pibrach, Stanz. 5.)

Say, not my hand these Cures to pass has brought
Or these, my virtue has atteined to:
I rather say, These God by me has wrought,
God's Author of the little good I do.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be the praise, who do
mightily manifest and magnify thy wisdom, power, and goodness, by employing,
and blessing the poor labors, parts and services of thy meanest and most
contemptible servants and instruments for the good of others. To whom therefore
be all the glory. In whom I shall ever be,

From my House in Peterburgh, at the Minster Gate, January 8. 1651. Thy Friend
and Servant to use, Lewis Millwater.

Postscript,
LEst happily (Reader) thou should think some things here written, to be
arrogantly and boastingly expressed, by way of applause, by the Actor, or
Author of these cures; We think it not amiss to let thee know, that this was
not indeed his very Antograph, or act, thus to write, or publish this Paper;
but that is was penned by some friends of his, who have had comfortable
experience of his dexterity and success in the same, who being much taken and
affected with his skill, and honesty herein, have thought fit to publish to
others, what themselves have found true in their own knowledge and experience;
and what good thou also or thine, may get by this notice, if need be.

This then, thus published is not a Preface to any larger Tract; wherein his
Medicines and means of cure should be exactly described; for we must tell
thee, that cannot be, they are practical, not notionall, and must be done by
his own hand, which when thou see, thou may, and wilt believe; He then
will leave with thee and thine, his experimented skill and directions, which
thou may propagate and communicate to others. This is now published as an
Index, assuring thee of the realitie of those Cures, which can be no otherwise
or better taught, than by practice, or seeing done.

Vale and Utere.
FINIS.

