COLASTERION: A REPLY TO A NAMELES ANSWER AGAINST The Doctrine and Discipline
of Divorce. WHEREIN The trivial Author of that Answer is discovered, the
Licencer conferred with, and the Opinion which they traduce defended.

By the former Author, J. M.

Prove. 26. 5. Answer a Fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his
own conceit.

Printed in the Year, 1645.

COLASTERION: A Reply to a nameless Answer against the Doctrine and Discipline
of Divorce.
AFTER many rumors of confutations and convictions forth coming against The
Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce, and now and then a by-blow from the Pulpit,
featherd with a censure strict indeed, but how true, more beholding to the
authority of that devout place which it borrowd to be utterd in, then to any
sound reason which it could oracle, while I still hoped as for a blessing to
see some piece of diligence, or learned discretion come from them, it was my hap
at length lighting on a certain parcel of Quaeries, that se^k and find not, to
find not seeking, at the tail of Anabaptistical, Antinomian, Heretical,
Atheistical epithets, a jolly slander, called Divorce at pleasure: I stood a
while and wondered, what we might do to a man's heart, or what anatomy use,
to find in it sincerity; for all our wonted marks every day fail us, and where
we thought it was, we see it is not, for alter and change residence it cannot
sure. And yet I see no good of body or of mind secure to a man for all his
past labors without perpetual watchfulnes, and perseverance. When as one above
others who has suffered much and long in the defense of Truth, shall after all
this, give her cause to leav him so destitute and so vacant of her defense, as
to yield his mouth to be the common road of Truth and Falsehood, and such
falsehood as is joined with the rash and heedles calumny of his neighbor. For
what book has he ever met with, as his complaint is, Printed in the City,
maintaining either in the title, or in the whole persuance, Divorce at
pleasure? It Is true, that to divorce upon extreme necessity, when through the
perverseness, or the apparent unfitnes of either, the continuance can be to both
no good at all, but an intolerable injury and temptation to the wronged and the
defrauded, to divorce then, there is a book that writes it lawful. And that
this Law is a pure and wholesome national Law, not to be withheld from good men,
because others likely anough may abuse it to their pleasure, can not be charged
upon that book, but must be enterd a bold and impious accusation against God
himself; who did not for this abuse withhold it from his own people. It will
be just therefore, and best for the reputation of him who in his Subitanes has
thus censured, to recall his sentence. And if, out of the abundance of his
volumes, and the readiness of his quill, and the vastness of his other
imploiments, especially in the great audit for accounts, he can spare us ought
to the better understanding of this point, he shall be thankt in public, and
what has offended in the book, shall willingly submitt to his correction.
Provided he be sure not to come with those old and stale suppositions, unless
he can take away clearly what that discourse has urged against them, by one
who will expect other arguments to be persuaded the good health of a sound
answer, then the gout and dropsy of a big margent, litter'd and overlaid with
crude and huddl'd quotations. But as I still was waiting, when these light
armed refuters would have don pelting at their three lines utterd with a sage
delivery of no reason, but an impotent and wors then Bonnerlike censure to burn
that which provokes them to a fair dispute, at length a book was brought to my
hands, entitled An Answer to the Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce. Gladly I
received it, and very attentively composed my self to read; hoping that now some
good man had voutsaft the pains to instruct me better, then I could yet learn
out of all the volumes which for this purpos I had visited. Only this I
marvel'd, and other men have since, when as I, in a Subject so new to this age,
and so hazardous to please, concealed not my name, why this Author defending
that part which is so creeded by the people, would conceal his? But ere I could
enter three leaves into the Pamflet, (for I deferr the peasantly rudenes, which
by the Licencers leav, I met with afterward) my satisfaction came in
abundantly, that it could be nothing why he durst not name himself, but the
guilt of his own wretchedness. For first, not to speak of his abrupt and bald
beginning, his very first page notoriously bewraies him an illiterat, and
arrogant presumer in that which he understands not; bearing us in hand as if
he knew both Greek and Ebrew, and is not able to spell it; which had he bin,
it had bin either writt'n as it ought, or scor'd upon the Printer. If it be
excused as the carelesnes of his deputy, be it known, the learned Author
himself is inventoried, and summed up, to the utmost value of his Livery cloak.
Who ever he be, though this to some may seem a slight contest, I shall yet
continue to think that man full of other secret injustice, and deceitful
pride, who shall offer in public to assume the skill, though it be but of a
tongue which he has not, and would catch his readers to believe of his
ability, that which is not in him. The Licencer indeed, as his authority now
stands, may license much; but if these Greek Orthographies were of his
licencing; the boys at School might reck'n with him at his Grammar. Nor did I
find this his want of the pretended Languages alone, but accompanied with such
a low and homespun expression of his Mother English all along, without joint
or frame, as made me, ere I knew further of him, often stop, and conclude, that
this Author could for certain be no other then some mechanic. Nor was the style
flat and rude, and the matter grave and solid, for then there had bin pardon,
but so shallow and so unwary was that also, as gave sufficiently the character
of a gross and sluggish, yet a contentious and overweening pretender. For
first, it behooving him to show, as he promises, what divorce is, and what the
true doctrine and Discipline thereof, and this being to do by such principles
and prooffs as are received on both sides, he performs neither of these; but
shows it first from the Judaical practice, which he himself disallows, and
next from the practice of Canon Law, which the Book he would confute, utterly
rejects, and all Laws depending thereon; which this puny Clark calls The Laws of
England, and yet pronounces them by an Ecclesiastical judge: as if that were to
be accounted the Law of England, which depended on the Popery of England; or
if it were, this Parliament he might know has now damned that judicature. So
that whether his meaning were to inform his own party, or to confute his
adversary, instead of showing us the true Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce,
he shows us nothing but his own contemptible ignorance. For what is the Mosaic
Law to his opinion, and what is the Canon utterly now antiquated, either to
that or to mine? Ye see already what a faithful definer we have him. From
such a wind egg of definition as this, they who expect any of his other
arguments to be well hatched, let them enjoy the virtue of their worthy Champion.
But one thing more I observed, a singular note of his stupidity, and that his
Trade is not to meddle with Books, much less with Confutations. When as the
Doctrine of Divorce had now a whole year bin published the second time, with many
Arguments added, and the former ones bettered and confirmed, this idle pamslet
comes reeling forth against the first Edition only; as may appear to any by the
pages quoted. Which put me in mind of what by chance I had notice of to this
purpos the last Summer, as nothing so serious, but happns often times to be
attended wi^h a ridiculous accident, it was then told me that the Doctrine of
divorce was answered, and the answer half Printed against the first Edition; not
by one, but by a pack of heads; of whom the chief, by circumstance, was
intimated to me, and since ratified to be no other, if any can hold laughter,
and I am sure none will guess him lower, then an actual Servingman. This
creature, for the Story must on, (and what though he be the lowest person of
an interlude, he may deserv a canvasing,) transplanted himself, and to the
improvement of his wages, and your better notice of his capacity, turned
Solliciter. And having conversed much with a stripling Divine or two of those
newly fledge Probationers, that usually come scouting from the University, and
ly here no lame legers to pop into the Bethesda of some Knights Chaplainship,
where they bring grace to his good cheer, but no peace or benediction else to
his house; these made the Champarty, he contributed the Law, and both joynd in
the Divinity. Which made me intend, following the advice also of friends, to
lay aside the thought of mi^-spending a Reply to the buzze of such a Drones
nest. But finding that it lay, what ever was the matter, half a year after
unfinisht in the press, and hearing for certain that a Divine of note, out of
his good will to the opinion, had takn it into his revise, and something had put
out, something put in, and stuck it here and there with a clove of his own
Calligraphy, to keep it from tainting, and further when I saw the stuff, though
very course and threadbare, garnisht and trimly faced with the commendations of
a Licencer, I resolved, so soon, as leisure granted me the recreation, that my
man of Law should not altogether loose his soliciting. Although I impute a
share of the making to him whose name I find in the approbation, who may take,
as his mind servs him, this Reply. In the mean while it shall be seen, I
refu^e no occasion, and avoid no adversary, either to maintane what I have
begun, or to give it up for better reason.

To begin then with the Licencer and his censure. For a Licencer is not
contented now to give his single Imprimatur, but brings his chair into the
Title leaf; there sits and judges up or judges down what book he pleases; if
this be suffered, what worthles Author, or what cunning Printer will not be
ambitious of such a Stale to put off the heaviest gear; which may in time bring
in round fees to the Licencer, and wretched mis-leading to the People. But to
the matter: he approves the publishing of this Book, to preserv the strength
and honor of Marriage against those sad breaches and dangerous abuses of it.
Belike then the wrongful suffering of all those sad breaches and abuses in
Marriage to a remediless thraldom, is the strength and honor of Marriage; a
boistrous and bestial strength, a dis-honourable honor, an infatuated
Doctrine. wors then the salv^ jure of tyrannizing, which we all fight against.
Next he says that common discontents make these breaches in unstaid minds,
and men givn to change. His words may be apprehended, as if they disallowed
only to divorce for common discontents in unstaid minds, having no cause, but
a desire of change, and then we agree. But if he take all discontents on this
side adultery, to be common, that is to say, not difficult to endure, and to
affect only unstaid minds, it might administer just cause to think him the
u^fittest man that could be, to offer at a comment upon Job; as seeming ^y
this to have no more true sense of a good man in his afflictions, then those
Edomitish Friends had, of whom Job complains, and against whom God testisies
his anger. Shall a man of your own coat, who has espoused his flock; and
represents Christ more, in being the true husband of his Congregation, then an
ordnary man does in being the hus^and of his wife, and yet this representment
is thought a chief cause why Marriage must be inseparable, shall this spiritual
man ordnarily for the increase of his maintenance, or any slight cause forsake
that wedded cure of souls, that should be dearest to him, and marry another,
and another, and shall not a person wrongfully afflicted, and persecuted eevn
to extremity, forsake an unfi^, injurious, and pestilent mate, tied only by a
civil and fleshly covenant? If you be a man so much hating change, hate that
other change; if your self be not guilty, counsel your brethren to hate it;
and leav to be the supercilious judge of other men's miseries and changes, that
your own be not judged. The reasons of your licen't pamflet, you say are good;
they must be better then your own then, I shall wonder else how such a trivial
fellow was accepted and commended, to be the confuter of so dangerous an
opinion as ye give out mine.

Now therefore to your Attorney, since no worthier an adversary makes his
appearance, nor this neither his appearance, but lurking under the safety of
his nameles obscurity: such as ye turn him forth at the Postern, I must accept
him; and in a better temper then Ajax, do mean to scourge this Ram for ye,
till I meet with his Ulysses.

He begins with Law, and we have it of him as good cheap, as any hucster at
Law, newly set up, can possibly afford, and as impertinent; but for that he
has received his hansel. He presumes also to cite the Civil Law, which, I
perceav by his citing never came within his dormitory, yet what he cites makes
but against himself.

His second thing therefore is to refute the advers position, and very
methodically, three pages before he sets it down; and sets his own in the
place, that disagreement of mind or disposition, though showing it self in
much sharpnes is not by the Law of God, or man, a just cause of divorce.

To this position I answer, that it lays no battery against mine, no, nor so
much as faces it, but tacks about, long ere it come near, like a harmles and
respectfull confutement. For I confess that disagreement of mind or
disposition, though in much sharpnes, is not always a just cause of divorce;
for much may be endured. But what if the sharpnes be much more then his much?
To that point it is our mis-hap we have not here his grave decision. He that
will contradict the positive which I alleged, must hold that no disagreement of
mind, or disposition, can divorce, though shown in most sharpnes; otherwise
he leaves a place for equity to appoint limits, and so his following arguments
will either not prove his own position, or not disprove mine.

His first Argument, all but what hobbles to no purpos is this. Where the
Scripture commands a thing to be don, it appoints when, how, and for what, as
in the case of death or excommunication. But the Scripture directs not what
measure of disagreement or contrariety may divorce; Therefore, the Scripture
allows not any divorce for disagreement.

Answer, First I deny your major, the Scripture appoints many things, and yet
leaves the circumstance to man's discretion, particularly, in your own examples;
Excommunication is not taught when, and for what to be, but left to the
Church. How could the Licencer let pass this childish ignorance and call it
good. Next, in matter of death, the Laws of England, whereof you have intruded
to be an opiniastrous Sub advocate, and are bound to defend them, conceave it
not enjoined in Scripture, when or for what cause they shall put to death, as
in adultery, theft, and the like; your minor also is false, for the Scripture
plainly sets down for what measure of disagreement a man may divorce, Deuteronomy. 24.
1. learn better what that phrase means, if she find no favor in his eyes.

Your second Argument, without more tedious fumbling is briefly thus. If
diversity in Religion, which breeds a greater dislike then any natural
disagreement may not cause a divorce, then may not the lesser disagreement: but
diversity of Religion may not; Ergo.

Answer, First, I deny in the major, that diversity of Religion, breeds a
greater dislike to marriage duties, then natural disagreement. For between
Israelite, or Christian and Infidel more often has bin seen too much love: but
between them who perpetually clash in natural contrarieties, it is repugnant
that there should be ever any married love or concord. Next, I deny your minor,
that it is commanded not to divorce in diversity of Religion, if the Infidel
will stay: for that place in St. Paul, commands nothing, as that book at large
affirmed, though you over-skipt it.

Secondly, if it do command, it is but with condition, that the Infidel be
content, and well pleased to stay, which cuts off the supposal of any great
hatred or disquiet between them; seeing the Infidel had liberty to depart at
pleasure; and so this comparison avails nothing.

Your third Argument is from Deuteronomy. 22. If a man hate his wife, and raise an ill
report, that he found her no virgin, if this were falls, he might not put her
away, though hated never so much.

Answer, This was a malicious hatred bent against her life, or to send her out
of doors without her portion. Such a hater looses by due punishment that
privilege, Deuteronomy. 24. 1. to divorce for a natural dislike, which though it could
not love conjugally, yet sent away civilly, and with just ^^nditions. But
doubtless the Wife in that former case had liberty to depart from her falls
accuser, lest his hatred should prove mortal; else that Law peculiarly made to
right the woman, had turned to her greatest mischief,

Your fourth Argument, One Christian ought to bear the infirmities of another,
but chiefly of his Wife.

Answer, I grant, infirmities, but not outrages, not perpetual defraudments of
truest conjugal society, not injuries and vexations as importunat as fire. Yet
to endure very much, might do well an exhortation, but not a compulsive Law.
For the Spirit of God himself by Solomon declares that such a consort the earth
cannot bear, and better dwell in a corner on the house top, or in the
Wilderness. Burdens may be born, but still with consideration to the strength
of an honest man complaining. Charity indeed bids us forgive our enemies, yet
does not force us to continue freindship and familiarity with those friends who
have bin falls or unworthy toward us; but is contented in our peace with them,
at a fair distance. Charity commands not the husband to receav again into his
bosom the adulterous Wife, but thinks it anough, if he dismiss her with a
beneficent and peaceful dismission. No more does Charity command, nor can her
rule compel, to retain in nearest union of wedloc, one whose other grossest
faults, or disabilities to perform what was covnanted, are the just causes of
as much greevance and dissension in a Family, as the private act of adultery.
Let not therefore under the name of fulfilling Charity, such an unmercifull, and
more then legal yoke, be padlockt upon the neek of any Christian.

Your fifth Argument, If the husband ought love his Wife, as Christ his Church,
then ought she not to be put away for contrariety of mind.

Answer, This similitude turns against him. For if the husband must be as
Christ to the Wife, then must the wife be as the Church to her husband. If
there be a perpetual contrariety of mind in the Church toward Christ, Christ
himself threat^ns to divorce such a Spouse, and has often don it. If they
urge, this was no true Church, Purge again, that was no true Wife.

His sixth Argument is from the 5 of Matthew 32. which he expounds after the
old fashion, and never takes notice of what I brought against that exposition;
Let him therefore seek his answer there. Yet can he not leav this Argument, but
he must needs first show us a curve^t of his madness, holding out an objection,
and running himself upon the point. For, ^aith he, ^f Christ (...) cause but
adultery, then all other causes as frigidity, in^^^^^ous marriage, etc. are no
causes of divorce; and answers that the speech of Christ holds universally, at
he intended it namely to condemn such divorce; (...) was groundl^sly practiced
among the Jews, for every cause which they thought sufficient; not checking the
law of consanguinities or a^^inities, or forbidding other cause which makes
marriage void, Ipso facto.

Answ. Look to it now you be not found taking fees on both sides, for if you
once bring limitations to the universal words of Christ, another will do as
much with as good authority, and affirm, that neither did he check the Law
Deuteronomy. 24. 1. nor forbid the causes that make marriage void actually; which if
any thing in the world does, unfitnes does, and contrariety of mind; yea, more
then adultery, for that makes not the marriage void, nor much more unfit, but
for the time, if the offended party forgive; but unfitnes and contrariety
frustrates and nullifies for ever, unless it be a rare chance, all the good
and peace of wedded conversation; and leaves nothing between them enjoyable,
but a prone and savage necessity, not worth the name of marriage, unaccompanied
with love. Thus much his own objection has don against himself.

Argu. 7. He insists, that man and wife are one flesh, therefore must not
separat. But must be sent to look again upon the 35. page of that book, where
he might have read an answer, which he stirrs not. Yet can he not abstain,
but he must do us another pleasure ere he goes; Although I call the Common
Pleas to witness, I have not hired his tongue, whatever men may think by his
arguing. For besides adultery, he excepts other causes which dissolv the union
of being one flesh, either directly, or by consequence. If only adultery be
excepted by our Savior, and he voluntarily can add other exceptions that
dissolv that union both directly and by consequence, these words of Christ, the
main obstacle of divorce, are open to us by his own invitation to include what
ever causes dissolv that union of flesh, either directly or by consequence.
Which, till he name other causes more likely, I affirm to be don soonest by
unfitness and contrariety of mind. For that induces hatred, which is the
greatest dissolver, both of spiritual and corporal union, turning the mind and
consequently the body to other objects. Thus our doubty adversary, either
directly, or by consequence yields us the question with his own mouth, and the
next thing he does, recants it again.

His eighth Argument shivers in the uttering, and he confesses to be not over
confident of it, but of the rest it may be sworn he is. St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.
says, that the married have trouble in the flesh, therefore we must bear it,
though never so intolerable.

I Answer, if this be a true consequence, why are not all troubles to be born
alike? why are we suffered to divorce adulteries, desertions, or frigidities?
Who knows not that trouble and affliction is the decree of God upon every state
of life? follows it therefore, that though they grow excessive, and
insupportable, we must not avoid them? if we may in all other conditions, and
not in marriage, the doom of our suffering ties us not by the trouble, but by
the bond of marriage; and that must be proved inseparable from other reasons,
not from this place. And his own confession declares the weakness of this
Argument, yet his ungoverned arrogance could not be dissuaded from venting it.

His ninth Argument is, That a husband must love his wife as himself, therefore
he may not divorce for any disagreement, no more then he may separat his soul
from his body.

I Answer, if he love his wife as himself, he must love her so far as he
may preserv himself to her in a cherfull and comfortable manner, and not so as
to ruin himself by anguish and sorrow, without any benefit to her. Next, if the
husband must love his wife as himself, she must be understood a wife in some
reasonable measure, willing, and sufficient to perform chief duties of her
Covenant, else by the hold of this argument, it would be his great sin to
divorce either for adultery, or desertion. The rest of this will run circuit
with the union of one flesh, which was answered before. And that to divorce a
relative and Metaphorical union of two bodies into one flesh, cannot be likn'd
in all things to the dividing of that natural union of soul and body into one
person, is apparent of it self.

His last Argument he fetches from the inconveniences that would follow upon
this freedom of divorce, to the corrupting of men's minds, and the overturning
of all human society.

But for me, let God and Moses answer this blasphemer, who dares bring in such
a soul endightment against the divine Law. Why did God permit this to his
people the Jews, but that the right and good which came directly thereby, was
more in his esteem, then the wrong and evil which came by accident. And for
those weak supposes of Infants that would be left in their mothers belly,
(which must needs be good news for Chamber-maids, to hear a Serving-man grown
so provident for great bellies) and portions, and joyntures likely to incurr
imbezlement heerby, the ancient civil Law instructs us plentifully how to
award, which our profound opposite knew not, for it was not in his Tenures.

His Arguments are spun, now follows the Chaplain with his Antiquities, wiser
if he had refrained, for his very touching ought that is learned, soiles it,
and lays him still more and more open a conspicuous gull. There being both
Fathers and Councels more ancient, wherewith to have served his purpos better
then with what he cites, how may we do to know the subtle drift that moved
him to begin first with the twelfth Council of Toledo? I would not undervalue
the depth of his notion, but perhaps he had heard that the men of Toledo had
store of good blade-mettle, and were excellent at cuttling; who can tell but it
might be the reach of his policy, that these able men of decision, would do
best to have the prime stroke among his testimonies in deciding this cause. But
all this craft avails him not; for seeing they allow no cause of divorce but
fornication, what do these keen Doctors here but cut him over the finews with
their Toledo's, for holding in the precedent page other causes of divorce
besides, both directly, and by consequence. As evil does that Saxon Council,
next quoted, bestead him. For if it allow divorce precisely for no cause but
fornication, it thwarts his own Exposition: and if it understand fornication
largely, it sides with whom he would confute. However the authority of that
Synod can be but small, being under Theodorus, the Canterbury Bishop, a
Grecian Monk of Tarsus, revolted from his own Church to the Pope. What have we
next? The Civil Law stufft in between two Councels, as if the Code had bin some
Synod; for that he understood himself in this quotation is incredible; where
the Law, Cod. l. 3. tit. 38. leg. 11. speaks not of divorce, but against the
dividing of possessions to diverse heirs, whereby the married servants of a great
family were divided perhaps into distant Countries, and Colonies, Father from
Son, Wife from Husband, fore against their will. Somewhat lower he confesses,
that the Civil Law allows many reasons of divorce, but the Cannon Law decrees
otherwise. A fair credit to his Cause; and I amaze me, though the fancy of this
doult be as obtuse and sad as any mallet, how the Licencer could sleep out all
this, and suffer him to uphold his opinion* by Canons, and Gregorian decretals,
a Law which not only his adversary, but the whole reformation of this Church
and state has branded and rejected. As ignorantly, and too ignorantly to
deceav any Reader but an unlerned, he talks of Justin Martyrs Apology, not
telling us which of the twain; for that passage in the beginning of his first,
which I have cited els-where, plainly makes against him: So does Tertullian,
cited next, and next Erasmus, the one against Marcion, the other in his
Annotations on Matthew, and to the Corinthians. And thus ye have the List of
his choice Antiquities, as pleasantly chosen as ye would wish from a man of
his handy Vocation, puffed up with no luck at all, above the stint of his
capacity.

Now he comes to the Position, which I set down whole; and like an able text
man flits it into fowr, that he may the better come at it with his Barbar
Surgery, and his sleeves turned up. Wherein first he denies that any
disposition, unfitness, or contrariety of mind is unchangeable in nature, but
that by the help of diet and physic it may be altered.

I mean not to dispute Philosophy with this Pork, who never read any, But I
appeal to all experience, though there be many drugs to purge those redundant
humors, and circulations that commonly impair health, and are not natural,
whether any man can with the safety of his life bring a healthy constitution
into physic with this design, to alter his natural temperament, and
disposition of mind. How much more vain, and ridiculous would it be, by
altering and rooting up the grounds of nature, which is most likely to produce
death or madness, to hope the reducing of a mind to this or that fitnes, or two
disagreeing minds to a mutual sympathy. Suppose they might, and that with
great danger of their lives and right senses, alter one temperature, how can
they know that the succeeding disposition will not be as far from fitnes and
agreement? They would perhaps change Melancholy into Sanguin, but what if
fleam, and choler in as great a measure come instead, the unfitnes will be
still as difficult and troublesome. But lastly, whether these things be
changeable, or not, experience teaches us, and our Position supposes that they
seldom do change in any time commensurable to the necessities of man, or
convenient to the ends of marriage. And if the fault b^^ in the one* shall the
other live all his days in bondage and misery for another perverseness, or
immedicable disaffection? To my friends, of which may fewest be so unhappy, I
have a remedy, as they know, more wise and manly to prescribe: but for his
friends and followers (of which many may deserv justly to feel themselves the
unhappines which they consider not in others) I send them by his advice to sit
upon the stool and strain, till their cross dispositions and contrarieties of
mind shall change to a better correspondence, and to a quicker apprehension of
common sense, and their own good.

His second Reason is as heedles, because that grace may change the
disposition, therefore no indisposition may cause divorce.

Answ. First, it will not be deniable that many persons, gracious both, may
yet happn to be very unfitly married, to the great disturbance of either.
Secondly, what if one have grace, the other not, and will not alter, as the
Scripture testifies there be of those, in whom we may expect a change, when
the Blackamore changes his color, or the Leopard his spots, Jer. 13. 23. shall
the gracious therefore dwell in torment all his life, for the ungracious? We
see that holiest precepts, then which there can no better physic be administerd
to the mind of man, and set on with powerful preaching, cannot work this
cure, no not in the family, not in the wife of him that Preaches day and night
to her. What an unreasonable thing it is that men, and Clergymen especially,
should exact such wondrous changes in another man's house, and are seen to work
so little in their own?

To the second point of the position, that this unfitnes hinders the main ends,
and benefits of marriage, he answers, if I mean the unfitnes of choler, or
sullen disposition, that soft words according to Solomon, pacify wrath.

But I reply, that the saying of Solomon, is a Proverb frequently true, not
universally, as both the event shows, and many other sentences writtn by the
same Author particularly of an evil woman, Prove. 21. 9. 19. and in other
Chapters, that she is better shunned then dwelt with, and a desert is preferred
before her society. What need the Spirit of God put this chois into our heads,
if soft words could always take effect with her? How frivolous is, not only
this disputer, but he that taught him thus, and let him come abroad.

To his second answer I return this, that although there be not easily found
such an antipathy, as to hate one another like a toad or poison, yet that there
is often such a dislike in both, or either, to conjugal love, as hinders all the
comfort of Matrimony, sears any can be so simple, as not to apprehend. And
what can be that favor, found or not found in the eyes of the Husband, but a
natural liking or disliking, whereof the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 24. beats witness, as
of an ordnary accident, and determins wisely, and divinely thereafter. And this
disaffection happning to be in the one, not without the unspeakable discomfort
of the other, must he be left like a thing consecrated to calamity, and
despair without redemption?

Against the third branch of the position he denies that solace, and peace,
which is contrary to discord and variance, is the main end of marriage. What
then? He will have it the solace of male, and female. Came this doctrine out of
some School, or some stie? Who but one forsak'n of all sense and civil nature,
and chiefly of Christianity, will deny that peace contrary to discord, is the
calling and the general end of every Christian, and of all his actions, and
more especially of marriage, which is the dearest league of love, and the
dearest resemblance of that love which in Christ is dearest to his Church; how
then can peace and comfort, as it is contrary to discord, which God hates to
dwell with, not be the main end of marriage? Discord then we ought to fly, and
to pursue peace, far above the observance of a civil covenant, already brokn,
and the breaking daily iterated on the other side. And what better testimony
then the words of the institution it self, to prove, that a conversing solace,
and peaceful society is the prime end of marriage, without which no other help,
or office can be mutual, beseeming the dignity of reasonable creatures, that
such as they should be coupl'd in the rites of nature by the mere compulsion of
lust, without love, or peace, wors then wild beasts. Nor was it half so wisely
spokn, as some deem, though Austin spoke it, that if God had intended other
then copulation in Marriage, he would for Adain have created a friend, rather
then a wife, to convers with; and our own writers blame him for this opinion;
for which and the like passages, concerning marriage, he might be justly taxt
of rusticity in these affairs. For this cannot but be with ease conceav'd,
that there is one society of grave freindship, and another amiable and
attractive society of conjugal love, besides the deed of procreation, which of
it self soon cloies, and is despised, unless it be cherisht and ie incited
with a pleasing conversation. Which if ignoble and swainish minds cannot
apprehend, shall such merit therefore to be the censurers of more generous and
virtuous Spirits?

Against the last point of the position, to prove that contrariety of mind is
not a greater cause of divorce, then corporal frigidity, he enters into such a
tedious and drawling tale of burning, and burning, and lust and burning, that
the dull argument it self burns to, for want of stirring; and yet all this
burning is not able to expel the frigidity of his brain. So long therefore, as
that cause in the position shall be proved a sufficient cause of divorce,
rather then spend words with this fleamy clodd of an Antagonist, more then of
necessity, and a little merriment, I will not now contend whether it be a
greater cause then frigidity, or no.

His next attempt is upon the Arguments which I brought to prove the position.
And for the first, not finding it of that structure, as to be scaled with his
short ladder, he retreats with a bravado, that it deserves no answer. And I as
much wonder what the whole book deserved to be thus troubled and solicited by
such a paltry Solliciter. I would he had not cast the gracious eye of his
duncery upon the small deserts of a pamflet, whose every line meddl'd with,
uncases him to scorn and laughter.

That which he takes for the second Argument, if he look better, is no
argument, but an induction to those that follow. Then he stumbles that I
should say, the gentlest ends of Marriage, confessing that he understands it
not. And I beleev him heartily: for how should he, a Servingman both by nature
and by function, an Idiot by breeding, and a Solliciter by presumption, ever
come to know, or feel within himself, what the meaning is of gentle? He blames
it for a neat phrase, for nothing angers him more then his own proper contrary.
Yet altogether without art sure he is not; for who could have devised to give
us more briefly a better description of his own Servility?

But what will become now of the business I know not; for the man is suddenly
takn with a lunacy of Law, and speaks revelations out of the Atturneys Academy,
only from a lying spirit: for he says that where a thing is void, ipso facto,
there needs no legal proceeding to make it void. Which is false, for marriage is
void by adultery, or frigidity, yet not made void without legal proceeding.
Then asks my opinion of John a Nokes, and John a Styles; and I answer him, that
I for my part think John Dory, was a better man then both of them: for
certainly, they were the greatest wranglers that ever lived, and have filled
all our Law Books with the obtunding story of their suits and trials.

After this he tells us a miraculous piece of antiquity, how two Romans,
Titus, and Sempronius made feoffments, at Rome sure, and levied Fines by the
Common Law. But now his fit of Law past, yet hardly come to himself, he
maintains, that if Marriage be void, as being neither of God nor nature, there
needs no l^gal proceeding to part it, and I tell him, that offends not me;
Then, quoth he, this is no thing to your book, being the Doctrine and
Discipline of Divorce. But that I deny him; for all Discipline is not legal,
that is to say juridical, but some is personal, some Economical, and some
Ecclesiastical. Lastly, if I prove that contrary dispositions are joined
neither of God nor nature, and so the marriage void, he will give me the
controversy. I have proved it in that book to any wise man, and without more a
do the Institution proves it.

Where I answer an Objection usually made, that the disposition ought to be
known before marriage, and show how difficult it is to choose a fit consort, and
how easy to mistake, the Servitor would know what I mean by conversation,
declaring his capacity nothing refined since his Law-puddering, but still the
same it was in the Pantry, and at the Dresser. Shall I argue of conversation
with this hoyd'n to go and practice at his opportunities in the Larder? To men
of quality I have said anough, and experience confirms by daily example, that
wisest, sobrest, justest men are sometimes miserably mistak'n in their chois.
Whom to leav thus without remedy, tossed and tempested in a most unquietsea of
afflictions and temptations, I say is most unchristianly.

But he goes on to untruss my Arguments, imagining them his Masters points.
Only in the passage following, I cannot but admire the ripenes, and the
pregnance of his native treachery, endeavoring to be more a Fox then his wit
will suffer him. Whereas I briefly mentioned certain heads of Discourse, which I
referred to a place more proper according to my method, to be treated there at
full with all their Reasons about them, this Brain-worm against all the Laws of
Dispute, will needs deal with them here. And as a Country Hind sometimes
ambitious to show his betters that he is not so simple as you take him, and
that he knows his advantages, will teach as a new trick to confute by. And
would you think to what a pride he swells in the contemplation of his rare
stratagem, offering to carp at the language of a book, which yet he confesses
to be generally commended; while himself will be acknowledged by all that
read him, the basest and the hungriest endighter, that could take the boldness
to look abroad. Observe now the arrogance of a groom, how it will mount. I had
writt'n, that common adultery is a thing which the rankest Politician would
think it shame and disworship that his Law should countenance. First, it
offends him that rankest should signify ought, but his own smell; who, that
knows English, would not understand me, when I say a rank Serving-man, a rank
petti-fogger, to mean a mere Servingman, a mere and arrant petti-fogger, who
lately was so hardy, as to lay aside his buckram wallet, and make himself a
fool in Print, with confuting books, which are above him. Next the word
Politician is not used to his maw, and thereupon he plays the most notorious
hobbihors, jesting and frisking in the luxury of his nonsense with such poor
fetches to cog a laughter from us, that no antic hobnaile at a Morris, but is
more hansomly facetious.

Concerning that place Deuteronomy. 24. 1. which he says to be the main pillar of
my opinion, though I rely more on the institution then on that. These two
pillars I do indeed confess are to me as those two in the porch of the
Temple, Jachin and Boaz, which names import establishment, and strength; nor
do I fear, who can shake them. The exposition of Deuteronomy. which I brought, is the
received Exposition both ancient and modern, by all learned men, unless it be a
Monkish Papist here and there: and the gloss which he and his obscure
assistant would persuade us to, is merely new, and absurd, presuming out of his
utter ignorance in the Ebrew, to interpret those words of the Text, first in a
mistakn sense of uncleanness, against all approved Writers. Secondly, in a
limited sense, when as the original speaks without limitation, some uncleannes,
or any; and it had bin a wise Law indeed to mean it self particular, and not to
express the case which this a cute Rabbie has all this while bin hooking for.
Whereby they who are most partial to him, may guess that something is in this
doctrine which I allege, that forces the adversary to such a new and strained
Exposition, wherein he does nothing for above four pages, but founder himself
to and fro in his own objections, one while denying that divorce was permitted,
another while affirming, that it was permitted for the wives sake. and after
all distrusts himself. And for his surest retirement, betakes him to those old
suppositions, that Christ abolisht the Mosaic Law of divorce; that the Jews had
not sufficient knowledge in this point, through the darkness of the dispensation
of heavenly things; that under the plenteous grace of the Gospel, we are tied
by cruellest compulsion, to live in marriage till death, with the wickedest, the
worst, the most persecuting mate. These ignorant and doting surmises, he might
have read confuted at large, eevn in the first Edition; but found it safer to
pass that part over in silence. So that they who see not the sottishnes of this
his new and tedious Exposition, are worthy to love it dearly.

His Explanation don, he charges me with a wicked gloss, and almost
blasphemy, for saying that Christ in teaching meant not always to be taken
word for word; but like a wise Physician administering one excess against
another, to reduce us to a perfet mean. Certainly to teach thus, were no
dishonest method: Christ himself has often used hyperbolies in his teaching;
and gravest Authors, both Aristotle in the second of his Ethics to Nichomachus,
and Seneca in his seventh De Beneficiis. advise us to stretch out the line of
precept often times beyond measure, that while we tend further, the mean might
be the easier attained. And who-ever comments that fifth of Matthew, when he
comes to the turning of cheek after cheek to blows, and the parting both with
cloak and coat, if any please to be the ^^fler, will be forc'^ to recommend
himself to the same (...) though this catering Law-monger be bold to call i^
wicked. Now note another precious piece of him; Christ, (...) he, does not say
that an unchaste look is adultery, but the lusting alter her; as (...) the
looking unchastly, could be without lusting. This gear is Licenc't for good
reason: Imprimatur.

Next he would prove that the speech of Christ is not uttered in excess
against the Pharisees, First, Because he speaks it to his Disciples, Matthew. 5.
which is false, for he spoke it to the multitude, as by the first verse. is
evident, among which in all likelihood were many Pharisees, but out of doubt,
all of them Pharisaean disciples, and bred up in their Doctrine; from which
extremes of error and falsity, Christ throughout his whole Sermon labors to
reclaim the people. Secondly, says he, Because Christ forbidds not only
putting away, but marrying her who is put away. Acutely, as if the Pharisees
might not have offended as much in marrying the divorced, as in divorcing the
married. The precept may bind all, rightly understood; and yet the vehement
manner of giving it, may be occasioned only by the Pharisees.

Finally, he winds up his Text with much doubt and trepidation; for it may
be his trenchers were not scrap't, and that which never yet afforded corn of
savor to his noddle, the Salt-seller was not rubbed: and therefore in this have
easily granting, that his answers fall foul upon each other, and praying, you
would not think he writes as a profet, but as a man, he runns to the black
jack, fills his flagon, spreds the table, and servs up dinner.

After waiting and voiding, he thinks to void my second Argument, and the
contradictions that will follow, both in the Law and Gospel, if the Mosaic Law
were abrogated by our Savior, and a compulsive prohibition fixed instead: and
sings his old song, that the Gospel counts unlawful that which the Law
allowed, instancing in Circumcision, Sacrifices, Washings. But what are these
Ceremonial things to the changing of a moral point in household duty, equally
belonging to Jew and Gentile; divorce was then right, now wrong; then permitted
in the rigorous time of Law, now forbidd'n by Law eevn to the most extremely
afflicted in the favorable time of grace and freedom. But this is not for an
unbutton'd fellow to discuss in the Garret, at his tressle, and dimension of
candle by the snuff; which brought forth his cullionly paraphrase on St. Paul,
whom he brings in, discoursing such idle stuff to the Maids, and Widows, as
his own servile inurbanity forbeares not to put into the Apostles mouth, of the
souls conversing: and this he presumes to do being a bayard, who never had
the soul to know, what conversing means, but as his provender, and the
familiarity of the Kitchen schooled his conceptions.

He passes to the third Argument, like a Boar in a Vinyard, doing naught else,
but still as he goes, champing and chewing over, what I could mean by this
Chimera of a fit conversing Soul, notions and words never made for those
chopps; but like a generous Wine, only by overworking the settled mudd of his
fancy, to make him drunk, and disgorge his vileness the more openly. All
persons of gentle breeding (I say gentle, though this Barrow grunt at the word)
I know will apprehend and be satisfied in what I spoke, how unpleasing and
discontenting the society of body must needs be between those whose minds
cannot be sociable. But what should a man say more to a snout in this pickle,
what language can be low and degenerat anough?

The fourth Argument which I had, was, that Marriage being a Covenant, the very
being whereof consists in the performance of unfeigned love and peace, if that
were not tolerably performed, the Covenant became broke and revocable. Which how
can any in whose mind the principles of right reason and justice are not
cancelled, deny; for how can a thing subsist, when the true essence there of is
dissolved? yet this he denies, and yet in such a manner as alters my
assertion, for he puts in, though the main end be not attained in full
measure: but my position is, if it be not tolerably attained, as throughout the
whole Discourse is apparent.

Now for his Reasons; Heman found not that peace and solace, which is the main
end of communion with God, should he therefore break off that communion?

I answer, that if Heman found it not, the fault was certainly his own: but in
Marriage it happns far otherwise: Sometimes the fault is plainly not his who
seeks Divorce: Sometimes it cannot be discerned, whose fault it is: and
therefore cannot in reason or equity be the matter of an absolute prohibition.

His other instance declares, what a right handicrafts man he is of petty
cases, and how unfitt to be ought else at highest, but a hacney of the Law. I
change houses with a man; it is supposed I do it for mine own ends; I attain
them not in this house; I shall not therefore go from my bargain. How without
fear might the young Charinus in Andria now cry out, what likeness can be here
to a Marriage? In this bargain was no capitulation, but the yiedling of
possession to one another, wherein each of them had his several end apart: in
Marriage there is a solemn vow of love and fidelity each to other: this bargain
is fully accomplished in the change; In Marriage the covenant still is in
performing. If one of them perform nothing tolerably, but instead of love,
abound in disaffection, disobedience, fraud, and hatred, what thing in the
nature of a covenant shall bind the other to such a perdurable mischief? Keep to
your Problemes of ten groats, these matters are not for pragmatics, and
folkmooters to babble in.

Concerning the place of Paul, that God has called us to peace, 1 Cor. 7. and
therefore certainly, if any where in this world, we have a right to claim it
reasonably in marriage, it is plain anough in the sense which I gave, and
confessed by Paraeus, and other Orthodox Divines, to be a good sense, and this
Answerer, does not weak'n it. The other place, that he who hates, may put
away, which, if I show him, he promises to yield the whole controversy, is,
besides, Deuteronomy. 24. 1. Deuteronomy. 21. 14* and before this, Exodus 21. 8. Of Malachy I
have spok'n more in another place; and say again that the best interpreters,
all the ancient, and most of the modern translate it, as I cited, and very few
otherwise, whereof perhaps Junius is the chief.

Another thing troubles him, that marriage is called the mystery of Joy. Let it
still trouble him; for what has he to do either with joy, or with mystery?
He thinks it frantic divinity to say, It is not the outward continuance of
marriage, that keeps the covenant of marriage whole, but whosoever does most
according to peace and love, whether in marriage or divorce, he breaks marriage
lest. If I shall spell it to him, He breaks marriage lest, is to say, he
dishonours not marriage; for least is taken in the Bible, and other good
Authors, for, not at all. And a particular marriage a man may break, if for a
lawful cause, and yet not break, that is, not violate, or dishonor the
Ordnance of Marriage. Hence those two questions that follow, are left
ridiculous; and the Maids at Algate, whom he flouts, are likely to have more
wit then the Servingman at Addlegate.

Whereas he taxes me of adding to the Scripture in that I said, Love only is
the fulfilling of every Commandment, I cited no particular Scripture, but spoke
a general sense, which might be collected from many places. For seeing love
includes Faith, what is there that can fulfill every commandment but only love?
And I meant, as any intelligent Reader might apprehend, every positive, and
civil commandment, whereof Christ has taught us that man is tho Lord. It is not
the formal duty of worship, or the sitting still, that keeps the holy rest of
Sabbath; but whosoever does most according to charity, whether he work, or
work not; he breaks the holy rest of Sabbath least. So Marriage being a civil
Ordinance made for man, not man for it; he who does that which most accords
with charity, first to himself, next to whom he next ows it, whether in
marriage or divorce, he breaks the Ordinance of marriage least. And what in
Religious prudence, can be charity to himself, and what to his Wife, either in
continuing, or in dissolving the marriage knot, has bin already often anough
discoursed. So that what St. Paul says of circumcision, the same I stick not
to say of a civil ordinance, made to the good, and comfort of man, not to his
ruin; marriage is nothing, and divorce is nothing, but faith, which works by
love. And this I trust none can mistake.

Against the fifth Argument, That a Christian in a higher order of Preist-hood,
then that Levitical, is a person dedicat to joy and peace; and therefore needs
not in Subjection to a civil Ordinance, made to no other end but for his good
(when without his fault he finds it impossible to be decently or tolerably
observed) to plunge himself into immeasurable distractions and temptations,
above his strength; against this he proves nothing, but gadds into silly
conjectures of what abuses would follow, and with as good reason might declaim
against the best things that are.

Against the sixth Argument, that to force the continuance of marriage between
minds found utterly unfit, and disproportional, is against nature, and seems
forbidd under that allegorical precept of Moses, Not to sow a field with diverse
seeds, lest both be defiled, not to plough with an Ox and an Ass together,
which I dedue'd by the pattern of St. Paul's reasoning what was meant by not
muzzling the Ox, he rambles over a long narration, to tell us that by the
Oxen are meant the Preachers: which is not doubted. Then he demands, if this
my reasoning be like St. Paul's, and I answer him, yes. He replies that sure
St. Paul would be ashamed to reason thus. And I tell him, No. He grants that
place which I alleged, 2 Cor. 6. of unequal yoking, may allnde to that of
Moses, but says, I cannot prove it makes to my purpos, and shows not first,
how he can disprove it. Weigh, Gentlemen, and consider, whether my
affirmations, backed with reason, may hold balance against the bare denials of
this ponderous confuter, elected by his ghostly Patrons to be my copes-mate.

Proceeding on to speak of mysterious things in nature, I had ocsion to fit the
language thereafter, matters not for the reading of this odious fool, who thus
ever when he meets with ought above the cogitation of his breeding, leaves the
noysom stench of his rude slot behind him, maligning that any thing should be
spoke or understood, above his own genuine baseness; and gives sentence that his
confuting has bin employed about a frothy, immeritous and undeserving
discourse. Who could have beleevd so much insolence durst vent it self from out
the hide of a varlet, as thus to censure that which men of mature judgment
have applauded to be writ with good reason. But this contents him not, he
falls now to rave in his barbarous abusivenes; and why? a reason befitting such
an Artificer, because he says the Book is contrary to all human lerning; When
as the world knows that all, both human and divine lerning, till the Canon Law,
allowed divorce by consent, and for many causes without consent. Next he dooms
it, as contrary to Truth; when as it has bin disputable among learned men, ever
since it was prohibited: and is by Peter Martyr thought an opinion not impious,
but hard to be r^futed; and by Erasmus deemed a Doctrine so charitable and
pious, as, if it cannot be used, were to be wished it could; but is by Martin
Bucer, a man of dearest and most religious memory in the Church, taught and
maintan'd to be either most lawfully used, or most lawfully permitted. And for
this, for I affirm no more then Bucer, what censure do you think, Readers he
has condemned the book to? To a death no less infamous then to be burnt by the
hangman. Mr. Licencer, for I deal not now with this caitif, never worth my
earnest, and now not seasonable for my jest, you are reputed a man discreet
anough, religious anough, honest anough, that is, to an ordnary competence in
all these. But now your turn is, to hear what your own hand has earned ye,
that when you suffered this nameles hangman to cast into public such a
despightfull contumely upon a name and person deserving of the Church and State
equally to your self, and one who has don more to the present advancement of
your own Tribe, then you or many of them have don for themselves, you forgot to
be either honest, Religious, or discreet. What ever the State might do
concerning it, supposed a matter to expect evil from, I should not doubt to
meet among them with wise, and honorable, and knowing men. But as to this
brute Libel, so much the more impudent and lawless for the abused authority
which it bears, I say again, that I abominat the censure of Rascals and their
Licencers.

With difficulty I return to what remains of this ignoble task, for the disdain
I have to change a period more with the filth and venom of this gourmand,
swelled into a confuter. Yet for the satisfaction of others, I endure all this.

Against the seventh Argument, that if the Canon Law and Divines allow divorce
for conspiracy of death, they may as well allow it to avoid the same
consequence from the likelihood of natural causes;

First, he denies that the Canon so decrees.

I Answer, that it decrees for danger of life, as much as for adultery. Decret.
Gregor. l. 4* tit. 19. and in other places: and the best Civilians who cite the
Canon Law, so collect, as Schneidewin in institut. tit. 10. p. 4. de divort.
and indeed who would have denied it, but one of a teprobate ignorance in all
he meddles with.

Secondly, he says, the case alters, for there the offender who seeks the
life, does implicitly at least act a divorce.

And I answer, that here nature though no offender, does the same. But if an
offender by acting a divorce, shall release the offended, this is an ample
grant against himself. He says, nature teaches to save life from one who
seeks it. And I say she teaches no less to save it from any other cause that
endangers it, He says, that here they are both actors. Admit they were, it
would not be uncharitable to part them; yet sometimes they are not both actors,
but the one of them most lamentedly passive. So he concludes, We must not
take advantage of our own faults and corruptions to release us from our duties.
But shall we take no advantage to save our selves from the faults of another,
who has anull'd his right to our duty? No, says he, Let them die of the
sullens, and try who will pity them. Barbarian, the shame of all honest
Atturneys, why do they not hoiss him over the bar, and blanket him?

Against the eighth Argument, that they who are destitute of all mariageable
gifts, except a body not plainly unfit, have not the calling to marry, and
consequently married and so found, may be divorced, this, he says, is
nothing to the purpose, and not fit to be answered. I leav it therefore to the
judgment of his Masters.

Against the ninth Argument, that marriage is a human society, and so chiefly
seated in agreement and unity of mind: If therefore the mind cannot have that
due society by marriage, that it may reasonably and humanly desire, it can be
no human society, and so not without reason divorcible, here he falsifies, and
turns what the position required of a reasonable agreement in the main matters
of society, into an agreement in all things, which makes the opinion not mine,
and so he leaves it.

At last, and in good howr we are com to his farewell, which is to he a
concluding taste of his jabberment (...) in Law, the flashiest and the fustiest
that ever corrupted in such an unswill'd hogshead.

Against my tenth Argument, as he calls it, but as I intended it, my other
position, that Divorce is not a thing determinable by a compulsive Law, for
that all Law is for some good that may be frequently attained without the
admixture of a wors inconvenience; but the Law forbidding divorce, never
attains to any good end of such prohibition, but rather multiplies evil;
therefore, the prohibition of divorce is no good Law. Now for his Atturneys
prise: but first, like a right cunning and sturdy Logician, he denies my
Argument not mattering whether in the major or minor: and says, there are many
Laws made for good, and yet that good is not attained, through the defaults of
the party, but a greater inconvenience follows.

But I reply that this Answer builds upon a shallow foundation, and most
unjustly supposes every one in default, who seeks divorce from the most
injurious wedloc. The default therefore will be found in the Law it self; which
is neither able to punish the offender, but the innocent must withal suffer;
nor can right the innocent, in what is chiefly sought, the obtainment of love
or quietness. His instances out of the Common Law, are all so quite beside the
matter which he would prove, as may be a warning to all clients how they
venture their business with such a cock-braind Solliciter. For being to show some
Law of England, attaining to no good end, and yet through no default of the
party, who is thereby debarred all remedy, he shows us only how some do loos
the benefit of good Laws through their own default. His first example says, It
is a just Law that every one shall peaceably enjoy his estate in Lands or
otherwise. Does this Law attain to no good end? the Bar will blush at this
most incogitant woodcock. But see if a draft of Littleton will recover him to
his senses. If this man having Fee simple in his Lands, yet will take a Leas of
his own Lands, from another, this shall be an Estoppel to him in an Assise
from the recovering of his own Land. Mark now, and register him. How many are
there of ten thousand who have such a Fee simple in their sconse, as to take a
Leas of their own Lands from another? So that this inconvenience lights upon
scars one in an age, and by his own default; and the Law of enjoying each man
his own, is good to all others. But on the contrary, this prohibition of
divorce is good to none, and brings inconvenience to numbers, who lie under
intolerable greevances, without their own default, through the wickedness or
folly of another; and all this iniquity the Law remedies not. but in a manner
maintains? His other cases are directly to the same purpos, and might have bin
spared, but that he is a tradsman of the Law, and must be born with at his
first setting up, to lay forth his best ware, which is only gibbrish.

I have now don that, which for many causes I might have thought, could not
likely have bin my fortune, to be put to this under-work of seowring and
unrubbishing the low and sordid ignorance of such a presumptuous lozel. Yet
Hercules had the labor once imposed upon him to carry dung out of the Augean
stable. At any hand I would be ridd of him: for I had rather, since the life
of man is likn'd to a Scene, that all my entrances and exits might mix with
such persons only, whose worth erects them and their actions to a grave and
tragic deportment, and not to have to do with Clowns and Vices. But if a man
cannot peaceably walk into the world, cut must be infested, sometimes at his
face, with dorrs and hotsflies, sometimes beneath, with bauling whippets, and
shin-barkers, and these to be set on by plot and consultation with a Junto of
Clergy men and Licencers, commended also and rejoye't in by those whose
partiality cannot yet forgo old papisticall principles, have I not cause to
be in such a manner defensive, as may procure me freedom to pass more
unmolested hereafter by these encumbrances, not so much regarded for themselves,
as for those who incite them. And what defense can properly be used in such a
despicable encounter as this, but either the sl^p or the spurn? If they can
afford me none but a ridiculous adversaty, the blame belongs not to me,
though the whole Dispute be strewn and scattered with ridiculous. And if he
have such an ambition to know no better who are his mates, but among those
needy thoughts, which though his two faculties of Servingman and Solliciter,
should compound into one mongrel, would be but thin and meager, if in this
penury of Soul he can be possible to have the lustiness to think of fame, let
him but send me how he calls himself, and I may chance not fail to endorse
him on the backside of posterity, not a golden, but a brazen Ass. Since my
fate extorts from me a talent of sport, which I had thought to hide in a
napkin, he shall be my Batrachomuomachia, my Bavius, my Calandrino, the
common adagy of ignorance and overweening. Nay perhaps, as the provocation may
be, I may be driven to curle up this gliding prose into a rough Sotadic, that
shall rhyme him into such a condition, as instead of judging good Books to be
burnt by the executioner, he shall be readier to be his own hangman. Thus much
to this Nuisance.

But as for the Subject it self which I have writ, and now defend, according
as the opposition bears, if any man equal to the matter shall think it
appertains him to take in hand this controversy, either excepting against ought
writt'n, or persuaded he can show better how this question of such moment to
be thoroughly known may receav a true determination, not leaning on the old and
rott'n suggestions whereon it yet leanes, if his intents be sincere to the
public, and shall carry him on without bitterness to the opinion, or to the
person dissenting, let him not, I entreat him, guess by the handling, which
meritoriously has bin bestowd on this object of contempt and laughter, that I
account it any displeasure don me to be contradicted in Print: but as it
leads to the attainment of any thing more true, shall esteem it a benefit; and
shall know how to return his civility and fair Argument in such a sort, as he
shall confess that to do so is my choice, and to have don thus was my chance.

The End.

