Captain Audley Marvin's SPEECH: DELIVERED IN THE UPPER HOUSE TO THE LORDS IN
PARLIAMENT. 24. May, 1641.

Concerning the Judicature of the High Court of PARLIAMENT.

DVBLIN.

Printed Anno Dom. 1641.

CAPTAIN AVDLEY MARVYN'S SPEECH: Delivered in the upper House to the LORDS,
24. of May, 1641.
MY LORDS,
SUch was the well composed Module and Beauty of those Letters of Royal Grace
and Favor, which by a select Committee of both Houses were treated upon, that
to say, you may be pleased to remember them, were an Injury, especially since
the Arguments of those several Conferences were all sealed up with this
wel-warranted opinion, that every word in them ought to be writ in letters of
gold, ingraved in brass, that present and succeeding times might read them
with greedy eyes, speaking in their own Dialect, the Emblem of a most
indulgent Prince, the Characters of Justice and Equity, and the Monumentall
Records of unparalled goodness, triumphing in his Majesty's breast, as in the
Sphere of their proper activitie.

The Letter concerning the validity of our Parliament, and the second
concerning the Graces are twins of a Royal birth, joined in conjugall bonds by
His Majesty.

(...) without a valid and effectual Parliament to out Graces is not to call
idlers, that are piping and dancing in the Market, to work in the vineyard, but
to call the laborers out of the vineyard, to pipe and dance in the Market
place; or if you please almost as ill suitable as a Parliament without
Judicature.

These two Letters so wedded, we have lodged in one sheet, I mean, included in
one instrument, which being ready to be presented in its own Dimensions, I will
not now epitomize.

In the third and last Letter, demanding Presidents from the upper House of the
Lords for their Judicature, His Majesty speaks Harmoniously to us, though in
a different key; he is beautiful, though his brow be not so smoothly limbed in
it as in the former: for certainly, it is an eminent policy in a Prince, and
an evident happiness to government, not to suffer poison to lodge in his
cares, especially such a quick spreading and pestilentiall poison, as would
eat out the Basis and foundation of Parliaments, and putrify those nerves and
Ligatures, by which, His most Excellent Majesty, and We his most loyal
Subjects have ever been, are, and (maugre their black and fatal suggestions)
shall be upostatically united.

May it please your Majesty.
Hic niger est hunc tu, Roman Caveto.
My Lords, I must in the name of the House of Commons entreat your patience,
whilst I present unto your Lordships, a ruste-drawn Map of the Jurisdiction of
this high Court of Parliament.

I shall imitate a Lands-cape; sust, show it you remote, and in its primitive
times, scare discernable whether Land, or no Land; whether a Parliament, or no
Parliament; then we shall sail nearer, until we come within ^ been befriended
in the course of our Navigation by our sails, we shall split on our own
Anchor. I mean, if in the computation of all times we have had a Parliament
unquestionable in substance, in form, in all necessary adjuncts, and now, even
now, when ecclipsed Justice, like the Sun imprisoned under a cloud breaks forth
with luster, be concluded in defect of Judicature, I say the stars have had
malignant aspects in this our horizon.

But first (my Lords) since in the strict words of the Letter, the house of the
Lords seems only interested, we may be thought to make an inrode upon your
Privileges, and to be pragmaticall without president, though not without
presumption.

Truly (my Lords) Anima est tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part.
Judicature is the Soul of this great compacted body, and injoyes that
diffusive property.

The times were, when both Houses sat in one place, and had one Speaker, and
since the power of Judicature must be founded upon a preparatorie Impeachments,
and this preparatorie Impeachment must be framed by the Commons house, we must
justify our selves not guilty of the title of fools by the Wiseman, to lay a
foundation and never consider by what means the structure is to be finished;
nay, excuse our selves from that general remonstrance of a general Grievance,
Extrajudiciall Proceedings.

Your Lordships are under his Majesty the Chief, be pleased to admit us
Members, though the feet; the health of these will much advantage the
preservation of the whole Compound; nay, on the contrary, the Gout is as
mortal and dolorous as the Headache.

Besides (my Lords) our commenced proceedings against the parties impeached of
high Treason, though seasoned with much moderation and temper, are of ripe age,
(...) in long coats, which are now suspend-drawne into question the Commons of
this Kingdom openly proclayme, That to be excessive vicious is to be secure,
and that facts of Treason, are above the cognizance, and Punishment of the Acts
of Reason, and the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom.

So (my Lords) it being out of dispute, (and yet desiring not to be
misconstrued, that we would make stakes with you in your own and proper
Judicature) that we are deeply interested in this Particular, I shall return
unto my first Proposition, and survay this high Court of Parliament; Parliament
did I say? From what radix? Parler le meant, the speech of the mind; this must
be attended with judgment and reason, but I think, we speak with none of
these, if we cannot maintain our Jurisdiction? This is its Etymology, which
is warranted by the best Antiquarie of his time, Vetusto nomine, e Gallia
mutato Parliamentum dicitur.

This high Court has not been confined to this individual appellation, but
has been christened by several godfathers.

Majores nostri Anglo-saxones entitled it. Prudentum Conventus, Concilium,
Magnus Conventusr. Succeeding Historiographers, Commune Concilium, Curia
Altissima, Generale placitum, Curia magna, Magnatum Conventus, Commune totius
regni Concilium. Prasentia Regis, Pralatorum, procitumque Collectorum.

But certainly, if they intended these flourishing titles to a Parliament
without Judicature, they spoke of their riding to Parliament, not sitting in it.

An unhappy Parliament: like the City Myndas, whose Gates were so wide, that
the City might run out of them.

To allow these to be Synonimas of Parliament, and to disallow Judicature, were
but Iewish-like, to say, All ha^le King of the Jews, and in the mean time,
Grucifie ^

Neither (my Lords) are these upstarted Titles, or new bought Coats of Arms,
that this high Court blazons. No (my Lords) they are venerable for their
Antiquity, and of most ancient birth, and extraction.

Mulmuccius, of some called Donwallo, did write two Books of the Laws of the
Brittons, the one called Statuta Municipalia, the other, Leges Iudiciariae, for
so the same do signify in the British tongue, wherein he wrote the same,
which is as much to say, as the Statute Law and Common Law, which Books were
written 441. years before the Incarnation of Christ, and how should there be
Statute Laws without a Parliament. King Alfred ordained for a perpetual
usage, That twice in the year, or oftener if need be, they should assemble
themselves at London, to treat in Parliament of the Government of the people
of God, how they should keep themselves from sin, should live in quiet, and
receive right by holy Laws and Judgments.

In the Heptarchy, Parliaments had their continuance, witness the style of
Parliaments in the time of Ina King of the West Saxons. Ego Ina Dei gratia,
etc. Congregatione Servorum Dei sollicitus, de salute animarum vestrarum and
statu regni mei, constitui rectum coniugium and iusta iudicia pro stabilitate
and confirmatione populi mei benigna sedulitate celebrari, and nullo Aldermano,
vel alicui de toto regimine nostro liceat conscripta abolere iudicia, so did
Offa. King of the Mercians, and Ethelbert King of Kent.

In the reign of King Athelston his Acts of Parliament are styled thus. Hac
sunt judicia Exoniae quae sapientes consilio Ethelstani Regis instituerunt, and
iterum apud Frefresham, and tertia vice apud -- ubi haec definita simul, and
confirmata sunt. Here I find a Parliament summoned, Consilio Regis, Prorogued
in those words Iterum, and tertia vice, the Royal assent in the Words
Confirmata sunt, the dissolution. ^ Rex consilio sapientum; etc.

King Etheldred. Hoc est Consilium quod Etheldrus Rex and omnes sapientes, etc.

King Edmond calls it Convent^^^ Sapientum, Spit itualium and Temporalium.

The Parliament of King Canutus at Winchester bore this Title. Hac sunt statuta
Canuti Regis, Anglorum, Danorum, Norvegarum, venerandoejus sapientum Consilio,
ad laudem and gloriam Dei, and sui regulitatem, and commune commodum habita in
sancto natali Domini apud Wintoniam.

Here we begin to make Land, and descrie a visible Title to a Parliament,
being in substance and form nearly allied unto the Presidents of these very
times; and though some will contest this word (Parliament bears date but from
the third year Edw. 1. yet (me thinks) those words in the ninth year of Edw.
2. being the immediate Successor to Edw. the first might convince them, viz.
Sciatis quod cum dudum temporibus progent^orum nostrorum quondam regum Angliae
in diversis Parliamentis suis, etc. which words (Progenitorum) had been
improper, if that name had commenced in his fathers reign.

In one word, time out of mind, this high Court, and its Iudicatore has
flourished before the Conquest, in the Conquest (notwithstanding that silent
leges inter arma) and ever since the Conquest until this present hour.

Me thinks, I appear in your Lordships eyes as one drawing his Sword,
traversing his ground, lying upon his guard, there being-neyther offense, nor
opposition to draw him into this distemper. Your Lordships may say, What need
you waken so many sleepy Records to prove Parliaments have been? who is it of
so desperate an opinion, that offers it in question?

Truly (my Lords) I cannot name Him, or Them; but whosoever they were that
instilled this jealousy of ^

Aristotle bids us not to dispute, ^trum nix sit alba, and the like visible and
apparent truths, but if any Man of an obdurate judgment would have denied that
there was Anima Rationalis, then Aristotle must prove there is Homo and Anima
Rationalis will be drawn in by consequence. Prove Homo, prove a Parliament,
and Anima Rationalis, which is Judicature, will be drawn in by consequence:
besides I am protected by the Verse.

Iudicis officium est ut res, ita tempora rerum
Quaerere
Next I must offer unto your Lordships that which the Law has a tender respect
unto, even the ends of Parliament Exitus acta probat

These I find thus to be capitulated by Sir Edward Cook, Primo, ad subditos a
delinquendo declinandos, hoc est, ut delicta tam bonis cautisque legibus, tam
debita earundem executione anticiparentur; now, if debita executio legum can be
in Parliament inflicted upon delinquentes subditos, without legal proceedings
and trial, (except they will say nothing, and so be pressed to death) I leave it
to be argued amongst children.

2. Vt tuta tranquillaque sit vita hominum, but certainly the life of man is
not preserved by the impunity of offenders, which must pass, sublata
judicatura.

3. Vt sixis quibusdam sanctionibus, sanctisque judicijs jus unicuique sieret;
but whether jus implies not punishing malefactors, as well as relieving the
oppressed, ( Crudelitas parcens, being more destructive to the Commonweal,
then Crudetitas puniens) I leave it to be argued among children.

Fleta says a Parliament is called, Terminare dubitationes, judiciorum, novis
injurijs emersis, nova constituere remedia, unicuique prout meruerit justitiam
retribuere. ^ apply this remedy. Then our Parliament must have a short cut in
trial. We must condemn without hearing of any part, for why should they
hear, if they have no power to determine.

Having thus far analized a Parliament, we must consider its Parentage, and
then prove our claim to Judicature by the title of Coheire with the Parliament
in England, which his Majesty's Progenitors have ever graciously confirmed unto
us.

A Parliament then is a structure founded upon the common Laws of England, as
is manifest in its proceedings upon many trials according to the course of the
Common-Lawes. It is the heir apparent to the Common Law, and parent of the
Statute Law. To make this position pass for touch, I will give you the Test of
that ancient and learned Author of the book entitled, Mirror de les Justices,
in his own words. Hoc cum sit forum in hoc regno plane supremum, pars est
structurae jurium municipalium, and nonunquam secundum frequentem illum, and
usitatum in lege communi ordinem processies habet.

My Lords; since with your LOPS. patience we are arrived unto this undeniable
truth, I will now open our title to the Common Laws of England, to the Statute
Laws of England before 10. H. 7. to the lawful customs of England, to the
Courts of Justice in England, to the Writs Original and Judicial of England,
and to the Presidents of England, even from the high Court of Parliament, unto
the petty Constables office.

The first knowledge the printed Statute give us of Magna Charta, is in 9. H.
3. yet we find it enrolled in the red book of the Exchequer. 3. King John.

King John in the 12. year of his reign went into Ireland, and there attended
with the advice of grave, and learned men in the Laws (whom he carried with
him) de ^ land should be governed by the Laws of England.

I find in Rotulo Patentum 11. H. 3. thus written. Rex, etc. Baronibus
militibus, and omnibus libere tenentibus salutem. Satis ut credimus vestra
audivit discretio, quod quando bonae memoriae Johannes quondam Rex Angliae
pater noster venit in Hiberniam, ipse duxit secum viros discretos, and
legisperitos quorum communi consilio, and ad instantiam Hibernensium statuit
and praecipit leges Anglicanas in Hibernia ita quod leges easdem in scripturas
redactas reliquit sub sigillo suo ad Scaccarium Dublin.

Shall I repeat the very words recorded, Rot. Patent. 18. H. 3. Rex, etc.
Comitibus, Baronibus, militibus, and liberis hominibus, and omnibus alijs de
terra Hyberniae Salutem. Quia manifest esse dinoscitur contra coronam and
dignitatem nostram, and consuetudines and leges regni nostri Angliae qua^ bonae
memoriae Dominus Johannes Rex, Pater noster, de communi ommium de Hybernia
consensu teneri statuit in terra illa, quod placita tencantur de curia
Christianitatis, de advocationibus Ecclesiarium, and Capellarum, vel de Laico
foedo, vel de Catallis quae non sunt testamento, vel matrimonio. Vobis mandamus
prohibentes quatenus hujusmodi placita in Curiae Christianitatis nulla tenus
sequi praesonatis in manifestum dignitatis, and Coronae nostrae praejudicium.
Scituri pro certo quod si feceritis, dedimus in mandatis Iudiciario nostro
Hiberniae, Statuta Curiae nostra in Anglia contra transgressiones hujus mandati
nostri cum justitia procedat, and quod nostrum est exequatur. Test Rege apud
Winchomb. 28. October. an. regni 18.

My Lords, I have read this Roll at large, because I perceive a holy
indignation in this Prince, that the officers of this Kingdom would hold Pleas
not suitable in every respect unto the Laws, and Customs of England, adjudging
the practice to be in manifestum dignitatis and coronae nostrae praejudicium.
Then observe the warning piece, Vobis mandamus prohibentes, etc. then the
punishment, Scituri pro certo. etc. But the Judges in those days were not so
acute ^ in case they had incurred it. Yet the Sophisters of Law in this
Kingdom may find that King not unprovided with his answer; for the words are
Dedimus in mandatis, etc. Statuta Curiae nostrae in Anglia contra
transgressiones, etc. So that then the Statutes and Rules of the Courts in
England, may be Presidents both for trial and punishment.

Rot. Pat. 30. H. 3. Rex, etc. prs communi utilitate terrae Hyberniae and pro
unitate terrarum, provisum est quod omnes leges and consuetudines quae in regno
Angliae tenentur, in Hybernia teneantur, and eadem terra eisdem legibus
subjaceat ac per easdem regatur sicut Job ^n^es Rex cum illic esset, statuit,
and firmiter mandavit. Ideo volumus quod omnia brevia de communi jure, quae
curr^nt in Anglia similiter current in Hybernia sub novo sigillo Regis: Here
are the old Laws and Writs, differing in nothing but in a new Seal; which I
wonder none of our witty Informers take advantage to make it an essential
difference.

13. H. 1. Coram rege in longo placito, I read una and eadem esse debet Lex
tam in regno Angliae, quam Hyberniae.

My Lords, I will add but this Quotation (which I happened upon this morning) 2.
Rich. 3. fol. 12. in Camera stellata. Terra Hyberniae inter se habet
Parliamentum, and omnimodas Curias prout in Anglia and per idem Parliamentum
sacit leges, and mutat leges, and illi de eadem terra non obligantur per
Statuta in Anglia, quia hi non habent milites Parliamenti. Here is a Grant of
Parliament past unto us of this Kingdom with all his appurtenances, rites, and
members, as they were formerly; or now held by the Subjects of England from or
by his Majesty.

Pray (my Lords) why are these clear records preserved to posterity? to
raise, or to confirm doubts?

That then their Parliaments are the very stars by which we must sail by;
their Presidents, the meridian sun we must observe to find the Latitude of our
proceeddings, the last rehearsed rolls proclaim ^ vouredly this name becomes
it, if one Justice of Assize may hear, and determine capital offenses, and
this Altissima Curia, not have power of a grand Jury to him to find Billa vera.

Yet ask this Justice of Assize by what president in this Kingdom he
adventures upon this service. Ask of the Justice of peace, by what Presidents
he takes notice of Presentiments, Indictments, awards the alias, the plures
Capias, and his Presidents must take shipping out of England.

Inquire of the Court of Chancery for its presidents of Equity, for the
Presidents of Writs and judgments. Inquire of the Kings Bench for a President
in Ireland, for a Wager of battle in an appeal. Inquire of the Courts of
Common Pleas for their Presidents in any of their rules of Court; Nay inquire
of the petty. Constable by what President in Ireland he executes his office,
nay, for the carrying of his painted staff, and they will return but starved
and hungry arguments, except they ship their Presidents out of England.

But admit (my Lords) we had no interest in the Presidents of England, were it
not durus sermo, that the long and well settled rites of Parliament should fall
to the ground for want of a President, which undoubtedly has power in it self
to make a President not repugnant to Law.

Who knows not but in the former dark and Tragical times, that all, or the
most part of the Roles, and Records of this Kingdom were kept in Breminghams
Tower, and that the end of them was the Antitype of the end of the world, even
a dissolution by fire; some laid in horse loades in every corner of the
streets for dunghill-rakers to pick antiquities up, and Tailors to make
measures of.

This Epidemicall consumption of our Records was a ^ want of them (though no
fault in us then unborne) should permit Treasons, Rapines, Murders, Disturbers
of the King, Kingdom, and Commonweal, not only pass with impunitie, but be
established in the greatest places of Judicature, as if Treason were the square
of the Law, and Allegiance become Treason.

Praised be Almighty God, this Kingdom is not so barren of the Professors of
the Law, but I see those persons in my eyes, that can with more respect unto
the dignity of His Majesty's Crown, with more regard unto his Majesty's most
Sacred and inviolable Oath, with more content to the whole Kingdom, personate
the King, amiable to his people in the dispensation of Justice in the High
Offices of the Judges impeached.

Yet (my Lords) notwithstanding the Bonsires of our Rolls, I will offer one
President or two, by which the ancient Judicature of the Parliament in this
Kingdom will appear in triumphant colors.

In a Parliament held in this Kingdom in Hen. 5. time Richard O Heydan Bishop
of Casshell was impeached in 30. Articles by John Gese Bishop of Waterford, 3.
Articles were for counterfeiting the Kings Seal, for counterfeiting the Kings
Letters Patent, for endeavoring to make himself King of Munster, so that the
Parliaments in this Kingdom have not been confined to trial of petty
Larcenies, and most properly should punish with the Sword, committing the rod
to every pedantick Schoolmaster.

In another Parliament held in this Kingdom in the Edw. 2. Sir Arnold Poor
was tried for killing the Lord Bonevaile, and by sentence of that High Court
was acquitted, it being found it was done in his own defense.

My Lords, the Treasons in this Kingdom formerly practiced have been by
hostile invasion for the most part, and were struck dead by the plain Letter
of the Law; the ^

Parliaments were but rare and Infant-like, and frighted with the clashing of
Arms from one place to another, and until King JAMES of blessed memory sat
at the Steerage of our weather-beaten Arc, our Dove never brought in her
Olive Branch, so that there could hardly be time allowed for a solemn trial,
if the occasion had been offered.

The manner of those Treasons resemble the forcible taking of a man's purse upon
the highway: these Treasons that we shall have to sift, are more like
cut-pursing, they smile in our faces, whilst their hands dive into our pockets:
the event is one, The loss of our Money, and though they be taken napping,
they will swear they meant us no harm.

-- Latet Anguis in herba. The first man that ever suffered for Treason, if want
of a President would excuse him, might have begot Traitors to the third and
fourth generation with impunitie. My house has taken fire, I call for water to
quench it, I would suppose him mad, that would advise me to let it burn to the
ground, because my neighbor would not quench his; and therefore I want a
President.

We will impute it unto the integrity of those times that have not fostred
such unbounded spirits to attempt such crimes, as might leave Presidents of
this Nature.

It is (my Lords) Justice that those who will renew Presidents of long buried
crimes, should renew or create Presidents of deserved trial, and punishment.

My Lords, I have mustered some few Arguments in vindication of the Judicature
of the Parliament in this Kingdom, they are valid enough for the intricacie of
the question: Where tacks will serve, what needs ten-penny nails. A good face
wants no band. A valid Parliament wants no assertions for its Jurisdiction, and
such is this ^ declaring the effectual validity thereof in an Emphaticall
sense.

There is nothing now left (my Lords) but that as I have spent some time in
scanning a Parliament with Judicature, since Contraria, contrarijs opposita
magis elucescunt, we may cast a smiling eye upon that pretty silken bugbeare of
State, a Parliament without Judicature.

Curia altissima, must be Curia infima; Curia magna must be Curia minina. It
will resemble a sword with guilt hilts, and a blade made of a larth. Whereas
then all Courts were derived from it, now all Courts may insult upon it.

My Lords, I leave to your Lordships consideration the cloth of State, (which
no man ought to name without reverence) whether it will not esteem it self in
a deplorable, and widdowed estate for the death of her only consort,
IVDICATVRE. Like the single Turtle it mournes, whilst the Cushions of the
Toulesale prick up their ears.

My Lords, me thinks, the Lions roar, the strings of the harps break and sound
in discord, the Flower deluces wither to be stretched out, in a place sans
Judicature. None sits under that Pavilion that bears the Sword in vain. The
high prized tincture of your Lordships robes begins to fade, the Ermins loose
their complexion, if they loose their Judicature.

That wel-becomming title to a Nation, PEERAGE, begins to hang down its head,
and blush, and curses the insluences in its nativitie, if it should come to
such an untimely end.

Your Speaker may study silence, and report that to himself which he never
read, nor heard of. A Parliament without IVDICATVRE.

The Right reverend Bishops may retire in to the ^ Judicature, that happen to
be discussed before this Tribunal (though most venerable in their own Sphere)
sit like so many Plovers pricked down for Stales, with this Motto, Videntur,
and non sunt.

We of the House of Commons, that were hitherto styled Prudentum Conventus, may
Impeach with little wit, and you remedy us with as little power, imitating
Baals priests, cut and lance our selves, contribute our Estates, our Studies,
our lives for his Majesty's ever prayed for happiness, Call and Call to their
gods that could not help them, Impeach and Impeach, and demand Justice from
our titular Lords, that can neither help themselves nor us.

My Lords, the Common Law speaks our Parliament and its Indicature, the Statute
Laws confirm it. Presidents streng then it. Reason, even undeniable reason
fortifies it, what Magic is there then, That the case is thus altered.

If it lies in the degrees of the persons impeacht, hear then the Statute of
Marlebridge, 52. H. 3. Provisum est concordatum and concessum, quod tam
majores, quam minores justitiam habeant, and recipiant in Curia Domini Regis.

Yet their offices may offer some things in consideration. My Lords, the late
Lord Keeper in England will not come in to dispute this point before the
Parliament, and Sir Robert Belknap, one of the Judges of the Common Pleas, was
put to banishment by the Parliament for subscribing an opinion against Law,
though forced by a dagger held to his breast; and the rest of the Judges that
subscribed the same were put to death. A reason I forgot that we may be excused
for want of Presidents, if there be any surviving. The parties impeached have
taken a course for that, and by an order of the Chancery had them in their own
custody, since their Impeachment, since the Master of the Rolls death unto this
present hour. Poor David, poor House of Commons, must encounter Goliath, nay
Goliath, ^ Saul's Armor, the Kings evidences, nay David's poor sling; this I
humbly present to your Lordships consideration. My Lords, England will not
(...) that we plead an equal interest in their Laws, but re^^y (...) support
us, especially in parliamentary proceedings his Majesty will conceive the
vanity of those, that taking advantage of his princely mind, involved in
multiplicity of weighty affairs would raise such dangerous doubts. Observe but
one word in the Rotul. Pat. 30. H. 3. Rex, etc. pro communi u^^litate terrae
hyberniae and pro unitate terrarum provisum est quod omnes leges, and
consuetudines. You see the confirming and enacting of the Laws and Customs of
England to be of force in Ireland, was, pro utilitate terrae Hyberniae, and pro
unitate terrarum, the Union of Laws being the best unity of Kingdoms. Those
then that would tread under feet the wisdom (...) those times so fortunately
commenced, and continued may be judged as the Incondiaries of Nations, and the
plagiaries of Government. My Lords, out of what I have (...) this infallible
Maxim may be drawn of the High court of Parliament. Si vetustatem spectes est
antiquissima, si dignitatem est honoratissima, si Iurisdictionem est
capacissima.

In the last place, I present unto your Lord (...) these three instruments,
being thrice severally read (...) debated, and solemnly voted in our House
(...) their perfection, and maturitie by such proceedings in (...) most
honorable House, as shall be suitable to your approved Judgments.

FINIS.

