An Exact of Lieutenant General MIDDLETONS LETTER: To the Honorable Sir
WILLIAM WALLER.

And by him communicated to, and Read in the Honorable House of COMMONS, on
Saturday last, being the 24. of this instant Month of August. 1644.

Wherein is set forth a VICTORY, Obtained against the Enemy by a Party of
Horse and Dragoones, under the Command of Captain Fincher, Quartermaster
General to Sir William Waller, at Farrington.

Wherein were taken, slain and dispersed near 600. Horse and Foot of the
Enemy; As also a List of the Names of the Officers that were taken, with many
other particulars in that great Defeat.

And withal, How one Captain Blunt a Papist, killed most cruelly a godly
Minister, which Captain, was with many others, there taken Prisoners in this
Fight.

LONDON, Printed according to Order, by G. Bishop. August. 28. 1644.

An Exact of Liev. General MIDDLETONS LETTER, To the Honorable Sir WILLIAM
WALLER.
Honored Sir,
THE Forces I am to have from Lime, are to be to morrow with me at Charde, the
London Regiment at Weymouth, I think will be with me a day or two hence, our
pistolls and Saddles are landed at Weymouth; I have given Orders to Commissary
Fox, to bring them to my Quarters at Charde; I have taken a Course to recruit,
by leaving a proportion of Horse upon diverse Hundreds in Summersetshire; I
doubt not, but the Horse will be in a good posture ere long; Having received
intelligence of some new Leavies near Bristoll, I commanded Captain Fincher,
Quartermaster General, with a party of three Hundred Horse, and one hundred
Dragoones that way, he came very opportunely about the time they were to March
to their rendezvous, killed only five in the place, dispersed and took the rest
prisoners, I have sent you a List enclosed, of the prisoners Names; I hope the
leavie is marred: One of the prisoners, Captain Blunt, a Papist, killed a
Minister not long since, most cruelly; I intend to send over all the prisoners
to Lime, I think this Captain Blunt deserves to be hanged. Your Honor may
acquaint the Committee of both Kingdoms with this cruel Act: It is impossible
to hear of any thing from my Lord General, but by sea, he is in good
condition, as I am informed; since our coming into these parts, we have not
only stopped their leavies of men and money, but likewise we have streightened
the Kings Army much of provision, I do hear his Majesty's Army is either
retreated, or intends shortly to retreat; I cannot affirm the truth of this. I
doubt not, but I shall be able shortly to inform you; for I intend to go
toward Exeter, and as near as possibly I can, to the Kings army, with a good
party of Horse and Dragoones, so soon as I have distributed the pistolls to the
several Troops; Colonel Stroude is here, and he is to raise a Regiment of
Horse, which I make no question he do quickly. If the Parliament will employ
their Forces this way, the Work was done.

Ilchester 21. Aug. 1644. Your humble servant John Middleton.

Prisoners taken at Farrington.
Edward Bisse Colonel. Captains.
EDward Davies, James Kirton, John Hasset, John Blunt.
Walter Swain Lieu. of Horse. Lievtenants of Foot.
T Thomas Heath, George Bingham, Thomas Rirketon, Edward Day.
Walter Swayne, Coronet. William Massy, Quartermaster. Henry Zouche, Chaplain
to the Collonell. John Swenbrooke, Servant to Captain Hassett. Henry Biggins,
Servant to Collonell Bisse. William Sims, Chyrurgion. William Brook, Servant
to Lieutenant Swayne. Thirty Eight Troopers, Twelve Foot Soldiers, Three
Barrells of Powder, a good quantity of Match and Bullets, near a Hundred
Horse.
FINIS.

