The Way to Thrive: OR THE HEAVENLY THRIFT.

Teaching a man so to THRIVE here, that he may Thrive for ever hereafter.

By Alexander Mingeis, Minister of Gods Word.

He that is greedy of gain, troubles his own house; but he that hates
gifts shall live. Prove. 15.27.

For the desire of money is the root of all evil, which while some have
coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows. 1. Tim. 6.10.

But godliness is great gain, if a man be content with that he has. 1. Tim.
6.6.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLIII.

The Way to Thrive, etc.
THere is no end (says the Preacher) of making many Books, Eccles. 12.12.
especially in these times wherein English men have gotten Athenian ears; that
is, either to tell or hear some news, Acts 17.21. and what more welcome
news, then both heavenly and earthly thrift?

Thrift I know cannot choose but be a welcome guest unto all: this is it that
all men (now adays) do look and long for, that the blind world most hunts
after, high and low, rich and poor, one with another. But diverse, diverse
manner of ways: the Covetous, he thinks that thrift does consist in heaping
up riches, the licentious in his pleasure, the proud in his ambition; but this
is not the right way of thriving.

The right way therefore of thriving is to learn so to thrive in Grace here,
that we may thrive in glory hereafter.

First, I say, we must learn to thrive in Grace.

And the reason is twofold: first, because Grace does not only bring to glory,
but also because it has the promise of this life, and of that which is to
come, 1. Tim. 4.8.

The first step therefore to the Heavenly thrift, is, to learn to be holy, and
to walk close with God, as Enoch did, Genesis 5.24.

Now the way to be holy, is not only to live the life of Grace, but also to
improve it; that is, to put our talent to use, to the end, that when the Lord
comes, he may receive his own with advantage, Mat. 25.27.

Tradesmen and Shopkeepers do not hoord up their ware, to have it lying by
them, but all their care is to put it off, with the most gain; and look with
how many more they trade, by so much greater is their profit. It is a fine
thing to have some ware in every man's shop, an Oar in every man's boat, and
some trafficque in every Country; for if one fail, yet all seldom or never
fail. It is a rich thing to have a stock of prayers going in this Town, in
that Country, in that house, Village, or Family: for if the prayers of one
righteous man avails much, Jam. 5.16. what does the prayer of a hundred, or a
thousand? the godly man therefore must needs be a rich and a thriving man, that
has not only his own stock, but also the riches and treasure of Heaven and
Earth; for in Heaven he has Christ and his Saints, and all the holy Angels for
his Advocate and friends: upon earth he has the Godly all the world over.

As for the wicked, he needs not heed them, for they shall be as chafe which
the wind drives away, Psalm. 1.4. for as they mind only earthly things, so
shall they come short of heaven, and though God fill their bellies with his hid
treasure yet they are no better then filthy swine, always wallowing in the
mire of sin, and rooking in the dunghill of the earth, being kept for the day
of slaughter.

But for the godly man, though his portion (for the most part) is the least in
this world, yet his is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven; and though he
seem to be most subject to the losses and crosses of this life, yet he knows
that all things do work for his good, Romans 8.28. and greater comfort in the
Heavens, because there he has stored up his treasure, Mat. 6.20. And albeit it
does not appear here what he is, because his life is hid with Christ in God,
Coll. 3.3. yet when he which is his life shall appear, then shall he also
appear with him in glory, 1. John 3.2. and shall shine as a star in the midst
of the firmament of Heaven, Dan. 12.3. all things working for his good, all
things furthering his salvation, and sending him heavenward.

The godly man therefore must needs be a rich man, who gains in death,
triumphs in sorrows, grows rich in adversity, and thriveth then most when
he loses most; for look by how much less he enjoys of this world, by so
much more he gets of Heaven; he in a gainer, I say, in death, in life, in
prosperity, in adversity; for so long as he has God on his side, so long he
has Heaven upon Earth, comfort in despair, joy in grief, pleasure in pain,
health in sickness, freedom in bondage, life in death, and all manner of
comfort in the extremest pangs of misery, Christ being unto him all in all
things, Col. 3.11. He is greater then any calamity can overcome, being more
then a Conqueror, through him that loved him, and washed him from his sins in
his blood, Romans 8.37, Rev. 1.5.

Who now would not but be a godly man, and desire (with Balaam) to die the
death of the righteous, to the end, that his last end might be like his? Numb.
23.10. Who would not but (with the Apostle) count all things loss and dung to
gain Christ? Phil. 3.8. And think godliness to be great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6.
Seeing it is it, that not only gives a man right to the things of this life,
and of that which is to come, but also it procures a blessing in and upon all
he enjoys; and therefore if a man would thrive, let him learn to be godly,
for that is only the true thriving way, the blind world therefore is mistaken,
that counts gain to be godliness, and the worldly thrift to be the only
thrift which places its chief felicity in the things of this life, and so
that people be but rich to the world, they care not how poor they are to God,
and how barren in grace. Heaven is but dung to them, and Mammon is their God;
and yet it is a wonder to see how these empty vessels do jet it upon earth! how
they take upon themselves to be the only people of the world! and that we can
easily grant them, while we look Heavenward, and lay hold upon eternal life,
1 Timothy 6.12. I cannot but wonder (I say) to see how they despise the poor, of
whom God has made many rich in faith, Jam. 2.3. when as they do not see
themselves, how they are not only poor, but also blind, wretched, miserable,
and naked, Rev. 3.17.

But it is no wonder, that they which despise God, should despise man, that
those whose hearts are glewed to the world should contemn Heaven: for it is
just with God, that those for whom sorrow is ordained hereafter, that they
should have their portion in this life; and they that thrive not heavenward,
should thrive hell-ward; yea, but give them riches, and let them enjoy the
Earth, they care not what becomes of Heaven; they are content to set all at
sinque and sice, and let them go at hazzards

Oh fools, and unwise! what have they gained, when they have gotten the whole
world and lost their own souls? Mat. 16.26. do they not well deserve to be
shut out of Heaven, that will go wilfully to Hell? or do they not know that
one soul is more precious then a thousand worlds?

But what do I talk of souls, of heaven, and hell, or of the world to come,
seeing all is denied in this age, and people live as if they never should see
death?

I answer, it were well for them if they never should so do; but though the
wicked do flourish like a green Bay Tree, Ps. 37.35. yet I know that there is a
reward for the righteous, and a God that judges the earth, Psalm. 58.11.

They are counted the wisest men now a days, that are thrivingest men; if then
we desire to be wise and thrive, let us learn to be godly; for thereby, we see,
we shall graspe Heaven and Earth at one span: we shall thrive in Heaven, and we
shall thrive upon earth; we shall thrive here and hereafter. This is to play
the part of wise men indeed, to be rich in grace, and rich in glory; rich in
life, and rich in death; rich in heaven, and rich upon earth.

I do not say here, that men may be lazy and thrive; neither that this heavenly
thrift consists without labor and pains; but as the worldling cannot thrive
without industry, no more can the godly without some endeavor: yet as the Race
is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong, nor yet bread to the wise,
nor riches to men of understanding, Eccles. 9.11. so the most laborious man, is
not always the most thriving man; because it is not to him that rises up
early, and lies down late, and eats the bread of carfulness, but to whom
God gives the blessing Psalm. 127.2.

Not that therefore we should not take pains, but by reason hereof strive the
more earnestly, Luke 13.24. especially for the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 6.33.
which suffers violence, Mat. 11.12. and for all other things they shall be
cast upon us.

Seeing therefore that godliness is the most gainful life, and a holy life
the most thriving life.

We are here in the second place to learn, how to lead a true and godly life.

I answer, God has diverse ways and means to bring us to this: sometimes for
the hope of worldly gain he brings us to heavenly treasure: sometimes by
taking that from us which we have, he gives us that which we have not, and
brings us to everlasting comfort: sometimes he imbitters the world unto us, to
make us relish Heaven: sometimes he brings us in love with Heaven, that we
might learn to despise and contemn the world.

But in sum and all, the only way to thrive Heavenward, is, with Christ, to
learn to deny our selves, and to take up our Cross, and follow him daily Luke
7.23. we must learn to abandon the world, and to bid all worldly comforts
adieu. And while our faces are Zion-ward ( Jer. 50.5.) we must forget the flesh
pots, the Onions and Garleek of Egypt, Exodus 16.3. Levit. 11.5. We must learn
to forget our own people and our Fathers house, if we would have the King to
delight in our beauty, Psalm. 45.10.11. or be true Israelites of the Heavenly
Canaan, or Citizens of the Celestial Jerusalem.

But may we not keep correspondency with the world and Heaven too? be rich
upon earth, and rich in Heaven; take our pleasure here, and have it hereafter?

I answer, no; for first the Apostle advises us not to be conformable to this
world, but to be transformed by the renewing of our minds, Romans 12.2.

Secondly, concerning riches; first, Solomon advises us not to labor to be
rich; Prove. 23.4. Again, Christ tells us, that it is as hard for a rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of God, as for a Camel to go through the eye of a
needle, Mat. 19.24. and therefore in Luke 6.24. he pronounces a woe unto them
that are rich; adding the reason, because they have received their consolation.
And S. James bids them weep and howl, for the miseries that shall come upon
them, James 5.1.

As for those that live in pleasure, they are but dead, whilst they seem to
live, 1. Tim. 5.6. They spend their years in pleasure, and in a moment go
down into Hell.

And therefore we must learn to improve ourthoughts, our words, and actions;
our state, our health, our wealth, our treasures, to Gods glory, our own
comfort, and the good of others: We must learn to order our ways aright, so
that no occasion or opportunity of time be let go, without doing of some
good, without drawing nearer unto God Jam. 4.8. and having a sweet union and
communion with him, in being at peace with him, having joy in the Holy Ghost,
Romans 14.17. and walking in the strength and power of God: yea, and that though
no eye did see us, God did not seem to regard us, nor the world to take notice
of us, because we know where our reward is. We look at eternity, and an
eternal wellbeing with our God, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at
his right hand pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. His love does constrain us
to do what we do, to suffer and undergo all things for his sake, because we
do know, that the sufferings of this life are not comparable with the joys
that shall be revealed, Romans 8.18. and the rather because we do know, that
this life is short enough, if not too short, to fit and prepare us for
eternity, and therefore we make so much the more speed to hasten our journey
homeward, which is Heaven.

The world we pass by with scorn, not heeding it; for though we buy, yet we
seem not to possess; and though we use the world, yet we seem not to enjoy
it, 1 Cor. 7.31. by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report; as
deceivers, and yet true; as unknown, and yet known; as dying, and behold we
live; as chastened, and yet not killed; as sorrowing, and yet always
rejoicing; as poor, and yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet
possessing all things, 1 Cor. 6.8.9.10.

And as the worldling lets no occasion pass by him, without bringing some of
his enterprises to pass: so the godly slips no opportunity of time, without
accomplishing his design: the time past he redeems with fervent prays, the
time present he bestows in all holiness and honesty; the time to come, he is
careful to spend it to Gods glory, his own, and another good: he is
diligent in reading, in hearing, and holy meditations; the godly is all his
delight, and the Saints are his chiefest treasure; he is at all times, upon all
occasions, and in all places, exercised in holy duties, and in devotion both
public and private: the distressed (by him) is relieved, the sick is
visited, the captive is redeemed, the poor is comforted: he is eyes to the
blind, feet to the lame, and counsel and strength to the weak and ignorant:
he has the prayers of others, and his own prayers do good to others, and his
example reaches all the world over: he is painful in travel, patient in
affliction; the world he contemns, and all the glory of it; Heaven only is his
aim, God is his comfort, Christ his treasure, and the blessed Saints and
Angels his only Companions; and when the world leaves him, Heaven receives him:
there is not a Grace, but he puts it to use, and gets interest upon it, yea
Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.16. as he walks from faith to faith, till he
appear before the living God in Zion, Psalm. 84.7.

Now as there is a thriving in godliness, which I call the Heavenly Thrift; so
there is (in the third and last place) a worldly thrift, which is our thriving
in earthly affairs; but because there are but few, but seem to be instructed
in this way, I will only briefly set down a twofold Rule.

The first is, that we have a care to avoid idleness. 2. That we get nothing
by false ways, or means.

First therefore, I say, that if we desire to thrive upon earth, we must avoid
idleness; because it is not only an enemy to thrift, but also the very mother,
or nurse of all evil: therefore an idle man cannot be said to be a thriving
man; because it is only the diligent hand that makes rich, Prove. 10.4.

Secondly, we must have a care that we get nothing by false ways, or means.

We must have a care of false weights, and measures, of adulterate ware, of
bribes, coveteousnesse, cruelty, and oppression, of fraud, deceit, and
extortion, and that we preach not the word for filthy lucre sake, whereby we
make merchandise of it, and set God, our own Consciences, and peoples Souls
to sale. We must have a care of swearing, and forswearing of our selves, lest
the flying curse take place amongst us, and consume the very stones and timber
of out houses, Zach. 5.4. We must have a care that the cry of the poor,
fatherless, and widows, come not into the ears on the Lord, and root us and
our posterity for ever out of the Land of the living. We must have a care that
we entangle not our selves with the cares of this life, that we meddle not
with the times, nor with Power and Authority, nor with them that are given to
change, Psalm. 24.21.

But because the worldling will be careful enough in this behalf, viz. to
study his own welfare and happiness upon Earth; I leave his worldly care to
bring him to a true and spiritual care of his everlasting happiness and
welfare in the world to come, seeing that for this he was borne and brought
into the world; and that this is the only thrift, if there be any true
thriving way under Heaven: Which way and means, God grant us, for Christ his
sake. Amen.

FINIS.

