CHRISTMAS, The Christians grand Feast: Its Original, Growth, and Observation,
Also of Easter, Whitsontide, and other Holidays modestly discussed and
determined. Also the beginning of the Year, and other things observable. Where
also among other learned Men, you have the judgment of those eminent Men;
Josephus Scaliger, Rodulphus Hospinian, Matthaeus Beroaldus, Joh. Causabon,
Doct. Fulk, M. Cartwright, Alsted, Hugh Broughton, Master Mead.

(...)

Epictetus. By THOMAS MOCKET; Sometimes of Queens College in Cambridge, and
Mr. of Arts in both the Universities; and now Pastor of Gildeston in
Hartfordshire.

Imprimatur,

November. 26, 1650. Edm. Calamy.



London, Printed for Richard Wodenoth at the Star under Peter's Church in
Cornhill. 1651.

CHRISTMAS, The Christians grand Feast: Its original, growth and observation;
discussed and determined.
FOr the dissolving of this doubt, Saturnus Aegyptius was wicked Cham, says
Laurentius Codomannus in Anno M. 1905, Saturnus Babylonicus was cruel Nimrod,
ibid.
and settling all religious, and peaceable men's minds and consciences concerning
the observation of Christ's Nativity, we must know

1 That Saturn, who (as Heathens themselves inform us Phornutus, Also Cicero de
natura Deorum Macrobius Saturnalium, l. 1. c. 7. Boccace genealogy of the gods,
) was son to Coelum, or Coelus and Vesta, Father of the Heathen gods, took to
wife his own sister Ops, by whom he had many children; Jupiter, Juno, Neptune,
Pluto, and others, Patri Coelo virilia exsecuit, he cut off his father Coelums
genitalia, and threw them into the Sea, a most unson-like, and an abominable
fact, he was famous in his generation, because he Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1. c. 7.
Polyd. Virgil. de invent^ribus r^rum, l. 3. c. 3.
first found out the art of grafting fruit trees and husbandry in Latium, a
part of Italy, and taught it first in Europe, he was generally honored by the
Heathens, as a god, and to that end, sacred rites were done unto him, and the
25 of December, with the rest of the days following, seven days together, were
appointed and generally observed by the idolatrous Heathen, to that end,
sacrifices, sports, and other solemnities, were magnificently, and with great
preparation and rejoicing performed, Polydor. Virgil. de invent. rerum, l. 2.
c. 14 23. and l. 5. c, 2. S^neca Epist. 18 Prin Histrom. p. 751. etc.
which the Apostle tells us is foul idolatry, a sacrificing unto Devils, 1 Cor.
10. 20. At which time also, there was a sheaf of Corn, offered to Ceres, their
Goddess of Corn, and an hymn sung in her praise, called (...) and (...). Also
Feasting, Pol. Virg. de invent. l. 5. c. 2. Horatius Ca^m. l. 1. Ode 37. and
Sermo l. 2. Satyr. 7. Also Virgil. Ovid, and alii.
Drinking, Stage Plays, Enterludes, Masks Mummeries, Dancing, and all
licentious dissoluteness by their Lords of mis-rule, (especially in England,
says Polydore Virgil) who, for that time commanded all in the house, the
Governors, as well as others. He was made propitious by sacrifices of men unto
him, as they thought. Plut. Moral. p 379.
His better part as they believed) being translated unto heaven, shines forth
in the greatest and highest of the seven Planets, called Saturn, a malevolent
star, Stella nocens Saturnus. Lucan.
Him, and also Belus, Jupiter, Mars, Mercurius, Venus, Pluto, Neptune, Apollo,
Bacchus, Flora, and many other souls of great men departed, the Pagans
worshipped for their gods, because while on earth, they deserved well of
mortal men, did many good things, says Lactantius Firminianus, Lactantius
institut. divin. l. 1.
who as Augustine Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 3. c. 3. and 17.
says, were known to have been adulterers, and notorious malefactors, though
in some other things famous. Sir W. Raleighs History of the World p. 73. 75.


That festival time in December, called Saturnalia, (Saturns feasts, because
in honor of Saturn their idol god) was called also (...), and (...), Yule,
Athen. l. 14. Veteres Theologi begin their year as (...) a Domini praesentia,
which some refer to his birth, some to his baptism, and some to the appearing
of the Star to the Wisemen, Beroald. Chron. l. 4. c. 1.
because of the sheaf then offered to Ceres, and hymn sung in honor of her,
for the words were generally used both for a sheaf and that hymn, which time
they spent in idolatrous sacrificing, feasting, revelling, and the like, as
abovesaid.

At this time was consecrated to the honor of Saturn, Ceres, and their
goddess Vesta, by the ancient Heathens especially.

So the first day of January, commonly called New-years-day, of which I have
not yet observed any good reason in Antiquity, save only this, because the
Christians retained the Julian Account and year, as the truest which begins the
year on the Kalends, or first day of January, as Hospin. de orig^ne Fest.
Ch^istian. f. 31.
Hospinian observes, without having respect to the true acconnt of the
beginning of time, but conceive rather that the year should begin on March 25,
when our Political and Civil year begins, and the first day of the worlds
creation, as some learned men think: Or rather now about the tenth of March,
when the Sun first enters into the first degree of Aries, and begins our
Spring, or about the 3d. of April, about which time Christ suffered, it being
usual with Antiquity, to record the day of the death of eminent persons in
honor of them, for their birth day, because they then begin to live the life
of Eternity. The Ancient Heathens, i Martis erat primus mensis, Venerisque
secundus, Ovid. Fast. lib. 1.
as the Romans, did begin their year with March, as appears by the names of the
Months still in use among us, namely, September, October, November, December,
that is the seventh, the eighth, ninth, and tenth month, till Numa Pompilius
the great forger and advancer of Heathe Roman Idolatry and Superstition, who
began to reign about the third year of the sixteenth Olympiade, says Plutarch.
Plut. in vita Numae Pompilii p. 48 Pol. Virg. de invent rerum l. 2. c. 4.
The Arabians and the Egyptians began their year with the Vernall Equinoctial
or Spring, and the Jews, their Ecclesiastical year for holy feasts and
Church Affairs with Abib about the latter end of our March. Or else, we should
begin in September, as the Asians, the later and Christian Greeks: for the
Ancient Greeks began their year with the Summers Solstice, that is in June, as
they did also their Olympiades, Sc^arpi Symphon. p. 141. Laurent. Codomannus
Annals. Beroaldus Chron. l. 4 c. 1. p. 236.
says Beroaldus, The Ecclesiastical Astrologers begin their year and account
with September, do also the Jews: the Jews for legal, political, and civil
affairs, because they generally believed the World was then created, the fruits
being then all ripe, and not any in March at the Passeoeer, for then corn was
green, and green ears were offered to God, as appears by Exodus 9. 31. 32.
Avenarius in Lexico Hebr.
the word Abib, (...) signifies Spica cum culmo, spica virens maturescens, a
green ear, earing, earing time Pagnin and Avenarius, see Exodus 9. 31, 32.
Levit. 2. 14. The Septuagint usually renders it by (...) new fruits: And the
text says expressly that the plague of hail, Exodus 9. which we may suppose
happened about the beginning of Abib, March Moon, or a few days before (as Mr.
Mead well conjectureth) had smitten the flax and the barley, Mead Diatriba 3.
part. p. 627.
because the barley was eared, and the flax bolled, but the wheat and the rye
were not eared, after which earing, it must have some time to ripen, with us
they have about two months and sometimes more, and so with them, (as I
conceive) harvest began (their two loaves of first fruits, and harvest feast of
them, because of the ripe corn) at Pentecost, Exodus 23. 16. the beginning of
harvest and not the end, as some affirm, for their seed time both for wheat and
barley in Egypt (and therefore also about that in Palestine) was in November,
and their barley was ripe in the sixth month, but their wheat not till the
seventh, about a month after, as Pliny informs us, which must be in May and
June, the usual time of Pentecost which fell out most commonly in May,
therefore this month was called Aethanim, which signifies strengths, because
all things were created in the strength, and much about the time, our Blessed
Savior was born, that month begins toward the end of our September
Month, but I return, having thought good to add a word or two concerning the
beginning of the year.

The first of January, commonly called New-years-day, a part of our Christmas
was dedicated to the honor of their two faced Polyd. Virgil. de invent. rerum,
l. 2. c. 4.
Idol Janus so called, and pictured, bcause he was a wise Prince, that did
look back, and well observe times and things past, and thence did wisely gather
and foresee what might be hereafter, and accordingly did regulate his affairs,
which day the Heathens did in like manner solemnize, and also by sending of
New-years-gifts one to another, wherefore the whole Catholic Church (as Mr.
Prin Histriom. p. 756. Council. Altisiod. A. C. 614. Can. 1. Synodus Turonica 2
Can. 23. Council. Constant. 6. A. C. 680 Can. 62.
informs us out of Alcuvinus) and four famous Councils appointed a solemn fast
to be kept on that day, to bewail all heathenish sports, plays, and lewd
idolatrous practices and profane courses, Polyd. Virgil de Invent. rerum l. 5.
c. 2.
prohibiting all Christians under pain of Excommunication from observing the
first of January as holy, or sending New years gifts. Durand. Rationale divin.
offic. l. 6. c. 15.
It was condemned also by many ancient and learned Writers, as Ambrose,
Augustine, Chrysostom, and many others, yea, and by two Popes as bad as they
were, namely, Pope Zachary, and Pope Martin.

February the second was dedicated to the honor of their goddess Februa,
Rhenanus in Tertul de Corona militum.
(the mother of Mars, Tertul. de Idolat.
another of their Deities) to whom the Pagans offered burnt torches, tapers,
and wax-candles to pacify the evil Spirits, as they did also on the altars of
Saturn, on his festival days, and the month is called February from Februus,
which is Pluto, the god of hell, as the heathens imagined.

May Day, the first day of May, was consecrated and kept in honor of their
devil goddess Flora, Polyd. Virgil. de Invent. rerum, l. 5. c. 2.
a notable rich whore, at what time they used to bring laurel, green boughs
and branches of trees and flowers, with singing and rejoicing, and adorn their
doors and houses with them, a heathenish idolatrous practice, condemned by the
Council of Toledo, Council. Toletanum A. C. 617 Can. 73.
where were present 77 Bishops, and by Pope Martin, and by many other good
writers, yet frequently practiced in many places of England to this day.

The first of November, was solemnly kept by the Pagans, in honor of all their
devils Deities, 1 Cor. 10. 20
and a Temple built in Rome, and consecrated in honor of them, both that feast
and Temple were therefore called Polyd. Virgil. de Invent. rerum, l. 6. c. 8.
Pantheon.

Thus you have a brief account of some of the Pagan idolatrous festivals, and
how observed by them in honor of their idol devil gods, and consequently how
little reason we Christians have to observe them. Now

2 To come nearer to the point in hand, we must know also that the heathen
idolatrous holy days were turned into Christian, as Christ's Nativity Polyd
Virgil. de Invent. rerum, l. 5. c. 1, 2. Durandus Ration. divin. offic. l. 7.
c. 34. in festo omnium Sanctorum, Franc. de Croy his first conformity c. 19. 20.
was appointed to be kept, and has long been generally observed on the very
time and day, when Saturns idolatrous, riotous feast was solemnized, and in the
room and imitation thereof, and therefore that time was anciently called Yule
(...), and (...), as the heathens called it, and the mad, ryotous, profane
plays, and sports in Christmas time, Yule-games and Christmas Karols, sung in
praise of Christ, as the heathens did the hymn (...), in honor of the idol
Keres, that is Ceres, Doctor Vsh^r. de anno Maced. and p. 40. out of Beda, de
ratione temporum.
goddess of corn.

Innocents day December. 28. The pretended day in which the Innocent children of
Bethlem were murdered by Herod's command, Matt. 2. 16.) is dedicated to the
memory, and kept in honor of them, as it was consecrated and kept festival in
honor of the Pagans idol god Quirinus the surname of Romulus, the founder of
Rome, whose idol feast is called Quirinalia.

The Circumcision of Christ, was solemnized on Jaunary the first, in the room
of their two-faced Jani hisrontis imago Virg. l. 7. Plutarch. in Numa Pompil.
p. 48. Latinae versionis Xylandri. Jodo^us in Hora^. f. 57.
idol Janus heathenish idolatrious-festivall, and from thence Yule an hymn
and sheafe, (a burnt offering) to Ceres, our Blazes Christmas Karols and
sending of New-yeares-gifts came.

The Purification of Mary, is celebrated on February the second, and called
Candlemas-day, because of the many wax candles and tapers offered and burnt in
honor of the Virgin Mary, Polyd Virgil. de Invent. l. 5. c. 2.
and christened by the Papist Candlemasday, as the Pagan Idolaters did on that
day to their shegod Februa, more abundantly then to Saturn on his day, but
accendant quotidie lucernas, quibus lux nulla est, let them light candles to
them that have no light in themselves, said Tertullian and Lactantius of the
Tertul. in Apolog adversus Gentes, ^actant. Institut l. 6. c. 2.
heathens.

May Day, also has been by us observed (by the command of Superiors as others
holy days were) even with the heathens customs of bringing green boughs,
branches of trees, flowers, and adorning of houses, windows, with them, just as
the Heathens did, also May-poles, dancing, drinking, and the like, Ethnicorum
more, after the manner of the idolatrous Pagans.

Likewise, The first of November, was dedicated and observed festival in
honor of the Virgin Mary, and all the Saints, by the Church of Rome, Polyd.
Virgil. l. 6. c. 8. Durand. Rationale divin o^^ic. Rodelphus H^spinian. de
orig. sestorum Christian. f. 159
and called All-Saints-day, (as the Pagans observed it in honor of all the
idol gods calling it Pantheon) and that by the decrees of Pope Boniface the
Fourth, and Pope Gregory the Fourth.

3 This change of Pagan idolatrous feasts into Christian, in honor of Christ,
and the Saints, was made by some of the Ancients, when Christianity was spread
among the Heathens, and many of them converted to the true faith, in hope, that
by complying with them, in observing their festival days but to Christian
ends, they should the rather draw the Pagan Idolaters from Paganism to
Christianity. Pope Telesphonus Rabanas M^urus I^st^t. Clericorum l 2. c. 31. ut
r^f^rt Guil Prin Histr^om. p. 774. Missas in nocte Nativitacis Christi t^r
celebrari statuit Telesphorus. Summa Conciliorum and Pontificum per Bartholom.
Carranzam, p. 17, 18. Doctor Fu^k in an^wer to the Rhemish Test. Matthew. 2. 5, 4.
who began about the year of Christ 140 in the time of Antoninus, the Emperors
reign, was the first Author we read of among the Romans, of the celebration of
Christ's Nativity, and on that day Saturns devil-feast was began, viz. December
the 25, but in other Churches (excepting Constantinople) I find as yet no
observation of it, the Church of Rome, where Antichrist was to reign, being the
first beginner and author as of most other superstitious observations, so of
this also. Before Constantine the Great, there were not many festivals
observed, and the feast of the Nativity of Christ, Easter and Pentecost, which
two last certainly (were observed before the Nativity) were not universally
observed till many years after, says Dr. Fulke, no not till many hundred years
after Christ, see Magdeburgensis Century 2. 4. 5. 6. Gregor. Magnus in Evang.
hom. 8. Chemnit. harmony p. 92.

The other feasts mentioned before, were changed by Pope Boniface, Bedae
Eccles. histor. l. 2 c. 14.
and Pope Gregory the First; Greg. Magn. Ep. l. 9 Ep. 71.
Pope Boniface began A. C. 419. Pope Gregorius began A. C. 590. as Alstedius
and Bellarmine Alsted. Chron. p. 279. Bellar. de Script. Eccl^s.
inform me, contrary to the judgment and will of renowned Ambrose, Augustiue,
and the whole Council of Afric, Guil. Prin histr^om. p. 760.
Can. 27. 28. and others. And to speak truth at the first, Christ's Nativity and
other feasts was religiously observed by the Christians. Hear Tertullian of
this matter, Tertull. in Apolog. adversus Gentes c. 39, 40 f. 187. Excellently
also to this purpose Greg. Nazianzene in orat. in Natalem Dom. A good example.
for Christians now to follow, on the Lords days, and days of thanksgiv^ng.
says he, (speaking of himself, and the Christians of his time.) Coimus in
coetum, and congregationem, ut Deum quasi manu facta precationibus ambiamus
orantes. We assemble together into one company, that so we might, as it were,
assault and besiege God with our joint prayers. Again, we feed our faith, with
holy words erect our hope, settle our confidence, establish our discipliue with
the often inculcations of divine precepts: also there are exhortations,
corrections, divine censures. After which, they kept the Supper, or Love-feast
(Agape) in which nihil vilitatis, nihil immodestiae admittur, non prius
discumbitur quam oration ad Deum praegustatur, in which, no vileness, no
immodesty is admitted, they sat not down (to eat) before they had first sent
up a prayer to God. Editur quantum esurientes capiant, bibitur quantum pudicii
est utile, and then falling to their meat, they eat no more then would well
satisfy their hunger, drink no more than was fit for modest persons, satiating
themselves, so as they remembered they were to worship God in the night after.
Ita confabulantur ut qui sciunt Deum audire, discoursing as they who well knew
God heard them. Post aquam manualem, and after water to wash their hands, and
lights were brought in, every one as he was able, was provoked to sing a Psalm
to God. And as prayer began, so it likewise concluded the feast, after which
they departed non in catervas coesionum, neque in classes discursationum, nec
in eruptiones lascivorum, not into the rude routs of swashing blades, not into
the companies of rambling fellows, not into the lashings out of lascivious
persons, but to the same care of modesty and chastity, like those, qui non tam
coenam coenaverint quam disciplinam, who had not so fed their bellies, as their
minds and hearts with wholesome discipline. Thus he shows how religiously they
observed their feasts; the supposed day of Christ's Nativity, and other
festival days at first, after their change from Pagan to Christian festivals,
which strict and religious observation of those days, were it now enjoined by
authority, and practiced, I believe it would be as much disliked by our
Christmas men, as the non-observation of the time is now displeasing.

4 But then withal, it must be remembered, that within a little time after, the
observation of these Pagan festival days (though the name and end was changed)
brought in all the heathenish customs, and Pagan rites and ceremonies that the
idolatrous Heathens used, as riotous Drinking, Health-drinking, Gluttony,
Luxury, Wantonness, Dancing, Dicing, Stage Plays, Enterludes, Masks,
Mummeries, with all other Pagan sports, and profane practices, into the Church
of God, which was never defiled with these profane abominations, till those
Pagan holy days were changed into Christian, which by reason of men's natural
process to carnal pleasures, and heathenish rites and ceremonies, etc. did
soon transform all Christian festivals into heathen again, as many learned and
good Writers assure us, Vide Prins Histricm. p. 760
till at last, all Christendom was overrun with them, and in a manner all
life and power of Christianity eaten out with those Pagan Christmas pastimes
and heathenish delights. Hunc diem plurimi Christianorum diurnis nocturnisque
compotationibus, commessationibusque pagunt, ita ut non Christi Natalia, sed
Bacchanalia potius and Lupernalia agere viderentur, so that they seemed not to
keep the feast of Christ's Nativity: Hospinian de orig. fest. Christ. f. 45.
and 159.
(the like may be said of other holy days) but rather the drunken and riotous
feast of Idol Bacchus and Pan, as Hospinian truly says. It is true also that
Beroaldus observes, Bercald. Chronicorum, l. 4. c. 1.
that the pretense of celebrating the memory and virtues of some eminent godly
Christians, brought in holy days, Primum ad otium, d^inde ad nequitiam and ad
caetera quae otium alit mala, inducit.
and holy days idleness, and idleness, profaneness and all licentiousness,
but we may say of the observation of holy days, as our Savior in another case,
from the beginning it was not so. The truth is, that holy days, Monkery,
Nunnery, solitary life, Images, praying for the dead, prayer to Saints departed
and Angels as Mediators, were brought in by the factors for Antichrist, yet
with such specious pretenses, and seeming devotion and holiness, that even
many good men were strangely deceived by them, till it was too late to
withstand them. But by those Christmas sports, carnal pleasures and delights,
God has in those few holy days been more dishonored, the devil better
served, evil men more hardened in their wickedness, and good men more grieved,
and more souls sent headlong to hell, than on any other day, yea, than on all
the rest of the year beside.

Wherefore, those godly Fathers, Augustine, Augustine the father flourished A.
C. 4: o died 433. B^llar de Script Eccles. Alst^d. Chronolog.
and others, observing those growing evils that followed thereupon, wished
Pagan festivals had never been turned into Christian feasts, but quite
abolished, the better to avoid all heathenish customs, dissolute and profane
practices.

And although the disorders and abuses of those days were afterward condemned
by Councils and Synods, as by the Council of Rhemes, A. C. 1583, by the Synod
of Toures in France, the same year, and by others before and since, yet all in
vain, no rooting of them out, but by taking away the observation of them
wholly, as experience shows.

Thus we see who first appointed those holy days we formerly kept as holy
festivities, viz. the Heathen Pagan Idolaters, in honor of their idol devil
gods, the souls of some dead Heroes, which all Christians ought to abominate,
and that long after such idolatrous use of them, some seducing and seduced
Christians turned the same days into Christian festivals in honor of Christ
and the Saints, in compliance with the Heathen Idolaters, out of hope to draw
them to a Christian Religion, but though the corruption of man's nature,
especially they having no divine warrant from Jesus Christ so to do, it turned
to the hardening of the Heathens in their Idolatry, and the universal and
abominable corruption of the Church of Christ.

5 Now let it be considered, whether Christ was born as on that day, which
commonly goes under his name, or about that time, and surely upon inquiry, we
shall find that he was not born then, but rather about the end of September,
in October, Hospinian. de orig. fest. Christia. Matthaei Beroaldi Chron. l. 4 c
12. Hen. Wolphius in Ch^o^. The Jews Ch^istian era or a^coun^, (...) birth of
Christ beginni^g in September, Josephus S^aliger de Emend. temporum, Hugh
Broughten in his Consent of Scripture, in A. M. 3953. Jo ban. Cansabon.
^xe^c^t. p. 91. Scaliger a so in Canonibus Isagogi^is, p. 297. Mr. M^ad.
^iatriba 3. part. p. 617. etc A^sted. Praecog. T^^ol. p. 532 and 572. Alsted.
Chronol p. 19. 22 74. and 120. Encyclop. p 2998. Who adds further, ut docent
e^uditi Chronol^gi. It is the opinion of the most learned Chronologers, says
Mr. Mead, Di^triba 3 d. port p. 6. 8. Doctor Drakes sacred Chronog. p. 72, 73.
Scharpius Symphon. Veteres animad vert^sse Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum,
natum fuisse aquinoctio Autumnali, quae cansa est ut annos inde sic
exorsiprioris aetatis Christiani, quos a Domini nativitate solita est inc^oare
Vetus Ecclesia. B^roaldi Chron. l. 4. p. 236.
which I thus clear, beside the learned Authors judgment mentioned in the
margin.

First, from the time of his conception, which was toward the end of December,
or in January at the farthest, and therefore his birth being full 9 months or
40 weeks after, must fall about the end of September, or in October which I
think evident, by laying down these Propositions, which I believe are manifest
truths.

1 That the Jews Ecclesiastical year began in Nisan, alias Abib, Exodus 12. 2.
This month shall be to you the beginning of months, the month in which
Israel came out of Egypt, Exodus 13. 4. which contains the latter part of our
March, and the former part of our April.

2 That the Jewish year consisted of twelve months.

3 That in those 12 months were 24 courses for the Priests to serve in the
Temple, each Priest fourteen days, 1 Chronicles 24. v. 1, and 6. to 20.

4 That in Abiatus course, Alsted. Chron. p. 19, 20, 74.
which was the eighth course or fortnight from the beginning of Abib, which
began on the latter part of our March, with our Marchmoon then.

That mistake that Zechary was high Priest, and officiated in September, in the
feast of Tabernacles may easily be confuted from the text, Luke 1. v. 1, 8, 9.
the primitive practice of the Church of Alexandria, which was very exact in
their accounts, they celebrated the birth of John the Baptist, April 2^. 13
the 28 mensis Pharmutii, says Cyrill, in an Homily on that occasion. Also by
the perpetual observation of the Jews, and is fully done by S^harpius,
Scaliger, Causabon, Ber^^ldus, Mead, Scharpi Symphon. p. 471. Causahon out
Scaliger. Exercit. p. 91. Bercald. Chron. l. 4. c. 2. Meads Dia (...) triba 3
pa t. p. 620.
and others.

5 That after Zecharies course of ministering in the Temple was ended, and
Zechary returned home, his wife Elizabeth conceived him, who was after called
John, Luke 1. 5, 6, 13, 19, 23, 24, After these days, (that is, the end of his
course and ministry) his wife Elizabeth conceived, etc. which was in the
latter end of our July, and John was born in the end of our April Scharp. Sym.
phon. p. 473. Alsted. Chron p. 20. 74. 121. Brough^ons Consent in A. M. 3953.
Causabon out of Scaliger. de Emendatione temporum, and in Canonibus Isagogi^is.
p. 29^. Causa^^^ Exercitati, p 91.
or thereabout.

6 That our blessed Savior was conceived in the womb of the Virgin Mary by
the Holy Ghost, six months after the conception of John the Baptist, Luke 1.
7, 26, 27, to 36. which must fall out about the end of December, or in January
six months after the end of July, the time of John's conception.

These things being granted (which I think cannot be denied) it must of necessity
follow that Christ's birth, which was nine months or forty weeks after, must
fall out about the end of September, or in October, especially he being her
firstborn.

Secondly, I clear this assertion concerning the time of Christ's birth, from
the time of his suffering, thus:

1 It is (I think) generally granted by Divines, Matthaeus Beroald. Chron l. 4.
c. 2. and l. 3. c. 8.
that Christ lived on earth 32 years and an half, or 33 and an half, Christ's
birth and baptism were both on the 14 day of the seventh month, to which our
September answers: he was three year and an half in his ministry, lived in
all 32 years and an half (says Beroaldus) but many others reckon 33 years and
an half; g Piscator in Luke 3. 13 Beza, Broughtons Consent against A. M. 3941.
Laurentii C^doman. Annals. Ainsw. Annot. in Numb 4. 3. with Genesis 5. 32.
^eroal^i Chron. l. 4. c. 2.
all (I think) acknowledge an odd half year, for he was baptized and entered
into his public ministry, when he began to be, or entered upon the thirtieth
year of his age. Luke 3. 22, 23. at which age the Leviticall Priests (as some
affirm) entered upon their service. Numb. 4. 3, 35, 39, 43, 47. or as some
others when the thirtieth year of his age was complete, and he began to enter
upon his one and thirtieth year, the words are (...), which word for word is:
he was beginning, etc. Beroaldus renders it thus: Ipse annum ingreditur
tricessimum: see the Authors in the Margin.

2 That he lived three years and an half in his public ministry, from his
baptism to his passion, is generally granted by Divines, yet some, Alsted.
Chron. p. 22. Scharpius in Sympho. p. 474.
I have read, say four years and an half, i Laurentius Codoman. Annals, H. B.
and R. B. Iti^erarium sacrae Script p. 477. August. contra Judaeos, Paganos,
Arrianos, l. 3. c. 5.
which disagreement does nothing weaken our assertion, but confirm it.

3 T^a^ he suffered the 15 day of the month Abib or Nilan, which was then
about our April the third, but Austine says on the 8th. Kalends of April (that
is March 25.

Now cast away all the whole years (be they more or fewer, it matters not) and
there remains half a year or six months, which all learned men (which I have
read or heard of acknowledge) which six months reckon (either forward or
backward, all comes to one account) from the time of his suffering and his
birth falls precisely about the end of September or beginning of October, and
so we have the time evidenced to fall out this way also pat with the other.
This also Beroaldus proves from the 9 of Math. B^rcaldi Chron^corum l. 4. c. 2.
Daniel.

Thirdly, Near upon the same time falls the observation of Mr. Mead, Meads
Diatriba 3. part p. 615. and 617. Hen. Wolphius in Chron.
and some others from John 1. 14. The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us:
(...); and tabernacled, pitched his tent, or dwelt in tents, for so the word
(...) signifies, answerable to the type of the Israelites, dwelling in
tabernacles, tents or bushes in the feast of the seventh month, Levit. 23. 34.
Deuteronomy. 16. 13. Nehem. 8. 14, a thing usual among the Jews, at the feasts of
Tabernacles, which began on the 15 day of the September-moon, and ended the 22,
at which time they affirm Christ to be born, and so happily answered the type,
which another custom used at that feast, seems to confirm, for while they were
carrying the boughs, they used this short prayer, Hosanna, Hosanna, a save now,
or save I beseech thee.

Fourthly, Add here unto the testimony of the Rabbines in Midrash Rabba, that
the Messiah must be born in the month Aethanim, alias Tisri, and September the
month of strengths, full of feasts, to teach of the Messiah, And so we find
that the three chief aniversary feasts of the Jews did foretell and type out
Christ's times.

As 1 Their Passover was a memorial of Isreal's preservation in Egypt, and
deliverance out of it in the first month Abib, fitly prefiguring Christ's
death, and our spiritual redemption wrought by Christ at the same time.

2 Their feast of Weeks, or harvest 50 days after the Pasover, the time of
giving the fiery law by Moses to Israel with our Pentecost, when the Spirit was
given in fiery cloven tongues. Act. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. So

3 Their feast of Tabernacles, or dwelling in tents or bushes on 15 of the
seventh month, and September, 8 days together, prefigured Christ's Nativity,
pitching his tent, or dwelling in the Tabernacle of his flesh among men, four
times eight years.

Fifthly, At that time Christ was born, all the world went to be taxed, every
man to his own city, Luke 2. 2, 3. but it is not at all probable, that the
journeying of all the world, men and women with child, should be commanded by
Empericall Edict in the depth of winter, when the ways were worst, and the days
shortest, and therefore unfittest for travail, especially for women with child,
there are days enough in the year beside to gather and pay money: neither was
Augustus Caesar, so bare of money and hard put to it: neither does Princes use
to gather such extraordinary taxes of their subjects in the middle of winter,
and when the fruits of the year are half spent, but presently after harvest,
Hen. Wolph. Chron. l. 1.
as Wolphius observes.

Sixthly, At that Christ was born, the Shepherds were watching their flocks in
the open fields all night, Luke 2. 8. but it is very unprobable, that they did so
in winter, especially in December month, sheep being frigoris
impatientissimae, most impatient of cold, as H. Wolphius H Wolp^. l. 1. Chron.
out of Heside l. 2. operum, but in houses or stables, as Columella says. l.
7. c. 3. and Virgil. l. 3. Georg. consider our Saviors words. Matthew. 24. 20.
Pray that your flight be not in the winter.

Seventhly, Neither is it likely, that the Wisemen that came to visit Christ,
were so unwise, as to take so long a journey to, and from Christ, in the Doct
Drakes sacred Chron. p. 72.
depth of winter.

Eighthly, Christ was born on the day of the Autumme Equinoctial, in which the
world was made by God, deformed and undone by Adam, but renewed by Natus mundus
and renatus eodem mense scptimo, ^er^ald. Chron. l. 4. p. 248. See Hen.
Wolphius Chr^n. l. 1.
Christ.

Ninthly, Beroaldus proves Christ birth to be in September, by another argument
from Daniel c. 9. in his 4th. Book, and 3d chapt to whom I refer the learned.

Lastly, The true, particular and exact time of Christ's birth cannot be
determined by men, and if Christ's birth were unknown to Clem. Alex. Strom. l.
1. who lived An. Christi, 195. Epiphanius, Beroaldus, Mead, Dr. Fulk on the
Rhem. Test. Matthew 2. 5, 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and them that lived the next age to Christ, why, I pray
you (says Hospinian) do you believe Epiphanius, Epiph. to^. 1. l 2.
who lived almost 400 years after, who held January 5, or Middelburgensis, who
Middelburg c. 4. l. 19.
was for the 8 Kalends of April, is March 25, or they that say he was born on
December 25. as did Orosius? Some of the Ancients held that Christ was born
January 6, and they called (...), also (...), some on April 29: some on May 19,
or 20: some in September, some on December 25, says Hospinian, and I.
Causabon, Hospin. de origin fest. Christ. Causabon. Exercit. 1. p 91.
some on March 25, then the day of the Vernall Equinoctial, says
Middelburgensis. Middelburg. l. 19. c. 4.
And accordingly, the birth of Christ was celebrated by the Roman, or Latin
and French Churches on December 25, says Theophilus Caesariensis, Palestinae
Episcopus. The Egyptians, Graecians and Armenians, a people in Asia,
celebrated his Nativity and Baptism, both together on our Epiphany, January 6,
says Cassianus and Hugo, Hugo in Matthew. c. 1.
others on the 15 day of mensis ^yb. and about January 9, some others on the 14
or 15 mensis Pharmuthi, that is April the 9 or 10, as Cyrill informs us in an
Homily on that Cyril in hom. ejus argumenti.
occasion.

The first institution of it cannot be known, says Hospinian, and the first
mention of its observation that he could find (though a diligent searcher into
Antiquities of this kind) was by Theophilus, In Pasch. Epist.
Saint Theophilus Bishop of Antioch. A long time after the Lords Ascension,
there was no day or certain time appointed for the observation of the birth of
Christ, says Beroaldus, Beroa^d, Chro. l. 4 p. 238. longo post Ascentionem
Domini tempore nullum fuisse festum, aut cer^o tempore distinctam diei natalis
observationem.
yea, there was no certainty agreed upon in Epiphanius time, as himself
witnesses, who lived almost 400 years after Christ; and it was after the time
of Constantine the Great (who died about 337) that the 25 of December, was
chosen, and first in the Latin or Roman Church, but not in the Greek Church
till the days of Chrysostom, Mast^r Mead Diatriba. 3. part. p. 619.
who made an oration, yet extant, at the first observation of that day, which
he says they received from the Roman Church, he flourished A. C. 400. But
Beroaldus says, Beroald Chron. l. 4. c. 1. p. 236. and 238. Hospin. de orig
sest. Christ. f. 66
there was nothing certain instituted til A. C. 532, and that, as it seems, the
first Council that determined that day, was the Council of Aurelia, or Orleans
in France A. C. 558, and after that the 10 Councils of Toledo in Spain, A C.
621, but it was observed long before that, and surely God has purposely
concealed that day of Christ's birth, that none might superstitiously observe
it, as he did Moses sepulcher.

Q. But if Christ's birth was about the end of September or in October, why
then did the Ancients set that time apart in memory of Christ's birth, and not
some other nearest to it?

A. The Ancients, who changed that Pagan festival to Christ's Nativity, did not
therefore pitch on that day, because they thought he was then both, says
Hospinian, Paulus Jovius, and others, especially J. Causabon, Hospin de orig.
fest. Christ. f. 160. Paulus Jovius bist. l. 38 Hugo in Matthew. c. 2. Causobon.
Exercit. 1. p. 91. Videntur Pii Patres, etc. Religionem facilius admissum iri
sperabant si eadem opera impias Gentium solemni ates deberent and novas
inst^tuerent, quae ad verum Dei cultum p^rtinent.
but because they hoped that the turning the Heathens feasts on these days which
were observed to christian, as they did also some other Pagan holy days,
observing the same days still, but to a better end and use, would be a means to
draw the Ethnicks from Paganism, to Christianity, but it turned to a quite
contrary effect, to wit, the hardening of the Heathens in their idolatry and
ways of sin, and the great corruption of the Church of God with heathenish
customs, profane and superstitious practices, through the pronenesse of
people generally to carnal pleasures, superstitious, and profane customs and
practices, and especially through the idleness, luxury, pomp, power, wealth
and dissoluteness of the Popes clergy, the superstitious Priests and Monks of
Rome Christian, (now long since turned Antichristian) following step by step
Rome Heathen, who brought in and countenanced Spurcitias Gentilium, the
filthiness, dishonesty and uncleanness of the idolatrous Gentiles, as many
good Authors and Salvion. de Gubern. Dei, l. 3 Greg. Magnus hom. 17. in
Evangel. and Moral. l. 6. c. 17. Aug. de Civit. D^i l. 2. c. 20. Franc. de
Croy, his first conformity. Synodus Tironensis sub C^arl. Magno, A. C. 742.
Can. 5 Jeffery Chaucer his Plowmans tale. See many others mentioned in Master
Prins Histriom. p. 760. etc. which I have not read.
Councils inform us.

Wherefore I conclude this section, that conformity unto, and retention of the
Heathenish customs in the observation of days, and perticularly of those days
first consecrated to Heathens spurious idol Deities, is not commendable in
Christians, suitable or agreeable to the Gospel, though under pretext of
honoring Christ, and his worship, but to be renounced and cast off for ever,
with detestation of all Christian pious hearts.

6 But suppose it were true, and certain that Christ was born in the Winter
Solstice, on that day we heretofore observed in memory of his birth, viz.
December 25, (the contrary whereunto is, I think, clearly and fully proved) yet
now by reason that our year consists of 365 days and 6 hours is longer then
the true natural and tropicall year, by 11 minutes and 15 seconds, or
thereabout, every 25th day of December is so much later then the former, so
that the 25 of December this present year 1650 falls out about thirteen days,
or more later than the true account of time, and later than it was, then which
Julius Caesar instituted the Julian-Yeare (the same year that is now in use
among us) about 54 years before Christ was born, also later by almost so much,
then it was on that year Christ was born, therefore our 25 of December is not
the day, but December 11, when the Sun enters into Capricorn, (though the
former supposition were granted, which may not be) and therefore not to be
observed in memory of Christ, especially by knowing Christians, least by their
practice they should teach others also to believe that for truth which is very
untrue, that Christ was born on that day, by which also we may see how untruly
though ignorantly many did say the Collect appointed for that day. Almighty God
which have given us thine only begotten son, to take our nature upon him, and
this day to be born, etc.

7 The celebration of our December the 25 in memory of Christ's Nativity
(supposing further that he was then born, M. Cartwrights Annotat. on the Rhem.
Test. Gal. 10.. 5. Matthew. 2. Sect. 1
and that that time is the true time of the year, and the same time it was when
Christ was born, viz. the day of the Winters Solstice) yet is it not
justifiable and warrantable for Christians who pretend to honor Christ to
observe it.

1 Because there is no precept, example, or approved ground in sacred Scripture
for the observation of that day in houour of Christ's birth, if any such be, let
him that can show it, and I will embrace it, and recant my error at
Pauls-crosse, or the Exchange, but it is an humane invention, and a mere
tradition of men, and was devised, and the religious observation of it, and
other holy days were imposed and commanded merely and only by man without any
ground and warrant from Christ, therefore they that will honor Christ, (as all
ought to do) must not observe it or them, being without Christ's direction. It
is an honor peculiar to Jesus Christ, to prescribe times, days and worships,
and an high intrenching on his Sovereign Authority and Kingly office, to
prescribe days and times, therefore what Christ our Lord and Master does not
command, or allow warrant to do, we may not do, we may not observe days or
times without his appointment and warrant, but punctually (as near as we can)
keep to his command, Deuteronomy. 5. 32, 3^. Jerem. 7. 22 Isaiah 1. 12. Therefore Dr.
Dr. Fulk. in answer to the Rhem. Test. on Luke 24. 50.
Fulk speaking of the sign of cross in baptism says, It cannot be a
memorial of Christ's, because Christ commanded it not, and so may I say of
this, and all other the like holy days.

2 Because these days have been and are elsewhere to this day greatly abused to
all manner of profaneness, dissoluetnesse and superstition, whereby God has
been more dishonored on the Christmas days, and so on all other holy days
also, and the Devil more served, than at any other time of the year, yea than
on all the rest of the year beside, therefore they are to be abolished, as
Hezekiah did the Brazen Serpent when abused to Idolatry, he brake it into
pieces, and called it Nehustan, a contemptible piece of brass, though at first
set up by Gods especial command for an excellent end, and did much good, 2
Kings 18. 4. Tertullian Tertull. de Corona Milit
proves at large in his book of the crown of soldiers, that when lawful
things are abused by Pagans or Idolaters, Christians may not use them, unless
they have Gods warrant for them. And Augustine shows. Aug. Epist. 86. ad Casub.
That the Church of Christ left off to fast on the Lords day, because the
Manichees had taken up that day to fast on. Also Bishop Jewel, Jewels Defense
of Apology, p. 441.
gives many like examples, yea, and the very Popes law P^pes Law distinct. 63.
Quia Sancta.
resolves; That if our Predecessors have done things well in their time, and
afterward they be turned to error or superstition, they must without any delay
be reformed: Indeed things necessary, though formerly grossly abused, as houses,
churches, wine, etc. may not therefore be abolished or laid aside, but the
abuse removed, as the Popish abuses and corruptions in both the Sacraments,
etc. but things only lawful, unnecessary, and not commanded of God, ought to be
abolished when grossly abused.

Beside, let it be also remembered, that many of our English or rather of Romish
holy days were dedicated to Saints, as the names of the days do witness, as
St. Stephen, St. John, St. Peter, St. James, Innocents-day, etc. which alone
makes the retention and observation of them sinful and Idolatrous.

3 Because the observation of this feast, and other holy days (so called) is
now against the command of the Supreme Authority and Magistracy, in this Land,
as diverse of the Ordinances of both Houses of Parliament do witness, and is
well known. And doubtless, we are in conscience bound to obey Authority in all
things lawful, and do sin in a wilful disobeying them. Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15, and do herein plainly contradict at least in practice,
their proceedings in order to Reformation.

4 Because our solemn League and Covenant binds us under an oath, To endeavor
the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness
and whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound doctrine and the power of
Godliness, least we partake in other men's sins, etc. And sure I am the
observation of these Heathenish, Popish holy days, comes under some of these
heads, and so under our Covenant to reform.

5 The Jewish traditions of the Elders, as of washing pots, cups, hands etc.
received from their forefathers without warrant from Gods Word, for the
religious observation of them, though with good intention, was reproved and
condemned by our Savior, Mark 7. 3, 4, 7, 8, 9.
therefore the observation of these also is justly reproveable, Matthew. 15. 2,
3, 5, 7, 13.
being mere inventions of men, and having been grossly abused and profaned.

6 The Jewish ceremonial days, and observations though commanded of God
himself under the law, are now long since abolished, and unlawful for Jews
(much more for Christians under the Gospel) and as a burden too heavy for
their forefathers to bear, therefore much more the religious observation of
these days, which are only the commandments of men, as unlawful for us
Christians, Gentiles.

7 Because the observation of them is a conformity to Pagan and Popish customs
and practices, which a Christian ought to abhor and abominate, and flee from
them as much as may be, instance in lesser matters than this, the cutting off
the hair of the head, beard, and the like, though otherwise lawful enough,
merely because Idolaters did so. Leuit. 19. 27, 28.

8 Christians are not bound to rejoice at the birth of Christ, on that 25 day
of December, which many superstitiously call Christ-mas day more than at other
times, therefore neither to observe it more than any other day.

9 The very name, with which the Pope and Papists have christened it
Christ-mas, is enough to make all true Christians to abhor the observation of
it Christ-mas, because the Papists had on that day a peculiar Mass pretendly
in honor of Christ, but to his great dishonor, it being a most detestable
Mass of Idolatry, in diverse perticulars, as these Protestant Divines writing
against the Papists doctrines, do unanimously affirm, and some have set them
out See Dr. Barns Du Plessis. Bishop Jewel. and alios quam plurimos.
perticularly.

10 The 4 Commandment enjoins us to work on the six days, and keep holy the
seventh day. Exodus 20. 8, 9, 10. so that if we observe Gods Commandment, there
is no room left for holy days, days of idleness, superstition, and
profaneness.

Object. But it may be, some will say, is there not room for Christs-day, and
other hoyldayes, as well as for days of fasting and thankesgiving?

A. No, because to fast on some special occasion^, we have not only an old
Testament, Joel 1. 14, 15. and 2. 12. to 18. Isa. 58. begin.
but also a new Testament. 1 A Gospel approbation. Mat. 6. 16, 17, 18. 2 A
Gospel command. Mat. 9. 15. 3 A Gospel example. Acts 13. 2, 3. So for days of
thanksgiving we have sufficient warrant from Gods Word. Psalm. 50. 14, 15. Exodus
15. 2 Chronicles. 20. 26, 27. Hester 4. 16. and 9. 17, 18, 19, 20. but we have
neither Scripture precept, approbation, nor practice for keeping of this nor
the other holy days.

Ob. But some have said, Our fathers and forefathers for many hundred years
have observed these days, especially Christmas, Easter and Whitsontide, and the
observation of them has been approved by Parliaments, Councils, and Synods,
and are now grown wiser than all those that we should now reject them.

A. I much reverence and honor Parliament Councils, and Synods and
forefathers, but they were but men, as we are, and did err foully, witness the
establishing of Popery, the Mass, praying for the dead, praying to Saints,
Angels, Images, Pictures and the Cross, yea, and adoring and worshipping of
them, and of some Saints, Saints Bones; clothes and other Relics. 2 They
lived in times of less means of knowledge and more ignorance, we of more
means and knowledge. 3 As godly and learned and wise men have in all ages
disallowed and condemned the observation of these days, as any that allowed,
approved of them. And so has our late English Assembly of Divines and
Parliament also done, whom (I believe) are as pious and learned as ever any in
any, former age in this Nation. 4 The matter is not who is most learned, pious,
and judicious but which party has Gods Word on their side and sound reason,
and for this let the judicious Reader judge by what I have said, I magnify not
my self, but desire to prefer the wisdom and Authority of God before and
above all men's whatsoever, and so far only follow me as I have Gods Word for my
warrant; homo sum, errare possum, at haereticus esse nolo.

Q. But is it not meet, that a day should be set a part in hand of Christ our
Blessed Savior?

A. Yes, very fit, but it must be only that day which himself has appointed
and sanctified to that end, and therefore called it by his own name, to
appropriate it to himself, viz: The Lords day, Revel. 1. 10. and has
commanded us to remember to keep it holy, Ex^d 20. 8, 9, 10. Remember the
Sabbath day to keep it holy, (is the day of rest,) the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God, we may not set days a part of our own head and without his mind, Neither
may any impose the observation of any day for this end, least they be found to
be Intruders of humane inventions, in stead of Gods Commandments on the
consciences of Gods people, whereof Christ only is King.

Ob. But many have religiously observed these days in preaching, hearing,
praying, singing, holy conference, etc. And have gotten much good thereby,

A. True, but ten to one have got more hurt and done more evil in these days,
than on any other time, contracted more guilt, and done Christ more dishonor
than on all other days. Besides, the observation of days and times, without
Gods warrant, and greviously abused to supperstition and profaneness, is not
lawful for Christians on pretense of some good gotten by duties of Gods
worship on those days, which may as well be on any other days.

Ob. But some say still, I see no hurt in them, they offend not me, I observe
them out of love and duty to my Savior, and with a good intention and well
meaning, I do no hurt to any man, and therefore I hope it is no offense to
Christ.

A. Good intentions and well meanings cannot justify any unwarrantable
practice, as good and well meaning Vzzah found by woeful experience, 2 Samuel 6.
6. The action it self was good, his aim and end good, and the man (surely) a
good man, yet he died by the immediate hand of God, for touching of the Arc to
save it when the Oxen shook it, and it was in danger to be broken into pieces,
because he had no warrant to touch it, being not a Le vite.

2 Love to God must be showed in obeying his commands, Joh. 14. 15, 21. 1 John
2. 3, 4. and 5, 3. But the observation of this festival in honor of Christ (I
think) has been clearly proved to be unwarrantable, not of Christ's
appointment, of mere humane institution, and therefore no duty to Christ, It
has also been extremely abused to superstition and profaneness, and is not on
the day Christ was borne, and against the command of the Magistrate, and
therefore is sinful, offensive to God and men, at least to the most godly and
judicious knowing Christians, sinful and dangerous to the soul, and if thou be
convinced that what I have here said is true, then thy observation of it is a
sin against conscience, a presumptuous sin, and so a dangerous sin, which, as
David, so all good men should carefully watch and pray against, Psalm. 19. 13.

Ob. But the poor complain, saying: This does put down all good house keeping
and hospitality. Many Gentlemen hereby take occasion to lay aside all charity,
whereby the poor formerly had much relief at their tables and doors.

A. The more is their sin and shame, who make that the occasion to withdraw
more than is meet, and a cloak for their covetousness, I here speak not
against charity, but against the unwarrantable observation of this festival
and the superstition, great abuses and disorders and profaneness of the time.
Rich men may now with much less charge and trouble, be much more beneficial
to the poor, if they please, and ought to be free-hearted and free-handed to
the poor, and to their neighbors. And I earnestly entreat them in the fear of
God to consider these Scriptures which are exceeding full of pressing arguments
to encourage them to charity. Pro. 11. 25. The liberal soul shall be made fat.
Pro. 21. 13. whosoever stops his ears at the cry of the poor, (their knowing
cries, wants and necessities, though themselves out of shamefac'tnesse do not
cry, himself shall cry and not be heard. 2 Cor. 9. 6. He that sows sparingly,
shall reap sharingly, but he that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully. As
full or more full are these follovving, Eccles. 11. 2. Pro. 11. 24, 25. and 21.
15, 26, and 22. 9. and 25. 21. Mat. 10. 42, 43, and 19. 21. Luke 6. 38. Gal. 6.
7, 8, 9, 10. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18. Jam. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Ob. But then Servants and Touth shall have no time of liberty to refresh
themselves; visit their friends, and mend their apparel.

A. 1 The Sabbath or Lords day is a day of rest from servile labor appointed
by the Lord himself, yet may not be spent any part of it in carnal delights,
but wholly in religious exercises. 2 Other time I read of none in the
Scripture. 3 I am well contented, there should be sometime allowed by the
State for that end, and if not, sure I am, Masters and Governors of families
ought to allow some convenient time to their servants for such occasions, and
do freely do so my self.

Upon the forementioned grounds, and such like, the Parliament and Assembly of
England and Scotland have abolished and taken away the observation of December
25, and all other holy days forbidden us to observe. And I hope no truly
conscientious Christian well weighing the premises, will any more plead for
the observation of that, or any of those Paganish, or Popish holy days, nor
observe them, but rather study to honor Jesus Christ by sanctifying his
Sabbath, sincere obedience to his Commandments, living soberly, righteously
and godly in this present world, and labor to abound in all works of charity:
Howsoever, I have discharged my duty, and the Lord make his blessing go along
with his truth.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by R. L. for Richard Wodenothe, and are to be sold at his shop
at Peter's Church in Cornhill, 1651.


