THE SOLDIERS TRIVMPH: AND The Preachers Glory.

In a Sermon preached to the Captains and Soldiers exercising Arms in the
Artillery Garden, at their General meeting in S. Michaels Church Cornhill in
London, the 31. of August, 1641.

BY MATTHIAS MILVVARD, B. D. Minister of S. Hellens.

Bern. ad Milites Templi, cap. 1. Infoelix victoria, quasuperans hominem,
succumbis vitio. LONDON, Printed by W.E. and I.G. for John Clark, and are to be
sold at his Shop under S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. MDCXLI.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, CHARLES. PRINCE OF GREAT Britain, Son and
Heir apparent to our Sovereign Lord, CHARLES, King of Great Britain, etc.
Long happiness in this, and eternal blessedness in the next world.
Most gracious Prince,
IT has pleased your Highness to honor the Company of the Artillery Garden,
by vouchsafing to be their General; wherein you have so endeared and obliged
them to your service, that upon just occasion their lives and bloods are for
your defense, ready tobe laid down. To whom then do I owe this Dedication, if
not first to your Highness? which if your Grace deigne to take into your
Princely Patronage, I have the utmost of my ambition. My weakness (I confess)
forbad me to aspire so high, but your Gracious clemency invited me thus far:
And indeed you may challenge it as a due debt, (if it were worth the owning) it
being the first Sermon preached since your Highness so much honored the
Company. You have a great Part to act, (most excellent Prince) when God shall
please to call you to it, whose word will teach you to govern your self and
people; to rule justly; and amongst the Courtly adulations and crouchings, not
to be lifted up, but to remember your self to be but man; not so much to
consider how great you are, as how good you should be; to acknowledge your
power to be lent you for the advancement of Gods true worship; to love God more
then your earthly dominions; to punish slowly, to pardon easily; to bend your
revenge more for the Commonwealths safety, then to satisfy your own desire;
to mollify sharp Decrees with the lenity of mercy; to desire to command your
self, as well as others; to subject your own passions to Reason, as well as
men; to remember that you rule over men; that you must rule according to Laws;
that you must not always rule, but one day be called to your account before
the supreme Judge of heaven and earth; and having ruled well, to receive an
immortal Crown in his everlasting Kingdom. Which shall be the prayer of

Your Graces humbly devoted, Matthias Milward.

To the Right Worshipful Alderman, THOMAS SOAME, one of the Colonels of the
Honorable City of London, and President of the Artillery Company.
Captain PHILIP SKIPPON, Captain of the same Company. AND To Captain JOHN
VENN, Deputy President. Lieutenant WILLIAM MANBY, Treasurer. AS ALSO To the
worthy Captains of the City, Martin Bond. Marmaduke Rawdon. George Langham.
Edward Ditchfield. Thomas Covell. Edmund Forster. William Geere. Samuel
Carlton. Tobias Massy. Randolph Manwaring. Henry Sanders. Nicholas Beale.
Robert Davies. Matthew Forster. John Bradley. Rowland Wilson. James Bunce. Tho:
Chamberlain. Tho: Buxton.
And to all other Gentlemen exercising Arms in the Artillery Garden, London.
Noble Sirs,
I Bring you here together, and cite your names in the view of his Highness,
your Princely General; that as he beheld you in your Warlike marches, so he
may know you in your religious postures. I have joined your sword to ours,
Preachers and Soldiers together; one has need of another; we to pray for you,
you to fight for us; being humm'd at by a company of Brownists as we walk the
streets; whose very cloaks which we buy of them, they hate upon our backs.
Pudet haec opprobrie nobis.

This Sermon, I hear, has undergone some censure, (but by the weaker sex)
for reciting Stories in it, as it is said; but they which spoke it, considered
not that I was to speak to Gentlemen that are both Soldiers and Scholars, and
not to women, who are now grown such learned Doctresses, that they will take
upon them to teach any Minister both what and how to preach. An over-shooting
expectation is an enemy to all honorable actions; and where that is not
satisfied, the undertaker suffers disgrace. From me therefore seeing nothing
of worth can be expected, I cannot suffer much in my reputation, if I have done
that which is worth nothing: Yet as it is, I am bold to present it to your
view, being in a manner enforced thereunto: For though your desires were
command enough, yet there is required a Vindication both of my self, and you;
Of my self, that the world may see my doctrine and preaching is not so
heterodoxall, as the malicious would make it; Of you, that mine enemies may see
your judgment has not so exceedingly erred in making choice of one, not
altogether so unworthy as their envy reports me. It would trouble me, said
Seneca upon like occasion, if Cato, or Laelius, or the other Scipio did thus
censure me: Nunc malis displicere laudari est, It Is praise to be dispraised of
those that speak ill, who never yet learned to do well. They are like bawling
dogs, (says he) qui non feritate, sed pro consuetudine latrant, that bark more
for custom then curstness. However, such as it is I present to you and the
worlds view. I can make it no better then it is, and if others will make it
worse, yet my hope is you will make the best of it. Finally (worthy Gentlemen)
Fear God, honor the King, be religious in peace, be valiant in war, fight the
good fight of faith, Agonotheta Deus, God the Lord of battles has promised
you immarcessibilem coronam, a neverfading crown, and triumph in his Kingdom.
So prays

Your faithful Symmachus, and Fellow-souldier, Matthias Milward.

THE SOVLDIERS TRIVMPH, etc.
BEloved Christians, worthy Gentlemen, Soldiers and Citizens, ye have had many
excellent Instructors, who have led you forth to fight the Lords battles in
your spiritual warfare, and they have phrazed their Sermons in your own
Martial terms, of Motions, Postures, Marches, Alarums, Retreats, and the
like; Whatsoever your Discipline affords in your Warlike Dialect, I shall
desire you to pardon me if I tread not in their steps, nor walk their round,
whom I may sooner envy then imitate: For, I profess ingenuously, as I should
hold it both an honor and ornament, if I could present my service in your
language; so I am loath (being to speak before our Christian Hanniball) to show
my self through ignorant boldness an old doting Phormio. I shall therefore
speak plainly, yielding the glory of learned eloquence to those who have gone
before me. And now after so many directions given you to fight, I purpose to
lead you forth to a triumph, yet not (I hope) before the victory, for even in
this Church militant, whilst we live, we have some triumphs: So says the
Apostle,

2 Cor. 2.14. Now thanks be unto God which always causes us to triumph in
Christ.

THese words may be called The Triumph of the Church Militant, whose
Catastrophes of Sorrow being turned into Trophies of Joy, she does in the midst
of devilish malice and worldly misery lift up her head with heavenly comfort,
praising God, who always in his Son gives victory. In all these things, says
S. Paul, (...), Romans 8.37. we are more then Conquerers. If so, then certainly
triumphers, Now thanks be to God, etc.

In this Triumph I observe four things:

1. The Actors. 2. The Author. 3. The Time. 4. A Thanksgiving.
First, the Actors or Triumphers are of two sorts: 1. The Preachers. 2. The
Hearers.


1. The Preachers: From whence I note the glory of the Ministry in us; for
though we be made Spectaculum, a gazing stock to the Angels, to the world, and
to men, yet Us, He causes us to triumph.

2. The Hearers: From whence I note the comfort that comes to you; for seeing
your good is the cause of our joy, you also are Actors in this Triumph; We
rejoicing in your Salvation, You, in our Ministration.

Secondly, the Author is God, he causes us, for seeing neither we nor you have
cause to triumph in our selves; Not we, for we are only Gods Laborers; Not
you, for ye are Gods Husbandry: Therefore He whose Laborers we are, whose
Husbandry ye are, he causes us to triumph; We for you, you by us, both in
Christ, He causes us to triumph in Christ.

Thirdly, the time of continuance, how long it lasts; Not like the Pageants
or triumphs of the world, a tedious toil, and a quick spoil, set up in a
year, and pulled down in a day; not per annos, for a few years, but
perennis, for ever, Always he causes us to triumph.

Fourthly, then follows a Thanksgiving, like the shout of an Army after a
victory, like that of Israel, when the Ark of God came into the Host, Now
thanks be to God which always causes us to triumph in Christ.

1. The Preachers of the Word of God are Actors, He causes us to triumph. Our
triumph stands in three things: Watching, Feeding, Ordering: And for these the
Church is compared to a City, to a Flock, to a Bride. To a City, Matthew. 5.
whereof they are watchmen, Esaias 21. To a flock, John 10. and they are the
Shepherds. Ier. 6. To a Bride, and they are the Paranymphi, the friends of the
Bride-chamber, Cant. 2. Three things therefore are due from them to the Church,
Munimenta, Alimenta, Ornamenta, says Bernard: As she is a City, she must be
watched for her safety; As a Flock, she must be fed of necessity; As a Bride,
she must be ordered with decency. In these stands our triumph.

First therefore ye shall see a description of this City, Apoc. 21. It was all
of gold, it had a great wall, and high, twelve gates, three East, three West,
three North, and three South, and it lay four square. To this heavenly
Jerusalem, the Church may be compared, Cujus murus concordia, antemurale
patientia. Bern. in dedicat. Ecclesiae. Unity of the Citizens is the wall, for
Civitas est civium unitas; a good conscience and patience are the Bulwarks. It
is called holy, because established in the holiness of faith; It is new,
because the Law dies, the Ceremonies fade: The Law, like old Zachary, is dumb,
and cannot speak, because John, which signifies Grace, is borne. Luke 1.20.
Old things are passed away, all things are become new. New hearts, Ezekiel. 36.
New tongues, Act. 2. A new commandment, John 13. It is called Jerusalem the
vision of peace, for Christ the Founder of it, and confounder of the enemies of
it, is our peace. The twelve gates resemble the twelve Articles of our faith,
through confession whereof we enter into the Church. The four parts of the
world show the amplitude thereof. Lastly, this City lies four square, which
is a resemblance of our faith, love, hope, and good works. They are all of one
length: for how much a man believes, so much he hops; what he hops, he
loves; and as he loves, he works: And thus (as says the Prophet) thou
shall be called a City sought out and not forsaken, Esaias 62.12.

But now, says the Preacher, I have seen this wisdom under the sun, A little
City, and few men in it, and a great King came and compassed it about, and
builded Forts against it: And there was found therein a poor and wise man, and
he delivered this City by his wisdom, but none remembered this poor man: Then
said I, Better is wisdom then weapons of war, Eccles. 9.14. But I know not
how, this City is betrayed, there is a conspiracy of the Prophets in the midst
of her, Ezekiel. 22. and a confederacy of the people, Esaias 8. I mean Jesuits and
Separatists, they craftily crept in to spy out our liberty, these have
wickedly gone out to betray our peace; not content to drink of the sweet
waters, but trouble the residue with their feet, Ezekiel. 34.17. yea like so many
Saepiaes have vomited forth Ink, with too much gall in it, to disturb our
Churches peace, and dash our triumph. I wish there had not been men arising out
of our selves, speaking perverse things, Act. 20.30. For as the sea would be
quiet of it self, if winds, and vapors, and exhalations did not trouble it;
so the people would have been tractable and peaceable enough, if some seditious
Orators, the blustering brethren of Boreas, had not set them in agitation.

When Ioab understood that his enemies were encamped both before and behind
him, he divided his Army between himself and his brother Abishai, with this
direction, If the Aramites be stronger then I, thou shall help me; but if the
children of Ammon be too hard for thee, I will come and succor thee. Let us
do so: and like those in Peter's ship that beckoned to their fellows in Andrews
boat, aid one another against the common adversary. They write of Lady
Margaret, Countess of Richmond, mother to King Henry the seventh, that the
would often say, On condition that the Princes of Christendom would combine
themselves, and march against the common enemy the Turk, she would most
willingly attend them, and be their Laundresse in the Camp. God unite us at
home among our selves, that the seamelesse coat of Christ, rent by schism and
faction, may be made up, that so we may triumph in Christ.

Secondly, the Church is a flock, and must be fed of necessity, and in this
also stands our triumph. Feed, feed, feed, says Christ to Peter: Earth, earth,
earth, hear the word of the Lord, says the Prophet Jeremy, for that is your
food: You are thrice called upon to hear, we thrice called upon toteach,
showing thereby that your joy and our triumph are both twisted upon one thread:
O ter foelices and amplius quos irrupta tenet copula, nec malis divulsus
queremoniis extrema citius solvet amor die, as he said of man and wife. Thrice
happy shall we and you be, if our unity be not divided with unjust complaints,
if our love to Christ be mutual, and our care to serve him equal. The Priests
lips, says the Lord in Malachy, shall preserve knowledge, and they shall seek
the Law at his mouth, Mal. 2.7. The reason there is given, For he is a
messenger of the Lord of Hosts, which teaches us and you our duties: First us,
He is a Messenger, that requires fidelity; a messenger of the Lord, that
requires sanctity; of the Lord of Hosts, that requires magnanimity. Secondly,
you: A Messenger, therefore you must give him audience; of the Lord, therefore
yield him obedience; of the Lord of Hosts, therefore you owe him reverence.

I am sorry to think that our Church should be troubled with two cruel
mothers: One has dry breasts, and yet will needs be a Nurse; wants
knowledge, yet will have a charge: Another has flowing breasts, yet will give
no suck; has learning enough, but will take no pains. Now both are bad, and
hinder your joy, and our triumph. We have a little sister, and she has no
breasts, what shall we do for our sister when she shall be spoken for? Cant.
8. Nay indeed, how can we speak for our sister when she should be done for? and
therefore one is oftentimes the punishment of another: for they who through
wilful sloth have dried up their breasts, God gives them a barren womb that
they cannot conceive. Give them, O Lord, what will thou give them? Give them a
barren womb, and dry breasts, Hos. 9.14. Do thou love me? says Christ,
Feed, feed, feed. This is the second part of our triumph.

Thirdly, the Church is a Bride, and must be ordered with decency. It is true,
as Clem. Alexand. says, her chiefest ornament is (...), with the ornament of
goodness, for the Kings daughter is all glorious within, and without too, her
garments are of wrought gold. There is therefore some outward beauty which the
Church has, comely Ceremonies, void of superstitious abuse, which serve to
edifying, and preservation of unity and order; for if there were none at all,
it would bring in (...), Will Worship, and every one after his own fancy
would fashion new forms of behavior; We should have as many factions as
fancies, and as many Gospels as Gossips.

Again, if there should be too many Ceremonies, that would induce (...),
superstition; and through multiplicity, men might be turned from the simplicity
of Gods true worship: Therefore there are not many, to keep us from
superstition; but some, to keep us in order. We all call for reformation, but
of mis-governors, not change of government. Is there no way to prevent
drunkenness, but by digging up the Vines?

I grieve to think on them which exclude themselves from this triumph which we
have in Christ, because they leave our Church; and the Church does well to
leave them that have broken down the walls of peace: Yet I could wish, that
though they be without the walls, they may be within the Liberties, but that
the Liberties go no farther then the Bars of Order, and these Bars have they
broken also. Well, Christ is the Bridegroom, the Church is the Bride, she must
have her peaceful ornaments: Yet as Tertullian said, Sunt qui te etiam per
ornamenta ferient; That which is some part of our Churches glory, there be that
wrest it to her shame: of whom I will say no more, but O miseram Sponsam
talibus concreditam Paranymphis! I rejoice, says S. Paul, beholding your
order, Col. 2.5. and he gave commandment that all things should be done (...),
decently and in order. Gal. 6.16. the Apostle exhorts to walk in rule, (...):
The word (...) is a military march, which requires order: And the Church is
compared to a well ordered Army, Cant. 6. Who is this that looks forth as the
morning, fair as the moon, pure as the sun, terrible as an Army with banners,
acies ordinata. God is the God of order, and wicked men are noted by the
Apostle to be such as are (...), that walk disorderly; and therefore all that
are enemies to good order, let them take heed of that place, Where there is no
order, Job 10.22. We should be like so many beams, shining from one Sun of
Righteousness; like so many brooks derived from one fountain of Grace,
sweetly united, orderly disposed: for the Churches glory consists in Watching,
Feeding, Ordering, and in that she triumphs, Now thanks be to God which
causes us to triumph in Christ.

Thus ye see how we that are Preachers, are Actors in this triumph, but yet not
without you that are hearers; we triumph in you, and you by us, both in Christ.

2. For Natura nostra est, Ordinatio autem vestra: Our nature, as men, is our
own; our Ordination, as Ministers, is yours: If we live well, it is our gain;
if we teach well, it is your gain: and like the Angels in Jacobs ladder, are
always ascending or descending: When they ascend, they inform the judgment
of the learned; when they descend, they speak to the capacity of the simple.
Ascendunt, ut erigant magnos; descendunt, ut nutriant parvos. See how S. Paul
ascends, 2 Cor. 5.13. Whether we be besides our selves, we are it unto God: See
how he descends, Or whether we be sober, we are it unto you; because Sancti
excedunt in contemplatione, sobrii sunt in praedicatione. Paul ascended, when
he said, We speak wisdom to the perfect: He descended, when he said, I gave
you milk, not meat. How ever it be, we esteem you a great part of our triumph,
for we preach Christ Jesus and our selves your servants for Jesus sake.

How comes, it then, that we are so much misconstrued in our preaching? What
comfort can we have, when prejudice precludes your judgment? For though we
pass not for man's judgment, yet we see it to be a daily consequent of our
labors, to be judged as often as we speak. If we come in the spirit of
meekness, it is accounted weakness; if we reprove their sin, they say we forget
our Text: Art thou here mine enemy? says one, 1 King. 21. What said this mad
fellow? says another. Thus whilst we, like birds of the morning, record the
praises of God, one or other that has bent his tongue like a bow, lies ready
to shoot out his arrows, even bitter words.

Wherefore beloved, seeing we desire to have you partners of our triumph, see
that ye be like minded, having the same love, and fulfill our joy: For what is
our joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even you it at the presence of the
coming of the Lord Jesus? 1 These. 2.19. Yes, you are our glory, and our joy.
Now thanks be to God.

Now worthy Gentlemen and Soldiers, I must neglect you no longer, whom having
spoken to as Christians, I must now exhort as Military men, for you I behold
this day in a triumphant manner, the joy and honor of this City. You have been
taught by others, the causes of undertaking a War to be three: Necessary
defense, due revenge, and reparation of damage. But that ye may conquer and
triumph, I shall commend unto you these three virtues, Piety, Justice,
Fortitude.

1. Piety, says the Apostle, is profitable for all things, it has the
promises of this life, and that that is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Other virtues
without this, are like force and agility in the body without eyesight, nature
without grace; like blind Sampson without a guide. All that which we call
Virtue, if it be not directed by the fear of God, and true godliness, are
names void of the things. What is prudence without it but a childish dexterity,
by which every one resolves of his actions, as he is a Lawyer, a Merchant, a
Scholar, but not as he is a man? so being wise in the retaile, he may be a
fool in gross. Valor without it, degenerates into ambitious desperateness,
and hardens a man's courage to mischief: And temperance without godliness is
rather a Diet then a Virtue; a mere abstinence for Healths sake, not a
profession for Religions sake.

Piety therefore is necessary for all men, and for a Soldier not least of all;
for he that goes forth every day to hazard his life, had need be prepared for a
good passage: Therefore says God, Deuteronomy. 23.9. When the Host goes forth
against the enemy, take heed of every wicked thing. A man must be at peace
with God, before he fight with his enemies. When Iehoshaphat heard War
proclaimed against him, it is said that he feared; and set himself to seek the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. It was Cornelius the Centurions honor, a brave Captain,
that he was a just man, and feared God. It is he that must be sought in the
first place, for The horse is prepared for the day of battle, but safety or
victory is of the Lord, Prove. 21.31. When Ioshuah fought in the valley, Moses
prayed in the Mount: When he held up his hand, Israel prevailed; and when he
let fall his hand, Amalek prevailed, Exodus 17.9. He that will conquer, must
observe this rule, Armanda men's fide, manus prece, vita castis moribus: He must
have his mind armed with faith, his hand with prayer, his life with chaste
manners.

Would you triumph then Gentlemen? with a faithful confidence trust in God:
Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but we will trust in the Name of
the Lord, said the best Warrior of the world, Psalm. 20.8. for the Lord God is
he that goes to fight for you, against your enemies, to save you. When Henry
the second was at S. David's in Wales, and from the cliffes in a clear day
discovered the coast of Ireland, said, If it be no farther, I with my Ships am
able to make a bridge thither: Which speech being realted to Murchard, King of
Lenister in Ireland, he demanded if the King added not with the grace of God:
when it was answered that he made no mention of God, then said he more
cheerfully, I fear him the less, that trusts more to himself then Gods
help. We cannot overcome, unless we fight under Christ's banner; No conquering,
no triumphing without Piety.

2. How can the War be religious, if not just? the Conquerours sword ought to
be swayed with the arm of Justice: it is that which measures out right to men
by equal proportion, and to be exercised even toward our enemies: it is that
which guards virtue, and combats vice. When the Soldiers came to John Baptist,
and demanded of him, And what shall we do? Luke 3.13. he answered, Do
violence to no man, accuse not falsely, be content with your wages. I have
read, that the Roman warfare was a School of Virtue. Aurelianus the Emperor
gave this charge to his Tribunus Militum, Upon thy life, says he, contain the
hands of thy soldiers; suffer them not so much as to kill a chicken, or pull a
grape of another man's; oil, or salt, or wood let none exact, but be content
annona sua, with his allowance: De praeda hostis, non de lachrymis
provincialium habeat, Let them take of the spoils of the enemy, but not live by
the tears of their Countrymen. See a passage to this purpose, Number. 20.17. when
Moses sent messengers from Kadesh to the men of Edom, he observed this order:
Let us pass I pray thee through thy Country: we will not pass through the
fields, or through the vineyards, neither will we drink of the water of the
wells; we will go by the Kings high way, we will not turn to the right hand
or to the left.

That Justice therefore may be preserved, not only violence and oppression,
but all beastly revenge must be avoided; men must not fight against nature, but
against enemies: Therefore God commanded his Soldiers not to cut down trees
bearing fruit: because (says one) lignum est, and non homo, nec potest
bellantium contra nos augere numerum: They are wood, not man, and cannot
increase the number of enemies, Deuteronomy. 20.19. It was a good answer of Anaxilaus
a Spartan Captain, (as Xenophon has it) who being accused for yielding up the
town Bizantium committed to his charge, he answered, As long as he fought with
men, he defended it, but when he saw he was to fight with nature, and that they
perished with famine whom men spare in war, he thought good to give it up. Tully
was an excellent man of Law, and knowing what Justice was, would have the Sword
give place to the Gown. It were indeed a note of excellent modesty, and might
be assumed, but how? as greater Hosts in their own houses give precedencie to
meaner guests, or as we say of doting parents, they are content to be made
fools by the wit of their children: but to ascribe it as a due or right, he
thinks not right, for the Gown can but meditate, and say, In Justice this
ought to be done, when the Sword says, For Justice sake this is done. Be just
and triumph.

3. You must have Fortitude, else Justice is weak: it is not possible to
triumph without that. It is a Problem in Aristotle, why Fortitude should raise
more admiration then Justice, Prudence, or Temperance: We are not so affected
with wonder when we see these, as when we behold a valiant Captain, or brave
Commander, he answers it thus: Because the object of Temperance, and exercise
of it, consists only in the moderation of pleasure; of Prudence, in the
ordering of Civil affairs; of Justice, in giving suum cuique, every man his
own: but Fortitude, the proper Virtue of a Soldier, has for its object
Victory, which cannot be had without blows and wounds, danger and dint of
Sword. A Soldier dares march against death, and out face it, which others
tremble to think on. This renowneth them above all other arts, for they are
attained with quiet study, warm case, and sound rest; but the Soldier finds
difficulty in his designs, and danger in his attempts, whereas cowards are the
scorn of men, and contemptible, as having nothing of price but their lives,
scarce that, nor any thing wise but their fears.

You shall know a valiant man by this, He is undaunted when he encountreth
force, and yielding when he meets with weakness and disability. The juster
that wrath is, the more commendable is mercy. One writes of Henry the Great of
France, when he might have hewed the Parisians in pieces, puts down his
Pistol, and saves them, saying, He would not suffer them to take harm, who
were not in case to do any. Tiberius would not take away the life of his
enemy by treachery, and told the Prince of the Celts, that Rome had a sword to
kill with, and not an Apothecaries box.

When revenge lies in a man's hand, the usual way to appease, is by submission
and entreaty: yet sometime resolution and courage does that which submission
cannot do: As that valiant Prince of Epirus, Scanderbeg, following a soldier
to kill him; when the soldier saw that no means of humility would mollify his
Captain, resolved at last to encounter him with his sword: This brave
resolution staid his fury, whom he not only forgave, but received into favor.
Our Histories write of John Beaufort, Earl of Dorset, with fifteen hundred
men, being encompassed between the sea with fifteen thousand French, Arminac
the General of the French sent to him, and advised him to yield: But he
answered, It is not the manner of the English to yield without blows, neither
am I so heartlesse as to deliver my self into their hands, whom God may
deliver into mine: And accordingly it came to pass, God gave him the honor of
the day.

It was Gods charge to Joshua, Only be valiant, and of a good courage: See
that in Nehemiah, when he was advised to hide himself in the Temple to save
his life, Should such a man as I fly? says he: And who is he that being as I
am, would go into the Temple to save his life? I will not go in, Nehem. 6.11.
When the children of Israel began to mutiny, having heard of Giants and Anakims
in the Land of Canaan, Come, let us make a Captain, and return into Egypt,
Number. 13.30. and 14.9. but Joshua and Caleb stilled the people, saying, Fear
not the people of the land, they are bread for us, their defense is departed
from them, and the Lord is with us, fear them not. What a triumphant exploit
was that of Eleazar, 1 Macc. 6.43. perceiving that one of the beasts was armed
with royal harness, he made a lane through his enemies with his sword to
approach that Elephant, and creeping under him, wounded him in the belly; and
with the fall of the beast being crushed to death, suo sepultus est triumph,
was buried in his own triumph, or rather triumphed in his own burial.
Syracides says of David, that he played with Lions as with Kids, and with
Bears as Lambs, Sir. 47.3. Valiant soldiers armed with divine fortitude, Tam
alacres ad interitum quam ad triumphum rapiuntur, are carried as cheerfully to
their death, as to a triumph: quam gloriosi revertuntur victores de praelio,
tam beati moriuntur Martyrs in praelio: From the battle they return
glorious Conquerours, in the battle they die blessed Martyrs. Whatsoever
happens in a just War, the Soldier is crowned: If conquer, with a triumphant
Garland; if vanquished, with a Martyrs crown. Securus interimit, securior
interit, says Bernard: he sins not when he kills, nor perishes when he dies.

The way to attain to this Fortitude, is, to keep a good conscience. Nothing
makes a man so much a coward, as the guilt of sin. When David had lost his
holiness, how faint-hearted he became! He that played with Lions and Bears
like Lambs and Kids, runs away from his own son: being disarmed of that
defense, Factus est in peccato timidus, qui fuerat in gratia metuendus: Whom
the state of grace found valiantly active, the guilt of sin made fearfully
fugitive. There is no way but this to conquer, and it must be by this, if ye
desire to triumph. Now thanks be to God, who causes us: And so I come to the
Author.

2. God is the Author of all the good we do; it is he that works, velle and
perficere; you cannot triumph but by him: The race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong. When Abraham returned victorious, Genesis 14. Melchisedech
met him, and gave God the glory, Blessed be the Lord God, who has delivered
thine enemies into thine hand: And Abraham told the King of Sodom, I will not
take so much as a shooe-latchet of thee. S. Chryfostome gives two reasons: 1.
Because he acknowledged God to be the giver of victory. As if he should say, I
brought nothing to this War, but voluntatem and promptitudinem, a prompt and
willing mind; Victoriam and triumphum operatus est Deus, The victory and
triumph is the Lords. 2. That the King of Sodom might not arrogate the glory
of his riches to himself, but to God: As if Abraham had said, I have God that
enricheth me, keep thy gifts to thy self, he is my buckler and my exceeding
great reward: a buckler to defend me, a reward to enrich me, Genesis 15. David
laid up the sword of Goliath in the Tabernacle of God, thereby acknowledging God
to be the Author of his victory. Ioshuah built an Altar unto the Lord of whole
stones, over which no man had lift up an iron, Josh. 8.31. The reason is given
by a Rabbin, that the good which men obtain by their prayers, they are
beholden to no hand for but the hand of heaven. I am able to do all things,
says the Apostle, through the help of him that strengthens me, Phil. 4. to
fight, to overcome, and all in Christ: Nihil possum a meipso, omnia possum in
eo, says the Apostle. To him that overcommeth, says Christ, I will grant to
sit in my Throne, even as I overcame, and sit with my Father in his Throne,
Apoc. 3.21.

Observe how S. Paul triumphed in those scars which he received for Christ; I
bear about in my body, (...), the marks of the Lord Jesus, tanquam aliquod
trophaeum. Wounds received by Christians in the Lords cause, how honorable are
they! Paphnutius having had his right eye put out for the Name of Christ,
Constantine the Emperor would often call him into the Palace; and as if he
sucked a blessing from those blemishes, would cherish the disgraced place with
kisses. S. Chrysostom professes, he had rather be like Peter, a prisoner for
Christ, then like the Angel that set him at liberty. Our triumphs are in
suffering, Romans 8. more then Conquerours.

The world, I confess, has her triumphs also, but not in Christ; yea Chriots,
and pomp of triumphs, like the Chariots of Pharaoh pursuing gods people. Shall
I crave leave to present before you a short view of two or three of them?
First, Malice, mounted upon a Chariot, runs upon the wheels of mischief,
cruelty, rashness, impatience, and impudence; drawn along with two fierce
beasts, Secular pomp, and Carnal power; fed like Diomedes horses, with the
flesh of men: A generation (says Solomon) whose teeth are swords, and their
jaws, knives to eat up the afflicted, and the poor from among men, Prove.
30.14. God is no Author of this triumph.

Next, Luxury has her Chariot that runs riot; they drive like Iehu, as if
they were mad; wheeled with Gluttony, Lust, Pride, and Sloth; drawn along with
two pampered and high-fed horses, Plenty and Prosperity; Oblivion the Coachman.

After these comes Covetousness, warily moving; her Chariot hung all with iron
hooks, running upon four wheels, Pusillanimity, Contempt of God, Inhumanity,
Forgetfulness of death; her horses, like her self, spare and lean, called
Tenacitas and Rapacitas, Greedy to catch, and Loath to forgo; raind up with the
bridle of Holding fast, and whipped on with a Desire of Having more.

These be the Devils and the Worlds Pageants, their end is Praecipices, and
downfalls: for they that climb by privy sin, shall fall with open shame.
Thou, O man of God, says S. Paul to Timothy, fly these things. It is our glory
that are Preachers, to win souls; it is your comfort. We cannot triumph
without you, nor you without us. What a joy will it be at that great day of
account, when we shall return our poor talents with advantage! When Peter
shall lead in triumph after him Jury; Andrew leading Achaia; John, Asia; Paul
triumphing with a world of souls after him: and some of us, I hope, triumphing
with some of you. Now thanks be to God which causes us in Christ. But if this
triumph be not constant, where is our comfort? It follows therefore in the
next place, the continuance of time,

3. Always he causes us to triumph.

Always in Christ, for he having triumphed over death and hell, does lead
Captivity captive, (...), he has unloosed the sorrows of death; so we in him
do always triumph: A good conscience is a continual feast; the Comforter
abides with us for ever; it is ever working: For as the creatures of God do
always continue their actions to which Nature enclines them, The fire always
burns, if it have matter combustible; the heavens always moving, except by
an Almighty power commanded to stand; the Sun always shining, though clouds
obfuscate his bright beams to us, yet ever clear in it self: So the
righteous, whom God causes to triumph in Christ, are always moving in the
sphere of Obedience, always warming with the flames of Charity, always
shining with the bright beams of Sanctity. The Father has not left me alone,
says Christ, because I do always those things that please him, John 8. so
do we in Christ: Always hope, Hos. 12. always pray, 1 These. 5. always give
thanks, Ephesians. 5. always rejoice, Phil. 4. always burning, shining, and
teaching, and so doing, always triumphing.

S. Augustine upon the Prophet David's words, All the day long will I praise
thee, has this Meditation: In prosperity, because I find consolation; in
adversity, because I feel thy merciful correction: When I was lost, thou
foundst me; when I sinned, thou pardonedst me; when I returned, thou
receivedst me; when I continued, thou crownedst me: For he that gives the end,
gives all things belonging to the end: The grace of inchoation, to begin well;
of continuation, to go on well; of consummation, to end well: Voluntatem
praeparat adjuvandam, adjuvat praeparatam: He prepares the will that he may
help it, and he helps it when he has prepared it, and so he causes us always
to triumph in Christ. Always? Now thanks be to God. So I come to the last Part.

4. The Thanksgiving. Amongst the Jews were as many Thanks-offerings, as
Offerings of Expiation and Atonement: To teach us, to be as thankful for
blessings received, as in our wants we are importunate to obtain them. The
excellency of this service would be considered, which is preferred by the Lord
himself before all sacrifices; peculiar to Saints; the service of the life to
come, when all other almost cease: it is all we are able to render. Non habeo
nisi minuta duo, Two mites is all I have, a soul and a body: Et si millies
rependerem, quid sum ego ad Deum? If I should give my self a thousand times,
what am I to God? Nature it self teaches this duty: The very ground pays
back the cost bestowed upon it; Non ingratus ager: The Sun draws up vapor
from the earth, sends it back in rain. Vnde exeunt flumina, revertuntur ut
iterum fluant: The rivers return to the sea from whence they came. As in the
Sun beams, the more their multiplication, the greater the reflection: so for
Gods blessings showed forth to you by his Ministers in every place, the greater
should be your fruitfulness, the more your thankfulness. Who causes us
always to triumph in Christ. Now thanks be to God.

Now here me thinks I should make an end, but that one thing is wanting to the
accomplishing of our triumph, which presents it self to our view this day:
That is, to acknowledge the causes of your triumphing, which are many.

1. In your Princely General, Patron and Protector of your Company, our
Illustrious Prince CHARLES, of whom it may be said, as of Titus the son of
Vespasian, Delitiae humani generis: The honor of Arms, whose hopeful virtues
are the food, life, and soul of Soldiers. In this we have cause to triumph.

2. In the order, and splendor, and (...), the united hearts and fellowship of
your whole company: Though ye differ in your individuals, as so many several
persons, and perhaps in opinion, yet you make up together one compacted Body of
an Army; and as touching your common good, have but one soul: Like the four
Elements, though of opposite qualities, yet they meet harmoniously in a middle
temper of man's constitution, and concordi pace ligantur. In this we have cause
to triumph.

3. In your brave Commander, the Captain of your Yard: Of whom I could say
much, but that I fear to offend his modesty, Et ne damnum illius laudibus mea
faceret verecundia, Lest my modesty also might damnifie his due praises. Only
thus much, because I will not sin against Justice, whilst I am afraid to
offend Modesty: If you desire to be instructed in Military Discipline,
accompanied with religious mildness, Christian sobriety, wise temperance,
manly fortitude, I say no more, but Follow your Leader. In this we have cause
to triumph.

4. In the bounty of our generous Citizens, and noble Benefactors, who have
begun a glorious work, your Campus Martius, your Field of Honor. The Romans
had such a place, which they called their great School of defense. It was
given to the people by a Vestall Virgin, Caia Tarnatia; but Tarquine the Proud,
the last King of Rome, took it away from them, and converted it to his own
use, in sowing corn there: Which corn, when he was deposed, the Romans threw
into the River Tiber, judging it unfit, that any should reap commodity from so
holy ground: In process of time, the sheaves of corn being stopped in a shallow
Foord of the River, became firm ground, and was called The holy Island; and
after the expulsion of Tarquinius, this Campus Martius was restored to its
former use, wherein they exercised Chivalrie, and feats of Arms. The like to
this is yours; but never a proud Tarquine will alienate the use of that so
happily begun.

Go on therefore ye worthy Citizens, finish your noble School of Defense: If
I have erred in commending you, ye will pardon my charitable mistake. I did
deliver freely what I thought you had done, or what I believed you should have
done, or what I hope you will do. It is wisdom to prepare for War. We have
enjoyed peace a long time, (blessed be God) but that peace has bred some
surfets, which we pray God to cure with gentle purges, without letting blood.
Lipsius gave this to be the reason of our Halcyon days in Q. Elizabeth's reign,
Quodjam in pace Britannia, imperio debet pacati sexus, We did owe our peace to
that quiet and mild sex: And yet we have had, and still have masculine
Princes, and still enjoy peace, blessed be God; But what then? shall that lull
us asleep, and secure us from all Martial meditation? because the Summer
quarter hangs upon us, shall we think that Winter rots in the Sky? Go on
therefore, let not so glorious a work be hindered with faint-hearted avarice,
but bestow your bounty for their convenience, who will be ready to spend their
blood for your defense. In ancient times, when the Captain returned from the
Wars in triumphant manner, he entered the City, Non apertis portis, sed
disruptis muris, Not by opening the gates, but by making a large breach in
their walls: To signify, as Plutarch says, that having so great and valiant
Soldiers, they needed no walls to defend them: As Homer calls Achilles, (...),
so these are the walls of the City. This is one of the glorious things that are
spoken of thee, O City of London; and it must needs joy your hearts to see so
many brave Worthies issue out of your sides, like the flower of Greece out of
the Trojan horse. In this also we have great cause to triumph. Now thanks be to
God which causes us to triumph thus on earth, even in this Church Militant,
and the same God bring us at last to the Church triumphant in heaven, through
the blessed merits of his Son Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the
holy Spirit be ascribed all honor, power and dominion, now and for evermore.
Amen.

FINIS.

