A MODEL OF A Democraticall GOVERNMENT, Humbly tendered to Consideration, by a
FRIEND and WEL-WISHER to this COMMONWEALTH.



LONDON, Printed for W. P. 1659.

A MODEL Of a Democraticall government, humbly tendered to Consideration, by a
Friend and Wel-wisher to this Commonwealth.
1. THAT the supreme Legislative Authority of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging,
be, and reside in a Senate and a Representative of the People.

II. That the sole power of debating and proposing Laws be in the Senate, and
the sole Result in the Representative of the People.

That this Parliament dissolve themselves by Act, and that therein it be
declared, that their dissolution be as a Parliament, and the Legislative
Authority they now exercise do determine the seventh day of May next.

III. That betwixt this and the said seventh of May, Writs issue out to such
places as this Parliament shall find most equal, and indifferent for the
Election of so many Members to themselves, as to make up their number three
hundred; which said number shall enter with them into the Parliament House the
eighth day of May next, and the said three hundred persons shall be the Senate.

IV. That the Senate do within one week after their first sitting choose out of
themselves, one hundred to be of the Senate for one year, another hundred to
be of the Senate for two years, another hundred to be of the Senate for three
years, and that before the 14. of May, in every May yearly there be one
hundred new Senators chosen out of those that are last gone out of the Assembly
of the People at that time, and that so many Senators go then out of the
Senate, whose time shall be then expired.

V. That after the first choice of the Senate, the nomination of the new
Senators be in the Senate, and the choice to be in the Assembly of the People.

VI. That there be an Assembly of a Representative of the People at
Westminster, the 8th. day of May next to be chosen and perpetuated by Annual
Elections as follows, only the first time, three times the number must be
chosen, viz. one third part for one year, another third part for two years,
and another third part for three years; and the said Elections shall be
annually made, upon or before the first Wednesday in March without any Writ or
Writs, or other Summons, viz.

For the Town and County of Bedford Four For the County of Berks Five For the
County of Bucks Five For the County of Cambridge and I Will of Ely Five For the
Town of Cambridge One For the County of Chester Three For the County of
Cornwall Eight For the County of Cumberland Two For the County of Derby Three
For the County of Devon Twelve For the City of Exeter One For the County of
Dorset Six For the County of Durham Two For the County of York Sixteen viz. For
the Town and county of Kingstone upon Hull and the East Riding Four For the
Northriding Four For the city and county of the city of York One For the
West Riding Six For the Town and Parish of Leeds One For the County of Essex
Ten For the County of Gloucester and City of Gloucester, and County of the
City. Six For the County of Hereford Four For the County of Hartford Four For
the County of Huntington Three For the County of Kent Twelve For the County of
Lancanster Six For the County of Leicester Four For the County of Lincoln Ten
For the County of Middlesex Three For the City of Westminster One For the City
of London Four For the County of Monmouth Two For the County of Norfolk Nine
For the City of Norwich One For the County of Northampton Six For the County of
Nottingham Four For the County of Northumberland, and Town of Barwick Four For
the County of Oxford Five For the City of Oxford One For the County of Rutland
One For the County of Salop Five For the County of Stafford Four For the County
of Somerset Ten For the City of Bristol One For the County of Southhampton Nine
For the County of Suffolk Ten For the County of Surrey Five For the Borrough of
Southwark One For the County of Sussex Nine For the County of Westmerland Two
For the County of Warwick Four For the County and city and county, of the
city of Worcester. Four For the County of Wilts Nine for the County of
Anglesey One for the County of Brecon One for the county of Cardigan One for
the county of Caermathen One for the county of Carnarvan One for the county
of Denbigh One for the county of Flint One for the county of Glamorgan Two
for the county of Merioneth One for the county of Montgomery One for the
county of Pembrook Two for the county of Radnor One For Scotland and Islands
thereto belonging, to be proportioned by the Parliament or Council of State.
Twenty For Ireland, to be proportioned by Parliament or Council of State.
Twenty
And if the Parliament and Council of State cannot so proportion them, as to
have twenty in each Nation chosen with convenience every year, then so to
proportion them, as that thirty in each may be chosen yearly, And so to order
as that ^wice thirty may be chosen for each Nation, the first time, and no more.

VII. That for the Election of the first Representative of the People, the
Ancient Laws, Customs and Rules be observed, (with such alterations as is
hereby made) and that the Sheriffs, by themselves or Deputies, and all others
concerned see that the said Elections be made, and the persons chosen returned,
as has been usual, without any Writ or Writs or other Summons, upon, or before
the first Wednesday in March next as aforesaid, and such persons so chosen,
shall enter into, and be of the Assembly of the People, the eighth day of May
Annually.

VIII. That no person or persons be Eligible, who shall not first declare, and
Engage under his or their hands and Seals to be true faithful, and constant to
this Commonwealth, without a King, Protector, or other Single Person in the
Government over these Nations, as also aginst a House of Lords or Peers, or
any Person or Persons that shall claim or Exercise any Authority in these
Nations otherwise then by or from the choice of the People.

IX. That no Person or Persons be capable of Electing or being Elected, to be
of the Senate or Assembly of the People, that have Aided, Abetted, or Assisted
the late King Charles or his Son in their Wars against this Parliament or
Commonwealth, unless they have given or shall give signal testimony of their
good affections to the Government of these Nations, by way of a Commonwealth,
or until it shall be otherwise declared by the Senate, and Representative of
the People.

X. That no Person or Persons be capable of being Elected to be of the Senate,
until he or they have given, or shall give signal testimony of his or their
good affections to the Government of these Nations, in the way of a
Commonwealth, or until it shall be otherwise agreed upon by the Senate and
Representative of the People.

XI. That if any Person or Persons shall presume to sit or Vote in the Senate
or Assembly of the People before he or they have declared as aforesaid, or not
being qualified as aforesaid (without license of the Senate) or being admitted,
shall propose, or give his or their consents to alter the Government contrary
to the said Declaration; or shall propose or give his or their consents, to
prosecute for Conscience every person so offending, shall forfeit his whole
estate real and personal to the Commonwealth: And the Treasurers, for the
time being shall, and hereby have power to seize and become accomptable for the
same to the Commonwealth accordingly.

XII. That the Exercise of the chief Magistracy and Administration of the
Government over the Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, and all Writs, Process,
Commissions, Patents, Grants, and other things, which now do, or at any time
did, or might run in the name or style of the Keepers of the Liberty of England
by Authority of Parliament, shall from and after the seventh day of May next,
run in the name and Style of The Senate and People of England.

XIII. That there be a Council of State consisting of fifteen persons, viz.
five out of each Squadron of the Senate, perpetuated by the supply of five out
of each new Squadron, that shall be from time to time elected into the Senate,
and the like number then to recede that were chosen out of the Squadron of the
Senate whose time is expired.

XIV. That there be a Council of War consisting of nine persons chosen and
perpetuated by the Council of State out of themselves, viz. three out of each
order annually as aforesaid.

XV. That there be a Council of Trade consisting of twelve persons elected and
perpetuated in the same manner out of the Senate.

XVI. That there be three Commissioners of the Treasury, and three
Commissioners of the Great Seal, chosen out of, and by the Senate, viz. one
out of each order or Squadron of the Senate, and perpetuated by annual
Elections as aforesaid.

XVII. That there be three Commanders in Chief by Land (viz.) one for England.
one for Scotland, and one for Ireland; and that he who is for England be
General of the whole Army; and he that is for Scotland be Lieutenant General;
And he that is for Ireland be Major General, in case there be any occasion of
Conjunction of any of the Armies to prevent Competition for the chief command,
and that there be annually a Major General chosen to command a year in
Ireland, and then to remove of course to command a year in Scotland as
Lieutenant General, and then to remove of course into England to command a year
as General, and so the said Commands to be perpetuated by the like Annual
Elections and Removes.

That there be three Generals at Sea perpetuated by the Annual Election of one
and the Receding of one, at the end of every year, and that he that is the
Eldest chosen be Admiral, the second chosen Vice Admiral, and the third Rere
Admiral, for their respective years successively, and according to their
Seniorities as aforesaid.

XVIII. That all Elections be made by the Senate, that all Field Officers be
proposed by the Council of War; all Ambassadors Extraordinary, by the Council
of State; all Judges and Sergeants at Law by the Commissioners of the Great
Seal; all Barons and Officers of Trust in the Exchequer, by the Commissioners
of the Treasury, and that such as are so proposed and Elected, do act according
to former practice and the Laws in being, or which hereafter shall be, in the
several places into which they shall be respectively chosen.

XIX. That the calling to Account and Punishing all Officers so proposed and
chosen for breach of Trust or other crimes, be by the Parliament or Assembly of
the People.

XX. That no Person be employed in more then one place of profit in the
Commonwealth at the same time, and that no Person continue above three years in
one employment, without a new Election, nor be Elegible into the same
employment, without as long an Interval as he was before in the same
Employment. And that all Elections be made void and new ones made, when and in
such Cases it shall be proved that any person that shall be chosen, did
directly or Indirectly endeavor to get himself chosen, or did by himself, or
any other on his behalf, with his knowledge and consent give any gift or reward
for or in respect of the said Election.

XXI. That in case of Death or other Removeal of any Person chosen into any
Place or Employment as aforesaid, a New Election be made of another into his
place to supply the rest of his Term to expire.

XXII. That all other things necessary for the perfecting and firm settling this
Commonwealth, both in Civil and Religious Administrations be according as shall
be from time to time proposed by the Senate, and assented unto by the People
Assembled in Parliament, and not otherwise.

FINIS.

