The Ex-ale-tation of ALE, The anciant Lickquor of this REALM.

OR, A clear definition of its efficatious opperation in several Pates, Arts,
and Professions.



July 30 London, Printed by T. Badger, 1646.

THE Ex-ale-tation of Ale.
Not drunken, nor sober, but neighbor to both
I met with a friend in Ales-bury Vale;
He saw by my face that I was in the case
To speak no great harm of a pot of good Ale.
Then did he me greet and said since we meet
(and he put me in mind of the name of the Dale)
For Ales-bury sake some pains I would take
and not bury the praise of a pot of good Ale.
The more to procure me, then did he adjure me;
if the Ale I drank last were nappy and stale;
To do it his right and stir up my sprite
and fall to commend a pot of etc.
Quoth I to commend it I dare not begin,
least therein my credit might happen to fail
For many men now do count it a sin
but once to look toward a etc.
Yet I care not a pin for I see no such sin
nor any thing else my courage to quail
For this we do find that take it in kind
much Virtue there is in a pot etc.
And I mean not the taste, though thereby much graced,
nor the merrygodowne without pull or hale,
Perfuming the throat when the stomach's afloate
with the fragrant sent of etc.
Nor yet the delight that comes to the sight
to see how it flowers and mantles in graile;
As green as a leeke with a smile in the cheek
the true orient color of a etc.
But I mean the mind and the good it does find,
not only the body so feeble and frail
For body and soul may bless the black boule
since both are beholden to a etc.
For when heaviness the mind does oppress,
and sorrow and grief the heart do assail,
No remedy quicker then to take off your liquor
and to wash away cares with a etc.
The Widow that buried her husband of late
will soon have forgotten to weep and to wail,
And think every day twain till she marry again,
read her but the contents of a etc.
It is like a belly blast to a cold heart
and warmes and engenders the spirits vitale,
To keep them from damage all spri'ts owe their homage
to the spr'it of the buttry a etc.
And down to the legs this virtue does go,
and to a bad foot man is as good as a sail,
When it fills the veins and makes light the brains
no lackey so nimble as a etc.
The naked complains not for want of a coat,
nor on the cold weather will once turn his tail,
All the way as he goes he cuts the wind with his nose,
if he be but well wrapped in a etc.
The hungry man takes no thought for his meat
though his stomach would brook a ten penny nail;
He quite forgets hunger and thinks on it no longer,
if he touch but the spark of a etc.
The poor man will praise it, so has he good cause,
that all the year eats neither Partridge nor Quail,
But sets up his rest and makes up his feast
with a crust of brown bread and a etc
The Sheapheard, the Sower, the Thresher, the Mower,
the one with his scith, the other with his flaile,
Take them out by the poll on the peril of my soul
all will hold up their hands to a etc.
The black smith whose bellows all summer do blow
with the fire in his face still, without ere a vale,
Though his throat be full dry he will tell you no lie,
but where you may be sure of a etc.
Who ever denies it the prisoner will praise it,
that beg at the grate and lie in the goal:
For even in their fetters they think themselves better
may they get but a two penny black pot of Ale.
The beggar whose portion is always his prayer,
not having a tatter to hang on his tail,
Is as rich in his rags as the churl in his bags,
if he once but shakes hands with a and
It drives his poverty clean out of mind
forgetting his brown bread, his Wallet and Mayle
He walks in the house like a sixfooted louse,
if he once be enricht with a etc.
And he that does dig in the ditches all day,
and wearies himself quite at the plough tail,
Will speak no less things then of Queens and of Kings
i^ he touch but the topp of a etc.
It is a Whetstone to a blunt wit
and makes a supply where nature does fail
The dullest wit soon will look quite through the Moon
if his temples be wet with a etc.
Then Dicke to his darling full boldly dares speak
though before (seely fellow) his courage did quail
He gives her the smouch with his hand on his pouch
if he meet by the way with a etc.
And it makes the Carter a Courtier straightway:
with rhetorical terms he will tell his tale
With curtises great store and his cap up before
being schoold but a little with a etc.
The old man whose tongue waggs faster then his teeth
(for old age by nature does drivel and draile)
Will frigg and fling like a dog in a string
if he warm his cold blood with a etc.
And the good old Clarke whose sight waxes dark
and ever he thinks the print is too small,
He will see every letter and say service better
if he glaze but his eyes with a etc.
The cheek and the jaws to commend it have cause;
for where they were late but even wanne and pale,
They will get them a color no crimson is fuller
by the true dye and tincture of a etc.
Mark her enemies though they think themselves wise,
how megre they look with how low a wayle,
How their cheeks do fall without spr'its at all
that alien their minds from a etc.
And now that the grains do work in my brains,
me thinks I were able to give by retale
Commodities store a dozen and more
that flow to mankind from a pot etc.
The Muses would muse any should it misuse.
For it makes them to sing like a Nightingale,
With a lofty trime note having washed their throat
with the Caballine spring of a etc.
And the Musician of any condition
it will make him to reach to the top of his scale,
It will clear his pipes and moysten his lights
if he drink alternatim a etc.
The Poet divine that cannot reach wine,
because that his money does many times fail,
Will hit on the veins to make a good streigne
if he be but inspired with a etc.
For ballads Elderton never had peer
how went his wit in them with how merry a gale?
And with all his sails up, had he been at the cup
and washed his beard with a etc.
And the power of it shows no whit less in prose,
it will fill ones phrase and set forth his tale;
Fill him but a bowl it will make his tongue troule,
for flowing speech flows from a etc.
And Master Philosopher if he drink his part,
will not trifle his time in the husk or the shale,
But go to the kernel by the depth of his art
to be found in the bottom of a etc.
Give a scholar of Oxford a pot of sixteens
and put him to prove that an Ape has a tail,
And sixteen times better his wit will be seen
if you fetch him from Botley a etc.
Thus it helps speech and wit, and it hurts not a whit,
but rather does further the virtues morale:
Then think it not much if a little I touch
the good moral parts of a etc.
To the church and religion it is a good friend,
or else our forefathers their wisdom did fail,
That at every mile next to the church style,
set a consecrate house to a etc.
But now as they say beer bears all away,
the more is the pity if right might prevail;
For with this same beer came up heresies here,
the old Catholic drink is a etc.
The Churches much owe as we all do know,
for when they be dropping and ready to fall;
By a Whitson or a Church ale up again they shall go
and owe their repayring to a etc.
Truth will do it right, it brings truth to light,
and many bad matters it helps to reveile,
For they that will drink will speak what they think;
Tom tell troth lies hid in a etc.
It is Justices friend, she will it commend,
For all is here served by measure and tale,
Now, true tale and good measure, are Justices treasure
and much to the praise of a etc.
And next I allege it is fortitudes edge,
for a very cow-heard that shrinkes like a snaile,
Will swear and will swagger and out goes his dagger,
of A be but armed with a etc
Yea Ale has her Knights and Squiers of degree
that never wore corslet nor yet shirt of maile,
But have fought their fights all twixt the pot and the wall
when once they were dubbed with a etc.
And (sure) it will make a man suddenly wise
yer while was scarce able to tell a right tale,
It will open his jaw he will tell you the law
as made a right Preacher of a etc.
Or he that will make a bargain to gain
in buying or setting his goods forth to sale,
Must not plod in the mire but sit by the fire
and seal up his match with a etc.
But for sobernes needs must I confess
the matter goes hard and few do prevail
Not to go to deep but temper to keep
such is the attractive of a etc.
But here is an amends which will make all friends
and ever does tend to the best avail,
If you take it too deep it will make you but sleep,
so comes no great hurt o^ a etc,
If reeling they happen to fall to the ground,
the fall is not great they may hold by the rail,
If into the water they cannot be drowned,
for that gift is given to a etc.
If drinking about they chance to fall out
fear not the alarame, though flesh be but frail,
It will prove but some blows or at most a bloody nose
and friends again straight with a etc.
And Physic will favor Ale as it is bound
and be against beer both tooth and nail,
They send up and down all over the Town
to get for their Patients a etc.
Their Aleberries caudles and possets each one
and sillabubs made at the milking pale,
Although they be many beer comes not in any
but all are composed with a etc.
And in very deed, the hop's but a weed
brought ore against law and here set to sale;
Would the law were renewed and no more beer brewed,
but all good men betake them to a etc.
The law, that, will take it under her wing
for at every law day or moote of the hale
One is sworn to serve our Sovereign the King
in the ancient office of a Conner of Ale
There Is never a Lord of Manor or of Town
by strand or by land by hill or by dale,
But think it a franchise and flower of the Crown
to hold the assise of a etc.
And though their lies writs from the Court Paramount
to stay the proceeding of the Court Paravaile,
Law favors it so you may come you may go,
there lies no prohibition to a etc
They talk much of state both early and late,
but if Gascoigne and Spain their wine should but fail,
No remedy then with us Englishmen
but the State it must stand by a etc.
And they that sit by it are good men and quiet,
no dangerous plotters in the commonweal
Of treason or murder, for they never go further
then to call for and pay for a etc.
To the praise of Cambivius that good British King
that devised for his nation (by the Welshmens tale)
Seventeen hundred years before Christ did spring
the happy invention of a etc.
But he was a Paynim and Ale then was rife,
yet after Christ came and bid us all hail;
St. David tid never trinke Peer in her life
put all Cwwrwwhibley a etc.
The North they will praise it and praise it with passion
where every River gives name to a Dale;
There are yet men living that are of tho'ld fashion
no Nectar they know but a etc.
The Picts and the Scots for Ale were at lots,
so high was the skill and so kept under seal;
The Picts were undone slain each mothers son
for not teaching the Scots to make Hetheraeale
But hither or thither it skills not much whether,
for drink must be had, men live not by ke^le
Nor by Haverhannocks nor by Haveriannocks;
the thing the Scots live by is a etc.
Now if you will say it J will not deny it,
that many a man it brings to his bale
Yet what fairer end can one wish to his friend
then to dye by the dart of a etc.
Yet let not the innocent bear any blame,
it is their own doing to break ore the pale,
And neither the malt nor the good wife in fault
if any be potted with a etc.
They tell of whom it kills, but say not a word
how many a man lives both sound and whole,
Though he drink no beer any day in the year,
by the Radical humor of a etc.
But to speak of killing that am J not willing,
for that in a manner were but to rail;
But Beer has its name cause it brings to the beer,
therefore well fare say J to a etc.
Too many I wis with their death proved this,
and therefore if ancient records do not fail
He that first brewed the hop was rewarded with a rope
and found his beer far more bitter then Ale.
O Ale ab alendo thou liquor of life
that I had but a mouth as bigg as a Whale;
For mine is too little to touch the least tittle
that belongs to the praise of a etc.
Thus J trow some Virtues I have marked you out
and never a vice in all this long trayle;
But that after the pot there comes a shot
and that's the only blot of a etc.
With that my friend said that blot will I bear
you have done very well it is time to stricke sale;
Weel have six pots more though J dye on the score
to make all this good of a pot of good Ale.
FINIS.

