Mr: HENRY MARTIN HIS SPEECH In the House of COMMONS, BEFORE his Departure
thence.

June 8. 1648.

Printed in the Year 1648.

Mr. Henry Martins Speech.
Mr. Speaker:
YOU know how forward I have been always from the beginning, to act and
speak Treason. I was not like Adam, that old fool, to hide my transgressions
in my bosom. I am an Achan in part, but not in whole: for he confessed his
sins troubled Israel, in a penitent way, but I scorn his baseness: I have
troubled Israel and glory in it. I hate that Traitor Judas, who will repent of
his Treason, and restore that money which was the price of Christ's blood: what
base principles had these blades? Had I receyved the 30 pieces of silver, I
would have gone with it straight to a Bawdy house, and have had a gallant young
Wench for it. I was once in hope to have spent the Kings Revenew this way, and
you know I put the same in a very good forwardness; but now I fear much those
Welsh Rogues, have been the leading Card to all mischief; and will be a
means to hinder my intention of erecting a famous Stews in the City of
London, with the Kingdoms money. The Raskalls pretend it is for their
Arreares, and an act of Indemnity they stand for: what cowardly Traitors are
these? Stand to ask an act of Indemnity of a King in prison, when I that am
no soldier (unless it be under Venus banner) durst speak high Treason as
frequently, as I dare lie with Mrs. Dunce. When the King had power equal with
ours, I durst tear his Proclamation: nay if I were sure I could do it, I durst
tear his heart out of his body, and drink healths of his blood to my little
creature in Drury lane; and yet these cowardly Goats who have swords in their
hands, must stand for that of us, which we have as much need of as themselves,
if the King should come again. And for their arrears, Mr. Speaker, you know as
well as I, what for buying of Land and Bawdy houses, we cannot spare them one
penny. For how shall you and all covetous men in the House, have their full
number of Lordships which they intend to buy, if these Knaves should have their
arreares? Or how shall I, and all the Whoremasters of the House, keep half a
dozen Whores, if they have their arrears? if that be granted them, we should
never be able to keep above one a piece (except some private friends.) And, Mr.
Speaker, what do you think Mr. Corbets wife, and the rest of the Members
wives would do, and how would they be able to maintain their Closet Gentlemen,
if the Soldiers should have their arrears? Pox eat them, they have hindered our
trading already: and now Langdale and Glemham are come in to assist that wicked
wight, the King. The Citizens fear a new War, and will not part with their
money. Mr. Speaker, I will turn up their Wives, and you shall plunder their
Bags, if the Army prevayle. But what a Devil made those Pippins of Kent to
rise? they begin to bud, and preach, and threaten Rebellion against us; that
had been enough had we sat these 7. years with them, and layne with their
wives, as we have done with the Londoners, then they had had some color of
complaint: but if Sir Thomas prevayle over their husbands, I will take a
Country house amongst them, and you shall see how I will come over their wives.

Mr. Speaker, I would advise you beg and buy all the Land in Kent, that you may
rack and punish them soundly, for rising against your profit, and my pleasure.
Would they, Knaves, have the King come home? which if they obtain, what shall
we have? I know nothing but a fair new Gallows, and a Gregory to be our
Godfather. I pray you, Mr. Speaker, do you think ever to enjoy your Lands,
bought since this Reformation, if the King come home? Or do you think I shall
go any more to a Bawdy house, or will my Wenches be suffered to come to me,
when I have no money, and lie in prison? No, no. Remember that the King is a
stern solid man, and no fool, and having all the people for him, we shall
hardly escape with our lives.

Mr. Speaker, nothing troubles me so much, as those Calves of Essex, who gave
entertaynment to those old dry bones of Goring, who is able to do their wives
no good: had they but sent for the Earl of Stamford, or me, we should soon
have got the love of their wives, or else we would have hazarded the running
of the Reins. But, M. Speaker, my greatest sorrow is, that I must be forced to
leave Mrs. Dunce, and the rest of my creatures behind me, if Sir Thomas do
not prevayle. If there be any Gentleman in the House, that has been in New
England, I desire to know whether there be any Bawdy houses in that Country; if
there be none, I must be at charge to carry a score or two of honest Wenches
with me. I know in Spain and France be good store, but their King is not in
prison, and I will not come amongst such obedient scabs. But I fear much that
I shall scarce get out of the Land, but must dye like a Bird upon a Tree, now
the Navy is gone; but if I should, it will not trouble me half so much, if the
King will but suffer a handsome Whore to be my Executioner: I conceive it could
not but well please John Baptist that his head was danced off with so handsome
a Wench as Herodias Daughter: I know, Mr. Speaker, the King loves me better
then he does Vane, or Perpoint, or Mildmay, or Haslerigge, or Evillin, or St.
John, or Wild, or your self, because I am plain with him, and tell him and
the world the truth of our intentions; I keep me to my principles, and scorn
to deal underhand like a Judas; I had rather kill my King then kiss him; I
know I kissed his hand at Hampton Court, but I speak ingeniously I had rather
kiss Mrs. Dunces breech. Mr. Speaker, pray if you have any money that is not
laid our upon Lands, send the Army some, that they may murder our enemies
furiously: I should not have been backward my self to send them some, but
that I have been too forward with the Bawdy houses, which have almost gleaned
me dry of money, of marrow, and almost frenchyfied my tongue, that I can scarce
speak out my speech.

Another question I have to ask, which is to know whether there be any
Apothecaries and Doctors there; if there be none, it will put me to a great
charge; therefore I heartily wish you, Mr. Speaker, to give your vote for me
that I may have 10000 l. granted me by the House, to furnish me with a Doctor
and Drugs, to keep and preserve my life; which if it be denied me, the French
scab will eat out my bowels: and if you vote for me to day for that money, I
will vote for you to morrow, for as much as will buy you a whole County in New
England. Mr. Speaker, let us betwixt us, take the Kings Crown out of the
Abbey, and make sale of that Babylonish Relic: it will yield us as much coin
as will buy you a great Town or two, and it will maintain part of my Wenches
charge. But I hear some say, that in New England they will not suffer us to
keep a score of whores apeece: but it is no matter; I have a project in my
head, to set the people in love with a Parliament, by telling them it is the
only way to make Religion flourish, and so deceive them, as we have done our
English at home: they being very factiously given, will be led in blindness
with much ease; then we being Parliament men may keep what Whores we please,
and you may buy what Lordships you please. You shall be Speaker of that House,
and I will be Chayreman of a close Committee at least: and when we are there, we
will send for Hugh Peter's to Preach that it is no sin to lie with a Saint.
You know they of that Nation are all such, who have been moved by the spirit
to lie with their mayds, neighbors daughters, neighbors wives, their own
daughters, and the like; and have for that been banished by the Minister of
the Parish, in which they lived, or else forced through shame to go thence,
because they would not stand in a white sheet, in their Parish Church: nay most
of them had no shame but would willingly have stood, would their conscience but
have given them leave to have come within a Church where the wicked meet.

Thus, Mr. Speaker, have I spoke my mind, as fully as I can at present: more I
could say, did not these sad tidings of arising in Wales, and almost the rest
of the whole Kingdom, call me to a speedy work; which is to choose my number
of Creatures, I intend to carry with me. For my Doctor, I have chosen him
already; a man without exception, and one known to you all his name is Dr.
Bastwicke, whom I know has good skill in my disease. Thus Mr. Speaker, I take
my leave of the House, hoping we shall all meet in New England very shortly.
Farewell.

FINIS.

