A CONFVTATION of the New Presbyterian Error.

Showing not only how near our late Presbyterians come to the Anabaptists, in
restrayning the Supper of the Lord from the people, by way of Examination, as
they do children from the Sacrament of Baptism, by way of Confession; but
also how they agree with Papists in Auricular Confession: and that their
practice is sacrilegious, new, usurped, and tyrannical.

By Alexander Mingzeis, Minister of Gods word.

Every plant that my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up.

Matthew. 15.3. Printed in the Year 1648.

A Confutation of the new Presbyterian Error.
Drawn not only from the unwarrantablenesse it has in Scripture, but also
from the inconvenience thence arising.
FOR the better clearing whereof, arises a threefold Question.

The first is, to know what right Christians have to the Lords Supper.

Secondly, what Christians are to be admitted, and who not.

Thirdly, what power the Minister has, to withhold the Communion from the
people.

First therefore, for the peoples right to that blessed Sacrament; I conceive
it to be equal with the right or interest the children of Christian parents,
have to the Sacrament of Baptism, which I prove by the Epistle of Paul to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 7.14. where he has these words: The unbeleeving husband
is sanctified by the wife, and the unbeleeving wife is sanctified by the
husband, else were your children unclean, but now are they holy, says the
Apostle.

From whence our late Presbyterians must either (with the Anabaptists) grant
that the children of Christian parents, have right to the Sacrament of
Baptism, without confession of faith, or else grant, that Christians that are
born within the Covenant pale of the Church, have right to the Sacrament of the
holy Communion, without their rigid and strict examination.

For as our Church admits the foresaid Infants to the Sacrament of Baptism, by
the virtue of the faith of their parents, so (I conceive) our Church cannot
withold any from the Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord, that is borne
within the Covenant, the pale of the Church, and has a desire to it.

But to this will be objected, first, that by the place aforenamed, is meant
the legitimation of children borne in lawful wedlock, and not that children
have right to the Sacrament of Baptism, much less ignorant and scandalous
people to the partaking of the holy Communion.

Secondly, that confession of faith and examination, is to be required in the
worthy Receiver, before his coming to the participation of that blessed
Sacrament, notwithstanding he b^ borne within the Covenant, and the pale of the
Church, and of Christian parents.

To the former objection I answer, that the Ap^stles conclusion is not only to
resolve the law^ull cohabi^ation of a believer with an infidel, but also that
their children so begotten in law^u^l wedlock, are interessed to the outward
ordinances and privileges of the Church, else he would not have added, else
were your children unclean, but now they are holy; which to be so, I prove by
another express place and warrant of Scripture: as when God commanded Abraham
Genesis 17.12. not only to circumcise himself and his seed, but also the stranger
that was borne in his house, or bought with money; all which circumcised
of^pring having as free access to the external worship and service of the
Sanctuary, as Abraham's own posterity. I reason from hence, That if those within
the Covenant under circumcision, had right to the outward privileges of the
Sanctuary, then much more have we to the ordinances of the Gospel, by reason
circumcision was not only a type of baptism, but also because we are called
to a greater liberty, Christ's yoke being easy, and his burden light, Matt.
11.30.

To the second objection, I answer, that albeit confession of faith and
examination is to be required ^n a worthy receiver, before he be admitted to
the participation of those divine mysteries, yet is it not always such a
confession as our Adversaries dream of, nor has the Church any such power to
examine as they pretend, much less to keep the Communion from the people,
upon pretense of that examination and confession.

For first for confession, Philip held it enough in the Eunuch, to believe
Jesus Christ to be the son of the living God; besides that, all which are
borne within the pale of the Church are interessed, as before.

But to this it will be objected, that the Devils may go thus far, therefore
etc.

I answer, the Devils may believe in general, but they cannot apply any thing
in particular to themselves. Now the rule of faith advises us to judge
charitably of all men, therefore etc.

As for examination, the Apostle wills a man to examine himself, 1. Cor.
11.28. and not to be examined by the Elders or Presbytery, therefore etc.

But to this it will be objected, that our people are not so able to examine
themselves as the Corinthians were, etc.

I answer, that appears, for some of them were drunk, and some sober, when
they came to be breaking of bread, and the participation of the blessed
Sacrament. And I never saw any drunken man yet in England admitted to the
partaking of the body and blood of Christ: wherefore here comes in, in the
second place, to know who are worthy to receive, and who not, or who are to be
admitted, and who not.

To which, I answer, all that are interessed as before, that have a desire to
it, and are able to examine themselves.

Now in examination there is only required these two things: viz. First to know
whether we be in Christ, and Christ in us; and whether we are able to discern
the Lords body in that blessed Sacrament.

First, therefore we must examine whether we be in the faith, and consequently
we in Christ, and Christ in us; according to that of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 13.5.
Examine your own selves whether you be in the faith, prove your own selves;
know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be
reprobates? So that all but reprobates may know themselves to be ingrafted
into Christ, by a true saving faith, and Christ into them, that they have put
on Christ and cannot put him off again: that they are baptized into Christ,
and with him buried by baptism, into the likeness of his death, to the end they
may rise with him unto the newness of life. They carry Christ along with them,
in the participation of that blessed Sacrament; and therefore cannot choose but
find him there.

The second thing that is requisite to examine our selves in, is to know whether
we be able to discern the Lords body in that blessed Sacrament, lest in eating
and drinking unworthily, we eat and drink our own damnation. Now to discern
the Lords body in that blessed Sacrament, is (by faith) to see Christ set
forth before us, in those blessed elements of bread and wine, and him
crucified. Which calls our sins to remembrance, and our selves crucified with
Christ to them through true and unsayned repentance. This is eating of the
Passover with unleavened bread, and bitter herbs, Exodus 12.8. whence we must
examine whether there be in us a^ unfamed purpose and resolution of amendment
of life, and that we will become new creatures, and so put now wine into new
vessels, in laying Christ in a new tomb or sepulcher, Matthew. 27 60. And
whether there be in us a bunger and thirst after Christ in that blessed
Sacrament, to the end we may not only be made one with Christ, but also that we
may be rooted and stablished in him, and grow up into a holy building in the
Lord, Ephesians. 4.15. and have all his divine gifts and graces sealed up unto us in
that blessed Sacrament. So that Christ may become in us a well of water of
life, springing up into life eternal, John 4.14.

This is the worthy receiving.

The unworthy is of three sorts: The novice, the stranger, and the scandalous.

By the novice, I understand such, who though they be born within the Covenant
and pale of the Church, yet are not sufficiently seen in the principles of
Faith, and of Christian Religion, which in the Primitive times) were called
(...), who with those before named, were commanded to depart after the Sermon
was ended, and the blessing pronounced, and were not suffered to be idle gazers
or lookers on, when the holy Sacrament of the communion of the body and blood
of Christ was to be administered.

By the stranger, I understand such, as were of another Congregation, or
Parish, who also were not to be admitted without certificate from the place
and Pastor whence they came, of their life and conversation, and their
sufficiency in receiving.

The third sort that was restrained from the Communion, was the scandalous
person, by which I understand the profane, and all sorts of Heathens,
Gentiles, Infidels, Heretics, Sectaries, and the like. These were the dogs
and hogs to whom the Sacrament of the blessed Communion of the body and blood
of Christ was denied, because it is not fitting to take the childrens bread,
and cast it unto dogs.

But it will be objected, that many such dogs we have now in the Kingdom: I
answer, first the Minister may be mistaken in judging them to be dogs, which
are saints. Secondly, I answer, that if it be understood of novices or ignorant
people, then it ought to be the care and endeavor of the Minister (according
to the custom of the Primitive times) to instruct and teach them in the faith,
and in the Principles of Christian Religion and virtue, which being the
Ministers fault that it is neglected; I do not see but he is more to be blamed
then the people; for he after the example of Christ ought to carry his Lambs
in his bosom, and gently drive on them that are with young; he ought by gen^le
persuasion and entreaty to allure and draw on the ignorant to come nearer unto
Christ, and not by force and strong hand keep him of. It is for those Christ
dyed, and dare the Minister deny him the bread and wine to whom Christ denies
not his body and blood? Is Christ come into the soul and made one with it, and
shall that soul be denied the outward privilege of his love? Let our new
Presbyterians therefore consider, what they have done in withholding the
Communion all this while from many which they know not. One says, [ I have
read it in Bishop Jewel, and Mr. Foxes Acts and Monuments] That the gifts of
the Lord should not have been denied to the Devils, if Christ had died for
them; but we deny it to Christians for whom he suffered. I pray God it be not
laid to our Ministers charge, and the blood of Christ be not required at their
hands, or at the least the souls of these innocents whom they have so much
discouraged. Christ says, that it were better for one that offends but one
of the little ones, that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were
cast into the bottom of the sea, then that any such offense were given.

Thirdly, I answer, if it be understood of the stranger or scandalous, then it
ought to be the care of the Elders and Churchwardens, or of any one in the
Parish (in case the Minister be a stranger himself) to give timely notice
unto the Minister of such an unworthy receiver, to the end he may be presented,
if he repent not: but not therefore to keep the bread of life from all,
because some are unworthy.

And therefore I utterly deny in the third and last place, that the Church, much
less any private Minister in particular, has any such power to withold the
Communion from all, under pretense of some unworthy receivers; or that they
have any such power, to lay burden or yoke upon the peoples necks of a new
invented and tyrannical discipline: for Christ and his Apostles did not
practice it, the primitive times, for ought I know, did not dream of it, and
the true reformed Churches are not privy to it. For Christ gave the Sacrament
to Judas which was a Devil, a thief, a murderer, and a traitor. The Apostle
bore with the Corinthians unworthy receiving (though otherwise he chekt them
for it) but we hear not of any new charge he laid upon them to be examined by
the Ministry or Presbytery, but that they should examine themselves, as being
in the faith, and living within the pale of the Church: but I must confess,
our late Presbyterians are grown wiser then either Christ or his Apostles. The
Primitive times used no such custom, but did as before is specified, which use
all the true reformed Churches following, except against none, but as before is
declared; and if any be ignorant, they take the more pains with him, by
instructing and teaching him, as before.

And therefore I do not only conclude this withholding people from the
Communion, under pretense of examination, to be Anabaptisticall, but also new,
usurped, sacrilegious, Antichristian, and tyrannical; and such a yoke as
neither we nor our fathers were able to bear. First I say, it is sacrilegious,
being worse then Church-robbing; for the one does but bereave the congregation
of corporal things, the other of spiritual, the one of temporal, the other
of eternal; the one robs the body, the other the soul, the one of things of
small value, and which endure but for a time, the other of Christ, of
inestimable value, and which indureth for ever. The wolf (says our blessed
Savior) comes but for to steal and to devour, but many such wolves are
entered into our Church this day, who are come to us in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly show themselves what they are, and by their fruits of pride, ambition,
vainglory, and covetousness, they may be known. I write not here against
the ancient, grave or Orthodox Divines, but against our new Doctors, and late
upstarts in the Church, who pretending great purity and reformation, have
brought all into disorder and confusion, and in stead of bringing souls nearer
unto Christ, have driven innumerable thousands farther from him, through their
unadvised and rash proceedings in the same against them.

Secondly, I say that this new yoke of tyrannizing over the souls and
consciences of the people, is not only new usurped, but also Antichristian:
And as it is like unto Anabaptists in Sacramental confession, so it is like
unto Papists in auricular. For as the Papist will admit none to the eating of
their breaden God, or wafer cake, before he has made confession of his sins,
so our new Presbyterians will admit none to the partaking of the holy Communion
before he have gone through the pikes of a new invented and tyrannical
discipline, having neither warrant in the word of God, nor any tracke of
example either in the primitive times, or true reformed Churches, so far as
ever I have read or understood.

Thirdly, and lastly, as it is sacrilegious and Antichristian, so is it
tyrannical, and contrary to the Apostles advice, which is, that we should not
rule as Lords over Gods heritage, but with meekness, etc. Which I prove from
the inconveniences thence arising being twofold. First, in that it discourages
people from coming to Christ, in that it drives them further from him.

First, I say it discourages people from coming into Christ, by thus
with^lding the Supper of the Lord from them, because they know they have right
to it, as being within the Covenant, and borne within the pale of the Church,
and of Christian Parents; and therefore if they have right to Christ in whom
they believe, why should they not much more have right to the outward
ordinances? And therefore as long as they are unlawfully kept and detained from
thence, they will not come to the Ministry of the word, though we preach with
the tongue of men and Angels, though I confessed should not be so, but the best
of the Saints, and chosen children of God have somewhat of nature in them; for
if a man's person be once disaffected, his doctrine will ever hardly be liked,
be it never so powerful or effectual. Besides what innumerable poor souls
have been very near driven to despair, because they have been judged (as they
have conceived) unworthy of the body and blood of Christ, or communion with him
in that blessed Sacrament: with tears I have been told they have been kept
from it, and with tears of joy they have come to it again. Now is not this an
offending of Christ's little ones, and the weak brethren, for who^ Christ dyed:
Is not this a Lording it over the souls and consciences of men? Is not this a
pushing and shoving of the weaker cattle from the Fountain of living waters?
is not this a shutting up of the Kingdom of God against all, and neither will
go in our selves, nor suffer them that are entering to go in? or is there not a
woe proclaimed and does belong to them that do so? Christ will have mercy and
not sacrifice, Math. 9.13. our new Doctors will have sacrifice and not mercy.
Christ says, come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, Math.
11.28. they drive all away. Christ will not break the bruised reed, nor quench
the smoking flax, Matthew. 12.20. they do both. Christ requires faith but as big
as a grain of mustard seed, Matthew. 17.20. they will have it as big as a
mountain. Nay they are worse then good Hezekiah the King, for he prayed for
them that came not prepared with the due preparation of the Sanctuary, 2. Chro.
30.19. but they drive them away, and keep all back, in thus withholding etc.

But by this with holding the Communion from the people, while they are duly
prepared it rather should fit them then discourage them. I answer, yes; if but
new Presbyterians could also give grace and incline their hearts, then they
might keep the Communion from them at their pleasure; but we must not do
evil upon uncertain and unwarrantable grounds, that good may come of it.

But they have power so to do, having the keys committed to their charge, and
the dispensation of the word and Sacraments.

I answer, they have the keys (some of them) it may be supposed, but not to
open hell and shut heaven. Neither is the dispensation of the word and
Sacraments committed to their charge to be disposed of at their pleasure, but
at the will and pleasure of the Almighty, and as occasion, time, place, and
persons, shall call for the same and desire it. They are Ministers of the word
and Sacraments, not Lords.

But the Sacraments are but outward ordinances, and in themselves indifferent,
therefore etc.

The minor is proved by that of Matthew, whereas Christ says expressly (speaking
of the bread) This is my body, not that I therefore take the bread properly to
be Christ's body but a type and figure of the same; howbeit they are so united
in the worthy receiver, that they can be no more severed then the shadow and
the substance, or the kirnell and the shell. Now we may find by the shadow
that there is a body, so likewise the Sacrament of the holy Communion puts us
in mind of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his body and
blood; therefore says Christ, Do this in remembrance of me. And the Apostle
as often as we eat of that bread and drink of that cup, we show or set forth
the Lords death until his coming again. And can the bride or beloved spouse
but rejoice to think and hear of her beloved, especially to be made one with
him, as she is in that blessed Sacrament, which being the shell that is broken,
in the distributing thereof, she comes to the kirnell Christ himself, whom
her soul seeks, and in whom she is delighted. Now let our new Presbyterians
call the Sacrament an outward ordinance alone, and a thing indifferent, they
may easily receive hereby (if they will not be wilfully blinded and shut
their eyes) how indifferent it ^s, and what they have kept the people from all
^his while: viz. from the communion and participation of their blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

Lastly, I prove this withholding the Communion from the people, under
pretense of examination, to be merely tyrannical, as it drives people further
from God. But because I have sufficiently spoken of this before, therefore I
come now to exhort my brethren to desist and leave off this new kind of
discipline and government in the Church: first, because it is new usurped, and
tyrannical. Secondly, because it has no warrant in the word of God, nor by
the practice and example of the primitive times and true reformed Churches.
Thirdly, because it swayes too much with common baptism and Popery, and to be
contented to be ruled by the word of God, and the custom and practice of the
primitive times, and all true reformed Churches. Which consists first, in being
diligent in Catechizing the youth of their several Parishes and Congregations,
and so laying the grounds of says and principles of Christian Religion, and
virtue among them.

Secondly, in being diligent to teach the word of God among the elder sort of
people, and how they ought to come to the partaking of the Sacrament of the
holy Communion, how they ought to be prepared for it, the benefit which they
are to receive thereby, and the danger that will and does ensue, in case they
eat and drink unworthily.

Thirdly, in case he find any merely ignorant indeed, to take a little the
more extraordinary pains with him, both in public and private, so he will be
content to be taught, but in case he prove obstinate and hate to be reformed,
then he may note such an one, and not give him the Communion, until he come
in and yield himself to wholesome instruction and government: for though he
be interessed as before, yet not being able to examine himself whether he be
in the faith, or to discern the Lords body in that blessed Sacrament, and his
obstinacy makes him altogether incapable of that blessed Sacrament; therefore
the key or censure of the Church is to be used against such an one: but in
case there be any measure of faith in the party, and that he can give but any
competent account of the same, and have a desire being of years, the Sacrament
is not (in my opinion) to be denied him, because Christ begins to be new
formed in him, he thirsts after the water of life. He is the smoking fl^x
which Christ will not quench until such time as he has brought judgment
into victory; seeing the Sacrament of the holy Communion serves not only to
sign and seal our salvation, but also convey grace to the worthy receiver, and
nourish it in him. But in case any in the Congregation (being qualified as
before) do receive unworthily, the Minister not being privy to it, the fault
is not the Ministers, but the parties receiving, and his blood shall be upon
his own head, because the Minister has told him the danger of unworthy
receiving. But what if the Minister do suspect any of scandal or
insufficiency, will it be objected?

I answer, he has power to keep the party back from receiving until such
times as his suspicion be better informed and his doubt cleared. But this he
must take heed of, that nothing be done of malice, but upon just grounds and
probable.

But what if the Minister be altogether a stranger?

I answer, then he is to use the advice and direction of the Elders and
Churchwardens, until such time as he be better acquainted; but not therefore to
leave the administration of the Sacraments, no more then he does of preaching
the word of God. And let him know this withal or resolve with himself, that
when he has done all that he can, he shall still find chafe among the good
corn, goats amongst the sheep, a Judas amongst the Apostles, and one without
his wedding garment at that heavenly banquet. And therefore it is not all the
examination and trial in the world that we can use, that will make all worthy
Receivers; but the blessing and event must be left and reserved to God only, to
whom be praise and dominion, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

