A LETTER TO The Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the Honorable House
of Commons.

Concerning the SVRRENDER OF Ruthin-Castle To Colonel Thomas Mitton, Major
General of NORTH WALES.

Together with THE ARTICLES Concerning the same.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter with the
Articles be forthwith Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London: Printed for EDW. HUSBAND, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
April 14. 1646.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons.
Honorable Sir,
THe Reducing of this Castle of Ruthin has cost me more time and Ammunition,
then I expected when I first laid Siege to it: At last having a Mine almost in
a readiness to spring, and Batteries prepared for a Demi-Ganon and a Culverin
to play upon it; It was this day agreed to be Surrendered upon the Conditions in
the enclosed Articles, which I was willing to accept, having perfect
Information by some that escaped out of the Castle, that there was in it
Provision sufficient for two months longer; which now I find to be true: And
if I should have forced it, I must have hazarded many men, and made the place
unserviceable, which is of very great use to the Reducement of this Country, it
being the most convenient place for a Garrison in all North Wales, as things
now stands with us. Yesterday before the break of day, a party of the Enemy out
of Denbigh Castle, being about sixscore, and thirty mounted firelocks, fell
upon Captain Richard Price his Quarters, within two miles of this Town; but he
was vigilant, and his Scouts performed their duty so well, that they were drawn
into the field before they came upon them, which gave him oppertunity to avoid
them, and convey the Alarm to this Town; And thereupon Colonel Carter with a
standing Horse-guard, which we are fain to keep in the field constantly to
secure our Out quarters; and Captain Simkies with my own Troop, which was then
upon the Guard in this Town, drew out and fell between them and Denbigh, and
within half a mile of their Garrison met with them, and charged them so
gallantly, that they broke in upon them, killed seven of them (as is said) upon
the place; and in the pursuit, took four Captains, one Lieutenant, two Cornets,
diverse Troopers, and about forty Horse, with the loss of one man of our side.
The Siege at Hoult has of late been of great difficulty and hazard to those
few men I have there: For the drawing off of the Cheshire Firelocks from that
Service, without any privity, gave the Enemy an advantage to burn the Guard the
Firelocks kept (which cost the Country much to fortify) and above forty
dwelling Houses more in the Town, and exposed my men (who lay in open Quarters,
and were fewer in number then the Enemy within were) to their power, which
necessitated my men to be upon continual duty. Upon the first of April the
Enemy sallied out and fell upon Major Sadlers Quarters, resolving to put all my
men in that House to the Sword, which they had been like to effect, had not a
Guard which was placed in a Mount, erected by us three days before relieved
them: In this storm I lost five men, and fourteen wounded; of the Enemy there
were killed their Commander Captain Cottingham a Papist, a Lieutenant, and two
more, and many wounded: There has been never a day since, but they sallied out
constantly twice or thrice a day, and as constantly beaten in. This service,
and the furnishing of such Garrisons which are reduced, occasions the expense
of very much Powder and Match; and therefore, I humbly desire, that the
Honorable House will be pleased to grant, that I may have a hundred Barrels of
Powder, and four or five hundred Firelocks sent me, and that some course may be
prescribed to convey it down speedily; the carriage and Convoy of the last
Powder I had, cost above half as much as the Powder was worth. And further,
that they will be pleased to appoint a Governor for this Castle, Lieutenant
Colonel Thomas Mason, is a very faithful active and godly Gentleman, and the
most knowing man in his profession that we have in these parts, having been a
Soldier above twenty years, and lost his command in Ireland, because he
refused to bear Arms against the Parliament: And if this place were worthy of
him, I should make bold to recommend him to their consideration. This
nevertheless, I leave to their Wisdoms to determine, and rest

Your very humble Servant, THO. MITTON.
Ruthin the 8 of April. 1646.
Articles agreed and concluded betwixt Robert Fogge, Chaplein to Colonel Thomas
Mitton, Major General of Northwales, and Captain Edward Thelwall, Commissioners
on the behalf of the said Major General on the one party, and Lieutenant John
Reynolds, Deputy Governor of the Castle of Ruthin on the other party.
1. IT is agreed and concluded by the parties above mentioned, That the Castle
of Ruthin shall be Surrendered unto General Mitton aforesaid, or his Assigns on
Monday next by ten of the clock in the Forenoon, without any dismantling,
demolishing, or defacing the same, or any Works now made in or about the same.

2. That all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, Provision, and Goods now in the
Castle be left safe, and no way harmed (saving the particulars hereafter
mentioned).

3. That the said Deputy Governor shall march away quietly, and without
molestation, with his Sword and one case of Pistols, and six Gentlemen with
him, and each of them his Sword.

4. That the rest of the Soldiers and others (the Irish only excepted) who
are barred by the Ordinance of Parliament, to pass to their respective
Habitations, or to Conway with a safe Conduct (they behaving themselves
civilly).

5. That the said Deputy Governor take only with him two Trunks, containing
only therein his wearing Apparel, and some few Clothes and Linnens of his
Sisters; And that a Cart be provided for the carriage thereof.

6. That in the mean time there be a Cessation of Arms on both sides, and no
advantage taken by admitting any strength of men or Ammunition into the said
Castle (other then the Hostages agreed upon by both parties;) And for the firm
confirmation of the Premises, the parties to these presents have interchangably
set to their Hands this Eighth day of April, Anno Domini, 1646.

Robert Fogge, Edward Thelwal.
I do consent to what my Commissioners have agreed unto, Tho: Mytton.
I also agree to the Articles above written, John Reynolds.

FINIS.

