Mrs. PARLIAMENT Her Invitation of Mrs. LONDON, TO A Thankesgiving Dinner.

For the great and mighty Victory, which Mr. Horton obtained over Major Powell
in Wales.

Their Discourse, Desires, Designs, as you may hear from their own mouths.

Monday 29 of May, in the eight year of the Reign^ of our sovereign Lady
Parliament.

Mrs. PARLIAMENT, her Invitation to Mrs. LONDON.
Dear Sister know, this is the Day,
On which we ought to Feast and Pray;
Because the Welsh-men we did slay
the clean contrary way.
Now shortly we must Pray ag^n,
Because we killed the Surrey men;
Who did assault us, you know when
the clean contrary way.
By Mrs. Truth principal Secretary in ordinary (protempore) to Mrs. Parliament.
Printed in the year, 1648.

Mrs. PARLAMEENT, her Invitation OF Mrs. LONDON, to a Thanksgiving Dinner.
FOR The great and mighty Victory, which Mr. Horton obtained over Major Powell
in Wales.
By Mercurius Melancholicus.
Enter Mrs. London, and Mrs. Common Council. Mrs. London. NOW, our good Lord
be thanked for this great Victory, which the Righteous under the Command of
that holy Saint Morton, have obtained over the wicked, under the Command of
those Reprobates, Poyer, Powell and Langhorne.


Mrs. Com. Couns. 'Twas a happy Providence my dear Sister, and much to be
admired amongst the Saints, for this will prove the animation of our own
party, and the discouraging of our enemies those pagan Cavaliers, who now begin
to take arms, and to fall foul on the people of the Lord.


Mrs. Land. Very true Sister, who would have thought of this new distemper, or
that our honorable Sister Mrs. Parliament, who was arrived to the very highest
pitch of honor and said to her self, J sit like a Queen, and shall know no
sorrow, should on the sudden become wretchedly miserable, she whom a Nation
courted, offering their lives and estates at her feet, and maintained her for
the space of seven years, in open Rebellion and Disloyalty against her head
and Husband, she that imagined her self so sure, that no humane strength could
shake her, is now become in a manner desolate.

Like to a Whore, both old, and evil grown,
She hated is, and pitied by none.

Enter Mrs. Militia a Malignant. Mrs. Mil. Hell take this everlasting
Parliament, or rather, this incorrigible Iunto, what a tossing to and fro they
make of me; the King my true and only Master must not Command me, (because
forsooth) like another Minerva, the fate of new Troy, as once that of the old
consists in me, Mrs. Parliament who has commanded me this seven years (the
Devil take her for it) is now woed by Mrs. London to part with me, and let her
another while enjoy me; this she has (but to her great cost) obtained, and now;

As at the first, a Royal Prince did own me,
His Power laid by, seven years the world has known me.
A three pil'd Bawd, to Mrs. Parliament;
Now Mrs. Londons; Cuckolds be content.

Mrs. Land. Look Sister, yonder is that malignant Dame, Mrs. Militia, muttering
to herself against Mrs. Parliament, O it is a notable Scold and of such force,
that she is able to break open iron barri^ado'd gates, to stand an Army and
toss huge Cities in the Air, but J have purchased her of Mrs. Parliament,
with a round sum of money, and the truth is, that godly woman, is altogether
swayed by Gold, she will do nothing for me without greating in the fist.


Mrs. Com. Coun. It Is very true, experientia docet, for my part had I the money
once J freely parted with, moved with my sister Parliaments pious words, I Would
be advised ere I gave it away, but I hope well of her, and that with us, she is
a Saint by calling; how does Mrs. Militia.


Mrs. Mil. Sick sick at heart, of the very same disease, that is now so
catching, the Pox, the Plague, and all those cruel malladies Pandora brought
on earth to ruin men though all conjoined in one, are not so mischievous.


Mrs. Coun. What disease Mrs. Militia.


Mrs. Mil. Why? Its called Parliament, the same that has murdered so many
thousands of loyal English subjects, this Mrs. Truth, her Speaker (pro
Tempore) well knows, who for her honor has busied himself, to raise an
Anagram, on her name, and to anex an Epigram thereto, it is this.


PARLIAMENT, Anagramma, A TRAP IL MEN.
Epigram.
A Trap they are, a Snare unto their Nation,
Having undone them, by a Reformation;
A Trap that Satan set, as since we find,
To fetter Kings, and ruin all mankind:
A Snare, a Trap, a Pit, wherein we fall,
And if they live, then must we perish all.
But yet there is hope, it so, may shortly hap,
These Traitors, shall be taken in their own TRAP,
ILL MEN.
Ill men, yea such a vile Rebellions crew,
No History records, no Age ere knew;
Men merely made of mischief, blood, and error,
Men borne to be their own, and the worlds terror.
Devils yet clothed in Flesh, cursed Projectors,
Good Men's sure ruin, evil men's Protectors,
Haters of sacred Peace, damned Regicides,
Horsleaches, Canibals, and Patricides:
Who place their thrones on Immolated men,
Have banished Justice, hoping she again
Will never more return, by Furies nursed,
Gotten by Devils, in their Cradles cursed:
Whom all the powers of Hell, this seven years
Have aided; Slaves that joy to drink our tears.
But the time now will shortly happen when
Treason must terminate, in those, Ill men.
(...) it printed is sufficient to make the people out of conceit with Mrs.
Parliament, while the world stands. Mrs. Co^; it is this same witch Mrs. Truth
that has undone us, but who comes here. Mrs. Parliament, Mrs. Thanksgiving.
Mrs. Humiliation.

Mrs Lon. O Mrs Parliament, I much joy to see you never was woman of your rank
so contemned and abused, here was, Mrs Militia the Malignant but even now, who
showed me and my sister Common counsel, an Anagram, which the Traitoresse
Truth had framed on your names, wherein she taxes you of I know not how many
crimes, and says you are worthy to be hanged, as an enemy to your Country.


Mrs Parliament, no matter what Truth reports, you know I care not for her, but
for Mrs. Militia and the rest o the Malignants, I have given order for their
removal, twenty miles from thy presence Mrs. London, Mrs Common counsel, you
are to publish the order, read it Mrs Thankgiving. Mrs. Thanksgiving Reads.

Tuesday May 22. 1648,
I Mrs Parliament, by the permission and assistance of Pluto, of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, Supreams Governesse, do decree and ordain that al
Papists by whom I mean al those that are for Monarchical government, for the
Book of Common Prayer, for Archbishops, and for order and decency in the^
Church of God, that all soldiers of fortune and all other persons whatsoever,
that have borns Arms against me, that is to say, all such, as have according
to their oath of Allegiance the Law of God the Law of the Land, and the Law of
nature, been in Arms and fought for the honor of their Sovereign Lord King
Charles to pull dow^^ my usurped power, to put a period to my Rebellions shall
at or before the five and twentieth of this instant May 1648 depart the cities
of London and Westminster, and all other places within twenty miles, and if
any of the said persons aforesaid, shall continue within twenty miles as
aforesaid, after the five and twentieth day of May, they shall be apprehended,
Imprisoned and proceeded against as Traitors.


Mrs Com. co^^ I like the order well, we will have none to converse with as
Mrs. London; but those that are Righteous what fellowship ought thereto be
between us Jews, and those saweie Samaritans of the Royal parti^, verily
none, Mrs. Land; Jnsooth you speak like a most godly Saint, my dear sister,
and for my own part I would have none to reside near me, but the good people
of the Lord.


Mrs. Parl. Mrs London, and Mrs Common Counsel, you both know that the wicked
ones of the Land are now combyning together against us; therefore a little to
protract the time; I have devised a way for to amuse the people, Mr, Horton
whom I sent with a party for the reducing of Poyer, has lately ceaz'd on
diverse Country fellows, who met with an Intent to list themselves under the
command of Poyer, Powel, Langhorn and the rest, this i will have noised to be a
victory a great and mighty victory, which news will cramp the Royallists
Designs, keep back the Scots a while, encourage our own party and cannot
choose but be an help unto us; you therefore Mrs Thanksgiving, proclaim
throughout the City, that every man praise God in his own parish, those that
have money feast and make good cheer, for this most great and mighty victory.


Mrs Thanks. I shall forsooth, but who shall Preach before you on that day.


Mrs. Parl. Who but my bonnie Bulehin Marshall I have not amongst al my Priests
not so fit, the B^lli^ God Vi^^s, is a mere Barrel and yields no noise without
you taber on him, Ni^ sqeaks so low a new shoe trod on by a sickly woman, makes
better mellodie, but Marshal bellows out my triumph, in such a tone, not all
the bulls that at Geneva thunde^, when they exclaim against Episcopacie, yield
the like music, go you Mrs Thanksgiving to him, and carry these good Angels
which will increase the vigor of his ^^^gs Mrs Th^nks* good Mrs Common
counsel, See that a Saint-lik^ (...) be prepared, and store of wine, that we
may ^eat our Zeal, you know we cannot heave our eyes to heaven til we have
often elevated cups, Mrs. Common coun, We will abound in all things, the
creatures none ought to enjoy but we, b^asts of the field, the fowls, of the
air, the fishes that flock in the tumid deep were made for us and for our use
alone.

The most ungodly Caval^irs are dam'nd
Not fit to have their gut^ with Pull^^ ^^^^d,
They must be fed, with creatures of low rate.
Least that they do increase and propagate,
To eat large Oisters Lobsters, and high fare,
Only is meat for us that Righteous are.

Mrs. Parl. But my good sisters what shall, we do to please the Surry men,
who are incenst against us, and swear to be our deaths men to prevent which
and pacify their fury, you Mrs. Humilliation proclaim abroad, that all be
sorrowful and mourn in ashes, for those good men's fall: Ha, ha, ha, I laugh
to think how my soldiers felld the Rogues, who durst d^s^re a King.


Mrs. Humuliation. I will not fail in my hypocrisy, I can lie down and cry
and wring my hands, strew slowre upon my face, and look as mongerly, as when
used to mourn during the war when as the Saints were beaten by the wicked
ones Mrs Parl; Now let us each unto our several charge, you Mrs London, stand
fast to me as I will do to you, I am resolved that you shall not out live
me, you Mrs Common counsel, be sure you smell out more plots and stratagems
each day, it makes for our advantage, thus take we hands, thus swear to fall
together, when as the house where I so long have voted shall be pulled down
and levelled to the earth, it will do me good to see thee Mrs London, consume
in flames, a sacrifice to Treason, to conclude, stand unto your ^^^kling
stoutly, when we fall, all the land shall taste of ruin.

T'Wil be my joy, when as I needs must fall
For to behold a ruin general;
This is the period of my Reformation.
To kill my King, and under my Nation.

FINIS

