A mis-le^ King, and a memorable PARLIAMENT.
THis present occasion so opportunely befitting me, I am resolved to treat of
that which has been omitted, and slipped out of memory long since, concerning
diverse and sundry changes and alterations in England in former times: Nor will
it be any ways burdensome to write of that, whereby every good and careful
Reader may learn to avoid diversities of miseries, and the danger and fear of
cruel death. I will therefore speak of that which has lain hid in the
darksome shade of forgetfulness, concerning men who have been led away by the
deceitful path o^ Covetousness, and have come to a most shameful and
ignominious death: a famous example to deter all men from practicing those or
the like courses.

ABout the year of Christ 1386. at such time as Richard, the second of that
name, then in prime of his youth, swayed the Imperial S^^^^er of our Realm,
there flourished famous in his Court certain Peers, though some of them not
of any honorable descent, yet favored by fortunes; by name, Alexander Ne^il;
Archbishop of York; Robert Vee^e, D. of Ireland; Michael de la Poole, Earl of
Suffolk, then Lord Chancellor; Robert Tressilian, Lord chief Justice of
England; and Nicholas Brambre, sometimes Major of London.

These men being raised from mean estates, by the special favor of the King,
and advanced to the degree of privy Counselors, were the men who had the
only rule of the Commonwealth; which they, under the King, governed for some
small space, with careful diligence, meriting thereby deserved commendations.
But not long did they thus steer the Ship of the Kingdom: for many of them
being of inferior rank by birth, not having their veins dignified with the
streams of noble blood; they were the sooner enticed with the fibidinous baits
of voluptuousness, and infected with insatiable itch of avarice: insomuch,
that despising the authority of the King, and neglecting the commodity of the
Realm, but only desiring to keep up the Revenues of the Kingdom, so wrought,
that by their policy, the King is impoverished, the Treasury exhausted; the
Commons murmr at the multiplicity of Tenths; Levies, and Subsidies; the
Peers repine to see themselves disgraced, and their inferiors honored; and in
a word, the whole Kingdom endures an universal misery.

The Nobility seeing the miserable estate wherein the Kingdom lay, blee^ing as
it were to death, urged their King to summon a Parliament; which was done
shortly after. In which amongst many other Acts, the aforementioned Michael de la
Poole is dismissed of his Chancellorship; and being accused of diverse and many
points of injustice, as Bribery, Extortion, and the like, he was soon cast into
the Castle of Windsor, and all his lands, which were of no small Revenue, were
consiseated to the King. Neither did the Parliament here give over, but
provided further for the whole State; by the mutual consent of the King and
Prelates, Barons and Commons, with an unanimous conjunction, they constitute
and give plenary and absolute power to certain Commissioners, as well of the
Spiritualty as Temporalty, for the ordering and disposing of the public
affairs, according, as shall seem best and most necessary for the desperate
estate of the Commonwealth, to depresse civil dissentions, and to pacisie and
appease the grudgings of the people.

Of the Spiritualty were chosen the Archbishop of Canterbury, the aforenamed
Bishop of York, the Bishop of Ely, lately made Chancellor of England, the Bishop
of Winchester; Bishop of Hereford, Lord Treasurer; Bishop of Exeter, Abbot of
Waltham, and the Lord John of Waltham.

Of the Laity were elected the Duke of York, the Earl of Arundel, the Lord
Goltham, the Lord Scroop, and John Devoureux Knight: these as men eminent in
virtue, were chosen by the general Suffrage, and sworn to carry themselves as
dutiful and obedient subjects in all their actions. And it was further
enacted, That if any should refuse or disobey the Ordinances so made for
public good, the punishment of his first offense, should be the cosiscation of
his goods; and for the second, the loss of life. Thus disposing of all things
for the best, the Parliament being dissolved, every man returned to his own
house.

Soon after, the aforementioned Chancellor, with others of their consederates,
being moved with implacable fury against the Statute of the late Parliament,
they buzzed into the Kings ears, that the Statutes lately enacted, were very
prejudicial to the honor of his Crown, and much derogatory to his Princely
Prerogative: insomuch that he should not have power, without the consent of the
new-appointed Commissioners, to do any thing befitting a King; no, not so much
as to bestow a largess, a principal means to gain the peoples love, upon
any, though never so well deserving.

By these and other the like impious instigations, with which the Devil (as
never unmindful of the end of those, who by their lives do prove themselves)
did continually supply them, they practiced to annihilate and disanull these
Acts of the Parliament, which seemed any ways to abbreviate or curb their
usurped authority.

And first, by their serpentine tongues, ambitious projects, flattery painted
out with glosing discourses, and covered over with the shadow of vigilan^^^ for
the good of the Kingdom, they so be witched the noble inclination of the
youthful King, whom they induced to believe, that all the ill they did, was a
general good, that he began to distalte, and at last to abhorte the last
passed Acts, as treacherous plots, and most wicked devices.

Next, they studied how to ingrosse all, or the most part of the wealth and
riches of the Kingdom into their own coffers; and to the same end, dealt so
cunningly, yet pleasingly with the King, that he gave to the D. of Ireland,
John of Bloys, the heir of the Duchy of Britain, and his ransom; to others,
Towns; to others, Cities; to others, Lands; to others, Money, amounting to the
sum of 100000 Marks, to the great impoverishment both of King and Kingdom:
neither did these King-eaters and Realm-devourers any thing regard it, but
setting unskilful and insufficient Captains and Governors over Towns and
Forts so obtained, gave occasion to the enemies of the Crown to surprise them,
and dispossess the King of them.

Thirdly, vilifying the dignity of the King, contrary to their allegiance, they
drew the King to swear, that with all his power, during his life, he should
maintain and desend them from all their enemies, whether foreign or domestic.

Fourthly, whereas it was enacted by the last Parliament, that the King at
certain seasonable times, and when his leisure would permit him, should sit at
Westminster with his Council there, to consult of the public affairs;
through the persuasions of the aforesaid Conspirators, he was drawn into the
most remotest parts of the Realm, to the great disparagement of the fidelity
of those honorable, grave, and faithful Peers, late made joint Commissioners,
in whose hands the whole safety and prosperity of the Commonwealth did recide.

And when as the Lord Chancelour, the Lord Treasurer, Keeper of the Privy
Seal, or any other of the Privy Council, came to relate any of their own
actions, or the state of the Realm, they could not be granted free access,
unless they related the business in the presence and hearing of the
conspirators, who were always ready to upbraid them if they uttered any thing
that displeased them, and to command them for any thing (though most nefarious)
that did content them: for thus could they the sooner learn and dive into the
acts of the Commissioners, and the better find evasions for their accusations:
Furthermore, when as the King in company of the Conspirators went in progress
toward the parts of Cheshire, Wales, and Lancashire, they made proclamation in
the Kings name, throughout the Shires as they journied, That all Barous,
Knights, Esquires, with the greatest part of the Communalty able to bear
arms, should speedily repair to the King for his defense against the power of
the Comissioners, chiefly of the Duke of Gloucester and the Earl of Arundel;
because they above the rest, did with their chiefest endeavors, study to
suppress and quell the devices of the conspirators.

Fifthly, contrary to the aforesaid Acts, they caused the D. of Ireland to be
treated chief Justice of Chester, thereby selling justice as they listed,
condemning the guiltless, and remitting the guilty, never respecting or
looking unto the equal balance of justice, but poizing down the scales with
heaps of Bribery.

Sixthly, by the procurement of the confederates, they caused certain honest
persons, who would not consent to their extortions, to be called and summoned
to their Court, and thereto answer to certain false accusations, wherewith
they were unjustly charged by perjuring hirelings; of which men so accused,
some were put to death, some cast into prison, all were vexed and troubled with
delays, length of their journey to and fro, and excessive charges; neither
were they eased of any these burdens, unless they would part with round
sums of money to the D. and his Accomplices.

Seventhly, they gave pardons under the Brod Seal, to Felons, Murderers, and
such like, only with this condition, that they should murder any whomsoever
they thought did mislike their exaction.

Eighthly, they taught the country of Ireland to look to its pristine estate,
I mean, of having a King; for they plotted how to have the Duke created King of
Ireland: And for the confirmation of which their design, they allured the King
to send his letters to the Pope.

Ninthly, the aforesaid Nicholas Brambre, in the time of his Majoralty, caused
two and twenty to be falsely accused of Felonies, and laid into Newgate, under
pretext and color of diverse crimes, and in the silent and dead time of the
night to be fast bound, and by a strong hand to be carried into Kent, to a
place commonly called Fawlocks, and then to have their heads struck off, except
one who being favored by the murderers, safely escaped; the blood of the test
died the streams of a small Rivelet adjoining.

Tenthly, soon after, to add one mischief to another, they sent letters under
the Kings Sigret, to the Major of London, by John Rippon Clerk, with a certain
libell, or schedule enclosed in the said letters, the tenor of which is as
follows.

That the aforementioned three Commissioners, viz. the Duke of Gloucester, the
Earls of Arundel and Warwick, and other of the Council, were to be arrested,
indicted, condemned, and put to a lamentable death as being such as had
conspired against the King, against his prevogative and against his Crown and
Imperial dignity; and to this they did in a manner constrain the King to
assent unto. Upon receipt of these letters, the Major and Aldermen of the City
of London, called a Common Council, wherein they consulted what course were
best to be taken in this matter; and after long debate, pro and con, it was on
all sides agreed, to deny and not to suffer that cruel and unheard of
Tragical Complot to be executed.

It ever happens, one wicked act draws on a second, and that second a third,
and so forwards, till the weight crackes the supporter.

Therefore the sail Conspirators being blinded with rashness, principally sent
letters by John Godfrey Knight, to the King of France, the Kings adversary, to
conclude a five years truce, should come over to Callis, and from thence
should send for the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundell and Warwick, and
for some other of the Commissioners, as though the King were unwilling to
determine of any thing without their advice; and being thus circumvented,
should be condemned as traitors, and so put to an ignominious and cruel death.

And for doing and performing of these things, the King of France was to
recover all the Castles, Towns, and Lands lying in these countries, and
belonging to the King of England. To prove these things to be true, there were
certain writings produced by the Commissioners, wherein were contained letters
from the King of France to the King of England, and from the conspirators in
the King of Englands name, to the King of France.

Moreover, there were other letters intercepted, directed to the said King of
France, the substance whereof was, to incite the King of France to leavre a
puissant power into England, against the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of
Arundel and Warwick, and the rest of the Commissioners, and all those that did
either countenance or favor the said statute and Commissioners.

Now here concluding their divelish conspiracy, the five aforesaid
conspitators departed from Westminster to the Castle of Nottingham, and sent a
Writ for Robert Beale, Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, John Holt,
Reger Fulthorp and Will. Burleigh, Judges of the said Court, and for John
Locton, the Kings Sergeant at Law: who being come into the Councell-chamber,
not knowing what they were sent for, the aforesaid conspirators caused the
gates and doors of the Castle to be shut, and then propounded these questions
following unto them.

First, whether those Statutes, Ordinances, and Commission, made in the late
Parliament at Westminster, were derogatory to the Kings dignity and Kingly
Prerogative; and, because they were to be punished who did procure those
Constitutions, and did incite and move the King to consent unto them, and did
as much as in them lay to hinder the King from exercising his Royal
Prerogative.

To these and other the like questions, with a joint consent they answered,
(...) death as traitors, or else to endure some capital (...) witness of
which assertion, being terrified with the fear of present death, the aforesaid
Judges, together with John Carey, Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer, they
signed and sealed a certain writing in manner of a Protestation, in presence
of these witnesses, Alex. Nevil, Archbishop of York, Archbishop Bangor, Robert
Duke of Ireland, Michael Earl of Suffolk, John Rippon Clerk, and John Blake
Fruiterer, dated the 19 of September, Anno Dom. 1387. in the 11. year of the
reign of K. Richard 2. Then were they compelled to swear, that they should
keep the passages undiscovered, upon pain of death; and so they had license to
depart.

And that which is worse, they caused the King to swear, That in his proper
person, with his whole power, he should take revenge of the Duke of Gloucester,
of the two Earls and their adherents, by causing them to be put to death.

But, God inspired into the hearts of the aforesaid Duke of Gloucester, the
Earls of Arundel and Warwick, the spirit of valor and magnanimity, who
seeing the heap of ills that daily did arise by the practices of those
cospirators, they set almost in every part of the Kingdom, intelligencers, who
should apprehend all Messengers, and intercept all letters of the Kings, or
that went under the Kings name, and should send them to the Commissioners.

And thus did they come to have intelligence of the whole plot of the
conspirators; all their Letters being indorced, with Glory be to God on high,
on earth peace, and good will toward men: and by coming to the knowledge of
each circumstance, they found, that the Kingdom was at the point of
destruction; according to that Evangelicall saying, Every Kingdom divided
against it self, shall be dissolved: Wherefore they sought for a remedy; every
man according to his ability, levied a power for the preservation of the King
and Kingdom: all which forces being united, amounting to the number of 20000.
fighting men, and courageously resolving to frustrate all the intended designs
of the conspirators, and to open the nut by cracking the shell, they divided
their Army, committing part of it to the Earl of Arundel: who by night marched
away with his Forces, and pitched his tents near to London, there fortifying
himself in the Forest adjoining, till such time as he had gained more
convenient time, and greater force, by the coming of his consorts. On the
other side, the conspirators intending to prevent their purposes, by power of a
certain Spiritual Commission, and by virtue of certain Letters Patents in
the hands of the Conspirators, though nothing to the purpose; yet to blind the
people, they caused to be proclaimed throughout the whole City of London, that
none upon pain of the forfeiture of all their goods, should neither sell,
give, or communicate privately or publicly, victual, armor, or any other
necessaries to the Army of the Earl of Arundel, but should bar them of
sustentation, comfort, or help, as Rebels to the King and country. But on the
other side, they began to fear, when they were denied their hoped-for aid by
the Major and Communalty of the City of London. And again, they were troubled
at the rising of the Commoners, to invade them. Wherefore they counseled the
King to absent himsent from the Parliament, (which was to begin at Candlemas
next, according as the King and Commissioners had appointed it) and not consult
of the affairs of the Kingdom, nor of his own Estate, commodity or
discommodity, unless the Duke of Gloucester, the two Earls of Arundel and
Warwick, with the rest of the Commissioners, would swear, That neither they,
nor any in their name, should accuse them, or urge any accusation against them.

Not long after it happened, that the King, with the aforesaid five
Conspirators, came from his Manor at Sheeve, to Westminster, to Saint Edmonds
Tomb, for the solemnizing of a Pilgrimage. The Major and Aldermen of the City
of London met him on horseback sumptuously attired, honoring him very much.

And when they came to the Mewes, they descended from their horses, and went
barefoot to the Tomb of S. Edmond; where as the Chaplain of the
Commissioners, with the Abbot and Covent, met them with a stately Procession.

In the mean time, the three Noblemen, viz. the Duke of Gloucester, and the
Earls of Arundel and Warwick having mustered their Troops on the fourteenth
of November, in the same year, at Waltham Cross, in the County of Hertford,
and from thence sent for the Commissioners that were there at Westminster in
Parliament with the King, sending an accusation in writing to the King, against
the aforesaid Conspirators, viz. the Archbishop of York, Duke of Ireland,
Earl of Suffolk, Robert Trisilian, and Nicholas Brambre; wherein they accused
them of high treason: which their appellation they did offer to maintain, and
that they were willing to prosecute the same; and to prove it to be true, they
caused also the rest of the Commissioners to subscribe, as parties to their
appellation.

When these things came to the ears of the King, he sent unto them, requiring
to know what their request was, and what they wished to have been done: They
returned answer thus: That they did desire, that the Traitors which were
always about him, filling his ears with false reports, and did daily commit
insufferable crimes and injuries, might be rewarded with condign punishment.
And likewise craved, that they might have safe liberty of going and coming to
his grace.

When the King heard their request, he gave them is Royal consent, and
commanded them to appear at Westminster; and the King sitting on his Throne in
the great Hall, the three aforesaid Peers Appellants with a great troop of
Gentlemen, entered, and making three lowly obeysances, on their bended knees,
they reverenced the King: and drawing near (the cause of their coming being
alleged) they there again appealed the Archbishop, Duke of Ireland, Earl
Treasurer, and Brambre of hightreason, according as they had done before at
Waltham Cross; but they betaking themselves to the private corners of the
Palace, even as Adam and Eve from the presence of God, not having the heart to
appear, to justify themselves.

The King called forth the Appellants, to prove and prosecute the Appellation,
prescribing them a day and place for the trial, which was to be on the day
after Candlemas day; and in the mean time, the King commanded them upon their
Honors, not any party to molest the other until the next Parliament.

The Duke of Ireland, under the guide of his grand Captain the Devil,
marching into Cheshire, Lancashire, and Wales, raised a new power, amounting to
the number of 6000 fighting men; from thence marched toward London with his
Army, with a furious intent and resolution to perform his bloody design. And
whilst these plots were laid, the Appellants being suddenly advertised thereof,
raised a great power, and joining with them the Earl of Derby, and the Earl
of Nottingham, and other Commissioners, marched with long and wearied marches
into a field near a village called Whitney, at a place called Lockeford
Bridge: In which field the Duke of Ireland was with his Army, having a river on
the one side of them, whereas they stood ready prepared to give an overthrow to
the Appellants, and displaying the Kings Standard, contrary to the Laws of the
land. When they saw the Army of the Appellants march down from the mountains,
like a Hive of Bees, and with such a violent fury, fear benumbed them, and they
were so amazed, that when they should give the assault (God not suffering the
effusion of blood) they stood like a Hive of Bees, or a flock of Cattle
without a head, without any stroke given, they flung down their Arms, and
yielded themselves to the mercy of the Appellants; and a few being slain, and
some drowned in the river, gave an easy victory to the Conquerours.

When the news of the victory was blown to the ears of the rest of the
conspirators, who were then stricken with fear, and careful for their
preservation, under covert of the night, they fled by water to the Tower,
drawing the King along with them.

On the other side Nicholas Brambre with a bold and resolute courage, in the
Kings name, caused all the gates of the City to be shut against the Apellants,
and to be guarded with an able and sufficient Watch: But these worthy and
dauntlesse members of the Commonwealth, marched toward London to confer with
the King; but when they heard that the said Nicholas Brambre had caused the
gates of the City to be shut against them, and to be strongly guarded, and
that the whole City did purpose to keep them out, they stayed their resolution.

On the 27 day of September, they encamped themselves in Clarkenwell, within
the liberties of the City of London. And when as the Major, with the Citizens,
came unto them with pleasing words, promising unto them all that the City
could afford with reason and equity; the Duke of Gloucester said, Now I know,
that liers speak nothing but lies, neither can any man hinder them from the
relating: whereupon by a joint consent in the evening, they removed their
tents, and pitched them before diverse gates of the City.

On the morrow there happened an enterview between the King and the Appellants,
so far, that they opened their minds one to the other: but because the King
loathed to speak with them, with such a rabble of men, and in regard of an
intolerable boldness, and some quarrel which was like to arise; and on the
other side, refusing to go out of the Tower to speak with them, and the
Appellants fearing some violence or wrong to be offered to them, would not
speak with the king without a strong guard of valiant warriors. Therefore the
most wise of the Appellants, after diverse disputations had, resolved to go and
confer with the King: but first they sent a strong Troop well armed, to search
all the Corners and Caves of the Tower; and relation being made of the safety of
the place, with a selected band of valiant Cavaliers, they entered the Tower;
and seizing the gates, and placing a guard, appeared before the King; and there
the third time appealed the aforesaid conspirators in the same sort and form
as before: which appellation being ended, the King swore, That he would adhere
to their counsel as a good King, and a just Judge, so far as the rule of
Law, Reason, and Equity did require.

Then it was published and made known in the presence of the King, and
throughout the Dominions, that on the morrow after Candlemas day, the aforesaid
conspirators should personally appear, to answer to the appellation, whereby
they were charged of so many treasons.

They expulsed diverse of the Officers of the Household; viz. in the place of
John Beauchamp, Steward of the Household, they appointed John Devonvex, Knight,
one of the Commissioners; Peter Courtney, Knight, was made Chamberlain in
stead of Robert Duke of Ireland. And the foresaid John de Beauchamp, Simon de
Burleigh, Vice Chamberlain, John Salisbury, Thomas Trynet, James Barats
William Ellingham, and Nicholas Nagworth, Knights; and Officers of the Clergy,
(viz.) Richard Mecford Secretary, John Blake Deane of the Chapel, John
Lincoln Chancellor of the Exchequer, and John Clifford Clerk of the Chapel,
were kept under arrest too, and were as partakers in the aforesaid Treason; for
that they knowing and having intelligence of the said Conspiracy, they did not
discover them.

And thus this hideous brood of Monsters, so often shaken, was quite
overthrown.

And on the Vigill of the Purification of Saint Mary, in the Privy Chamber at
Westminster, be joint consent of all the Commissioners, the aforesaid John
(...) John Holt, Roger Fulthorp, William Burleigh, John Locton, and John Carey
were displaced from their Offices, and without any further ado arrested of
Treason, and by the command of the Chancellor were clapped into the Tower; and
Roger Carleton in the place of Belknap, Walter Clapton in the place of
Tressilian, were constituted.

The great Parliament began the second of February following, in this manner:
All the Peers, as well of the Spiritualty as of the Temporalty, being
assembled in the great Hall at Westminster, the King soon after came and sat
down in his Throne; and after him appeared the five Noblemen Appellants, (the
fame of whose admired worth ecchoed through all the Land) entered the House in
their costly robes, leading one another hand in hand, with an innumerable
company following them; and beholding where the King sat, all at once, with
submissive gestures they reverenced the King. Brambre was taken a little
before, and cast into the Jail of Gloucester.

The Clergy then placing themselves on the right hand, and the Nobility on the
left hand of the King, according to the ancient custom of the High Court of
Parliament; the Lord Chancellor standing with his back toward the King, by the
Kings command declared the cause of their summons to the Parliament: which
being ended, the five aforesaid Appellants arising, declared their aforesaid
Appellation by the mouth of Robert Pleasington their Speaker, who thus spoke:
Behold, the Duke of Gloucester comes to purge himself of treasons which are
laid to his charge by the conspirators. To whom the Lord Chancellor, by the
command of the King answered: My Lord Duke, the King conceives so honorably
of you, that he cannot be induced to believe, that you, who are of affinity to
him in a collateral line, should attempt any treason against his sacred
Majesty. The Duke with his four Companions, upon their knees humbly gave
thanks to the King for his gracious opinion of their fidelity.

Then after silence proclaimed, they arose, and delivered in certain Articles
in writing, wherein were contained the particularity of the Treason.

When the Articles were read, the Appellants requested the King, that sentence
of condemnation might be given against the Conspirators, and they to receive
the guerdon of their deserts; which the King promised to grant.

And when the third day came of their proceedings against the Conspirators, the
Lord Chancellor in the name of the Clergy, in open Parliament made an Oration,
showing that they could not by any means be present at the proceeding, whereas
there is any censure of death to be passed. For the confirmation whereof, they
delivered in a Protestation, which being read, they spoke, That neither in
respect of any favor, nor for fear of any man's hate, nor in hope of any
reward, they did desire to absent themselves; but only that they were bound by
the Canon not to be present at any man's arraignment or condemnation. They
likewise sent their Protestation to the Chapel of the Abbey, where the
Commons sat; which was allowed of. And then, when the Appellants called for
justice against the Conspirators, the Lords of the Spiritualty arose, and went
into the Kings Chamber near adjoining.

But the King being moved in conscience, and in charity, perceiving that in
every work they are to remember the end; and being willing (contrary to the
rigor of the Law) to favor rather these that were guilty, then the actors in
that Treason, if they were able to allege any thing in their defense caused
the Process to cease: but the Peers (being earnest) requested, That no
business past, present, or to come, might be debated, until this Treason were
adjudged; to which Petition the King graciously granted his assent.

On the 11. day of February, when nothing could be alleged, nor no witness
produced, in justification of the conspirators, but that the definitive
sentence of Condemnation must be pronounced against them, the aforesaid John
Devoreux, Marshall of the Court, and for that time the Kings Lieutenant,
adjudged them this heavy doom; That the said Archbishop of York, Duke of
Ireland, Earl of Suffolk, Tressilian, and Brambre, should be drawn from the
Tower to Tyborne, and there to be hanged upon a Gibbet until they were dead,
and all their Lands and Goods to be confiscated, that none of their posterity
might be by them any way enriched.

On the 12. day of February, which was the first day of Shrovetide, Nicholas
Brambre appeared in Parliament; and being charged with the aforesaid Articles
of Treason, he craved favor to advise of Counsel learned, and some longer
time for his more full answer to his accusation: But the Judges charged him to
answer severally to every point in the Articles contained: whereunto Brambre
answered, Whosoever has branded me with this ignominious mark, with him I am
ready to fight in the Lists, to maintain my innocence, whenever the King
shall appoint.

The Appellants hearing this courageous challenge, with resolute countenance
answered, That they would willingly accept of the Combat, and thereupon flung
down their Gages before the King; and on a sudden the whole company of Lords,
Knights, Esquires, and Commons, flung down their Gages so thick, that they
seemed like Snow in a Winters day, crying out. We also will accept of the
Combat, and will prove these Articles to be true to thy head, most damnable
Traitor, and so they departed for that day.

And although the Appellants were not idle in the night, yet on the next day,
to aggravate their Appellation against the Conspira ors, there came diverse
companies of the City of London, complaining of the manifold injuries they had
suffered by Brambre, and other Extortions and Exactions wherewith they had
been daily charged.

But before they proceed with his trial, they were stayed by most unfortunate
Tressilian, who being got upon the top of an house adjoining to the Palace, and
had descended into a gutter only to look about him, he was discovered by
certain of the Peers, who presently sent some of the Guard to apprehend him,
who entering into the house where he was, and having spent long time in vain
in looking for him, at length one of the Guard stepped to the Master of the
house, and taking him by the shoulder, with his dagger drawn, thus said, Show
us where thou have hid Tressilian, or else resolve thy days are accomplished:
the Master trembled, ready to yield up the ghost for fare, answered, Yonder is
the place where he lies, and shows him a round Table covered with branches of
Bay, under which Tressilian lay close covered; when they had found him, they
drew him out by the heels, wondering to see him, as Vipers use, to wear his
head and beard o're-grown, with old clowted shoes, and patched hose, more like
a miserable poor beggar, then a Judge.

Tressilian being come into the Hall, was asked what he could say for himself,
why judgment should not pass upon him for his treason so often committed, he
became as one that had been struck dumb, and his heart was as it were
hardened to the very last, and would not confess himself guilty of any thing:
And for this cause the Parliament arose, deferring Brambres trial till the
next day. But Tressilian was without delay led to the Tower, that he might
suffer the execution of the sentence passed against him.

Immediately Tressilian is upon a hurdle, and drawn through the streets of the
City, with a wonderful concourse of people following him, at every furlongs
end he was suffered to stand still to rest himself, and to see if he would
confess and report himself of any thing, but what he said to the Friar his
Confessor is not known, neither am I able to search it out; when he came to
the place of execution he would not climb the Ladder, until such time as
being soundly beaten with bats and staves, he was forced to go up, and when he
was up, he said, so long as I do wear any thing upon me I shall not dye,
wherefore the Executioner stripped him, and found certain Images painted like
to the signs of Heaven, and the head of a Devil painted, and the names of
many of the Devils wrote in parchment, the exorcising toys being taken away,
and he was hanged up naked, and because the spectators should be certainly
assured that he was dead, they cut his throat, and because the night
approached, they let him hang until the next morning, and then his wife having
obtained a license of the King, took down his body and carried it to the
Grey-Fryers, where it was buried. On the morrow sentence was likewise pronounced
against Brambre, who being drawn upon a hurdle from the Tower to Tyborne
through the City, showed himself very penitent, humbly craving mercy and
forgiveness at the hands of God and men, whom he had so grievously offended,
and whom he had so injuriously wronged in time past, and did earnestly desire
them all to pray for him; when the rope was about his neck ready to be turned
off, a certain young man, the son of one Northampton, asked if he had done
justice to his Father or not, for Northampton was sometimes Mayor of the City
of London more wealthy and more substantial then any else in the City, him did
Brambre and Tresilian accuse of Treason and Conspiracy against the State, and
condemned him to die, being dispoiled of his estate, he himself at length
hardly escaped, to whom Brambre answered and confessed with bitter tears that
what he did was most vile and wicked, and with an intent only to murder and
overthrow the said Northampton, for which craving pardon of the young man being
suddenly turned off, and the Executioner cutting his throat, he dyed.

These men being dispatched, the Parliament discontinued their proceedings
against the rest of the Conspirators till a more convenient time, and took
into their considerations other more weighty affairs of the weal public,
they made the Earl of Arundell Lord Admiral, giving him authority to resist
and to repulse either by Sea or Land the enemies of the Crown wheresoever he
should ^inde them.

And it was further agreed on, that for the appeasing of all private
discontents (if any were) the King and the rest of the Appellants with the rest
of the Commissioners should dine together in the great Hall, which they did,
and there was great joy at this reconciliation throw all the Kingdom.

When these things were concluded, they then began this arraignment of the
Traitors, whereupon John Blake and Thomas Vske were indicted on the fourth day
of March, who although they were men of inferiout quality, yet were they found
to be parties in the said Treason; Vske was a Sergeant at Arms, and was
indicted amongst the Conspirators, so that being late made Sheriff of
Middlesex he had indicted the five Appellants and the Commissioners as
Traitors, and Blake was an Intelligencer of Tresilians, one that used to go
and come between the Conspirators, and relate the state and success of the
treason from one to another.

And when they could say nothing to prove themselves clear, sentence was
pronounced upon them as their Masters were before them, they were carried to
the Tower, and from thence were dragged at the horse tail to Tyborne, and
there hanged.

But Vske obtained this favor, that his head was cut off after he was hanged
and set aloft upon Newgate for Fowls of the air to take repast.

On the sixth day of March there were called to answer, Robert Belknap, John
Holt, Roger Falthorpe, William Burleigh, John Locton, and John Carey Baron of
the Exchequer for their conspiracy against the Commissioners at Nottingham,
but because it is not needful to rehearse every part of their indictment, they
were all condemned like as the rest.

Whilst the Peers were trying them, the Clergy were retired into the Kings
Chambers, but when word was brought to them of the condemnation of the Judges,
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Winchester, the Chancellor, the
Treasurer, Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal arose hastily and went into the
Parliament House, pouring forth their complaints before the King and the Peers
humbly upon their knees, beseeching them for the love of God, the Virgin Mary,
and of all the Saints, even as they hoped to have mercy at the day of
Judgment, they should show favor, and not put to death the said Judges then
present, and bitterly bewayling their iniquities in whose hearts the very life,
soul, and spirit of our English Laws lived, flourished and appeared, and
there appeared great sorrow both on the one part of the Complainants and also
of the Defendants.

The Duke of Gloucester, likewise with the Earls of Arundel, Warwick,
Nottingham, and Derby, whose hearts began to be mollified, and joined with them
in their latnentable Petition.

At length upon the intercession of the Clergy, the execution upon the persons
was ceased, and their lives were granted them, but were sent to the Tower to be
kept close prisoners.

On the twelfth of March, being Thursday, it happened that the aforesaid
Knights, Simon de Burleigh, John de Beauchamy, James Baroverse, and John
Salesbury were brought into the Parliament House where their accusations was
read, proved, they found guilty, and not any way able to clear themselves.

From this day almost till the Ascension of our Lord, the Parliament House was
only taken up with the trial of Sir Simon Burleygh, for three Appellants, viz.
The Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel and Warwick, with the whole House
of Commons, urged that execution might be performed according to the Law: and
on the other side, the King and Queen, the Earls of Darby and Nottingham, and
the Prior of Saint John his Uncle, with the major part of the upper House, did
labor to have him saved.

There was also some muttering amongst the common people, and it was reported
to the Parliament that the Commons did rise in diverse parts of the Realm, but
especially about Kent, in favor of the said Sir Simon Burleigh, which when
they heard those that before spoke and stood for him, now flew clean from him,
and by joint consent on the fifth day of May, sentence was pronounced only
against the said Sir Simon, that he should be drawn from the Tower to Tyborne,
and then to be hanged till he were dead, and then to have his head struck from
his body. But because he was a Knight of the Gaiter, a gallant Courtier.
powerful, and once a Favorite of the Kings, and much respected of all the
Court, the King of his special Grace, was pleased to mittigate his doom, that
he should only be led to Tower Hill, and there be beheaded.

On the twelfth of May, the Thursday before Whitsontide, in like manner were
condemned John Beuchamp Steward of the household to the King, James Bereverous,
and John Salsbury Knights, Gentlemen of the privy Chamber, whereof the two
first, viz. John Beuchamp, and James Bereverous were beheaded on Tower Hill,
but John Salsbury was drawn from Tower Hill to Tyborne, and there was hanged.

On the same day also, was condemned the Bishop of Chichester the Kings
Confessor, but because of his great dignity, he was pardoned.

And also concerning the translation of some Bishops, because Pope Urban the
sixth, after it came to his ears, that the Archbishop of York was condemned to
avoid all hope of Irregularity, he created him Archbishop of S. Andrews in
Scotland: which Archbishop was under the power of Scots, enemies to the Crown;
and in the gift of the Arch-Pope: and because the Pope did challenge half the
title of all England to maintain his wars, but although he craved it, yet he
was denied: therefore he dealt warily and craftily; hoping to make up his mouth
by the translation of Bishops: the Bishop of Fly then Lord Chancellor, was made
Archbishop of York, the Bishop of Dublin succeeded in his place; the Bishop of
Bath and Wells in his place: the Bishop of Sarum in his place, and the Lord
John of Waltham Lord Keeper of the privy Seal in his place; and this by his
translation of Bishops he gained himself much money, according to the laws of
the Canon; and when this came to the ears of the Parliament, that such a sum of
money should be transported out of the Land, they strove what they could to
hinder it, but could not, because the Clergy gave their consent.

On the last day of May, the King appointed both Houses to meet at Keemington
whereas they made a conclusion of all the trialls of the said treason, granting
license to Thomas Trenet, William Ellingham, and Nicholas Nagworth Knights,
Richard Metford, John Slake, John Lincoln, Clerks to put in bail provided
they were sufficient, and to go into a place of England where they listed,
without any let or hindrance of any of the Kings Officers. Moreover, the six
Justices, with the Bishop of Chichester, who stood condemned with them, were
sent into Ireland, there to remain for a term of life, and thus they were
divided, viz. Rob. Belknap and John Holr in the Village of Dromore in Ireland,
not to remain as Justices or any officers, but live as banished offenders, not
to be out of Town above the space of two miles upon pain of death? but the
King out of his gracious bounty was pleased to give a yearly annuity of 40.
pound to Robert Belknap, of twenty marks to John Holt, during their lives; and
to Roger Fulthrope the King allowed forty pound, and to William Burleigh forty
pound during life, confining them to the City of Dublin, granting Burleigh the
liberty of two miles, and to Fulthrope three miles for their recreation, John
Carey and John Locton with the yearly allowance of twenty pound during life,
are confined to the Town of Waterford with the like liberty, and the like
penalty; And the Bishop of Chichester is likewise sent to Cork, there to
remain with some allowance, and the like penalty.

On the third day of June, which was the last day of the Parliament, the King,
the Queen, the Peers of both Estates with the Commons, came to the Abbey at
Westminster, whereas the Bishop of London, because it was his Diocese sung
Mass, and the Mass being ended, the Archbishop of Canterbury made an Oration
concerning the form and danger of the Oath, which being, although the Peers
and Commons had taken the Oath of Allegiance, and homage to the King, yet
because the King was young when they took Oath anew (as at the first) at his
Coronation.

These Ceremonies being performed, the Metropolitan of England with all his
Suffragans there present, having lighted a Candle, and putting it under a
stool, put it out, thereby excommunicating all such as should seem to
distaste, dislike or contradict any of the fore passed Acts in the last
Parliament; And the Lord Chancellor by the Kings appointment, caused all that
were present to swear to keep the said Statutes inviolably whole, and
undissolved, as good and faithful Liege-people of the Kings, and the form of
the Parliament was observed throughout all the Realm.

On the morrow, which was the fourth day of June, many courteous falutations
and congratulations having passed between the King, the Nobility, and
Communalty, the Parliament was dissolved, and every man returned home.

And now let England rejoice in Christ, for the net which was laid so cunningly
for our destruction, is broken asunder, and we are delivered. To God be the
praise for all.

This Parliament begun at Westminster 1386. in the tenth year of the reign
of King Richard the second.
FINIS.

