A SPEECH MADE BY CAPTAIN Audley Mervin to the Upper House of Parliament in
Ireland, March 4. 1640. Together With certain Articles (of high Treason)
against Sir Richard Bolton Lord Chancellor, John Lord Bishop of Derrie, Sir
Gerard Lowther, Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Sir George
Radcliffe Knight. Unto which is added an humble and just Remonstrance of the
Parliament.

Printed for HVGH PERRY, Anno Dom. 1641.

CAPTAIN AVDLEY MERVIN, his Speech to the Lords in the Upper House of
Parliament, March 4. 1640. concerning the impeachment of the Right Honorable
Sir Richard Bolton Knight, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, John Lord Bishop of
Derry, Sir Gerard Lowther, L. chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Sir
George Radcliffe Knight with high Treason, by the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses of the Com-mons House.
My Lords:
I Am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons house,
to present unto you Irelands tragedy, the gray headed common Laws funeral,
and the active Statutes death and obsequies, this dejected spectacle answers
but the prefiguring type of Cesars murder wounded to death in the Senate, and
by Brutus his bosom friend, our Cesars Image, by reflection, even the
fundamental Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, the sole means by which our
estates are confirmed, our Liberties preserved, our lives secured, are wounded
to death in the Senate, I mean in the Courts of Justice, and by Brutus too,
even by those persons that have received their beings and subsistence from
them, so that here enters first those unseparable twins, Treason and
Ingratitude.

In a plain phrase (my Lords) I tender unto you Treason, high treason, such a
treason that wants nothing but words to express it.

To counterfeit the Kings Seal, to counterfeit the Kings Money it is treason,
but this dies with the Individual party.

To betray a Fort is treason, but it dies with a few men.

To betray an Army is treason, but it dies with a limited number, which may be
reinforced again by politic industry.

To blow Up both Houses of Parliament is treason, but succeeding Ages may
replant branches by a fruitful posterity.

But this high Treason which I do now again in the name of the house of
Commons charge and impeach Sir Richard Bolton Knight, Lord Chansellour of
Ireland, and Sir Gerard Lowther Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Court of
Common Pleas, John L. Bishop of Derry: Sir George Ratcliffe Knight, is in its
nature so sarre transcending any of the former, that the rest seem to be but
petty Larcines in respect of this. What is it to subvert the fundamental
Laws of this Kingdom? High Treason.

What is it with a contumacious malice to trample under feet the rich Legacies
of our Forefathers purchased with sweat and expense, I mean the Statute
Laws, what is it but high Treason?

What is it through an Innate antipathy to their public good to incarcerate
the liberties of the Subject, under the Jron and weighty chains of an
arbitrary government? High Treason.

What is it (since his Majesty the most aimiable and delightful portraiture
of flourishing and indulgent Justice to his Subjects) to present him personated
in their extrajudiciall censures and judgments, but to possess (if possible)
the hearts of his loyal Subjects of this Kingdom, that he is a bloody and
devouring Tyrant, and to provoke their never dying allegiance into a fatal
and desperate Rebellio.

What is it to violate the sacred grants of many of his Majesty's Progenitors
Kings and Queens of England confirmed under the broad Seal being the public
faith of this Kingdom, by an extrajudiciall breath grounded upon no record?

What is it to insert a surreptitions clause forged by some servile brain in
the preamble of our last Act of Subsidies, by which the Kings most excellent
Majesty and the Earl of Strafford are placed in one and the same Sphere,
allowing them but equal influences to nourish the allegiance of this
Kingdom, what is this but to extol other then regal authority, and to
crucify the Majesty of cur most gracious Sovereign betwixt the two Thieves
of government: Tyranny and Treason.

My Lords, having such a full and lasting gale to drive me into the depth of
these accusations, I can hardly steer and confine my course within the
compass of patience, since I read in the first volumes of their brows, the
least of these to be the certain ruin of the Subject, and, if proved, a most
favorable Prologue to usher in the Tragedy of the Actors, Counselors, and
abetters herein. What was then the first and main question? It was the
subversion of the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. Letthen Magna Charta,
that lies prostrated, besmeared and roaling in her own gore discount her
wounds as so many pregnant and undeniable proofs mark the Epithet magna;
(...) confirmed by 30. Parliaments in the succession of 18. Kings, the
violation of which has several times engaged the Kingdom of England in a
voluntary sacrifice; a Charter which imposes that pleasant and well be coming
Oath upon all Sovereignty to vindicate and preserve the immunitie there of
before the Crown incircle their royal Temples, in this Oath of so high
consequence and general Intrest, his Majesty does in a manner levy a fine to
his Subjects use, for avoiding all fraudulent conveyances in the administration
of Justice, and this oath is transplanted unto the Judges as the Feoffees in
trust appointed between his Majesty and the Subject, and sealed by his
Majesty's provident care, with that emphaticall penalty, that their estates and
lives shall be in the Kings mercy, upon the violation of the same, either in
whole or in part, neither has the deserved punishment, for the breach of this
oath been enacted, as Fulgura ex vitro, as Bugbeares to enforce the obedience
of Children; No my Lords, the just execution of it upon their predecessors,
though in breaches not so capital, might have warned them to have strangled
their ill-borne resolutions in the cradle, before they should now proclaim
their infamy, and petition for their punishment: witness Sir Tho: Wey land his
banishment, confiscation of his goods and lands, only for his mercenary Justice
contrary to his Oath, who was chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in the time
of Ed. 1. witness Sir Will: Thorpe chief Justice of the Kings-Beach, in the
time of Edw. 3. who was adjudged to be hanged, because he had broken the Kings
oath, made unto the people where with he was entrusted, for so was the
interpretation of the reason entered in the Roll.

Yet my Lords, though Magna Charta be so sacred for antiquity, though its
confirmation be strengthened by Oath, though it be the proper Dictionary that
expounds meum and tuum, and assigns every Subject his Birthright, it only
survives in the Rolls; but is miserably rent and torn in the practice.

These words Salvo contenemento, live in the Rols, but these are dead in the
Castle Chamber.

These words; Nullus liber hujus ejiciatur e libero suo tenemento, in
praejudicium parium, live in the Rols, but they are dead where property and
freehold are determined by paper Petitions.

These words; Nulli vendemus, nulle differemus Iustitiam, live in the Rols, but
they are dead when the suites, judgments, and execution of the Subject are
wittingly and illegally suspe^ded, retarded and avoided.

Shall we desire to search the mortal wounds inflicted upon the Statute Laws,
who sees them notlying upon their death bed stabbed with Proclamations, there
Primitive and genuine tenures escheated by Acts of State, and strangled by
Monopolies.

Will you surveigh the liberties of the Subjects, every prison spues out
illegal attachments and commitments, every pillory is dyed with the forced
blood of the Subjects, and has ears, though not to hear, yet to witness
this complaint.

Do you doubt of the defacement of the aymiable Offices of his Majesty's most
transplendent and Renowned Justice, and grace, let then that Microcosme of
Leters Patents confirmed under his Majesty's and his predecessors broad Seal
of the Kingdom, being the public faith thereof, and yet unchristened by
frivolous and private opinions, rise up in Judgment, let the abortive
Judgment of the tenure in Capite, where no tenure was expressed, nay let the
Heretical and Traiterous opinions where the Tenure was expressed, yet to draw in
all by Markets and Faires granted in the same Patents rise up in Judgments.
What glass has this unhappy divided Kingdom from his Majesty's presence and
audience, to contemplate the fair and ravishing form of his royal intentions
in, but in the clear and diaphanous administration of his Justice, and what
do these traytrous and illegal practices aim at but in affront to his
Majesty (which we most tenderly resent) and discontent to his Subject, to
multiply as by a Magic glass the royal dispensation of his favors into the
ugly and deformed visage of their suppression of the liberties, devastation of
the estates, and the deprivation of the lives of his loyal Subjects, so that
it may be said; Regali Capiti cervicem consul equiaam Jungere sic vellet
variasque inducere plumas.

My Lords, these ought to be considered with as serious an care, as they were
practiced by mischievous experiments.

Inquire of the Netherlands why their fields are grown fertile, by the
inundation of blood, why the pensive Matrons solemnize too too frequent
Funerals of their Husbands and issue, and they will answer you it was for the
preservation of their hereditary Laws, which Tyranny would have innovated.

This Kingdom personated in the sable habit of a Widow with dissheveled
hayres seems to Petition your Lordships, that since she is a Mother to most of
us, yet certainly a Nurse unto us all, that you would make some order for
redress of her Tyrannical oppression.

These persons impeached, resemble the opacious body of the Earth interposed to
eclipse that light and vigor, which the solar aspect of Majesty would
communicate unto his Subjects.

They imitate the fish Sepia, that vomits a dark liquor out of her mouth to
cloud the waters for her securer escape.

They are those to whom the keys have bin committed, yet they have barred the
door to them that knocked.

They are these unnatural Parents, that give their children stones, in stead
of bread, and scorpions for fish. Was it for this purpose that ye royal
authority situated them in these eminent places, that, like Beacons upon high
Hills, they should discover and proclaim each innovation and stratagem against
the public weal; whilst they in the mean time employ therein fire to a
public Incendiary, or, like Ignes fatui, seduce the easy and believing
Traveller into pits and unexpected Myres?

Were they sworn to seal their damnation, and not the confirmation of our
liberty, ostates, and lives? Shall a man be censured for perjury, in that
breach of his private Faith, and these be justifiable in Treason, aggravated by
perjury against the dignity of the Crowns, and public faith of the
Kingdoms? No my Lords, the grave, judicious, and mature examination, and
deserved punishment of these traitorous proceedings, will speak these times as
glorious to posterity in their information, as they are now lamented in their
persecution.

The bloud-thirsting sword of an hostile enemy, by a timely union, and a
defensive preparation may be prevented.

The thin rib'd Carcass of an universal famine, may have his consumption
restored by a supply from our neighboring Nations.

The quick spreading venom of infectious pestilence may be prevented by
antidots and qualified by physical remedies. But this Catholic grievance,
like a snake in the most verdant walks, (for such are the unblemished laws
truly practiced) stings us to death, when we are most secure; and like the
Kings evil, can only be cured by his Majesty's free and gracious premission
of our modest and gentle procedings, for his vindication and our preservation
therein included.

Spencer and Gamston who have left their names monumentally odious for the
evil counsel they fed the Kings ear with, yet did possibly advantage their
own friends, while these dart their envy and treason for a common Centery,
equal touching the bounds of every superficies: for as concerning ye valide
estates they have illegally overthrown, when the laws by your Lordships
industry receive their native vigor, they will reassume their confirmation:
but the estates happily in themselves legal, that they have in an
extrajudiciall form established, will haste as speedily to their dissolution
so that Judas like they betray their best friends with a kiss.

My Lords J cannot find any surviving Chronology of times, this season to be
paralleled with all circumstances, which makes me view the Records, amongst the
infernal spirits to find, if matched there J might extenuate their facts; where
^ they appear like the false spirits sent into the mouth of the Prophet Ahab
to speak delusions to subvert the host of God.

The most vehement and traiterous encounter of Satan, is lively deciphered in
the true example of Job: where first, I observe the disaualogie, he overthrowes
not Jobs Magna Charta, he disseizes him not of his Inheritance, nor
dispossesses him of his Leases; but only disrobes him of some part of his
parsonall estate: when he proceeds to infringe Jobs liberty, he does not
pillory him, nor cut off his ears, nor bore him through the tongue; he only
spots him with some ulcers; here Satan stains, when these persons by their
traiterous combinations, envy the very blood that runs unspilt in our veins;
and by obtruding bloody Acts, damned in the last Parliament: will give Satan
sise ace, and the Dice at Irish, in inthralling the lives of the Subjects by
their arbitrary Judicature.

I would not my Lords, be understood to impute to the Judges: an iufallibility
of errors: nor in impeaching these, to traduce those, whose candor and
integrity, shine with more admired luster, then their white furs, who like
trophies of virgin-justice, stood fixed and unmoved in the rapid torrent of the
times, while these like strawes and chips played in the streams, until they
are devolved in the Ocean of their deserved ruin.

No my Lords, humanum est errare, and the Law allows Writs of Error, and
Arrest of Judgment: but where there is crassa ignorantia against their Oath,
against the Fundamental, Elementary and known Laws of the Kingdom: Nay (my
Lords where it is rather praemeditata malitia, where there is an emulating
policy who should raze and embesell the Records in the practique, that are for
the tender preservation of our liberties, estates, and lives, seeking only to
be glorious in a national destruction, as if their safety were only involved
in our ruin, there I have command to pity, but not excuse them.

To kill a Judge, quatenus a Judge, is not Treason, but to kill a Judge sitting
in the place of judicature, is treason; not for that the law intends it, out of
any malice against the party, but for the malice against the Law: where then
can an intensive or an extensive malice be expressed or employed against the Law,
then the practical dialect of these persons impeach't, speaks with a known
and crying accent.

The Beniamites slang stones with their left hands, yet they would not miss a
hairs breadth; these extrajudiciall proceedings are slung with the left, I
mean they are sinistrous, and imprint their black and blew marks, more
certain, and more fatal; for that they may say, Quae regio in terris nostri
non plena labor is? Though these things be familiar unto us, yet I cannot but
admire how this unproportionable body of judicature should swell up into such a
vast and ulcerous dimension, but why should I considering this excentrick
motion of the body of the law had his birth obscure, resembling the tares that
were sowed in the night time, but here is the difference; they were sown by
the enemy in the absence of the Master: but these are sown by the
Grand-masters themselves, purposely to overtop and choke the expected Harvest.

Innovations in Law, and consequently in government, creep in like heresies in
Religion, slily and slowly, pleading in the end a saucy and usurped legitimacy,
by uncontrol'd prescription.

My Lords, this is the first sitting, and I have only chalked out this
deformed body of high Treason: I have not drawn it at length, lest it might
fright you from the further view thereof: In conclusion, it is the humble
desire of the Commons, that the parties impeached, may be secured in their
persons, sequestered from this house, from the Counsel table, and all places of
judicature, as being Civiliter mortui; that they may put in their answers to
the Articles ready now to be exhibited against them; and that all such further
proceedings may be secretly expedited, as may be suitable to Justice, and the
precedents of Parliaments, so his Majesty may appear in his triumphant
goodness, and indulgency to his people; and his people may be ravished in their
dutiful and cheerful obedience, and loyalty to his Majesty: your Lordships
may live in Records to posterity, as the isntrumental reformers of these
corrupted times, and that the Kingdom and Commonwealth may pay an aymiable
sacrifice in retribution, and acknowledgment of his Majesty's multiplied
providence for our preservation herein.

Articles of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in the Parliament assembled,
against Sir Richard Bolton, Knight. Lord Chancellor of Ireland, John Lord Bishop of
Derry, and sir Gerard Lowther Kr, L. chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas, and Sir George Radcliffe Knight. in maintenance of the accusation,
whereby they and every of them stand charged with high Treason.
FIrst, that they the said Sir Richard Bolton Knight. Lord Chancellor of Ireland,
John L. Bishop of Derry, Sir Ger. Lowther Knight. L. chief Justice of his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and Sir George Radcliffe, Knight, intending
the destruction of the Commonwealth of this Realm, have traitorously
confederated and conspired together, to subvert the fundamental Laws and
government of this Kingdom, and in pursuance thereof, they and every of them,
have traitorously contrived, introduced, and exercised an arbitrary and
tyrannical government against Law throughout this Kingdom, by the countenance
and assistance of Thomas Earl of Strafford, then chief Governor of this
kingdom.

II.
That they and every of them, the said sir Richard Bolton, Knight. L. Chancellor of
Ireland, John L. Bp. of Derry, Sir Gerard Lowther, Knight. L. chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, and Sir George Radcliffe Knight have traitorously assumed to
themselves, and every of the^, regal power over the goods, persons, lands, and
liberties of his Majesty's subjects of this Realm; and likewise have
maliciously, perfidiously and traitorously given, declared, pronounced, and
published, many false unjust and erroneous opinions, Judgment Sentences, and
Decrees, in extrajudiciall manner against law, and have perpetrated, practiced,
and done many other traitorous and unlawful acts and things, whereby as well
diverse mutinies, seditions and Rebellions have bin raised, as also many 1000.
of his Majesty's liege people of this Kingdom, have bin ruined in their goods,
lands, liberties, and lives, and many of them being of good quality and
reputation have bin utterly defamed, by Pillory, mutilation of Members, and
other infamous punishments: By means whereof his Majesty and the Kingdom have
bin deprived of their service in Iuries, and other public employments, and
the general trade and traffic of this Island for the most part destroyed,
and his Majesty highly damnified in his Customs and other Revenues.

III.
That they the said sir Rich. Bolton, John L. B. of Derry, sir Ger. Lowther,
Knight. and sir G. Radcliffe, and every of them the better to preserve themselves,
and the said Earl of Strafford, in these and other traitorous courses, have
labored to subvert the rights of Parliament and the ancient course of
Parliamentary proceedings: all which offenses were contrived, committed,
perpetrated, and done at such time, as the said Rich. Bolton, Sir Gerard
Lowther: and Sir George Radcliffe Knights, were privy Counselors of state
within this Kingdom, and against their and every of their Oaths of the same,
at such times as the said Sir R. Bolton K. was Lord Chancellor of Ireland, or
chief Baron of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer within this Kingdom, and Sir
Gerard Lowther K^. was L. chief Justice of the said Court of Common Pleas, and
against their Oaths of the same, and at such time as the said John L. B. of
Derry was actual Bp. of Derry within this Kingdom, and were done and
speciated contrary to their and every of their allegiance several and
perpetrative oaths taken in that behalf.

IV.
For which the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, do impeach the said Sir
Richard Bolton, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, John Lord B. of Derry, Sir Gerard
Lowther Knight, Lord chiese Justice of his Majesty's said Court of Common
Pleas, and Sir George Radcliffe Knight. aforesaid, and every of them of high
Treason, against our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity.

The said Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, by protestation saving to
themselves the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter, any accusation or
impeachment against the said Sir Rich. Bolton, John L. Bishop of Derry, Sir
Gerrard Lowther, and Sir George Radcliffe aforesaid, and every of them, and
also of replying to the^, and every of their answers which they, and every of
the^, shall make to the said Articles, or any of them, and of offering proof
also of the premises, or of any other impeachment, or accusation, as shall be
by them exhibited; as the case shall according to the course of Parliament
require.

And the said Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, do pray, that the said Sir
Richard Bolton Knight, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, John Lord Bishop of Derry,
Sir Gerard Lowther, Knight, Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's said Court of
Common Pleas, and Sir George Kadcliffe, Knight, and every of them, be put to
answer all and every of the premises, and that all such proceedings,
examinations, Trial, and Judgment, may be upon them and every of them, had
and used, as is agreeable to Law and Justice.

Copia vera. Signed PHILIP PHERNESLY.
Cler. Parliamenti.

