ANTICHRIST IN MAN THE Quakers Idol. Or a faithful discovery of their ways and
opinions by an eye and ear-witness thereof. TOGETHER With an Answer and
Confutation of some dangerous and damnable Doctrines justified, in a paper sent
by them unto me: As also one of them taken with a lie in his mouth before the
Magistrates.

By JOSHUAH MILLER, a Servant of Christ in the work of the Gospel.

Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines,

Hebr. 13.9. As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so did these resist the
truth,

2 Timothy 3.8, 9. Desiring to be Teachers of the Law, understanding neither what
they say, or whereof they affirm,

1 Timothy 1.7. If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his
tongue, his religion is in vain,

James 1.26. London, Printed by J. Macock, for L. Lloyd, and are to be sold at
his shop, at the sign of the Castle in Corn-hil, 1655.

To all that believe Salvation and Justification by the death and resurrection
of Christ, which he in his own person performed, as a full satisfaction for all
their sins, past, present, and to come; especially to the real Believers in the
County of Glamorgan.
DEarly beloved in the Lord, although many of my Brethren have taken in hand to
declare the Spirits, Ways, and Opinions of these poor deluded people; which are
so satisfactory, that I confess it were but superfluous in me to add more to
the Press. Yet when I seriously ponder, that this may appear where those Books
have not been divulged: And sometimes I am apt to think, that a few leaves from
one known in each Country, may tend more to the satisfaction of the people
therein, then from a stranger, though for my part I am the weakest and
unworthiest of all for this work, but seeing Providence has cast me in that
place, where I have had more converse with and knowledge of them, then many
others, I intend this Book principally for the sakes of the people where I
live: And truly I am necessitated to appear thus openly in respect of the lies,
and false rumors abroad, and for the truths sake, which seeks no corners; Oh
Beloved! remember that these are the last times, and this is the most
insinuating depth of Antichrist that ever was. Indeed in the Ranters, the Devil
appeared as he is (black, but I fear the (white Devil) is too near these. Was
he not in the Pharisees? and yet they were devout men) now may he be called
trans-formed into an Angel of light: The Lord help you to continue in the
faith, till Christ comes, keep your Lamps burning, study more the
deceitfulness of your hearts, try Doctrines by the Spirit and Scriptures
together, be not hasty to hear every one, or every thing, frequent more the
society of Gospel Saints, hold fast Prayer in the holy Spirit, waiting upon God
in his Ordinances: And in so doing you are in the safest way for instruction,

Your servant in the Lord Christ, JOSHUAH MILLER.
From my house at Cardiff the 20 of October. 1655.
ANTICHRIST in MAN, THE Quakers Idol.
GOD has given us of this Island several warnings for this many years, both
outwardly in the Kingdoms of men, and inwardly in the Kingdom of Christ: the
former we have for this many years felt the smart thereof; and yet are we like
the man that sleeps on the top of a Mast. Gray hairs are upon the head of this
Nation, for our murmurings, ingratitude, not living holy to our liberty
enjoyed; but O sad indeed is the warnings in his spiritual Kingdom. What talk
we formerly had of letting up Christ in our hearts, in our houses, in the Camp,
in the Court; but has not many like Baruch been seeking great things for
themselves, and forgot crucified Christ? O! ye Magistrates, can you see Christ
bleeding a fresh every day in City, Town, Village, Country, speared by Oaths,
Lying Drunkenness, Profanation of the Lords day, Whoredoms, Blasphemies? are
you Christian Magistrates, and will not step in to punish such Offenders? O! ye
Saints, can you hear the most abominable errors vented, and neither pray
against nor weep over them. Where is the ancient zeal of David to the Temple,
of John against Jezebel, of Paul against the Athenians, of John against
Antichrist? can you bid God speed to Christ's enemies, and not shed a tear for
that? (O let us of England look into our hearts, and examine what is the cause
of these spiritual judgments now among us: these people called Quakers, are to
me the saddest and most deplorable spectacles of revolted Professors that ever
I have heard or read of since my knowledge of them. I find the Book (called the
perfect Pharisee) a most notable yet lamentable description of them.

I will in the subsequent lines give you a short, yet faithful relation of
their ways, opinions, and carriages, not from other men's Books, but for the
most part upon personal knowledge; and what else, upon evident witnesses. And
herein my desire is to give a testimony to the truth of Jesus. so far as I have
had converse with them.

And first I shall answer that common objection amongst them; namely, they say
a great power of God goes with them that carries them out against sin. And
therefore hence they infer, that their way is of God.

Wherefore I will first answer this, before I enter upon the manifestation of
their ways and Doctrines, I answer this two ways.

First I say, Greatness of power in man is no argument of divine goodness, or
true religion, if their principles and Doctrines be haetrodox: the Devil is
said to be of great power, we wrestle against principallities and powers, Ephesians.
6.12. yea he is said to work mightily, that is with forcible and strong
impulsions on the spirits of men; therefore the Scripture must try all such
strong motions, or else God knows whither such strong powers will lead.

A mighty power has gone with the Turk, to enlarge both his Dominion and
Religion; yet I hope that's no argument his religion is of God, read that word
in 2 Thessalonians. 2 10.11. its said the Lord shall send them strong delusions to
believe a lie, the reason he gives you in the preceding verse, yet this strong
delusion is Satan's Throne.

And this makes me the less to wonder at that spirit by which they are drawn
forth.

But secondly, they say, this power is of God, because it leads them out
against sin; to this I answer, that herein they may be mistaken; for I question
not but Satan may have his Throne in the heart, and yet the outward carriage to
man honest and devout, for he has his wiles and devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. and how
far he may carry men out to be against the act of sin, and yet sin the end of
that intention, the Pharisees are a lively testimony thereof. Paul knew this
well when he foretold the Devil should transform himself into an Angel of
light, 2 Cor. 11.14. now Angels of light are holy and without sin, which thing
if you hear some affirm, consider they may be Devils, for all that.

Therefore I will briefly give a few demonstrations to unfold this Orthodox
Paradox, how the Devil may carry a man out against sin, and yet sin be the end
of that outward holiness, and such men as much in the power of Satan as they
were before.

And this both in Doctrine and Practice.

1. For Doctrine, many a man may acknowledge a Christ, and a hell; yea,
confess him Gods son, yet in the power of Satan's Kingdom. What have we to do
with thee thou son of God? art thou come to torment us? before our time Mat.
8.29. mark, this was the Devils that spoke, and confessed Christ; yet while
they thus confessed Christ, their end was evil, for hereby they would have
persuaded him to have let them alone in the poor men possessed, till the day of
judgment, for they would not be tormented before the time. So that on the
other hand it is evident, that the Devils acknowledge a Hell, which many men
worse then Devils deny.

Therefore such as confess Christ (only) for fear of torment, to me they have
only Satan's spirit, and his acknowledgement of Christ with theirs, both
proceed from one root.

But for the practice, the Devil may and does in these four respects suffer his
instruments sometimes to be strict against sin, and yet they under his
Dominion. Christ tells us that all the while the Pharisees was devout, yet they
were of their father the Devil John 8.44. did not he stir up those devout women
to persecute the Apostles? Acts 13 50.

Satan may help a man to leave some sins for diverse ends, for the end crowns
the action.

1. A man may be empowered to leave some sins for fear of hell only, and yet
have hell in his conscience all that time; upon this account to me is all these
abstinencies, devotions, pilgrimages of Monks, Nuns, and Friars, Thus they
compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte, and hereby make him ten times more
the child of the Devil, then he was before, Matthew. 23.15. they rise often in the
night to Prayers, go barefoot, sometimes in hair-cloth many a mile in cold
weather, and yet the Quakers in doing thus, do but imitate the Monks of Rome.
Who leads them to all this? truly not God, for he teaches no man by good works
to purchase Heaven; fearfullnesse has surprised the hypocrite, who shall dwell
with everlasting burnings, Isaiah 23 14. what are hypocrites but seeming devout
persons, yet sear of Hell or Satan is the cause of their Religion, fear takes
hold of them certainly, I am of this opinion that a hypo crite is as much the
(...) of the Devil, all the while he is (...), even as a profane person, its
not to be doubted that such as fear Hell, most, are in part, if not altogether
under his power let them seem never so religious to man. To instance this, I
have read of a people called Coord^s, that worship the Devil; for say they, God
is a good man and will not hurt us, but the Devil is cross and will.

2. Satan may set and engage some to speak against sin very zealously, and yet
make them hugg sin in the heart. Who did prompt Judas to say, this ointment
might have been sold for much, and given to the poor? the spirit of God tells
you, it was the money Devil, John 12.4.6. he had no, more intent to releeve the
poor then I have to go barefoot to Rome. So the Lord tells the Prophet that many
came to hear him, and spoke well of his Doctrine as if it were sweet and a
lovely song to them, yet for all these fine words, their hearts went after
their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31. who did teach them to speak so hypocritically
but Satan, just thus have some now turned Quakers, formerly, confessed they
have received much good through my Preaching, I do readily believe, that in
times of Gospel light and liberty, Satan appears in no garb more then in
Hypocrites Apparel.

3. Satan may carry men to forsake many sins, and yet Pride, Ambition, may be
the end of that holiness, the Pharisees fasted that they might appear unto
men, Mat. 6.16, ambition was the end of their devotion. What made Absalon to
speak so fair to his fathers Subjects, saying, O that I were a King in Israel,
I would do right to all? a good pretense, yet ambition of the Crown was the
motive to such good speeches, as you may read; afterward he made war against
his father to dethrone him, 2 Samuel 15. and this is common amongst many men at
this day. And this is no riddle in Divinity to say that the Devil may lead men
to a holy action in show, and yet the end thereof sin; of this take one
instance more, what led King Herod to desire to worship Christ? nothing but
murder for he intended to kill him, Mat. 2.8.16.

4. The Devil may be said to lead men out to some good actions in appearance,
and yet the world may be the end thereof; what moved Demis to forsake the
Church, that has, moved many to be of the Church. As in these times blessed be
God, the Saints have liberty, yea have been preferred to honor, religion being
in fashion, which I desire may never be out of fashion, yet many will follow it
while the dole of worldly advantages goes therewith, and when they have gotten
sufficiently, or can get no more, they pull off their Vizards, and we find by
woeful experience too many are returned with the Dog and the Swine to their
Vomit and Wallowing in the mire, 2 Peter 2.22. I beseech the Lord enable us to
ken Satan's wiles this way, Ephesians. 6.11. what moved Judas to betray his Master,
that moved many to own him a while.

I shall not insist further on this matter, you see Satan may act men to some
good actions: I mean not which are (properly good) for so none but God can; but
so in appearance, as Christ told the Pharisees; that which is highly esteemed
amongst men (when the heart is naught) is abomination in the sight of God,
Luke 16.15.

Therefore you that fear the Lord, let not the seeming holy carriage of any
draw you, if so be you find their opinions are contrary to the Scriptures
especially if they deny fundamentals; for how can that man's conversation be
holy (before God) when he holds not fast the truths of Jesus Christ, remember
what Paul writes, if I or an Angel from Heaven preach another Gospel, Gal. 1.8.
you know a curse attends though he be as holy as Paul nay if he pretends to be
perfect without sin as an Angel, yet we must not believe him the more for that
any other Gospel, mark its unsound or cursed Doctrine that shall be preached by
any, contrary to what the Apostles did, then certainly this Salvation by the
light in us is cursed; for Paul nor any of his brethren, never taught any such
thing; where do you find one syllable of their bidding men turn into the light
in them, they preached faith altogether which relates to some object without
men.

Now God willing, I shall without partiallity give you my friends, especially
in and about Cardiffe, a faithful relation so far as I can remember of my
dealings with them, though I am a stranger in this County where I was called,
both by God and good men; yet am I made the chiefest mark of their shafts; I
know not why, unless it is because I formerly loved them too much, therefore
they will now hate the the more, and my residence amongst them lays me open to
their more often oppositions.

I did warn some amongst them to avoid the society of some whom I knew not
sound in the faith, yet they would plead for a liberty, which I feared would in
the end snare their souls, which is now woefully effected.

I have been four times publicly railed at, three times by one man, whereof
twice in one day at St. Andrews, and Licwith, at Cardiffe since that, and now
lately on the 16. October. being the Lords day at Cardiffe, by a young man, and
two women.

I never met with such a railing, reviling, brawling spirit, or heard the like;
they might give us as good language as the Angel did the Devil; but I think
they cannot bridle their tongues, James 1.26. such words as these I have had
from, them, thou Priest, deceiver, false Prophet, hireling, thou preachest
nothing but lies blind guide; with such a bed-role of junctives, that the
Oyster women of Billingsgate would blush to name; O Sirs is this the spirit of
Christ, which is a meek sweet, gentle, loving spirit, certainly their hearts
are not very clean, whose mouths are full of cursing and bitterness; yea the
poison of Asps, is under their tongues, Romans 3.13. they manifest Pride, and
passion sufficiently, the Lord rebuke them.

F. G. At Cardiffe on the 19 Septem. 1955. In discourse with a Quaker about the
Scriptures, I exhorted him to own them as Gods word, and it would be no
dishonor to Christ, he denied, saying often thou lie, they are not Gods
word, I said to deny them under this name was the way to derogate from truth;
and in time, this will lead us next not to use them at all, he gave most
intolerable revilings for this, that would have moved the tongue of the dumb,
but I bore all patiently through grace.

After that he held out perfection in this life from sin, I told him we are
free from sin only in respect of the guilt, Heb. 10.2. and power thereof, Romans
6.14. but not in respect of the seed or motion or act of sin: I confessed that I
had sin in me, he answered, then thon had none of Christ; for he that's born
of God does not commit sin, 1 John 3.9. I told him the word was does (not make
sin) it reigns not in him, but he would admit no interpretation thereof; then
said I does not the same. Apostle tell us, if we say we have no sin we deceive
our selves, and are liars, 1 John 1.8. his answer was, that word was spoken by
the carnal man. Friends I pray take notice he calls John the Apostle a carnal
man, because he confessed he had sin.

I could not make him acknowledge that Christ ascended with his body to Heaven,
but he did shift and evade the same.

After this, he came to St. Andrews, and when the Sermon was ended, he began
publicly to rail at me in the usual terms. And there denied any mediate call
to the ministry charged me with a lie, for saying Paul had sin after converted;
but I quoted the 7 Romans 13. to prove it, he would not hear; but fell to the
Fisher-womens weapons, so I left the place, but could not be rid of him.

Since this to silence their Rabshekah spirits, I often made a challenge to
dispute if they could find a man of reason or Scripture; for they commonly say
that Ministers preach nothing but lies; and indeed they deny any Minister or
Ordinances since the days of the Apostles: So that by their Doctrines the
blessed Martyrs in Queen Mary's days was no Ministers. Most abominable
Doctrine!

At last in answer to my challenge I received this Letter from a Quaker.

JOshuah Miller,
I being brought by Providence in the place where thee and Edmund Ellis were
together: And at my coming away thou did boast in challenging any of us whom
thou call Quakers, to dispute with thee: Appoint the time and place, and its
like some of them whom thou in scorn call Quakers, may be with thee to know
what thou have to lay to their charge.

From one who is known to thee by the name of Francis Gauler.
October. 11. 1655.

In answer to this, because I would not shun any occasion to own the truth, I
instantly sent this answer following in general to any of them.

LET him who has a spirit of love, meekness, and moderation, void of railings
and bitterness, judgings and condemnings, that can bridle his tongue, if any
such man be among you, if he will own these errors here set down, and dispute
for them, let me know it; and I shall God willing appoint the time and place.

1. That the light which God has given to every man that comes into the world
is sufficient to Salvation, without the help of any other means or discovery.
2. That the Scriptures are not the word and mind of God to us, but the
conditions of them that spoke them forth. 3. That spirits are not to be tried
by Scriptures. 4. That there ought to be no sense, meaning, or expounding the
Scriptures to the people. 5. That we are not justified by faith upon Christ's
death and resurrection, in what Christ purchased for us, but by what Christ
does in us. 6. That Christ ascended not into Heaven with the same humane body
he had on earth (though glorified.) 7. That the humane bodies of all men, after
death, shall not rise again at the day of judgment.
He that will undertake to maintain any or all of these, and will dispute them
by Scripture, send me word thereof.


F. G. Upon the next day at night, I received a long Letter from the same man,
whereby he would seem to justify some of the aforesaid opinions; but because
he could not spel my name, nor write true English, and much nonsense, I sent
the Letter back with this answer, that I would receive no Papers from him, for
I challenged a public dispute according to promise.

T. H. After this, on the 13 of October, came another Quaker into my house, who
in his Mummical posture sat down, I asked him his business, he said he came
to deny that John, Apostle John was not his Idol, as I had told him. I answered
thou speak falsely, I never told thee so, it seems my wife had spoken those
words, but his memory was not perfect; hereupon I entered into discourse with
him in hopes to convince him of his errors: And after about two hours
conference, I made him recant these four opinions.

1. 'That the light in every man is sufficient. 2. 'That Christ is in all men.
3. 'That the Scriptures are not Gods word. 4. 'That a converted man has no
sin.
Then I said go home and come no more into the Quakers company, you have now
denied their errors; for if you do I will look upon you as a dissembler, and a
hypocrite.

But the next morning he comes into my house with these words, I am come to
recant what I said yesterday, in that I said the Scriptures were the word of
God, now its an error; I asked him, who told him so? He answers, the witness
within me; then it seems the Scripture is no rule, but you must judge them: But
to be short with you, do you own them Gods Word, or not? He answers, no, its an
error. Then I took him by the shoulder to turn him out of my house, but he
would not go till my wife did use her strength to heave and thrust him forth,
and that with much ado.

So that they will say and unsay, affirm and deny, in a few hours; therefore
well are they compared to Waves to the Wind, being tossed to and fro with every
Doctrine, Jude 13. Ephesians. 4.14. And yet these men desire to be Teachers of the
Law whereas they know not what they say, nor whereof they affirm, 1 Timothy, 1.7.

All this, while while I received no answer of their accepting to dispute upon
any of the points before mentioned; but upon the 16 of the same month, being
the Lords day, in the midst of my Sermon at Cardiffe, where was about four
hundred people, came in three of the Quakers, namely, Mary Erberry, Elizabeth
Richards, and Francis Gauler with others; they again felto their railings
having nothing else to speak, so that I was hereby hindered from proceeding in
my, Sermon, the tumult could not be appeased: I told them again before all the
people, that I did there challenge any man that could dispute for any of the
opinions I sent them; but all in vain, two of the Aldermen, Mr. R. D. Mr. A. R.
desired me to come down, for my staying there was endless; for which I thanked
them for their love and care of me: But after I was gone forth, the Bayliffe
sent me a paper; Mary Erberry gave him for me, which contains a wild chase
answer to the seven points I sent them; but this was contrary to their promise
who accepted a dispute and now they think to, put it off with a paper argument.

Upon the next day the Bailiffs sent for them to the Hall, intending to commit
them as disturbers, according to Law; but at last they being over-byassed by
discourse, and their relations. As also F. G. to get off, told the Bailiffs I
had appointed the first meeting to dispute, and that was the first meeting;
which I protest before the Lord, Angels, and Men, is a most abominable
(Cretian lie) for I had no more discourse with them then what is here set down
in reference to any time concluded, here take notice for all their perfection,
this man had the brazen face to sin against God before the face of the
Magistrates; and by these tricks they obtained a dismission.

All this being the sum and substance of my discourse with them I am now cried
out for an answer to their paper, which I might refuse, but hold to the first
challenge of a dispute; but seeing none of them is of that ability to make a
Syllogism, who can neither speak or write true Orthography: I have for the
truths sake, and at the request of some of my Christian friends, and for the
satisfaction of all, in the subsequent pages, made a discovery and confutation
of the most horrid opinions held forth in their paper; and herein I shall pass
over all the revilings I find, together with what truth is spoken, I only
intend to extract the errors they maintain; and shall, the Lord assisting, set
them down in their own words, without the least variation of one syllable; and
I conceived it the more honorable and just, to set it forth in Print, 1. That
all might see and judge thereof; for in secret I will say nothing. 2. Because I
would not have my sense falsely interpreted by them, who have great heads and
little wit. 3. Because I know not whether they might put forth my Answer in
Print, according to their own private advantage who would stigmatize my words.
And this is the last answer I intend, God willing to make unto them, let them
write or speak what Satan will have them, for fools will be babbling, unless I
shall find some extraordinary call thereunto; and in this all that have wifedom
to judge aright will Acquiesce.

A Confutation of some most dangerous and damnable opinions, held forth and
maintained in a Paper sent me from the Quakers, on the 16 day of October. 1655.
signed in the names of Francis Gauler, John Mayo, Mary Erberry.
1. THat which thou call error, that the light which God has given to
every one that comes into the World, is sufficient to Salvation without the
help of any other means or discovery.
Answ The gift of God is perfect, and he has given Christ the light of the
World, which does enlighten every one that comes into the World. And this is
the true light which is able to the utmost to save them, and has not the God
of this world blinded thy eyes, who calls it an error, that the measure God
has given is not sufficient to salvation, without any other means or
discovery, as if Christ was not (the only, means) to Salvation. And now to the
light in thy Conscience I speak. which is the light of Christ, which discovers
thy evil thoughts, and makes manifest thy evil deeds, which will lead thee to
God, if thou hearken to it, which is sufficient. And thou that say it is an
error, to say that the true light which lightens every one that comes into the
World, is sufficient to lead to Salvation. Oh art not thou ashamed!

Confut. In answer to this, I shall divide what they say into three heads, and
pass their reiteration of the same thing, which is vain tautologie.

The sum of what they affirm in this answer is.

1. They affirm that Christ (under that name) does inlighten every man, and
hereby that Christ is in every man.

2. That this light Christ gives to all, is sufficient without any other means
or discovery.

3. That Christ is the means, and that there is no other means of Salvation.

Which are all three (as I shall prove by Scripture) Errors, if not damnable.

1. To the first I answer that Christ gives light to no man under that name,
but to him that believes. And this I have cleared in some Sermons at Cardiffe,
on John 1.9. for consider, its God as Creator inlightens all, but not as
Christ; for that name was never attributed to him, but as God man, the anointed
of God, for our redemption, as John 1.1. tells us, that this God does lighten
all. True, Christ is God, yet not as he is called Christ, for so he is a
Mediator, a middle person betwixt God and Man; therefore if they had said, God
as the Creator gives a light to all, I should agree: But under that appellation
as he is Christ, its unfound, and not to be received: And from hence will
follow that which I have noted, that then, Christ is in all men; which is so
directly contrary to Scripture, that unless men be in the dark, they will not
own.

Therefore he that said upon that word know you not that Christ is in you,
except ye are reprobates. 2 Cor. 13.5. [W. E.] made this interpretation, that
Christ is in all men, only they are ignorant thereof, went much wide from the
sense, and has helped the Quakers to this opinion.

I shall therefore briefly lay down two Arguments that evince the contrary,
drawn from Scripture, that Christ is not in all; and therefore, as Christ, does
not inlighten all.

Argum. 1. All in whom Christ is, have the spirit of Christ; but some have not
the spirit of Christ: Ergo, Christ is not in all (...)

The major is evident and needs no proof, for Christ and the spirit cannot be
divided.

The Minor, I am to prove, that all men have not Christ's sprit Judges 19, these
be they who separate themselves, having not the spirit; it any man have not the
spirit of Christ, he is come of his Romans 8.9. implying, that there are a sort
of men without the spirit, and consequently without Christ: so that this
argument is impregnable, if the Scripture be judge: as he that has a body
without a spirit is not a man; so he that is without the spirit of Christ, has
not Christ.

Argum. 2. He that has no faith, has not Christ; but some men have no faith,
therefore they have not Christ.

The major I prove by these Scriptures, Paul tells how he was in Christ, and
Christ in him, Gal. 2.20. The life I lead in the flesh, is by the faith of the
son of God, or upon him: he knew no other way of Christ being in himself, or
other men; therefore he prays for the Ephesians, that Christ might dwell in
their hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. yea it must needs argue Christ is in none but
by faith, because damnation is so often threatened to him that believes not.

The minor, that all men have not faith, its manifest by these two Scriptures.
Moses tells the people that they were children in whom was no faith, for they
sacrificed to new Gods, which new Gods were but old Devils, as read Deuteronomy.
3^.17.20. So Paul bids us pray that we may be delivered from unreasonable men;
for all men have not faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. therefore all men have not Christ
Faith is the hand that receives Christ; otherwise its a riddle to the Scripture
to aver that Christ is in him that wants faith: Lets take heed of adding to the
word, as such an opinion does, lest all the Plagues therein be poured our upon
us. And thus I pass to the second head in the first position; namely, that
this light is sufficient to save without any other means.

This opinion flatly contradicts the whole current of Scripture; for its no
where said the light in every man will save; but ^inely Paul tells us, that its
sufficient to excuse, accuse, and condemn, Romans ^.15. so that the Heathens who
have this light shall be condemned thereby, and not for their unbeleef.

For first this opinion affirms that we are saved by what is in us, which is too
near the Popes, to the Heathens that have it, deny Christ to this day. Consider
with me, how can this light in every man discover these three things?

1. That Christ was born of a Virgin, it must be faith to understand this,
which was a riddle to the wisest Philosophers; and in time if men follow this
light in them, they will come to deny the birth of Christ.

2. Will it tell this, that the World was made out of nothing? The wisest men
of old, said, ex nihilo, ni il fit; out of nothing, nothing can be made;
therefore Aristotle mocked at Moses, for saying God created all things out of
nothing; nay does not the Author to the Hebrews inform us, that by faith we
understand the World was framed, Heb. 11.3.

3. How will the light in every man convince of the resurrection and ascension
of bodies? Its an opinion in Philosophy, that nothing can move out of its
clement. Certainly the wise Heathen had a greater measure of the light in them,
which is the first (...) then I can think any men have now; they denied all
these with many more, which through faith we receive. And, truly, this opinion
leads us to the Heathen for our Gospel; but let them that will, go; for my part
I never intend to run to the Heathen for the Gospel. How did Apollo convince
the Jews, that Jesus was the Christ, by the light in them? no, but by the
Scriptures, Acts 18.8.

2. This opinion destroys all means of Salvat on; Yea it danies Christ to be an
absolute Savior, but only an outward means of Salvation.
for so is the third head, wherein they affirm, that Christ is the only means:
true, without Christ we cannot be saved; yet I would know where they read that
word that Christ is styled the means, and not Salvation it self: this is too
slight a word of Christ, and makes him but an instrument; whereas he is called
the Savior, the redemption, not the means of Salvation: this opinion denies
three things.

1. It denies all faith; for if my Salvation be by what is in me, then faith is
void; for what is seen is not faith, Heb. 11.1. Is not faith the instrument or
means of Salvation, often named in Scripture? We are saved by faith He that
believes shall be saved Mark 16.6 John 3.18. with diverse other places; though I
say faith justifies not as an act, but as it relates to the object of
justification, which is Christ; so that faith is the means to apprehend Christ,
who alone justifies us, in, and through faith.

2. This opinion denies Preaching to be a means of Salvation, directly contrary
to Paul's testimony thereof: It pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching, to
save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. but it seems these men are so wise, that
it pleases them, that Preaching shall not be a means of Salvation. read Romans
10.14, 15.17.

3. Then the Scriptures it seems are no means in their account, to what end was
they written here? A learned man tells you that the Scriptures are able to make
us wise to Salvation through faith in Christ, 2 Timothy 3.15. does not this
maintain other means besides Christ?

What can be said more to condemn this damnable Doctrine, that denies all
external means of Salvation? as if a man might be saved without Scriptures,
Preaching, or faith.

But I will end the Answer to the first error, or rather heresy, by giving
this distinction of a threefold light, which to me the Scripture warrants: The
first is, the light of nature or reason, this every man has. And this is meant
by that word John 1.9. yea this light it is, the Quakers contend for to be
sufficient, and this is but a comparative darkness to the second. And that you
may have not my words for the same Paul upholds this distinction: the Gentiles
which know not God, do by nature, the things contained in the Law. Where take
notice what does Paul mean by nature, nothing else but the light they have to
distinguish them from beasts; yet mark, he says they know not God for all this
light: So 1 Cor. 11.14. does not nature teach you? what can be more perspicuous
then, to signify the light which is natural, or common to all, without
exception?

2. Light is that of grace, which is through faith in Christ: and the first is
called the light of God; this second the light of Christ. Awake thou that
sleep, and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians. 5.14. he means here of a
secure sinner under Satan's power: so its said, he has redeemed or called us
out of darkness into his mavelous light. What Is this mavelous light? but
that of faith in bringing the sinner to Christ: The first light is no wonder,
because its common to all; this second is to be admired, because peculiar to
some, 1 Pet. 2.9.

3. Light is that of glory, which is the consummation and perfection of the two
former. And this I understand by that word of Christ, he that follows me
shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life, John 8.12. mark,
it speaks in the future tense, as if our life now was not full of light, that
is, totally freed from dark thoughts, evil motions, and the like: But the time
shall come, when he that follows me shall partake of a life without sin or any
darkness at all. Now let none mis-understand me, I do not say or mean that
there are three lights in God, but a threefold degree of the same light: as
the Sun shines not, nor heats not all over at first breaking forth so
gloriously as it does at noon: as there are three lights in the Firmament, yet
they are from one.

So this threefold light the Lord has made to manifest himself three ways; the
first was under and before the Law; the second was in the Gospel; and the third
is in glory.

The first light makes us men, the second light makes us Christian men, the
third glorified men: The first brings us under the rule of the Law; the second
brings us under the rule of Christ in the Gospel; and the last brings us to the
Kingdom of God in the Beatifical Vision: And I hope that we may safely
distinguish where the Scripture does. He that understands these three degrees
or measures of light, will be able to escape the snare the Fowler of this
opinion has laid for him.

I come now to the second That the Scriptures are not the word and mind of God
to us; but the conditions of them that spoke them forth.
Answ. In the beginning was the word, and the word was God, which was before
Scripture was written; neither was it in the beginning; and the Scripture is
but that which testifies of it. And here that which thou call error, is
owned, for the Scripture is one thing, and the word of God another thing; and
thou that have no knowledge of the mind of God but by Scriptures, do
manifest thy self, that thou have no better knowledge of God then the Heathen
which did write on their Altar, To the unknown God: And thou art not a Minister
of the spirit; who says, its an error to hold that the Scriptures are not the
Word of God. And thou that have no word of God, nor knows nothing of God but by
the Scriptures, declarest thy self that thou art a stranger to God and his word.

Confut. In this Answer you may see as in a glass, what they maintain: I shall
take it into three parts, and answer the same.

1. They aver the Scriptures not to be Gods Word; and what reason they give is,
because Christ is called the Word of God in diverse Scriptures; but will it
hence follow that we may not call the Scriptures Gods Word? no more then David's
calling himself, though Prophetically of Christ, a worm and no man makes him
the less a man, Psalm 22.6. did not the word of the Lord come to the Prophets?
and is not that word set down in diverse Chapters? as Jerem. 2, 1.7.1. Hosea
1.2. is not this the Word of the Lord to us, for our instruction though it came
first to them? was it the word of God then and not now? shall we take the
writings as the words of the Prophets or not rather the word of God spoken by
them?

Indeed here lies the distinction, Christ is the Original and Essential Word of
God; but the Scriptures are the Word of God declarative. What difference
betwixt a man's mind and his word? nothing but the word of man is the
Declaration of his mind, The Scripture must be either of these words.

1. The word of the Devil, or 2. The word of man, or 3. The word of God.
To say its the first, is Diabolical Blasphemy.

To aver the second is Idolatry.

But to hold the third is sound and sober Divinity: I will only give one plain
Argument from Scripture to prove it Gods Word.

Argum. If one command of God in Scripture is called Gods Word, then all the
commands of God in Scripture are and may be called Gods Word; But one command
is called Gods Word, Ergo.

The proving of the major, will ratify the minor without further
demonstration; for if I make appear that one command is styled the Word of God,
then it must needs follow the rest are so.

For proof hereof, read the words of Christ himself. Mark 7.10, 11, 12, 13.
where Christ quotes the fifth Commandment, and tells them, that some not
obeying that, in relieving their Parents, had made the word of God of none
effect. For Moses said in the Law Honor thy Father and Mother; and whosoever
curses Father or Mother, let him die the death; but ye say, if a man shall say
unto his father or mother, Corban, that is to say, its a gift, by whatsoever
thou might be profited by me, he shall be free. And ye suffer him no more to
do ought for his Father or Mother, making the Word of God of none effect by
your tradition; What was this Word of God they made of none effect, but this
fifth Commandment? no other sense can be put upon it. Now if Christ who is the
Essential Word, thinks it no disgrace to himself to call one command Gods Word,
I may safely call all the Commands Gods Word, having Christ my example; for he
makes two words, and is not Christ better able to tell us what we shall call
them then the Quakers? yea sure, let them prattle what they will, this testimony
is unanswerable. What word did Paul and Barnab is teach in the Synagogue, but
the Prophets? Acts 13.5. 2 Cor. 4 2. I doubt Atheism will creep in by such
unwholsom words. So came in Popery; yet to give them their due, the Quakers was
not the first that broached this opinion; for Swenckfeldius, that lived in the
16. Century, denied the Scriptures to be the Word of God; so that this is no
new light, but old error raked up from his writings. And let sober men judge
whether this is not the next step to make doubt of the truth of the Scriptures,
and then we shall be Heathens indeed.

2. Take notice how they set Christ and the Scriptures at variance; in saying,
the Scripture is one thing, and the Word of God another thing: do not they
divide? whereas Christ says they testify of him: and as he and God are one,
so is Christ and the Scriptures one; for they cannot be broken, John 10.35.

3. They compare all our knowledge of God by Scriptures, to no better then that
of the Heathens Inscription of the Altar: So that by this monstrous opinion of
theirs, we first worship an unknown God, while we do worship by the Scriptures.
Secondly, it follows that its Idolatry to worship him by the Scriptures; which
saying, to me is manifest blasphemy. Yea thirdly, we are all strangers to God
that thus know him, and we with all the Saints before us, that knew God in, and
by the Scriptures, are but Heathens, and so in a damnable condition; for these
are their word, And thou that know nothing of God but by the Scriptures,
thou art a stranger to God and his Word.

What need Paul exhort Timothy to give himself to reading, if no knowledge of
God was to be had thereby? 1 Timothy 4.13.

A Gentlewoman of repute, whom I judge to be faithful to Christ, told me, that
one of them sought to dehort her from reading the Scriptures, which it seems
this opinion allows. O how sad are these things! that the Lord has cast us in
such an age, wherein our ears shall hear one thus endeavor to pervert another:
had not the Quakers themselves all the knowledge they now abuse by the
Scriptures? O ungrateful men! yet some will pretend they have all the Bible in
them, and they never read it; which I dare boldly say, is a lie with a
witness. And this leads me to the third opinion,

That spirits are not to be tried by Scriptures.
Answ. And thou that say its an error to say that spirits are not to be
tried by Scriptures; thou art in the error, and do manifest thy self, that
thou would try the living by the dead.

Confut. The reason they give for this, namely, that God is called the searcher
and trier of hearts, this will stand them in no stead at all.

For I shall prove that the Scripture is the rule and touch of Doctrines by
this-Argument.

Argum. If we are to receive no other Doctrine but what is a greeable to
Scripture, then the Scriptures are the trial of Doctrines: But the Scriptures
commands us to believe no spirit or Doctrine, but according to them, Ergo.

The proof of the major resolves all, and the Fabric of this error falls,
Isaiah 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to
this word, its because there is no light in them. What Is the Law and Testimony,
but Moses and the Prophets, which was to be the rule of judging Doctrines? And
mark, though men might pretend that they had a light in them, and therefore
would not be tried by the Scriptures. The Prophet plainly tells us, The Church
of Rome holds this opinion that spirits must not be tried by the Scriptures.
that its no light at all, its rather a ground of darkness in them.

And Luke did ill in those Quakers account, to commend the Bereans, for being
so noble as to search the Scriptures, to know and try Paul's Doctrine, whether
it was agreeable thereunto, Acts 17.11. are we not bid to try the spirits? and
how must that be? By a light in us. O strange unheard of Doctrine! yet why say
I unheard of? the old Enthusiast, hold thus, and thence came in visions, and
immediate revelations with him, as does begin now: Some saying, they have the
Scripture by immediate Revelation. Or we have a more sure word of the Prophets.
See Ursin chat. p. 35.
Let us view that word of 2 Peter 1.19. We have also a more sure word of
Prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed, as unto a light shining in a dark
place, until the day dawn, and day star arise in your hearts.

What Is this sure word of Prophecy Peter would have the Jews that were
believing take heed to or keep, but the Prophets which was more certain, then
any voices or revelations? and therefore be careful ye receive no other
Doctrine but agreeable to the Scriptures. How long must we take heed to them?
until the dawn or day star arise? that is, until Christ rise in, and raise up
your hearts to perfect glory; for the day star and day dawning, are the Ushers
in of perfect day. So to me the Scriptures is our rule, till Christ bring us to
the day of perfect glory, where shall be no more night; until then keep to the
Scriptures, as the more sure word then all Visions or the like: And this is
safest, for every man to suspect his own spirit and opinion, that its not from
God, if it concurs not with the Scriptures.

And this dark place is our hearts.

Verily, I much fear that the next step such people will take, will be, that
they may write as Authentic Letters as the Apostle Paul, and as good
Scripture: of this opinion was the old Cataphrygians from Montanus their
Leader, in the year of Christ, 145. who held that he had a greater measure of
the spirit, then the Apostles had, therefore might make new Scripture.

For the Scriptures being a dead Letter, as they say, we know how to understand
better then they, having been many years in Christ, before most of them knew
any thing of God.

For the Letter kills not of it self, but by an accident, as Romans 7.12, 13,
14.

The fourth Error they seem to own, is that there ought to be no sense,
meaning, nor expounding the Scripture to the people.
As to this as all the rest, they begin as Conjurers do, with many good words,
but in the middle lies the poison, when they say.

Answ. And whilst thou puts meanings and senses to that which was given forth
by the Holy Ghost: do not thou discover that thou have not the same spirit
that gave them forth? for the Epistles and Writings of the Apostles was given
to be read in such a place, to such a people, and not to make a Trade of them,
as thou do.

Confut. In this they deny any interpretation of Scripture, because say they,
we have not the same spirit that gave them forth, which I deny; for the spirit
is given to every Believer to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. though we have not
the same measure of the spirit the Apostles had, yet the Lord has left us
sufficient to understand the Scriptures by. Has the Lord left in the Church to
that end Pastors and Teachers? and have not they Gods spirit? Ephesians. 4.8.11. Gal.
4.6. 1 Cor. 12.3. but the truth is, they would have no opening the Scripture at
al, as by their writing Pamphlets does appear.

Whereas did not Ezra wade, and give that sense of the Law? Nehem. 8.7, 8. did
not Christ expound? Isaiah 61.1. Luke 4.17.22. for all wondered at the gracious
words that came from him: which intimates he Preached from that Scripture. So
read, Luke 24.27. after his resurrection, he opened the Scriptures concerning
himself. Did not Philip? Acts 8.32.35. expound Isaiah 55.7. to the Eunuch? read
also how many Scriptures Paul expounded and opened Acts 13.33. he opened the
2d. Psalm, as also Isaiah 55.3. so he gave the sense of Psalm. 16.10. Acts
13.36. when Paul was brought Prisoner to Rome, he expounded both the Law and
the Prophets, Acts 28.23. So that what the Minister does now in taking a Text,
and opening thereof, is warranted by the former practices.

In that the Quakers say, the Epistles was written to such a people: in that
they say true; but what would they infer hence? therefore they are not for us
to use or Preach upon; they may say the like of all the rest of the Scriptures;
but if they would have no interpretation of Scriptures, what will they say of 2
Peter 3.6. who says, that in Paul's Epistles are many things hard to be
understood, which the unlearned and unstable wrest as they do other Scriptures
to their own destruction? whereby I gather that even in Paul's Epistles many
things are mystical, and must be opened in the spirit of wisdom. Alas, if no
expounding Scriptures, then will they take these in the Letter, John 3.4. How
can a man be born again? shall he enter again into his Mothers Womb? Cut off
thy right hand, pull out thy right eye. I have read of some that understood
this in the letter, and did pull out their eye; but if they had let it alone,
the Scripture had not been broken. What misery fell upon the Jews, because they
did not better expound Christ's words, Destroy this Temple, and I will raise it
in three days?

I might call a Cloud of witnesses in this case.

Therefore let them say what they will, God has owned the way of expounding
and opening Scriptures, to the conversion of thousands as Seals to the
Ministry: And herein I bless God I am not without witness in the hearts of
some at this day; yea some of them now turned enemies to truth, have openly
owned me as the instrument in Gods hand, for their good (I speak it with grief)
and to their shame; to the intent if God will give them grace to repent of
their errors and hypocrisy 2 Timothy 2.25.

Now I come to the fifth, which you shall see whether they own or not.

5. That which thou call error that we are not justified by faith upon
Christ's death and resurrection, in what Christ has purchased for us, but by
what Christ does in us.
Answ To this they answer seemingly fair; yet as the Pox Herod did to Christ,
so do they with the truth. The Saints say they were justified by faith, and its
Christ that justifies; and he that has the faith of Christ lives in him: But
the faith and justification which stands in the comprehension and conceiving of
Christ without, will stand thee in no stead. And thou that puts the Scriptures
for the word, art not justified at all, but art under the condemnation; and had
not thou been a reprobate, thou would have known Christ in thee.

Confut. I confess in this answer of theirs they contradict themselves often,
one while affirming and denying: I know this before them, that Christ is in the
Believer, and that its that Christ justifies, but not by his being in us; for
so they would have it, by telling us, that the faith which stands in the
conceiving Christ without, will stand us in no stead. I wonder first how all
the Patriarchs and Prophets was justified before Christ came, but in conceiving
Christ without? And where did the Apostles teach such Chemical Doctrine as
this? so that to me, this opinion of theirs totally rejects justification upon
Christ's death without us, which is directly, contrary to the following
Scriptures: Who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our
justification, Romans 4.25. Being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved
from wrath through him, Romans 5.9. But now once in the end of the World has he
appeared, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself; its needless to heap
Scriptures to prove this which is as clear as the Sun. What a riddle is that in
Divinity, for them to say, we are justified by faith, and that upon Christ,
within is this faith or sight, what I have in poffession, I need not believe I
have it, for I know it? this is sense and not faith; therefore they speak
nonsense. The Prophet tells us by his stripes we are healed, but they make all
Christ did, but a Pattern and example, which is an old heresy newly revived;
it seems all the faith of the Apostles will stand them in no stead by this
Doctrine, for they never did Preach justification by what is done in us, but by
Christ without us, read Romans 5.10. Heb. 9.14.15. Alas, what need Christ to have
taken upon him our nature, and suffer such mighty persecutions as he did, if he
hereby did not perfect Salvation for us; or as if such a faith as lies upon his
merits were invalid, as the Quakers would make it? I must tell you plainly,
that I had rather live amongst Heathens, that never heard of Christ nor the
Scripture, then with such people, who after they have had all their knowledge
of God and Christ through the Scriptures, and the preaching thereof, should now
vilify them and blaspheme them: Yea, some pretend that they should have known
as much, if they had never read the Scriptures. O detestable Doctrine! and
ungrateful men thus to despise the outward means of Salvation: how many Saints
of old and in Queen Mary's days, sacrificed their lives for this very truth
now opposed?

What difference betwixt Popery and this opinion? for that which he calls
justification by works or inherent grace; that they call Christ. I make no
question but the Pope will give them his blessing for this; yea, and Canonize
them as Saints also. Now Antichrist works (...), and is within men indeed. I am
sure if he be (...), they are Mystical Antichrist John tells us, that Antichrist
was in the world in his time; which was before the Pope or Pap^^^ had a being
many years, 1 John 2.18. this of justification by a righteousness within us,
is man's grand Idol, and Christ's arch enemy. O beloved! take heed of losing your
faith on Christ's satisfaction to God for you, without you, lest you hereby at
once lose all your comfort.

To the sixth opinion, that Christ ascended not to Heaven with the same body he
had on earth, though glorified.
Answ. To this they make an equivocal answer in these words, concerning Christ's
body, as the Devil contended about the body of Moses. And if thou have ears to
hear thou may hear, the same is he that descended, has also ascended, who
is a spirit, that says the flesh profits nothing, etc.

Consut. Wherein I easily perceive, they speak like the blind Oracles of
Delphos, which shows their hearts not right in this matter.

1. They imply ye might as well say, I am a Devil for disputing about Christ's
body; for so they make the comparison.

2. It seems that as the Devil nor none could find Moses body to this day,
Deutr. 34.6. so Christ either has no body, or else its not to be found, truly
this sense I most in charity make of their words, yea I have sufficient ground
to believe, that some do deny Christ ascended with his body, whereas, Acts
1.11, 12. Men and Brethren why stand ye gazing? this same Jesus which ye see go
up into Heaven, shall so come, etc. Christ ascended with a body, because they
saw him with their natural eyes; for a spirit is not seen in that manner. Our
vile bodies shall be made like to his glorious body, Phil. 3.21. Paul it seems
knew that Christ's body was glorified and affirms the resurrection of the Saints
bodies to the same glory. Job longs before Christ came in the flesh, believed
that he should with his eyes, yea and in his flesh, see the God-man Christ
Jesus at last, Job 19.26. there is one Mediator betwixt God and Man the man
Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. mark, Paul affirms it in the present tense, not there
was, as if his humane nature was vanished; but there is still the man Christ:
its needless to spend time in proving so plain and glorious a truth; but that
I find some question it, and others deny it: yet the first fathers of this
Heresy, was above 1500, years agone. Ap^lles, a Syrian by birth, taught that
Christ only ascended with his spirit, and left his body to return to the earth.

And if Christ's body did not ascend, as some would have it, then the bodies of
the Saints shall not ascend; and this must necessarily follow: But as to that
they give me no answer by way of justification: therefore I will not treat of;
supposing here is sufficient delivered for confutation of six most damnable
Heresies, which its evident by their words, they maintain, unless they will
confess and deny in an hour, as some of them have learnt the Act of
dissimulation, equivocation, and mental reservation, indifferent well already.

Therefore my humble request to all Gods people, especially to those in the
County of Glamorgan, with bleeding hearts, consider the Blasphemies vented
forth, yea, and publicly owned and pleaded for by some men; and shall not
Ministers Preach and Pray against these things? Shall Quakers have their
liberty, and we be deprived of ours by their revilings, even in the times of
our exercise? In the paper they sent me they deny disputing, for indeed they
cannot, for their mouths are full of railings; so that Argumentum Baco alinum,
is the fittest way to deal with them. As Agur said of himself, may well be
applied to them, surely they are more brutish then any man, and have not the
understandings of a man, Prove. 30.2. And in contending with them, I have fought
with beasts, not at Ephesus, as Paul did; but at --

What monstrous Doctrine is this? to suffer women to be Preachers by way of
authority, condemned as against nature Isaiah 3.12. 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. 1 Timothy
2.12.14. this opinion was first held by the Pepuzians, that women might Preach;
because they wickedly affirmed Christ assumed the form of a woman, and not of a
man. In France, they allow not a woman to be a ruler over the affairs of men's
goods: But with us some women will be rulers over, and directers of men's
consciences; for so amongst the Quakers, women commonly teach as well as men.

1. I will touch now upon some of their less trivial matters: At first they
keep a stir about the Ministers going into the Pulpit, saying he is a Pharisee
for that; verily, if Ezra the Scribe was alive, they would call him Pharisee
also, for going into his Pulpit, Neh. 8.4. is not that the most convenient
place for the people to hear: So they quarrel about words to no purpose, Paul
condemns such strifes, 1 Timothy 6.4. 2 Timothy 2.14. avoid such contendings.

2. F. G. As for thee and thou to one person, its indifferent to me, but when
they lay a command upon it. As one did in discourse with me, I asked him where
was the command? (he said) the firth Commandment says, Thou shall honor. I
told him the command was not to the word thou, but the honoring of Parents,
which I feared he did not; yet read John 1.51. where Christ says you to
Nathaniel. Again what a noise have we about putting off the Hat with them, as
if respect was to be showed to none? wherein they miserably wrest that
Scripture, that he who respects person, finneth. Which is meant principally
for Magistrates, and such as sit in the seat of judgment, and condemns only
partiality, but there is a civil respect to all men, Honor all men, 1 Pet.
2.17. let them read that word if they dare, Levit. 19.32. Thou shall rise up
before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man, and fear God; it
seems by this that little fear of God dwells in the heart when honor and
respect is denied to the ancient, seeing God calls himself the ancient of
days, Dan. 7.9. And for their horrid a buse of Christ Ministers, we can best
bear it. seeing we should have most patience. Paul did teach Timothy another
lesson, the Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor especially they
that labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 3.17. Heb 13.17. But all the dirt
and plagues they cast on the faithful Ministry, will fall upon their own heads;
for the younger not to honor the elder, and ruler, is threatened as a turse,
which I think in these men is now manifest. Did not the Lord by Isdiah the
Prophet complain of this, that the Child shall be have himself proudly against
the Ancient, and the Base against the Honorable? Isa. 3.5.6. read but what
evils and Tyrannies fell on the State of the Jews after this, therefore we know
through grace, how rightly to divide the word of truth in this case, better
then the Quakers, for all their immediate calls, 2. Tim. 2.15.

Thirdly, I have observed the strange kind of Apish postures they appear in,
sometimes like the Swine, looking and bending to the earth, then staning and
raving like the men in Bedlam, anon they go with bended back, arms infolded,
thus mocking the Lord their Maker, that has made them otherwise; sometimes
they weep and howl Pharisee like to he heard of men. As if they were in Hell
already, for Christ tells us the damned shall so do, Matthew. 34.51. besides the
disfiguring their faces makes them Pharisees, Mat. 6.16.

I wonder much at their weepings, if they have no sin, as some of them affirm.

Again, I have heard them hum like a swarm of Bees, as if Beelzebub, the God of
Flies was there. Well dear Christians some of you have read the life of Kilpin
a great Quaker, but lately brought back to Christ. How he manifests that he was
often possessed with the Devil: As also you have heard of the fly that came to
two men in a Bed at Wrexham. Lets be warned by these things to hold fast to
Christ's person, keep your faith and profession without wavering, Heb. 10.23.
Lets not be Rubenites unstable as water, for we shall not excel, Genesis 45.4.

I beseech you to conform to wholesome words of the Lord Jesus, 1 Timothy 6.3. for
Popery came in at this door. And unless our God prevent it, Heathenism will
creep in the same way.

Secondly, I advise you to withdraw from the company of these men; and in so
doing you will keep the Scripture rule, and find much peace and comfort in your
soul. An Heretic after the first and second admonition reject, Titus 3.10.
though I believe many are not Heretics amongst them; but are like silly
sheep-meerly-deluded, pity them, and pray for their return; yet take heed of
touching Pitch lest you be defiled therewith; if any man brings not the
Doctrine of Christ, receive him not into your house, nor bid him God speed, 2
Epist. John 10. if many had kept this word, they might have-been kept from the
hour of Temptation, that now has overtaken them, we are forbid to keep company
with a railer too, 1 Cor. 5.11. As these men are.

Thirdly keep and ask for the old paths, not in which wicked men have trod, but
all the Saints before you; many have lost their zeal to contend for the faith,
Jude 3. truly they have need to be inquired after, Jerem. 6.16. the
indifferency of spirit about Christ, his Ordinances and Ministry, has
exceedingly hurt the souls of many, take heed lest that word Jerem. 18.15. fall
to your share, because my people have forgotten me, they have burnt incense to
vanity: and they have caused them to stumble in their ways. to walk in a way
not cast up; mark, how full this Scripture is to condomn such people as bring
such opinions, that was never cast up by the Apostles and Prophets, for they
never bid men turn into the light within; no nor never said to any man, to the
light in thy conscience I speak; this word was unheard of till now, neither is
there any such expression in all the Scripture.

To sum up my discourse, I understand that Popery and vain Philosophy, is the
foundation of their religion, the Jesuits without doubt are unknown to them,
and us, amongst them; the Lord reveal this man of sin, and I question not but
he shall not be hid.

In order to this, take this relation Ireceived from good hands.

A Gentleman of this County upon the Road meets with one that seemed a stranger
to him, they fell in discourse upon the Quakers, the stranger justified them to
be a people of the highest light, and holiest conversation: After this he owned
and justified Transubstantiation also; and this man is since found to be one
Baras, supposed to be a Romish Priest, its more then suspicious, they are nean
of kin to the Pope, when his Emissaries will plead for them; for I am sure they
condemn the true Protestants, as Heretics.

Seeing they are against all Ministers, as Antichristan; the Pope laughs in his
sleeve at this, for he has told them so; for this is known to all men of
understanding, that the Church of Rome denies any Gospel Ministry in England;
therefore the Pope and the Quakers in this agree.

And that you may without spectacles, see, that his Agents are not strangers
amongst them; take this following relation, as a most evident demonstration
hereof.

The Information of Geo. Cowlishaw, Ironmonger of the City of Bristol, taken
before the Magistrate of the said City. On the 22. Janu. 1654.
WHo informs upon oath, that in the month of Sept. last, this informant had
some discourse in Bristol with one Mr. Coppinger an Irish man, formerly a
School fellow of his, that came thither purposely for his Passage into Ireland
who told this informant that he had lived in Rome and Italy this 8 or 9 years;
and had taken upon him the order of a Friar of the Franciscan Company; and he
told this Informant that he had been at London lately for some months; and
whilst he was there, he had been at all the Churches and meetings, public,
and private, that he could hear of. and that none came so near him as the
Quakers: and that being at a meeting of the Quakers, he there met with two of
his acquaintance in Rome, the which two persons were of the same Franciscan
order and company, and were now become chief Speakers amongst the Quakers; and
that he himself had spoken among the Quakers in London about 30 times and was
well approved of amongst them. And this Informant further says, that the said
Coppinger asked him, what kinds of opinions of religion there was in Bristol;
and the said Informant told him there were several opinions and judgments, the
said Coppinger asked him whether there had been any Quakers in Bristol: and the
said Informant, said, no: whereupon the said Coppinger told him 2. or 3. times,
that if he did love his religion, and his Soul he should not hear them.
Whereupon this Informant told him, that he thought none of them would come to
Bristol: who expressly replied, that if this Informant would give him five
pounds he would make it five hundred pounds, if some Quakers did not come to
Bristol within three weeks, or a month, then following. And on the morrow the
said Coppinger departed for Ireland, his native place; and about 18 days after;
there came to this City two persons, bearing the name of Quakers.

This matter is well known to many in the City, that this Oath was taken by the
foresaid person: only John Audland in his Paper against Mr. Farmer, says,
that they were in Bristol before the time herein mentioned; which may well be,
and yet Mr. Cowlishaw speak true; that they were not there to his knowledge.
And herein I leave all men whose wits are not bewildred with fancies to judge
whether this man's testimony upon Oath is to be believed, before all their
railings and paper denials.

These things are for our warning to take heed of this mystical Antichrist in
man, who appears under all forms; to the intent to destroy both forms and
religion also; when they call all our worship of God but Idolatry, which
opinion is an absolute point of the Papacy to this very day.

And to believe or think our justification is by some thing wrought in us; is
that Antichrist whose name is, Mystery; Babylon the great, the mother of
Harlots, which John saw in his Vision, Rev. 17.5. and this was before any Pope
appeared in the World; therefore beloved remember that there is a twofold
Antichrist in the World, Literal and Mystical; the one all have heard of, the
other few believe, because its inward and less dissemblable, and this is that
Antichrist now amongst the Quakers, who say in these words: But the faith and
justification which stands in the comprehension and conceiving Christ without,
will stand thee in no stead. I leave every understanding Christian to judge,
whether this affirmation be not a denial of Salvation, by the blood and
satisfaction of Christ: But this I have fully answered before; only I request
all that love their Souls to take heed, for there are many Christ's now in the
world. Mat. 24.5. Grace and Peace be with all that love the Lord Jesus.

An APPENDIX.
I Conceive it not amiss to give a brief answer to that act of their quaking
fits; the ground they have, is because the Prophets did so. But to this I shall
answer in a few particulars.

First for Moses quaking, remember the occasion thereof, and the place where it
was, even at Mount Sinai, and the terror of the sight was thundrings and
lightnings, the noise of Trumpets, the Mountain smoking, Exodus 20.18. now this
is no pattern to us unless we live at Sinai; for the Author to the Heb.
12.21. says we are not come to Sinai, but to Zion, where is no more such
terrors, and legal tremblings; and to me, Moses quaking at that time, was the
weakness of his Faith, as well as the peoples, which practice we must not
follow in their fears and amazements, if we be the sons and daughters of Zion.
And verily, to judge charitable of some called Quakers, I think they are gone
back with the Galathians to the Law of Moses; only some opinions they hold
even contrary to that Law.

Secondly, for the Prophets quaking, we read of three especially; but they are
not examples to us, for what they did was for signs. As Jerem. 23.9. he did
tremble in respect of the Adulteries and swearings of the people, being amazed
to think what judgments should fall upon them for their sins. And Ezekiel. also
chapter 12.18. he was commanded to eat his bread and drink his water with quaking,
the reason in the next verse he gives is for a sign of the desolat on and
famine that should come upon the Israelites and their Cities. So Habbakkuk. did
quake also at the high consideration of Gods Wonders in the Sea for the
Children of Isreal's deliverance; so that to me here is no ground for example to
us, unless some will pretend to be Prophets, by foretelling things to come,
which I shall never believe, until they can manifest a better Commission, then
I see they have; therefore lets not wonder if you hear some go naked also
because Isaiah did; for believe it, they may as well attempt to walk on the Sea,
as Peter did too; but how they condemn us for taking the Prophets and Apostles
words and preaching them to the people; and yet themselves take the Prophets
signs, and would imitate them in doing the same; but remember Christ tells us,
that an evil and adultrous generation seeks after signs even such as Adulterate
the precious truths of Christ, Mat. 12.39. Yea they would willingly be
Prophets, if the people would but account them so, then they might thunder us
with Bell, Book, and Candle like the Pope, as they do pretty well already,
because we receive not their Doctrine.

Thirdly trembling of the body was never commanded, nor yet used as a sign of
conversion, as the Quakers make it, some saying they were never converted til
now. Indeed I read only of Paul's trembling, Acts 9.5, 6. at the voice, when
going to Damascus, which did arise only from a terror and fear, being at once
struck to the earth, and blind his conversion; was after this in a miraculous
way, and one Swallow, makes not a Summer. So you read the Jailer trembled at
the Earthquake for fear of the loss of his prisoners. So Foelix trembled at
Paul's speaking of judgment, yet went away the same man, Acts 24.25. So that
sin was not the ground of trembling in these men.

Fourthly, neither did the Apostles preach such Doctrine: how many do you find
that thus trembled corporally at their preaching? Verily, you may put their
names all in a Ring; but for men now to make it necessary, yea a sign of
conversion to quake, the Apostles themselves are strangers to this: Sure the
conversion of some with us, is very sudden, if quaking be a sign: but Paul's
words satisfy me that there is nothing of God, yea no profit in such motions of
the flesh; for bodily exercise profits nothing 1 Timothy 4.8. I have seen
counterfeit Beggars in London, that would artificially shake their whole body
for money; without doubt, if they came among the Quakers, they might pass for
good converts.

Fifthly, neither can I read any quakings of the former Prophets above once and
that for signs: but behold these do it often; yea, I admire at one thing, why
they tremble, seeing some of them affirm they have no sin; herein their very
practice and opinions are riddles even to themselves. So that out of their
mouths the most just hand of God touches them, that they shall fear where no
fear is, Psalm. 53.5.

And for the Scripture bidding us work out our Salvation, with fear and
trembling, signifies not a bodily one, but that of the heart as Elihu tells us,
Job 37.1. which is an awful reverence of Gods presence in the beholding all our
actions, but slavish fear is excluded, Luke 1.74 he has delivered us from the
hands of our enemies, that we might serve without fear.

Lastly, trembling (sometimes) is an effect of Gods wrath, which a believer is
freed from, Jer. 10.10. at his wrath the earth shall tremble; so that the
Devils tremble at the wrath of God, and the execution of his Justice upon them,
James 2.19. how far this quaking differs? or how near kin its to that of
Satan's, and hypocrites? he that has an eye may resolve: the Lord tells us that
fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites Isa. 33.14. And if so, then trembling
as an effect of fear will follow, so that in this act of their quaking, they do
no more then the Devil, and wicked men from slavish fear, and legal frights did
before them.

But where perfect love is, it casts out this fear which has torment, 1 John
4.18 for unbelief is one of the proper causes of all such motions, whether it
be in Saints or Sinners.

By all this its evident, that their quaking is not from the Prophets, seeing
they did it for signs, and but once: I will not wish that which David did
prophetically to Christ's enemies, to fall on them.

Let their eyes be darkened that they see not, and make their loins continually
to shake, Psalm. 69.23. truly poor souls their eyes are too much darkened
already; therefore I beg of God, they may be opened to see their error, nor can
I desire their loins should continually shake, for that is as great a judgment
as the former; but affectionately request that they may shake no more: yet I
will comfort my self with this, though the Mountains do shake and tremble with
them. Though great men should quake too, for they are Mountains; yet I will not
fear, Ps. 46.3.3. but shall through grace with the humble Saints of Christ
(stand still) and see the salvation of God, Exodus 14.13.

FINIS.

