A MESSAGE SENT FROM THE OFFICERS and SOLDIERS IN THE ARMY, TO THE Kings
Majesty in the Isle of Wight, on Wednesday November. 22. 1648. Communicating
their last and final Resolutions, touching their disposal of his Royal
Person. And their Remonstrance and Proposalls, for the executing of speedy
Justice, upon King, Lords, and Commons, who have acted contrary to the trust
reposed in them by the People.

With the Charge of the Army thereupon, and their Articles of High Treason.

BY the appointment of his Excellency, the Lord General, and the general
Council of Officers.

Signed, John Rushworth Secr.



London, Printed for R. Williamson, and are to be sold in St. Danstons
Churchyard, near Temple-Barre, 1648.

The Armies Message and Remonstrance.
Whereas we have endeavored to Remonstrate the danger and evil of the way
you are in, and cleared the way unto what we have to propose, we shall with the
same plainness and faithfulness, give you our apprehensions of the remedies;
for which purpose upon all the reasons and considerations aforegoing, we
proceed to offer, as follows.

First, we conceive and hope, that from what has before been said, you may
find abundant cause to forbear any further proceeding in this evil and most
dangerous Treaty, and to return to your former grounds in the Votes of
Non-addresses, and thereupon proceed to the settling and securing of the Kingdom
without and against the King, upon such foundations as hereafter are tendered;
but if notwithstanding all the evils and dangers remonstrated to lie even in
the Treaty it self, you will ye proceed in such an evil way, we shall at least
desire that you make sure to avoid that main venom and mischief attending it.
viz. The Kings restitution with impunity, etc. and that imperfect bargaining
for partial justice against inferior offenders; And for the avoidance of
these, we propound.

1. That you would reject those demands of the King, sent to you on his and his
Parties behalf, and (especially in relation to that concerning his restitution
or return to London with freedom, etc.) that it may be expressly declared and
provided by you, that, notwithstanding any thing concluded, or to be concluded
in this Treaty, the Person of the King may, and shall be proceeded against in a
way of justice, for the blood spilt, and the other evils and mischiefs done by
him, or by his Commission, Command or Procurement, and in order thereto shall
be kept in safe custody as formerly.

2. That for other Delinquents you would lay a side that particular bargaining
Proposition, which as we understand, the King has refused in the terms you
offered, and whereby all your justice and mercy too would be rendered, to be
dependant upon particular contract, with, and grant from the King; and not upon
the judicial power of the Kingdom in Parliament; We therefore desire.

1. That that capital and grand Author of our troubles, the Person of the
King, by whose Commissions, Commands, or procurement, and in whose behalf, and
for whose interest only, (of will and power) all our Wars and troubles have
been, (with all the miseries attending them,) may be speedily brought to
justice, for the treason, blood and mischief, he is therein guilty of.

2. That a timely and peremptory day may be set for the Prince of Wales, and
the Duke of York, to come in and render themselves, by which time (if they do
not) that then they may be immediately declared incapable of any Government, or
trust in this Kingdom, or the Dominions thereunto belonging, or of any kind of
Right within the same, and thence to stand exiled for ever, as enemies and
traitors, to dye without mercy, if ever after found and taken therein;) or if
by the time limited, they or either of them do render themselves, that then the
Prince for his Capital Delinquency (being in appearance next unto his
Fathers,) may either be proceeded against in justice, or remitted, according as
upon his appearance he shall give satisfaction or not; concerning his being
drawn into the rebellious engagements, he has appeared to head; and the Dake,
as he shall give satisfaction, or not concerning his carriage in and since his
going out of the Kingdom (being without leave) and in opposition or contempt of
the Parliament and to the prejudice of the public peace,) may accordingly be
considered as to future trust, or not; But (however) that the Estate and
Revenue of the Crown may be sequestered, and all the matter of costly pomp or
state suspended for a good number of years, while the desola ion and spoils of
the poor people made, by and in behalf of that Family, and for that vain
interest (the state and greatness thereof) may be in good measure repaired, or
recovered; And that the Revenue (saving necessary allowances for the Childrens
maintenance, and to old Servants and creditors of the Crown, not Delinquents)
and also the 100000 l. per annum, Voted to the Crown in Liew of the Court of
Wards, may for those years be disposed toward public charges, debts and
damages for the easing and lessoning of the peoples Contributions toward the
same; so as the Estates neither of the friends to public interest, nor alone
of the inferior Enemies thereto, may bear wholly the burden of that loss and
charge, which by and for that Family, the Kingdom or the good people thereof
have bin or (for future security) shall be put unto.

3. That for further satisfaction to public justice, Capital punishment may
be speedily executed upon a competent number of his chief instruments also,
both in the former and latter War, and (for that purpose) that some such, of
both sorts, may be pitched upon to be made examples of justice in that kind, as
are really in your hands or reach, so as their exception from pardon, may not
be a mockery of Justice in the face of God and men.

4. That the satisfaction of Arrears to the Soldiery. with other public
debts. and the competent reparation of public Damages, (especially and
primarily of such as voluntarily engaged for, and have constantly adhered to
the common Cause, and suffered for the same) may be put into some orderly and
equal, or proportionable way, etc.

Now (after public justice, had therewith the present quieting of the Kingdom
thus far provided for) we proceed in order, to the general satisfaction, and
settling of the Kingdom, as follows.

1. That you would set some reasonable and certain period to your own power, by
which time that great and supreme trust reposed in you, shall be returned into
the hands of the people, from, and for whom you received it; that so you may
give them satisfaction and assurance, that what you have contended for, against
the King (for which they have been put to so much trouble, cost, and loss of
blood) has been only for their Liberties and common Interest, and not for your
own personal Interest, or power.

2. That (with a period to this Parliament, to be assigned as short as may be,
with safety to the Kingdom, and public interest thereof) there may be a sound
settlement of the peace, and future Government of the Kingdom, upon grounds of
common Right, Freedom, and safety, to the effect here following.

1. That from the end of this, there may be a certain succession of future
Parliaments (Annual, or Bienniall) with secure provision.

1. For the certainty of their meeting, sitting, and ending.

2. For the equal distribution of Elections thereunto, to render the House of
Commons, as near as may be, an equal Representative of the whole people
electing.

3. For the certainty of the peoples meeting (according to such Distributions)
to elect, and for their full freedom in elections, provided, That none who have
engaged, or shall engage in War, against the right of Parliament, and interest
of the Kingdom therein, or have adhered to the enemies thereof, may be capable
of electing, or being elected (at least during a competent number of years) nor
any other, who shall oppose, or not join in agreement to this settlement.

4. For future clearing and ascertaining the power of the said Representatives;
in order to which, That it be declared, That as to the whole interest of the
people of England) such Representatives have, and shall have the supreme power
and trust, as to the making of Laws, Constitutions, and Offices, for the
ordering, preservation, and Government of the whole; and as to the altering,
and repealing, or abolishing of the same, the making of War, or peace; and as
to the highest and final Judgment, in all civil things, without further
appeal to any created standing power, and that all the people of this Nation,
and all Officers of Justice, and Ministers of State (as such) shall, in all
such things be accountable and subject thereunto, and bound and concluded
thereby, provided, That,

1. They may not censure, or question any man after the end of this Parliament,
for any thing said or done in reference to the late Wars, or public
differences, saving in execution of such determinations of this Parliament, as
shall be left in force at the ending thereof in relation to such as have served
the King against the Parliament.

2. They may not render up, or give, or take away any the foundations of common
Right, Liberty or Safety contained in this settlement and agreement. But that
the power of these two things (last mentioned) shall be always understood to
be reserved from, and not entrusted to the said Representatives.

5. For liberty of entering dessents in the said Representatives. That, in case
of corruption, or abuse in these matters of highest trust, the People may be in
capacity to know who are free thereof, and who guilty, to the (...) only they
may avoid the futher trusting of such, but without further penalty to any for
their free judgments there.

2. That no King be hereafter admitted, but upon the election of, and as upon
trust from the People, by such their Representatives, nor without first
disclaming and disavowing all pretense to a negative voice, against the
determinations of the said Representatives, or Commons in Parliament; and that
to be done in some certain form, more clear then heretofore in the Coronation
Oath.

These matters of general settlement (viz. That concerning a period to this
Parliament, and the other particulars thence following heitherto) we propound,
to be declared and provided by this Parl. or by the authority of the Commons
therein, and to be further established by a general Contract, or Agreement of
the people, with their subscriptions thereunto, and that (withal) it may be
provided, That none may be capable of any benefit by the Agreement, who shall
not consent and subscribe thereunto; nor any King to be admitted to the Crown,
or other person to any Office, or place of public trust, without express
accord, and subscription to the same.

We have thus plainly, and faithfully propounded our apprehensions, how the
evil and danger of the present Treaty may in good measure be avoided, and our
further conceptions of a way, wherein, hopefully through the blessing of God
(if most men be not given up, some to unjust domination, or particular
Interest, the rest to servitude) the Kingdom may be quieted, future
disturbances prevented, the common Rights and Liberties provided for, and the
Peace and Government of the Kingdom settled, to a just public Interest; and
this we have set forth in such hands and particulars, which (if you will but set
aside, for the time, less importaint matters) may most of them be brought to
effect, and the rest assured, and put into a good way of effect, within a few
Months, so as you might then ease the Kingdom from the burden of the
greatest part of that force, which otherwise (in case of Accommodation with the
King) you will be necessitated, for a much longer time (probable for many
years) to keep on, upon the public charge, unless, upon the Accommodation
you would give up all to the Kings power again, and expose those that have
engaged against him, as sacrifices to his and the Cavaliers Reveng: And (for
our parts) let but that way of justice be effectually prosecuted and the
settlement of public Interest (upon which foundations as are before propounded)
be assured to us and the Kingdom, and put into a course of effect (and we
shall not only embrace with chearfullnesse, but shall with eagern^sse desire
discharge from our present service, and shall be most ready to disband all, or
part, as shall be though sit, the Arrears of the soldiers being satisfied.

November. 22. 1648.
THere is a general Report, that the Army is engaged to expedite a Message to
his Message, to advertise him of their proceedings, and Overtures, for the
executing of Justice, and bring of all Delinquents to a speedy Trial; to the
end, that the enemies of peace, may be all remanded in, and the differences of
this sanguishing Kingdom speedily united and composed.

FINIS.

