Colonel Mittons Reply TO Lievtenant-Colonell Reinkings Relation OF The taking
of Shrewesburie: Which was printed without License, though said (in the Title
thereof) to be published by Authority
THE laying of a design for the taking of the Town of Shrews bury, was in
agitation several ways, both by the Committee, and my self, they sent unto Of
westrey for me to Wem to consult about it; M. Huson (a Minister) was the only
man that first advised us to this way, wherein God gave us the town: after
ward one Captain Willier seconded him therein.

The first attempt we endeavored to make upon the town, was the 14 of
February, but the darkness of the night (and the ill mannaging of the march)
by Lieutenant. Col. Reinking retarded the business so much, that we were feign
to retreat for that time.

Next day being Saturday, in the afternoon, the rest of the Gentlement of the
Committee and my self fell in council how to go on with the design again,
and sent for Lieutenant Col. Reinking, M. Huson, Captain Willier, and others to
advice with us.

We did agree to go the next night; being the Sabbath, to surprise the Castle,
being much troubled, least any of the well-affected in the Town (...) suffer by
reason of our former attempt.

They that should have gone with me, were the foresaid Lievtenant-Colonell, M.
Huson, and Captain Willier, we had likewise sent unto Major Fennicke, who was
then Governor of Morton Corbet, to go along with us, with what strength he
could afford, to second us with the rest of the Forces from Wem, and my Horse;
the place were we should have scalled the Castle-wall, required ladders five
yards long, the ladders we had the night before were so heavy, that they could
not be carried under four men to one of them; whereupon I sent for the Joyner
(that lives in Wem) to me, and gave him order to make ladders of that length,
with two of his feasoned railes, which were so light, that one man might carry
one of them a mile with ease. But as we were ready to give order to march, word
came from Shrewsbury, that they kept out Scouts toward Wem: therefore we
thought fit to proceed no further at that time, and sent likewise to
countermand Major Fennicke, who was to meet us upon our march.

I stayed with them (as I remember) at Wem, till Tuesday in the evening: Upon
the Monday before I went, we did agree to fall upon their Garrison at Atcham
(having great hopes we should gain it) and did intend to fortify it strongly,
it being a place upon the river of Severne, within two miles of Shrewsbury,
which would much annoy the town: but P. Maurice being at Chester, we conceived
our strength was not sufficient to defend the place, till we had made it
tenable, and did agree to send to Sir William Brereton to borrow some of his
Auxiliaries, and so for that time I took my leave of the rest of the Gentlemen
of the Committee, and went to my Garrison to Oswestree, they promising me, and
(Colonel Hunt in particular) desiring that if I had any design, I would make
them acquainted, and when they were to go upon any they would acquaint me.

Upon the Friday following they sent me a Letter to Oswestree (about four in
the afternoon I received it) mentioning their march upon a design that
night, wherein they desired me to have an eye upon Prince Maurice, lest he
should send some party to fall upon them, and wherein they wrote, that they
would have a regard to my honor in the first place.

Between 7 and 8 of the clock, Capt. John Betton being with me I showed him the
Letter, so he and I advising together, we resolved speedily to be gone, not
making any one acquainted which way we went: I sent to Lievtenant-Colonell
Pope, to come along with us, who brought with him two or three of his Troop,
and I my self had only one man, but sent to all my Horse to follow, which they
did with great speed: we met them upon their march upon the old heath, a mile
from the Suburbs, though Lievtenant-Colonell Reinking sets forth, that they
were in the Suburbs before I came in unto them: and whereas he says, that he
had only two light marches, I caused them to put out thirty and above, asking
them if they would surprise the town with light matches: Colonel Lloyd, when
I showed him the light matches, being also much displeased.

Upon my first coming in, I went (as Lieutenant-Colonell Reinking reports) to
the Gentlemen of the Committee, and saluted them, and asked them the reason why
they had not sent me more timely notice of the design, they answered (and Mr.
Charlton in particular) that they did only intend to have a scrip at
Shrewsbury, as they passed by: but their greatest hope was to possess
themselves of Atcham.

I kept constantly with the Horse, sometimes with the Gentlemen of the
Committee, sometimes with others: they that came with me from Oswestree and I,
being not one from the other all night, according to our promise that we made
to one another: this mean while Lievtenant-Colonell Reinking went on with the
Foot, as he sets forth, (leaving all the Horse behind him upon the Heath) I
being in the Van of them with Capt. More, the All-arme was given unto the
town: whereupon (as Mr. Huson told me and others) that Leivtenant-Colonell
Reinking would have gone back, had it not been for him: and thereupon he
himself took a sledge, and went to the Palisadoes, by whose encouragement, and
Capt. Williers, they went on again, and made their way through them: The mean
while I went on with: the Horse into the Suburbs, where we found the Lord
Colvill, and where-we stayed near a quarter of an hour before the Foot could
break an iron chain to let us pass to the gate. From thence I marched strait
to the gate, where we stayed near upon a quarter of an hour before it was
opened, which being done much about the break of day, I entered with the Horse
the first my self, one would have entered before me, but I wished him to
forbear, which he did till I entered: we went direct to wards the maine
guard, our Foot being beaten back by them, they very earnestly cried for the
Horse, we made all haste possible unto their relief, (those that came with
me from Oswestree being still with me) and Captain More one of the
Committee, when we came into the Hay-street, we thought to have entered upon
them through a narrow passage between some Drapers shops, but were beaten
thence, and they killed one of our horses: whereupon Captain John Betton ^^d
us (...) along the Hay-street, and so by Chads Church, by which means we
surrounded them: and then, and not till then, they fled.

As foon as they were dispersed, I called for an old Gentleman (my Uncle) that
lodged the next house to that guard: while I was talking with hion qume of the
Committee, and Lievtenant-Colonell Reinking went to the Castle shinking to have
it delivered unto them, and did agree upon terms with them thereon: but when
they came to surrender it, they asked. To whom they should deliver it? the
Committee told them. to L. Col. Reinking they asked, whether I was not there:
the Committee answered, I was in Town; they replied, They would not deliver it
till I came: where upon the Committee sent M. Charlos Langford, who came in
great have to me: I went presently with him, and had it delivered unto me: I my
self went to the gate of the Castle, and with my own hands (as they passed
out) wrote, the names and quality of all the Soldiers therein, and gave the
list of them to Colonel Lloyd.

So when they were all gone out, and sent with a guard to the stone bridge,
(excepting the Irish, upon whom I put a difference in the lift that I gave
Gelonell Lloyd) I entered the Castle first, diverse others of the Gentlemen of
the Committee being there, and followed me.

So it will here plainly appear, that (upon my coming) the order he stands.
upon, to be Commander in chief, was in valid, I being the ancientest Colonel
in that County, having a Commission for three Regiments, as also that I came in
to them a mile before they came into the Suburbs, and that Lievtenant-Colonell
Reinking had more then two lighted matches, and that I took the command of the
horse upon me, and that I led up the horse to beat the maine guard, which were
not beaten away, till the Horse surrounded them, and that the Castle was
surrendered unto me.

These things I never intended to have published, but that Lie^^^nant-Colonell
Reinking put forth a pamphlet upon Saturday last (as I conceive) to my
dishonor: I having formerly written to, and reported in the House of Commons,
contrary to what he caused to be printed.

Tho. Mytton*

Printed according to Order, by R. Austin.


