A MESSAGE TO Both Houses of Parliament, for a personal Treaty with the King,
(and his Majesty to come to London,) or Treat at Hampton Court.

By the Lord Lowden, the Lord Lauderdale, Sir Charles Erskine, Mr. Hugh
Kennedy, and Mr. Robert Barclay, Commissioners from the Kingdom of Scotland:
Subscribed by the said Commissioners, November. 5. 1647.

Also a Letter from the Army, concerning the Propositions to be sent to His
Majesty.

BY the appointment of the General Council of the Army,

November. 6. 1647. Subscribed Will. Clerk,Secretary.
Imprimatur

Gilb. Mabbott.





C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon as printer's device

London, Printed by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, 1647.

A LETTER FROM THE ARMY Concerning The Propositions to be sent to His MAJESTY.
Mr. Speaker,
WHereas it is generally reported that the House was induced to make another
address to the King, by Propositions, by reason it was represented to the
House as the Desire of the Army. From a tenderness to the privileges of
Parliamentary actings, this Night the General Council of the Army, declared,
that any such Representation of their Desires, was altogether groundless: And
that they earnestly desire no such consideration may be admitted in the Houses
Resolutions in that particular.

Putney Novem. 5. 1647. Signed By the appointment of the General Council of
the Army. William Clerk, Secretary.

For the honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the honorable House of
Commons.
A Message to both Houses of Parliament for a personal Treaty with the King,
and His Majesty to come to London, or Treat at Hampton Court.
Right Honorable,
AS upon the removal of his Majesty from Holdenby, against his will, by a party
of the Army under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, we expressed our sense and
the resentment of the Kingdom of Scotland of that violent action, so the
Committee of Estates of the Parliament of Scotland, finding that his Majesty is
still kept within the power of that Army, thought themselves obliged to
endeavor to know the certainty of His condition, in obedience to their
commands, we have applied our selves to His Majesty, that from himself we
might know the truth thereof, who was pleased to show us his usage, ever since
He came from New Castle, but for His present condition He really confesses
He cannot, but referres us to know it, from the two Houses of Parliament, and
the Army.

Both Houses (by many Professions, and engagements) have declared to the
Kingdom of Scotland that they would take care of the preservation of His
person, His just power and greatness, (which both Kingdoms have sworn not to
diminish,) and the Parliament of Scotland upon the Kings going to Holdenby, did
declare against all harm, prejudice, injury, or violence to be don to his
royal person, Therefore in pursuance of the trust committed to us, we make
this address to the Honorable Houses, conceiving it needless to apply our
selves to the Army, who we suppose are and ought to be under their command,
desiring to know from them the certainty of His Majesty's condition: and the
rather that we are informed, there are intentions in the Army of the removing
him from Hampton Court.

The Kingdom of Scotland finding that their stability, and happiness does so
much depend upon the safety and preservation of His Majesty's Royal person,
And being resolved that no alteration of affairs shall ever separate them from
that duty Allegiance they owe unto him, nor from their constant resolution to
live in all loyalty and obedience under His Government, have often shown their
earnest desires, and contributed their utmost endeavors, toward the composure
of these unhappy differences. And the Houses of Parliament having by their
Votes of the 26th. of October last intimated to us their resolutions to apply
themselves to His Majesty, and that they are preparing Propositions to be
tendered to Him; We do desire that they may be expedited and communicated to
us; that according to our many engagements and relations there may be still a
conjunction of Counsels, in those things that are for the Common peace and
joint interests of both Kingdoms.

And for the better asserting of them, for clearing His Majesty's doubts, and
for the giving, and receiving mutual satisfaction: We do desire (in the name
of the Kingdom of Scotland) that there may be a personal Treaty with His
Majesty, as the best and readiest means to obtain the joint desires of both
Kingdoms; And for that effect, that the King may be invited to come for
London, with that honor, freedom, and respect due to His Majesty, or (at
least) remain at Hampton Court, and not be under the power, and constraint of
Soldiers, where both Kingdoms may make their free applications to Him without
any danger of such stop, or affront as has been already committed against a
Commissioner of Scotland: And for which no reparation has been yet made, and
that His Majesty be no more carried about with the Army at their pleasures.

These we conceive to be the most probable and effectual means for attaining
an happy peace, settling of Religion, restoring His Majesty to His just Rights,
and continuing, and strengthening, a good understanding betwixt these
Kingdoms, which are most earnestly desired by the Kingdom of Scotland, And
shall be constantly and faithfully endeavored by

Your Lordships humble servants. Lowden, Lauderdaill, Charles Erskine, Hugh
Kennedy, Robert Barclay,

Worcester House the 5. of Novem. 1647.
For the Right Honorable the Speaker of the House of Peers pro tempore.
FINIS.

