THE DESIRES AND PROPOSITIONS PROPOSED To Sir John Hotham, by the Prince his
Highness, concerning the Town of Hull.

With Sir John Hothams Answer and Resolution nothing derogating from his former
Constancy.

Likewise a most Remarkable Passage concerning the PALSGRAVE.

Together with the Occasion of his Majesty's going from York to 2 Newarke upon
Trent.

John Brown Cler Parliam^^torum

July 19. LONDON, Printed for Edward Johnson.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

THE DE^IREE OF THE Prince His Highness, to Sir John Hotham.
Worthy Sir,
WHen the Prince with his forces drew near the Town of ^ull, He sent forth a
Herald to Command the Gates to be opened, and to have the town surrendered up;
But He found the same Entertainment which his Majesty had formerly.

This Answer being returned to His Highness, you cannot conceive but at so
great a Repulle and denial, he must be very much moved. Whereupon immediately a
second Messenger was sent to the town, at which Summons Sir John Hotham did
presently attend his Highness from the Walls, to whom his Excellency did
deliver himself in this manner.

That it was strange that he against his Oath of Allegiance, and muth contrary
to the trust and confidence which his Majesty had formerly reposed in him,
should thus obstinately both against Equity and Justice oppose his Majesty, and
constrain him to use such violent means to obtain that, which he thought he
might by His Power and Right Command.

And withal informed him, that now it was no time for dispute, but walled him
to surrender up the Town, which he so long had detained from his Majesty, which
if he would do, and submit himself unto his Royal Clemency, happily His
Majesty, out of his tender Aflection which He always bore to the informities
of His Subjects, which he is sensible may be sometimes misled, might indulge
these his yet Contumelious Errors, and in hope of his future amendment forget,
and forgive his former Errors, and restore him to all those Liberties and
Fortunes he formerly enjoyed.

After His Highness had thus delivered himself, Sir John Hotham after some
small pause, but serious Consideration, in all humble manner thus expressed
himself unto his Highness.

Let your Excellence be pleased to send a patient Ear unto your most faithgull
servants defense, whose Loyal intentions have always been, and ever shall be
most zealous to serve your most Royal Father, and next ofter him your
Excellence.

And I could wish both my Life and Fortunes certiople, that by the free Expense
of them I might testify the Gratitude and Observance of Duty, which I owe unto
your most Royal Father, and my most Gracious Sovereign,

You cannot tax me of such foul and heinous Crimes, as the Malignant Party do
object against me, when you shall rightly consider that all my endeavors have
labored for the privilege of the Subject, and the security of the Kingdom, no
wais impugning the Prerogatives which belong to the Crown.

And certain it is, that both your Royal Self, and also all the world may
justly condemn me of Infidelity, if I should trecherously deceive that trust,
which the Supreme and Highest Court of this Kingdom has entrusted me withal,
and in the Breach whereof may ensue the general Ruin of this Nation.

A trust of so great weight and high Consequence cannot be deceived, but a
heavy discredit must of necessity brand him, who shall give the occasion of
that breach.

So far is from me the very thought of disloyalty, that if it shall please that
power, who did first commit that trust to me, to consent with my self, I shall
all freedom of mind, and Loyalty of heart give up both the Town, and my self,
and all that I may properly call mine unto his Majesty, and humbly prostrate
both them and my self at His Majesty's feet, not doubting, but upon His just
and mature consideration, he may not only forgive my Errors, if any in this
case have bin committed, but also command my fidelity, and out of his clemency
and goodness think me fit to serve His Majesty.

Thus Sir John Hotham having delivered himself, but keeping the town, the
Prince left him for the present, and we do expect that His Highness should
levy a Battery against the town.

The Palsgrave is gone from Yorkshire, into Lancashire, to take up forces, and
to repair to Hull with all speed he can.

The King himself is gone from us, and with the next Tuesday night be at Newark
upon Trent, and from thence he will go to Liecester: Thus I rest,

John Mills.

(...) The Kings Majesty has also Declared to all the Northern parts of
England, that whosoever shall give him their cheerful help at this time,
either with Men, Horse, Arms, or Money, to be brought, sent, or conveyed unto
him. He will look upon it as a service never to be forgotten, which Declaration
He commanded should be sent to all his loving Subjects in Yorkshire, which they
most cheerfully assented to, promising to aid and assist him with Men, Horse,
Arms, and Money, for the peace and safety of the Kingdom.

Both Houses Voted, that it is illegal and against the Laws of the Land, for
any to appear in such a warlike manner.

Ordered that this be printed and published

John Brown Cler. Parl. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. C(...)





