THE MID-NIGHTS WATCH, OR ROBIN GOOD FELLOW His serious Observation; Wherein is
discovered the true state and strength of the Kingdom as at this day it stands
without either Faction or Affaction.

LONDON, Printed for George Lindsey, 1643.

The Midnights watch.
THe harmless spirit and the merry, commonly known to the world by the name
of Robin Good Fellow, having told his Fairy mistress of fleering upon
strangers Elves, and the tickling of her nose with her petulant finger, and
receaving but frowns for his favors and checks for his counsels he grew
weary of her service, and being as light of love as he was of care he resolved
to visit her no more. The troubles and commotions in the upper world had
wrought his thoughts another way, and in a serious humor one night he resolved
to go abroad, to observe the new courses and alterations of the world.

The first place he came at was Windsor, where he found a good part of the Army
newly come from Redding, he heard them talk as confident of victory as if they
had killed the Cavaliers already, he much admired the understanding and
resolution of their General, and daring not stay there any longer for fear he
should be taken for a Malignant and be whipped, he made a swift dispatch for
Oxford, yet not far from Windsor he met at the towns end many Sentinells and
incountered some Courts of Guard, though they were men of war he heard them
much to desire peace, and freezing in the cold, Robin could not choose but
laugh, to hear them comfort one another by boasting in what hot service they
had been.

When he came to Oxford, the first place he ventured into was St. Mary's
Church, where indeed he found a Convocation of many reverend heads, some
whereof had lately departed from London for their consciences sake, and
esteemed the freedom of their minds of a greater consequence then their
Revenues: they much lamented the iniquity of the times, and wished indeed (if
they could be found) that abler and more learned men might supply their
deserted places. Robbin wondered at the gravity of the men, who with great
wisdom and moderation were discoursing amongst themselves from whence the
first cause of these distempers did arise, and some imputing it to this, and
some to that, Robbin departing from them three times, sneezed out aloud,
Bishop, Bishop, Bishop.

From thence he came to Christchurch where he found a pack of cunning heads
assembled together, these were men of another temper, and indeed they were the
ottachousticons of the Kings, Who whispered into his sacred ears all the ill
counsels that they had contrived, Those were they that possessed him with
impossible things, and induced him to believe them. They would tell him of
great battles which were never fought, wherein he had the victory, and some
conquests were told him to be achieved by the Parliament wherein he received
no loss at all. A band or two of men, have passed for a whole Army, and a
Liter on the Thames for a whole fleet at Sea. Robbin much wondered that they
being so near unto him the influence of so Sacred a Majesty could work no
better impession in their souls; and drawing near unto the bed chamber he
found His Majesty though in these distracted times yet full of native
constancy, and tranquillity of mind, and secured better by his innocence then
his Guard. With much Joy and Renown he departed thence, and observing as he
went (for it was past midnight) many a loose wench, in the arms of many of the
Cavaliers, he gave every wench as he passed by a blue and secret nip on the arm
without awakening her. He heard amongst the Sentinells, as he was departing
from Oxford of a great victory obtained by one Sir Ralph Hopton against a part
of the Parliaments forces, wherein the Earl of Stamfords regiments were said
to be quite routed, many of his Soldiers slain, many taken prisoners and
great store of Arms, and Ammunition with them, amongst which a great brass
piece on which the Crown and the Rose were stamped, was most remarkable. Robbin
had a great desire to go thither himself, and to justify the truth of so
absolute a Victory. He had not gone as far as Eusham, but he espied the nine
Muses in a Vinten ers Porch crouching close together, and defending themselves
as well as they could from the cold visitation of the Winters night. They were
extreme poor, and (which is most strange) in so short an absence and distance
from Oxford they were grown extremely ignorant, for they took him for their
Apollo, and craved his Power and Protection to support them. Robbin told them
they were much mistaken in him, for though he was not mortal he was but of
middle birth no more then hey, they being the daughters of Memory, and he the
son of Mirth, but he bade them take comfort for that now in Oxford there was
sure news of Peace and a speedy hope of their return to their discontinued
habitations: at this they seemed with much Joy to rouse up themselves, and did
assure him that if what he reported did prove true, they would sing his praises
throughout all generations. The Elf proud of such a favor in the name of
Oberon did thank them, and did conjure them to perform it, and in the twinkling
of an eye he conveyed himself to Salt-Ash in Cornwall, where Sir R. Hoptons
forces were quartred. He found the defeat given to the Earl of Stamford
nothing so great as Fame in Oxford confirmed it to be. Collonell Ruthens
regiment indeed was sorely shaken, and some of his men slain, and many taken
prisones. With a curious eye he observed what Arms and Ammunition were taken,
and above all he had a laboring desire to see the brass piece with the Crown
and the Rose on it, which so much dignified his conquest: he searched up and
down the Army, and in and about the Magazine but he could not find it. At
length despairing of what he looked for, the venterous Elfe came into Sir
Ralphs chamber, and finding him asleep, and safe as Wine and Innocence, he
dived into his pocket, and the first thing he took out, he found to bear the
impression of the Rose and Crown, and it was a brave piece indeed, for it was
a farthing token which was all peradventure that was in it. Robbin ashamed to
see himself so deluded could not at the first but smile at the conceit, and
putting it into its Magazine repenting himself of his journey, he did swear
that he would never trust Fame, nor Pamphlet more, though printed in a thousand
Universities.

From thence with much indignation, and more speed he flung away, and in a
moment placed himself at Bristoll, where he found the face of things just like
the air of an April morning, it smiled and it rained both at once, some were
greedy of peace, and some again were as eager of war; here some stood for the
King, there others for the Parliament, the greater number was for the one side,
but the better for the other. The husband was divided against the wife, the
sister against the brother, and the son lifting forbidden hands against the
father. Robin beholding so strange a division amongst people so near in blood,
wished himself again in Fairy Land; for said he, we have no such dinne, no
such tumults, nor unnatural quarrels, but all silence and oblivion and a
perpetual peace. And quickly abandoning the place, he in an instant came into
Glocestershire, to a Town called Tedbury, where the more to increase his
misery he met with the spirit of faction and distempered zeal. This was the
spirit that was accustomed to make a great hubbub in the Churches to tear off
the Surplice from the Ministers shoulders, and when the children were to be
signed with the sign of the Cross (like a Devil dispossessed) to tear
himself for fury, and with great noise and foaming to run out of the Temple.
This spirit would feign have persuaded Robin to turn Roundhead, and told him
that they were the best sort of Christians: I, replied Robin, that is even as
true as God is in Glocestershire. As he was proceeding in his discourse, he was
intercepted by a great noise and tumult of people, who cried out, fly, fly,
fly. Amazed at the suddenness of the cry, and the multitudes of the people
that came thronging by; he looked about him to understand what the business
was, he found it a company of people, whom flying from Cirencester, the
ignorant fury of the sword had spared. Prince Rupert had newly entered the
Town, and having thrice summoned it, and they refusing to yield it into his
hands, he seized on it by violence, and on his first entrance he burned a great
part of the Town, the shot from the windows by the Muskets of the Town did
wonderfully annoy his men, and he found no better means to prevent that
mischief, but by setting fire on the houses, there was a great overthrow, and
Colonel Carre, and Colonel Massey, two chief Commanders for the Parliament,
were either slain, or desperately wounded. Robin found this Prince to be a
Gentleman of himself of a civil and serious disposition, a man few in words,
and very little beholding to Fame for the many strange reports he had delivered
of him; affrighted at the thunder of his Arms, Robin dispatched himself from
him with as much speed as the bullets flew from the mouth of his angry Canons,
and on the first summons of the Cock he came to Newarke, where either through
fear of some new design upon them, or through some great cold they had taken,
he found every man of the Earl of Newcastles garrison soldiers to be ficke of
a Palsy: loath to continue amongst those crasie people, with an invitive
dispatch he came to Pontefract, where he found the Earl of Newcastle with the
greatest part of his Army gone toward York, not so much through fear as it
was suggested, but for complement rather, and to entertain the Queen of
England, who was expected to be either at Newcastle, or at York. He found the
Army of the Recusants, though in many combats shaken and scattered, yet not to
receive so great an overthrow as many tongues too credulously have voiced it.

Neither did he find in York Mass to be said in every Church, it being cross
to the method of the close and subtle generation of the Papists to make a
public profession of their Religion before they had fully perfected their
intentions and by the strength of Authority made both the ends of their
designs to meet together. Howsoever it being discovered that the War which
was pretended, for the maintaining of the Kings Prerogative tended now indeed
to the innovation of Religion, and to make the Papists appear the Kings best
Subjects, it has turned many hearts and armed many hands against them. The
news of the Queens landing made Robbin so brisk, and so overcharged him with
news, that being as unable to contain it, as he was greedy to receive it, he
could not take a full survay of York, nor had the leisure to go unto Newcastle
to discover what good service those four ships have done to hinder any
malignant vessels that come either from Holland or from Denmark from landing
at Newcastle; a mad vagary took him to come up to London, which the vagabond
else performed with such a suddenness, that could he be discovered in his way,
he would have proved rather the object of the memory then of the eye. The first
place he came into, it was a Conventicle of the Family of Love, it was then
much about two of the clock in the morning, and the Candles being put out, they
were going from one exercise unto another. Robbin presented himself before them
all, and seemed lusty as the spirit of youth when it is newly awakened from the
mornings sleep; the women were well contented to stay, but the men cried out, a
Satyr, a Satyr, a Satyr, and thrusting them before them all tumbling
headlong down the stairs together, they left him laughing to himself alone.

FINIS.

