A SOBER ANSWER, TO AN ANGRY PAMPHLET: OR, ANIMADVERSIONS, By way of Reply,
to Robert Barclays late Book (entitled, Truth cleared of Calumnies) in answer
to a Dialogue between a Quaker and a Stable CHRISTIAN.

By WILLIAM MITCHELL.

Matthew. 24.24. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and
shall show great signs and wonders: insomuch that (if it were possible) they
shall deceive the very Elect,

2. Pet. 3.17. Ye therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things before,
beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from
your own stedfastness.

Aberdene, Printed by John Forbes, An. 1671

An Epistle to ROBERT BARCLAY, Which may serve for an Admonition to the
Quakers in and about ABERDENE.
SIR,
I have considered the Preface prefixed to your book, wherein you give an
account of the rise of Quakerisme in this place (under the notion of the LORDS
raising up the witnesses of this day) and the opposition it met with. And
First, It is alleged that your supposed witnesses (and yet real enough in
bearing testimony against the truth) were reproached as demented distracted and
bodily possessed. Sir, did you ever hear any speak (in this place) thus of
Quakers? Or rather, are you not too apt to take things upon trust; without
weighing what truth or falsehood may be in a report? Yet it is not to be thought
strange, though Quakers had been charged with all this: when as men of Faith,
Credit, and eminent Piety, (in our neighbor Nation) have testified of their
extraordinary quaking, going naked in the streets, (even the women of them) and
some pretending to a power of raising the Dead: and for this end taking them
out of their Graves, calling them by name to arise and walk; but their
ineffectual attempts of this kind, made them to return covered with confusion
and shame, and yet as much hardened in their delusions as ever! See Sam Clarks
Mirror, page 259. 262. 263. 267. See the Perfect Pharisee, published by the
Ministers of New Castle page 41. 48. see Pagits Heresiography page 250. 257.

Secondly You say they were called nothing better then John of Leyden, and his
Accomplices. Sir, I hope you are not ignorant that John of Leyden, and those that
followed him, were much led by revelations and delivered their Doctrines, as
being moved of GOD; and that with as much confidence as any of you pretend
unto: And at first they spoke against bearing Arms and would not suffer a man
to wear a Ring, nor a woman a Silken Gown: they made a great show of
Humility, and their ordinary communication was about Mortification. But what
their after carriage was, we are sufficiently informed by those that have
written of their principles; and of their practices, see Pagits Heresiography,
page 13.

Thirdly, You speak of some serious and sober professors in and about
Aberdene, who (in the year 1663.) began to find the Savor of that Life, in the
testimony of that so much reproached people, which some years before had
stirred in others. Sir, that people whom you call so much reproached, have with
very much bitterness reproached others: and cast as much obloquie upon the best
persons that have differed from them as ever a generation of men did: Are not
their opprobrious terms so far from any good savor, that they rather savor
of a Spirit of rancour, and bewray a root of bitterness to be within?

And let not Quakers think to shelter themselves under the practice of Christ
and his Apostles, who were wont to speak of Pharisees, and other open enemies
of the Gospel: as being a viperous Generation, children of Hell and of the
Devil; now let us search the records of Scripture, and (as I suppose) it will
not be found that Christ and his Apostles carried thus: to those that professed
subjection to the Gospel, and owned Christ to be the Messiah, showing
earnestness of desire, that Souls might be saved: being willing to take any
course for promoting and furthering this great and glorious design.

And Sir, because you speak of Professors who had found that savor of life in
the testimony of Quakers, which before had stirred in others: It is probable
you will not take it well, to say, that those others were Ignatius Loyola and
his followers; and yet in very deed, the Quakers carriage is very like unto
theirs: which Doctor Stillingfleet (in his late book of the Idolatry of the
Church of Rome) notably demonstrats; there he tells of a Sect in Spain called
Alumbrado s, or the Illuminati: this Sect under a pretense of mental prayer,
divine contemplation, and union with GOD, they despised Sacraments and
Religious exercises. Of this Sect Ignatius Loyola, the father of the Jesuits,
was vehemently suspect to be. Those of his own order who have write his life
(Maffeius, Orlandinus) say; First, that it was his custom not to give men any
titles of respect, but to call them by their common names, and resolved he
would not break this custom: because to do it; proceeded from too great fear
of men. Secondly, He preached in an Enthusiastical manner, going up and down the
streets: preaching to all persons, and to all sorts of men; and being examined,
confessed he was unlearned. Thirdly, When afterward he was committed to
prison, he preached to people with great zeal, and they gloried much in his
sufferings: and the rest of the prisoners making their escape by the negligence
of the keepers, Ignatius and his adherents would not stir. Fourthly, Being to
form a society, he had for that purpose used himself to all the Arts of
insinuation imaginable* obliging men with expressions of the greatest kindness,
bearing all affronts with wonderful dissimulation. Fifthly, Having gotten
persons to be of his mind, he used all means to prevent any difference hapening
among them. Sixthly, They preach in the streets and market places; and invited
people to hear him: and no doub^ (says my Learned Author) he converted many
from the use of laces and ribbands And says he, I know not whether any of the
innocent and religious order of the Jesuits had any hand of forming this new
Society among us (as has been frequently suggested) but if one may guess the
father by the child's likness, Ignatius Loyola the Founder of the Jesuits, was
at least the Grandfather of the Quakers. See these things at length, in the
above mentioned Treatise, page 305. 313. 314. 315. 316. 317. 320. 321. 324. 325.

Moreover Sir, If you would have others to savor and relish life in your
testimony, ye must study more self-denial, and show forth first, less pride, be
not too big in your own conceit, consider Isaiah, 65.5. Even be content with
Burying places, that better then your selves do lie in; and do not seperat from
us as children of Heth: this is intolerable sauciness.

Secondly, Show forth less passion and anger, the Scripture says the Man of
GOD must be gentle and meek, 2. Tim. 2.25. reviling does better become Shimei's
then Saints.

Thirdly; Show forth less censoriousness, do not say that men (who can manifest
their spiritual descent from Christ upon as sure grounds, if not surer grounds,
then any Quaker) are smothering and resisting the Light, because (forsooth)
they will not dance after your pipe.

Fourthly, Show forth less folly: It would be your wisdom to be well acquainted
with your own hearts, and not to pretend so much to the knowledge of other men's
hearts; when as it may be, ye know not their names.

Fifthly; Show forth less contrariety in your doctrines to the good and holy
word of GOD. Set not your selves against the ordinances of Christ, and
Justification by his imputed Righteousness.

Sixthly, Show forth less ignorance, as to the nature of true Conversion:
crying out against forms, and wearing of ribbands, speaking thou and thee, and
keeping on the hatt, condemning all that are not of your gang, saying, ye were
never well till now, (which is a great part of the Religion of many of your
Proselytes) will never prove you nor them to be true Converts.

Seventhly, Show forth less endeavors for promoting the Popish interest, if ye
were under their hire, ye could not advance their interest more, then by
decrying our Ministry and Churches: when once ye have persuaded people to the
belief of this, then they are fit matter for Priests to work upon: and they
cannot but thank you, for doing their work to their hands. Sir, if you listen
not to my advice, yet I have followed my Light in tendering it unto you.

Sir, in the close of your preface, you fall foul upon the Author of the
Dialogue as having deceitfully misrepresented the Quakers, which is a crime he
is not sensible of: for his design in the Dialogue, was not to tell the world
all the Scriptures which the Quakers abuse; but only to give a true
information of the grossest of their opinions, (and briefly to answer some of
their arguments, and to lay down Scripture grounds for instructing the
ignorant, and confirming the weak in the truth) which He was in some capacity
to do, having exchanged several papers with Quakers: and would have continued
in replying to their papers; but that he was told, it would prove no better,
then (according to the proverb) lis Ptolemaica, that is, a long and constant
strief: Quakers (as he heard) being like some froward and scolding women, who
will be sure to have the last word: and indeed after this, he is resolved to
let Mr. Barclay have it.

Some are of opinion that Quakers are of their nature, who are best appeased by
neglect; and soonest quieted by silence: and yet a total neglect of them
(though they be contemptible in the eyes of many) may make them formidable.

Sir, It is altogether unnecessary to be at pains in ripping up your wild
comparisons, it were easy to be sharp in reflections; but these things can
neither commend to GOD, nor good men: and therefore desiring you, and your
brethren would allow some time for reading this my Answer: (which was in
readiness diverse months ago; but a convenient opportunity was wanting to
publish it till now) I take my leave, wishing the LORD the great and Mighty GOD
to extend his Power and Mercy for your recovery: and that he would reclaim you
according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all to himself. Philipp.
3^ 21.

W. M.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Reader.
IF a person who (really) affects retirement, has adventured thus to appear in
public (when hereby he brings himself under the lash of the censures of many,
which otherwise he might escape) his plea is, that Truth (even the least grain
of truth) is so choice, and precious: that it calls to the denial of these
things which would stand in the way, and hinder an undertaking of the defense
of it.

If it be said, that an abler hand had been meeter for a work of this
importance: the Authors apology is, that what is done, needs be no impediment
to others; but rather a provocation of them to appear for the interest of
truth which is so much trampled upon: in the mean time let none find fault
with the Author for doing that, which in other cases passes for good service:
when a house is on fire, he that brings water to quench it, though (it may be)
he contribute but a little help; yet he is not blamed but encouraged. Now the
flame of error has more danger in it, then a flame of fire: and therefore an
endeavor to quench it, cannot be justly censured.

In case the Author be twitted with this, that he has done nothing, but what
was done before: his answer is, that if the adversaries of truth, have been at
paine^ to pluck out of the dunghill of Heresy old errors, and to send them
abroad in a new dress: then the author should not be quarrelled with; for
making use of these weapons, by which heretofore good old truths have been
defended: And he further says, that Popery from the mouth of a Quaker will be
swallowed down by some (as glorious discoveries) who yet would not listen to a
Popish Priest speaking the same things? And therefore the Author thinks that
it may be good service to well meaning people, to take off the Quakers
arguments, by the same answers which PROESTANTS have used against Papists:
that so it may appear, that Quakers and Papists are sailing in one boat, though
their faces look several ways; but not willing to detain the Reader any
longer, from perusing the following Treatise: which that it may be blessed for
reducing the mislead, and establishing those that yet stand, is, and shall be
the earnest desire of him, who is

Thy Servant for Christ's sake. William Mitchell.

GOOD READER.
Be pleased to do Me that favor, as to correct with thy pen these following
mistakes.

Page 16. line 20 read incolis. p. 27. l. 15. r. have not always many. p. 52.
l. 4. r. which is said to be more. p. 53. l. 1. r. causa infirma. Epist. p. 1
l. 1. r. reproach, for reroach. p. 16. l. 20. r. its rightly translated, p. 54.
l. 17. r. Now in that he says p. 94. l. 23. r. repeal.

Reader, there are diverse othter literal escapes, but seeing they do not
obscure the sense, its expected thou will in charity cover them: If any thing
in the book seem dark, I desire thou would look into the Dialogue, to which
the book has reference: and by that means, thou may get some clearness.

Some ANIMADVERTIONS, By way of Reply, to a Book ENTITVLED, TRUTH CLEARED OF
CALUMNIES.
I. HEAD. Wherein the Lawfulness of Salutations is justified.
SECT. I. Concerning Salutations by Gestures.
THE AUTHOR.
HAving (after the Quaker-rate) saluted me with Reproaches, then page 10. 11.
he tells us that Quakers dearly own Salutations, warranted by the
Scriptures, such as Christ commanded, and the Saints practiced, but the
salutations that are amongst us, he calls corrupt and Idolatrous; and
instanceth in bowing the Body, and uncovering the head: The reason alleged to
prove this to be Idolatry, is, because these things are the signification of
our worship to GOD, and what is Religious worship but that which is given to
GOD? Answer, It is true, Religious Worship is given to GOD, and its that which
is peculiar to GOD, and due to him alone, and giveing to the Creature, what is
thus pecular to GOD? Is Idolatry, but bowing of the body and uncovering of the
head is not of this nature. And therefore, worship is to be distinguished, it
is either Civil or Sacred, (this distinction is founded on Scripture, of
Civil-worship we read, Luke 14.10 Then shall thou have worship in the presence
of them that sit at meat with thee: We read of Sacred Religious worship; Matthew.
4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.)
Civil worship proceeds from a reverencing of men, for their Stations,
Relations, or some notable Qualifications, and this kind of worship, has been
given and received by the holiest of Saints, (neither is it any where forbidden
in Scripture) and so Joseph upon his approach to his Father Jacob, he bowed
himself with his face to the ground, Genesis 48.12. Abraham and Lot bowed
themselves to the Angels, (supposing them to be men) Genes. 18.3. and 19.2.
compared with Heb. 13 2. and the Angels accepted this worship without any
reproof of them for it; yea, Abraham bowed himself twice before the people of
the land, Genesis 23.7.12. and though every practice of Abraham is not to be so
lowed, yet these practices which are not condemned in Scripture, neither by
repehension or prohibitio^, why should we be blaimed for an imitatio^ of the
Saints in them? Seeing we mantain Sacred, Religious worship to be due, only to
GOD, and his glory must not be given to another as the Papists give to their
Images, of which one of themselves affirms, that it is the constant opinion of
their Divines, that the Image is to be honored and worshipped with the same
honor and worship which is given to him, whose Image it is. None can say,
(unless they will be peevish and perverse) that we bow to men, to worship GOD,
in and by them. It is known that the Papists speak of two kinds of Religious
worship, namely, absolute, which they give to GOD, or the Saints, and relative,
which they give to their Images, and therefore Papists have no advantage, as to
their Idolatrous worshipping of Images, from our allowable practice of bowing
to men, thereby to testify a mere Civil respect to them.

The Gentleman disputes against bowing of the body as Idolatry, but he
seems to justify Moses his doing Obeisance to his Father in law; And yet what
is obeisance, but civil reverence by bowing the body, in token of that regard
which we owe to some person of note?

SECT. II. Concerning Salutations by Words.
And as Salutations by Gestures are warranted by the Scriptures, so likewise
are Salutations by words, Ruth 2. 4. And behold Boas came from Bethlehem, and
said unto the Reapers the Lord be with you, and they answered him the Lord
bless thee. And that command of Christ's, ( Matthew. 10.5. when ye come into an
house salute it; Its explained by the Evangelist Luke, chapter 10. verse 5. And
into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, peace be to this house. Now its
known that the Jews in their ordinary Salutations and Greetings, when they
wished all happiness unto one another, they expressed it thus, Peace be to You:
And from this, I infer that bowing of the body, and expressing our affections
by words, comprehending desires and good wishes, ( though persons be not
friends, but foes, Matthew. 5.47.) is agreeable to Scripture, and the practice of
renowned Saints. As for taking of the Hatt, seeing it is not manifest from
Scripture, that the Saints did wear Hatts, (the word so rendered Dan. 3.21. is
varied on the margin Turbants, which were Head-garments peculiar to those
Eastern Countries) it is no wonder that we do not read of their putting them
Off, and yet this being one harmless way, whereby we express outward honor to
those to whom it is due, why should it be quarrelled against? We must not think
it enough to give Superiors inward honor, the Scripture also calls for
outward honor, Levit. 19.32. Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and
honor the face of the old man.

SECT. III. Containing an Answer to the Quakers Objection.
He says, Its strange that we should say (considering our principles) the
kingdom of God consists not in words, for what is our Preaching, and the
Scripture it self, and the very Gospel according to us, but a company of
words. Answer. Truly by the Scriptures we mean nothing else, but that
Heavenly Doctrine, those divine instructions, or revelation of the mind and
will of God, which the Lord excited and moved Holy men of old, to speak and
write for the good of his Church and People, and (...) (or the Gospel)
according to us, is the doctrine of Christ, (the good news and joyful tidings
of Salvation by him to poor sinners) contained in the Scriptures; And the
Preaching of this Gospel has been found the Power of God to the salvation of
many a Soul, Romans 1.16. Now if Quakers be for another Gospel, then they may
justly be reputed subverters of the Christian Religion, and enemies to the
Cross of Christ, and therefore liable to that curse which is threatened Gal.
1.8. And likewise know, that we use to distinguish between the subject matter
of the Scripture, or the doctrine which it contains, and the words or writtings
containing, or expressing this Doctrine, the one is as the Blood, the other as
the Veins in which it runs.

II. HEAD. Wherein is warranted our way of speaking, in Opposition to the
Quakers Thou and Thee.
Page 12. He finds fault with me for saying, that to whom the singular number
is agreeable, the plural may be applied without making a lie, and says the
proofs alleged, evince nothing in this matter. Answer. Though that place
Luke 22.31. be not understood of one, Exclusively of others, yet Christ there
directs his speech only to one, (viz. Peter) and he says not (after the
Quakers way) Satan has desired to have Thee and You, that he might sift Thee
and You, but behold Satan has desired to have you, and to sift you as wheat.
It is plain that the third Epistle of John, is directed to a single Person,
verse 1. The Elder unto the well beloved Gaius whom I love in the Truth, and
yet verse 12. the Apostle says, Ye know that our report is true. Job. 18.2.
there Bildad speaking to Job, says, how long will it be ere you make an end of
words? I am of that mind, that if our Translators had translated Attah, and
(...), not according to the rigor of construction, but as use has made the
propriety of our Language, that then the Quakers would have kept their old
tone, and said you instead of thou. But if men will needs make a contentious
busle about words, then let them read and ponder 1. Tim. 6.4. he is proud,
knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof
comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings.

III. HEAD. Showing that the Quakers departure from us, is not to be justified
by our departing from Papists.
He confesses that when they walked with us, the Lord begat a measure of
honesty and integrity in diverse of them, turning the bent of their hearts
toward him. Answer. By what means was this honesty and integrity of heart
wrought in them? Was it not in the use of these very Ordinances which now they
cry down, their consciences cannot but force some of them to an acknowledgement
of this? Now when the Lord first wrought this integrity in them; what was it
that he countenanced for begetting of it? It could not be any antecedaneous
measure of integrity, for they had not integrity before it was wrought, and
therefore doubtless GOD has regaird to his own appointments, blessing and
making them effectual.

May not some of the Quakers remember that (even in their walk with us) by
such a Sermon, and the opening of such a Scripture, the bent of their hearts,
was drawn Heaven-wards and GOD wards? Which though they should refuse, yet
there are many living Witnessess who have found this effect of Preaching, and
do remember it, to their unspeakable comfort.

He adds page 13. That the Lord visited some while they lived among Papists,
and at times refreshed them. Ans. The question is whether these persons were
visited in a way of conversion, by Popish inventions and traditions? Among
Papists themselves the Scriptures are to be found, and God has blessed to some
(in times of Popery) the reading of the Scriptures, for their Reformation, and
illumination in the knowledge of the truth. When Luther betook himself to the
Augustine Monks College, there he met with a copy of the Latin Bible, which
he read with great attention and admiration; and thereafter spent his time in
searching the Prophetical and Apostolical writtings, seeking thence to inform
himself in the knowledge of Gods mind and will. It is known that in the
darkest times of Popery, the Lord wanted not his witnesses, who stood up in
defense of the truth, whom the Papists (when they could get their hands on
them) cruelly butchered and murdered, and the labor of these servants of God
was nor in vain, but attended with great success.

Now it remains for him to prove that such as were converted among Papists,
were converted by Popery, that is by their invented corruptions. And yet if the
primest of Quakers were ever savingly wrought upon (as I cannot but think, thus
it is with some of them) the work was begun by the Lords blessing, and
countenancing these self-same ordinances, which they reject as our Traditions.

He thinks it meet to pass by that objection (calling it weak) from Solomon's
sacrificing at Gibeon. Answer. No wonder if it be weak, coming from a feeble
person, and yet an Apostle among the Quakers, namely, P. L. in a Letter of his
(which no doubt he will justify as the immediate endytment of the Spirit of God)
to the People of ABERDENE.

IV. HEAD. Concerning the Light, and their Union with CHRIST, that have Saving
Grace and Light in them.
He quarrels at me for calling the Light in us, our Light. Ans. Though it be
Efficiently and Originally the Light of Christ, yet is it nor Subjectively
ours: Is it disingenuity, to say, that we are the persons in whom this Light is?

He says page 14. 15. That sometimes the being of Christ in men, signifies
the existence of Christ in them to prepare for union with him and that Christ
must needs be in men, before thy have union with Christ. Ans. We grant that
Christ may be and is in men in respect of his general presence, and as to
common operations before they be in Union with him; But it is incumbent for him
to prove, that Chrst is in men as to saving grace and light, (which is the
Quakers principle) and that men who are thus savingly enlightened are without
Union to Christ.

As for those spoken of John 1.5.10. (the other Scriptures shall afterward be
examined) in that they knew not Christ, this shows that saving grace was not
their privilege: The Scripture abundantly testifyeth, that persons truly
gracious and savingly enlightened, are in a state of union with Christ; and
therefore Christ is said to be in them, Romans 8.10. to dwell in them, 2. Cor.
6.16. and they are said to abide in Christ. 1. John 4.16. and to dwell in Him,
Joh. 6.56. All which expressions clearly import an Union between Christ and
those that have saving Grace and Light in them.

He subjoyneth if it be thought strange that Christ should be in the Heathen,
and they not know him. Was it not as strange, that he should be among the Jews
who had the Letter that did bear a testimony of him, and they not know him?
Answer. It is not so much for men to have the Scriptures among them, and
miracles wrought before them, as to have Saving Light and Grace in them, though
some that enjoyed the former, did sadly mistake Christ, yet such as had Christ
in them, by his saving Light, they cordially owned Christ, and had the
Mysteries of his Incarnation, Passion, and Resurrection revealed to them; see
Ioh. 1.14. Act. 1 3.

Page 16. He says Christ does reveal himself in some measure unto all, in whom
he bears witness against iniquity. Answer. If it be a Revelation of Christ to
persons in that they have a testimony in them against sin, then we must yield
that the Americans have Christ revealed to them: Yea more, the very Devils have
this Revelation of Christ, for they have that in them, which witnesses against
iniquity and sin: And therefore notwithstanding all the Quakers pleadings for
Heathens (as having saving Light in them) he does them but small favor, in
putting them in the same case with Devils.

SECT. I. The Danger of Asserting Saving and Sufficient Light to be in all.
He calls it difingenuity for saying, that the opinion of all men's having
sufficient Light in them tends to put Christians in the same condition with
Pagans. Ans. This Doctrine of Saving sufficient Light in all, naturally tends
to it, for if Pagans have saving Light, their state should be as safe as the
state of of Real Christians. Where saving illumination is, there is also saving
Faith, there being a concatination between these Graces of the Spirit. That
Scripture, while ye have the Light, believe in the Light, is understood of the
Person of Christ, Ioh. 8.12. Ioh. 12.46. which the Jews then had among them,
and not of subjective inherent light, wrought in the soul by Christ, for this
being a created thing is not to be believed in. If the Pagans light be
sufficient, then there is no Spiritual benefit (let the Quaker call it as he
will, whether the raising of the seed in them, or refreshing of them, the seed
being raised) necessary to Salvation, that accrues to Christians by the
Scriptures and the Gospel, but Pagans may have the same by their light, else
their Light is not sufficient. Now is not the tendency of this opinion to make
the Gospel a vain and needless thing, and men's labor in Preaching the Gospel,
wholly unnecessary? Yea, it tends to make men impiously proud, as if they
needed not to be beholden to GOD for more light; And therefore if any of the
Quakers judgdement, had been overhearing David, when be prayed, Open mine eyes,
that I may understand the wonderful things of the law, give me understanding
that I may keep thy precepts. They might have been bold to correct David,
saying look to the Light within thee, (that's sufficient) what need thou pray
for more?

Whereas he says, page 17. That men are said to be brutish in their knowledge
and to have no understanding, because they turn their backs upon the light, and
will not follow it. Answer. This is but petitio principis, a begging of the
question, (which yet must not be given upon alms, without solid proof) taking
it for granted, that persons who are brutish in their knowledge, having no
understanding, yet have saving Light in them which they refuse to follow.
Before the Quaker speak of men's being in darkness, because of their opposition
to the Light; It would concern him first to prove, that the wicked who in
Scripture, are called darkness, have saving Grace and Light in them. Can dead
men have this saving Light? And is not every man by Nature Spiritually dead?
Ephesians. 2.1. To assert that persons Spiritually dead, have saving grace and
light in them, looks like a contradiction, for then they should be spiritually
dead, and not spiritually dead: And though according to Scripture they be
children of darkness, yet according to Quakers they should be children of
light; for to be a child of light, is as much as to be one in whom there is
saving grace and light, sufficient to guide him to please GOD, Luke 16.8.

If it may well be supposed (as he says) that the light in some is darkness,
then the Quaker would do well in exhorting his Disciples, to bid them take heed
of their light, (and not to it.) This was Christ's way of exhortation, Luke
11.35. And as I remember that phrase, take heed to the light of GOD within
(which is so common among Quakers) is not to be found in all the Scripture.

Neither can saving light, which is from Christ in any sense be called
darkness, as the Quaker insinuates, calling it darkness to them that reject
it, in that it gives them not comfort and joy, etc. We own that a
disconsolate state wherein men walk without comfort, is called darkness, but
this name is no where given to Christ's saving light, which he setteh up in the
soul; and though comfort and joy, be the result of the souls assurance and
confidence of being in a state of light; yet this joy and comfort is not the
proper effect of that light (which proceeds from Christ) but of that Lord who
gave the light, who is therefore styled the God of all Comfort, 2. Cor. 1.4.

He denies, that having of saving light and grace presupposes Conversion,
which he illustrateth by the similitude of a wound and plaster, the being
healed of a wound presupposes the plaster, but the application of the plaster
presupposes not the being healed. Ans. What is this to the purpose? For when a
man has saving light and grace, he is in part healed, cured of the dominion and
reigning power of sin: And ths supposes an application of healing grace, which
is conveyed into the soul, by the converting and sanctifying Power of the
Spirit of GOD, and to make a difference between having of saving Grace, and
being in a state of Grace, is but the figment of the Quakers own brain. Its
true, the wicked do not stand in grace; For how can they stand in that which
they have not?

He adds page 18. That there may be a sufficient light in men, who may be
said after a certain manner not to have the Spirit; as wicked persons have not
the Spirit, bringing forth the fruits thereof in them, to wit, love, meekness,
goodness, faith, etc. Answer. Can that person be said to have sufficient
light, who is destitute of goodness, and wants faith which units to Christ, in
whom the Christians strength and sufficiency lies? Philp. 4.13. And without
whom we can do nothing, Ioh. 15.5.

Besides having the spirit, implies the souls receiving of the spirit, and this
phrase notes the implantation of the Graces of the spirit in the soul, at its
Conversion and Regeneration. Where the spirit of the LORD is, there is
liberty, 2. Cor. 3.17. this spirit is a spirit of faith, 2. Cor. 4.13. and
though the spirit reprove and convince the wicked, and by his motions call upon
them, and strive with them, yet it will not follow, that they have sufficient
light, or saving light; for men may have reproves, strivings, convictions,
that are far from saving grace: And unless the Quaker can make out that the
Spirit calls upon every man, and strives with every man, in order to his
conversion, then he cannot conclude that all have the Spirit, (even according
to his own notion of men's having the Spirit) and if all have not the spirit,
then all have not sufficient light, as for that place Ioh. 16.8. it rests for
him to prove that the word world (which is homonymous) is there taken for all
and every one throughout the world.

SECT. II. The necessity of the Knowledge of Christ's outward Crucifixion.
He tells us, page 19. 20. That the Apostle, 1. Cor. 2.2. Speaks not of
Christ as crucified outwardly, but of him, as he was inwardly crucified in the
Corinthians, as the word imports, being rightly translated out of the Greek, I
determined no to know any thing (...). i. e. in you. Answer. Here he has no
ground to except against our Translation, the words being solidly and soundly
enough translated, for by an ordinary Enallage, which particularly is called
Protheseon Parallaga (which is the putting of one preposition for another) in,
is rendered among, and this is consonant to the Hebrew and Greek, see Genes.
34.30. ye have made me to stink, Bejoshev haaretz, in incoll^s ter^ae, and yet
its translated among the inhabitants of the Earth. Then Acts 6.8. Stephen did
great wonders and miracles, (...), in populo, and yet who justly quarrel, if it
be said that the wonders and miracles were wrought among the people. Then Luke
1.28. (...), Benedicta tu in mulieribus, but yet it must be rendered (for
making it good sense) blessed art thou inter mulieres, among women, 1. Cor.
2.6. we speak wisdom (...), in perfectis, in the perfect, and yet the
skilfullest Translators render it, inter perfectos, among the perfect; Paul in
delivering his message was not in them, though they wanted not inward fruits of
that Gospel which he Preached to and among them.

That it may appear how corruptly the Quaker would be translating the words, it
must be considered that the doctrine of Quakers is, That Christ was crucified
in the Corinthians, in the time of their unbelief, and at that time Christ was
crucified in them in his suffering seed; that seed of Light and Truth, suffered
in them under the burden of their transgression. Now remark, that the knowledge
of Christ mentioned, 1. Corinthians. 2.2. was that which Paul rejoiced in, hence he
says, God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of Christ; now it would
not have been the Apostles joy, but his grief, to know that the Light of Christ
was born down in them by their transgression: And therefore I must say it
again, that text speaks of Christ outwardly crucified, and the obediential,
heart affecting knowledge of Christ thus crucified, is the maine thing that all
who profess Christianity, should aim to attain unto. And as it is a calumny
to insinuate, that that which we plead for, is a bare naming of Christ's Death
and Passion, so it is a gross abuse of that Scripture, 2. Cor. 5.16. to infer
from it, any thing against the knowledge of Christ's outward Crucifixion. For
the thing which the Apostle there condemns, is earthly and carnal thoughts of
Christ, as if Christ as King of Israel, should begin an earthly and temporal
Kingdom, in this manner (says the Apostle) from henceforth know we him no
more, or we know him no more as a man living amongst us.

He adds page 21. That the Blood of Christ known and felt within for Christ
as he is within, is not without his Blood, which he gives to them, who know
not distinctly, the outward shedding of the Blood, as it was many hundred
years ago. Answer. It is hard to take up what the Quaker means by Christ's
Blood within, he calls it spiritual, even the pure Blood of the Vine. But
seeing he speaks of it, as distinct from the outward shedding of Christ's
Blood; it would seem that either he inclines to justify that which has been
charged upon some of his brethren, for saying, that they are not such fools, as
to hope to be saved, by that JESUS, who was crucified at Jerusalem above
sixteen hundred years ago: Or that which has been charged upon others of them,
who affirm, that CHRIST as man dwells in them. A doctrine that tends to
overthrow the Ascension of Christ to Heaven, there to continue till the
Restitution of all things, Act. 3.21. If the Quaker design nothing by the
Blood of Christ felt within, but the inward working of the Spirit, helping men
believingly to apply Christ's Blood which was shed at Jerusalem, (besides this,
there is no other heart cleansing and conscience purging Blood, and every
cleansing Grace in the Soul, is the fruit of this Blood.) Then it is his work
to prove that they are wholly ignorant of this Blood, (that is, know no such
thing as Christ's Passion and Suffering) who yet are helped to a believing
application of it, which if he do, then true Faith shall be a blind Faith,
contrary to Esa. 53.11. by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many.

SECT. III. The tendency of the Quakers Principle, to introduce Paganism.
He says, as for thy deceitful insinuation to render us odious, that if our
principles were generally owned, these Nations would be overspread in an Age or
two with as palpable darkness, as the Heathens at this day are; seeing it has
no just ground, we return it upon thee, as false and malicious, etc. Answer.
Bona verba quaeso, soft words and hard arguments would become you better. If it
be the Quakers principle, that the light within is a sufficient teacher, and
that taking heed to this, there needs no more, then it is no deceit to affirm
that this tends to introduce Paganism, and that the general owning of it would
make these Nations in a short time as the Heathen Nations at this day are. Now
that this is their principle, our Quakers cannot deny, but by denying the
writtings of their infallible friends, who in their Printed books call upon
people to cease from their outside lights, and to return to the light of
Christ in them, saying, that they who look out at teachers without them, are
strangers to that Covenant, by which all come to know the Lord, and need not
that one teach another. I am credibly informed (by a Reverend Person whom I may
trust) that upon occasion of his visiting a dying friend (in Aberdene) there
was at that time in the house two Quakers, and both of them pressed so much
upon the dying man, to take heed to the light within, (making this the chief
and only matter of their discourse) that my informer found fault with them,
that they spoke so much of taking heed to the light, and nothing of believing
in Christ: Whereupon on of their further said, that if he took heed to the
light there needed no more words, neither book without, nor teacher without:
which in effect is, that the light within is so sufficient a teacher, that
there needs no other to teach but that, neither the teaching of the Scriptures,
nor the Ministry of men; and laying this Teaching aside, what a woeful plight
should these Nations (in an Age or two) be in? There is no doubt but dismal
darkness would overspread them. It is like, that now the Quakers do see, how
much this principle contradicts their own practice (and must of necessity tend
to make them odious) for they have teachers, and teaching among themselves. And
therefore its added, page 22. that the light must not only be taken heed unto,
but believed, obeyed, and walked in, which who do, it will lead them to use the
Scriptures, and lead them to the assemblies of Gods people, and to hear and
receive the Ministry of those whom God sends. But some of the Quakers in
England, to keep their principle from clashing with their practice, have been
heard say, that their teaching is but to take people off from other teachers,
that they may be brought to mind the light in them alone; and then they will
cease teachings. Now when all Teaching cease, except the inward teaching
which the Indians have, how quickly shall we be like them, among whom the Name
of CHRIST is not in rememberance.

SECT. IV. The Light GIVER must not be confounded with the Light given.
He adds page 22. That they do not confound the Light Giver with the Light,
or enlightening given. Ans. Ye do plainly confound them, for do ye not call
that light Jesus Christ, wherewith all men are enlightened? And yet this light
is but a ray or beam proceeding from Christ, and therefore he is said to be
that True Light, which enlighteneth every man: clearly importing a difference
between the light in all men, and Christ the Donator of this light. It is
acknowledged that where the light, or enlightening from Christ is, there is
Christ himself, namely, according to the nature of the light: which light in
the wicked is common, but in the Godly is saving, and so Christ is in the one,
as to a common, but in the other, in respect of a saving operation of light.
Now when he says that Christ is in all men, if his meaning be that as God, he
is in all men, then we do not control him, for thus Christ is every where. If
his meaning be that as man, he is in all men, then the Scripture controls him,
which holds forth his Manhood, must continue in Heaven, until the time of
the restitution of all things. If his meaning be that Christ is in all men to
enlighten them that they may believe, then his proof is not sufficient, which
is Ioh. 1.9. compared with 7. for this seventh verse, speaks expressly of John
the Baptist, the forerunner of Christ, as is evident by looking back to the
preceding verse, There was a man sent from God, whose name was John, the same
came for a witness to bear witness of the light, that all men through him might
believe. Here the Evangelist holds forth John's calling and the end of it,
which was to bear testimony concerning Christ. This was the special scop of
John's Ministry, to point out Christ in his excellencies and usefulness to lost
men, and to whom the offer of Christ comes (in the Ministry of the word) they
are called upon to believe in Christ, none being excluded.

SECT. V. There is a Consistency between Man's Lapsed State, and the Remainders
of the IMAGE of GOD in him.
He asks, how it is consistent (to affirm that some remainders of knowledge,
and principles of good remain in man after the ruins of Gods Image in him)
with what we say, to wit, that there is no good thing at all in men
unconverted, and that man fell wholly from God, as to all things that are good.
Ans. Who of us do say so, without adding any limitation? And yet there is no
inconsistency between these things (even as set down by you) if rightly
understood, for though men unconverted have not any saving good, yet it
follows not, ergo, they are destitute of all good. The unconverted have
precious Souls in them, which are of great excellency and worth; and there
still remains in them some similitude of GOD, their Souls being Spiritual and
Immortal. It is true man by the fall was bereaved of saving graces, in so much
that true holiness, and saving knowlegde he has not; yet he is not denuded of
all knowledge: In him there are certain notions concerning good and evil,
which though they cannot direct to Salvation and Eternal happiness; yet if we
live not up to them, they serve to leave us unexcusable.

Now it may be demanded, whether it be inconsistent to say, that a City is
wholly demolished, whereas there is some rubbish, and some foundations of
houses still remaining? If this be not inconsistent, why should it be thought
an inconsistency: To say, that though men be fallen off from GOD, yet he
retains some fragments, and Relicts of the Image of GOD? As in very deed he
does, for the Image of GOD is the conformity of the creature to the Creator,
and the Soul of man is conformable to GOD in its nature, as it is a Spiritual
and Immortal Substance. Likewise, man has not lost all his dominion over the
creatures. And it is to be observed, that though there be light in the
consciences of men that are corrupt, yet this light is not the corruption of
the conscience; but it is derived from Christ and comes from him, as a
bountiful Creator: and in this respect the light of knowledge, reason, and
understanding, that is in man since the fall, may be called the light of Jesus
Christ, for he is that true light that thus enlighneth every man, that comes
into the world.

V. HEAD. Concerning the Scriptures.
SECT. I. Showing how the Quakers vilify the Scriptures.
Look to page 24.25. And we may easily perceive the Quakers dis-esteeme of the
Scriptures, though in speaking to people, they would bear them in hand to the
contrary. For,

1. They grant that they meet not to read the Scriptures, but to wait on the
Lord, and they meet to worship GOD, whose worship is to be performed in Spirit
and in Truth, and not in External Reading. Now do not these men's endeavors
tend to disgrace the Scriptures, in that they make an opposition, between
reading the Scriptures, and waiting on GOD, and Spiritual worshipping of him;
as if the Lord could not be waited on, in the use of reading his Word. Was not
the Eunuch in the duty of waiting, when sitting in his chariot he read the
Prophet Isaias? This work was so well pleasing to GOD, that the Lord encouraged
him in it, helping him to understand what before he knew not, Act. 8.28. Did
not the Saints under the Old Testament worship GOD in Spirit and in Truth?
Surely the Lord required of them, sincere, Spirit worship, which they
performed, (lifting up their Souls to GOD) and did not satisfy themselves with
the bare outside and carcass of duty, Lament. 3.41. And yet they were not
enemies to external Reading of the Scriptures, Act, 15.21. Moses of old time,
has in every City them that Preached him, being Read in the Synagogue every
Sabbath Day. And although Reading the Scriptures was a duty done under the Law,
it does not cease to be a duty under the Gospel, because it is no where
repealed, but on the contrary, as it was commanded in the Old Testament, so it
is confirmed in the New, this being a special means of having the Word of GOD
to dwell richly in us, Coloss. 3.16.

It is most agreeable to the Scriptures, for a Minister to take the Bible and
read a part of it, opening and applying it, see Nehem. 8.5.8. And Ezra opened
the book in the sight of all the people, so they read in the book of the Law of
GOD distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading.
Christ himself took a text and applied it, Luke 4.18.21. And albeit Christ did
this in the synagogue, Quid inde? What then? did he not likewise Preach in the
synagogue? And yet Preaching continues to be the Ministers duty, 2. Tim. 4.2.

As for that Scripture, 1. Cor. 14.29.30.31. it conduces nothing to keep up
the successive talking of Quakers. For the Prophesying here mentioned was the
act of Prophets, and it is restrained to them, all the Prophets who prophecy.
Now the Gentleman will have much ado, to prove all his brethren, who at their
meetings take upon them to Preach, or rather (to use his own term) prate one
after another to be Prophets: especially, to prove their women preachers to be
in the number of them, for their preaching is expressly prohibited, verses
34.35. Let your women keep silence in the Church, for it is not permitted, unto
them to speak, -- it is a shame for women to speak in the Church. Neither
does the afore-cited Scripture make any thing against our way; for Ministers
amongst us, sometimes speak two or three, and the spirits of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets. The Quakers themselves have not many speakers; for at
times they sit dumb, as if silence could promote their mutual edification: Was
this the Churches way? Or the custom of the Apostles, and primitive
Christians? Certainly this hemlock (or invention) has sprung up since their
late apostasy from the Truth.

Secondly, They will not have the Scriptures called their Masters letter, no
(forsooth) their Masters letter is written in their hearts, and there they are
to find it, neither is their Master separated from them, as those who use to
write letters to servants to set them on work. But is not Christ as much
separate from Quakers, as from the seven Churches of Asia? Or was he not as
near those Famous Churches, as them? And yet they had letters sent to them from
their great LORD and Master, to direct them in their duty, Revel. 1.11. I am
Alpha, and Omega, and what thou see write in a book, and send it unto the
seven Churches which are in Asia. Now will ye observe how much these persons
bend their strength to evacuate the authority of the Scriptures; For they say,
GOD requires us to do all our work by immediate counsel and direction, as if by
the outward command contained in the Scriptures, GOD did not require any work
of them: yea they will not allow the Scripture precepts the name of Commands;
but call them the outward testimony, and signification of the Command, which
(as they say) they regaird in its place, that is only when they have an inward
command, and so while this inward command is wanting, through their neligence
in waiting, all that time, the Scripture loses its authority, and is of no use
to them. Is this to regard the Scriptures? Does it not tend to forward and
confirm negligent Atheists, in their contemptuous slighting, and undervaluing
of the Scriptures? Oh! that all such would read and tremble at the reading of
Ioh. 12.48. he that receives not my words, has one that judges him, the word
that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day.

Thirdly, They prefer their silent waiting, to the reading of the Scriptures,
as if we must first come to this, ere we can know the Scriptures aright. Now
they should prove (which is not so much as touched upon) that their way of
waiting is a mean appointed by GOD for right understanding of the Scriptures,
or profitable speaking concerning them. Waiting in their notion is Apocriphal,
not warranted by any Scripture. Some of them have defined it to be a silent
posture of the heart without thinking good or evil. It seems to me, no better
then mispe^t time, to be employed in seeking such a posture of heart: the heart
is such a stirring and working thing, that if it be not upon good, it will be
busy enough in evil, as may be found in our daily experience. According to
Scripture, faith, patience, and hope, must be exercised in waiting, Psalm. 40.1.
Lam. 3.26. and can we be in the exercise of these graces without thinking good
or evil? What an odd conceit is this?

Fourthly, Lest they should seem to be too great enemies to the Scriptures,
they confess it to be their desire to try Doctrines by the Scriptures. Ans. If
this be their desire indeed, how is it then, that one of the Quakers seeing a
Religious woman (in this Town) with a Bible in her hand, told her, she might as
well read a Latin book as that Book? And why is it, that they do not desire
their hearers to bring their Bibles, that so they may the better discern
whether the doctrines taught at their meetings, be answerable to the
Scriptures? But happily they think not this convenient, lest their juglings
should be found out; And I must tell the Gentleman (that though he charge us
with juggling) that the Quakers have been suspected from their first rise, as
notable juglers, which R. Farmer, in his Mystery of ungodlyness shows by this
instance, says he, it is usual for Quakers to say, they own the Scriptures,
yea, we confirm and establish the Scriptures, and witness the Scriptures; Now
says he, an honest-man (that means plainly) would think they believed the
Scriptures to be the written Word of GOD, and the rule of a Christian to walk
by, in things to be believed and practiced, But says he, these persons play
the deceivers (not using words in that sense, they are usually understood) they
mean otherwise, they say in express words else where, the Scriptures are not
the Saints rule of knowing God and living to him. And indeed these are the
words of one C. Atkinson a Quaker, (see his book, called the sword of the Lord
furbished, in answer to the Ministers first principle) and a little after he
insinuats, that to affirm the Scriptures to be the rule, is to put darkness
for light, and light for darkness. Now let all unbyassed persons, judge whether
these men put the Scriptures in their true place.

SECT. II. Proving the Scriptures to be the Word of GOD.
He adds page 26. That every declaration of a man's mind, is not his word, for
signs may be a declaration of his mind. Ans. Though a dumb man may declare his
mind by signs,; yet this makes nothing against the Scriptures, being the word
of God, which are such a declaration of Gods mind, as he uttered and spoke. If
any thing can be accounted the proper word of one, that must be it, which he
utters and speaks: Now the Truths, the Commands, and Precepts, contained in the
Scriptures, were uttered and spoken by God, Exodus 20.1. And God spoke all these
words, etc.

He says, people usually distinguish between a man's word and his write. Ans.
True: For they call the one verbum dictum, a word spoken, and the other verbum
scriptum, a word written; but can it be inferred from this, that the Scriptures
are not the Word of GOD, which he has committed to writting, for the good of
his Church and People.

He says, the Word of GOD is like unto himself, spiritual, yea, spirit, and
life, and therefore cannot be read with the external senses. Ans. The Word of
GOD is twofold, 1. There is the coessential, coeternal word, namely, JESUS
CHRIST, who is one with the Father, this Word properly cannot be read, though
we may, and do read of it. 2. There is the Spiritual Word, the temporal
expressed Word, or the Word written in time, now the external senses may be
employed in reading this Word.

He says, that these scriptures (Hos. 1.1. Joel. 1.1. Esaias. 38.4.) are
understood of that word from which the scriptures were given forth. Ans. It is
not denied, that the Lord spoke by the Prophets, and was the author of giving
forth the scriptures, but yet that word of the Lord which came to the Prophets,
is not mean'd of the Word made flesh, (as Quakers would have it) but of the
mind and message of the Lord contained in Scripture Jeremiah 14.1. the word of
the Lord that came to Jeremiah: Now what word was this, surely, none else but
the message which the Prophet was to deliver from GOD, to the persons therein
concerned, having reference to that dearth which should make Judah mourn and
languish, verse 2. The same may be said of the other scriptures.

He adds, What the Scripture says and GOD says, may be said, that they are
one, because of their agreement. Ans. This is to advance humane writings, and
to equal them with the scriptures, when their sayings agree with what God says.

He says, every one that reads and hears the scriptures read, hears not God
immediately. Answer. GOD himself speaks in the Scriptures to them that have
ears to hear him, Rev. 3.6. And though all that read and hear the Scriptures
Read, hear not GOD immediately, as the Prophtts who had truths revealed to them
by immediate inspiration; yet when we read the Scriptures GOD speaks to us
mediatly, by his written Word: and believers so hear his voice, that at the
reading and hearing of the Scriptures, they are forced to say the voice of GOD,
and not the voice of man.

Page 27. He says, (in answering 1. These. 2.13.) that the word which they
heard of the Apostles, was the living word. Answ. The word which they heard of
Paul, and received as the word of GOD, was the Scripture or written word, which
speaks of the essential and living word, or it was the doctrine he preached
concerning Chtist, grounded on, and warranted by the Scriptures, compare 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. with Act. 26.22.

He says, that the Pharisees in striking at the first Command, did
consequently strike at the living word which gave it forth. Ans. The Pharisees
without doubt, were enemies to Christ, and struck at him many ways; but yet
the word, which they sought to make void, Mark 7. is plainly held forth, to be
that written precept, honor thy father and thy mother, compare verse 13. with
verse 10.

He concludes the matter, saying, that the reason why they may not call the
scriptures the word of God, is, that people may be directed to that inward
living word. Ans. If they believe the Scriptures to be true, they may and ought
to call them the word of GOD, for the Scriptures call themselves the word of
GOD, Ephesians. 6.17. the sword of the spirit which is the word of GOD, this sword
of the spirit, is not a carnal, but a spiritual weapon, even the holy
Scriptures, (which are mighty through GOD, for repelling the temper, and
cutting assunder temptations) this was the sword which Christ made use of, in
his conflict with Satan, its written, and again it is written, Matthew. 4. Luke
4.

By calling the Scriptures the word of God, (which is a name due to them) this
will make their testimony concerning Christ to be more regarded, and therefore
the more effectual means to our closing with the living word. It seems
Quakers have strange thoughts of the Scriptures, as if they were set up as an
Idol, instead of that from whence they came. If we profess love to the
Scriptures, and desire to obey them, this is not to Idolize them, and we are
far from putting the Scriptures in Christ's stead; Did they ever hear any of us
call the Scripture, the eternal Son of God, that Savior who dyed and suffered,
thereby paying a ransom for sinners Redemption? Do we not say, that though the
Scriptures be the word of God, yet there is a vast difference between them and
Christ, he being the essential, eternal word, and the Scriptures only the word
written in time? Why then should it be insinuate, that we call Christ the
Scripture, and put the Scripture in his stead, is not this unworthy dealing? We
distinguish between Christ, the word, and the word of Christ, and though the
Scripture be not that word which is Christ, yet it is the word of that word,
Colos. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly.

SECT. II. Clearing the Scriptures to be the Rule.
He adds, that it rests to be proved, that the Law and Testimony mentioned,
Esaias. 8.20. was not the inward law. Ans. The proof of this will not be
difficult, for here the Prophet opposes what is written (as being no light) if
it agree not to the law and testimony. Let people pretend what they will, to a
law and word within: yet if they accord not with the Scripture law, or
scripture word, there is no light of truth in them. It is undeniable that the
outward law gets the name of testimony, this name was given unto the law
written in the two Tables, in regard whereof, the Ark was called the Ark of the
testimony, because those Tables were laid up in the Ark, Exodus 25.16. 1. King.
8.9.

My intent in bringing that scripture Ioh. 7.49. was only to prove the
acceptance of the word law, for the outward law left upon record in the
Scriptures though the Quaker maliciously glosses on it, as if in speaking for
the law, we were crucifying Christ afresh, therein comparng us to the
Pharisees: whereas the comparison will fit the Quakers a great deal better then
us, their known rash censuring abundantly declares their conformity to
Pharisees; for they can freely pronounce men damned and cursed, who will not
take their gate of it, and this was the way of the Pharisees, this people (said
they) who know not the law are cursed. Neither is it probable that Christ
checked the Lawyer, Luke 10.26. in saying, how read thou? But rather would
have men in matters of Religion to consult the scriptures, and therefore in
convincing ignorant and erroneous persons of their ignorance and errors; He
alleged the Scriptures against them, Matthew. 22.31.32. When a question arose
about devorcement, Christ had present recourse to the Scripture, Matthew. 19.4.
have ye not read, that he that made them at the beginning, made them male and
female? So when the Pharisees accused Christ's Disciples for breach of the
Sabbath, Christ said unto them, have ye not read, what David did, when he was
an hungered, and they that were with him. Matthew. 12.3. Christ then would have
the scriptures the rule to walk by, and matters of Religion to be tried by
them: for he refers us to the scriptures for direction, and its his will that
we resort to them (in controversies and doubts) for resolution.

He says, page 28. That we seem to lay much stresse upon this, that it cannot
be made out to a Jew or Turk, that Jesus the Son of Mary, is in very deed the
Christ without the Scripture. Answ. We lay so much stress on it, that we think
Quakers can never prove this fundamental truth referring them to the light
within, for they pretend following of their light in opposing Christ, as much
as Quakers do at this day in opposing the precious ordinances and truths of
Christ: And if Paul's course was commendable, so must ours, if against the Jews
we should allege scripture in demonstrating Christ to be the Messiah; for the
Jews profess a belief of the scriptures, of the Old Testament. Though the
inward testimony of the spirit be of great use to persuade and assure us of the
divine authority of the scripture, yet it is false to affirm that this can be
proved no other way, but by the spirits inward testimony: there are other
arguments whereby the authority of the scripture may be convincingly and
solidly proved against Turks and Pagans, and all Anti-scripturists whatsoever.
Let me crave leave to put Quakers in mind of one argument, which is
excellently improved, by that judicious servant of GOD, Mr. Baxter, in his book
of the Saints rest, page 239. Where he thus reasons, if the Scriptures be
neither the invention of Devils, nor of men, then they can be from none but
GOD, (he takes it for granted, that good Angels could not be guilty of forging
the scriptures) now he proves at length (it would be needless to set down here
the full proof of this argument, because the book is common, and in the hands
of many) that the Scripture is not the invention of Devils, that no mere men
were the inventers of Scripture, it was neither devised by good men, nor by bad
men, then sure by no man, and consequently must of necessity proceed from GOD.

When the Ancient Fathers had to do with Pagans (who were strangers to the
inward testimony of the spirit) they made use of other arguments, in proving
the Scriptures Divinity: such as the Heavenliness of the matter, the Majesty
of the style, the efficacy of the Doctrine, the verity of the predictions, and
by these and such like arguments, they confounded the learned Pagans. And
JOHN CALVIN, lib. 1. cap. 7. of his Instit: plainly supposes that there are
other arguments (besides the testimony of the spirit) to prove the divine
authority of the Scriptures, says he, verum quidem est, si argumentis agere
libeat, multa posse in medium preferri quae facile evincant, siquis est in
Coelo DEUS, Legem, and Prophetias, and Evangelium ab eo manasse i. e. True
indeed it is, that if we pleased to deal by arguments, many things might be
produced, that may easily prove, that if there be a GOD in Heaven, that the
Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel came from him. Now seeing the Quakers have
cited CALVIN, I would advise them to look to the 9. chapter, wherein be fully
shows, that fanatical men, who (forsaking scripture) betake themselves unto
revelation, do overturne all principles of godliness.

He says, that Ioh. 5.39. may be translated, ye search the scriptures, as
Pasor translateth the words. Ans. The same Pasor, speaking of that scripture,
the kingdom of God is within you, (...), he rendereth the words in medio
vestro, in sinu gentis vestrae, that is, in the midst of you, in the bosom of
your nation; and yet the Quakers will not admit of this translation. It is
confessed that (...), is taken by some (even PROTESTANT Writters) in the
indicative mood, though by that which follows, it appears to be imperative
rather then indicative; for the great controversy at that time was, whether
Christ was the Son of GOD, and the true Messiah, now Christ remits them to the
scriptures (which the Jews deservedly had in high esteem) as bearing witness
unto him, search the scriptures and they are they which testify of me; As who
would say, peruse them frequently, search them diligently, digging for these
heavenly treasures, as men do for gold, who break every clod, that they may
find the golden oar. Neither does Christ check them, when he says, in them ye
think to have eternal life, this was a true thought, as to the scriptures
pointing out the way to Eternal life, 2. Tim. 1.10.

Seeing the Quaker (page 29.) grants that the scriptures are profitable, for
doctrine, correction, reproof, instruction in righteousness, why then, does he
not acknowledge them to be a perfect rule of faith and manners; What more can
be requisite to prove their perfection, then their teaching truth, confuting
error, reproving sin, and discovering duty. There is enough said, and
delivered in the Scripture, to direct us in things to be believed and
practiced, and if the Scriptures do not actually profit us for this end, the
blaime is to be laid at the door of our ignorance and perverseness. Now the
scriptures are thus profitabe that the man of God may be perfect. i. e. That
the Minister of Jesus Christ may be complete, and every way fitted for the
work of his Calling, for though any man led by the spirit of GOD, may (in a
general sense) be called the man of God; yet the Lord honors his Ministers
with this tittle, and peculiarly attributs it to them, 1. Sam. 2.27. and 9.6.
1. King. 17.18.

SECT. III. Showing that the Spirit within is not the Rule.
In stead of answering my argument, proving that the Spirit within is not the
rule, he says, did these Jews receive Christ who had the scriptures? Did they
not reject him, and why? Because they hearkened not to the inward voice and
testimony of the Father concerning him, and this was the testimony which he
said, was greater then that of John. Ans. Look into the place where Christ
speaks of this testimony, and it will be found that it is no inward voice of
the Father, there spoken of. See Ioh. 5.36. I have a greater witness then that
of John for the works which the Father has given me to finish, the same works
that I do, bear witness of me: That is his works in doing miracles, these were
a more convincing witness of Christ's being the promised Messiah, then that of
John: And therefore, when John's Disciples asked, saying, art thou he that shall
come, or do we look for another? Jesus answered, go and show John these things
which ye do hear and see, the blind receive their sight, etc. As for that
testimony which the Father gave concerning Christ, verse 37. it was not an
inward voice and testimony, but an outward audible voice from Heaven, Matthew.
3.17. compared with 2. Pet. 1.17.18. And Christ reproves the unbelieving Jews,
in that they were ignorant of the Father, though they gloried so much of him,
as being the people whose Progenitors had heard the voice of GOD, Deuteronomy. 4.12.
Now Christ shows that all this was nothing to them; for they were strangers
to such manifestations of GOD, and they looked not like that people whose
Ancestors had heard so much of GOD, ye have neither heard his voice, nor seen
his shape.

He says, there is not any word 1. Ioh. 4.1. of trying the spirits by the
scriptures. Answer. It is sufficient if there be warrant in other places
(though no express mention of it in this) for trying the spirits by the
scripture. Now seeing every spirit (is not to be believed) that is, every
doctrine propounded as received by inspiration from Gods spirit, false teachers
will be as ready as any to boast of the spirit: and therefore we must try from
what spirit their doctrine comes. And what surer and safer way can there be of
trying, then that for which the Beraeans are commended, even in trying the
Apostles themselves? They searched the Scriptures whether these things were so,
Act. 17.11. and Christ appealed to the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39.

He says, cannot the spirits be tried by the Spirit of God? How tried Peter
the spirit of Ananias and Saphirah? And is not the trial and discerning of
spirits the privilege of the Saints now? Ans. We are speaking about the trying
of Doctrines, now Ananias and Saphirah, their failing was not in a matter of
Doctrine, but of Fact, by lying in keeping back pa^^ of the price of the
possession, which Peter knew extraordinarily: as appears by the miraculous
effect, that attended his reproving of this sin, which was their sudden
death, and present giving up of the Ghost, Act. 5.5.

As for discerning of spirits (if thereby he either intend the knowledge of the
secret conceptions and inward thoughts of men's spirits, or a certain
infallible knowledge, who be truly spiritual, and who not.) It is not the
privilege of the Saints now, neither was it ever a privilege common to all
the Saints, 1. Cor. 12.10. to another is given the working of miracles, to
anothter discerning of spirits. Though the Saints have that anointing in them
which teaches them all things; yet as hereby external teaching is not excluded
(for John himself was now teaching in writting this very Epistle to them) so is
not trying of the spirits by an external rule, the anointings, teaching, may
well consist with bringing Doctrines to the Touchstone of the Word, does not
the anointing (or the spirit) direct us to the law and testimony? And if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.

He says, were there any more strongly deluded then the Pharisees, yet how
much did they lay claim to the scriptures, how came they to be deluded, who
were so skilled in the scriptures according to the letter of them? Ans. That
the Pharisees were deluded, the Scripture is not to be blamed for this, the
fault was in their blindness, hence they are so often called blind guids,
Matthew. 23.16.24.26. It is granted that deluded souls, such as are unlearned and
unstable, may and do wrest the scriptures unto their own destruction, 2. Pet.
3.16. But yet there is enough said in the Scriptures, by which delusions might
be discovered, and controversies ended: If men would be humble and studious in
the use of helps and means, bringing not discutiendi acumen, a disputing head,
but discendi pietatem, a pious heart, desirous to be instructed.

And for further clearing of our mind in this, it is to be considered, that
albeit we look upon the scriptures, as a rule for finding out truth, and
deciding controversies, yet that we may be right discerners, we judge a work of
the spirit necessary, for removing our natural depravedness, perverseness, and
ignorance, so that though the scripture be sufficient for discovering
delusions, and ending differences in genere objecti, yet the spirit is
necessary in genere causae effectivae.

He adds page 30. Though the same deluding spirit, who deceived first may
deceive over again, that makes nothing against the insufficiency of the
spirit, to discover the delusion. Answer. We blaime not the spirit for men's
falling into delusion at first, or for their continuance in delusions; Who can
charge the spirit with insufficiency, as if he could not discover the tricks
and deceits of Satan? Yet persons who reject the Scripture, refussing it to be
the rule, pretending only to an inward rule, they provoke the spirit to give
them up to delusions, and open a gap for a deluding spirit to enter in. May not
the History of I. Galpen, once a Quaker (be an admonition and warning to all
that Sect) who by casting off external teaching, and harkening to a voice
within, was put upon mischievous and detestable practices. Sometimes he was led
to the Fiddlers house, and being told it was such a man's house, he answered, be
it whose house it will, Christ led me hither, and hither I must go: Then was
his hand forced to knock at the door, and a voice bad him say, behold Christ
stands at the door and knocks: Otherwhile, he was carried upon his hands and
knees out of the doors into the street, and when his wife would have stopped him,
he said, he must not be stopped, he must forsake wife, children, and all to
follow Christ. Sometimes, he was forced to take up a knife, and to put it to
his throat, and the voice said open a hole there, and I will give eternal life.
But in the end the Lord was pleased to give him repentance: whereupon he
published a narration of those things, to discover the danger of these ways,
and to be for caution of others, to take heed how they go out of Gods ways,
and forsake his ordinances: lest falling into the error of the wicked, they
decline from their former steadfastness, and lest not receiving the love of the
truth, that they might be saved, God give them over to strong delusions to
believe a lie. See this History set down largly by Mr. Samuel Clark, in his
book called the Mirror for Saints and sinners.

SECT. IV. The Quakers way is ineffectual to convince an Opposer.
Quakers in their way cannot convince a Gainsayer, for what they call truth,
others differing from them, call delusion and error, and how can they produce
any evidence (that they are not deluded) for the conviction of an unbeliever,
who knows not the testimony of the spirit in them? And himself has not the
spirit, being in the number of those who are without GOD, and without the
Spirit. Suppose one say, that he has a testimony of the spirit, to assure him
of his gracious state, I would ask whether the testimony of the spirit be any
otherwise then according to the Word of GOD? It is like, Quakers will confess
that every testimony speaking peace (being contrary to the word) that testimony
is not the voice of the spirit of the Lord; but the voice of the spirit of
delusion. Now I would ask (if trial by the word be neglected) how is it
possible to know whether this testimony speak according to the word, or
whether it speak contrary to the word? If Quakers say, that they are assured
by the same spirit that gives the testimony that it is according to the word,
and other evidence they need not look after: the voice of the spirit that
speaks in them, is that beyond which there needs no enquiry. Then I ask again,
how can Quakers convince deluded persons, who pretend to the testimony of the
spirit, in reference to their gracious state? For they persuade themselves,
that it is the voice of the spirit that speaks peace to them; and other
evidence they will not look after, the testimony of the spirit, is that beyond
which there must be no enquity. Now will not Quakers according to their
principles, be so far from convincing such of their mistake, that they will
rather confirm them in their deceit?

Now according to us scripture is the rule (which lies patent and open to both
parties. And therefore a Papist of great note, is feign to acknowledge that
Scripturis nihil est certius, nihil est notius. i. e. nothing is more certain
and more evident then the Scriptures.) And this is profitable (...), that is,
for conviction, and (as was said) though the Scriptures do not actually
convince the stubborn and stiff-heretick; yet there is so much in them as may
satisfy an inquisitive adversary, who is willing to know right from wrong, and
truth from error. Appollos mightily convinced the Jews by the Scriptures.

It is inconsequential to argue, that the Scripture or written word, is not the
rule to us, (to whom GOD has set down his mind in write) because it was not a
rule to them who lived when the Scripture or written word was not.

As for the Prophets, the event of what they foretold, was that whereby they
were to be tried, Deuteronomy. 18.22. When a Prophet speaks in the Name of the LORD,
if the thing follow not, that is, the thing which the LORD has not spoken, but
the Prophet has spoken presumptuously, thou shall not be afraid of him.
Ierem. 28.9. The Prophet which prophesies of peace, when the word of the LORD
shall come to pass, then shall the Prophet be known that the Lord has sent him.
But because GOD for the trial of his people, may sometimes suffer such things
to fall out, as false-prophets fortell, Deuteronomy. 13.2. Therefore when men pretend
themselves to be prophets sent of GOD, their doctrine must be brought to the
rule and touchstone of GODS written word, and thereby examined, Esaias 8.20.

He says, page 31. that we disjoyne the word and the spirit, because many
preach and read the scriptures, and talk of them without the joined concurrence
of the spirit, which they ought not to do. Answer. He has not offered to prove
that the Scriptures should not be read or spoken of, without the concurrence of
the spirit, unless that be his proof (we say, they ought not to do) but upon
what ground do ye say so? 1. The command for reading and speaking of the
Scriptures, has not this condition annexed to it, that we should read and
speak of the scriptures, only when we have a concurrence of the spirit, and
never but then, where is there such a condition mentioned? 2. What shall be the
carriage of wicked persons, who are strangers to the drawings and motion of the
spirit, must the Bible be to them as an Almanac out of date? Shall it be to
them, as a book useless to look into? 3. When the Saints want the concurrence
of the spirit, may they not read and talk of the Scriptures, as a mean of good
to their souls? How many cold hearts have been rubbed and chaffed into
spiritual heat, by reading and talking of the Scriptures; In so doing the Lord
has met with them, and made their hearts to burn within them: Now though the
scriptures may be read and spoken of, without the concurrence of the spirit.
Yet to affirm this, is not to disjoyne the Scriptures and the spirit,
separating the one from the other; for still the Scriptures remain to be the
endytment of the spirit, being spoken and breathed forth by the spirit, Act.
28.25. Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Isaias the prophet unto our fathers, Act.
1.16. this scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the holy Ghost spoke
by the mouth of David. Mark the Scriptures which Dav d and others of the
Prophets penned, they are the breathings forth of the Holy Ghost himself.

Why does the Quaker complain so much, for my improving Esaias 59.21. as if it
made so much against me; whereas it is directly to that purpose, which it was
alleged for; namely, that GODS Spirit and word go together, and does not the
Lord here promise, that the Spirit and Word should continue with his Church and
People, to direct and instruct them in all necessaries, throughout all ages
sucessivly, even unto the end of the world?

He asks, cannot dead things kill, if men feed upon them? Answ. There is no
doubt of it, yet the Scripture or that part of Scripture which is called the
law, is said to be killing in such a way, as dead things are not: And therefore
this killing Letter is spoken of as being the ministration of death, and the
ministration of condemnation; For the Law threatens death against the sinner,
and curses every one that abides not in all things that are written therein,
2. Cor. 6.7.9. Now are the dead things which the Quaker reckons up, thus
killing? It shall not be denied, but feeding upon sand, gravel, stones, etc.
will prove deadly and destructive to the body, even as the drinking in of the
lifeless poisonous opinions of Quakers will prove hurtful and destructive to
the soul.

SECT. V. Quakers have learned their Language about the Scriptures from Papists.
Now any may perceive a Popish design in all the Quakers reasonings against
the Scriptures, for both Papists and they join in studing to disgrace them.
Herein they very much resemble one another. Ye may hear how Quakers lisp after
the Papists, and concur with them in speaking the language of Ashdod.

Do not Papists call the Scriptures, Do not Quakers say of them, 1. A nose of
wax, or a rule of lead which may be bowed every way as men please? If the
delusion be strong in the heart, will it not twine the Scriptures without to
cause the scriptures to seem for it 2. Papists call the Scriptures inky
Divinity, paper and parchment? Quakers speak of the Scriptures as a dead
letter; 3. Papists blaime the Scriptures, (the reading of them by the Laity) as
that which causes controversies, multiplyeth both Heresies and Sects? Quakers
say, ye that set up the Scriptures as a rule, what Sects, what jangling, and
contesting is among you; 4. Papists prefer the Church before the Scripture?
Quakers prefer the light within, hence they say, that it is by the inward
dispensation (that the outward dispensation of the Gospel is serviceable)
without which it has no service at all. 5. Papists contemn and vilify the
Scriptures? Quakers will not have the Scriptures to be so much as a copy to
the^, but the Spirit is both their teacher and their copy, and if they walk
according to this, by looking upon it, and eyeing it, they shall be good
scholars and proficients, they need not go forth for a copy. 6. Papists say the
church was judge before the Scriptures were written. Quakers say, there was a
rule before the Scriptures were written? 7. Papists deny the Scriptures to be
the principal and complete rule of faith And Quakers do the same.

So true is that of Tertullian, CHRIST is always crucified between two theives.

He denies, That that more sure word of prophecy, 2. Pet. 1.19. is the
scripture. Answer. Had it not been meet, not only to have denied this, but
likewise confuted what was said, proving it to be so; Is not the Apostle more
to be believed (then any Quaker) who expounds that more sure word of prophecy
calling it, verse 20, not the word in the heart, but the prophecy rf
Scripture, or Scripture prophecy, which is said to more (...) sure then a
voice from heaven; not as if there could be any uncertainty of the Lords voice
speaking from Heaven: this is sure enough in it self, but yet Scripture
prophecy is more sure quoad nos, as to us, because a trans^ient voice is more
easily mistaken, or forgotten, then a standing record.

VI. HEAD. Concerning Justification.
SECT. I. Wherein is cleared the Quakers agreement with Papists in the Doctrine
of Justification.
Page 32. He raises a great storm against me, as displaying the banner of
disingenuity, venting filthy imaginations, discovering vanity and malice,
extending my self in a foolish and vain excursion. Ans. I wish the Gentleman
would reflect how much his pen and spirit has been dipped in the gall of Asps,
and remember that causa firma est semper querula. I have not leisure to answer
his bitter revilings and railings, and therefore passing them: I shall endeavor
to trace him, according to the method he has proposed, in giving (as he
pretends) an honest, and plain, and true account of their belief in the matter
of Justification.

He says, page 33. That we are justified by Jesus Christ, both as he appeared
and was manifest in the flesh at Jerusalem, and also as he is made manifest and
revealed in us, and thus Christ and his righteousness without, are not divided
from his righteousness within, but we do receive him wholly, and undivided the
Lord our righteousness in the sight of God, and which ought not, nor cannot be
divided. Ans. Here he insinuats that our opinion is, to divide the the
righteousness of Chirst without, from his righteousness within, which is the
calumny of Papists against us; as if we held that because Christ's righteousness
is imputed to men, there needed no other righteousness. When as we mantaine
that inherent righteousness and imputed are inseparably annexed: so that every
one that is justified has holiness and righteousness wrought in him. We may
not confound Justification and Sanctification (seeing the Scripture
distinguishes them) and yet we must not divide them. Now that the Quakers
fraud and cheatry (which I supect he is guilty of) in this thing, may be
discovered; it will be necessary to enquire how the word justify (in the
present affair, namely as it imports the sinners Justification before God) is
used in scripture: and in this PROTESTANTS and Papists are at variance. Papists
say, that it signifies to make inherently just and righteous (as calefaction
signifies to make inherently hot) on the other hand PROTESTANTS affirm that it
signifies not the making of a man just, by infused inherent righteousness; but
to absolve, account, and pronounce a man righteous, Prove. 17.15. he that
justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both are
abomination to the Lord. Mark, to justify is not to make inherently just and
holy (for this would not be abominable, but acceptable to God) but it is to
absolve and pronounce a man righteous, as to condemn, is to declare a man
guilty, and accordingly sentence him to punishment.

Now in that he says, that they are justified by Christ revealed in them, by
which he understands grace and holiness wrought in them by Christ, (for he
afterward explains it to be that which in scripture is called Christ formed
within.) Here he falls in with the Popish sense of Justification, by
righteousness infused. And his more full agreement with Papists, will appear
even in that, wherein page 34. 35. he says, that they greatly differ from
them. To make good this, I shall do two things. 1. Set down the words of G.
Keith, in his paper to me, (which Mr. Barclay acknowledges to be in substance
the same with that which he has written) Says he, I perceive that by the
righteousness of Jesus Christ imputed, by which thou queries, if we be
justified thou understandest not his work of righteousness, he works in his
Saints, but his obedience and sufferings even unto death in the flesh (not
excluding but including his souls sufferings) at Jerusalem. To which I thus
Reply, that we are even justified by the righteousness of his obedience and
sufferings, in that Vessel or Manhood not formally but causally; forasmuch, as
by his obedience and sufferings therein, he was the procuring cause of that
grace and power of his revealed in us, which produces a work of righteousness
wrought in us: by which we are formally (as the Schoolmen speak) righteous,
and this inward righteousness wrought by him in us, is truly and properly his
Righteousness, and that on a twofold account. 1. For that by his obedience and
sufferings, he procured an entrance to men's hearts, to become a Prince and a
Savior in them. Secondly, In that he is not only the remote procuring cause
in the manner aforesaid, but the immediate worker of it in us, by his immediate
Arm and Power, so that he is well called the LORD our righteousness. Now that
there is no inconsistency between these two, to be justified by the obedience
of Jesus Christ in the flesh at Jerusalem, as the remote procuring cause, and
to be justified by the work of Righteousness wrought by him in us, as the
formal cause is manifest, being causes of different kinds, which do not
repugne one to another, but sweetly concur to the producing their effect.
Thus far G. Keith.

Second thing to be done, is to show wherein PROTESTANTS differ from Papists in
the matter of Justification: which will be notably seen by the answer both of
PROTESTANTS and Papists, to this important and weighty question, viz. what is
that very thing, which causes a poor believing sinner stand pardoned and so
just before GOD, and for which he is pronounced righteous, or absolved from the
accusation and condemnation of the law, and accepted unto eternal life. Now the
Papists in answering this question, have recourse to infused, inherent
righteousness, ass ting this to be the thing, whereby they are justified in
the sight of GOD. But PROTESTANTS though they look upon a principle of Grace
within, as an excellent gift of GOD; yet they cannot lean to that for
Justification, but think their only refuge to be the imputed righteousness of
CHRIST, (namely, the satisfaction and merit of his Death, Passion, and
Obedience in fulfilling the law) judging this to be the very thing by which
Believers may appear before GOD, and in the confidence whereof they may live
and die: And for which they are accounted righteous, absolved from death, and
accepted unto eternal life. Now let us hear the Quakers answer to the
aforementioned question, and it will be found, that as Papists make the formal
cause of Justification to be an inherent righteousness wrought in us, and
inspired into us by the Spirit of GOD, so the Quakers do the same; for G.
Keiths express words are; that we are justified by a work of righteousness
wrought by Christ in us as the formal cause: And therefore when in their
Printed book, they say, that they rely on Christ himself revealed in them,
indwelling in them, as the ground and foundation of their Justification. What
can their meaning be? (though they blind the eyes of the simple, by using words
inoffensive in themselves) but as G. Keith explaineth it, to wit, that Christ by
his obedience and suffering, was the procuring cause of that grace and power of
his revealed in us, which produces a work of righteousness wrought in us by
which we are formally righteous. Now is not this a manifest coincidency with
Papists? For even they make the obedience and sufferings of Christ, the
procuring cause of that grace and righteousness wrought in them, which they own
as the formal cause of their first Justification. So that both Papists and
Quakers deny the imputed righteousness of Christ, to be the very thing by which
a Believer stands pardoned and so just before God and for which he is
pronounced righteous, or absolved from the condemnation of the law, and
accepted unto eternal life: which is looked upon as carrying with it such
danger, that some PROTESTANTS are of opinion, that hereby the Church of Rome
does raze the very foundation. And upon this ground, Mr. Samuel Hammond
undertakes to demonstrate the impossibility of Salvation, in and by the
principles of Quakers, in his book, called, The Quakers house built upon the
sand.

SECT. II. That Works are not Meritorious of Justification.
He adds, that he may not deny Justification by works, but plead for it,
according to the true sense and mind of the spirit. Answ. Let him hold there
and we shall go along with him, for we readily yield that by works, a man is
declared and manifested to be a justified person, so that good works justify
our justification: being notable evidences thereof, and signs of that faith
whereby we are justified; for we are not justified by a barren faith, but by a
faith which is fruitful in good works, and this is that which the Apostle
drives at Iam. 2. But justification by works, such as the Quakers plead for, is
not according to the true sense and mind of the spirit. Is it the mind of the
spirit, that good works are the meritorious cause of Justification? Which Sam.
Fisher (one of the Quakers ringleaders) plainly asserts, exercit. 1. page 84.
and page 88. he says, there are good works which in different respects are
called (truly enough) both Christ's and ours, viz. ours, as done in and by our
persons; Christ's, as done only by his Power in us: and by these (call them as
ye will, Christ's or ours) is the justification of all, that ever were, or shall
be justified, both deserved and effected.

Object. We understand it not any other way then thus, that all their merit or
worth is from Christ. Ans. Where does the scriptures say, that works wrought in
us have merit in them (from Christ) to deserve justification? This is a
Doctrine of your own forging and not of Christ's teaching. Though good works
shall not want a reward, yet they do not merit. It is false to say, that reward
and merit infer one another. PROTESTANTS use to distinguish between a reward
of merit, and a reward of grace: which distinction is grounded on scripture,
compare the original words in Matthew. 5.46. with Luke 6.32. and in that you
affirm the reward to be of grace, then it is not merited by works; the Apostle
opposes these two, making them incompatible, Romans 11.6. And if by grace, then
it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace, but if it be of
works, then it is no more grace, otherwise work is no more work. We acknowledge
that God of his rich mercy and goodness, has promised to reward good works,
and being faithful he will not deny himself, 2. Tim. 2.13. But a reward given
by promise, does not import merit and desert, the reward proceeds from the
bounty of the Giver, and not from the merit of the receiver.

Now the Quakers wisdom is much to be observed, in that they refuse to own
the grossest sort of Papists (for then their draught would be found out, and
their tendency sufficiently known) but they (under the specious name of new
lights) can creep toward the moderate sort of them: who say, that works are
not meritorious, but as they proceed from grace, and by virtue of Gods promise:
when as indeed, if works be of, and flow from the free grace of God, this
inferrs that they are not meritorious; for that which does merit, must not be
done by the strength of another; especially his, at whose hands we look to
merit.

It is evident that the Gentleman is of a higher strain, then to be only for
a reward or merit (as he phraseth it) of free grace, and upon the account of
the promise: Else how shall he be able to reconcile himself to his brother Sam.
Fisher, who ( exerc. 1. page 90.) makes use of this Popish argument, namely,
evil works are the meritorious cause of our condemnation, therefore good works
are the meritorious cause of our justification, (insinuating that there is a
meritorious dignity in good works, even as there is a meritorious indignity and
sinfulness in evil works) this argument has been often answered by a denial of
the consequence, because our evil works are perfectly evil, but our good works
are but imperfectly good. And giving but not granting, that our works were
perfectly good, yet all the requisits to make a work meritorious would not
agree to them.

He adds, that the works that Papists seek to be justified by, are such as
they believe, none can be justified by. Ans. Though they do not go along with
Papists in some of their practices, yet they own their principle, as has been
abundantly cleared, and therefore their correspondence with Rome being
manifest, we must conclude, that in stead of coming out of Babylon, they are
rather running to it.

His next work, page 36. Is to make people believe, that we are near a kin to
Papists; But none who know what Popery is, are like to give him credit, yet if
any be of such an easy faith, as to take upon trust what he says, then no
wonder if the blind leading the blind, both fall into the ditch.

We shall consider wherein he charge us as guilty of Popery, which he
brancheth forth into several particulars. 1. Because we deny, that we are
justified by Christ dwelling in us. Ans. We affirm that we are justified by
the righteousness of Christ, and when this righteousness is believingly applied
and laid hold on, then Christ dwells in us, is this Popery? Or can any that know
the difference between Papists and us, think that we agree with them in the
matter of our Justification? 2. He says, according to us the way to attain to
a state of Justification, is not by believing in the light, wherewith Christ
inlightens every man that comes into the world. Ans. That being a created work
of light, it is not the object of faith, we are no where warranted to believe
in a creature, but threatened with a curse if we do it. 3. He says, that we
deny, that men are to know their justification, or that they are in a justified
estate, by the immediate testimony of the spirit, and so do Papists, Ans. It is
by us looked upon as an error in Papists, that they are against the certain
knowledge and assurance of Justification, and do so much cry up doubtings; but
though Papists should oppose the knowledge of justification by an immediate
testimony of the spirit, this will not prove it to be Popery: Every thing that
Papists mantaine, is not Popery, for it is known, they hold some truths in
common with the Orthodox: Popery is their super added inventions and corrupt
additions to the truth, amongst which is their and your doctrine of
justification by inherent righteousness.

SECT. III. We are not justified by good and Gracious Works wrought in us.
He says, that Romans 3.28. Gal. 2.16. The works of the law are excluded, but
not the works of Christ in us. Ans. Either the works of the law which in these
scriptures are excluded from justification, must be evil and sinful works, or
else good and gracious works: they are not evil and sinful, for here the
Apostle confutes such among the Romans and Galatians, as had corrupted the
doctrine of justification; but it would be irrational to think, that their
opinion was that sinful works did justify: could they imagine that to be the
cause of justification, which deserves and brings on condemnation? And
therefore the Apostle excludes (from justifition) good and gracious works, and
consequently the works of Christ in us, as not being the meritorious cause of
justification.

Further, we shall find that works simply and in general, are excluded from
justification: and this is notably proved in the case of Abraham, who though a
gracious and godly man, yet was not justified by works, Romans 4.2.3.4.5. For if
Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but what says the
scripture, Abraham believed GOD, and it was counted to him for righteousness,
now to him that works is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt, but
to him that works not, but believes in him who justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness. Likewise works without that limitation (of
the law) are excluded, Tit. 3.5. which scripture was cited by me, in opposition
to justification by works, as the meritorious cause thereof, (verse 7. that
being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of
eternal life,) and indeed works in us, and done by us, neither merit
justification nor salvation, though they be the qualification of the persons
that are justified and shall be saved, (for all such are regenerate and renewed
by the Holy Ghost.) It is a known saying, good works are the way to the
Kingdom, and not the cause of reigning: and we only deny them to be
meritorious causes of blessedness, in this respect the Apostle excludes works
generally. And therefore the Gentleman might have kept in his insulting,
triumphing words, why should he be at so much pains to make to himself a man
of straw, and then take pleasure to undress him? There is no hazard to exclude
the merit of works in justification, and yet to affirm them necessarily
requisite in the subject justified.

He tells us page 38. That they justly cast off the accusation of Popery,
having express testimony of scripture, that we are justified by works, Jam.
2.24. Answer. Papists allege the same scripture for justification by works,
and therefore one answer shall serve you both: we must distinguish betvveen
justification before GOD, and justification before men: if we speak of GOD,
and being justified in his sight, and before his Tribunal, then works cannot
serve the turn, Job. 9.2.3. But how should man be just with GOD, if he will
contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand. Yet works are
useful in respect of men, to declare and clear our Justification as to them:
thus Abraham was justified by works, Jam. 2.21. that is, declared to be just;
hereby he was approved as just and righteous in his own conscience, and before
the World.

He says, that good works are not ours, in that signification, as where it is
said, Hebrews 4 10. he that has entered to his rest, has ceased from his own
works. Answer. None of us do affirm that that good and gracious works are ours
in that way that sinful works are; and therefore his answer is but a shift: he
cannot deny good works of Christ in us to be called ours, for though we be
enabled to them by Christ, (and so efficiently his) yet they are subjectivly
our own, our own faith, and our own repentance (it is not Christ but we, who
repent and believe.) Hence it is evident that if justification be by good works
of Christ in us (then our good works justify us) for these are ours in respect
of subject and inherency.

He adds, that faith may be excluded from justification, if it were granted
to be imperfect. Answer. This is his groundless assertion, for the matter and
substance of our justification is not faith; but the perfect righteousness of
Christ apprehended by faith: and upon the account of this object of faith, to
wit, Christ's perfect righteousness: Which faith applies, therefore faith is
said to be accounted for righteousness, Romans 4.5.

He says, that little faith is perfect in the measure of it, and though the
Disciples had doubting, yet the faith was not doubting. Answer. According to
this he might as well say, that light in the Air (at the very first breaking
in, and dawning of the day) is perfect light; for though the Air then be
partly light and partly dark, yet the light is not darkness: yea, he might call
gold (attended and mingled with a great deal of dross) perfect gold, because
the gold is not dross. And page 39. he reasons no better, alleging that
though we know but in part, yet our knowledge is not imperfect, we may know a
thing in part, and that which we know of it we may know perfectly. Ans. It is
needful to enquire, what is meant by imperfection, is not that imperfection,
when there is not that degree of grace in us, which ought to be? Now when our
faith is but little, and our knowledge in part, have we all that faith and
knowledge that we ought to have? Or rather have we not cause to complain, that
we come short of the command? Who can say they know GOD, believe in him, and
love him, in the highest degree that they are bound to do, if not, then these
grace^ must be imperfect?

Object. It is said of Abraham, that his faith was perfected by works, Jam.
2.22. Answer. This comes to no more, but that his faith was made known and
discovered by his works; like that expression, where GODS strength is said to
be perfected in our weakness, 2. Cor. 12.9.

In answering that place Eccl. 7.20. he brings scriptures to prove, that there
are righteous men who do good. But this was not the thing denied, he should
have proved that righteous men on earth do good so purely, that there is not
the least fault or blemish cleaving thereunto. As for that scripture 1. Ioh.
3.9. he that is born of GOD sins not (it does not prove an absolute freedom
from sin; for this is contrary to the experiences of the Regenerat, and Saints
in all Ages, who have bitterly bewailed, and ruefully mourned under the sense
of their sins) the words in the Greek are, (...), that is he makes not sin,
sin is not his trade. Now a man makes a trade of sin, when in sinning he is in
his Element, where he would be: there is no work so pleasing to him, as the
work of sin. But this is not the disposition of a Regenerate Person.

He adds that the Prophet Isaiah 64.6. says not all our righteousness which
is of thy working in us, who are Saints is as filthy rags. Answ. Neither does
the Prophet say (as the Quaker brings him in speaking) all our righteousness,
which we, even the best of the Saints can perform, of and from themselves are
as filthy rags. The Prophet speaks in general (and plurally) of
righteousnessess, and that in the person of the whole Church; and not relating
only to the wicked and ungodly, therefore he uses the word all, and our
righteousness.

To affirm the Saints righteousness to be filthy rags, is no just ground to
make us ashamed, for we do not reflect on the holy Spirit of GOD (as if
filthiness did proceed from him) he is good in giving us the least degree of
grace: not being bound to give us any (his work of grace and holiness in us, is
a special ornament to the soul, making it in beauty to resemble GOD) but in
respect of us, imperfection cleaves to this grace, in that it is not all the
grace which the Law of GOD requires of us: being commanded to love GOD, with
all our hearts souls, and minds, Matthew. 22.37. The best action and works done
and performed by us (as instruments) have something of the taint of sin
adhering to them; where is the soul that is carried out in prayer, and other
spiritual duties, with that love and delight, with that purity and fervency of
spirit, which the spiritualness of the law does call for? Now it is the sin
which cleaves to the Saints good works, which is to be thrown away, this
indeed is not an ornament but a deformity, for which we should be humbled and
ashamed in the sight of God.

He says, page 40. 41. that the Saints are subordinate coworkers with Christ,
but yet it follows not that his works in them, and by them are defiled, and
though it be said, who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean; this hinders
not, but that the Lord can, and does make clean, those who have been unclean,
and so out of them who are made clean, can bring forth clean things. Answer.
1. We grant that there are thousands in Heaven whom the Lord has made
perfectly clean, and their actings have not the least impurity in them, Heb.
12.23. Revel. 21.27. 2. We grant that there be many on Earth who are sanctified
and cleansed: yet their cleansing and sanctification is but in part, they are
not thoroughly cleansed and perfectly sanctified; there is yet an unclean part
in them, they have in them flesh as well as spirit; and however this unclean
part, viz. the flesh, should be chained and kept down; Yet GODS People to their
smart and grief, find the stirrings and rysings of it, and the resistance and
opposition it makes; whereby they are hindered from doing good perfectly, Gal.
5.17. the flesh lasts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh,
and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do, the things
that ye would. Romans 7.19. the good that I would, I do not, but the evil which I
would not, that I do. Now men being but in part holy, and in part carnal;
therefore the works which proceed from them have some filth and taint of sin
cleaving to them: there is sin in the best men to undo them, if GOD should
deal with them in rigor, Psalm. 130.3. If thou Lord should mark iniquity,
O Lord who shall stand, 1. King. 8.46. for there is no man that sins not: And
yet we deny not, but by degrees the clean part increases, and the unclean is
diminished; yea and at last all the uncleanness shall be wrought out: there is a
happy time coming, when the children of GOD, shall not have spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing; but this privilege is reserved for them till they come to
Heaven, for there is not a just man upon earth that does good and sins not,
Eccl. 7.20. Intimating that the just man's doing good is attended with sin:
sinfulness cleaves to his good actions, as was formerly cleared by that
similitude (which the Quaker has not in the lest weakened) of clean water
passing through an unclean pipe, and thereby receiving a tincture of
uncleanness. The Gentleman that supposes himself so well skilled in the
outward creation, should have instructed me, what that outward water is, which
is not capable of defilment: And having first done this, he might then (the
more freely) have come to his supercilious application.

SECT. IV. Justification is not by inherent Righteousness, but by the imputed
Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST.
He adds that justification is taken for the making a man righteous, and then
it is all one with sanctification. Answer. Is not this to confound what the
scripture distinguishes? Now justification and sanctification in scripture are
always spoken of, as distinct benefits, 1. Cor. 6.11. But ye are sanctified,
but ye are justified, Romans 8.30. whom he called (namely to a conformity to the
Image of his Son) them he also justified. And it is to be observed, that we
need not contest with Quakers or Papists, whether the word justify, signify to
make righteous or no? Only we say that the righteousness which does make a man
just, or justifyeth him, is not inherent in him. And to assert justification,
to be the making of a man righteous, by infused, inherent righteousness (or
righteousness wrought in him) is to confound what GOD distinguishes, and to
alter the scripture sense of the word justify.

He adds, page 42. that admitting the Apostle Phil. 3.9. speaks not of his
righteousness whilst he was a Pharisee, yet he was still to deny the work and
righteousness which was to proceed from his own will and spirit. Answer. The
Apostle in the preceding verses, disclaimed righteousness proceeding from his
own will and spirit: but verses 8.9. he ryseth higher, and goes a step
further, even to the present time, (I account all things) intending the present
graces and privileges which he enjoyed, and disclaiming them in the matter of
Justification; Paul durst not lean to any work of grace in him (the best man's
graces being imperfect) as that which can endure GODS sight, his exact and
severe trial: and therefore is that word, 1. Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by my
self, yet am I not hereby justified: Notwithstanding his holy course of life,
and obedience performed to the law, yet he saw a necessity to look after a more
perfect righteousness then this: such as God himself cannot refuse as imperfect
and insufficient, namely, the righteousness which is of GOD by faith.

Then in the following verse, there are the excellent fruits and advantages,
which redound to them, who renouncing confidence in themselves, lay hold on
Christ for righteousness. Such as 1. Increase of Knowledge. 2. Mortification of
the Old Man. 3. Resurrection to newness of Life. To make these things the
righteousness whereby we are justified (as the Quaker does) is to confound
Justification with Sanctification, for here the parts of Sanctification
(namely, Mortification, and Vivification) are expressly mentioned.

He says, My last argument from 2. Cor. 5.21. is most absurd and impious, for
accordingly it would follow, that as Christ was made sin for us, who of himself
knew no sin, no not in the lest, so we may be made righteous before GOD, though
we have no holiness, no faith, no good thing wrought in us. Answ. He indeed
impudently and absurdly wrests my argument, the strength of which lies in
this: that as our sins are inherent in us, and imputed to Christ, so his
righteousness is inherent in him, and imputed to us: Or as Christ was made sin
for us, by the imputation of our sins to him, Isa. 53.6. so we are made
righteous before GOD, by the imputation of his righteousness to us, he has
made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of GOD in him, upon which words, one thus excellently glosseth,
he sin, and we righteousness, and not ours; but the righteousness of GOD, and
not in us, but in him: Even as he sin, not his own, but ours, nor in himself,
but in us, so therefore are we the righteousness of GOD in him, as he is sin in
us.

The Quakers inference is impious, and absurd to imagine, that GOD (considering
his purity and justice) should accept one as righteous in his fight, and yet
his person remain abhored of GOD, as an unholy sinner; for the righteousness
of Justification and Sanctification are twin blessings, which go together in
regard of GODS actual application of them: And therefore it is a mistake
arysing (to speak fairest) from ignorance, to insinuate that we are against
inward righteousness and holiness; seeing we profess that without this no man
shall see the Lord. And though we plead for the imputation of Christ's
tighteousness as to Justification; yet we do nor hold, that there needs no
other righteousness at all: We assert Justification and Sanctification to be
inseparable companions, and that whosoever is justified, has inherent
godliness and righteousness. And therefore it is false to say, that we
strengthen the profane and wicked in their presumption; for we declare to them
that while they continue wicked they are without hope, and can lay no just
claim to Christ's righteousness: and that they must be new creatures, of they
can never come to the New Jerusalem.

He asks page 43. Whether the Apostles did sin in writting the Scriptures?
Answer. There are two things that shall be said to satisfy this demand. 1. That
this was a singular extraordinary case, and no doubt but GOD (he that made an
immaculate Conception, in the womb of her that was a sinner) can preserve
extraordinarily some singular action from impurity, such as the penning of the
scriptures was. But what is this to us, who can pretend to no such thing? 2.
Though the matter contained and delivered in the Scriptures, remains
inviolable and without the least defilment; yet what hazard is it to affirm,
that the Apostles in penning the Scriptures were nor inflamed with love and
zeal: According to the utmost extent of the Law, though being tall Cedars,
their love and zeal was far above the love and zeal of others.

VII. HEAD. Concerning the Quakers groundless magnifying of their Sect.
I mean to be thrifty of my paper in answering the Quakers self-advancing and
exalting words. He says, page 44. The flock of Christ is like to him, and can
it be an unsuitable thing, for one who supposes himself to be of Christ's flock,
to say, the flock with whom he is, it likest to Christ? Answer. What though the
flock of Christ be likest to him? Should the Quakers therefore set up
themselves above all the people of GOD on Earth? Are none of Christ's flock but
they? Oh! It is intolerable pride to vilify all the Saints and Servants of GOD
in the world, and to shut them out from being of Christ's flock; for if this be
their privilege, then Quakers are not the most Christ like people, others may
call themselves so as well as they.

He says, that Christianity stands not in flying the society of men, but the
matter is for people, to have their occasions and business in the world using
it, as if they were not using it. Answer. This indeed is the great work and
business; but can it be inferred from hence, that the true power and life of
holiness is more truly known to Quakers, and eminently held forth by them,
then by any people else that have come forth since the Apostles days? It were
good that that parable were remembered, Luke 18.9. And he spoke this parable
unto certain which trusted in themselves, that they were righteous and
despised others. And truly what ever thoughts the Gentleman has of the
PROTESTANT CHURCHES, (which in disdain he calls our Flocks) there are many
in them who live in the world very much dead to the world: and their
communication and habitual course of life, holds forth their conversations to
be in Heaven; some of them have professed it were ill for them, if they lived
not every day, as if it should prove their dying day.

We are far from commending the way of Monks and Hermits; but their example was
brought, to give chek to ignorant well meaning people: who are apt to be too
much taken with an outward show of mortification.

He says, page 45. such as have had so much of the fear of God upon their
hearts, that they durst not adventure upon sin, would they not love to be
perfect? Answer. Yes surely, perfection is their aim, and the white that they
shoot at, and therefore they long to be in Heaven, where they shall sin no more
for ever; but they know that the Saints while on Earth shall be clogged with
sin: and that the question is not, whether GOD can by the singular assistance
of his grace, keep any in this bodily life totally pure from sin? But whether
GOD has not declared and revealed his mind to the contrary: and whether he
sees it not fit to have his people while in this world) exercised with relicts
of sin, to be as pricks and thorns in their sides, and to keep them humble,
lest they should be exalted above measure. And though the Saints do fear and
dread to adventure upon sin; yet through the strength of remaining corruption,
and violence of temptation, they may (to their hearts sorrow and grief) be
drawn to it, which will be evident by reading over the seventh chapter to the
Romans.

He asks page 46. Whether such as have lived in the sense of Gods favor,
would have pleaded for continuance in sin, and does not continuance in sin take
away and eclipse the sense of Gods favor. An. There are conscience wasting
sins and falling or continuing in them, will greatly eclipse the sense of
divine favor; but there are sins of daily incursion which people may be guilty
of, and yet enjoy the favor of GOD. The godly dare not plead for allowing
themselves in the lest sin, approving of any sin will mar our peace, and let
in a sensible damp upon the soul.

The persons mentioned by me (in the Dialogue) as having such notable
enioyme^ts of and communion with GOD, were far from Quakerisme, they would have
looked upon your opinions as monstrous, and to be abominated with the greatest
detestation.

VIII. HEAD. Proving the Quakers to be guilty of Equivocating.
He says page 47. That it is a false challenge and a calumny to charge them as
denying Baptism and the Lords Supper, for they do own these things in the
substance and reality, and in the true acceptance. Answer. They are utterly
against Baptism with water, and the Lords Supper as instituted by Christ in
giving and receiving Bread and Wine. Now in this sense Baptism and the Lords
Supper are commonly understood, and do not Quakers dissemble and equivocate,
when they speak one thing and mean another? When they speak plain words that
other men use, saying, they are for Baptism and the Lords Supper: but it is
with a reserved sense, and not in that sense wherein the words are usualy
taken; what is this but to speak lies in hypocrisy? As the Apostle charges upon
the Seducers and false teachers in his time, 1. Tim. 4.2.

It is a slander to say that we place the shadow for the substance, the husk
for the kernel. Do we not make a difference between the outward signs, and the
things signified? Pressing people no to rest satisfied with the one without the
other: and to seek not only the bread of the Lord, but that bread which is the
Lord. We know and believe that outward privileges will not serve the turn,
there must be reality and truth of grace in the heart, otherwise GOD will
punish the circumcised with the uncircumcised, Ierem. 9.25.

IX. HEAD. Wherein the Quakers Objections (against our singing of Psalms) are
answered.
Page 48. He confesses that singing of Psalms was used by the Saints, that it
is a part of GODS worship, when performed by his spirit, and still may
warrantably be performed, and it is not unusual among Quakers, yea David's words
may also be used as they suit the condition of the party. Answ. It is good that
he grants (and yet it is no more then he should) the lawfulness of singing
David's Psalms, yet truly I suspect his words have not so honest a meaning, as
they have a look, for if Quakers be for singing Psalms; How comes it to pass
that the exercise of this duty is not keept up among them at their meetings?
Though they have been meeting in this place for about eight or nine years; yet
none (for ought I can understand) have been witnessess to their practice in
this thing. But happily the singing that the Gentleman pleads for, is of the
same nature with that of some of his friends, who leading the horse of I.
Nayler, in his entrance to Bristol: and singing (with one bare before him)
holy, holy, the holy one of Israel; which they applied to the said Nayler, and
he for his part, professed that he might not refuse any thing, that is moved of
the Lord, and that he thought the Father did command them to do it. A woman
Quaker said, that she witnessed the holy of holies was risen which moved her so
to do. See Naylers Trial, page 4.5.

However, my arguments for singing of Psalms remain untouched, yet he moves
two objections against our way of singing.

Object. 1. Though singing of Psams in the true sense of them be allowable, yet
as used by us is abominable, because the persons using it, are a mixed
multitude. Answer. He has not proved it unlawful to join in singing with a
mixed multitude, has GOD any where forbidden their singing? We find in
Scripture that all the creatures are called upon to sing praises to GOD, Psalm
148.11.12.13 Kings of the earth, and all people, both young men and maidens,
old men and children, let them praise the Lord. Psalm. 96.1. O sing unto the
Lord a new song, sing unto the Lord all the earth. As for that Scripture 1.
Cor. 14.15. it does not only speak of singing with the understanding, but also
praying with the understanding. And if hereby he would infer that the mixed
multitude should forbear singing, he may as well urge them to forbear praying:
yea according to his way of reasoning, I know no spiritual duty that they
should be employed in, because they are dead in their sins, and it is the
living that serve God spiritually, and not the dead.

2. Object. All lying is abomination, but many times it falls out, that by
singing of Psalms the people come to lie in the presence of God. Answ. This
objection says nothing when we sing Psalms that suit our condition (then we
are not guilty of lying) and the truth is, there is such plenty and variety of
spiritual matter in David's Psalms, matter of such general and comprehensive
concernment; that they readily offer matter to us, to present our own case to
GOD. But suppose that the Psalm do not suit with our condition, yet we do not
lie in singing it, why should the singing of these words (my heart is not
haughty, and I water my couch with tears) be accounted a lie, more then the
reading of them? May we not sing these words as expressing the condition of
former Saints? And withal secretly wishing that the frame of our hearts were
like unto theirs, is this to lie in the presence of GOD?

X. HEAD. Concerning Baptism.
SECT. I. There is no Substantial difference between JOHN'S Baptism, and CHRIST'S.
Page 49. He acknowledges that John's Baptism (was with water) and that his
Baptism and Christ's Baptism agreed in the Author, but he says as to the
matter they are not one, for John himself distinguishes them, Mark. 1.8.
Answer. In this place John makes no difference between the matter of his
Baptism and Christ's Baptism, he only shows a difference between his office
and work, and the office and work of Christ; all that John could do was to
administer the outward Element, but Christ could give the spirit by means of
the outward Baptism: so that John here depresseth himself and advances Christ,
it being Christ alone who bestows what the outward Baptism signifies. I
indeed have baptized you with water but he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost.

He says, they agree not in the end, for the end of John's Baptism was but to
point and show forth the other, as the end of the shadow is to point to the
substance. Ans. The Scripture speaking of John's Baptism, calls it the Baptism
of repentance for the remission of sins, Mark. 1.4. intimating that its end was
to signify and seal remission of sin: which likewise is the end of Christ's
Baptism, Act. 2.38. Now John's Baptism and Christ's agreeing not only in the
Author, but also in the matter and end, this proves thar there is no
substantial difference between them.

Object. They differ in substance, for it is written Act. 19, 2.3.4.5. that
there were of the Baptism of John who had not so much as heard of the Holy
Ghost. Answer. The meaning is not, that they heard not of the person of the
Holy Ghost, being Disciples and Believers, they could not be totally ignorant
of this, doubtless they were acquainted with the Scriptures, and from thence
they could not but know, that there was a Holy Ghost; But the thing they were
ignorant of, was the visible, miraculous, and extraordinary gifts of the Holy
Ghost: which then flourished in the Church, and yet were not common to all that
were Baptized, Act. 8.15.16. they prayed for them that they might receive the
Holy Ghost, for as yet he was fallen upon none of them, only they were
baptized in the Name of the LORD JESUS. The Apostle did not anew baptize those
persons that had been baptized with the Baptism of John: only he gave a right
explanation of John's Baptism, and then laid hands on them, upon which followed
the gifts of the Holy Ghost, viz, speaking with tongues and prophesying verse 6.

SECT. II. Showing that Baptism with Water is an Ordinance of CHRIST and to be
continued in the Church.
He adds, That where Christ commands his Disciples to baptize, Matthew. 28.
there is no command to baptize with water. Answ. The subsequent practice of the
Apostles may satisfy sober persons, that Christ's command had reference to
baptizing with water; Can there be a better comment upon the command then
Apostolical practice? And it is observable that when Philip had preached Christ
to the Eunuch, and it would seem had informed him of the ordinance of Baptism
(however it is sure, the knowledge of it he had) immediately upon the sight of
water he desired to be baptized, Act. 8.37. see here is water what does hinder
me to be baptized. And that command of Christ's ( Matthew. 28.) to his Apostles,
as it does not expressly speak of Baptism with water; so neither of Baptism
with the spirit, and therefore if the Quaker exclude the one, he may likewise
exclude the other.

Object. It is said baptize into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
and this is Baptism with the spirit- Answ. This is affirmed, but without proof.
The Name of GOD has various acceptations, and how does he make good, that it
is taken here in his sense, and not any other way? If by baptizing into the
Name of GOD, he mean regenerating of men, making them just and holy like GOD:
Then I say, this was commanded before, when our Lord said, go teach (or
disciple) all nations, does not this imply an endeavor to make them holy and
righteous? And therefore if Baptizing them into the Name of GOD, import the
same thing: this would infer a needless tautology in the command of Christ,
which the GOD of wisdom will not own, in so short a sum of words.

He adds page 50. That Peter's words in baptizing Cornelius after he had
received the spirit imply no command. Ans. Is it not (totidem verbis) in plain
terms said, he commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the LORD, Act,
10.48. and the Scripture phrase of doing a thing in the Name of the LORD, is as
much as doing it at his command, and by authority and warrant from him, Matthew.
18.20. Where two or three are gathered together in my Name (that is, in
obedience to my command) there am I in the midst of them.

Object. That the Apostles received no commission to baptize with water, is
clear from that of Paul, where he says, I thank GOD I baptized none of you,
but Crispus and Gaius, and the household of Stephanus for I was not sent to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel. 1. Cor. 1. Answer. If the Apostle had no
commission to baptize with water, how was it then, that he thus baptized some?
He would not have done this of his own head and self-will, Paul should have
sinned in baptizing any at all without commission: and therefore we gather that
he was sent indeed to Baptize, but his principal mission was to Preach; and
this is not an adding to Scripture but the true meaning of it, which will be
further clear by comparing it with Hos. 6.6. for I desired mercy and not
sacrifice. Now it is certain that sacrifice was a thing that GOD required, but
mercy was the principal thing, it was not so much sacrifice as mercy that GOD
called for. Even so Christ sent Paul not so much to Baptize as to Preach; he
sent him principally to Preach as being a more principal work. The Quakers
instance about worshipping of Images, is altogether impertinent, the Religious
worshipping of them (more or less) is absolutely forbidden. But Paul had not
such an absolute prohibition as to baptizing with water, otherwise he had not
adventured upon the baptizing of any.

He says, That Scripture Matthew. 28.19. relates to the Baptism of the Spirit,
and not to Baptism with Water. Arsw. Because this is the maine Scripture, that
the continuance of Water Baptism is grounded upon, it will be needful to clear
that by Baptism here, is intended (not the Baptism of the spirit) but Baptism
with water. For making out of which, two things are to be remarked, 1. That the
Baptism here mentioned is held forth to be the action of the Apostles: hence
Christ said to them, go and teach all Nations Baptizing them. Now to baptize
with the Spirit, is spoken of as the peculiar action of Christ; to ascribe to
men a power of Baptizing with the Spirit, is to attribute to them, what is
peculiar to Christ, Matthew. 3.11. he that comes after me is mightyer then I, he
shall baptize with the Holy Ghost. 2. The Baptism of the spirit, is a
sanctifying, renewing, operation of the spirit in and upon the heart. Now if
this Baptism were here intended, then the duty commanded should be confounded
with the promise, for the promise is, I will be with you, that is, by the
assistance, presence, and powerful operation of my spirit, accompanying your
labors, making them effectual upon the hearts of people: so that understanding
the words of the Baptism of the spirit, there should be a confounding of the
duty commanded, with the mercy and blessing promised: therefore the Baptism
which Christ commanded is Baptism with Water (as is verified by the Apostles
practice) which is to continue as the Preaching of the word, unto the end of
the world.

Page 51. He undertaketh to elude the Scriptures cited by me, as holding forth
the excellent end; and uses of Baptism, the first was Act. 2.28. To this, he
says, that here is no mention of outward water. Ans. Neither is there mention
of outward water, 1 Cor. 1.16.17. and yet be grants that baptizing there has
reference to water. 2. He says that repentance and remission of sins may be,
and are found without water Baptism. Ans. Therefore, Baptism with water is not
absolutely necessary to salvation, which we readily yield. 3. He says, where
Baptism with water is, both these are frequently wanting. Answ. Ergo, the
Papists are in an error, who affirm that Baptism does ex opere operato,
confer grace.

Second Scripture is 1. Pet. 3.21. To this he says, that the words following
clear the meaning, not to be water Baptism, not the putting away of the filth
of the flesh. Answ. These words do indeed manifest that Baptism of it self, is
not available unto salvation, and so the Popish opus operatum, is struck at: as
if by the mere receiving of Baptism, grace were conveyed. The like may be said,
to what he alleges in answering the other Scriptures, viz. Act. 22.6. Ephesians.
5.26. Gal. 3.7. in all which he proceeds upon a wrong supposition, as if we
thought that Baptism of it self (or by any force of the outward element of
water) were effectual to cleanse the soul, and to work grace and regeneration:
Now this is far from our thoughts, who make the efficacy of it, to be only the
power and operation of the Holy Ghost, accompanying the ordinance in the right
use of it.

He adds, that Baptism with water is but a figure, which was to give place to
that one Baptism Epes. 4.5. Answer. This one Baptism was the Baptism which
Christ commanded, and it has been cleared, that this Baptism was Baptism with
water: so that that one Baptism, cannot be called the substance, and Baptism
with water the shadow seeing they are the same thing: and therefore it
remains that baptism with water is an ordinance of Christ, and (the Lord
concurring with it) a profitable mean to further our Salvation. And whereas he
reflects upon our baptizing of Infants, and the manner ^f it: it must be
adverted, that the quarrel betwixt Quakers and us, is not whether Baptism
belong to Infants, or whether it should be by sprinkling or dipping: but they
are against all Baptism with water (even of adult persons) not allowing this,
so much as the name of an ordinance of JESUS CHRIST.

XI. HEAD. Concerning the LORDS Supper.
He grants page 52. that Christ was the Author of the Lords Supper, and that
the Disciples were enjoined the observance of it, but he says, this provss not
that it was to be of perpetual continuance. Answ. Hereby is proved all that was
intended, namely, that the ordinance of the Supper, has Christ for the
Instituter of it: and therefore it is called the Lords Table, 1. Cor. 10.21.
and the Lords Supper, 1. Cor. 11.20. Why then does the Quaker vilify this
Ordinance, by speaking of it with that addition (the Lords Supper so called)
cannot he find in his heart to give it that name, which the Scripture gives it.

He says, That by breaking bread Act. 2.42. is meant their ordinary eating.
Answer. The eating there, is not ordinary, but Sacramental eating, which
usually is expressed by this phrase of breaking bread, (a part being taken for
the whole) Act. 20.7. 1. Cor. 10.16.

Neither does Act. 2.46. make it evident, that their breaking of bread was
their ordinary eating. This text speaks not of daily eating (but of
continuing daily in the Temple) And though they did eat from house to house;
yet the Syriak expounds it expressly of the Eucharist: and it is thought that
the Faithful abode sometimes in one house, and sometimes in another for fear of
persecution. It seems the Gentleman knows not well the way of PROTESTANT
CHURCHES, who thinks that their Sacramental eating is but once or twice in a
year, they plead that it should be often: and the practice of some is
answerable, in that they communicate once in a fortnight, and others once every
month. And albeit we do not go to this ordinance to make a full meal for our
bodies (liberal feeding of them at such a time would make the better part to be
neglected) yet as much is made use of, as serves to represent the Spiritual
nourishment of Believers by Jesus Christ, and more is not requisite.

He adds page 53. That the eating mentioned Act. 2.46. is conjoined with
this, that they sold their possessions, and if we make the Apostles example and
practice our rule, why do we not sell our possessions as they did? Answer. We
hold not our selves bound to follow the Saints and Apostles in every thing, all
their practices are not to be imitated by us: And therefore we distinguish
their practices, some of them were accidental or occasional, being occasioned
by the special necessity of times and seasons; these are not always binding
(but only when cases and seasons are alike) and of this nature, was their
selling of their possessions. Then some of their actions were upon such grounds
as are of perpetual and common concernment, to one Church as well a another, to
one Age as well as another, and these actions are still obligatory: thus we
ought to follow them in breaking bread, or in the ordinance of the Supper;
because this concerns the Churches of Christ in this Age as well as in their
Age: seeing the Lord left it as a standing and lasting monument of his love, to
continue until his coming again in the clouds, as shall be made good in due
time.

He asks, Why we do not abstain from eating blood, and things strangled, as
they did? Answer. The command in reference to these things was but temporary,
and there is a plain repeal of it: in that Christian liberty is extended to
whatsoever is sold in the shambles, of that (says the Apostle) eat making no
question for conscience sake, 1 Cor. 10.25.

He asks again, Why we do not wash one another feet, which they were as
solemnly commanded to do, as to take and eat? Ioh. 13.14. Answer. How is it
then, that we do not read in all the Scriptures, that ever the Disciples
practiced this thing? They continued in breaking bread, but where is there
mention of their washing the feet of one another? The great design of this
command, was to teach the Apostles humility and love, and mutually to
condescend for one another good, even to the meanest and lowest services: our
Lord and Masters pattern of humility, should make fellow servants ashamed of
their statliness and pride.

He denies that the Apostle 1. Cor. 11. recommended the practice of this
ordinance by way of command. Answer. What clearer command can there be then
that verse 28. let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread,
and drink of that cup. Mark, the Apostle does not only hold forth, that they
were or might be in the use of this ordinance; but that they ought and should
be in the use of it, plainly enjoining this by way of precept: and withal
discovering the necessity of previous examination, before their partaking of
this so solemn an ordinance. It is further to be observed that the Corinthians
were to be often in the use of this ordinance, as often as ye eat this bread and
drink this cup. Now these ordinances which were abolished by the coming of
Christ (and yet for a season were practiced) they were nor often used by the
Apostles and primitive Christians: Let me clear this, by instancing in
circumcision (which is the instance very much talked of by Quakers) we read
indeed that Paul circumcised Timothy, (but whom other did he circumcise?) He
refused to circumcise Titus, Gal. 2.3. and the reason of Timothies
circumcision, was to prevent the scandal of weak brethren, Act. 16.3. Now where
does the Apostle when he warrands Christians to be often in the use of this
ordinance of the Supper, give this as a reason? Namely, that it was for the
sake of the weak, who could nor suddenly be weaned from it, (let the Quaker
show this from Scripture if he can) The Apostle had a higher rise, he saw
divine authority stamped upon this Ordinance, that (says he) which I received
of the Lord, have I delivered unto you. 1. Cor. 11.23.

SECT. I. The Ordinance of the SVPPER is not abolished, but to be continued
till the coming of CHRIST.
Page 54. He lets of his great gun, (small shot will not serve his turn)
thinking to give this Ordinance deadly wound; But really, he makes a noise
without doing the least spoil. Let us examine the Scripture which he brings
for the abolishing and ending of the LORDS SUPPER, it is 1. Cor. 10.15.16.17. I
speak as unto wise men, judge ye what I say, the bread which we break, is it
not the communion of the Body of Christ. Then says he, the Apostle proceeds to
show what that bread was, for we being many are one bread, and one body, for we
are partakers of that one bread. Answer. There is not a word here concerning
the abolishing of the the Lords Supper. This Scripture affords a notable
argument to promote union and onness among the professing people of GOD: The
drift of it being to show, that as many grains of Wheat make up one loaf, so
many members make up one Body of Christ; and partaking of that one bread,
thereby they profess union in love toward one another.

He asks, What is that one Bread, is it the outward, or the inward? Ans. It
is both the outward and the inward, and yet it is but one Bread, in regard of
the Sacramental union, which if between the sign, and the thing signified: and
by virtue of this union, the sign sometimes gets the name of the thing
signified; as when Christ took the bread, saying, this is my Body. Now by this
answer, our intent only is to show how truly the bread may be called one
bread (and that this ordinance is to be continued, we shall prove another way)
and therefore it is a pitiful evasion for him to say, that we might as well
plead for the continuance of all the sacrifices and offerings, etc. Any one may
see a non sequitur in his reasoning.

He adds, page 55. That the Apostles and primitive Christians who had a large
measure of the spirit, did use this ordinance, but it was not by necessity of
command. Answer. It cannot be denied but once there was a command to be in the
use of this ordinance, Christ said, do this in rememberance of me. Now there is
no repeal of this command, neither in express terms, nor by due consequence
from scripture: unless he can make (a formal or virtual appeal hereof) to
appear, we have reason to think that the primitive Christians set about this
ordinance, by virtue of a command, and that still we are obliged to do the same.

He adds, That we have no ground to say, that Christ enjoins the observance
of this ordinance, till his outward coming so many hundred years after. Answer.
The Scripture is plain that the duration and continuance of this ordinance
must be, till Christ come, 1. Cor. 11.26. Now this coming of Christ is not to
be understood of an internal coming, in a spiritual inward way of appearance in
the hearts of his people; We deny not, but Christ promised thus to come to
them, and has made his promise good, by a plentiful infusion of the graces of
his spirit into their hearts; after this manner he came to the Corinthians, who
were called to be Saints, 1. Cor. 11.2. and had the Spirit of GOD dwelling in
them. 1. Cor. 3.16. and were washed, justified, sanctified in the name of the
Lord Jesus. 1. Cor. 11.6. and enriched in all knowledge, 1. Cor. 1.5. But
notwithstanding this inward coming they continued in the practice of this
ordinance; and that (as has been cleared) necessitate praecepti, in regard of
a command; and therefore that coming (until which this ordinance must be
continued) what other can it be, but even Christ's coming to judgment? Spoken
of by the Angel at his alcention, when he shall come in like manner as he was
seen go to Heaven, Act. 1.11. Now surely, Quakers must needs be great enemies
to their own souls, who oppose this ordinance which the primitive Saints (who
had the substance more then any of them) conscientiously practiced, and the
Lord expressly commanded: and plainly intimats his mind, that it should be
perpetuated for the good and benefit of his Church, until his second coming to
judge the World.

It is meeter to pass by the Gentle-mans empty words, which fill up page 56.
then to make a repetition of, or any reply unto them. Only it is to be
considered that the difference between Quakers and us, is not about the
qualification of persons, who should be admitted to the Lords Supper; but they
raze the very ordinance it self.

HEAD. XII. Concerning the MINISTRY.
SECT. I. Quakers are against a Mediate Call to the MINISTRY: And an immediate
Call they have not.
He adds page 57. That it cannot be asserted in opposition to Quakers (who
grant the same) that the Ministry of the word is an ordinance of Christ. Ans.
In the Dialogue I pointed at a Ministry mediatly called, and are Quakers for a
mediate call to the Ministry? At when men are set a part and ordained to that
Office, by fasting, prayer, and laying on of hands: It this be their mind, why
do they speak against those who are thus ordained? As not being the Ministers
of Christ, but having their Ministry from men.

He asks, Why I cite Ephesians. 4.11. Answer. To show that Christ appointed
Ministers to be in his Church, and here is touched the principal and public
Officers given to his Church: whereof the three first were extraordinary, and
but temporary, and the three last ordinary and perpetual: For should these
cease as the former? Then Christ (might come under that imputation, of not
being faithful to his promise) who gave them to continue till we all come in
the unity of the faith unto a perfect man.

He adds, That it is owned by them that the Ministry is not common, yet that
hinders not but that any of them may speak when the saints are met together,
according to 1. Cor. 14.31. Answer. I would ask how he can make out, that the
prophesying mentioned in that place is an ordinary Office? And if it be
extraordinary, then it can be no foundation, for Quakers to build an ordinary
practice upon. Besides when it is said, ye may all prophecy one by one, it is
not to be understood of all the members of the Church indifferently; for some
are forbidden expressly to speak in the Church, verse 34. And therefore that all
must be referred to the Prophets: all the Prophets may prophecy, and the same
Apostle says, all are not Prophets, 1. Cor. 12.29.

He alleges, it is not proved that some are called to the Ministry i^mediatly
without the intervention of men and some mediatly by men authorized for that
purpose. Answer. Were not the Prophets and Apostles called immediately? The Lord
sent them by his own immediate command, Amos. 7.15. Matthew. 16.1.6.7. was nor
Timothy set a part to the work (mediatly) by the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery; 1. Timothy. 4.14. And it was given him in charge to lay hands
suddenly on no man, 1. Tim. 5.22. we deny not but such (recorded in Scripture)
as had a mediat outward Call to the Ministry, had also an inward Call (that is,
competent qualifications, gifts and abilities for the work) but it must be
observed, that the inward call, and immediate call, are not the same thing: In
Scripture the one is opposed to the other, Paul who was immediately called to be
an Apostle; opposes himself, 1. To false Apostles, who were called by the mere
authority of men. 2. He opposes himself to ordinary Ministers: who might have
an inward call from GOD, and an outward call from men appointed by GOD for this
work, see Gal. 1.1. Paul an Apostle not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus
Christ.

He adds, That they who come preaching the Gospel, not in speech only, but
also in power and in the Holy Ghost, and in the evidence and demonstration of
the spirit, give sufficient proof that they are called of GOD. Answer. Methinks
then, he should have more favorable thoughts of PROTESTANT MINISTERS: who have
been and are powerful Preachers of the Gospel, being able to give as evidences
of their mission from GOD (besides their competent qualifications, and
ordination to the Ministry) the success of and some daily assistance of the
Spirit in their Labors; and yet the Quaker; in the heat and anger of their
spirits, do not spare such. But stepping up to the Throne of Judgment, they
impiously censure them, as deceivers, hypocrites, and children of the Devil.

He makes much ado, page 58. as if we were falling in with Papists, in
pleading for miracles; when as it is known we do not pretend to the doing of
miracles; only if men be so bold, as to assert an immediate call (which the
Quakers do) such as the Apostles had: we think it meet that they show the signs
of their Apostoleship, and the tokens of their immediate call; which has been
always accompanied either with the working of miracles, foretelling of things
to come, or some other extraordinary thing. Jonah foretold the destruction,
which within forty days was to come upon Nineveh. John's call was attended
with extraordinary things at his conception and birth, and there were singular
predictions concerning him.

Object. So there are special predictions concerning the Lords pouring forth of
his Spirit, upon many in these latter days to prophecy. Answer. I suppose the
special prediction which he aims at, is, Joel 2.28. now this prediction was
accomplished in the extraordinary pouring forth of the Spirit upon the
Apostles: when they were filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with
tongues: the Apostle urges this, as the accomplishment of that promise in
Joel. see Act. 2.15.16.17. When Quakers can manifest that Scripture predictions
(of preparing the way of the Lord) are applied to them by Angels and confirmed
by the testimony of Christ, as they were to John, we shall then look upon them,
as called as he was, but not till then.

He says that Tit. 1.5. Act. 14.23. Prove not that those Elders had not the
Call of the Spirit of GOD in themselves. Answer. What ever inward call they
might have; yet they had not an immediate call, which is by the immed at voice
and command of GOD, without the intervention of men: and therefore in that
Moses consecrated Aaron, it follows that his call was not immediate (but
rather an extraordinary mediat call) and yet he was called of GOD: being set a
part in that way which the Lord had prescribed and appointed.

SECT. II. Proving the continuance of the MINISTRY.
He adds that my proof from Ephesians. 4.12.13. is altogether impertinent,
because we are against the perfection of the Sa nts in this life. Answer. This
is a pregnant and pertinent proof to bold forth the continuance of the
Ministry, the term whereof is the day of judgment: For this Ministry must
continue till all the Elect come and meet in that complete unity (not only of
opinion, but also of he art and affection) which is called the unity of the
faith, and it is that which the Saints shall attain unto: being come to the
state and degree of perfection in the life to come, which state is here called
a perfect man.

Neither can it be gathered from verse 14. (that this perfection is on earth)
where the Apostle only shows that the Ministry of the word is a mean
ordained by God, to preserve and keep his People from the poison of dangerous
errors, and from the snares of subtle, crafty seducers. It is true, the
Ministry is given for perfecting of the Saints, and hereby (as a mean) they
are brought to perfection in parts, and pressed to seek after an absolute full
perfection even in degrees. Now in casting of the Ministry that we plead for
(namely a Ministry according to the order delivered by the Apostles and
prescribed in the word.) Quakers manifest themselves to be enemies to the
Ministry of Christ, and injurious to their own souls.

XIII. HEAD. Concerning the SABBATH.
SECT. I. The observation of the SABBATH is warranted by the fourth Command.
He adds page 59. That as the fourth Command requires the observation of one
day of seven, so it expressly instanceth that day, to be the seventh. Ans*
Though the fourth Command instance in the seventh day (that is for number) yet
it speaks not precisely of the seventh day in order from the creation. It is
said six days shall thou labor, but the seventh is the Sabbath, mark, the
seventh is the Sabbath, the Lord says not the seventh from the creation. It is
likewise worthy special observation to consider the preceptive and the
benedictive part of the fourth Command, or the beginning and conclusion of it.
In the beginning it is said, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. In the
conclusion it is said, Wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed
it; observe the phrase, not seventh day, but Sabbath day is blessed, so that
the fourth Command neither begins nor ends with that term the seventh day, but
with that of the Sabbath day: which is an evidence that the design of this
Command, is not to bind the Church to a precise keeping of the seventh day from
the creation; for there is no express mention of that day in all the fourth
Command: the maine intendment therefore of the fourth Command is to prescribe a
seventh day to be keept holy (after six days labor) which GOD appoints: And
this to the People of GOD under the Old Testament, was the seventh day of the
week, (it being appointed by GOD in the first institution of the Sabbath, Genesis
2 3.) but to us it is the first day of the week; the Sabbath being translated
and changed to this day by divine authority, as will afterward appear.

1. Object. The keeping of one day of the week for a Sabbath is not perpetual,
but abolished, Coloss. 2.16.17. let no man judge you in meat or drink, or in
respect of a holy day, or new Moon, or of the Sabbath days. Answer. Here the
Apostle opposes ceremonial ordinances, but not Gospel institutions. Indeed the
Old Anabaptists, and Familists (with whom Quakers go along) they urged this
text against all difference of days under the Gospel; though the Apostles
only design be to decry the several sorts of days, which were in use among
the Jews, of which he gives an observable enumeratio^: proceeding from their
yearlie holy days, to their monethlie new Moons, and from them to their
weeklie Sabbaths: so that granting the weekly Sabbath to be here taken in, yet
it makes nothing against the Christian Sabbath, but against the old seventh
day Sabbath.

2. Object. Romans 14.6. plainly holds forth all days to be alike. Answer.
What was said before, serves to clear this Scripture, it speaks of
ceremonial days: of such days as are in the rank with ceremonial meats, and
therefore opposes not the moral weekly Sabbath.

3. Object. Gal. 4.10.11. Ye observe days and months, times, and years, I am
afraid of you. Ans. There is a twofold observation of days, moral and
ceremonial, now the Apostle speaks not against the former, but the latter: he
would not have Jewish times (such a their Sabbatical years, their annual
feasts; their monethlie feasts, called new Moons, their weeklie seventh day,
which is probably thought to be included in that clause ye observe days) to be
observed (which the Jewish false teachers cried up) but he was far from crying
down the fourth Command, which is no less binding then the rest of the
Decalogue: it being delivered in the same majestic manner pressed with the
same severitie, and written by the same finger of GOD, and put into the same
Ark, with the rest. He that said, Thou shall not commit adultery; Thou shall
not steal; said likewise, Remember the Sabbath day keep it holy: and therefore
if persons take upon them to sacrifice this Command to their wild fancies, they
need not spare the other Commands. And in very deed the Commands of GOD, are
little beholden either to Papists or Quakers; for Papists reject the second
Command, and Quakers give the same usage to the fourth. And this puts me in
mind of a Story I have heard concerning an Honest Countryman, who traveling
on the rod, there were two who denied the Sabbath, came up to him, upon a
design to try his knowledge; the question they propounded was concerning the
number of the Commands, the well meaning man, knew the persons and shapt an
answer suitable to their principles, telling them there were eight Commands:
whereupon the Querists made sport, and upbraided the poor man with his
profession, and his ignorance; but he gravely replied, that the scripture
indeed spoke of ten Commands, Deuteronomy. 4.13. but they had taken away one Command,
and the Papists another: so that between them, they had brought the Commands
from ten to eight.

In his answer to Matthew. 24.20. where Christ intimats the continuance of a
Sabbath. He says, that Sabbath, is neither here nor else where said to be the
first day of the week. Answer. Though there be no express mention in this
place, of the first day of the week; yet in that it proves the continuance of a
Sabbath, it overthrowes the Quakers opinion: who would be levelling all days,
making them alike. And it is to be remarked, that Christ was come into the
world, and relates the sad things, which were to befall his Disciples, after he
was ascended to the Father; and yet even then a Sabbath was in being

He adds page 60. That as the outward Jew man not be put to fly on his
outward Sabbath, so the inward Jew desires much more that he may keep hi^
Sabbath, which is his spiritual rest in Christ, Heb 4.9. Answer. The Apostle in
this chapter speaks of a rest, which Believers only enter into; And shows,
1. That this rest is not the rest of the Sabbath, verse 4. 2. That it is not
the rest of the Land of Canaan, verse 8. If Jesus (that is Joshua) had given
them rest, then would he not have spoken o^ another rest. It follows then
that the rest which Believers only shall enter into, is the rest of Heaven,
verse 9. there remains therefore a rest for the people of GOD. Now because
there is an eternal rest promised to the Believing, obedient people of GOD,
says this, any thing why they should not observe one day of seven, as a
Sabbath unto the Lord, Oh, the conscientious keeping of the Sabbath is a
comfortable evidence of those that shall be admitted to this rest.

SECT. II. The first day of the Week is set a part for the Service of GOD by
Divine Authority.
He adds, If we have the same authority for keeping the first day of the
week, as the Jews had for keeping their day, then let it be produced. Answer.
It was produced before, but he would not see it: however for the sake of others
we shall consider again that Scripture, Rev. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the
Lords day. Now that by the Lords day is meant the first day of the week, will
be clear, if we advert that there are peculiar grounds, why this day is
singularly to be called the Lords day, beyond other days; Because, 1. on this
day our Lord arose, and ceased from the work of Redemption, Mark. 16.1.2. 2. On
this day our Lord graciously (and frequently) appeared unto his Disciples, Ioh.
20.19. 3. On this day our Lord declared himself to be the Son of GOD with
Power, Romans 1.4. 4. On this day our Lord plentifully poured his Spirit upon his
Apostles, for Penticost (or the fifthtieth day from the Passover) is computed
to have fallen out that year on this day, Act. 2.1.2. Thus it is apparent that
the first day of the week may (beyond other days) be peculiarly termed the
Lords day. To this may be subjoyned the observation of famous Beza, who
observes out of an ancient Greek Manuscript, wherein the first day of the week,
is expressly called the Lords day. Now this day being called the Lords, it
imports that the Lord is the author and instituter of it, this tittle (as I
remember) the Lords, is in the New Testament attributed but to two things:
namely, to the Supper ((...)) and the day ((...)) now the Supper is called the
Lords, because he did institute and appoint it, and so the day is called the
Lords, because Christ is the author and appointer of it: and therefore in
keeping this day we walk obediently to the fourth Command, which requires on
day (to be observed as a Sabbath) which the Lord appoints: we then keep this
day, because it is a day instituted and appointed by the Lord.

Neither must those two expressions, the day of the Lord, and the Lords day, be
confounded; for all days wherein GOD executes judgment upon sinners are
days of the Lord, Amos 5.18.20. But the Lords day mentioned Revel. 1. is but
one, which at that time was known to the Churches to be the first day of the
week. Ignatius (who lived in John's time) speaking of this day, says, Omnis
Christi amator, Dominicum celebret diem, Reginam and Principem dierum omnium:
that is, let every one that loves Christ keep holy the Lords day, which is the
Queen and Empress of all days.

Whereas page 61. 62. he insinuats that every day, even all the days of our
life, are to be given up unto the Lord and spent in his service. Answer. It is
true, we ought daily to be employed in the worship and service of GOD; But as
this will not infer, that every day is to be keeps as a sabbath (which must
be wholly consecrated to the service of GOD) so it makes nothing against the
keeping of a weekly sabbath? for the Jews before Christ were bound every day to
serve GOD; and yet they were tied to the observance of a weekly Sabbath.

Thus my former charge is still made good against Quakers, that it is for the
inventions of men, but the ordinances of Jesus Christ which they disowne.

HEAD. XIV. Concerning Original Sin which Quakers deny.
He affirms page 62. That the thing which we intend by original sin, is not
expressed in scripture. Ans. Is it not expressed in Scripture, that there is
corruption and sin in us from our conception and birth? (And this is that which
we intend by original sin) for this the Scripture is plain, Ioh. 3.6. that
which is born of the flesh is flesh, intimating that men by their natural birth
are corrupt and fleshly. Job speaking of man's birth utters these words, who
can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, Job, 14.4. David acknowledged that
corruption and sin, wherewith he was defiled from his conception, Psalm 51.5.

He says, the thing that we intend by original sin, is, that all infants are
sinners before GOD only for Adams sin. Answer. It seems he is not well
acquainted with our Doctrine about original sin. It is true we assert (and with
good warrant) that Infants are guilty of Adams sin, for in Adam all die, and
therefore in him all have sinned, 1. Cor. 15.22. And though Adams first sin may
be called original sin; yet we distinguish of original sin, it being either
imputed or inherent. Original sin imputed, is the disobedience of Adam, which
is imputed to his posterity, Romans 5.19. by one man's disobedience many were made
sinners. Original sin inherent, is that hereditary inbred corruption, which we
brought with us into the world: and this is conveyed and derived to Infants
from their immediate Parents, in sin did my mother conceive me.

Page 63. He denies that the guilt of Adams first sin lies at the door of
Infants who never actually sinned. Answer. The Apostle confutes the Quaker Romans
5.12. Where first he shows, that by one man, (namely Adam) sin came into the
world. Secondly, That death entered the world by sin. Thirdly, That death (i.
e. lyableness to death) passed upon all. Fourthly, The reason why death (which
came by the sin of one man) passed upon all; for that all have sinned, so that
Infants are not exempted from the guilt of that one man's sin: which will be
further clear, if it be considered that the Greek ((...)) will bear in whom,
thus it is varied on the margin of our books; and so Beza renders it, and they
who are well skilled in the Greek, think this the best reading. Now it is only
one of three things that can be alleged for the antecedent of this relative in
whom, either sin, or death, or that one man: but it is not sin, for (...)
(rendered sin) cannot answer the Greek relative, because they are of different
genders; neither is it death (as the Quakers pretend) for what sense is it to
say, in which death all have sinned? This is an improper speech. It was long
since observed, that in peccato moriuntur homines, non in morte peccant, men
dye in sin, they are not said to sin in death: and therefore this in whom, has
reference to that one man, namely, Adam; in him, all (without exception of
Infants) have sinned.

Object. It is plain that sin is not imputed to Infants, for the Apostle says
Romans 5.13. sin is not imputed where there is no Law, now Infants are not
capable of a Law. Answer. Infants may be considered in respect of their own
persons, or in respect of their representative: now though Infants as to their
own proper persons be not capable of a law; for they cannot discern between
their right hand and their left, yet their representative was capable of a law;
Yea, to Adam the representative of all mankind, a law was actually given, and
this will serve to answer the Quakers two other Objections.

1. Object. Why should Infants be guilty of Adams sin, and not of the sin of
their other forefathers? Answer. The reason is, because Adam is to be looked
upon, not as a single individual person; but as a public universal person:
Now that Adam was a public person representing mankind, is evident from the
miserable event of his sin, which made not only himself obnoxious to death,
but likewise his Posterity descending from him in an ordinary way, Romans 5.12.
Yea, such of his Posterity have come under death, as never actually sinned in
their own persons, verse 14. death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them
that had not sinned, after the similitude of Adams transgression; that is, over
Infants who sinned not actually as Adam did, in their own persons, yet they
were subject to death as well as others.

2. Object. It is said Ezekiel. 18.20. the soul that sins it shall die, the son
shall not bear the iniquity of the father. Answer. What if the son be a partaker
of the fathers iniquity, will not GOD then visit the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children? Exodus 20.5. Now though Infants partake not of Adams sin by
imitation, yet they partake of his sin, in so far as Adam was the root of
Mankind, and sinned as a public person representing them: the root dying all
the branches dyed in it, and with it, 1. Cor. 15.22.

He says page 64. That Infants are subject to diseases, and death, this proves
them not to be sinners. Ans. The Scripture gives ground to believe, that if man
had not sinned he should not have dyed; because death is only threatened in
case of man's sinning, Genesis 2.17. and upon his sinning GOD told him (not till
then) that he should return to the dust, Genesis 3.19. It is true the inanimat
creatures suffer for the sin of man. But it follows not, that therefore all
of Mankind who suffer death are not sinners; especialy, seeing the Apostle
plainly affirms, that death entered by sin, and death has passed upon all,
for that all have sinned: so that he concludes all persons who are liable to
death, to be under the guilt of sin, and consequently sinners. Christ indeed
though innocent, was a man of sorrows, because our sins were laid upon him.

He pleads for the salvation of all Infants who die in their infancy,
alleging that Scripture Mark. 10.14. suffer little children to come unto me,
for of such is the Kingdom of GOD. Answer. The Kingdom of GOD is taken either
for the Kingdom of Grace, or for the Kingdom of Glory: and such Infants as are
subjects of his Kingdom of Grace, upon whom the Lord exercises a gracious
government, in regenerating and sanctifying them: all such Infants shall be
admitted to the Kingdom of Glory. But how will the Quaker prove that all
Infants who die in their infancy, have such s gracious operation in and upon
them? Now the Scripture is plain that there is that in Infants, which makes
them liable to destruction, Ephesians. 2.3. by nature we are children of wrath,
that is from the very first receiving of our natures and beings, we receive
withal a lyableness to the wrath of GOD. And that some Infants do perish, may
be gathered from that which befell Sodom and Gomorrha, none of the inhabitants
were spared, no not the Infants and Sucklings: and they were not only consumed
with fire and brimston; but it is expressly said that they suffer the vengeance
of eternal fire, Jude verse 7.

He says, page 65. That Christ is a Savior not only to save from sin, but
also from the consequences of sin, not only from the fruits and branches of
it, but from the seed. Answer. Christ indeed is a perfect Savior, and will
completely save his people from every sin and evil, but whom he thus saves, it
supposes that they had sin in them to be saved from; but if the Quaker speak
truth, Infants have not sin in them to be saved from: for he says, they are
not guilty of Adams sin, and the seed does not make them guilty of sin before
GOD, because they do not close with it: now actual sin they have not, so that
Christ is not a Savior to save them from their sin; and consequently they are
shut out from being in the number of Christ's people. I cannot but take notice
of the Gentle-mans impudence, or else ignorance, in bringing that Scripture
Matthew. 1.21. as making so much against us, as if we were for a salvation in our
sins: whenas nothing can more unjustly be charged upon us. We assert that whom
the Lord saves, he works in them a detestation of sin, and a purpose to come
off from all their sins; and delivers them (in this life) from sin in part,
compare Romans 6.6 with Romans 7.20.24. and at death he gives them a total riddance
of sin, Heb. 4.10.

To say that Infa^ts are saved from sin, because they are not suffered to fall
into it, (it might be as well said, that Christ died to save the Elect holy
Angels from sin, because they are not suffered to fall into sin.) This looks
like the old evasion of the Pelagians, viz. that Infants need Christ, not to
save them from sin, but to bring them to the Kingdom of Heaven: against whom
Augustine urged that they divided these two names of our Savior, Jesus, and
Christ, making him a Christ where he was not a Jesus.

HEAD. XV. Concerning the perseverance of the Saints, which Quakers are against.
He adds, That they hold no such matter as falling away from Regeneration,
and that these that fell away never attained to regeneration. Ans. Here he
seeks to hide himself, but may easily be discovered: For is not this the
doctrine of Quakers, that Saints may fall totally and finally away from true
and saving grace? G. Keith in his answer to my Queries, sticks not to say, that
this is clear both from experience, and abundant testimonies of Scripture. Now
are not Saints regenerat? What is Regeneration but to be brought into such a
state, wherein we are made like GOD in righteousness and holiness? And this
being the state of Saints, then it follows, that if Saints may fall away
totally and finally (which Quakers grant) then there may be a total and final
falling away from Regeneration.

It is in vain to assert a total and final falling away from saving grace
(because it is said, some who believed afterward fell away, and some make
shipwreck of the faith, and some who tasted the good word of GOD, and the
powers of the world to come fell away.) Seeing it is known that we use to
distinguish between seeming, counterfeit grace, and sound, saving grace,
between the common gifts of the Spirit, and the saving graces of the Spirit:
Now it is incumbent for the Gentleman to prove, that they who believed and
made shipwreck of their faith, (or others who finally fell away) had the sound
and saving graces of the spirit, which is the thing that we deny.

He says, That Philipp. 1.6. is to be understood no otherwise, then as the
condition is made good on their part, as Heb. 3.14. we are made partakers of
Christ if we hold fast unto the end. Answer. The condition which the Lord
requires on his peoples part, he promises to enable them to make good, Ierem.
32.29. I will give them one heart, that they may fear me for ever. Here is a
promise that GODS People shall persevere in cleaving to him: and the promise of
GOD cannot fail, it is more sure then Heaven and Earth, Mark. 13.31.

Page 66. in answering 1. Pet. 1.5. He says such as are keept by the power of
GOD, it is through faith, but as they abide not in that power through faith but
wander from it, they fall, and cannot but fall. Answer. A goodly reply
(forsooth) which is as if he had said, if the Saints fall from faith, they must
fall and cannot but fall. ( Remonstrants grant that a Believer quatalis, as a
Believer cannot fall away, but qui talis est, he that is a Believer may fall
away.) Now the design of that Scripture 1. Pet. 1.5. is to show that there are
two things concurring to prevent the Saints, total and final fall, namely,
faith and the power of GOD: both work together to keep the Saints unto
Salvation; that Lord who gives faith unto his people helps them to persevere in
it, for he is not only the author but the finisher of their faith, Heb. 12.2.

In answering Ierem. 32.40. He says, it should be translated thus, I will put
my fear in their hearts, that they may not depart from me. Answer. The words in
the Hebrew are, lebilti sur megnalai, which will as well carry shall not, as may
not depart from me. But granting that the words were translated according to
his own desire, yet they are full enough to prove the Saints perseverance (the
Lord putting his fear into them for this end) GODS love will not suffer him to
depart from the Saints, and fear will not let them depart from GOD: GOD
principles their hearts with such a measure of his dread and fear, as stays
them from an utter departur from him.

He makes short work with these other Scriptures, Ioh. 10.27.28. Ioh. 13.1.1.
Ioh. 2.19 saying, that they speak of those who were to come to a through
regeneration. Answer. This is a bare affirmation, without any proof. There is
no mention in the texts themselves of a through regeneration; and if it be
only thoroughly regenerate, or perfectly sanctified persons that shall
persevere; then perseverance is the privilege only of Saints in Heaven,
(whose attainment this perfection is) and not of Saints on earth who groan
under their imperfections.

Now seeing that Saints who have true and saving grace are the Regeneat
Children of GOD, (when by faith they receive Christ, GOD ownes them for his
children, and they are truly regenerat, Gal. 3.26. Ioh. 1.12.13.) On the other
hand graceless persons are branded as being the children of the Devil, Ioh.
8.44. Is it not then manifest that to mantain the total and final Apostasy of
the Saints from grace, will infer, that they who are the children of GOD, by
true regeneration this day, may the next day become the children of the Devil?
Because the grace that they have now, they may utterly lose it, err to morrow.

He asks, whether I look upon the Quakers as having fallen away? Answer. His
book (containing nor only his private sentiments, but the common opinions of
Quakers) is a sufficient proof that they have apostatized and fallen from the
truth: and such of them as have felt a gracious operation on their hearts, (but
in this hour of temptation are under a sad snare) I trust the Lord will
convince them, and grant them repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth:
that by their rising again they may edify and rejoice those Souls whom they
have wounded, and stumbled by their fall.

HEAD. XVI. Concerning the hazard and danger of Quakerism.
SECT. I. It tends to the neglect of that Worship which is due to GOD.
He says page 67. That they deny not true worship, but only our Idolatrous
worship. Answer. If our Worship were Idolatrous, they had reason to deny it;
but it is unreasonable to call our Worship Idolatrous, when they have not a
shadow of reason to prove it to be so, unless the Gentleman think that ((...))
the Quakers naked affirmation is a sufficient reason. Now it is manifest that
Quakers refuse GOD the worship which is due to him in the use of the creatures,
in that they can, and do adventure to use these, without seeking GODS Blessing
upon them: which has been (by former Saints) accounted a profane custom,
utterly unfit to be heard of, among Christians professing the knowledge and
fear of GOD! Are we not commanded to eat and drink to the glory of GOD? 1. Cor.
10.31. And must we not then look up to GOD, and desire his help to improve the
creatures to his glory? Besides the creatures of themselves cannot nourish us,
if GOD deny his blessing, our eating and drinking can do us no good: and
therefore we have need to address our selves to GOD by prayer; for by this
means the blessing is obtained, and the creatures come to be sanctified to us,
1. Tim. 4.4.

Object. To receive the benefits and gifts of GOD with thanksgiving, and to
witness it sanctified to us by the word and prayer is owned by us. Answer. Do
Quakers witness the creatures sanctified to them by prayer, when yet they do
not pray for the sanctified use of them? Pray, observe the way that Christ
took (his example is worth our imitation) at the receiving of the creatures he
looked up to Heaven for a blessing, Mark. 6.14. and gave thanks, Matthew. 15.36.
and this appears to have been his ordinary practice, he was known of his
Disciples in breaking bread: it being his ordinary manner to bless the bread
(in some special way) which he break, whereby he was discerned and differenced
from others Luke 24.30.31.

Object. It is usual among us, when we sit down, to wait upon the Lord for
sometime, that we may know our selves stated in his fear, and as there we
stand, outward expressions may be uttered by us. Answer. When they are not thus
stated in GODS fear, yet they have liberty and freedom to fall to meat: so it
would seem though they will not pray without fear, yet they can eat without
fear, which is the character of wicked persons, Jude, verse 12. As for their
waiting (its but an engine to overthrow Scripture precepts) seeing it has
reference to a new inward command, without which they do not hold themselves
obliged, to express their desire in words, but as they are thus required of
them.

He adds page 68. That to say, that a man cannot, nor ought not to pray
without (an impulse) the spirits drawing, and motion, has no bad tendency,
because all such prayers, as are performed without the help of the spirit, are
abomination, not true prayers, but hypocritical and deceitful. Answer. We grant
these things. First, That the spirit teaches and helps the Saints to pray,
sometimes they are so stirred and moved to prayer, that they cannot be at
quiet; but they must to some secret corner: and there pour out their
complaints before the LORD, Gal. 4.6. Secondly, That the season when the spirit
moves to duty, should be laid hold on, Psalm. 27.8. when thou said seek ye my
face, my heart said unto thee, thy face I will seek. Thirdly, When the spirit
moves the w^ek is sweetest; then the Christian is cheerful in the exercise of
duty. The joy that is in a little hearty praying, is beyond all the joys that
the world can afford, Isaiah. 56.7. Fourthly, Persons cannot pray aright
without the spirit, and therefore the prayers of the wicked are said to be an
abomination unto the Lord. Prove. 15.8. But it must be observed, that though
prayer without the spirit be an abomination to GOD; yet omission of prayer is
double abomination: the reason is, because to pray without the spirit, is a sin
for the manner, but to neglect prayer is a sin, both as to matter and manner.

He adds, whosoever can pray to the Lord indeed, let him pray, but that any
can pray without the spirit, that we deny. Answer. May he not according to this
way of reasoning, take men off from eating? If they can eat to the glory of
GOD indeed, then let them eat; but that they can eat to the glory of GOD,
without the spirit: that's denied. Likewise he may take men off from the works
of their calling, for as the praying, so the plowing of the wicked is sin,
Prove. 21.4.

A motion of the spirit, is an encouragement to, but it is not our alone
warrant for prayer: GOD in his word has commanded prayer, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. pray
without ceasing: in obedience to this command we ought to set to the duty. And
if it be alleged that we should pray (when we have the spirit) without
ceasing; but not otherwise: it may as well be said, that children should honor
their Parents, and husbands love their wives, when they have a motion of the
spirit to it; but in the absence of this motion, they may omit these duties.

He asks, what ground I have to believe, that some Quakers for the space of a
whole year, have not so much as once bowed a knee to call upon GOD in their
families? Answer. There is too much ground for the belief of it: their
infrequency in family prayer, is too palpable. One of them confessed (whom I
forbear to name) that now he was come to that pitch, that he prayed always:
and though heretofore he was wont to call his family together, and pray with
them; yet he had not done so for a twelve month past. Is this a lovly Religion
which takes men off from family prayer? It is a miserable shift, to tell that
friends of truth, who have any whom they can join with: do meet, wait, and
pray together. Now grant that persons in Quakers families were enemies to
truth, would it not be a work of charity, and demonstration of love and
tenderness to their souls, to pray with them, and for them? Must not Abraham
keep up Religion in his family, because an Ishmael was in it? Nor David
because of the presence of Absalom?

Page 69. He looks upon me, as one wholly unacquainted with the ways and
motions of the spirit, for supposing that an impulse of the spirit, may be
denied for many years. Answer. Is there not ground to suppose, that men may
turn loose negligent, and defective in waiting, even for several years: If
so, then the motions of the spirit may be denied to them, (which he
acknowledges are frequent, but to those that wait for them) and therefore all
that time that they (who neglect to wait) want the motions of the spirit: they
must not adventure upon prayer: yea they must not pray, though they were at the
gates of death, and in danger of present drowning.

It is true he conceives, that at such a season the breathings of the spirit
will not be wanting to the Saints; but what shall the wicked do in this case;
Must they keep silent? Shall it not be lawful for them, to follow the advice
which the Apostle gave to Simon Magus? Act. 8.22. pray GOD if perhaps the
thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee.

The Quakers principle is, that men should not pray without a motion of the
spirit. Now suppose that persons contract guilt by their not waiting, hereby
provoking the Lord to withhold the motions of his Spirit from them: then these
motions being withheld, their not praying is not sin: and therefore they need
not to be troubled for their omission of prayer. Now does not this tend to lull
people asleep in security, and to keep them from charging themselves with that
sin: which without repentance GOD will charge upon them? for he will call
sinners to an account for their omissions, as well as for their commissions.

SECT. II. Quakerisme tends to render Mortification of sin useless.
He asks page 70. Whether mortification of sin be useless, where the end of
it (which is perfection) is attained? Answer. There is a twofold perfection;
namely, comparative, and absolute; the Apostle speaks of both these kinds of
perfection, Philipp. 3. and denies to himself an absolute, complete
perfection, verse 12. not as though I had already attained, either were already
perfect. Yet he outstripped many others in holiness, and so had a comparative
perfection, verse 13. let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded.
Now when there is an absolute, complete perfection (which is the thing the
Quaker pleads for) without the least indwelling corruption and sin: to such
there is no use for mortification. Persons need not to be taken up in killing
sin (which is the importance of the word mortify) that have not sin in them to
be killed.

He quarrels at my saying, the opinion of a sinless perfection in this life
wounds the very vitals of Religion, and here the Quaker triumphs (but it is
before the victory;) Asking, Whether the vitals of Religion consist in sinning
or not sinning? Answer. The vitals of Religion consist in the means appointed
by GOD, (and diligent improvement thereof) for subduing and bearing down sin:
such as prayer, repentance, mortification, believing, application of the Blood
of Christ, And though the Quakers grant that these things are needful for
attaining unto perfection yet supposing a sinles perfection to be actually
attained unto (by men in this world) what need is there then to pray for pardon
of sin, to repent of sin, apply Christ's blood for cleansing from sin? Seeing
there is no sin to be pardoned, repented of, or cleansed from. And therefore
(the Gentleman not denying that such consequences do flow from his principle)
he is feign to shift, saying, that they who come to perfection witness the true
use of these things; but in the mean time he should remember, that (under a
pretense of perfection) he takes them off from the practice and use of the
aforementioned duties and means; and so Christianity in the vitals of it is
struck at.

He accuses me of confusion and contradiction, because (as he says) I would
infer a sinless man to be a sinning man. Answer. Is it either confusion or a
contradiction to affirm one of the Quakers conceitedly sinless men (to be
sinful) who pretending to be without sin; yet discover much sin, by their
pride, passion, bitterness, censuring and condemning others, and vilifying them
by opprobrious terms, and railing accusations: if such say, they have no sin,
they are but liars, and the truth is not in them, 1. Ioh. 1.8. It is
remarkable, to consider whom the Apostle speaks of, if we (says he) what we?
look to verse 1. we that have heard and seen and handled the word of life;
verse third, we who have fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ, verse 7, we who (by our Justification) are cleansed from the guilt of
all sin; yet it we say, we have no sin, we are not sincere but hypocrites,
deceiving both our selves and others.

Object. This Scripture 1. Job. 1.8. is conditional, otherwise it would
contradict what follows, verse 9. and chapter 2.4. and chapter 3.9. Answer.
There is no contradiction; but sweet agreement between these Scriptures: for
verse 9. speaks of forgiveness of sin, (which consists in freedom from the
guilt of sin) and this may be where sin is nor utterly abolished. And 1. Ioh.
2.4. is understood of a sincere nor absolutely perfect keeping of the Commands
of GOD. And as for 1. Ioh. 3.9. it was formerly opened, and may be further
cleared by comparing it with chapter 5.16. where the Apostle speaks of a sin
unto death, which they that are born of GOD cannot commit, verse 18. we know
that whosoever is born of GOD sins not, but he that is begotten of GOD,
keeps himself and the wicked one touches him not: That is, so as to draw him
to that unpardonable sin, the Child of GOD is secured from this sin.

HEAD. XVII. Wherein Truth is cleared of Calumnies.
Page 72. He comes to examine whether their or our principles will be most
acceptable to the wicked. And first, he says, wicked men and hypocrites love
well to hear, that they can never be free from their sins in this life. Answer.
Some wicked men, are so well conceited of the honesty and integrity of their
hearts, that it is a hard thing, to get convictions of sin fastened upon them:
and as for mortification of sin, which we urge as necessary to Salvation; there
is nothing more distastful to the wicked then this.

Secondly, He says, they love well to hear, to be justified by Christ without
them. Answer. How is it then, that so many wicked men, scoff at justification
by Christ's righteousness without them? Calling [in contempt] this imputed
righteousness an imaginary, putative righteousness. Is it not natural for
persons to seek to be justified by something within them?

Thirdly, He says, they love well to hear, that the words without them are the
only rule. Answer. Doubtless there are many wicked persons, who could wish
there were no such rule. Has it not been the attempt of the wicked to destroy
the Scriptures? In the tenth Persecution the books of the holy Scriptures were
ordered to be burnt: and to this day there is a secret enmity in the hearts of
thousands of sinners against the Scriptures.

Fourthly, He says, they love well to hear, that they may use the customs and
fashions of this world, and that they may use sports, games, and plays, and
wear laces, ribbons, etc. Answer. They hear from none of us any thing to
encourage them in following sinful customs and fashions: these we oppose, yea,
we think that people should be sparing even as to lawful games and recreations.
As for wearing ribbons, laces, gold-rings, etc. we judge it not simply
unlawful; and yet persons sin, when in this they exceed their degree and rank:
which is the thing condemned by the Apostle, 1. Tim. 2.9.

Fifthly, He says, they love well to hear, that men must not expect to hear
GOD immediately. Ans. Some of them know not what is intended by GODS immediate
speaking, and others have no liking to hear GOD mediatly by the Ministry of his
Word: this is a burdensome stone, that they would feign be rid of.

Sixthly, He says, they love well to hear, that water Baptism, and giving of
Bread and Wine are the Ordinances of Christ; for then they think they are
Christians, if they partake of these outward things, Answer. Our endeavor is
to take them off from their groundless thoughts: telling them that outward
privileges must not be rested on, and that who ever build their hopes of
Heaven merely upon these, they build upon the sand, a foundation which will
fail them in the day of their strait.

Seventhly, He says, that none plead more for the observation of the Sabbath,
then profane light men. Answer. The contrary is abundantly known, for none are
greater enemies then they to the true observation of the Sabbath: which must be
devoted entirely to GOD, and spent in the public and private exercises of his
worship and service. Are not the wicked brought in saying, when shall the
Sabbath be gone? Amos 8.5.

Eighthly, He says, they love well to hear, that they may be members of a
Church, though they have no infallible evidence of holiness. Answer. Have all
the members of the Quakers Church infallible evidences of grace and holiness? I
must be free to tell you, that your raw, conceity Proselyts, are so ignorant,
and yet so confident, that sober men suspect them to be in a fools paradise.

Ninthly, He says, they love well to hear of our Doctrine of Election and
Reprobation. Answer. I have heard diverse of them (Pelagians mocked at
predestination) wrangle against this doctrine, and herein Quakers join with
them; but the truth will stand firm against them both.

Tenthly, He says, they love our Doctrine of once in grace and ever in grace.
Answer. What ground can graceless persons have to like this? ( they being
alienated from the life of GOD) the promise of persevering in grace does not
belong to them: and we do not plead for a wild perseverance, the Saints who
have had most persuasions of their perseverance, have been most closs and
circumspect in their walk with GOD. Thus it is evident that our principles do
not gratify the wicked, nor give them the lest allowance in licentiousness and
looseness: and if any of us be looss and licentious (as a lace, there be too
many!) it is our principle, that the wrath of GOD will come upon such children
of disobedience.

HEAD. XVIII. The Quakers tenants are pleasing to the Wicked.
The Quakers religion is exceeding suitable to carnal hearts. First, They love
well to hear, that a sufficient light is in them, that Christ (and saving
grace) is in them. Secondly, They love well to hear that all days are alike,
and that men may work and plough on the Sabbath as well as on any other day.
Thirdly, They love well to hear, that Family Prayer is but a form. Fourthly,
They love well to hear that they must not pray in secret; but when they have an
inward drawing and motion to it. Fifthly, They love well to hear outward
teaching cried down: and mind the light within, here is your teacher and this
light is not a chapter without you, in a book. Sixthly, They love well to hear
the holiest Ministers spoken against, as hirelings, and Baals Priests.
Seventhly, They love well to hear, the LORDS Ordinances vilified and
reproached: carnal Bread and Wine, is lovely language to them. Eighthly, They
love well to hear, that Adams sin is not theirs, and that the evil seed does
not make them guilty of sin before GOD, until they close with it. Ninthly,
They love well to hear, that they may sit down to eat, and drink, and rise up
again without a word of thanksgiving or prayer to GOD. But I am tired with
raking in this Dung hill. I leave it to unbyassed persons to judge, whether
these principles will not sure with carnal hearts? Will not the wicked be glade
to hear these things cried down, which they themselves live down, and cannot be
brought up to the practice of them?

He shuts up his book charging me with a notorious lie. Ans. Wherein am I
guilty of lying? The Dialogue supposed A Conference between an enemy to, and a
Lover of the Truth; and might I not (without a lie) testify so much love to
men's Souls, as to express pity toward the seduced, wishing GOD to (reclaim
them, and to) confirm his people in his ways? What is it that some will not
carp at? Epecially, the persons that I have to do with: of whom a pious
Minister in England, gives this testimony, says he, We have a strange
generation of men abroad, whose very Religion consists in railing, reviling,
reproaching the Servants of the living GOD, not the best men, nor the best
Ministers under Heaven can escape them. Then he sets down a letter, wherein the
Quakers gave the Ministers of Christ these following names; Conjurers, Thieves,
Robbers, Antichrists, Witches, Blind-guides, Devils, Liars, Dissemblers, Baals
Priests, a Vipe^ous and Serpenti^^ Generation, Bloody Herodians, Blasphemers,
Scarlet colored Beasts, Babilons Merchants, Busybodies, Whited walls,
Painted Sepulchers, reavening Wolves, Persecutors, Tyrants, greedy Dogs,
Pharisees!

Then he gives good advice, Christians (says he) when ye hear this language
learn to conform your selves to Christ, go ye first to GOD with the LORDS own
plea. Zach. 3.2. Now the LORD rebuke thee O Satan, even the Lord that has
chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee.

See Ambrose his looking unto Jesus, page 1006.

FINIS.

