Mistress PARLIAMENT Presented in her Bed, after the sore travail and hard
labor which she endured last weeek, in the Birth of her Monstrous Off*spring,
the

The hopeful fruit of her seven Years Teeming, And a most precious Babe of
Grace.

With the several Discourses between Mrs. Sedition, Mrs. Schism, Mrs. Synod
her dry-Nurse, Mrs. Jealousy, and others her Gossips.

Oh sick! oh saint! alas my sight does fail,
My Members tremble and my Spirits quail;
Oh what a chillness does my heart oppress,
But what the cause often is, I know you will guess
It Is this most hedious Birth does me a maze,
And much torment me when on it I gaze:
But more when as I think what men will conster,
To see the expected Babe of Grace prove Monster.
BY Mercurius Melancholicus.

May.10th London

Printed in the Year of the Saints fear. 1648.

Mrs. PARLIAMENT presented in her Bed, after the sore travail and hard labor
which she endured last week, in the Birth of her Monstrous Offspring, the
CHILD OF DEFORMATION. Mrs. Shisme The Kingdoms mine, I am the child, My
name's Tom. Presbyter.


Mrs. Sedition It Is false, it is The Saints; whose King I Am, styled, Holy St.
-- Oliver.


Mrs. Schism We are the Saints, we, Presbyters.


Mrs. Sedition We Independents, are.


King Charles Nor Saints, nor Kings, what need these stirs?
It Is mine which you would share.

Jealousy I smell a plot, the Kings no doubt,
To prove true, what is known;
When Thieves about stolen goods fall out
True men still get their own.

Mrs. Sa. Yandseal No, no, arm, arm (the common Foe
Appears for Charles) I Will; bawle
Herod and Pilate made friends so,
Though Christ, he then must fall
The Child-wif's laid, the tables's spread: but oh!
The Gossips strive for place, it is always so.

Act. 2. Scen. 1.
Sedition. ANd why you first, Mrs. Schism. Pray you give place to Seniority.


Schism. Nay, nay, neighbor Sedition, me thinks you and I should be better
friends, our affections are the same.


Sedition. And one Progenitor, the Devil, belongs to both I confess, only,
because I come of the Elder house (for though you are of the House of the
Incendiaries in the Church, which is a very ancient Family, I grant, yet I am
of that of the Incendiaries in the State, which preceeds in antiquity) I claim
the priority, both here, and also in presenting my service to Mrs. Parliament,
yea, I expect the pre-eminence above you in her Honors employments too.


Schism. Cozen! Whatsoere your seniority may plead for you to her in your
behalf, my past actions in her service may exact as due to my deserts: Never
did any State Incendiary bring the Designs of any Tyrant to such perfection in
an age, as I have done Mrs. Parliaments in less then seven years, under the
vizard of Religion, therefore, by your leave Mrs. Sedition, I think my self
worthy to be preferred before you in her affections.


Sedition. Marry gip with a wynnion! you preferred before me. Have not my
pretenses, to make every freeborn Subject a quiet possessor of his propriety
and liberty, to suppress Tyranny, and prevent Arbitrarinesse in the King
(which I intend to act my self) brought Mrs. Parliament to this height of
unlimited power which now she is at, and do you think now to carry away her
favor from me?


Mrs. Sa. Yandseale. Fie, fie friends fall out about trifles? You have both
deserved well, and no doubt shall in fit time and place receive your reward;
but agree, agree, and the rather because the common enemy begins to stir and
hold up his head again: and will you by your divisions give life to their dead
hopes? what were this but to blast all your former glorious actions, absolutely
frustrate all your golden hopes, and wholly annihilate your vast expectations,
and will you now prove such enemies not only to her, whose servants ye profess
your selves to be, but also to your selves and all your friends? Come come, you
shall (like gentlewomen of equal birth and merit) walk hand in hand, and have
the same degree of place at her table and in her affections: only for the
present I must prevail with Mrs. Schism, that Mrs. Sedion may have her right
hand; for Mrs. Parliament has now occasion to use the sword, (as indeed when
will she not find occasion to use?) and we all know Mrs. Sedition knows how to
weild that best for her advantage.


Mrs. Schism. I am content, for I must confess that I am no ^^ghter, though
none could ever match me for an Incendiary and Abettor to war and bloud*shed.
Will It please you walk to Mrs. Sedition?


Mr. Sedition. Your Servant, in your hand, sweet Cousin Schism.


Mrs. So this is well and timely brought about.


Exeunt. Sa. andseale. We loose our precious hopes if these fall out.


Scen. 2.
Enter Mrs. Parliament in Childbed. Mrs. Parl. Nurse, Nurse, -- why Nurse,
Where art thou Nurse?


Enter Mrs Synod Dry Nurse. Nurse. Anan forsooth Mistress, I am here: What is it
your pleasure I should do?


Mrs. Parl. O, prithee Nurse speak softly (for a time:) the noise which tho^
make with thy babbling and prating pierces my head, and may prove a great
hindrance of my Recoverie, if not totally obstruct it. I am very weak with my
past sore Travail, and should I fall into a Relapse it might cost me my Life;
and then Nurse, you would (I know) confess (as being sensible of your loss)
that the most bountiful Mistress, that ever you had, is deceased: Was it ever
known that such a rate was given a Dry Nurse before; four shillings a day,
besides other by-blowes, gratuities and especially three or four steeple houses
and pofitable Lectures? therefore Nurse it nearly concerns you to have a
special care of me.


Nurse. Dear Mistress, you shall for the future experience my diligence to
comply in all things with your desires, and my care hereafter shall evidence
the readiness of my obedience to your commands.


Mrs. Parl. It is well said Nurse: -- But is Mrs. Truth gone?


Nurse. Gone, quoth you? Why what should she do here? Do you ever hope to
recover your strength or regain your credit by her? If you should follow her
Directions and take such Physic as she would prescribe you, she would give
you such a Potion as would make you fall a vomiting with a witness, and then
up would come (to the view of the whole World) all that you have converted to
the satisfying of your own private Lust, though pretended to be done for the
public good of the Kingdom; as the Revenues of the Crown --


Mrs. Parl. O, prithee Nurse speak softly.


Nurse. Noble men's Estates, Bishops Lands and Houses, all Sequestrations, and
vast Compositions, besides great sums of Loan-money for Rebels Lands in
Ireland, Public Faith Money, Excise money, Contribution and Free Quarter; All
would up. Verily Mistress, if you be ruled by her, it will inevitably follow,
that you cannot escape your (I too sadly fear too too sudden) dissolution.


Mrs. Parl. It is truth Nurse; I have ever rejected her Counsels (though I have
always made the World believe I have followed them most precisely) and though
I sent for her in my extremity, and desired her to indite that seigned
Confession so to blind the eyes of the World that I might the more securely
and undiscovered compass mine own Design, yet know Nurse, that I hate her
company, and loath her sight, much less will I follow her Dictates and
Directions.


Nurse. No, do not Mistress, Did you ever reap any benefit by her company? or,
Did at any time any good accrue to you by following her counsel? If the People
should know all that she can tell of you (and she can as well be hanged [which
you know is the least you have deserved] as conceal her knowledge, but will at
some time or other discover all) What would be the event thereof? Indeed
Mistress I tremble to think (being in the same condemnation, and deserving the
same reward with your self) and by that little experience thereof, which you
have had of late you may be sensible enough what you must expect.

No, no, Mistress, if you hope to recover again, make use of Mistress Mendax, the
whole Pack of your weekly forging Pamphleters, they have ever stuck close to
you, and by employing them still, you know how advantageous it has been to the
advance of your Designs; but among them all there is none (since Britannicus
his decease) comparable to Luke Haruney or Walker, the quondam pillorie
Iremonger, he is always at your elbow, with his outside Satin, and inside
Devil, ready to breathe into the ears of your tame Guls and noosed Woodcockes,
what you think may best advantage the Cause (though never so false) in his
perfect Occurrence.

Besides it is evident what service his double diligence has done you in
endeavoring to suppress your worst Enemies, the Tell-truths of the Times,
Pragmaticus, Melancholicus, Elentichus, etc. whose publishing the Truth of
those foul Enormities which they by intelligence have and do daily discover in
your Actions, have done you more hurt of late, than all the Kings Army could
heretofore; by their pens having wounded you deeper in your credit and
reputation, than ever the Sword of the Cavaliers did your body in your
Soldiers; and therefore the care of your creature Walker, in endeavoring to
discover and so suppress them, deserves your notice and encouragement. Besides
as a testimony of his affection to your Service, and to manifest his knowledge
to be as deep in the Greek as Hebrew Tongue, he has desired you to hear this
Etimologie of Parliament, 1648.


Mrs. Parl. Read it, good Nurse, let me hear it: I know he ever puts that
forth that shall tend to my Honor and advancement in the good opinion of the
Saints. Read it Nurse, read it Nur. Parliament in the Greek is written thus
(...).

They that can read and understand it may, I Will look for the English of it
according to his direction, Rev. 17. v. 5.


Mrs. Parl. Do good Nurse, I long to know the English of it, MYSTERY BABYLON
THE GREAT, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations, Nurse of error, heresy and
blasphemy. Parl. O hold Nurse, sick, sick, a sudden shivering carreers
through every part, besides -- a -- deadly -- qual -- O -- Nurse. Help good
Women, help, help. Mrs. Schism, Mrs. Toleration, What are ye all deaf?
Cannot one of you hear? Why Mrs. Sa-Yand-Seal. Help, help.


Scen. 3. Enter Mrs. Sa-Yand-Seal in haste, after her Mrs. Jealousy and the
rest of the Gossips shreeking and screeming with Mrs. Suburbs the Deputy. Mrs.
Sa-yand-seal. What Is the matter Nurse?


Nurse. O Mrs. Parliament, Mrs. Parl. -- is gone, is gone.


Mrs. Suburbs. Be patient Nurse, she is but in a swoone, burn some ill-senting
thing under her nose: that will bring her again.


Nurse. Oh what shall I burn?


Mrs. Sa. Yandseale. Nothing makes a loathsomer smell than the Vote wherein she
resolved upon the question, that she would make no more addresses to her
husband, herhead, and that it should be treason for any to bring Messages from,
or carry intelligence to him.


Mrs. Suburbs. It Is well thought on, Mrs. Sa: Yandseale good Nurse run to H.
Elsing, and wish him to cut it out of the journall book, and bring it thou
hither, and burn it presently


from behind the Curtain Nurse. I fly -- Melancho it is more than time, shall
I hail Rainsborough for you.


Mrs. Jealousy. But Gentlewomen do you not deceive your selves? (pardon me I
am jealous for Mrs. Parliaments good, and am the foundation upon which her
rising to this height was laid at first) as I conceive no incense would smell
better, and be more comfortable in all men's nostrills than the fume of that,
burnt


Mrs. Sa. Yandseale. Yea (Gossip Jealousy) but not in the nostrils of all
women, especially hers, because it would trouble her much to be made s^nsible
of the burning of that her darling: and as for others, it is good to please
sooles a while: so she recover, it is no matter for burning of it: when she
ge^s strenght again, it is but pre^mbling that it was done in fear, and in case
of eminent danger, and t^en she may revote it again.


M^s Sedition. There spoke an Ac^p^l (...) indeed, and he must nee^s be a good
man, for we read that his counsel was as the Oracle --


Nurse. He', her', here '^is. Mrs. Sa. That Is well burn it quickly, rub her
temples, she sneezes -- so, so, -- she com^^ again -- why M^s. Parl^ament.


Enter Nu^se Mel. behind the curtain, And I hope shortly to see he come to
that good-m^ns end, it will save G^ig the trouble.

Parl. Where am I -- O sick, Awe -- Awe,


Sa. A Basin Nurse, quickly: -- so -- up with it Women -- so it is well.


Mrs. Sub God bless us, Whaa is here? -- What black stuff is this?


Sa. Nothing but Atra bilis or melauchollicke adust, throw't aside, throw't
aside, I have many times my self vomited the like.


Mel from behind the curtain. I believe you indeed Mrs. Sa-yand-seal, for
(good People) it is no less than and Heresy Blasphemy, which during her
health she winked at and swallowed, and now in her weakness up it is come: And
-- let me see -- there is something else in the bowl -- What is this? -- A
scrowle? -- and something writ in it too? -- Read it Gentlemen, I warrant she
has uttered her mind in it.

The Scrowle.
From XLI. to VIII. have I (a Brood
Of Vipers) England swaid: and (in an hood
Of zeal close lurking and the public Weal)
Bewitched the simple and their hearts did steal.
But now by time unmasked it is plainly seen
For Englands Blood and Wealth my thirst has been.
Gentlemen, I am sorry she is come again, I was in good hope she would have gone
this bout, but (believe me) she is not long lived, the next news from Wales
sets her packing, if that from the North do not do it before.

Rowze up your valiant hearts brave English men
And put in Charles his hand his sword again.
God bless and save Him.
FINIS.

