A Copy of A LETTER SENT From Sir Tho. Middleton, to the Honorable, William
Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the House of COMMONS.

Concerning the raising of the Siege at OSVVESTREE, July 3. 1644.

By the Forces Commanded by the Earl of Denbigh. Sir Tho. Middleton, and Sir
Will. Brereton.


Wherein was diverse of our Enemies, men of Quality, taken Prisoners; 7.
Carriages, 200. Common Soldiers, 2 Pieces of Artillery, 100. Horse.

Also several other Letters to persons of Quality in Confirmation of the said
Victory.

Together with a List of all the Prisoners and Carriages that were taken.

Printed according to Order.

London, Printed for Edward Husbands. July 10. 1644.

To the Honorable, William Lenthall Esquire; Speaker of the House of COMMONS.
HONORED SIR,
NOt to trouble you with vain Relations, whereby to hinder the other serious
employment for the Kingdoms good; May it please you to be advertised, That the
Town of Ossestree, late taken by the Forces of the Parliament, under my Brother
Colonel Mittons command was upon Saturday last begun to be begirt, and since
strictly besieged by the Kings forces, consisting of about Fifteen hundred
Horse, and Three thousand five hundred Foot, under the command of Colonel
Marrow; And that thereupon, in pursuance of a Council of War's determination,
occasioned by an earnest and importunate Letter from my Brother Col. Mitton,
directed to me, for speedy relief and raising of the siege of the said Town; I
did upon the Lords day last past, with such Forces of Horse and Foot as I then
had with me, and the Foot Forces of Cheshire, all of us then at Knotsford, upon
a determinate resolution to have marched for Manchester, and then for the
service in the North: According to enjoynment of the Committee of both
Kingdoms, returned and readvanced with all my said Forces, unto a place called
Spurstow heath, where that night we quartered, and thence advanced upon Monday
morning toward Whitchurch; we quartered that night likewise in the open
Fields, at a place called the Fens in Flintshire, where yesterday we marched
toward Elsmore, and so to the said town of Oswestree, where the Enemy
endeavored by battering and storming of the same, violently to have carried
it; about Two of the clock in the afternoon we came in sight of the Town, and
within Three miles of it, where the Enemy having got Intelligence of our
Approach, were prepared to receive us, the chief Forces of our Enemy consisting
of the most valiant Commanders and Soldiers, drawn out of the garrisons of
Chester, Cheshire, Shrewsbury, Shropshire, Ludlow, Denbyshire, Flintshire, and
other places. The Enemy had taken the passage of water near to Whittington, and
very furiously assaulted and charged us, but were repulsed and forced to
retire, through the courage of our Horse, who most courageously entertained the
Enemy, three several times the skirmish was doubtful, either side being
forced so often to retreat, but in the end our Foot Forces coming up, relieved
the Horse, beat back the Enemy, and pursued them with such force, that the
Horse thereby encouraged, which indeed was formerly weary, joining with the
Foot; they put the Enemy to an absolute flight, in which we pursued them Five
miles toward Shrewsbury, to a place called Felton heath, and where likewise
we remained after their flight again thence Masters of the Field: In the
skirmish with the Enemy, and in the pursuit, we lost several of our Horse,
some of our Troopers, but never a Footman which I am yet informed of, many of
the Troopers are hurt, but I hope they will recover; I lost one Captain
Williams, and one captain Lieutenant Fclether, a very courageous man, being
Captain Lieutenants to Colonel Barton, in my Brigade was dangerously shot, but
I hope not mortally. As for the Enemy, they lost many stout men, had many of
them taken prisoners, the number whereof the enclosed will manifest, some of
them being of great quality; As, the Lord Newports eldest Son: And besides, in
their flight such was their haste, that we found in the way of our pursuit of
them, the high way, as it were, strewed with store of Bread, Cheese, Bacon, and
other good provisions, clothes, and else, such necessary appurtenance to an
Army, besides some whole Veals and Muttons new killed. The Enemy before the
relief came, had taken the Church, being the strongest hold about the Town,
upon the approach of the relief they suddenly deserted it, and sent their two
battering pieces unto Shrewsbury. In the way also were taken by our Forces,
seven Carts and Wagons laden with provisions, as Beer, Bread and other
necessaries, whereof one was laden with Powder and other Ammunition, the Town
of Oswestree I find to be a very strong Town, and if once fortified, of great
concernment, and the Key that lets us into Wales.

SIR, I had to my aid three Regiments of Foot, viz. Col. George Booths
Regiment, a gallant Regiment led by himself on foot, to the face of the Enemy;
Another by Col. Manwaring, and the third by Col. Croxon, all of them stout and
gallant Commanders, and the rest of the Officers and Soldiers full of courage
and resolution. Major Louthien, Adjutant General, that brave and faithful
Commander, to whom I cannot ascribe too much honor, brought up the Rear that
day.

SIR, I rest Yours, THO: MIDDLETON.

Prisoners taken at Oswestree; July 3. 1644.
Captains of a Troop of Horse.
Francis Newport, heir to the Lord Newport. Captain Swynerton.
20. Welsh and Shropshire Gentlemen. 1. Coronet of Horse, which had no command.
Lieutenant Norrell. 1. Quartermaster. 2. Corporalls. 32. Troopers. 2. Pieces of
Artillery, to come up to the walls to save the Musketeers. 7. Carriages,
whereof one of Powder. 200. Common Soldiers, most of them Welsh. 100. Horse.
Great store of Arms found in the corn and ditches.
There is since taken Major Mauley, and Major Whirney, under the walls of
Shrewsbury; we doubt not but to give a very good account of our service there,
and that speedily.

For the much honored, the Lady Middleton.
Madam,
I Shall trouble you with the sight of this paper, wherein you may please to
observe Gods Providence to us; on the Lords day last we marched from Knotsford
to Bundbury, fourteen miles from Bunbury in Cheshire, to Fens Hall in
Flintshire, eleven miles on Monday, on Tuesday we marched to Osestry: in the
narrow lanes they laid their Ambuscadoes, three miles short of the Town, kept
all passages and lined all hedges to the Town, hedges thick, and lanes strait,
from which our men beat them, though their horse charged our men very
furiously, followed them up to the Town, to their maine body, fighting all the
way for three miles, in the mean time their Carriages were drawn away, and
their Foot Marched away in a Body, our men pursuing took these prisoners, but
they being strong in horse hindered, that Execution that might have been done
upon them: I can assure you, the Town of Oswestrey will be of great concernment
to this Kingdom, and I hope this Enemy is well queld by raising of this Siege,
though they were one thousand five hundred Horse, three thousand five hundred
Foot; but I hope your Countrymen are gone for the mountains, and will not
easily be drawn back for the same service, so with Remembrance of my service,

Your Ladyships faithful servant, W. D.
Oswestrey, July 3. 1644.
Sir,
I Shall give you a short account of our present condition: by Gods Providence,
We have won Munsford Bridge, beat the Enemies musketeers therefrom, have
brought all our carriages over; are now within three miles from Shrewesbury,
our forlorn hope, and the Enemies are at the present engaged, we are all now
marching up with the whole Body. My Lord Denbigh, my Major Gell, Sir Tho. Mid.
and the forenamed Cheshire Gentlemen, are all at the present Advancing up; this
was the design mentioned in my former letter, dated at Oswestry, but not
signified: In brief the Drums and Trumpets command me away, and cease for the
present, So I rest

Muntesford Bridge, 3. in the afternoon, of 4 July 1644. Yours T. B.

Noble Sir,
THese enclosed will show you the State of Yorkshire, thanks be to God, much
altered with us in a day, for yesterday, a Commander and Kinsman of mine of
Lichfield, our Enemy, sent me a jeering letter, to advertise me that the Prince
had taken old Lesly Sir Tho. Fairfax, 48. pieces of Cannon, thirty thousand
Arms, and had routed, slain, and taken all the rest of our friends. This was
with great triumph blazed, with Bonfires, Bells, and Ordnance; in this Letter
the Lo: Fairfax himself was taken. The Earl of Denbigh at Manchester was by a
Counsel of War to retreat to Oswestrey, to raise the siege there laid by Col.
Marrow; and 4000. at least, but before my Lord could all out reach it, marching
with incredible speed, Sir Tho. Middleton with less then two thousand was in
fight, and with exceeding hot service Marrow was raised, his foot routed,
his carriages taken; he had but one piece, and that he sent away before,
hearing of my Lords approach, my Lord thereupon, without stay Marched toward
Shrewsbury, which he has begirt as we hear, with about five thousand men.
Sir John Meldrum, and Sir Will. Brereton are by this time about York, and the
fresh supply of Scotch, which I hope will yield us daily increase of good
nevvs, of which God-vvilling, I shall not fail to acquaint you, as I possibly
may. I thought to have written to the Lord General, my right worthy good
Lord, the Earl of Essex, but I presume you will impart these unto his
Excellency. Noble Sir, I beseech you esteem me as I really am,

Staff. July 6. about 8. Evening. Your faithful Servant, Lew. Chadwick.

FINIS.

