THE MESSAGE OF John Lambert Esquire, In ANSWER to the PROCLAMATION.
I Have not been so long versed in the Interest and Concern of this State, (in
whose greatest Affairs (since a Commonwealth was imagined, and accordingly
framed by an Army) I have deserved the name of a Second) as to startle at the
sound of a Proclamation, and quit my hopes and designs, or surrender at the
first Summons, which scares none but Cowards and men unprovided: I see it is
oftentimes the fortune of Greatness and Ambition to be clouded and eclipsed, as
it is likewise the more eximious and conspicuous luster of such grandeur to
redeem and recover its self from its ruins and obscurity. The great Marius
tasted of this vicissitude while he lurked in the Fens of Minturnae, and yet a
more popular person great Rome afforded not.

Shall I gratify by the meanness of a never yet dejected Spirit, the
impossible intrigues of my Rival? and must I and my Fame be, prostituted to the
pleasure and Lubet of a Treaty victory? Shall I disarm my mind, and abandon my
self and my Friends (whose number and courage lackt but its proportion of
wisdom,) and kneel at a Bar, that have passed the Pikes and defied Artillery?
Rather let as much reproach stick on my Achievements in the Camp, as on my
wives Feats in the Bed.

Of how much and great importance the very Name of a General is, this last half
year has amply informed the Nation: and can it be rationally thought that I
will forgo that Title, and become a private person, further then this my
present retirement? I know I am designed a Sacrifice to the Peoples Liberty,
whom the interruption and violation of this present Parliament most highly
displeases. But am I thereforc only to be blamed? why not Fleetwood,
Whitlock? all the burden must (it seems) rest upon my shoulders, that have
more then I can well bear already on my head? or else is it but a fetch, and a
specious pretense, thereby utterly to disable and weaken my interest in the
Army, and so to make room for a new Gamester.

Well, my Fates, (for I scorn to whine with my Friend Desborow) do you pardon
me. I disdain mercy, it is a word not befitting a great mind; if I have
betrayed or slighted the good and common benefit of three Kingdoms, I have
undone my self, and so may others, and that's some part of satisfaction to my
Country. Yet, why may there not be a lucky reserve, and a fortunate aftergame
for me, while I have the long Legs of the Anabaptists instead of Fortunes
Forelock to hold by.

Sir George Booth and I are now in the same predicament (saving my inviolable
Liberty, that Nolime tangere, for all General Moncks fierceness) my comfort is
the Ananias's will not purchase my estate, no more then the Presbyters will Sir
George's, and I do not know who else will or can, for the Cavaliers have no
money, and besides are no such good State-Husbands: Well, adieu, Fare ye well,
if any one enquire after me, I am in the pursuit of Sir Thomas Midleton.

John Lambert.

LONDON Printed for James Dukeson. 1660.


