Mistress PARLIAMENT Her Gossipping. FULL OF MIRTH, MERRY TALES. chat, and other
Pleasant Discourse, Between, Mrs.Statute. Mrs.Justice. Mrs.Truth.
And Mrs. Parliamnt. Mrs. Ordinance* Mrs. Synod. Mrs. ENGLAND being Moderator.


Mistress PARLIAMENT, that late lay in,
Invites you now unto her Gossipping;
And as the Order is unto this day,
For what you eat; she will make you Roundly pay;
Pray Commons eat; Har's Chat and Laughter.
And Committee-Fruit in dishes after:
Fail too and welcome; I have still in store
To prove Her Bawd, Murderer, Witch, and Whore.
Her Tryall's past; she is condemned to die,
Her Execution Day draws nie;
Come Help to guard her to the Gallow-tree.
ENGLAND is freed of all her Misery.
BY Mercurius Melancholicus:

may 22 Printed in the year of the Downfall of the Sectaries, 1647.

Mrs. Parliament her GOSSIPPING.
Enter Mrs. Parliament, Mrs. Statute, Mrs. Synod. WELL, well; Never make
comparisons with me Goodee Statute, it is, known to my Neighbors what I am well
enough, and to what Houses allied; thou art but of a mean Parentage; nor that
Trollup (thy sister Justice neither;) marry come up mother Ugly? shall thou and
thy Sister Damnable take the upper hand of me? I defy ye both, and scorn to
foul my mouth with two such Bagagges, that for neglect of doing your several
Offices, are now turned out of service by my Mother Parliament, and now do ye
think to take place? Yes, yes, when my mother has nothing else to do, so ye
shall. Get you gone to your King to the I Will of Wight, he perhaps may entertain
you, (if Colonel Hammond pleases) for my Mother shall have nothing to do with
such homely Gossips as you are; Pray be packing: neither Statute, Justice, Law,
Reason, not Religion, either comes within her doors so long as Ordinancas eyes
be open: And though I say it (that should not say it,) I have been an obedient
Daughter to her, and have up rising, and down-lying, with all diligence
executed her commands (right or rong) she knows it well enough, and so does my
Father in law Cromwell too; and my Reveren'd Uncle, the new Chancellor of
Oxford. High and Mighty Phillip Switch, Earl of Pembroke, will swear Dam him
he loves me; and I must love him again, in despite of what do ye call it hu,
hu, hu, I huming Learning, it is; my Mother and I have peppered huming learning,
Bishops! ha, ha, ha, I laugh to think of Canterbury; oh my sides, how I made
him shorter by the head, and quite spoiled his huming learning: Dostors cotha;
I have cast their waters for them, and made many of them to drink water, and to
leap at a crust too; I laugh to think on it, what do they call them, Deanes,
Prebends and Chapiters; all one with me, or my Uncle Phillip either: If we say
they be all Popish, they be all Popish, and pray who dare say the contrary;
then will my Uncle and I out them their profane Nurseries of Learning because
there should be none wiser then ourselves; and put in their Places Innocents in
Learning, pure J^norance, Devout Folly, and Zealous Madness; What though the
Wicked term them Fools, Madmen or Knaves, so long as we are a^l accounted so
at Westminster; Is it any matter for Learning? Give me my Mother tongue in a
pure Parliament Dialects the Alphabet where of begins with K. that is in plain
English Knave, or Knaves: L. betokens Learning, and may be let out, Besides it
is a Numerall Letter, and signifies fifty, that is some of the Number of the
Beast; and is used in CharLes ^ M. that may stand, because we cannot spell
money without it, which my Mother Parliament loves exceedingly: Money is the
main Key of our Work; Take away money, alas Ordinance is not worth a straw, nor
Parliament neither: O begins my own Name; we have taught the people that
already, to cry out O, oh! when we kill them; Rob or Plunder them of all they
have, and then the poor wretches being ready to starve, will quickly learn O:
P. begins my Mothers Name, P. Parliament, P. Privilege, Pay, Perjury; P. is
the best Letter in our Alphabet. Q. is profane, being the first Letter of
Queen, and is not to be used in my mother tongue, save in two places;
Question, and Quarter: R is abomination, and so is C too; who has not read
(...) we cannot endure it, Rex, it is as hateful to us as a Cross upon a
Steeple; yet in Riches or Revenue it is tolerable: S signifies Sessments, Say
and Seal, and is a Letter much used in Westminster School, as S for Sed^tion,
S. Sacrilege, S slavery: T TOM, T -- etc. T Traitors, T Tyburne, T tyrants,
and T taskmasters, Turn coats, etc. V. Vote U for me, and i will Vote for U: V
shall pay for all (U the Common People I mean:) V have undone us all; the Devil
take U, and all the rest of the Alphabet for me; Here be Letters enough for my
mothers Children; your will with me Statute?


Stat. Had I my will, I would hang both thee and thy mother too: had thy mother
been an honest woman Statute had never forsaken her; when I and my sister
Justice gave her over she entertained thee into service, to execute her unjust
commands; then she played the Strumpet to some purpose became a Murderer, a
Witch, a Thief.


Ord. Will thou prove my mother a Witch or a Whore?


Stat. Yes, and a murdering bloody Whore too: Sister Justice call hither my
Cozen Trut^, she can witness it.


Just. I will obey ye. Sister Truth? why Sister Truth, Come into the Court.


Enter TRUTH. Stat. Truth, here is a difference betwixt Mrs. Ordinance the
Bastard Issue of Mrs. Parliament and my self; I know thou art her professed
enemy; but yet thou art so honest, that thou can not hate her Person more
then her Conditions; therefore I desire thee to speak of her as she deserves
and no otherwise.


Truth. I will; she deserves to be hanged drawn and Quartered; or burnt with
her Houses about her ears.


Just. Make her Crimes known good Truth; I must not always defer deserved
punishment.


Truth. Dear Cozins, had either of you both been used by her as I have been;
you would not ^uffer her to live a Day.


Stat. I prithee tell us how?


Truth. Why she has Voted me a Malignant kicked me out of the Church, the
Parliament House and all the Courts of Justice, and bannish'd poor Truth into
an ^land, where J have suffered all miseries whatsoever, as cold, hunger,
nakedness, whilst she like a Strumpet, has ^ur^eited with the Excess she has
gained by Extortion, Theft and Rapine; Robbed God, the King and Commonwealth,
and has bewitched the People into abhorred Rebellion, and led them blindfold
by the Noses to their own destruction; That her eldest Bastard Ordinance is
likewise a Traitor to the Kingdom, and a bloody murderer, of souls as well as
bodies* and an arrant Pick-pocket, and a Pawde, and her Daughter the like; for
what mischief soever has been Ordered by the one, has been acted by the
other, both against Reason, Law and Conscience.


Just. I can forbear her no longer; apprehend the Scrumpet that she may suffer
deserved punishment, according to he^ crimes?


Stat. I Will prosecute the Law on them, and Truth shall brin^ in the Evidence
against them both. But who comes here cla^ all in sables? Enter Mrs. England in
mourning


Eng. Was ever grief like mine? O my HEAD! my Eye are dimmed with weeping; my
bowels tremble, my hands are palsied over, my heart weeps blood, and all the
faculties of my soul and body are out of frame; I am troubled with lunitick
passions, and a dull lethargy seizes on all my vitalls; sure I am bewitched, a
Paniqe fear glides through all my veins; Help, help O ye Celestial powers,
and stave Confusion off me, which threateneth my sudden ruin.


Stat. It Is Mrs. England; she is in a strange fit, i will see if I can comfort
her, And know the reason of her discontent,
Sure she is bewitched by Mrs. Parliament.


All hayl to sad dejected England; What is the reason of your heaviness? if
Justice can administer any comfort to thee; be sure on it: Here is my cozen
Statute too, and honest Truth will do the lik.


Eng. Dear friends, welcome to poor despised England; this full seven years J
have inquired after you, and never could find you out till now, though J have
sought for you at Westminstered, and all the Kingdom over.


Truth. Alas Mrs. England, we have been, all three banished from thence this
seven years, and beat out of the Church too, Robbed, Plundered, and
Sequestrated of all our Lands and goods, flung into Prisons, and exposed to all
the miseries that Malice could invent against us.


Just. Mrs. Enland, our sufferings are all alike: therefore it is but folly to
complain of our wrongs; let us find out the authoresse of all this mischief,
that by her Witchcraft and black Sorcery has wrought all our ills; Know you
who it is has wrought all this that J may whet my glittering sword, and pierce
the Strumpets heart.


Eng. It Is soon known who is the Author of our miserys it is that damned Hagge
Mrs. Parliament, and her Daughter Ordinance, that feeds fat with Theft and
Rapine, and quaff whole mazor Bowls of Englands blood.


Stat. Let Us apprehend the Witch, and try her and her Daughter by the known
Laws of the Land; but first let us degrade her, strip her out of her
Parliament-Roabes, and then search the Imposture, to see what marks she has
about her privities, to give such damned Spirits suck, as Manchester and
Lenthall her two Familiars, and those Evil spirits Mildmay, Vein, Martyn, and
Devil Challonor conjured as low as hell, and all the damned Furyes in the
Houses to know tbeir wrists, and bite their fingers ends off, tearing their
Snaky locks whilst they sit mumbling over their hellish Charms, and execrable
Spells, till we have dispersed all hells balefull Powers, that now seem to
overtopp us.


Eng. We are all agreed; let us make it known unto the Common People, and they will
dispatch her presently; many hands will make light work with her: but first let
Mrs. London guard her surely lest she run away before this be effected.


Just. No, it is pity the Rude multicnde should handle her; Let me first try
this damned Geneva Witch; perhaps she may confess her guilt: If she can
rehearse the Lords Prayer, or the Creed she is no Witch.


Truth. She has denied that long since; Nurse Synod can tell that well enough:
I Will draw up her Indictment presently.


Eng. Do good Truth, and i will produce you witnesses enough against her I Will
warrant you.


Just. Summon them all three to the Bar.


Eng. Mrs. Parliament, Mrs. Ordinance, Mrs. Synod, answer to your Names, and
appear in the Court to answer what shall be objected against you for my Lord
the King.


Enter Mrs. Parliament in a Scarlet colored Robe, Riding on a beast of many
heads, and a Cup of Red Wine in in her hand, with Ordinance, and Synod. Eng.
Mrs. Parliament hold up thy hand to the Barren, Thou art Arraigned by the Name
of Parliament, That whereas thou have (not having the grace of God before thine
eyes) ever since Novem. 3. 1641. against the Laws of our Sovereign Lord the
King, by the instigation of the Devil, Traitorously endeavored to change the
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; and to root out the King and his Posterity;
to root out, and overthrow the very beings and foundations of Parliament; and
to bring a scandal and reproach upon that High and Honorable Ceurt; That she
has by her sorceries and delusions bewitched the People into Rebellion against
their Gracious Sovereign the Lords Anointed; That she has sacrilegiously
robbed God of his Worship, he Church of its Patrimony, the King of his Revenue;
the Subject of his Liberty; and changed Religion into Faction; Preaching into
prating Blasphemy, Treasons, Contradictions and Tautallogies; That she has by
the Power of the Sword by the help of a Tyrannical, Schismatticall and
Overawing Party) robbed and killed the Subjects, even at her very doors as they
come to make know their a grievances; That she still keeps her King in Prison,
and insults and Tyranizes over the Lives and Fortuns of a Freeborn people,
charging them with insupportable Impositions to maintain an Army to destroy
themselves who act nothing but Rapine, Murder and Cruelty, and has brought all
the Plagues of God upon this Nation.


Stat. What say thou Mrs. Parliament, art thou guilty, or not guilty of all
these crimes objected against thee by Truth?


Parl. Guilty of all this, and ten times more, and would do it again, had I
yet power.


Truth. Graceless wretch! Let us proceed to sentence.


Stat. Mistress Parliament, thy Conscience is a thousand witnesses: I Wish thou
could repent; Thou art to return to the place from whence thou camst and from
thence to be drawn to the place of Execution, and there to be hanged and
Quartered. So Lord have mercy on thy soul. Take her Jaylo^.


Parl. I defy ye all; do your worst: Yet save my child.


Stat. Call a Jury of Women to search her.


Enter Women and search her, and find Witches marks upon her, and Exit. FINIS.

