VERY GOOD NEVVES FROM IRELAND. OF Three great Victories obtained against the
REBELS. I. By the Lord Inchequin, who has taken 200 horse 60 Prisoners, His
Lordships own Brother, 3000 Cows, 8000 Sheep, and 100 Arms. II. By Sir Charles
Coote, who Killed 300 upon the place, took 200 prisoners, and much prey. III. By
Major General Jones, who has taken 8000 Cattle, and five Garrisons from the
Rebels, with much Provisions.


ALSO Papers concerning the Remonstrance of the Lord Inchequins Officers.

London printed for V, V. and are to be sold at the Exchange, Anno Dom.
MDCXLVII.

VERY GOOD NEWS FROM IRELAND: OF Three great VICTORIES obtained against the
REBELS.
Right Honorable,
MAjor General Jones our Governor of this City of Dublin; and Commander, in
chief of all the Forces of this province of Lemster (to keep the Soldiers in
action, and destroy the Rebels quarters, and force them at a distance) designed
a considerable strength to march into the County of Wicklow.

The Rebels hearing of their design, marched out of their quarters from
several places, and (upon their near approach) fled before them: The very
noise of our men strickes such a terror into the hearts of the Rebels, that
they know not what to do being extremely fearful of being forced to another
engagement.

So that our men have had very good success in Wicklow, from whence they have
brought very good prey of which I have sent you a list (enclosed herein) of the
particulars, by which you may see what a mighty booty God has put into our
hands.

And if the Lord be pleased to settle you at peace at home, and reduce all the
differences in England to an happy union, I doubt not but things will go well
here, And our valiant Commander in chief has a design by which he hopes to
bring the Rogues low before Winter.

Ordinary wheat is now (at Drogheda) at ten shillings a Barrel, and dearer
at Dublin.

But such care has been taken for provisions here; that Dublin have got in
all their Harvest; and that without danger, or interruption.

The old Fox, Owen Ro-Oneale keeps close with his Forces about Kilkenny, he
is there at one House mending his Works, and taking in provisions, and will
not fight but upon his own conditions, if he could get a great advantage
perhaps he would make use of it, but before we come near him he Alarmes his
Forces to a withdrawing posture.

And the Irish have no other considerable strength to depend upon.

So that moneys coming first over to encourage our Soldiers, and then supplys
of men and Equipage we have great hopes of a good forwardness in reducing
th^se par^s in short time. So prays,

Your Lordships humble servant, WILL. MORE.
Dublin the 1. of Sep. 1647.
A List of the great prey taken by Major General Jones his Forces, in the
County of Wicklow, and parts adjacent.
^000 Cattle brought to the City of Dublin, 3000 Cattle brought to the Garrison
of Drogheda, 5 Garrisons quit by the Rebels, the Enemy fled, Many loads of
provisions burnt, and spoiled.
Postscript,
We have news now come from the North that Sir Charles Coote, Lord President of
Connought, has fought with a party of the Rebels, and given them a notable
defeat, according to the List enclosed,

The Victory of Sr. Charles Coote Lord President of Connought, against the
Rebels.
300. Slain upon the place, 200. Taken prisoners, Many wounded. Diverse Arms,
provisions, and a very considerable prey taken out of their quarters.
SIR,
THE Lord Inchequin, Lord president for this province of Munster was lately
moved by his Officers about a Remonstrance which was occasioned by their
hearing of some differences in England, between the City of London and the
Army under his Excellency Sir Thomas-Fairfax and the distractions which they
heard the Parliament to be in thereby, which his Lordship was much sorrowful
to hear.

But afterward hearing that these differences were well appeased, and the
Parliament sitting safe, the prosecution of the said Remonstrance was appeased,
and his Lordship did pretty well satisfy his Officers therein.

Yet they have again importuned his Lordship about moneys, being very earnest
about their Arreers, and pressing him to send over for moneys to be speedily
sent them.

A party of the Rebels his Lordship heard were gathering to try if they could
raise the Seige, but having notice of it he sent out a commanded party who fell
upon the Rebels and defeated them, A list of the particulars whereof I have
sent you enclosed, resting.

Yours to serve you MILES SMYTH.
Cork the 1. of Sep. 1647. A list of the particulars of the victory obtained
by the Lord Inchequin, in the Province of Munster Taken
200. Serviceable Horse. 60. Prisoners. His Lordships Brother 3000 Cows. 8000
Sheep: 100 Arms.
A List of the great prey taken by Major General Jones his Forces in the
County of Wicklow, and parts adjacent.
5000 Cattle brought to the City of Dublin, 3000 Cattle brought to the Garrison
of Drogheda 5 Garrisons quit by the Rebels, the enemy fled, Many loads of
provisions burnt and spoiled.
The Victory of Sir Charles Coote, Lord President of Connought, against the
Rebels.
300 Slain upon the place, 200 Taken prisoners, Many wounded, Diverse Arms,
provisions, and a very considerable prey taken out of their quarters.
A List of the particulars of the Victory obtained by ^^e Lord Inchequin, in
the Province of MUNSTER. Taken
200 Serviceable Horse, 60 Prisoners, His Lordships Brother, 3000 Cowes, 8000
Sheep, 100 Arms.



FINIS.

