Wonderful News from the North. OR, A TRUE RELATION OF THE SAD AND GRIEVOVS
TORMENTS, Inflicted upon the Bodies of three Children of Mr. George Muschamp,
late of the County of Northumberland, by Witchcraft: AND HOW MIRACULOUSLY IT
pleased God to strengthen them, and to deliver them: As also the prosecution of
the said Witches, as by Oaths, and their own Confessions will appear, and by
the Indictment found by the Jury against one of them, at the Sessions of the
Peace held at Alnwick, the 24. day of April, 1650.

November. 25. 1650.
Imprimatur,

JOHN DOWNHAM.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. and are to be sold by Richard Harper, at his shop in
Smithfield, 1650.

A Preface to the Reader.
Courteous Reader:
WIth a sad heart I present unto thee the ensuing Discourse, not out of malice
to the person of any, but to show the great mercy of Almighty God, and to
magnify his glorious Name for preservation of Me and my Children, and for
delivering us from those extreme torments and miseries wherewith by
Diabolical means we have been afflicted. In prosecution of which sad Story,
I have delivered nothing but Truth, as is testified by very many people of
great Rank and Quality, as also by Divines, Physicians, and numbers of other
people, who have been sad Spectators of our Miseries. Beseeching the Almighty
God to deliver thee and all good Christian People from the like Miseries, and
Torments, which have happened unto Me, and my poor innocent Children.

Thine, Mary Moore.

A brief Description of Mr. GEORGE MUSCHAMPS Childrens unnatural Trials,
from the Year of our Lord, 1645. Until Candlemas, 1647. The time of their
Releasement.
FIrst in Harvest, some two Months before MICHAELMAS, about four or five of
the Clock in the afternoon, Mistress MARGARET MUSCHAMP suddenly fell into a
great Trance, her Mother being frighted, called Company, and with much ado
recovered her; as soon as the child looked up, cried out, dear Mother, weep
not for me; for I have seen a happy Sight, and heard a blessed sound; for the
Lord has loved my poor soul, that he has caused his blessed Trumpet to
sound in my ears, and has sent two blessed Angels to receive my sinful
soul. O weep not for me, but rejoice, that the Lord should have such respect
to so sinful a wretch as I am, as to send his heavenly Angels to receive my
sinful soul, with many other divine expressions: Calling good Mother send for
my dear Brother, and honest Mr. HUET, perhaps the Lord will give me leave to
see them; that faithful man may help my soul forward in praying with me, and
for me; for we know the prayers of the faithful are very powerful with the
Lord. They b^^^g three miles off, in the Holy Island, were sent for, and with
what speed might be, came; she all this while in her Heavenly Rapture, uttering
such words as were admirable to the beholders, her Brother and the Minister
came to her, which heard her express much joy. The Minister exhorting her, to
whom she gave such satisfaction, that he blesled God in showing such mercy to a
child of eleaven years old. All that night she continued, apprehending these
Heavenly Visions, the Minister praying with her, and for her, as she desired
him. After she fell into a little rest, and when she awaked, remembered not any
thing she had said or done.

Witnesses to this first, Mr. HUET, Minister. Mrs. KENADY, her two Brothers,
and two Sisters, with her Mother. GEORGE ROBINSON, and his Wife. KATHERINE
GRAME. ODNEL SELBY, and his Wife. MARGARET DIKSON, with diverse others in the
house then present.


After this she continued well till Candlemas.

ON Candlemas Eve, betwixt the hours of one and two in the afternoon, being
the Sabbath, her mother with most of her servants being at Church, only her
two Brothers, and two Sisters with her, she was suddenly stricken with a great
deal of torment, called for a little beer, but ere they could come with it,
the use of her tongue was gone, with all her limbs, pressing to vomit, and such
torments, that no eyes could look on her without compassion: Her mother
coming home with a sad heart, beheld her child, using what means could be,
but no ease, till eleaven or twelve a Clock at night she fell into a slumber
and slept till six in the morning; as soon as Berwick gates were opened her
mother sent for Physicians, both of soul and body, with the Lady SELBY,
Colonel FENVVICKS Widow, with other friends, who forth with came to behold
this sad fight, with many others that came to the child waking out of her
sle^pe, which was without present torment, but had lost the use of both limbs,
tongue, stomach, only smiled on them, and signed, that we could understand
she had all her other senses very perfect, but would let nothing come within
her mouth of any nourishment, for her Jaws were almost closed: Physicians gave
their advice, with other friends; and what could be had, was gotten for her:
but her signs from the beginning were, away with these Doctors Drugs, God had
laid it on her, and God would take it off her.

She begged that Mr. BALSOM, Mr. STROTHER, and Mr. HUET, would be her Doctors in
their earnest prayers to the Lord for her; for she was confident there was no
help for her, but from Heaven: yet her mother to her great expenses neglected
no lawful means that could be used. About 12. a clock she had a tormenting
fit before all the company; but it was not above an hour: but from that time
till Whitson Eve, being 16. weeks, she slept as well in the nights, as any
one, but as soon as she awaked in the morning begun her torment: First three
or four hours every day, increasing till it came to eight hours, every hour
a several torment, such strong cruel ones that cannot be expressed, as many
with weping eyes beheld it, that Ministers would pray by her till the sad
object would make them leave her to the Lord, expecting nothing but death. Sir
WILLIAM SELBY his Lady, the Countess LENDRIK, the Lady HAGGARSTON, with many
others, would look, till sorrow would make them forbear: Yet as soon as these
torments were over, the child would instantly smile, and make signs she felt
no pain at all: solying quietly till the next morning, only we wet her lips
with a little milk and water; for nothing she would let come within her jaws;
but would smile and show her Arms and breast, and say God fed her with Angels
food: for truly all the 16. weeks fast, did not appear to diminish her
fatness or favor any thing at all.

On Whitson Eve in the morning she had eight hours bitter torment, in the
afternoon her mother being abroad, left her Husbands Brothers Daughter Mrs
ELIZABETH MUSCHAMP with her, who made signs to her to carry her into the
Garden, in her mothers absence; her Cozen casting a mintle about her, gave her
her desire, and sat in the Garden with her on her knee, who in the bringing
down had so little strength in her neck, that her head hung wagging down; but
was not set a quarter of an hour, till showing some signs to her Cozen,
bolted off her knce, ran thrice about the Garden, expressing a shrill voice,
but did not speak presently: she that was brought down in this sad condition
came up stairs on her own legs, in her Cozens hands: Captain FALSET, his
Wife and his Daughter being then in the house, did behold this miraculous mercy
of the Lord done to this child: her mother being at Berwick, three miles off,
was sent for, and imparted her joyfulnesse unto the Lady SELBY, and good Mr.
BALSOME, whose prayers with the rest (as the child said) had prevailed with God
for mercy. When her mother came home, her Daughter which she left in so bad a
condition, came with her clothes on, down to the gate, calling Mother, Mother
welcome home. Now the Mothers joy may be imagined, but not expressed; desiring
her mother presently to send many thanks to Mr. BALSOME, and Mr. STROTHER for
that the Lord had answered their prayers for her. The next day being the
Sabbath, she begged on her mother to return thanks to the glorious God, who
never failed any that trusted in him, and her self would ride into the Holy
Island and join in thanks and prayers to the Lord, with Mr. HUET, Sir THOMAS
TEMPEST, Captain SHAFT, with the rest of the parish that feared God; She by
Gods power did it the next Thursday, being a Lecture in Berwick, her self, and
with Mr. BALSOME and Mr. STROTHER gave glory to the Lord for his never
forgotten mercy to her; though her flesh did not diminish, yet her strength was
but weak, and her stomach by degrees came to her again, and for seven or eight
weeks was very well: then her mother removed to Berwick, where the Garrison
being kept, the discharge of a Musket would cause her to fall into very great
ecstasies, being there several times for 24 hours space, she would be suddenly
taken with her former torments. For three weeks space she lost her stomach, and
all her limbs, and of a sudden recoverd all again, not remembering what she had
either done or suffered. To avoid this inconvenience, her mother removed from
Berwick, and carried her in one of these sad conditions one mile off Berwick,
where she continued seven weeks more in these afflictions.

Her eldest Brother upon S. John's day at night in the Christmas following
betwixt the hours of 1. and 2. was taken exceedingly ill, that it was thought
he would not live: the next morning he was a little eased of his extremity and
pain, but both his stomach and the use of his legs taken from him, so that he
was forced to have help to put on his clothes, was lifted into a chair where
he sat all day long, but could neither eat nor drink any thing, but a little
milk or water, or sour milk. He consumed away to nothing, yet not
heart-sicke; but would reason, talk and laugh with any friend as if nothing
ayled him. His mother now being pressed down with sorrow, sent to the Doctors
both at Newcastle. Durham, and Edenborough, not doubting or suspecting any
unnatural Disease; the Physicians all agreed by the course of nature he could
not live a month to an end, which was sad news to his sorrowful Mother, God
knows.

After two or three weeks she had another fit of her former torments* after
she had lain three or four weeks in her extremity, begun, and cried the
Rogue, never till then, offering a word in her torments, but as if some were
striking at her; she seemed to save her self with hands and bedcloaths from
blows, deciphering a wretched creature as we all after knew by her
description: Sometimes he would fight with her in the shape of a Dragon, of a
Bear, a Horse, or Cow: Many fancies she did express; and good things, she
said, fought for her, and still got the better of him: The enemies Weapons were
a Club, a Staff, a Sword, and Dagger; her good things got them all, as she
thought, and after the wretch, she thought, got the Dagger again.

Now when she fixed her eyes upon her objects, no action you could use would
move either eyes or gesture, till she came out of her fits, then did not
remember any thing she either did or said: After a while she would make her
hand go on her breast, as if she would write, with her eyes fixed on her object;
they laid paper on her breast, and put a p^n with ink in her hand, and she not
moving her eyes, writ, Jo Hu. Do. Swo. have been the death of one dear
friend, consume another, and torment me; whilst she was writing these words,
she was blown up ready to burst, shrinking with her head, as if she feared
blows: then would she be drawn, as in convulsion fits, till she got that
writing from them that had it, and either burn it in the fire, or chew it in
her mouth, till it could not be discerned. Let any one snatch the paper from
her and hide it as private as he could, she would have gone to the party and
place, still in torment till she got it, and either burn it or chewed it, that
none could discern one word she had wrote, then immediately she would have
ease: Thus for a month or six weeks, every other day, with several torments,
and such like expressions continued; her good things, as she called them came
still and saved her from her enemies.

These words written, and her other expressions, caused her sad m^ther to have
very contradictive thoughts: So that one day her Niece MUSCHAMP that had been
her Companion in most of these sad conditions, being troubled to think what
this child's writing should mean; said to her Aunt, there is one that I have
ever feared since my cousin MARGARET was first afflicted; but I dare not name
her whom I have suspected: Her Aunt answers, and only one I suspect: And these
Letters make me tremble to think on it; but the Lord pardon our thoughts, if
we think amiss: So revealing our thoughts one to another, and pitched both on
DOROTHY SVVINOVV. Her Niece says, Mrs. SVVINOVV came to see the child when
you were away, and spoke harshly of you, and besides the childs looking on
her, which she never did on any else, makes me fear her: Her Aunt answered, if
she could do me hurt, and not her own soul, I fear her more then any else,
but that cannot be; so Lord pardon us, if we think amiss, and let us not
speak any further of her.

This childs mothers occasions called her to Newcastle, which journey was not
pleasant, leaving so sad a house at home, and her childs writing, and her
Neeces thoughts, and her own, made her very sad, that her servant wondering to
see such a change, presumed to ask the cause of it she knowing her servant to
be trusty, revealed the suspected party to him, no living soul being by; her
occasions being dispatched returned home.

But in her absence her Daughter had been quite distracted, run up and down
with a staff in her hand, saying she would kill the Rogue: in this rage she
apprehended her good things (for so she called them) in the likeness of a
Dove, and a Partridge, and begun and sung, Judgo and revenge my cause O Lord:
Next, How long will thou forget me Lord; shall I never be remembered? And
concluded, Behold and have regard, ye servants of the Lord; and so came out of
her fit, not remembering any thing, either done or s^yd; she never having any of
these Psalms by heart, or any book by her, nor as yet any voice to sing them
to this day.

By her at that time was my Niece MUSCHAMP, Mr. MOORS six sons, and his
Daughter, with my own children and servants, and diverse neighbors. After my
coming home, she fell into another of these strange fits; the Minister of
Tweedmouth being by, seeing and hearing many strange passages, which cannot
half be remembered: But part of her discourse was; that if she had two drops of
his blood or hers, within ten days, it would save her life; if not death long
coming, but torment perpetually.

Diverse of these fits she had, in every one expressing their blood would save
her life; from ten days to six, from six to three, which was on a Saturday,
being heavily tormented, her tongue taken from her, with her eyes fixed on her
objects, wrote thus again, JO. HU. DO. SVVI. has been the death of one dear
friend, consumes mother dear friend, and torments me; for three days they
have no power, but the fourth they will torment me: two drops of his or her
blood would save my life, if I have it not I am undone, for seven years to be
tormented before death come. Whilst she was writing the tears coming down
her face, still saving her self in this bitter agony, as it were, from her
enemies blows.

As soon as her mother came from Newcastle, she sent (that servant she
revealed her mind to at Newcastle) to one JOHN HUTTON, he was one it was
suspected that could do more then God allowed of; bidding him confess who had
wronged her child, or she would apprehend him: her child in her extremity
writing the two first Letters of his name, with another.

So when this servant told him his message another being by to witness his
answer, which was thus: WILLIAM HALL, your Mrs. knows as well who has wronged
he^ child as I: for the party that with a troubled mind your Mrs. had
concealed all this time, and at Newcastle in her chamber all alone told you is
she that has done her all this wrong. The servant answered, God bless me,
could he tell what his Mistress said to him, no living soul else prese^ it,
bidding him reveal the party? the Rogue said, a great stone is not easily
lifted, and he had one foot in the grave already: repeating many old sayings:
but said, DOROTHY SVVINOVV wife then to Colonel SVVINOVV, was the party that
had done all the mischief to her child, and was the cause of all her further
crosses.

This answer being brought, and her child's last writing, three days they had
no power, the fourth to torment; and the Sabbath being one of the three, the
monday following, her mother, her Niece MUSCHAMP, her son in Law EDWARD MOORE,
GEORGE ARMORER, WILLIAM HALL, and WILLIAM BARD, rid to Etherston thinking Mr.
WALTO^N to have been a Justice of the Peace; but was not: then she with her
company went directly to Sunderland, where Jo. HUTTON dwelt, and sent for him,
who forthwith came, and though they had never seen him, but by the childs
description, nor he them; he knew them all naming their names; and fell down
on his knees for to pray for the child; but her mother bidding him rise, she
desired none of his prayers, but tell her how he came to know what she spoke to
her servant all alone, so far off, he repeated before all the company what he
had formerly spoken.

She said her eldest son was very ill too, the Lord bless him, not thinking
that he was wronged; but the Rogue answered, one was the cause of both: she in
a maze said, I had a sister that dyed in a restless sickness, God grant she
was not wronged too: the Rogue said, Mistress, Mistress, one is the cause of
all, envy nothing will satisfy, but death. Said she is this possible?
Mistress said he my life is in your hand, but I Will maintain DOROTHY SVVINOVV
was the death of the Lady MARGERY HAMBLETON, the consuming of your son, and the
tormentor of your daughter, and the cause of all your evil; and if you would
have my hearts blood take it, for my life is in your power, none speaking of
blood to him. She told him the child had wrote two drops of his or her blood
would save her life; and if the Devil had left so much in him, she would (if
it pleased the Lord) have it ere they parted. The wretch using still Godly
words and his prayers, desired to take his blood privately, that none should
see; so the child nickt him half a dozen times in the forehead, but no blood
appeared; then he put forth his right arm and that was not till her mother
threatened his heart blood should go before she wanted it; then he laid his
thumb on his arm, and two drops appeared, which she wiped off with a paper,
the which she had writ the words in, and bid him farewell: he bid them ride
softly, they had both tide and time enough, it being a fine quiet day; of a
sudden as soon as they were on horse back it grew very boystrous, that they had
much ado to sit on their horses; riding fast, at Sunderland Towns end, came
two white Lambs to them, and kept close with their horses till they came to
Bambrough, being two long miles, neither sheep nor lambs near them; the water
was very deep, yet being venterous they rid it over.

On Monday night she fell into a heavenly Rapture, rejoicing that ever she was
borne, for these two drops of blood had saved her life, otherwise she had been
seven years in torment without any ease, or death had come: behold her two
Angels (which she was bold to call them) on her right hand, and her Tormenters
on her left, setting her self with a majestic carriage, her words so
punctual and discreet, that it was admirable to the beholders.

Saying her Angels bid her now be bold to speak out, looking on her left hand,
saying, thy name is JOHN HUTTON, and hers is DOROTHY SVVINOVV, she has been
the death of my Aunt HAMBLETON, the consumer of my Brother, and the tormenter
of me; she knowing my Aunts estate was but for life, and her only son had
married FAUSETS daughter, who to enjoy the estate, he having but one son, was
the cause of young JAMES FAUSETS unnatural fits: But thinking Mr. FAUSET would
follow her more strictly there, then we could do here, let him alone, to be
the more vehement with us, every fit promising me case, if I would consent to
lay it on my mother; but I will never consent, but if it were possible endure
more torment; fince she is all that the Lord of his goodness has left to take
care of us five fatherless children; except our Father in Heaven, which
protects her for our sakes.

Thus for two hours together she continued in a very heavenly religious
Discourse with these Angels, rejoicing that she had got two drops of blood;
saying, if her Brother had as much, it would save his life also; witness to
these words were Mr. MOORE of Spittle, his six Sons and a Daughter, Mr.
ELIZABETH MUSCHAMP, Mrs. MARGARET SELBY, ANNE SELBY, and GEORGE LEE, who was
almost cast away coming into Barwick Harbor in a Ship by that fearful
tempest which HUTTON raised. GEORGE ARMORER, WILLIAM HALL, WILLIAM BEARD, HENRY
ORDE, with diverse Neighbors, all admiring the Lords great power expressed in
that afflicted child. Her mother being destrous to have some small quantity of
HUTTONS blood, rode the next day to him with two servants, who brought him to
her son, he not being able to go to him. He acknowledged still his life was
in her hands, and came riding behind one of her servants home to the Spittle
where she dwelt, and being brought before Mr. MOORE, confirmed all that he had
formerly confessed, and withal said, Mrs. SVVINOVV had two bad women about
her, the Millers and the Websters Wives, who had been the death of Jo. CUSTERD
and his Wife, with many other things of their wickedness: That night he
desired to go to rest, and when he pleased to call him, he would confess
further to him alone; the next day came Mr. WILLIAM ORDE, Mr. BROAD Minister,
with Mr. HEBERIN, and EDWARD SAUFIELD, who heard all this confirmed, and so
the mother took her son in her arms to the place where the wretch was, and
got his blood.

He stayed there seven or eight days, and yet Mr. MOORE had never power to
examine him any more, the wretch still desiring to be gone, the mother in the
presence of MARGARET SELBY, MARGARET ORDE, and WILLIAM BEARD, charged him, that
although he had been long the Devils servant, at last to be but a bridge for
Gods creatures to go over, in confessing the truth; who answered, Mistress,
Mistress. If I were a young man, able to endure all the torments that should be
laid on me, I would take my death that Mrs. DOROTHY SVVINOVV was the death of
the Lady HAMBLETON, the confumer of your son, and the Tormentor of your
Daughter, and the cause of all your other troubles.

Now whilst he was there the Girl was never troubled, but he was not past the
Towns end, till she fell into a terrible fit; saying, DOROTHT SVVINOVV with
two Witches more were come to torment her worse then ever HUTTON did, and the
one was a young woman, and the other an old: So that till they had Justice of
DOROTHY SVVINOVV, her mother and they should never be at peace: Upon this her
mother rid to Justice FOSTER of Nuham, and upon Oath gave Information against
both HUTTON and Mrs. SVVINOVV, to apprehend them, who after delays apprehended
him, and sent him to Newcastle Goal, but not her, though it will appear she
was three several times in his company after he had the Information upon Oath,
whereof he gave her a Copy, with the Copy of HUTTONS Examination, but would
never let Mrs. MUSCHAMP see it; seeing that delay, she spoke with a Durham
Justice at Bellford, which not being in the County, and in haste he could not
grant her a Warrant to apprehend the said Mrs. SVVINOVV; but bid Mr. FOSTER do
Justice, which is not yet done.

The Girl having many tormenting fits, in the midst of which her Angels
always appearing to her, banishing the Witches, which she apprehended; the
Girl would cry out and relate to her Angels how she by the two Witches had
been tormented, forcing her to get the information, whereof her mother kept a
Copy; so that let her mother give the paper to whom she would, or lay it any
where, the child would go to either place or party most strangely. As soon as
her Angels departed. her torments leaving her, she told them that her enemies
would have killed her: but justly might she sing the 35. Ps Plead thou my cause
O Lord, etc. Repeating the first part thereof so sensibly and distinctly, that
the Ministers there present admired to hear it. As likewise her declaring the
death of the Rogue HUTTON in prison before it was known there, saying if he
had been urged he would have discovered the other 2. Witches; foretelling many
strange truths, appointing diverse meetings with her Angels, such a day and such
an hour, to consult with them what should become of her brother, and what
punishment her enemies should have, bidding every one they should not so much
as look after her, for if they did it would anger her Angels, and undo her,
for there were some strange Angels besides her own to meet her; this being the
fourth meeting with them, and it would declare all, saying she must have all
clean clothes about her; for this day or to morrow she must meet them under
such a tree in the Garden: After coming out of her fit, she remembered not any
thing what was done or said.

Her mother observing her words, which hitherto had been so remarkable,
clothed her child all in white, and freely commended her to the Lord, watching
his glorious time in the afternoon, being in a walk under a tree with her
Brothers and sisters; suddenly she gave a great shrike, and skipt over a double
ditch and another, and run to the Garden door. Her eldest sister came to her
mother saying, MARGRET is gone to her Angels meeting, who with have ran with
the key of the Garden door, where her child was standing, beating at it,
saying, I come, I come: she opened the door and left her to her protector, and
hastily went to the other side of the house to secure that part of the Garden:
but (alas) ere she came, a wicked creature set on by the enemies instigation,
had been looking after her, and her child wringing her hands, weeping
bitterly, as if she could have torn her flesh from the bones, or hair off her
head, saying who was here? what wicked creature had stayed her blessed Angels
from her; and for three hours together took on grievously, her mother weeping
with her, begging of the Lord not to punish the innocent for the wickeds fault.
After some time the child went into the Garden again, where finding one of her
Angels, she said, Lord, it was not my fault: but well is me that you will come
unto me! but (alas) where are the rest? Her mother being within, hearing these
words. A quarter of a year (a long time to be without comfort) still weeping:
Then she had this Answer from her Angels, that for twelve weeks they would not
visibly appear to her. This she remembered for three days, and related to her
brothers and sisters and the rest of the household the shape of those Angels:
which were bodyed like Birds, as big as Turkies, and faces like Christians, but
the sweetest creatures that ever eyes beheld: one of the strange ones came
flying over the trees with a sweet voice, and gave her notice the rest were
come; which she found most true. Two or three lighted upon the ground, and the
rest with the heavenliest voices that ever were heard, with a resolution to
declare the truth of all. And if the Justices, and Judges at the Assizes would
not do justice, her own two Angels (who were always to her like a Dove and a
Partridge) would visibly, to the admiration of all the beholders, appear like a
man and a woman, and justify the truth, if the wicked wretch had not scared
them away. But now the one of her Angels bid her have a care she were neither
frighted nor angered for twelve weeks, in which time they would not come to her;
but in the mean time her enemy would make every third fit a terrible one,
which was most true.

In the mean time Colonel SVVINOVV dyed, and she comes into the Country, and
because FOSTER would do no justice, I got her apprehended in Berwick; she made
such friends that it was a greater freedom to her then she had formerly from
all other Laws, and went at pleasure. The Girl with her mother being one
Sabbath day at Berwick Church, coming along the Bridge with her Husbands son,
and daughter; DOROTRY SVVINOVV being at the farther end thereof, the Girl
never seeing her but in her fits, knew her and was ready to fall down in her
mothers hand, crying yonder is the woeful thief; her mother knowing it true,
said now to the Girl it is not she, who answered, I have seen her a hundred
times to my smart, it is she: her mother troubled much at the sight too, would
have had the Girl back, but her desire was to be at home, who was no sooner
come in, but she fell inro a terrible fit, for two hours long; sometimes her
tongue drawn in within her throat, other whiles hanging over her chin on her
breast. Sad and heavy sights were seen in her afflictions, still bidding all
that were by her see the wicked Wretch DOROTHY SVVINOVV with the two Witches at
her back, saying she would not let her go back to Berwick, lest the Justices
should have been witnesses themselves; but let her come home, where she knew
all their hearts were hardened: for alas, she said I have two weeks and two
days yet before my Comforters come, which made her enemies thus cruel, that
if it were in her power to take their lives she would but the Lords preserving
power would never leave them who suffered these torments for his own glory and
their souls health saying, ours were but the corrections of a loving Father to
show his great power in his weakest children, rejoicing exceedingly that he
thought her (a sinful creature) worthy so much happiness, accounting it more
joy to see her blessed Angels then all the world could afford, thanking God
especially for making her a watch over her mother, brothers, and sisters, and
would foretell strange things before they happened.

When her 12. weeks were past, the very day and hour came diverse to see the
Event, and waited with patience her appointed time, which was the very minute
of the hour of the day 12. weeks, they were scared from her, Mr. BROAD,
Minister, Mr. STEVENS, Physician, Mrs. MUSCHAMP, and Mrs. HAGARSTON, besides
their own Neighbors were Witnesses, hearing her express much joy to meet
with those long absent dear friends, relating the intention some had to look
after them again; so apprehending them in the Chamber, where the Spectators
heard her for two hours, most divinely and heavenly discourse with them,
answering and replying to that religious discourse, praying for her enemy
DOROTHY SVVINOVV, with the tears running down her face, that if the Lord had
mercy in store to grant her it, lamenting the sad condition she had run her
soul into, for satisfying her malice to lessen her hope of eternity, making
such a description between hell torments and heavenly joys, as that no Divine
on earth could have gone beyond her: Crying out for Justice, saying, if she
were in hold as a Fellon ought to be, her power would be gone, and their
torments eased; but now with much joy she blessed God her Angels would never
leave her again, whilst they were in affliction; saying, she would go to the
Judges (and desired to carry her brother there to) and beg for Justice; if
she got it, her brother should come home as well as ever he was, she no more
tormented, and there should be no more hard heartedness against her mother,
which the Lord knows was such without any just cause, that her passion is by
Gods power beyond imagination: Every fit she spoke to this effect, till the
Sizes came: in her fit her brother asked her if it were possible that he could
ride that could neither go or stand; she answered that the Lord would enable
him, therefore he should go, and her Angels would go along with them, and
bring them safe back again.

So their Mother not daring to disobey such divine commands, whose confidence
does wholly depend upon Gods providence from Heaven, rid behind her son, and
came to the Judge, relating her sad condition; he heard her, but being falsely
informed, did not resent it: she went to the Justices to remove DOROTHY
SVVINOVVS body to the County where the act was committed: they pretended
ignorance, the childrens mother went with them to a Counselor to instruct
them, whose answer was he would not meddle in it: Yet these dejectments did not
drive her from an undoubted confidence in an all sufficient God; the next day
between one and two of the Clock in the afternoon the Girl suddenly had a
fit and after her torments her Angels appeared unto her, to them she
complains, saying, no Justice abroad, no Peace at home, what should become of
her mother? for that Godless thief DOROTHY SVVINOVV, by the instigation of
the Devil, had hardened the heart of both Judges and Justices against her, and
now at this instant (said she) is using means to harden her husbands heart
against her too (which she knows will be cruellest to her of all) and withal
begun to consume her eldest sister, and that she would this night, or to morrow
morning go to the Judge, beg once more for Justice; if she got it, her
Brother with the rest should be well, if not, worse then ever; saying, if the
Judge denied her it, it would not be well with him; this was part of her two
hours discourse.

Witnesses the Chamber full, amongst which was, Colonel SIPTHORP, and his Wife.
Colonel RODDAM. Captain TOMPSON, his Brother and two Sisters. Mr ANDIRSON, and
Mr. SVVADVVELL. Mrs. CLETHER. Mrs. ALLGOOD. Dr. GENISON.


BEfore she was out of her fit came Dr. GENISON, who invited the mother with
her children to his house, being the next house to the Judges Chamber, in
regard the Girls first appointment was always kept; so after her supper sent
to see if it were more convenient to wait upon the Judge that night, or the
next morning: the answer was returned that night was fittest: So Dr. CLETHER
and his wife, with Dr. GENISON and his, went along with the mother and their
children thither, there was a great many spectators to see the Event.

Thus being set down in the chamber, her mother began her former suit, in
begging Justice: his answer was, that that which belonged unto the County
Palatine of Durham, belonged not unto him: So she requested him in his return
back, either to do it, or else give order to the Justices in the County to
apprehend her; of a sudden the Girl fell into a fit, relating before them
all DOROTHY SVVINOVVS malice from the beginning, the cause of the troubles that
broke Sir To. HAMBLETONS heart, the death of his Lady, and how she sought still
by evil means to take away her mothers life, when the Lord would not permit
that, got leave first to torment her, then to consume her brother, and now has
begun to consume her eldest sister, and harden her Father in Laws heart, to
make her mothers life more sorrowful, with her hands up, and eyes fixed upon
her objects, begged Justice for the Lords sake, for Jesus Christ's sake; saying
I ought to command Justice by the Laws of the Realm, in the name of our
Sovereign Lord the King, but I beg not in the name of any mortal man, but in
the name of the King of Kings, Justice for Christ's sake, Justice for his
mercies sake, it we have but ordinary Justice, which ought not to be denied to
the poorest creature who demands it, my brother that sits there shall go home
as well as ever he did, I no more tormented, my mother no more afflicted, and
my sisters torments at an end: if we have no justice my torments shall be
doubled, my brother worse then ever he was, and my sister (which she has this
day begun to torment) worse then any of us, and my mothers afflictions, by the
hardening of folks hearts against her will be unsufferable; but the Lords
preserving mercy will never leave them who depend upon his providence; but it
will be worse for them who deny us justice then for us. These words with many
more significant expressions, that the Judge thought she feigned: but as soon
as she was out of her fit, did not know what was past, as all the beholders did
see, only an innocent bashful Girl, without any confidence at all when she
was out of her fits. So her mother returned home with them, where she found her
other Girl began to consume.

That night she came home the Girl fell into a fit, pressing to vomit, but
nothing came up but a piece of Fir-stick full of crooked pinnes: after her
Angels came, she cried out of the Judges injustice, saying, now the enemy when
she sees she can have no justice, strived to choke her with these things,
being stones, coals, brick, Lead, straw, quills full of pins, with straw full
of pins, tow, and Virginal wire, all full of pins; one great stone for three
weeks together came always to her throat and went back again, till at the
last the Lord brought it up. She bid watch with her brother three weeks; for
they would if they could either cut his throat in the night, or else burn him
with fire; therefore let the Watchers be very wakefull, and careful, so
blessed be God they were, and did hear as it were knives sharpning on the
stairs, and 3 several times fire was found in the room one night, like to
have burnt them, but by Gods mercyes were saved. She said now DOROTHY SVVIHOVV
was seeking a new way to take away her mothers life; for she was consuming the
child within her, and withal bad them watch with her brother and sister that
night twelve month they began to torment him (which was Saint John's day at
night) betwixt the hours of 1. and 2. in the morning, and that very moment of
the hour they would seek to take his life and the use of his sisters legs, if
Christians prayers and diligent watching did not prevent them; so it pleased
the Lord to move the hearts of good friends to watch with them till the hour
came.

The Girl then had her fit, and cried out, the Grand Witch Meg is come to the
door with a lighted Candle in each hand, pray on one half hour longer, and
their power will be gone, who observed her request, there was a sudden smell
of brimstone, but nothing seen by any; but here are some of their names that
were witnesses to most of her trials, and first them that prayed by her.

Mr. BROAD. Mr. EDWARD ORDE. Mr. GEORGE ATHERLONY. Mr. EDWARD MOORS six
Sons, and one Daughter.
With diverse others, which were too tedious to relate.

AFter this her Brother and Sister continued still consuming, and she every
other day falling into her fits, and after torment her Angels always appearing
unto her, she still declares that DOROTHY SVVINOVV hardened the hearts of all
that her mother had to deal with, said, it should be worse and worse, till of
an instant the Lord should make her greatest enemies her greatest friends;
declaring how that if she were in hold her pain were gone, as well as HUTTONS
was for telling her own releasement a quarter of a year before it came;
saying, it was neither for her own desires or her own ease, that the Lord
released her, but to help her mother when she could not help her self, which
was most true to her great grief and sorrow, but much joy to think that the
Lord should not only foretell it, but enable her own to help her: She still
expecting justice, sent these strange things the Girl cast off her stomach to
Durham, which could scarce be believed; yet by chance one being by at the
casting of them, which was there present, got a Warrant to apprehend DOROTHY
SVVINOVV, and served it her own hands, with many contradictions ere it was
done: Where DOROTHY SVVINOVV came into a chamber in the Constables house, which
afterward she confessed was for fear of taking her blood, which was never in
the others thoughts: Yet obeyed not that Warrant, till a second, then went but
only and put in bail, as though it had been for an ordinary fault, which the
Girl in her fits cried out of, saying, that still gave her further power to
work her wickedness. Still all this quarter the Girl in her fits desired them
to watch with her, on Candlemas Eve, and they should not think their labor
lost, and betwixt the hours of one and two the next day the glory of God
should appear, her mother being confident of the Lords mercy, gave notice to
all that came nigh her; so some that feared God came to see the Event, which
releasement being writ from her own mouth will confirm these warnings of her
former trialls, which have all with much patience been gone through, that the
preserving mercies of the most glorious God, who never fails those that depend
upon his most firm promises was never more declared on earth then in the
weakest of his creatures, preserved by a gracious God, to whom let all that
read and hear these unexpressible mercies, give all Glory, Honor, Laud, and
Praises.

The Expressions of MARGARET MUSCHAMP when she was in her last extreme fit,
upon the second day of. FEBRUARY, 1647.
THey thought because their time was but short, to have tormented me worse then
ever, but I defy them.

I have reason to bless God more for his mercies to me, then I think ever
sinful creature had.

Both my torments are at an end, and those fearful sights I do not now see,
though it has pleased God to suffer and let them have power to torment me, yet
I was never without comfort.

My time was sad when I had no comfort, but I thank God who has given me
patience.

I bless God who never suffered the Devil to have so much power, as to cause
me blaspheme his name, or to speak words to offend him.

It is a great mercy that he granted me patience to endure my pain; if it had
pleased God I should have been content as well with torment as releasement.

To her Angels.
Because I shall have no more torment, shall not I see your faces again?
That Is sad to me, that is more grief to me, I had rather endure my pain;
that is more grief ten thousand times, but sinee it is Gods will, I am as well
content with the one as the other, I still trust in God he will send you to
protect and watch over us.

I have endured my pains a great while, it is two years ago yesterday; yet I
bless God for it, always with much patience, my pain has been very
vehement for the time, yet I bless God I did never speak words to offend
him: I confess I do not deserve it, I deserve no such thing, rather
Judgment, not such Godly Chasticement: since he granted them power, he never
left me to my self.

Is this the last farewell? If it had been Gods will, I had rather endured all
the to ments could be put to a creature.

But since it has pleased God it should be so, I am content, the thing that is
his will, the Lord grant that it never be sorrowful to me, but make his will
my will, that we may never repine.

He knows the secrets of all hearts.

As for that wicked woman, if she had had any fear of God, she would have
thought that though she had done it never so secretly, yet God would find it
out: She should have thought no such thing; but where the Devil gets entrance,
his temptations are very strong.

These torments are more welcome to me, then if I had been in my perfect
health; if I had not known what torments had been, what pain had been, I
should never have seen such joyful sights: these are more joyful to me then
all the pain.

Our pain, what is all our pain? what is all the pain on earth? Gods mercy is
above the Devils power.

Their time is limited.

They sought my mothers life, but could not get it.

Oh! to think of Hells torments which she has run her soul into, that is more
torment then all ours. It Is comfort for me, joy for me, that God has shown
his power, that God has given the Devil power to torment, I care not what thc
Devil can do; I defy all the Devils in Hell, for where the Devil has any
power, he triumphs as much as he can, though he triumph and we are weak, God
is strong, his power is not lessened.

That wicked woman DOROTHY SVVINOVV was the cause of the death of my Aunt
MARGERY HAMBLETON, she was the cause of those troubles, which she thought
should have broke my Aunts heart, but they broke Sir ROBERTS, that the estate
might fall to her son: She was the cause of JAMES FAUCETS unnatural fits,
but she let him alone, because she knew that if he came to London he would
follow her more strictly then we can here.

She set two Witches more to torment us: Jo. HUTTON, that dyed in prison was my
great tormenter, these Witches have begun my sisters torment, though our
torments have been more long, yet her time has been most sad, because she
wanted comfort: though I have had my pains, I never wanted comfort.

She has entered into the Devils service, ought she not to think of the torment
of her soul?

If it had not been thus with us, we should have despised the mercyes of God,
our comfort is for joy in heaven, that's more comfort for us, that's more
happiness to think of, then all our pains and torments; if our bodies were
torn at horse heels, and dragged with wild Bears, yet all were nothing to
heavens joys.

Our souls are a precious jewel, we ought all to look after them; our bodies
are but dust and ashes: if our bodies were tortured with all torments, one
blinke of heavens joys will sweeten all.

Now my torments are at an end, I care not though they were longer: the torment
of my body is nothing, but to think of the torment she has hazarded her soul
into, is the torment of Hell fire.

We confess we all deserve that, but not by that means she has.

None will believe it, she sets such a fair face upon it: where the Devil
tempts, delusions are strong.

The Devil has gotten power to harden all hearts.

Those that are to do us justice, will not: though they deny us justice, yet
God can and will in his due time, grant us justice over them all.

Though God has suffered the Devil to have power to torment us; they now have
their times: certainly our times are in a better life; we have no pleasure
here, all our pleasure is in the world to come.

I have cause to bless God, who does send these blessed Angels to watch over
me: my pains were always with joy, never sorrowful, and when I had no
comfort, yet I had hopes that God who laid them on me, would take them off me
in his due time.

Have not I reason to bless God? none has reason more: the Lord grant I never
forget his mercies: he has been very merciful to us, in granting us patience
to endure more then we could expect at his hands.

What is this they have run their souls into? the Lord grant them hearts to
repent them of their sins; the Lord grant us penitent hearts to repent us of
our sins: we have all done as much as deserves hell, where is gnashing of
teeth, pains, fire and brimstone for ever.

We have cause to bless God that has not suffered us to go neither to
Witches, nor any of the devils servants, but to look to God.

No creature thought we could have endured, what can we endure of our selves?
No, without God we can do nothing, what cannot God enable us to endure? There
is nothing that can be done, but we can do it by Gods assistance, we cannot say
we can do any thing of our selves, no not the least thing in the World, seeing
our help is in an able God, we can do any thing.

I know the Lord will never suffer the devil to have any further power over
our bodies; though they hurt our bodies, they shall not hurt our souls, they
shall not come near our souls.

Our souls are all the comfort we can expect, what are our bodies? Our bodies
are nothing; I bless God that would have his glory tried on our weak bodies,
which no creature thought could have endured such torment.

We have reason my brother, sister, and all of us to bless God; yea, all
creatures that behold it have reason to bless God, and to think that he is a
merciful God to us, it is his mercy we know, it is his promise that all those
that repent with penitent hearts, he is still ready to forgive them, we
acknowledge it is Gods mercy, not our deserts.

They have tormented my brother a year a gone St. JOHN'S day at night, and they
have tormented me two years agone yeasterday, my sister is pined away, they
began with her since Lammas, she has less comfort then we have had.

She from the beginning has had great pain without comfort, and though my
pain have been sorest, yet I have had great comfort.

Since God has granted this day to be my releasement, have I not reason to
bless this God? My brother and sister are still under their burden: Let them
not think it a burden, but rather beg patience to endure it.

If ever God give them health, we have all reason to have thoughts of eternity,
and never to forget the word of God.

My sister is worse then my brother, or then ever I was, my torments were
vehement, sometimes a day, sometimes eight hours, sometimes shorter, sometimes
longer; and though my time was sore and vehement, yet still I had ease after
it, but my sister has no ease.

Now when I am released, what shall become of my brother and sister, if it
please God to give them so much power as to torment them? If that God make me a
watch over them, that I may declare their grief, it is a great mercy.

They thought to have choked me, once they made me cast up pins, and stones,
and things that creatures would not think possible should have come out of my
mouth, yet God enabled me to endure that not any creature thought I could.

They thought to have done the like to my Brother, but God did not suffer the
Devil to have so much power, but they have striven so to do.

For my Brother GEORGE he had need to have a care of himself, he by the sight
of me I saw consumed; we have reason to bless God he is away.

If you love my sister BETTYES life bring her not home, you may as well take a
knife and cut her throat, as be the cause of her torments.

If they love my sister and brothers life, bring them not in sight one minute,
by looking on them does them more hurt then we think of.

If my sister had gone away to and not looked so much on my Brother as she has
done it had been better for her.

She has done her self more wrong then us, in setting these two more against
us, though it has pleased God to let them have so much power over our bodies,
yet they never had power over our souls.

They are trying all ways in the world to have power to torment my Mother, they
are seeking to torment her by an unnatural way, if we have not a care of our
selves, and one of another by Gods mercies.

Shall they never have more power to torment me?

They thought this last night to have made me more passionate then ever I was;
I bless God though they made me somewhat passionate, yet still God enabled me
with patience not to be much extravagant much after their desires, those
Justices all of them have denied us Justice: Let them take heed of themselves:
Let them take heed of a heavy burden that may fall upon themselves: Though
our Mother be loving unto us; yet let them take heed of a heavy burden may
fall on them: I wish to God it be not so, that the innocent do not suffer, the
Lord grant they may have a sensiblenesse of the wrong they have done us, and
suffer not the innocent to endure for them.

Now after this, when they cannot get power to torment me, will they ever be
more vehement with my brothers and sisters?

Whenever she is put in hold till she come to her trial she should not have
her liberty; for if she come abroad amongst her company, she will be as cruel
as ever.

If these two Witches were caught and in hold, she would go to death to the
utmost to make them more vehement then ever: though they torment the rest, yet
they shall never have power to torment me.

It is said in the word of God, you shall not suffer a Witch to live; yet she
consults with Witches, and consults with their ways, which by the Law of God
deserves death.

Shall I never behold your faces again? If it were so it would be more sad to
me then all my pain: Though you be not in my sight, yet I trust in Gods mercy
so much, as that you will still watch over us, and protect us.

God grant we never forget Gods mercies, to be impatient, seeing we have rest
in torment.

What mercies can be shown unto a creature, but it has pleased God to show it
to me? that it has pleased him to grant me so much patience, though of my
self I was not sensible of my torments, that was a mercy and much comfort to
my soul, that though they tormented my body, they never had power to cause me
speak unbefitting words to hazard my soul.

But had it not pleased God to have sent you to me that time, what have would
become of me? I had been distracted and like a mad body.

When the Devil was strong and had most power, God still crossed him of his
opportunity.

Those that are so malicious, seldom any thing satisfies their minds, save
this extravagant way, that is a fore thing: many times malice is never
satisfied without life: shall I never see you with my eyes here? yet ye will
reveal this, either by me, or by some other means

It shall be more strange before it be all declared. Now after this time shall
I never have more torment by any Witch, nor none I hope. Shall I meet you in
such a place, at such a time? I will.

Seeing you have set me that time of appointment, I hope you will put me in
mind of it: I will, if it be Gods will to make me do it.

Mr. FRANCIS BROAD, and Mr. GEORGE ATHERLONY two Ministers, with Doctor
STEPHENS a Physician, were with her in diverse of her last tormenting fits.

These words were spoken in the hearing of two Ministers, and at least a
hundred others. And taken by Mr. Edward Ord.
MARGARET WHITE of CHATTON, her own Confession of her self.
Confesses and says, That she has been the Devils servant these five years
last past, and that the Devil came to her in the likeness of a man in blew
clothes, in her own house, and griped her fast by the hand, and told her she
should never want, and gave her a nip on the shoulder, and another on her back;
And confesses her Familiar came to her in the likeness of a black Greyhound,
and that the Devil had carnal knowledge of her in her own house two several
times.

Likewise the said MARGARET WHITES Confession upon Oath of others, as
follows, viz. Mrs. DOROTHY SVVINOVV of CHATTON, and JANE MARTIN of the same,
and sister to the said MARGARET, WHITE of CHATTON, aforesaid,

Confesses upon Oath that Mrs. SVVINOVV, and her sister JANE, and her self
were in the Devils company in her sister JANES house, where they did eat and
drink together (as by her conceived) and made merry.

And Mrs. SVVINOVV, and her the said MARGARETS sister with her self, came
purposely to the house of Mr. EDWARD MOORE of Spittle, to take away the life
of MARGARET MUSCHAMP and MARY, and they were the cause of the Childrens
tormenting, and that they were three several times to have taken away their
lives, and especially upon St. John's day at night gone twelve months; And
says that God was above the Devil, for they could not get their desires
perfected; and says, that Mrs. SVVINOVV would have consumed the child that
Mrs. Moore had last in her womb, but the Lord would not permit her; and that
after the child was borne Mrs. Swinow was the occasion of its death, and Mrs.
Swinow came riding on a little black Nag to the Spittle with a riding coat, and
that she and her sister were also the occasion, and had a hand in the death of
the said child: And further confesses that she and her said sister were the
death of Thomas Young of Chatton (by reason) a kill full of Oats watched
against her sisters mind; And further says, that the Devil called her sister
Jane (Besse:) She confesses, that her sister Jane had much troubled Richard
Stanley of Chatton, and that she was the occasion of his sore leg.

This is acknowledged and confessed to be true, before John Sleigh Justice of
Peace, and Robert Scot Town Clarke of Barwick. MARGARET WHITE, I her Mark

This was confirmed after, in the presence of Mr. Ogle of Eglingame, Mr. Walton
of Etherstone, Mr. Foster of Newham, Justices of the Peace, being present a
multitude of people at Kime^stone: This same was afterward taken upon Oath at
Morpeth, in the presence of Mr. Delavall, High Sherriffe of Northumberland, Mr.
Ogle, Mr. Fenwick, Mr. Delavall, Mr. Shafto, Mr. Kilinworth, Mr. Hall, six
Justices of the Peace. Warrants issued out after her Indictment was found, for
the apprehending of her, but as yet not taken.

Northumber. Ad Generalem Sessionem Pacis tent. apud Alnwick pro Com. pred. die
Mercurii viz. 24. die Aprilis, 1650. Coram Gulielmo Selby Mil. Georgio Fenwick
Ar. Henrico Ogle Ar. and al. Justic. ad Pacem in Com. pred. conservand.
assignat. etc. Necnon, etc.
Nomina Jurator. ad Inquirend. etc. Johannes Ilderton. Ar. Will. Armorer, Genesis
Nich. Forster, Genesis Ephr. Armorer, Genesis Franc. Alder. Genesis Richard. Widhouse,
Genesis Georgius Lisle, Genesis Alex. Armorer, Genesis Christoph. Ogle, Genesis Edvardus
Bell, Genesis Radulphus Watson, Genesis Hugh Arrowsmith, Genesis Jo. Creswel. Genesis Joh.
Ord, Genesis Georgius Craw, Genesis Franc. Forster, Genesis Henricus Johnson, Genesis


Qui quidem Jurator, putant ut sequitur.

IUr. pro Custod. libert. Angl. Authoritat. Parliamenti super sacram suam
presentant. quod Dorotheo Swinow nuper de Chatton in Com. Northumber. Vid. 24
die Martii Anno Dom. millesimo, sexcentesimo, quadragesimo, octavo, ac diverse.
al. dict. and vicibus tam antea quam postea Deum pre oculis non hab. sed
instigatione Diabolicaseduct. quosd. malas and Diabolicas Arts Angl. vocat
Witchcrafts, Enchantments, Charms, and Sorceries, nequit Diabolic. ac Felonice
apud Spittle in Com. Palatin. Dunelm. die and Anno supradict. usa fuit and
exercit. ratione quarundum malarum and Diabolicarum Artium quidem Sibilla Moore
de Spittle pred. in Com. Palatin. Dunelm. pred. infans existen. and ad tunc in
Pace Dom. R. ad tunc existen. a pred. vicesimo quarto die Martii supradict.
usque primam diem Aprilis Anno supradict. languebat. and pred. Sibilla apud
Insulam Sacram in Com. Palatin. pred. ad mortem suam devenit and vitam suam
dimisit and sic Jur. pred. super sacr. suum pred. dicunt quod Vid. Dorothea
pred. Sibilla ratione practitionibus and exerit. Diabol. Artiu^ pred. apud
Insul. sacr. pred. in Com. Palatin. Dunelm. pred. modo and forma pred. Felonice
and Diabolice interfecit Contr. Pacem Publicam nunc.

Copia. Ex. per Crow. Cl. Pa.

Northumber. Ad Generalem Sessionem Pacis tent. apud Alnwick pro Com. pred. die
Mercurii, viz. vicesimo quarto die Aprilis 1650. Coram Gulielmo Selby mil.
Georgio Fenwick Ar. and Henrico Ogle Ar. and al. Justic. ad Pacem in Com. pred.
concernant. assignant. etc. Necnon etc.
Whereas Dorothy Swinow of Chatton Widow, does stand indicted at this
Sessions of diverse Witchcrafts, Enchantments, Charms, and Sorceries, and
especially for useing and practicing the said Diabolical Arts upon Sibilla
Moore an Infant and Child of Mrs. Mary Moore Widow: It is therefore Ordered by
the Court, and the High Sheriff of the said County, his Bayliffes and
Officers, and all others whom it may concern, are hereby required forthwith to
apprehend the body of the said Dorothy Swinow, and her to carry and convey unto
the Goal of the said County, there to remain until she shall be thence
delivered by due course of Law.

To the High Sheriff of the said County, and to all Constables and Officers,
whom it may concern.
Crow, Cl. Pac.

Northumber. Ralph Delaval Esquire, High Sheriff of the said County,
to all Bayliffes of Liberties, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, and
whomsoever else it may concern, greeting;
By virtue of an Order from the Sessions of the Peace to me directed, these are
to charge and command you, and every of you, that immediately upon sight
hereof, you attach and apprehend the body of Dorothy Swinow of Chatton Widow,
and her safely convey to the Common Goal at Morpeth, there to remain until
she shall be from thence delivered by due course of Law; hereof fail not, as
you will answer the contrary at your utmost perils.

Given under the Seal of my Office this 26. day of April, Anno Domini, 1650.
Per eundem Vic.

FINIS.

