THE VNIVERSALLITY OF GOD'S FREE GRACE IN CHRIST TO MANKIND.

PROCLAIMED and DISPLAYED From 1 Timothy 2.6. and Hebr. 2.9. according to their
genuine sense.

THAT ALL MIGHT BE COMFORTED, Encouraged; every one confirmed and assured of
the Propitiation and Death of Christ for the whole Race of Mankind, and so for
himself in particular.

Through urgent importunity, Written by Thomas Moore.

Joh. 3.14, 15, 16. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness: Even
so must the Son of Man be lifted up: that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have Everlasting life.

Heb. 2.9. But we see JESUS, who was made a little lower then the Angels, for
the suffering of Death, crowned with glory and honor, that he by the grace of
God should taste Death for Every Man.

LONDON, Printed in the Year of the Patience and Forbearance of our Lord. 1646.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Christian Reader,
IF we believe the great love of GOD to Mankind (fallen into sin and enmity
against him,) manifested in the gift of his Son, to be the Savior of the
World; who by the grace of God tasted death for Every man, And became the
Propitiation for the sins of the whole world, and the fruits hereof so great
for all men, that they extend as large as the heaven and the earth, bearing
forth their Testimony with more brightness then the Sun, and working on
every man's sense, to lead to Repentance. Psalm. 19.1, 7. Romans 10.18. Acts 14.17.
Romans 2.4. and so precious in those to whom through the Gospel it spiritually
appears, That it converteth, and brings in to Christ, and also teaches to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly
in this present life, etc. Tit. 3.4.5. and 2.11, 12, 13. Then I hope thou will
not count it strange, if some be heartily grieved, when in a Church, where this
great Love is testified; And set forth in the authorized Doctrine thereof,
(many professing themselves zealous) to see them.

1. So denying and blaspheming this great love of God to mankind in Scripture
affirmed. Joh. 3.16, 17. 1 John 4.14. as if God ever, and from all eternity
hated the greatest number of men, so as they neither are beholden to him for
any good will, or love, nor have any door of Repentance or means of life
opened, and afforded by him in truth for them.

2. So contradicting, and blaspheming the plain sayings of the Gospel of
Christ, as that he gave himself a Ransom for All Men, 1 Timothy 2.6. and by the
grace of God, tasted death for Every Man. Heb. 2.9. as to affirm plainly and
directly contrary; as, That Jesus Christ did not die, or sh^d his blood for
every man.

3. Calling the Expression in the Doctrine of the Church of England, (that
says, Jesus Christ, God the Son, has Redeemed me, and all mankind,) a flat
lie, affirming the truth to be, he has redeemed none but the Elect.

4. Running into so many long ago condemned, evil and Papisticall ways and
arguings, to maintain their Contradictions of Truth. Yea, I suppose, it would
be grievous to thee also, to perceive the same. Neither I am persuaded, will thou count it strange, that this Love of God believed should constrain the
Believer in love to bear forth the testimony thereof, and also maintain it
against opposition: yea, and when to the godly and sober-minded, the same is
plainly testified, and the testimony subscribed, and yet by others in heat and
rashness traduced. Then on the importune request of many, to permit it to more
open view, that it may be rightly known, and so tried, and either approved, or
the errors found therein, discovered and confuted, which done in love, and by
fair dealing with the Scripture, will be lovingly accepted, though the fury of
such as have no way, but by incensing Authority with false suggestions, and
evil Reports, (however garnished) to overcome those they oppose, cannot be
justified as Christian; Wherefore Christian and Juditious Reader, if thou
conceivest me to err; I hope thy love will lead thee in a Christian way, to
show it me by the Scripture, which I will thankfully embrace; and if thou will
endeavor the same; I then entreat but these four things of thee, which I know
the grace of Christ believed and heeded, will teach thee not to deny me; And
they are these.

First, that thou answer to the business about the matter affirmed: as namely,
about the Redemption, Reconciliation and Propitiation wrought by Christ in his
own body for men, distinct from that he by his Spirit, in application thereof
works in men, and so according to the distinction the Scripture makes, and
^^ntioned in the five first Chapters of this ensuing Treatise.

Secondly that thou add not to that I have affirmed of the Death of Christ for
All Men, such things as I neither affirm, nor by any necessary or reasonable
consequence can be said to be included in, or to arise from my Affirmation, as
some have done, As that Christ should die for all men alike; or that all men
shall be Eternally saved; or that all or any man has by Nature Free Will to
that which is spiritually good, or that all that believe Christ dyed for All
Men, shall be saved, all which the Truth affirmed, and the Treatise every where
condemns.

Thirdly, that in answering, thou be pleased to use spiritual weapons, and
right Arguing from plain places of Scripture, compared with other like places,
and so forbea^ those carnal and Popish ways, and manner of Reasonnings,
faulted by so many Worthies in this Church.

As 1. Pretending insufficiency in the Scripture, to be the determiner of all
matters of Faith, but that how plainly soever the Scripture affirms, yet the
matter is but sub judice, without some other determination.

2. Pretending darkness in the Scripture, yea in Fundamentalls, and that of
themselves, however compared with other-like places, they are full of obscurity.

3. Use of carnal Reasons, to frame absurdities to follow, if the truth, the
plain sayings of Scripture import, be received and professed.

4. Imposing strange senses, on plain sayings of Scripture without proof.

5. Devising ways to maintain such senses, that they might appear as if they
were proved by Scripture: as to instance the most common of these ways.

1. To restrain a general sense, to be meant only of a particular, as the
Papists have done in some places to maintain the supremacy of the Pope: and
the Socinians, or new Arrians have restrained those general words of all
things, and the world, made by Christ, to be meant only of a new Creation, And
all things, to be only all the Elect; And the world, to mean the Church, or a
World of Believers; thereby to deny the being of Christ, before he took flesh,
and so his being God also.

2. To avoid places speaking of the same business, to invent reasons against
the true sense, and frame another sense out of Places treating of another
business, as some have done to deny the Resurrection, and others to deny their
Brethren the reading of the Scriptures, and use of spiritual gifts.

3. To compare words spoken by and of God, and acts done by him, with words
spoken by, and of men, and acts done by them, as of like large extent and
signification, as some have done to dishonor God, and to flatter and Idolize
men.

4. To addde too, diminish from, or alter and mingle the sense and sentences of
Scripture, as some for their own ends do, and the Devil did.

5. To set one place of Scripture against, and in contrariety with another, to
make void the appearing sense in one, that they might choose that which best
likes them, as has been usual with many Adversaries to the Truth.

6. To turn plain places, and Narrations of Scripture into Allegories, it is
usual with such as use to deny the truth of the litterall Sense of the
Scripture, and of the Resurrection, and of serving God with our bodies.

7. To confound together in one, without distinction, such things, and in such
respects, as the Scripture makes clearly distinct, as to instance some of
them; The end of Christ's Death, and the Application of his Death. And the
salvation wrought on earth by Christ in his own body with God for men; and the
salvation in the application thereof he works from heaven by his Spirit inmen
to God; And God his love of Compassion, and his love of delight. And Election
to Sonship, and Predestination to the Adoption of Sons, And Secret Election
in God, and Actual Election of and by God; And the manner of the Declaration
of the Gospel, and the manner of outward Worship. -- The portion of Spirit sent
forth before. Christ came in the flesh, and since his coming and Ascension;
And spiritual gifts, graces, Administrations, Operations, and outward Callings
and Offices in the Church, etc. All which the Scriptu e makes distinct, but
they are usually confounded by the inconsiderate, and such as deny and darken
things appertaining to the Foundation.

8. To make sayings in first and second Person, and restrictive Applications
and Propositions for example of like large extent, with sayings in the Third
Person generally; and propositi ns for the ground of Faith; and usual course
of the unlearned and inconsid rate.

9. To allege the change of times to justify a contrary Sense, or Doctrine,
or way, to that plainly appearing in the Scriptures; as an order of Friars did
for their (by them called) Eternal Gospel for these times; In which they said,
That delivered by Christ and his Apostles, must give place, as the Old rights
and Ceremonies did at Christ his Ascension. And other Papists do for blotting
out the second Commandment, and having Images in the worshipping of God,
because they say, No such fear of Idolatry and Superstition in these times, as
when that command was given; And so do the Rhemists for their Translation, use
such Allegations.

10. To invent lies and slanders to make infamous such as will not be of the
same opinion with themselves; In which the Antichristian brood abounds; And so
have too many done in thi^ very business also, inventing and conceiting to
themselves, and giving it out to others, That whosever believes, and
confesses that Christ is the Savior of the World, that he gave himself a
Ransom for All men; and by the grace of God, tasted death for Every Man; and
alleges for the same, Joh. 4.42. 1 Timothy 2.6. and Heb. 2.9. They are false
witnesses against Christ and his Apostles; And they are Papists, or at the best
Arminians, and Time-servers, and of loose lives; And do, and must of necessity
hold, that Christ dyed alike for all men: that all by nature have free will to
spiritual good: That there is no Election: That there is no grace here
attaineable, but what a man may fall from: That whosoever believes, that
Christ dyed for all men, shall undoubtedly be saved, and such like loathsome
opinions, as the Doctrine such slanderers oppose, condemns, and the slandered
abhorres. In use of which corrupt ways and dealing with the Scripture, and
with Believers, and that all under color of Allegation, and right
Interpretation of Scriptures, how God is dishonored, and the Scripture made of
no force, I hope thy self discerns: But when this is done, so to shut the
door of Repentance and Faith against All Men, as withal, to teach them to
abuse Scriptures, to deny Gods Creation of all men, and to deny that All men
have sinned, and shall dye, and rise again, and come to Judgment, or that it
is their duty to speak the truth, and render their dues to every man: and
withal opens a way for ushering all manner Heresies, and Popish Superstitions,
as in the ensuing Discourse will in some measure appear, this is still worse,
for which cause I have to my utmost shunned all these ways, and observed
carefully all I have requested of thee. And this being granted, thy answer will
be very acceptable, and received so far as truth appears in it to me, and
all others that desire not to close our eyes, or harden our heart against any
truth testified by Scripture fairly dealt withal.

Lastly, I desire thou take not this I have said as a challenge of thee, or any
to answer what is written in this Treatise, but only as a Testimony of my
willingness, to (...) I have written, to be by Scripture thyed, and if error
be the (...) to be discovered, that I may see and confess it; that so nothing
may be done through strife and contention, ^^riving not for Victory but truth;
nor desiring any Victory, but from being also encouraged hereto likewise, by
this persuasion, That in some sort duty does engage me: for by Authority I was
lead to make Protestation to maintain so far as lawfully I may, the true
Protestant Religion, as it is expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against all Popery and Popish Innovations: To which both the Tenet of Christ
not dying for every Man; and the abuse of Scripture, and manner of arguing, by
which some would prove that contradictory Tenet, does set wide open the door,
which is shut by the Doctrine of the Church of England, which says expressly.
Article 6. Holy Scripture contains all things necessary for salvation, so
that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or
be thought requisite necessary to Salvation.

Article. 20. It is not lawful for the Church, to ordain, any thing that is
contrary to Gods Word. Neither may it so expound one place of Scripture, that
it be repugnant to another, wherefore although the Church be a witness and a
keeper of holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree any thing against the same,
so besid^s the same ought it not to enforce any thing to be believed for
necessity of Salvation.

Article. 2. One Christ, very God, and very man, who Suffered, was Crucified,
dead and buried, to reconcile his Father to us, and to be a Sacrifice, not
only for original guilt, but also for all Actual sins of men.

Article 15. Christ in the truth of our Nature, etc. he came to be the Lamb
without spot, who by the Sacrifice of himself, once made, should take away the
sins of the World; And sin was not in him; But all we, the rest, etc.
offend in many things. Article. 31. The offering of Christ, once made, Is that
perfect Redemption, Propitiation, and Satisfaction for all the sins of the
whole World both Original and Actual; And this expressly testified against a
gross Popish Innovation.

Which Doctrine, had I not believed, I would not so have Protested to main
aine, And for the maintenance hereof I have gone in as orderly a way to avoid
all the aforementioned abuses of Scripture, and to make the Scripture sole
Judge, and testify the truth in the words thereof, as I could. An I so have
divided the (...) in 24. Chapters. The first five of Premi^ees, for better
understanding the business, and the rest to proveit: And so

Chap. I. Of the distinction between the Salvation Christ ^ffected in his own
b^dy, with God for men; And that he effects by his Spirit, in men to God. from
page 1. to page 15. Chap. II. Of the diverse distinct ends, of the Death of
Christ set forth. page 16. to p. 20. Chap. III. Of the diverse manner of
mentioning those ends in Scripture. page 21. to 25. Chap. IV. Of the diverse
ways of propounding the death of Christ in Scripture. page 26, 27. Chap. V. Of
the difference of the extent and force of the same words in Scripture. page 26.
to 30. Chap. VI. An Assaye for right stating the Question. page 32. to 36.
Chap. VII. The Question opened and answered by Scripture. p. 37, 38. VIII. The
proof from the Consideration of Christ, as the Public Person. page 40. to 48.
Chap. IX. The proof from the joint-mentioning of Creation and Redemption by
Christ. page 49. 52. Chap. X. The proof from the distinction and change of
Person in the Scripture. page 53, 54. Chap. 11. The proof from the force of
words, scope, and circumstances. 1 Timothy 2.4.6. page 55. to 62. Chap. 12. The
proof from the like in Heb. 2.9. page 63. to 65. Chap. 13. The proof from like
places of Scripture, speaking of like things. page 66. to 70. Chap. XIV. The
answering of the 1. Objection, and 4. Reasons to it. page 71. to 88. Chap. XV.
The answering of a 2. Ob^ection. page 89. to 94. Chap. XVI. The answering a 3.
Objection. page 95. to 103. Chap. XVII. The answering a 4. Objection. page 104.
to 112. Chap. XVIII. The answering of a 5. Objection. page 113. to 124. Chap.
XIX. The answering a 6. Objection. page 124 to 128. Chap. XX. The Proposition
again proved by 6. Arguments, and 18. Proofs. page 129. to 137. Chap. XXI. An
Addition of Proofs more peculiarly for the effectuallinsse of the Ransom,
with the remoovall of a double stamble to some. page 138. to 143. Chap. XXII. A
removeall of a Doubt, seeming to be raised from three places of Scripture. page
144. to 153. Chap. XXIII. Some discovery of the profitablenesse of this
Doctrine, to be believed, and holden forth. page 153. to 154. Chap. XXIV. That
Profit further discovered, and pressed in 10. Uses. page 155. 1. Use. To the
Profane. from page 155. to 158. 2. Use. To the Civil only. from page 159. to
161. 3. Use. To the Superstitious. from page 162. to 164. 4. Use. To the
Pharisaically Righteous and zealous. page 165. to 169. 5. Use. To the
Imbondaged. page 170. 6. Use. To the weak Believers, groaning after, and
wanting Consolation. page 171. to 172. 7. Use. To hasty, feigned, and boasting
Believers. page 173. to 175. 8. Use. To the truly converted, wanting light in
the large extent of the Ransom given by Christ to God for All Men. page 176.
to 178. 9. Use. To establish Believers. page 179. 10. Use. To all whosoever.
page 180.
The POSTSCRIPT. page 186. to 194.
I pray thee, read without prejudice, Try all things by Scripture; refuse not
any thing the Scripture warrants; And show me in love by the Scripture, any
error, wherein I have gone aside from the truth it records, and prove thy
sayings Affirmatively, and by fair and just dealing with the Scripture, and I
will yield to thee, and thank thee, or else acknowledge the Truth so plainly
testified in the Scripture, as in the main of my drift, I am sure thou can
not deny; If agreeing in the same Truth, thou see how to mend any expression, I
shall thank thee; only let us always agree in this, That the plain
Affirmations of the Scripture, are true; and neither to be tried, nor doubted
by us, but believed; but all our sayings may be tried, yea, and doubted, until
they wholly agree thereto; And thus with desire of the Spirit of truth, to
lead us into all Truth, I commit this Testification of th. Truth of the 1 Timothy
2.6. and Hebr. 2.9. to thy perusal, desiring a blessing on the same; and so
Rest;

Thy Well-willer. T. M.

THE VNIVERSALLITY OF GOD'S FREE GRACE IN CHRIST to MANKIND.
1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself a Ransom for all.

Heb. 2.9. That he by the Grace of GOD should taste death for every man.


The sense (as the words import) appears to be.

Proposition.
THat JESUS CHRIST, by the Grace, goodwill, and favor of God, did taste death
for every man, and so also gave himself a ransom to God for all Men, and so is
become the Propitiation for the sins of the World, and the SAVIOVR of the
WORLD.

FOR the better and more plain proceeding in the proof of this sense, That it
may appear rightly stated, and rightly proved; there are five things to be
headed and understood: as the distinction between,

1. The redemption, reconciliation, and salvation he effects by Jesus Christ,
in his own body with God for men.

And the redemption, reconciliation, and salvation he effects by his Spirit
in men to God; and which of these here meant.

2. The diverse distinct ends of the death and blood-^hed of Jesus Christ,
mentioned in the Scripture, and of which of them is here affirmed.

3. The diverse manner of mentioning these ends in Scripture, and in what manner
it is mentioned here.

4. The diverse ways of propounding the death and suffering of Christ in the
Scripture, and how it is propounded here.

5. The difference of the extent and force of the same words in Scripture, when
they are of men, and by men; or the opposition between men, and men or other
creatures. And when they are by God, and of God, and the opposition between God
and men; or with a mediator between, and how the extent and force of the words
appear here.

I. Of the distinction between the Redemption, reconciliation and salvation
which Jesus Christ effected in his own body with God for men, And of that he
effects by hi^ Spirit in men to God, and of which here meant.

1. THat there is a Redemption, Reconciliation and Salvation wrought by Jesus
Christ, in his own body with God for men, is evident, In that he is called,
the Christ, The Savior of the World, Joh. 4.42. And the Propitiation for our
sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world. 1 John
2.2. Whence it is said, God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself,
not importing their trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19. and so this is called
the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Romans 3.24. Who his own self bare our
sins in his own body on the tree. 1 Pet. 2.24. and so by the grace of God,
tasted death for every man. Heb. 2.9. and gave himself a ransom for all men. 1 Timothy 2.6. and through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to God,
Heb. 9.14. being the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world.
Joh. 1.29. for effecting of which Redemption, Reconciliation and Salvation;
Jesus Christ,

1. Appeared, was Manifested, was sent, and came into the world to take away
our sins. 1 John 3.5. To put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. Heb.
9.26. The sin of the world. Joh. 2.29. to save sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15. Not to
destroy men's lives, but to save them, Luke 9.56. to be the Savior of the
World. 1 John 4.14. To save the world. Joh. 12.47. and not to condemn the
world, but that the world through him might be saved Joh. 3.17. And this
business his first coming into the world was to. effect, for which he was
furnished: for

2. In this his appearing and manifestation, he was made flesh. Joh. 1.14. of
the seed of David according to the flesh. Romans 1.3. made of a woman. Gal. 4.4.
and so was very man, The man Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy 2.5. and in the likeness of
men. Phil. 2.7. having the nature of all mankind, even subject to the
infirmities thereof; though altogether without sin, yet subject to feel
afflictions, in sorrow, sadness, yea Agonies of soul, and pain in hunger,
weariness, and death of body, such infirmities as had never befallen the
Nature of man, but for sin: and so was in the likeness of sinful flesh.
Romans 8.3. and so fit to be in the stead of mankind. Heb. 10.5.

3. Being thus in the Nature of mankind, he was set, and stood a public
Person, in the Nature, and room of all mankind, while he was about this work,
as the first Adam did, who was the figure (or Type) of him that was to come,
and now has come. Romans 5.14.18, 19. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22.45.46.

4. Being such a public person in the room and Nature of all mankind, he also
became for them, under the same Law and Obligation, in which they were, which
charged them with sin, and bound them over-to punishment: By virtue of which
his coming under that Law, All the sin and punishment, The whole debt of
mankind, by order of Justice, became his, whence it is said, he was made under
the Law to redeem them that were under the Law, Gal. 4.4, 5. We know that what
things soever the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law, that
every mouth may be stopped, and all the world become guilty before God. To.
3.19. And he becoming under this Law for us, might be rightly challenged with,
and arrested for our debt, whence he is said to have taken upon him the form
of a servant. Phil. 2.7.

5. Being thus in the nature, and stead of mankind, under the law for them; God
was pleased, to challenge the whole debt of him, and to impute all the sins
the Law could charge mankind withal unto him, and to arrest, and call him to
account, and enter into judgment with him for all: Whence it is said, God was
in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses to
them. 2 Cor. 5.19. He laid on him the iniquity of us all, Esai. 53.6. and made
him to be sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. which imputation he accepted, whence it
is said; he himself bare our sins. 1 Pet. 2.24. So that himself calls them
his, and said, Innunerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have
taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up, they are more then the
hairs on my head. Psalm. 40.12.

6. Having on him our sins, God laid on him the punishment and curse that was
due to us for those sins, and he did suffer the same curse, and so died as
the sinner, for our sins in the room of us all; He was wounded for our
transgressions. Esai. 53.5. He was made a curse for us. Gal. 3.13. Christ dyed
for our sins according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.4. he suffered for our
sins, the just for the unjust. 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ died for the ungodly, Romans
5, 6. he died for all, 2 Cor. 5.15. and so by the grace of God, tasted death
for every man. Heb. 2.9. which is in account with God, and those that are
taught it of him, as if all had died. 2 Cor. 5.14.

7. Having thus suffered, and dyed for our sins, he, even the same that dyed,
rose again the third day according to the Scriptures. 1 Cor. 15.4. and so rose
justified, and acquit of all our sins imputed to him, and a Triumphant
Victorer over curse and death, and all the enemies of our Salvation: Declared
to be the Son of God, with power according to the Spirit of Holiness, by the
resurrection from the dead. Romans 1.4. was raised for our justification. Romans
4.25. put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. 1 Pet. 3.18.
Justified in the Spirit. 1 Timothy 3.16. the Just One. 1 John 2.1. having spoiled
Principallities and Powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing over
them in himself. Col. 2.15. and so gave himself a ransom, and a propitiatory
sacrifice to God his Father, for all men. 1 Timothy 2.6. 1 John 2.2.

8. All this his Oblation and Sacrifice of himself to God, did he sanctify
and dignifie, through the oneness of his will with the will of his Father, he
having one and the same will, mind and purpose with his Father, in all this:
Hebr. 10.5.10. And by virtue of his divine Nature, and Aeternall Spirit,
through which he offered up himself without spot to God. Heb. 9.14. He that
has offered himself, being God. Romans 9.5. and man. 1 Timothy 2.5. yea, God man in
one Person, Joh. 1.14. Matthew. 1.23. So that by reason, of this personal union,
of the divine and humane nature in one Person, the blood that was shed, and
with which he is entered the heavens, to appear before God for us, is called
Gods own blood: Act. 20.28. Which is more then if all and every man in the
world had suffered all that was due to their sins, and is accepted of God at
the hands of Christ, as if all had died. 2 Cor. 5.14. So as this redemption is
in Christ perfect, the work accomplished and done, and the Father with him,
and in him is well pleased. Matthew. 3.17. he having now taken away sin, and
abolished death. 1 John 3.5. 2 Timothy 1.10. And is now at the right hand of God
the Father, who has released and given over all into his dispose, and made him
Lord of all. 1 Pet. 3.18.22. Act. 10.24.36.

And this is the salvation which Jesus Christ has wrought in his own body
with God for men; which all creatures in heaven and earth could not have done,
but Jesus Christ has done it, and so has answered that part of Gods will, who
will have all men saved. 1 Timothy 2.4. in that he has given himself a ransom
for all; Yet if there be not a Salvation also wrought in men, they will yet
perish in a second death, having no power in themselves to come to Christ.

2. There is a Reconciliation, Redemption, and Salvation which Jesus Christ
effects by his Spirit in men to God; of which is spoken, when in affirming
the former wrought, men are thereupon entreated to suffer the Spirit in the
news thereof, to effect this latter in them: We pray you in Christ's stead, be
ye reconciled to God. 2 Cor. 5.20. and receive not this grace of God in vain.
2 Cor. 6.1. Whence the confession of the Saints is, Thou have Redeemed us unto
God by thy blood, out of every, etc. Revel. 5.9. The former was by
Blood-sheading, This by blood-sprinking, or washing, Revel. 5.9. and 1.5. with
Heb. 9.19.24. and 12.24. Whence these are said, To be Elect according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father, through Sanctification of the spirit, unto
obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.2. and so it is
said, It is the Spirit that quickneth. Joh. 6.63. The Spirit gives life, and
writes the Epistle of Christ in the heart, and conformeth to Christ 2 Cor.
323.6.17, 18. The law of the Spirit of Lafe in Christ Jesus, has made me free
from the law of sin, and of death. Romans 8.2. and so such are said to be
washed, and sanctified, and justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. 1 Cor. 6.11. delivered from the power of darkness, and
translated into the Kingdom of his dear Son. Col. 1.13. called out of
darkness, into his mavelous light. 1 Pet. 2.9. Who have eternal life, and
shall be perfected therein: 1 John 5.12, 13. and 3.2. and this is said to be in
them. Col. 1.29. Ephe. 1.19. Phil. 2.1.12, 13.

For effecting of which Redemption, Reconciliation, and Salvation, Jesus Christ
is exalted at Gods right hand. Act. 2.33. him has God exalted with his right
hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and
forgiveness of sins. Acts 5.31. And there this is also put in as the ground
of our hope for this Salvation, that He is set at the right hand of the throne
of the Majesty in the heavens. Hebr. 8.1. And there he is fully furnished, for
the making known, and tendering the Salvation wrought in his own body, and the
virtue thereof in this Salvation, by his Spirit, applying the fruits of that to
men, and to effect aeternall salvation in them that obey his call in believing.
Isai. 45.22. Hebr. 5.9.

1. In that he has received all Authority, who is gone into heaven, and is on
the right hand of God, Angels and Authorities and Powers, being made subject
unto him. 1 Pet. 3.22. so as all shall bow to him, and he is the head of the
Church, and Lord of all. Phil. 2.9, 10. Ephesians. 1.20, 23. Acts. 2.33, 36. having
life in himself, and quickening whom he will, men as the Father. Joh. 5.21, 26.

2. In that he has there received, and is filled with the holy Ghost
immeasurably in the humane nature glorified, and that to send forth to men,
both to the rebellious, that the Lord might dwell among them. Psalm. 68.18. and
all men come to the Knowledge of the truth in due season. 1. Tim. 2.4.6. And
moreover, to such as in the day of grace, so receive the knowledge of the
truth, That they are brought to believe on him, To put his words in them, and
teach them all things: Ioh. 14.26. To indue them with spiritual and useful
gifts. Acts 2.33. Ephesians. 4.7.13. and to lead them into all Truth. Joh. 16.13.
and conform them to himself: 2 Cor. 3.18.

3. In that he is there advanced in his peculiar Office, The great High Priest
over the House of God, The Prophet and King of his Church, and peculiar People.
Hebr. 3.3.6. and 5. and 7. Acts 3.22, 26.

4. In that he is there exercising in all Love and faithfulness in in the
business for which he ascended thither and appears before God. Heb. 9.24.

In some sort Interceeding, or putting in for Transgressors, even the sons
of men, yet in, and of the world; And that Spirit may so fill, unite, and
bless those that believe on him, and so go forth in their Confession and
Conversation, and in the Ministration of his Gospel by his servants, That those
among whom they dwell and converse, might be convinced, and brought to believe
the report of the Gospel. Isa. 53.12. (as once Luke. 23.24.) even as himself
left the pattern hereof with us: praying to his Father, so to bless his
peculiar ones, That the world may believe that thou have sent me: and that the
world may know that thou have sent me, and host loved them (believers) as thou
have loved me. Joh. 17.21.23. That so the men of the world might be convinced,
and the convinced allured, to come to Christ, and to God in him, Matthew. 5.14,
15, 16. yea, so as that he does also in some measure enlighten every man that
comes into the world. Joh. 1.9.

But in more special manner does he enterceede, being the Advocate for his
chosen ones, that by the heavenly Call are brought in to him, and do through
his grace, submit to him, and believe on him. Hebr. 3.1, 6. 1 John 2.1. And
presents them in himself, to his Father and himself, holy and spotless. Col.
1.22. Ephe. 5.27. according to what he has done, and is for them, that they
may be accounted, not according to what they have done and are in themselves,
but according to what he has done, and is for them, and is to them, and in
them, and what they are in and through him. Psalm. 103.10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 1.30.
Phil. 3.3, 8, 9.

And thus through his Eternal Spirit, and by virtue of his blood once shed,
And in his own body, that once dyed, and is now glorified for them, wherein
also dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, in whom they also are complete,
does he appear, presenting them, and advoceating for them, at the right hand
of God in heaven. Hebr. 9.12.13.24. and 4.14. and 6.20. and 10.21. Revel. 1.18.
Col. 2.3.9, 10. And so does he.

I. Take away from before his Father, and himself, and procure to them
remission of all their sins, against, and since grace received, and procures
sanctifying, and timely removal of the corrections in faithfulness imposed on
them; and healing of their remaining infirmities, and causes them to appear
beloved in the love wherewith the Father loves him. Hebr. 8. tot. Jere. 31.34.
Mic. 7.18. Isaiah. 44.22. and 54.7, 9. 1 John 1.7, 9. and 2.1, 2. Jo. 17.23.

II. Present before his Father and himself his Covenant of precious Promises,
the Father has made with him, his own fore put-forth, and granted Petitions
for them, and his present good will, and gracious thoughts to them, and so
procures the grant of dispensation, so far as is meet for them. Psalm. 89.18,
19.34. with Hebr. 8.1, 6. and John 17.6.20, etc. And this not by a submissive
entreaty, as we supplicate one for another, or yet in such manner, as himself
did interceede on earth, by supplications with cries and sufferings. But with
Power and Authority, his Father having fore-accepted his sacrifice, and given
all power and authority to him: He and his Father being one in will, and in
love to them, so that it is. Father I will, that they also whom thou have given
me, be, etc. Joh. 17.24. Hebr. 7.28. and 8.1.

III. By his Spirit enter into their hearts, moving them, with sorrow for, to
acknowledge, confess, and turn from the offenses he is taking away for them.
Acts 5.31. 1 Ioh. 1.7, 9. And to long and pray for the good things he is
presenting before his Father for them. Romans 8.26. Zach. 12.10. That so they may
pray in the holy Ghost. Ioh. 14.16. and 16.26. Jude 20.

IV. Returning more abundance of the same holy Spirit upon them, To answer
their prayers. Psalm. 85.8. To dwell in them, To teach, consolate, sanctify,
support, and lead them in Union and fellowship with him, through all
sufferings and services of love. Ioh. 14.16, 17, 18.26. and 15.26, 27. and
16.13, 14, 15. Romans 8.2.14. and so to subdue their lusts in them. Mic. 7.19. To
tread down Satan under their feet in due time. Romans 16.20. To answer their
Adversaries for them. Matthew. 10.19, 20. To increase and perfect them in
conformity to himself. 2 Cor. 3.18. 1 Ioh. 3.2. and to preserve them to the
inheritance reserved in heaven for them. 1 Pet. 1.4.5.

And this is the salvation he works in his people, which they are to suffer
to have its perfect work in them, and by his grace show it forth. Romans 12.1,
2, 3. Phil. 2.1, 2.

In which discourse of the Salvation which Christ works from heaven, by
virtue of that Salvation which he wrought in himself on earth, appears a
twofold Salvation, which he from heaven now works. Viz. O^^ Common; The
other Special and eternal, of each it is fit distinctly a little to (...).

First, there is a common Salvation, which by virtue of his death and
Resurrection and Sacrifice, and the accept ^blenesse, and effectuallnesse
thereof, with the Father, he has obtained, and works for all men: So as
(Scripture Affirming it.)

1. By him, The earth, and all the inhabitants thereof, (which by sin) are
dissolved (he does bear up the pillars of it. Psalm. 75.3, 4. Hebr. 1.3. and
all the frame of the Creatures, the Air to breathe in, The Sun to shine, the
rain to fall, and the residue of the Creatures for man's use preserved. Psalm.
145.8, 9. Matthew. 5.45. Col. 1.18. And this expressly called, and said to be a
witness of his goodness. Acts 14.17. and 17.24, 31.

2. By him also is procured the Patience and long-suffering of God, yea, and
much bounty in many mercies also to men. 2 Pet. 3.9. Revel. 2.21. Psalm. 17.14.
and 136.25. And this expressly said to be, to lead them to repentance. Romans 2.4.

3. By him also is procured some means, with some light therein, and according
thereto, to ^^de men to Repentance, that they might come to the knowledge of
him, Though to some more darkly, and to some more clearly and sully. Romans 1.19.
etc. Acts 17.24, 30. Matthew. 28.19. Psalm. 19. Romans 10.

4. By him also (...) sent forth at one time or other, some secret
supernatural light and (...) of his Spirit, in and according to the means
vouchsafed, tending to, and striving with them, to reprove them of sin,
moving to repentance, and seeking after God, with s^^e motions tending to
confession of sin, to Prayer, Equity, Mercy, Moderation in use of outward
things: use of means to such God. John 1.5, 9. Prove. 1.23. Joh. 16.8, 9. G^ne.
6.3. Mich. 2.7. And thus he calls many yea in some degree or other, All the
(...) of men. Act. 17.30. Mat. 27.3, 14. Prove. 8.4, 5, 3^, 34. Isai. 4^.^2.

5. By him also is procured, and sent forth to men, while they yield too, and
do that which by this sight, and these motions of his Spirit he (...) and
^eadeth to an in reast of incrcies, with more Light and goodness. Gene. ^0.
tot. 2 Chronicles. 11.17. (...) 10.30. Romans 2.14, 15. And if, as light increases,
they abide in his Call, and (...) on in his Teachings, be will pour (...) his
Spirit to their, and make known his (...) to them, and they shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make them free. Pro. 1.33. and 4.32.35. Joh. 8.31,
32. Acts 10.1, 6.

6. Yea, with some, where the Gospel comes, he goes farther, so inlightning
them to understand the truth of the report of the Gospel; that they do
believe, That through the Satisfaction made by Christ, remission of sins past
is procured, and that in believing on him, aeternall life is to be enjoyed,
where-through they are prevailed with, to confess this truth, and to desire
after him: and to attend with his people, in the use of means, and in some
fellowship and walking with them: Tasting some sweetness of the good Word of
God; and yet not come into Oneness with, and rest and stablishing in him,
Isai. 6.28, 34. Gal. 3.1, 2, 3. and 4.11.19. and 5.4. Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6. and
10.29. Hos. 11.3, 4. And these are brought out of Egyptian darkness, and so
far saved; Though by departing from this grace, or abusing of it to
wantonness, some of these may become ungodly, and so perish through their own
folly, and miss of aeternall life, as was shadowed in our Types of old. 1 Cor.
10.1, 11. 1 John 2.19. Jude 4.5.

And as the reconciliation, redemption, and Salvation wrought by Christ in his
own body for men with God, is in it self so perfect, that in some sense, and
that in truth, all may be said, to have been reconciled, redeemed and saved,
yea justified in him; though most in themselves be destitute of every of these.
Romans 3.22, 23, 24. and 5.14.18. And though this be mysterious, yet may it be as
well understood, and believed, as That all men were once made righteous in the
first Adam, and so were in him, Truly righteous. Eccles. 7.^9. of which
righteousness (he falling, and loosing all, and so all falling in him, before
they had being from him) none of them ever felt or partaked of. Romans 5.12. for
so though all again recovered, and made righteous in the second Adam: yet of
the choice benefit of this recovery, and of this Righteousness, many do
never, partake of, or enjoy, because they turn from grace offered, and loose
their own souls, and dye before they come to have a being in him, and so are
d^^arred thereof. Prove. 1.24, 32. and 8.36. Mat. 16.26. Eccles. 11.3. Job.
3.3.5. 1 John 5.11, 12. Nor does their never enjoyment, any more prove, that
they were never recovered in the second Adam, them their never enjoyment of the
life and righteousness of the first Adam (who was the figure of the second)
proves them never to have be, made righteous and alive in him, only this
dissimilitude the Scripture shows: That as the first Adam being a living
soul, and of the darth, he lost all our souls in his fall, without remedy on
his part. To. 5.12, 14, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 15.45, 47. So the second Adam is a
quickening Spirit, and the Lord from heaven, and so loses none, but whoever
now perishes, destroys himself, and loses his own soul. Hose. 13.9. Matt.
16.26. which farther proves, the perfection of the salvation wrought by
himself in his own body, and his faithfulness in his business he is to do
from heaven, about bringing all so redeemed to the knowledge of the truth.

So that as he has in himself so saved all men: so being ascended, he does by
virtue of his death, and the redemption wrought in himself, use such means,
and in some seasons so put forth Spirit therein, That he makes all saveable, so
as there is a possibleness in and through him, and possibility with him, for
all men to come in to him, to believe on him, and in believing to be aeternally
saved Job. 3.16, 17, 18, 19. whereby the effectualness of his ransom with his
Father, his faithfulness in his business in heaven, his gracious mind, good
will in his Call, by motions of his Spirit, through his Word and works: and
the destruction of all that perish to be of themselves, is fully proved, as
also, that all attending to this salvation do believe on him, shall have the
special salvation in which is aeternal life; And the faith of this common
salvation, is as the opening the door to the special. Jude 1.2, 3.

And of the salvation wrought by Christ in himself with God for men, and by
virtue thereof extending of this common salvation to men, is meant. 1 Timothy 2.4,
6. In which sense let the proposition be understood: And thus is Christ the
Savior of the World. Joh. 4.42. The Savior of all men. 1 Timothy 4.10. but
especially of them that believe; of which special Salvation now.

Secondly, there is a special and aeternall salvation, which Jesus Christ by
virtue of his death, and resurrection, does in his spiritual application
thereof to the hea^^^ and consciences of man, work in men to God. Hebr. 12.24.
and 9.14. Such as in discovery of his grace in the forementioned salvation,
are by his Spirit in the heavenly Call sent forth therein prevailed with, to
yield to his reproves, and so to believe and accept the Atonement made that
forsaking all things else, they come in to him; and depend on him for life, he
works in them (...) his Spirit, applying and sprinkling his blood on their
hearts, and extending the virtue of his resurrection in them; An especial
Salvation, that is aeternall, such as is above all mentioned in the common
salvation. Prove. 1.23. Job. 6.44, 45. Romans 5.4, 11. 1 Pet. 3.21. whence he it
said to be the Author of aeternall Salvation to all them that obey him. Hebr.
5.9. And this obedience effected through the Spirit in their believing, is said
to be unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of JESUS CHRIST. 1 Pet. 1.2.
whence they are said to be come to the blood of sprinkling. Hebr. 12.24. Whence
however through his bloodsheading he has interest in all men, and right to
dispose of them. Romans 14.9. yet have none any right in his special
privileges, nor can have part with him therein, unless he by his Spirit wash
them with his blood. Tit. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. That our Savior said to Peter on
mother occasion, being true in this, If I wash thee not, thou have no part with
me Joh. 13.8. and so they confess that believed in Christ, he has loved us
and washed us from our sins in his own blood. Revel. 1.5. And so they are
affirmed to be washed in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God: 1 Gor. 6.11. because it is by his blood applied by the virtue and power of
his Spirit: where through,

1. He makes the heavenly Call more powerful and prevailing in their hearts
for drawing them forth of the hopes, condition, fellowship, service, thraldomes
and pollutions of the world, to submit to, look on, and seek to enjoy the
grace of, and life in Christ. 2 Pet. 1.4. and 2.20. Joh. 6.44, 45. 2 Timothy 1.9.
Heb. 3.^, 6.

2. He more and more reconcileth their hearts, and powers to God in sight and
belief of his precious bloodshed for them, overthrowing their pride and high
thoughts of themselves, and their stubborn reasonnings, and evil and hard
thoughts of God: and their Inclinations of seeking content in other things, or
help by other means, and raises them up to high esteems of Christ, and God
in Christ, and the grace, Spirit, righteousness, and life in him, with servent
inelinations and desires after the some, to be ever found in it, and comforted
and guided thereby. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20, 21. and 10.4, 5. Tit. 3.3, 4, 5, 6.
Zach. 9.12, 13. J^^. 6.45. Is. 55.5. Psalm. 3.3.7, 8, 9, 10.

3. He cleanses and purisyeth their hearts and consciences through the
sprinkling of this precious blood therein, and ^^shing them therewith, making
is effectual in their believing through all their powers Hebr. 12.24. 1 Pet.
1.^. and that both in regard of the guilt of sin, freeing them from the heavy
charges, and bondage of the law, the fears of wrath, and terrors by hell,
Hebr. 9.14. Romans 5.1, 2, 11. and 7.4, 5.25. and 8.2. And also in respect of the
Tyrannical pollution and service of sinful lusts; this blood believed in,
breeds in the heart a loathing of sin, and self-wrought righteousness
worldly and fleshly pleasures, riches, honor and same: Zach. 12.10. Gal. 5.24.
and 6.14. 1 John 1.7. and it also breeds inward love and child-like
affections to God, and Christ and his government, Gal. 2.20. 1 Pet. 1.7, 8. 1
John 4.19. and sinceere and member-like love to brethren. 1 Pet. 1.21, 22. Ephesians.
5.1, 2. and compassionate to men. 2 Cor. 5.14. with singleness of heart, and
spiritual frities of joy, peace, patience, etc. And heavenly desires after
approbation and nighness with Christ in all services of love to God or
brethren, Acts 15.8, 9. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Col. 3.10, 11, 12. Phil. 2.1, 2.

4. He marketh and seals them by his Spirit with his blood (as once in
Ceremony our Types of old. Exodus 12.13.) for deliverance in special manner,
and to the day of Redemption. Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.30. and thereby strengthens
their faith to rest an God in Christ for the Promises of the New Testament.
Hebr. 9.14, 15, 16. Romans 5.5, 11. for his performance to th^^, all he has
promised to confer on them. R^^. 4.18, 25. and working in them all his grace
requires of them. Psalm. 138.8. Is. 26.12. as also faith for standing in the
days of Temptation, and overcomming. Revel. 12.11. and so to live by Faith:
Gal. 2.20. and walk in love. 2 Cor. 5.14. which works sweetly. Gal. 5.6. 1
Cor. 13.

5. He brings them in to approach, with holy boldness to God, and liberty
in use of his Ordinances; and to Union and fellowship with himself and his
people. Romans 5.2, 3. Ephe. 2.13, 17, 18, 19, 22. Hebr. 10^ 9.22. and 12.22, 24.
1 John. 1.1, 2, 3, 7. and so guiding them to some to the Spirit, he enters them
into his rest, and Kingdom, and causes them of the Spirit, to reap life
everlasting. Hebr. 4.3. a ^et. ^.11. Gal. 5.18. and 6.8.

6. He having thus fitted them, gives them (...) experiment all those things
mendoned in (...) special Intercession and Advocation, with many unutterable
discoveries of Love, and (...) of Spirit. C^^. 1.2, 3, 4. and 2.5. and 5.10.
etc. Ep^es. 1.17, ^0. which (...) with assurance of his (...), and of the
inheritance, Romans ^.32, 36. and makes their hearts to glory in God, and to
love, long, and wait for the coming again of Jesus Christ, who will come in
due time, and free them of all trouble, and possess them of the inheritance,
and crown them, and make them glorious like himself in soul and body, 1 John
3.2. Revel. 22.17, 20. 2 Timothy 4.8. Phil. 3.21.

And this is a little discovery of that special salvation he works in
Believers unto God, of which confession is made. Rev. 5.9.

Now between those two salvations, that with God for men, and that in men to
God, The common, and the special; The Scripture does often and many ways
distinguish, and that very clearly, as to instance.

1. The former is called a reconciling by his death; The other a saving by his
life. Romans 5.10. The former a reconciliation wrought for the world by God in
Christ; The latter a Reconciliation of some by Christ to God; God was in
Christ, reconciling the World to himself; God has reconciled us to himself by
Christ. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.

2. For effecting the former. Christ came from the Father, and came into the
world. Job. 16.28. 1 Timothy 1.15. and was made poor. 1 Cor. 8, 9. and made low
and abased. Romans 8.3. For effecting the other, He left the world, and went
again to the Father. Job. 16.28. and was exalted and glorified by, and at the
right hand of God. Acts 5.31.

3. In effecting the former, he was abased more and more, till in his
resurrection it was perfect, and we despised him also. Phil. 2.7, 8. Isai.
53.3, 4, 5. In effecting the other, He is exalted and glorified more and more
till that be perfected, and is precious in our hearts. Isai. 4.^. and 55.5. 1
Pet. 1.21, 22. and 2.4, 7. Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. Cant. 5.10, etc.

4. The one is a Redemption (for us) in Christ Jesus. Romans 3.24. the other is a
Redemption of us in our souls and bodies. Luke. 1.74.79. Romans 8.23.

5. The former was by bloodshedding, for which he went out of the City, Hebr.
9.12. and 13.12. the other is by presenting his blood before his Father, and by
his Spirit sprinkling the same on the heart and conscience of his people, for
which he entered into the holy of holyes. Hebr. 9.14.24. and 12.24. Revel. 1.5.

6. The former is already perfectly wrought and done and finished in himself,
and so accepted with the Father, that he has made him Lord, and extends
through him fruits of patience, and goodness to men, without men's knowledge of
him, or what he has done, even while they are enemies, and without strength.
Ioh. 17.4. and 19.30. Romans 5.6.8, 10. and 3.11, 12. Act. 14.17. but the other
is begun in the making known him in the salvation wrought and perfected in the
knowledge of him, in both that and the aeternall Salvation. Tit. 2.11, 12. and
3, 4, 5, 6. 2 Pet. 1.2, 3, 4.

7. The former has prevailed with God for men, so as he has accepted the
sacrifice of Christ, and given over all into his dispose, and made him Lord of
all. Hebr. 10.12. Psalm. 110.1. and 2.7, 8. and does prevail in that God for
his sake extends patience and bounty to men, with means to lead them to
Repentance. Romans 2.4. The latter prevails in and with men to God. Psalm.
110.3. Isai. 55.5. Ioh. 6.44, 45. Tit. 3, 4, 5.

8. The former is affirmed in Scripture to be for all men. Ioh. 3.17. but the
latter is only for and to believers. Ioh. 3.16. Act. 10.43. Hebr. 5.9.

Thus are the common and special Salvation distinct, and the former, first and
general for all; and the latter, following and peculiar to believers: And that
which the Scripture distinguishes, it becomes no man to confound.

Now what the Scripture makes distinct, and puts difference in, we may
safely so view, and speak of them, and so the death of Jesus Christ, at the
ransom and Propitiation being affirmed in Scripture to be for sinners, for the
world of mankind, for all men, and every man, and this that common Salvation,
wrought for all men in his own body, and so the ground of that salvation
extended to all, wherein all are made so saveable, that they might be
aeternally saved, and this declared, that they might believe it; and in
believing repent and come in to Christ, and so be eternally saved: It appear^^
to be the sense of 1 Timothy 2.4.6. Hebr. 2.9. And in such, and so large a sense,
is the Proposition, and no larger: And so this first Consideration has lead to
right stating of the Question for the sens^^ and afforded proof also, and
answer to most of the Objections: that ^y ^buse of reason, and some places of
Scripture speaking of the (...) Salvation, (...) against it.

CHAP. II.
Of the diverse distinct ends of the Death and blood-shodding of JESUS CHRIST,
mentioned in the Scripture, and of which of them is here meant.

THere are in Scripture set forth, and plainly affirmed diverse distinct ends of
the death and blood-shead of Christ, in his laying down his life.

The first end, and that which is general and common, of the largest extent,
was, to be a Ransom, a sacrifice and Propitiation, or a propitiatory Sacrifice
for sinful mankind, To take away sin before God for men; He appeared to put
away sin, by the sacrifice of himself. Hebr. 9.36. The Lamb of God, which
takes away the sin of the world. John 1.29. He dyed for our sins,
according to the Scripture. 1 Cor. 15.3. And he is the Propitiation for our
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world: 1
John 2.^. And in this general and common end are included, three distinct, yet
inseparable ends: The first, in respect of God, that was offended; from whom
man was fallen, and against whom become an enemy; The Second in respect of
JESUS CHRIST, the Mediator between God and man kind: The third in respect of
mankind fallen, and mediated for, each of which it is meet we should
understand.

1. In respect of God offended with mankind, The end of the death of, and
ransom given, and Sacrifice offered by Christ, was to fulfill the truth, and
satisfy the Justice, and perform that good will of God, who would have all
men saved: Mankind having sinned and fallen, the truth of God will have it so,
That he that sins must the: And the Justice of God will have it so, That
(...) fails in any thing of that Law which he ought to perform to God,
shall suffer the Curse. Gene. 2.17. and 3.19. Ezekiel. 18.20. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal.
3.10. Psalm. 49.7, 8. And God may as soon cease to be God, as fail in his
truth or Justice; and mankind, if they suffer this death and curse, must
perish, and never get out of it again, so as man being under this judgment;
no mercy can be shown him, no peace afforded him, but it would be as it were
cross to the holy Nature of God: But Jesus Christ by the Fathers appointment,
and his own will, becoming a second Adam. Romans 5.14. a public Person (as the
first Adam) In the room of all mankind, He, by the grace of God, tasted death
for every man. Hebr. 2.9. And suffered the curse for all, that by the Law were
under the Curse. Gal. 4.4. and 3.13. And this is with God, as if all had dyed.
2 Cor. 5.14. So that now in Christ, mercy and truth are met, righteousness
and Peace have kissed. Psalm. 85.10. Now God may bring men into a new Treaty,
and show mercy, and extend Peace to them: his truth and Justice as brightly
shining therein, as his Mercy and Peace: Christ his Son, having in man's
nature and stead, fulfilled his Truth, and satisfied his Justice: and so far
saved all men, according to his will. Romans 8.3. 1 Timothy 2.4. And thus it is
said, God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself. 2 Cor. 5.19. and
Christ speaking of his coming to die, and offer himself a Sacrifice, says of
this end; Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. Hebr. 10.6, 9.

2. In respect of Jesus Christ, the Mediator between God and man; The end of
the death of, ransom given, and sacrifice offered by JESUS CHRIST, was, that
he might be the Lord of All, have them all as his own, to dispose and judge,
to command, and accordingly to condemn, or forgive, as he saw fit: Christ was
the Lord of all, as the Father, for all were created by him. Joh. 1.1, 2, 3.
But mankind, being fallen into sin, and so under death and curse, became
without Christ, and without God in the world; Alienated from his favor and
presence: Ephe. 2.1, 2, 12. Gene. 3.24. and became dead in sin. Romans 5.12,
18. And though God and Christ, lost not their right of Lordship over men, yet
man being fallen, the liberty of exercise was on man's part barred: and there
was no way but one, that God and Christ should judge and dedestroy mankind for
the sin, and in the verse and death, under which they were fallen; mankind
being now, like a fallon and Traitor, with sentence past upon him, and upon the
ladder or Tree, with the rope about his neck, and ready to be turned off,
having neither benefit of Law, nor Pardon; nor friend among all the Creatures
that can help him, and so no way for favor, or coming into any new treaty or
Judgment, or living to God any more: but only in this new way agreed on
between God and Christ. That Christ should take this cause in hand, bear this
sin, go upon the ladder, and suffer this death and curse upon the tree;
whioh he once having suffered and overcome, all mankind should be his, and he
become their Lord, that they might live to him: and so be all brought out of
this first death by him; And those that did in the day of grace accept him for
Lord, and yield to his government, he might give them aeternall life, and
those that would not so do, he might sentence them to a second death. 2 Cor.
5.21. Gal. 3.13. Jo. 3.18. Also mankind in their sin and fall, by reason of
the conquest Satan had over them therein, were become his slaves, and
vassalls, and he by his conquest and power, got such interest and mastery over
man, that he was their Lord by the right of war: Now Jesus Christ, by his
conquest over the Devil in the wilderness, and through his life, and by his
Resurrection, and in his Ascension, did overthrow the Devil, and conqvered
him, and spoiled him of all his right of Lordship, and led Captivity captive,
and so himself became Lord by virtue of his conquest also: Mat. 4. Jo. 12.31.
Col. 2.15. Ephesians. 4.8. so has he redeemed all men, by purchase and ransom of
his Father, and by strong hand, and conquest, from the Devils right of
Lordship: and so is the Lord of all men by a double right, namely of ransom
and conquest, and has all into his dispose, and for a new treaty. And all
shall be made alive to stand at his judgment; and he has a new and aeternall
life to bestow on all that in the day of grace do in believing submit to his
Spirit: And another, even a second death for such as through the day of grace
rebel against him; and he is the Judge: and so it is said, For to this end
Christ both dyed, and rose and revived, that he might be the Lord both of the
dead and living. To. 14.9.12. And that he dyed for all, that they which live,
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that dyed for them,
and rose again. 2 Cor. 5.15. Whether we live therefore, or dye, we are the
Lords. Romans 14.8. And we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ.
2 Cor. 5.10. Romans 14.11, 12. And then all shall acknowledge him that dyed to be
Lord, and he shall judge. Phil. 2.7, 11. Romans 2.16.

3. In respect of mankind, for whom Christ did mediate, The end of the death
of, the ransom given, and sacrifice offered by Christ, was, -- To remove out
of the way, all that stood between God and man, which was as a bar that kept
back all streams of mercy and peace; that none tending to salvation could be
shown to man; as, the bondage of the Law, that held under sin, the power of
death, that lay on man by reason of sin, and the Lordship and power of the
devil, that held under both: And so Christ dyed for all, that all are dead. 2
Cor. 5.14. And we are dead to the Law by the body of Christ. Romans 7.4. and he
has abolished death by his coming. 2 Timothy 1.10. In a word, he has blotted
out the handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, and contrary to us, and
took it out of the way, having spoiled Principallities and Powers, etc. Col.
2.14, 15. -- Also he dyed, and offered himself in Sacrifice, To procure pardon
and remission of sins, and favor and life into his own hands for mankind,
that he might dispose thereof according to the Tenor of the Gospel: For
without shedding of blood is no remission of sins. Hebrews 9.22. And he was
delivered (to death) for our offenses. Romans 4.25. -- Also that he might open a
way for men to come in and partake of this grace, through his Spirit in the
Gospel; In which he is set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, etc. Romans 3.25. In which Gospel he has brought life and Immortallity
to light. 2 Timothy 1.10. That in the Testimony thereof, all men might through him
believe. John 1.7. and in believing, have life. Joh. 3.16, 17, 18.

And all these three ends, that in respect of God, that in respect of Christ,
and that in respect of mankind, are all for the good of mankind, and meet all
in this one end of his death, for ransom, sacrifice, propitiation. And this is
affirmed in the Scripture throughout; And each particular in this general, to
be for the world, for all men, for every man, and so, and for such ends, and in
such sense, appears. 1 Timothy 2.4.6. Heb. 2.9. to be meant: And so the
Proposition is also to be taken: yet are there other ends of his death: and so.

The second end of the Death, and bloodshedding of CHRIST was to seal,
rattify and confirm the New Testament of precious Promises; whence it is
called, The New Testament in his blood, which was shedd, etc. Luke 22.20. and
his blood, called the blood of the New Testament. Mat. 26.28. That Christ is
come, and has dyed for our sins, and rose for our justification, and is the
Propitiation for the sins of the World; That he is the Lord, and all men are
his, and ought to live to him, and that there is life in him for them, Is the
affirmation and Declaration of the Gospel, and shall one day be known to be
true, whether men will believe it or no; But for such as through grace do
believe it, so that in that believing they repent, and come in to Christ, and
depend on him, There are for them many precious and gracious Promises from
Christ, and his Father. 2 Pet. 1.4. Hebr. 8.6. contained in one general, which
is of aeternall life. 1 John 2.25. and branched into many particulars, as
remillion of sins, subduing of lusts, Sanctification, hearing of Prayers,
preservation in this Grace, and guidance, and protect on of spirit, through all
services of him, and suffesings for him, and to the possession of the
Inheritance, etc. as before instanced: A I which being by Covenant, or as in a
Will and Testament plainly recorded, are called the New Testament: Gal. 3.17,
18. of which Testament, Christ is the Mediator. Heb. 9.15. And where a
Testament is, there must also be the death of the Testator; for a Testament is
of force after men are dead, otherwise it is of no strength at all, while the
Testator lives. Heb. 9.16, 17. but the Testator once dead, if it be but a man's
Testament, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth, or adds thereto. Gal.
3.15. How much more this Testament of Christ, sealed with his blood. Hebr. 8.
and 9, 10. And this end peculiarly is for, and belongs to his Called and
chosen ones. That they which are called, might receive the Promise, etc. Hebr.
9.15. and 10.19. Such as have in believing received the Atonement. Romans
5.1.3.11. This end joined with the former, is the ground of their hope.

The third end of the death of Christ, was to be a witnesse-bearing, and a
seal of the witness he had borne to the Truth, in his declaration and
ministration of the Gospel, as he says, To this end was I borne, and for this
cause came I into the world, That I should bear witness to the Truth. Joh.
18.37. so it is said, He before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession: 1 Timothy 6.13. or profession; And in this end was included the testimony of his
faithfulness, and obedience also to his Father. Ioh. 12.50. Phil. 2.8. And the
Testimony of his compassion and care for the good of All, where he had preached
the Gospel. Matthew. 9.35.38. And the Testimony of his more special love, and
tender care and faithfulness toward those given him in the heavenly Call by his
ministration, watching to preserve them in the Truth, even to the Adventuring,
and laying down his life for them. Joh. 10.11, 18. which end in respect of
testimony more nearly respected them among whom he ministered, and by
instruction, us also; But especial is this end, and the holding of it forth
also for our example, to lay down our lives for the Brethren. 1 John 3.16.
P^^^ not as a Propitiation for sins, He only did that, and is that for all
men. 1 John 2.2. Nor yet as the seal of the New Testament, He only did that,
and his blood is that for all his called and chosen Ones. Heb. 9.12, 14, 15,
16, 17. But in witnesse-bearing to the truth, In love and testimony of
faithfulness to Brethren: To go on and be faithful in all services of love,
for edifying in faith and love, even to the death, and laying down our lives
for the Brethren. Phil. 2.1, 8.

Now these ends the Scripture making distinct, and offirming the first more
large then either of the two latter: It is not for man to confound them, or
limit the former to the latter: And understanding. 1 Timothy 2.6. Hebr. 2.9. to
affirm of the first end only, as indeed they do, and so the Proposition
likewise: This Consideration also leads to a right stating the Quistion
concerning the sense: and proves it also to be as before set down: And
answers the Objections, that by abusing of placer speaking of the peculiar
ends, are framed to gain say that which the Scripture affirms of the general
end of Christ's death.

CHAP. III.
Of the diverse manner of mentioning these ends in Scripture, and in what manner
mentioned here.

THe death of JESUS CHRIST in respect of these forementioned ends, is diversely
mentioned in the Scripture, as may be seen.

First, sometime more ends of his death then one are mentioned together:
Sometime that end of his death which was for propitiation and ransom is
coupled together with that end which was to testify love and faithfulness in
his ministration, propounded for our example: And then such general words as
the World; All men, etc. are not used, because his ministration on earth did
not reach to all the World, nor to all men at that time in the world: And yet
such a word, as though it may in some sense be peculiarly applied to some: yet
in another sense it may be applied to all: and so because the Ministration was
not to all, and yet the ransom for all, he uses such a word as may be applied
to the one or the other sense, and so carry both senses in one: as for our
example he says; The Son of man came not to he ministered unto, but to
minister, and give his life a ransom for many: Matthew. 20.28. so Mark. 10.45.
he says for many, but he says not, but for many; and so leaves the word at
large for both senses, as Romans 5.19. Sometime that end which was for
propitiation and ransom, is coupled together with that end, which was for
sealing the New Testament, which belongs not to all men, but to his chosen
Ones, that have partaked of the heavenly call; And then such general words, as
cannot in any sense be appropriated to some peculiar: as the world; All men,
etc. are not used; nor yet such a word as may not in some sense be applied so
generally: And so he says, not some, nor his Elect, nor, but only for many.
But so speaks, as his words may be applied to either, or both the senses, as
occasion is; Seeing the propitiation is for all, and the New Testament for
Believers, which are many also; he faith, this is my blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. Matt. 26.28. See
Hebr. 9.14, 15.

But sometime the death of Christ in respect of that end, which was for
propitiation and ransom, is only mentioned, and then as sit is for all, so in
propositions for Faith, It is expressed in such general words, as the World; All
men, etc. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15, 19. and so it is here, in 1 Timothy 2.6. and Hebr. 2.9.

Secondly again, that end of the death of Christ, as it was for ransom,
propitiation and reconciliation is mentioned in the Scripture in a threefold
sense distinctly, as every reader may see.

1. As it is in it self, by and in Jesus Christ, given to, and made with God
for men, and that without the knowledge, will, motion or act of any of the
sons of men, yet so perfectly and fully in and by himself, as the public
person in the room of mankind. And so prevailing and acceptable with God the
Father, that he has received the same, and taken such well-pleasednesse
therein, as he has borne testimony thereof, and given over the dispose of all
into the hands of his Son, and filled him with spirit, life and authority to
dipose all: By reason whereof, as full redemption and recovery is in Jesus
Christ, and by him wrought in himself, as there was overthrow in and by the
first Adam; So he has life and justification for all in himself, and power and
authority both to dispense thereof to all that in the making it known submit and
come in to him, and to judge all that harden themselves and rebel against him.
1 Ioh. 3.5. 2 Timothy 1.10. 1 Jo. 2.2. To. 5.18. To. 14.9, 12. Phil. 2.8, 11. Ps.
68.18.21. as is before shown in the redemption wrought in himself, and in the
first and general end of his death.

2. As this ransom, propitiation and reconciliation, made by and in Christ
with God for, and his right of Lordship over men thereby, is made known by
Christ, through his Spirit in the Gospel to men, so as they may thereby be
convinced of the perfection thereof fully effected by him, and accepted of the
Father, and of the overthrow given death and the devil by him, and that
redemption he effected for mankind: And this knowledge, with so much spiritual
power, as they might be convinced of sin, because they have not believed on
him, and that they might come in to him, and submit to his sentence, whether of
absolution or condemnation, and acknowledge him Lord to the glory of God,
whether to their glory or shame (in which they might here find mercy with him)
and to which however here they resist, yet he will one day bring them, when he
shall so far see the travel of his soul. Ioh. 16.8, 9, 10, 11. Romans 14.8, 9,
10, 11, 12: 2 Cor. 5.10. Phil. 2.8. Isa. 45.22. Dan. 12.2. as is before a
little touched.

3. As some men have so entertained and received this knowledge in this day of
grace, and are therein convinced and submitted to this acknowledgment of him,
so as they are by his grace brought in to receive in their hearts this
atonement made by him, and so to believe on him, wherein they experiment the
goodness and power of it, quieting and renewing their hearts, and reconciling
their hearts to God and Christ, and to brethren in Christ, and to giving up to
his spiritual regiment. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. Acts 18.27. Romans 5.1.5.11. 2 Cor.
5.18. and 3.3.17, 18. And this last is peculiar, and not common; for,

The Scripture distinguishes and puts great difference between the
redemption, life and justification that is in Christ for men: And the same upon
or in men, through the enjoyment of Christ. Romans 3.^2, 24, 26. and 4.24, 25.
and 5.18. between the Atonement made in and by Christ for men, And the same
received by such as believe in Christ. Romans 5.1.6, 10, 11, 15. 2 Cor. 5.8, 19.
1 John 5.10, 11, 15. 2 Cor. 5.8.19. 1 John 5.10.11, 12. And the former of these
to be larger then the latter, and so not to be confounded, and limmited by men:
Now of the former, is made in Christ, and at farthest, as m^de known, that we
might be convinced, and so brought in to Christ, it is evident. 1 Timothy 2.4, 6.
and Hebr. 2.9. do mean: and so far, and no farther is the sense of the
Proposition, and Objections from the latter against it, appear to be an abuse
of such Scriptures.

Thirdly, again we find the death of Christ in respect of the ransom and
propitiation wrought in Christ in himself, with God for men (even as the
creation of men by Christ) mentioned diversely in respect of Person.

1. Sometime in the first Person singular, concerning the Speaker, Who loved
me, and gave himself for me. Gal. 2.20. Thy hands have made me^ Job. 10.8. so
verse 9. Psalm. 119.73. and 139.13.16. no reasonable understanding can hence
infer, he gave himself for no other, and made no other.

2. Sometime in the first Person plural, where the Speaker couples those he
speaks of together with himself: He delivered him up for us all. Romans 8.32.
he made him to be sin for us. 2 Cor. 5.21. he is the Propitiation for our
sins. 1 John 2.2. As the Lord lives that made us this soul. Jere. 38.16.
Has not one God created us. Mal. 2.10. No right reasoning can infer hence,
therefore no other; for that would contradict the plain testimony of Scripture.

3. Sometime in the second Person, with personal application: My blood, which
is shed for you: Luke 22.20. so 1 Pet. 1.18.19. The Lord that created thee, oh
Jacob, and he that formed thee, oh Israel, fear not, for I have Redeemed.
Isai. 34.1. reason must yield, such sayings answer not the Question, how many
he redeemed and created.

4. Sometime in the third Person, with a special personal application, and
that sometimes to the better part: I lay down my life for the sheep. Joh.
10.15. redeemed his people. Luke 1.68. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him.
Psalm. 149.2. so Isai. 43.15. and sometime to the worser part: The weak Brother
perish, for whom Christ dyed: 1 Cor. 8.11. denying the Lord that bought them,
and bring upon themselves swift destruction. 2 Pet. 2.1. He that made them,
will not have mercy on them. Isai. 27.11. sure no sober-minded men will
affirm, that the sayings of any one of these parts will resolve the Question,
how many God made, or Christ by death and ransom bought; unless one put both
parts together.

5. Sometime in the third Person generally, without any restraining
Application: We have seen, and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to
be the Savior of the World. 1 John 4.14. and 2.2. And that he dyed for all. 2
Cor. 5.14, 15. has made of one blood all Nations of men. Acts 17.26. And
suchlike sayings, do directly and fully answer the Question, How many God
made, and how many Christ dyed, and gave himself a Ransom for: And the like
might be said, for showing how many have sinned, how many shall dye, how many
shall rise again, how many shall appear before Christ's Judgment Seat: All
these are to be found answered in the Third Person generally, without any
restraining Application, where it appears to be All men, and cannot rightly be
opposed by places where they are spoken of in the first Person singular, or in
the first Person plural, or in the second Person, with personal Application,
or in the third Person, with any restrictive Application, as all and every of
them are in many places spooke of in that manner, as well as the creation of
men, or Ransom given by Christ for them: Now the 1 Timothy 2.6. and Hebr. 2.9.
are spoken in the third Person generally, without any restraining application,
and such places must settle us in the sense. And so in this consideration, we
are led to see what expressions to find the sense of the Proposition in, and
where proved; Namely where the death of Christ as the Ransom and Propitiation,
is mentioned without other peculiar ends joined with it: and where that
Propitiation is set forth, as made by Christ: and to be made known or offered
so to be without the receite in gracious operations joined with it; And what is
affirmed of it in places so speaking, may not be denied or straightened by any
places otherwise speaking, which puts by the most usual Objections against it.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the diverse ways of propounding the Sufferings and Death of CHRIST in the
Scripture, and how it is propounded here.

THE death of CHRIST is diversely propounded in Scripture; and that as in
respect of every end, so in respect of this end of giving himself to the death,
as the Ransom and Propitiation, and sometime coupled with other ends.

1. Sometime it is propounded most especially and intentionally, as, and for an
example to Believers to follow, in love, and in the fruits, in sufferings and
services thereof, and as the motive thereto. Ephesians. 5.1, 2. 2 Cor. 8.9. In which,
if the love and services thereof, be of Believers one to another, then he is
set forth, as having loved us, and given himself for us. Joh. 15.12. 1 John
4.7, 10, 11. If the love, and service thereof be to be enlarged according to
any nigh relation between us, as husband and wife, then he is set forth, as
having loved his Church, and given himself for it. Ephe. 5.25. If the love and
service thereof in patience and suffering, and in overcomming evil with good,
be to be exercised toward unbeleeving ones, or Adversaries, then he is set
forth, both as having so suffered for us, 1 Pet. 2.18, 24. and also as having
suffered for the unjust. 1 Pet. 3.14.18. which manner of propounding his death,
is used to prevail with Believers, to follow his example; but does nor show
how many he dyed for, and so cannot with Justice be brought to answer that
Question, or to oppose it.

2. Sometime it in propounded by and of Believers, as the ground by which in
discovery and belief thereof, they were turned and brought into God, and borne
anew, Tit. 2.11, 14. and 3.4.5. with Joh. 3.16. And by which they are kept in
dependence on him. Romans 5.6.11. Gal. 2.20. And by which their love is made
operative to Brethren 1. Gor. 8.11.13. and all men. 2 Cor. 5.14.

3. Sometime it is propounded to Believers, as the ground and motive.

To be more and more reconciled in their hearts and Powers to God. 2. Cor. 5.21.

To settle and bottom them in the faith of Christ. Gal. 1.4, 6.

To strengthen and stablish their confidence and expectation. Col. 1.20.23.

To enhance and lead to the testification of love to Brethren. Phil. 2.1.8.

To preserve from pride, carnal confidence in instruments, and from schism. 1
Cor. 1.12.

4. Sometime it is propounded to such as are Overseers of some Congregations,
or particular Assemblies of the Church for further end. Act. 20.28.

To admonish them to keep this doctrine firmly, and teach it. 1 Timothy 1.11.15,
18, 19. and 4.10, 11.

To provoke them to watchfulness over the flock, over which they are made
Overseers, and faithfulness in declaring the Gospel to them. Acts 20.28.

To constancy in suffering and enduring hardship in their ministration. 2 Timothy
2.3, 8.

All which ways of propounding, are mavelous profitable for our comfort,
instruction, admonition and exhortation: but not set forth as the places
showing how many he dyed for.

5. Sometime it is propounded as the foundation laid, and ground to offer life,
and bring in such as either know it not, or believe it not; to believe; it
being true whether they believe it or not, and therefore, as a Truth affirmed,
that they might believe it. Joh. 1.29. and 3.16, 17. And this propounded
sometime to such as believe not, that they might believe. Act. 1.7.30, ^1.
Sometime to such as do already believe, both in respect of themselves, and of
them which are weak in believing, and of them which do not (as yet) as all
believe.

To show what Gospel was preached among them, and to others 1 John 4.14.

To show what Gospel they have to Preach to the World. Romans 1.1, 4, 5.

To be a ground and pattern to them of declaring the Gospel not only to such
as are weak and wavering, but also to such as believe not. 2 Cor. 5.10, 11, 19.

To be a ground of Prayng for such as believe not. 1 Timothy 2.1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Mat. 5.44.

To be a ground of holding forth the Word of life in a good Profession, and a
good conversation toward them that believe not. Phil. 2.6, 16.

To be a motive to do all this, as the means to bring them to God. Mat. 5.13,
16. with 1 Cor. 2.2. and with patience to bear their injuries, and wait till
God be pleased to give them Repentance. Luke 9.55, 56. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.

And as all these last ways of propounding, are of great usefulness; so in
such Places where the Gospel is so propounded, shall we find resolution of
the Question for how many Christ dyed, and information of the sense, and in
such manner is 1 Timothy 1.6. Hebr. 2.9. propounded, and so not to be limited by
places in another manner propounded.

CHAP. V.
Of the difference of the extent and force of the same Words, when they are of
men, and by men; and when of God and by God; also when the Opposition is
between men and men, and when between GOD and MEN.

THE words in this business, that any difference is made about, is the words,
All men, and Every man; and The World: Now this is a thing so commonly known,
that the same word in diverse sentences, may differ much in signification and
extent; and yet by the Sentence in which the word is, the signification and
extent thereof clearly import, and discover it self, That little need there is
to say much hereof: And as it were ungodly and unequal, to compare God and
man, to make them alike and equal. Isai. 40.13, 14, 18. Psalm. 113.4, 5. So it
would be near ungodliness, and very unequal and rash, to compare the
Thoughts, Words and Works of God, with the thoughts, words and works of men,
to make them equal and alike in extent and force. Isai. 55.8, 9. So it is as
easy for men to understand a great difference in the extent of the same word,
spoken of and by God, and spoken of and by men; and when the opposition is
between God and men, and when between men and men: For if one speak of a
household or family, and say, This man governes all: even a child of twelve
years old, of a reasonable understanding will understand, The word All, to
extend but to the Family; And if one say of a Corporation, This man governes
All, he will understand the word, All, to extend to the Corporation: And if
one say, The King governes All; He will understand the word, All, to extend but
to the Dominion whereof he is King: But if one say, God governes All, he will
understand the word, All, to extend to the whole world, and All in it: as Psalm.
103.19. And so, if one say of a man's work, his fame is all the world over; it
will be understood to be far and near, in many Countries, and a great way: But
if one say of the works of God, Their line is gone through all the earth, and
their words to the ends of the world; It will be understood in the largest
sense: as Psalm. 19.4. And so it would be found either ignorance or rashness,
or consciousnesse of the weakness of a man's cause, that he would prove
thereby, to go about to compare and make of like large extent, the word World;
where it is said, There went out a Decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the
World should be taxed: Luke 2.1. And where it is said; The Worlds were made by
Christ; and he is the Propitiation for the sins of the whole World, Hebr.
1.2. Joh. 1.3, 4. 1 John 2.2. Much more, to go about to make of like large
extent, the words, All men: and the World: when spoken by envious men, that
thought a few o^ many to follow Christ: Joh. 3.26. and 11.48. and 12.19. and
when spoken by the Spirit of God of the works of God and Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19.
1 Jo. 2.2. Much worse still, when the extent of the, All that came to Christ,
Luke 15.1. is brought to expound and limitt, The extent of the All Christ dyed
for. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. and that he bids, look to him, and be saved. Isaiah
45.22. or the every man, of whom men spoke. Acts 2.8. with the every man of
whom the holy Spirit speaks. Joh. 1.9. seeing the one is a speech of and by
men; and the other of and by God.

Besides the words, all men, and every man, are evident not to be of like large
extent in every place; and yet of the largest extent, the place where it is
used does import, and the sentence in which it is used, importing the sense.

1. Sometime, the words, All men, and EVERY MAN, evidently signifying All, and
Every one of Mankind, without exception; so as none can deny it: As, God made
all Nations of men of one blood, Acts 17.26. He knows the hearts of all men.
Acts 1.24. death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Romans 5.12. By
the offense of One, judgment came upon All Men, to condemnation, verse 18. All
are gone out of the way. Romans 3.12. All have sinned. verse 23. We must All
appear before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, 2 Cor. 5.10. That Every one, etc.
Again, He is the Savior of all men, specially of Those that believe. 1 Timothy
4.10. He gives to all men liberally. Jam. 1.5. At I live, says the LORD,
Every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God, etc. Isa.
45.23. Romans 14.11. Phil. 2.10, 11. All Nations that God has made, shall come
and worship before him. Psalm. 86.9. with diverse like places, where all cannot
be meant, but of some, or some of all sorts: but, of All men that God made.

2. Sometime in Scripture, the word, All Men, is found to mean one and another,
rich and poor, Believers, and Unbeleevers; All without exclusion of any, or
restraint to any one, or some of all sorts: as, Though all men should be
offended. Matthew. 26.33. I say unto All, watch. Matthew. 13.37. Except ye repent,
ye shall all perish. Luke 13.3.5. Provide things honest in the sight of All
men. Romans 12.17. Render therefore to all their dues. Romans 13.7. Let your
moderation of mind be known to All men. Phil. 4.5. showing all meekness to
all men. Tit. 3.2. If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably
with all men. Romans 12.18. so Hebr. 12.14. and such like places, not admitting
restraint.

3. Sometime, All, is found so used in Scripture: so as it cannot be meant of
Gods People, good Men, Saints, hearers of the Word, weak Brethren, newly
converted, Believers, or the Church of God at all; much less of Gods Elect and
chosen only; as, All m^n (...) not faith. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Woe unto you, when all
men speak well of you. Luke 6.26. She made all Nations drink of the wine of
the wrath of her fornications. Revel. 14.8. yet here all Unbeleevers are meant:
So that the Scripture speaking on diverse occasions, to diverse purposes, and
concerning diverse Subjects, and in diverse manners, does use the words, All men,
and Every man, in larger or scanter sense. And yet always in the largest
sense, the words, with the scope of the place, the Circumstances in it, the
preceding and following words, the business reated of, the common accepted
sense, in view of those of, and by, and to whom they are spoken, and between
whom the opposition is, will bear. Whether for All upright. 1 Cor. 4.5. for
all that are, or seem Believers. 1 Cor. 7.7. for All spiritual men. 1 Cor.
12.7, 11. or for all evil and bad men. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. or for All, both Elect or
Reprobate. Joh. 5.28. And All that come of Adam by Propagation. 1 Cor. 15.22.

Now the Words All, and Every man, in 1 Timothy 2.4.6. and Hebr. 2.9. being spoke
by the Spirit of GOD, and of the Works of God for men: and the opposition
being between God and men, and but one man, the Man CHRIST JESUS between; who
is God and Man, and is expressly said, To give himself a Ransom for all men:
The larged sense must of necessity be taken, and no more is required or
affirmed in the Proposition.

So then, the sense of the 1 Timothy 2.6. and Hebr. 2.9. and of the Proposition
affirmed, is to be understood of.

1. The Redemption wrought by Christ in his own body, and the Common salvation
he there-through works: And

2. So of his Death, as it is set forth for Propitiation: And

3. So mentioned by it self, without the other ends annexed too with it: And

4. Propounded as the foundation of Repentance toward God, and Faith toward
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and this in the Third Person generally, in general
words:

And vet to prevent all mistakes, and cavills, this is to be further added.
That the Death of JESUS CHRIST, as the Ransom and Propitiation for All, and
Every Man, is to be understood of the Death of JESUS CHRIST, as he ^^risen and
ascended, and at his Fathers right, hand, filled in man's Nature with the holy
Ghost and Authority. Acts 17.31. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. So that his Death,
Resurrection and Ascension, with some fruit of all of them together, are herein
comprehended, and to be heeded. Acts 4.10, 11, 12. with Romans 14.9, 12.

1. He dyed to make Propitiation for the Sins of All men. 1 John 2.2. Hebr.
2.9. and to seal the new Testament for his called and chosen ones, and to purge
and cleanse them with the aplication of his blood. Hebr. 9, 14, 15. Ephesians.
5.25, 26.

2. He rose from the death justified, and to receive justification in the room,
and for All men, that he might have Power to bestow it. Romans 3.22, 24. and
5.18. and 4.25. And to bestow it on, and give new and living hope to his called
and chosen ones. Romans 3.22, 25, 26. and 5.1. 1 Pet. 1.3.

3. He Ascended, and sat down on the right hand of God, to be the Lord of
All. Acts 2.34, 36. and 10.36. Romans 14.9. And to be the Head, Husband,
High Priest, Prophet, and King of his called and chosen ones. Hebr. 3.1, 6. and
5.6. and 6. and 7. and 8.

4. He is filled with Spirit, to send forth to the sons of men, to the
rebellious, and to enlighten every man that comes into the world, that the
Lord God might dwell among them. Psalm. 68.18. Joh. 1.9. and 16.8. And to
witness Sonship, and lead his Called and Chosen ones into all truth. Romans
8.14.16. Joh. 16.13, 14.

And thus the Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of JESUS CHRIST, is.

1. To all men a ground -- of Instruction, to convince them of sin, and of
Christ his right of Lordship over them. Joh. 16.8, 11. Romans 14.9.12. -- And of
alurement to come in, and be reconciled to God by Christ. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. and
-- of hope, that in coming in, and yielding to his Call, they should have
life. Joh. 3.14, 15.

2. To his Called and Chosen ones, that believe on him, a ground for
Confirmation -- of their Faith, -- of their Justification, -- of their
Preservation in Grace, -- of their enjoyment of the Inheritance. Romans 5. and 8,
32. etc. of which is not here to be understood in in that affirmed, for all
men: But of the former, that hope set forth for All, according to that Christ
has done for all; and so I suppose all that will, may understand the sense.
That we may have the Question rightly stated, about the death of JESUS CHRIST,
in what sense he dyed for all men.

CHAP. VI.
An Assay for right stating the Question.

THIS Question being diversely stated by many, I think it meet to mention the
same briefly, that it may appear the better, how it is stated here.

1. Some say, JESUS CHRIS dyed for all his Elect, and only for those that are
elect to Sonne-ship, and eternal, Inheritance, and for no other; Not for all
m^n, every man, or any man, but the Elect. This is flat against, and openly
contradictory to the affirmation of the Scripture, and is that opposed in the
whole drift of this Tract.

2. Some say JESUS CHRIST dyed for all men alike, wrought redemption for them
all alike, with like love, and like intention, and for like ends. But as this
has no ground in the Scripture, so it is already shown confuted by it.

3. Some say, JESUS CHRIST dyed for every man, in case every man believe on
him, and for no man to Salvation, in case every man persist in unbeleife. But
this is no Scripture sense, and imperfect to make any sense to go on with at
all; for Christ has dyed, and given himself a Kansome to God for all men,
whether any man believe it or no; and has by his death so purchased all men of
God, that he is become their Lord, and shall judge them, though they should
persist in unbelief; neither shall they all so persist. Romans 14.9, 12. 2 Pet.
2.1. Isai. 53.11.

4. Some say, JESUS CHRIST dyed in some sort for all men, and ^o as all do,
receive some good thereby, -- he dyed for all as a Lord, but he did not die for
all as a Surety, to pay the price for, and become the Propitiation for the
sins of all. This sense answers not the Question, which is, not about what
good all do receive from or by the death of Christ, but what good he has
thereby wrought and procured for all men, that he might have pou^^ and freedom
to bestow according to his will, that is one with the Fathers; yet is the
Affirmative, in this expressed sense, true; though it be not the whole truth of
this business: But the negative not only denies the remainder of truth, but
denies, and unsaith again, even that which was affirmed; for if he did not pay
the price, and purchase them, how (according to the Gospel) is he become their
Lord? Romans 14.9. 2 Pet. 2.1. And if he be not the Propitiation for their
sins, how shall he judge them according to the Gospel, and by it? 2 Cor.
2.10. Romans 2.16. Joh. 12.47, 48. and if no price be paid, nor Propitiation made
for them, but that what ever reprievall patience or mercies they receive, they
will but aggravate their condemnation, no door of Repentance and life being
opened in truth for them, to which this patience and bounty might lead them:
what good do they then receive; or rather be they not necessarily more
miserable? Romans 2.4, 5.

5. Some say JESUS CHRIST so dyed for all, that his death is sufficient for
all, and applicable to all; but not so as he has indeed ransomed all men, and
become the propitiation for their sins: The Affirmative part of this sense is
very good, and will stand well: But the Negative both crosses plain
Testimonies of Scripture; and also denies and unsaith the Affirmative again;
for what sufficiency is there applicable from Christ, or by his Servants, for
or to any man, of any thing that Christ has not first perfectly wrought, and
received in himself, that he might according to the Gospel, bestow it on them,
Psalm. 68.18.19, 20.

6. Some say JESUS CHRIST dyed for all men, in respect of the kind or general
lump of Mankind considered; because he took the Nature of all mankind, and so
dyed for all; But that he did not dye for all in respect of the Individualls:
not for every particular man: But here is a denying in truth of what was
equivocally granted; nor is this according to Scripture sense, but very cross
to it, in the negative. Hebr. 2.9.

7. Some say JESUS CHRIST dyed for all men, that they might be saved, and for
the Elect, that they should undoubtedly be saved: This sense I conceive good
and true, but I suppose, not full enough to express all that is in his death
for All men^ you this sense grants.

1. That that was the very mind, will, and intention of Christ and God, that
Christ should even so die for All, that they might be saved, Joh. 3.17. and
that for that end he came and dyed, and rose. Luke 9.56. 1 Timothy 1.15.

2. That his death was sufficient for this very end. 1 Timothy 2.4.6.

3. That the death, and so the Ransom of Christ was effectual with his
Father, for the end for which it was given. Matthew. 3.17. Hebr. 10.

4. That he has received of the Father, fullness of authority, and spirit to
make this grace known to them, with such tenders of it, that they might he
saved Psalm. 68.18.

5. That he will extend light at some-time, in some means or other, so far
to every one, that whosoever perish, their destruction will be of themselves.
Ioh. 1.4, 5.9. Hos. 13.9.

All this is necessarily intimated in this sense, though through some want of
distinguishing between the Redemption that i^ wrought by Christ in himself,
through effusion of blood, and that he works by his Spirit in men by
application of his blood, the sense appears not full enough in expression.

8. Some say that CHRIST, by shedding his Blood, redeemed the World of Mankind:
satisfied Gods Justice, Bishop Davenant, Animadversions on a Treatise,
entitled, GOD's LOVE to Mankind. page 298.
and obtained a way of Salvation for every Man, (and then add,) but GOD never
intended that the outward, Act, should presently put every man in Possession of
Pardon, or of a state of Justification and Salvation: But the way which he
opens for every one of us to partake of the fruit of our Redemption, and of
his plenary satisfaction; is, by Repentance and Faith to come and lay hold of
the Redeemer.

According as I understand, the Question is here in the first Affirmation
rightly Stated: The sense true and full; and by the addition: The distinction
made between the Salvation that was wrought by CHRIST, in his own body with
GOD for men, and that Salvation, which in application of the former, he
works by his Spirit in men, whereby Repentance and Faith is effected. Acts
5.31, 32. and a way and possibility of that also, for every man is at first
affirmed in this Affirmation, agreeing with the common Salvation before
mentioned.

So that JESUS CHRIST has so dyed, and given himself, a Ransom to GOD for all
men, and is become the Propitiation for their sins: That in and by himself,
he has so Redeemed and saved all men, That they are all given into his
dispose, and he will raise them all out of the Death he dyed for them, and set
them alive before him, that they shall acknowledge him LORD, and come before
his Judgment seat. Romans 14.9, 12. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. Phil. 2.8, 11. 2 Cor.
5.19.10.

And he is also so filled with Spirit for them, to make it so known, and with
such tenderness to them, that they might be saved; in which he will he found
Faithful, so as by him All are made saveable. Psalm, 68 18. Joh. 1.4, 5, 9.
Isai. 45.21.22.

And thus the Question stated, if it be opened and answered in every particular
in it, it will more fully appear right and true.

CHAP. VII.
The openinng of the Question answered by Scripture.

QVESTION I.WHy did God send his Son? and why did JESUS CHRIST come into the
World?

SCRIPTVRE. To be the Savior of the World, 1 John 4.14. That the World through
him might be saved. Joh. 3.17. I came to save the world. Joh. 12.47. My flesh,
which I will give for the life of the World. Joh. 6.51.

QUEST. II.What World is that Christ dyed, and rose, for that they might be
saved?

SCRIPTURE. All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made
that was made; In him was life, and the life was the light of men. Joh.
1.3.4.7. One Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a ransom for all. 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. It Is the world of mankind.

QUEST. III.What manner of men did Christ come and dye so for?

SCRIPTURE. For the unjust. 1 Pet. 3.18. for the imgodly, Rem. 5.6.

QUEST. IV.For how many such sinners has he dyed?

SCRIPTURE. Death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Romans 5.12. We
thus judge, that if One dyed for all, then were all dead, And that be dyed for
all. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. He gave himself a Ransom for all men. ^ Tim. 2.6.

QUEST. V.In what mind and heart did he so dye for all men?

SCRIPTURE. God so loved the World, that he gave his only beg^tten Son. Joh.
3.16. That he, by the grace of God, should taste death for every man. Hebr. 2.9.

QUEST. VI.To what end did CHRIST so come and dye, and offer up himself to GOD
for men?

SCRIPTURE. To put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. Hebr. 9.26. the
sinno of the world. Joh. 1.29. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, That Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15.

QUEST. VII.What has Christ done, and what is he become hereby for men?

SCRIP. He has slain the enmity. Ephesians. 2.16. abolished death, and brought
life and immortallity to it through the Gospel. 2 Timothy 1.10. being the
Propitiation for the sins of the whole world. 1 John 2.2. full of grace and
truth. Joh. 1.14. having received gifts for men; yea, the rebellious, that the
Lord God might dwell among them. Psalm. 68.18. able also to save them to the
uttermost, all that come unto God by him. Heb. 7.25.

QUEST. VIII.But is there any liberty or right for every man to come to him?

SCRIP. Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice is to the sons of men; Oh ye
simple, understand wisdom, and ye fools, be of an understanding beart, etc.
Prove. 8.4, 5, 6. La^k unto me, and be you saved, all the ends of the earth.
Isai. 45.22.

QUEST. IX.What profit in this Call, seeing they can neither of themselves
understand, nor will any spiritual good.

SCRIPTURE. Turn you at my reproof; behold I will power out my Spirit unto
you, I will make known my words to you. Prove. 1.23.

QUEST. X.What hope is there for them, if they do fubmit to his Call, and so
by his Spirit, be drawn in to him to believe?

SCRIPTURE. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name,
whoseever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. Acts 10.43. him
that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out, he that believes on me, has
everlasting life. Joh. 6.37, 47. being made perfect, he became the Author of
eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. Hebr. 5.9. in believing on him.
Joh. 3.14, 15, 16, 18.

QUEST. XI.May this news be plainly declared to all men?

SCRIPTURE. Go ye therefore and teach all nations. Matthew. 28.20. Go ye into
all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. Mar. 16.15.

QVESTION XII.To what end will God and Christ have this Gospel declared, and
testified to, and among all men?

SCRIPTVRE. That all men through him might believe. Joh. 1.7. And he that
believes and is Baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not, shall be
damned. Mar. 16.16. Joh. 3.18.36.

So that by Scripture it plainly appears that Jesus Christ has so dyed for
every man, that he has redeemed all Mankind, and satisfied God's Justice, and
is become the Propitiation for the sins of all men, and has made them
saveable, and has opened the door, that they might be saved; and is so
faithful and able, and uses such means, that whosoever perishes, it will be
through their own fault: And now the sense so explained, and Question stated, I
will proceed to more enlarged proof.

CHAP. VIII.
An entrance to the more enlarged proof of the Proposition.

FOr the enlarging the proof of the Proposition (first set down,) In the sense
in the five first Considerations explica^ed; and according to the Question
stated in the latter end of the sixth Chapter, and opened and answered in the
seventh Chapter; I shall take this course, keeping the bounds before hinted.

1. By considering CHRIST as the common Person in the room of all Mankind, in
what he did on earth, of whom the First was a figure.

2. By considering the joint mentioning of Greation and Bedamption by Christ.

3. By considering the constancy of the Scripture in changing the Person, when
having spoken of that which is general, it mentions any special.

4. By considering the places themselves, in the force of the words, the scope
and circumstances of the place whence the Proposit on is affirmed.

5. By considering like places of Scripture, speaking of like things in like
manner.

6. By answering the most usual and strongest Objections frumed against it.

7. By adding some Arguments to satisfy such as must have reason satisfied.

1. Of the consideration of Jesus Christ, as the common, and public Person,
JESUS CHRIST, in this great Work of the Redemption of Mankind, is set forth in
the Scripture, as a public Person, in the room and stead of all Mankind, as
the first; Adam was, whence the first. Adam is affirmed to be the figure or
Type of Christ: Romans 5.44. and so as the one is called the the first Adam, and
the other is called the last Adam; The one the First man, the other the Second
man. 1 Cor. 15.45, 47. for our better understanding whereof, there are three
things to be premised, before we confider the Gomparison:

PREMISE I.
That the business we are here to view and deal about, is the work of
Redemption of mankind, wrought by Jesus Christ; and so of those Works of God,
that are from God, outward and toward his Creatures, and so not of that or
those works of God which are in himself; and so only in Christ, and for
Christ; as his wonderful and secret Counsels in the Election of Christ Man;
to Union of Person with the Son of God; and so to Sonne-ship and aeternall
inheritance; And in that Election, electing some to Sonneship and Inheritance
in and with him: And his praeterition and appointment of others to be servants
to this his Son, and those chosen in him; for in respect hereof, Christ was
before Adam, and all other Creatures; yea, so as Adam himself, and all things
were made by him and for him. Col. 1.15, 16, 17. Rom 11.36. 1 Pet. 1.20. Prove.
8.22, 27. Ioh. 1.1, 2, 3. Where as in the business we are now about. It is
expressly said, That was not first which is spiritual, but that which is
natural, and afterward that which is spiritual; And Christ is called the
last Adam, the Second man. 1 Cor. 15.45 47. and Adam is called the First Adam,
The First man, and the figure of him that was to come. Romans 5.14.

PREMISE II.
That however Christ was figured by Adam in respect of the common place he
stood in, The publikenes and account of that, in that public place done by
him, and therefficacy and fruit thereof for and to all in whose place he stood:
And the prevailing power thereof in all that come to have being from him; yet
there is great difference between these two Adams, and their work. The first
man was made a living soul, who might have stood, and so with him, all
naturally theseending from him; but no power, if fallen, to rise and live
again; The last Adam was made a quickening Spirit, so as he might be able not
only to rise from the death himself, but to quicken and raise those fallen and
dead; The first man of the earth, made of the dust, and by his fall, became
more earthy, returning to dust again, weak and mortal; The Second Man, the
LORD from heaven, who though for mankind dying, yet could not be holden of
death, and being risen, can die no more, but lives ever. 1 Cor. 15.45, 48.
with Gene. 2.7. and 3.19. and Acts. 2.24. Revel. 1.18. The work of the First
Adam should have been to have continved in that integrity and righteousness,
and likeness of God, in which God had made him, and to have kept himself, and
all his Posterity, that Sin and death might not have entered on them: But he
did turn aside, and so fell, and lost himself and all his Posterity, and so
sin and death entered, and his work is called disobedience. Gene. 2.17. and
3.1, 7. Eccles. 7.29. Rom, 5.12, 19. The work of the Second Adam, was to take
away sin, and abolish death, and destroy the work of the Devil, and so
work redemption for mankind, that he might bring them all out of death, and
set them alive before him; and that he may confer aeternall life on such as
believe on him, in the day of grace; And this work, fit for this end, he has
perfectly done, so that in him is no sin, and his work is called Obedience.
1 John 3.5, 8. Hebr. 9.26.2 Tim. 1.10. Romans 3.22, 24. and 5.18, 19. And these,
and suchlike differences and dissimilitudes the Scripture affirms.

PREMISE III.
3. In that and such respects, as the first Adam was a figure and Type of
CHRIST; Yet this is also so to be understood, even in those things, whereof
he was a Figure and Type, according to other Figures and Types mentioned in
the Law, having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the
things themselves. Hebr. 10.1. So that there is an abundance in Christ; beyond
that which appears in the Type, Shadow or Figure; so that therein Christ
comes not short, but goes beyond the figure, in that wherein it figured him:
So that the Redemption and restoration wrought in and by himself, in his own
body for men, is not only as full and large, as the fall by Adam, in and of
himself, but much more full and large: For though, by one offense in him, sin
entered, yet the Pardon procured by Christ, and in his hands to bestow; is of
many offenses to justification of life. Romans 5.16. Besides the Power of his
grace in such as through the receipt of it, come into Christ, is much more
abundant and prevailing, and leads to a better life, then the Power of the
corruption in that one offense, in those that naturally come of Adam, or the
life that by the power of death it overthrowes. Romans 5.17.19, 21. Yea, not
only does this restoration by Christ, extend it self to the resurrection and
alive making of Adam, and all that fell, and became dead through the First
Adam. 1. Cor. 15.21, 22. And to the aeternall life of all that in the day of
grace believe on him. Romans 3.26. and 5.21. and to a restoration of the whole
creation or Creatures that were blemished and weakened through the fall. Romans
8.20, 21. Col: 1.20. 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. But the benefit extends to such, as
neither hurt Adam, nor were hurt with any overthrow by or with him. 1 Pet.
1.12. Ephesians. 2.9, 10. 1 Timothy 3.16. Hebr. 12.22. yea, unexpressibly does Christ
exceed his Figure: And these Premises considered, let the comparison it self,
wherein Christ is set forth a Public Person, be viewed, And that,

First in the state and condition of the place he stood in, The first Adam
stood in a public place, not singly for himself alone, but he was in the
room and place of all Mankind, not of some, as only for those elected to
Sonneship, nor of some others, as for those appointed to be servants, but for
all Mankind; not only as, and because they were in his loins, for so they
were also after his fall, and loss therein of the honor and virtue of that
public place, But by virtue of the account and work of God, and agreement and
Covenant between God and Adam: so at what God did to and for him, he did it to
and for all mankind; So as in him God made all righteous, when he made him so,
and blessed all, when he blessed him, so as all were there in him once righteous
and blessed. Eccles. 7.39. Genesis 1.27, 28. And he was then to look to his
abiding with God, and keeping the charge given him, for and in the behalf of
all mankind (who indeed were by Propagatioo to come of him,) and so he is
called, The man, as he that alone by and in himself represented all men, and
stood or fell for all men: He, The first Adam, The first man, The Man, and so
the public one, in the room of all, 1 Cor. 15.45.47. Genes. 2.15.16. and
3.22. Romans 5.12, 18, 19. a Figure of him that was to come, even CHRIST.

The Second Adam also stood in a public place, not for mimself, but for all
mankind, not only for some Elect and Chosen, but for all mankind, for recovery
(not of Election, or appointment to service, for they were never in Adams
keeping, nor lost by him, but) of the privileges of sons and servants, and
bringing out of that death, into which all were fallen: He stood in the room
of all, else in that respect, he had been short of his figure; whereas God did
more honor to Christ then to Adam: for though he made Adam, a public Person,
to stand in the room of all mankind, to keep them in that righteousness God
had made them, and so far honored Adam; yet he glorified his Son, in
making him a public Person, by death to restore all men lost by the first
Adam; Hebr. 2.9. And so Christ took flesh subjected to mortallity, became
under Law, and bare the sin of mankind, and underwent the curse, undertaking
by Sacrifice of himself, to sarisfy Gods Justice, and make such peace with him,
as to overthrow death and Devil, and present himself (...) live and just
before his Father; and this for and in the room of all mankind (who indeed are
given him, and shall be brought to him. Romans 14.9. Phil. 2.8, 11.) and so he is
also called the last Adam, The Second man, The man, as he that alone in and by
himself came and undertook and suffered, and rose and wrought this Redemption,
and Righteousness with God for, and in the behalf of all men, being indeed
the public Person. 1 Cor. 15.45.47. 1 Timothy 2.5. Romans 5. and in this his publik
place, not betrusted with fewer then the first Adam.

Secondly, in the motion, acting, and performance of the business put on them,
and accepted by them to perform; and so the business undermaken by the first
Adam, in that public place, was a public business; The business of all
mankind, and concerning them all, and so though without their personal
knowledge, will, motion or Act. Yet by virtue of the place Adam stood in, and
by virtue of the account of God, it was the disobedience and sin of all, when
he disobeyed and sinned, and deserved death, being in the room of all. Romans
5.12, 18, and so the business undertaken by the second Adam here on earth, in
his public place, was a public business, the busiof all mankind, and
concerned them all, and though without their personal knowledge, will, motion
or act, yet by virtue of the place he stood in, and by virtue of the account
of God, it was in Christ, and for Christ with God, the Death and Resurrection,
the Sacrifice and Satisfaction, and so the Redemption of all, when he finished
his obedience in dying, and Rising, and offering himself a Sacrifice, and
making Satisfaction, being in the room of all: nor is he inferior, but
superior to his Figure. ^ Cor. 5.14. Romans 3.24. and 5.18. The business thus
far in either, being yet but between God and themselves for mankind, in the
first or Second Man.

Thirdly, the effect and fruit of this public business, in this public
place, was also public, and concerned all mankind. The effect and fruit of the
disobedience of the first Adam, overthrew all mankind, so as in and by him they
were all deprived of that life and righteousness they had in him, and all
fallen under sin and death, and that (though secretly and invisibly, and in
some sort inexpressibly, yet) so virtually, verily, and indeed, that all might
be truly said to have sinned, and death to be passed on them, and through that
one offense, judgment to have come on all to condemnation. Romans 3.23. and
5.12.18. though this did not yet make them to partake of, and feel this
misery, which comes by coming to partake of the humane namre, though having a
being from the first Adam by propagation, yet this so opened the sluice or door
of this misery, that it laid such a necessity and unavoidable force on the
Nature of mankind, that no one can shift it, but as soon as they do through
propagation, come to have any being and life from the first Adam, they do
partake of this misery. J^h. 14.4. and 15.14. Psalm. 51.5. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3.
Romans 5.19. Even so the effect and fruit of the Obedience of the Second Adam,
has recovered and restored all mankind in him, so as in him and by him, in
that done and wrought in his own body, they are all again Redeemed and
restored, and made Righteous: yea so, as all that was contrary to them, is
taken out of the way, wrath appeased, Justice satisfied, Death abolished, and
Life obtained: And that (though secretly and invisibly, and in some sort
inexpressibly, yet) so vntually, verily, and indeed, That it might be truly
said, as things are in Christ, who was in the room of all (that as in the
former respect, all have sinned and come short of the glory of God; so in this
latter respect) being justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption
that is in Christ Jesus. Romans 3.24. The Righteousness of God, which is by the
Faith of Jesus Christ unto all. verse. 22. By the righteousness of one, the
free gift came upon all men to justification of life. Romans 5.18. Though this
yet does not make any to partake of, and enjoy and feel the benefit and
blessedness of the same, which comes only by coming through a spiritual
application and operation, to partake of the divine Nature in Christ, in a new
and spiritual birth, that gives a being in, and makes one in him. Joh.
3.3.5. Romans 3.22, 25, 26. yet has this done in CHRIST for men, and it is
acceptance with the Father, so opened the door to life, and put such a force
in this grace, discovered by the Gospel; that whoever, through the spiritual
discovery and application thereof, comes so to believe, as to have a being in
Christ, and to have him, and be one in him, he does therein and thereby
undoubtedly partake of the benefit and blessing of that done in and by Christ,
and so of eternal life. Joh. 3.36. 1 John 5.10, 11, 12. so that in this
respect also, Christ is no whit inferior to his Figure.

Fourthly, in respect of the virtue, power, and operation of this public
business, where it takes hold in all, or any that come to the participation of
the same, no one excepted: When any come by propagation to have a being from
Adam, they do necessarily, and naturally in that very participation of his
nature, and by virtue of his being in the room of all when he sinned and fell,
and by virtue of Gods account of his sin, as the sin of all, partake at
once in themselves, and all their powers, -- of the guiltiness of that first
and great offense, -- and of the corrupt, sinful, poisonous and perverse
disposition and inclination, prone to all evil, and averse to God and all
goodness, which entered the nature of man upon the fall, -- and of that
Subjection to weakness and mortallity then imposed on Adam: And this evil,
whereof they partake from the first Adam, does pollute all their Powers, and
work in their members, to bring forth fruit unto death, and so subjects them
to misery and death more and more. Romans 5.14, 15, 19.21. and 7.5. So when any
come by a spiritvall birth, to have a being in Christ, and so receive this
grace of the Atonement made in him; then, and in that very participation of
that grace, and the divine nature of him, by virtue of that he has done in the
room of all, and by virtue of Gods account thereof; he now freely imputing it
to them, the virtue and power of the Spirit of life that is in Christ, does so
enter into their hearts, and apply his blood therein, that at once they partake
of his Justification, and righteousness, and of his spiritual mind and
disposition, and of that aeternall and divine life, that is in him in their
spirits, and this rich grace, whereof they partake in and from Christ, does
work so mightily in them, that it quickens them, sweetning them with peace,
and joy, and hope, and purifieth, and renews them to his likeness, and
works forth in fruits of righteousness unto life. Romans 3.23, 25, 26. and
4.25, 26. and 5.1, 2, 5, 11, 17, 19, 21. and 8.1, 2. 2 Cor. 3.3.17, 18. and
this superabounding, and being of greater power and efficacy then the former.

And yet still does CHRIST exceed and go beyond his Figure much.

1. In that all be undertook, was freely undertaken, and all his obedience in
dying for the sins of men, and rising justified for them, was altogether for
them; he neither having sin to suffer for, or be justified from, nor being
engaged to us by any natural and necessary bond, as the First Adam was, who
had our righteousness and lives in keeping, and us in his loins; and his
business was for himself, as well as us, so that here appears glorious
abounding grace to sinners. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. 1 Pet. 2.24. and 3.18. Romans 5.20.

2. In that whereas the first Adam by fall, brings none to partake of death in
themselves, but those that come to have being from him, and so partake of his
sin: Such is the power of the recovery wrought by Christ for all, and the
overthrow he has given death: that all shall be made alive thereby, and
brought before him to acknowledge him Lord, even those that refuse to be
brought to it, in the day of grace, that so they might be made in him, and
partake of the blessing, shall one day be made alive, and brought before him,
and rightly judged by him for that refusal. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. Joh. 12.32. Romans
14.9, 12.

3. In that whereas the first Adam, in his public place, stood and fell for
all alike, and threw thereby all alike into sin and death: such is the
abounding grace of CHRIST, that by vertne of that done in his public place,
he has not only wrought a general recovery for all, and made them saveable,
so as he will make them alive, to acknowledge him LORD: But for all his Called
and Chosen, that in the day of grace are prevailed with, to acknowledge him
Lord, and come into him, through his Spirit, he by virtue of the same blood of
his that was shed for all, is for them a High Priest, Prophet, and King, at his
Fathers right hand, in a more special manner, and for more special favors,
then for the residue of the sons of men, as has been shown before; and here
appears the glory of his rich grace to his chosen ones. Hebr. 9.14, 15. and 8.
and 7 etc.

Now let the Apostles inferrences, and conclusions in this comparison be
heeded, Romans 5.18. As by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men (that
is virtually, as is before shown; and here are all men without exception, as
Verse. 12.) So by the righteousness of One, the free Gift came upon all men,
etc. (that is virtually, as before shown, and here are all men without
exception, as Romans 3.24.) Again, Romans 5.19. As by one man's dis^bedience, many
were made sinners, (that is also vertually, without exception) who are many
indeed, but all that having being from him, are therethrough become dead, so as
death works in them, as is before shown; and these are very many also:
Whence the word many, that may bear both the senses, is here used, and not the
word All, which could bear but one sense,) so by the Obedience of One, shall
many be made righteous (virtually all, which are many; but by In joyment only,
so many as have being in him, and that by that very being, and these are many
also,) And because of this, as also in another rospect now to be named there is
a change of another word in this latter sentence, whereas only, that sense is,
of being made virtually righteous, or sinners in first or second A^am; not
only the word, All men is used, but this expression; judgment came on all men,
and the gift came on ^ll verse. 18. Here, where a farther sense is in the death
and sinfulness spoken of, and in the life and righteousness: though the Word
(were made) is kept still in respect of sin, because all that lived and had
being from Adam, were already so sinners; yet in respect of righteousness, the
word is changed to (shall be made Righteous) because all that lived and had
being from Adam, were not newborn, and so had not an actual being in Christ,
and the like change of words may be discerned, in the mention of a virtuall
justification of men in Christ, in that actual of CHRIST for men, and an
actual justification of men through CHRIST. Romans 3^30, 24, 25, 26. And another
^^sp^ of such change of words may be, because both that which is natural is
first And of Gods O^de^, that all shall first hear the likeness or Image of
the earthly Adam. 1 Cor. 15.46. and 48. and so the like change of words on the
same grounds, it there found, where it is said in one verse, since by man came
death, by man (...) also the ^^s^erection from the dead: And in the (...)
verse: For as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. 1
Cor. 15.21, ^2. And through this whole discourse is appeanes. That what the
Scripture affirms of CHRIST, being a Public Person, and of his likeness to
the first Adam, in the public place, does fully testify as much, at 1 Timothy
2.6. and Hebr. 2.9. affirm. And so justifyeth the Proposition.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Consideration of the joint mentioning of Creation and Redemption by
CHRIST.

IN the mentioning Creation with Redemption, there are two things very
observable, that do also prove the Proposition.

First, the mind and good will of CHRIST to mankind, that appears in that
manner of joint mentioning them; wherein appears.

1. His great love and good will to mankind, who were at first made by him, not
only righteous, but in that Nature, and likeness in Purity also, which
himself was to take, And though Adam, had lost himself and all mankind, and all
the righteousness given, and nothing left, but the very nature and likeness
of his own Creation, and that defiled also, and subjected to misery and death,
in which it must have perished, which might have provoked him to anger; yet he
beholding mankind in this hateful and lost estate, did so love him, that his
pity and compassion did yearne toward him, and would not suffer him to be
lost, or perish in this death and misery, without help: nor to be deprived of
all the Creatures made for him, but would work a Redemption and recovery for
him what ever it cost him: And thus in the very beginning of the declaration of
the Gospel, and that life which was with God in Christ for men, and now
manifested to men, in sending forth his Soune in good will to dye for our
sins, and having raised him for our Justification, and filled him with life,
1 John 11.2. and 5.11, 12. Romans 5.25. Heb. 2.9. Ioh. 1.1, 2. he puts in this at
the very beginning, All things were made hy him, and without him was not any
thing made that was made, and then he joins herewith, in him was life, and the
life was the light of men. Joh. 1.3, 4. And what can be less seen or
acknowledged in this manner of Connection, then 1. That he made all Creatures
for man, and man also, so he loved man above all Creatures; yea, though man was
fallen, yet for the love he bare him, be would work a Redemption, and procure
life, and it is in him for mankind. 2. That it is for men, that were made by
him; men, as men his Creatures, not a part only, but the whole. Life is in him
for all men made by him, whence All men, and Every man is expressed. verse. 7.9.
and the World, verse. 10, 11.

2. Such is his love to mankind, created by him, that for his sake he has
restored, and preserves for men's use the residue of Creatures that were made
for man, and has prepared a liberty for the Creation to return to its first
purity. Psalm. 8. Romans 8.20. Hebr. 2.6.9. When the Devil, that without a
Temptor, of his own will forsook God, and became enemy to him, had by
Temptation overthrown mankind, and got them in captivity for his slaves,
mankind then being under sin, and wrath, and curse, so as the very truth and
justice of the God of Mercy and Peace stood against mankind, and pressed for his
overthrow in execution of the Curse, the Earth, with all the Creatures that
were made to serve Mankind, were a^forfeited and dissolved, so as their purity
and service of man was departed: and all turned in enmity against mankind, that
was turnedenemy to God: The Angels of heaven having now no liberty or will to
do any service for mankind, and Sath an ruling and carrying them with him,
according to his will; Then was all out of Order before God, and went cross to
his mind, so as he could not rejoice in his own works that he had created and
made: But behold so great the love of God and CHRIST to mankind, That be would
reconcile mankind in his Son; And make a Peace for them in and by the blood
of his Son. And having made that Peace then by his Son, that made it to
reconcile all things to himself. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. Joh. 3.17. Psalm. 85.10. and
75.3. Romans 14.14. Mat. 28.20. Joh. 1.7. and 3.16. Hebr. 12.22. Mat. 18.10. In
opening the way of life for mankind, setting him in such a state of favor
again, That Mercy and Truth, Righteousness and Peace might agree in one for
the salvation of Mankind, -- That the oreatures might again be restored,
preserved, and sanctified for the use of men, -- and that the Gospel and good
tidings of this grace of God might be declared to Mankind, that they might
through him believe; And that in believing, they might have everlasting life:
and that such at through his grace believe, might be in union and fellowship
with him, and each other, and the holy Angels, -- And that the Angels may
minister to them: These being his Church, of whom Christ is the Head, who have
the specialty in his love, -- And that the Heaven and Earth may be made new for
these, that they may therein with Him enjoy the inheritance, -- and that Satan
may be wholly overthrown, and he, and all that will do his will, and be of
his seed, may be turned into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone.
Ephesians. 4.7.16. 1 Timothy 4.10. Isai. 65.17, 18. Revel. 20.10.14, 15. Jud. 15. And
then is all right before God, well-pleasing in his view, and as he would have
i^, who will rejoice in his works. Revel. 21.5. and all this (in love to
mankind, created by him,) has Jesus Christ undertaken to ^^e; that whosoever
(of Mankind) believes on him, may enjoy the benefit of it: And is not all this
affirmed in the Gospel, where the Creation and Redemption are mentioned
together. Col. 1.16.20. where also the same general words, of All things, are
used in mentioning Creation. verse. 16. Reconciliation, verse. 20. and
Preservation. verse 17. And what less now does all this iuferre, then thus
much, That all Creatures could not content him while Mankind was in a
Remediless Condition; That all the Mercy showed to Creatures, is for the love
he bears to mankind; That the Redemption and Peace wrought by Him for
Mankind, is as large as his Creation and Preservation of mankind:

That he is able, and stands ready to Call, and in their submission to his
Call, to bring them in to God; and what great and unspeakable love to mankind
is this.

3. This his love to mankind, is yet further confirmed by this, that in such
joint mentioning of Creation and Redemption, he has set a stamp or seal, and
written a Testimony for mankind to read -- of a Ransom given, and Redemption
wrought for mankind, in that the earth dissolved by sin, is preserved: and
the continual streams of wrath deserved, are kept off; Christ bearing up the
Pillars of the Earth. Psalm. 75.2, 3. -- of a readiness to do them good in
communicating grace to them. Acts. 14.17. -- of Power to accomplish salvation
in and upon them. Isa. 50.2, 3. -- c. of his nigh coming to them, in those
works to lead them to repentance. Romans 2.4. All which set forth the love of
God to mankind. 1 Tit. 3.4. Psalm. 19.

Secondly: That Gods being the Creator of man, and man's being the Creature of
God, is used as an Argument, to induce to faith, to stir up faith, and to
strengthen confidence in God, in times of distress, and in Prayer, and in holy
wa^king. Job. 10. Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me, etc. verse 8.13.
and Chapter 14, 15. Thou will have a desire to the work of thy hands, so Psalm.
1.39.16, 17. And commit the keeping of your souls to him, as to a faithful
Creator. 1 Pet. 4.19. And it is coupled with Redemption in the ground of
Confidence: Isai. 43.1. Now mankind having sinned and fallen (by the Devils
Temptation, who though fallen, are and were the Creatures of God,) If God had
not respected mankind, as his Creature, more then the Angels that fell; if his
Son had not taken the nature of mankind, and therein suffered and made
satisfaction for the sin of mankind: and so wrought a Redemption for mankind,
created by him, that he might save mankind: And this as large as all mankind
created by him; what force or strength could be in this Argument, grounded upon
his very Creation and workmanship. To which also might be added, That Gods
Creation of all men by Christ, of which it were Athisme to doubt, sure
Paganism at least, is set out nothing nie so often in the Scripture, in those
general words, All men, Every man, The world, The whole world; as the death of
Christ, as the Runsom and Propitiation, to be the Savior of All men, (...):
Let any diligent Reader consider it.

CHAP. X.
Of the Consideration of the constancy of the Scripture, in changing the
Person, when having mentioned the general, it mentions the special.

AS the Scripture in mentioning only that Redemption wrought by Christ in his
own body with God for men, and the common salvation coming to men thereby:
Does ever, when it propounds it to bring men to believe, mention it in the
third Person generally. And when it does mention those high and peculiar
privileges belonging to his chosen ones, does never propound them in such
general terms: And when it closes both together in one sentence or
expression, it uses such a word as may be applied to both senses, or either of
them: as, Many; and not such a word as cannot be rightly applied to the
special; as, All men, The World, etc. nor such a word as straitens the
general sense: as, but many, only many, etc. so likewise we shall find, that
when the Scripture speaks of the one and the other near together, however it
express the one in the third Person generally, yet in mentioning the other, it
changes the Person, and speaks also ordinarily, applicatively: as to
instance.

2. Cor. 5.19, 20, 21. In the 19. verse, speaking of the reconciliation God
has wrought for men in Christ, he affirms it for the world: and in the 20.
verse, beseeches men to be reconciled, on that ground, as himself and others
were, verse 18. but speaking of the privileges by the death of Christ to those
who in spiritual application thereof, have believed, and so received Christ,
the righteousness of God, and Gods righteousness in him, he changes the
Person, and says, verse 21. he made him to be sin for as, who knew no sin,
that we (he says not The World, but we that in believing are righteous in
and before him) might be made the righteousness of God in him: even have all
Gods Righteousness to him manifested in and upon us. This is the hope of his
called and chosen:

Gal. 4.4, 5. Speaking of that which God has done for all, he says, God sent
forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Low, to redeem them that were
under the Law, (as all were. Romans 3.19.) but mentioning the special
Privileges of Adoption, he changes the Person, and says; That we might
receive the Adoption of sons; not only, The Spirit of Adoption, as in
believing at first, but all the privileges of Adoption. Joh. 1.12.

1 Pet. 3.18. Speaking of what Christ has done for all men, he says, he
suffered the Just for the Unjust: But mentioning what he does by his Spirit in
Believers, he changes the Person, and says, That he might bring us to God.

1 John 2.1, 2. Speaking of the peculiar privileges of Believers, he says,
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, JESUS CHRIST the
Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our sins: Such the Privilege of
those that believe in Christ, that if overtaken with sin, they may seek and
find pardon for themselves, and seek and look to receive all the Privileges
promised them: having so great an Advocate with the Father, so beloved of him,
so faithful to them, who is also the Propitiation for their sins: Wherein his
love was first testified to them, and by virtue of which blood, he now
Advocates at Gods right hand for them, as is before shown: But having mentioned
that which appertains to all men, he adds a change of the Person, and
says, And not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world;
That so Believers may know (though others sin) yet what Gospel to hold forth
to them; and how to pray for them also: And like distinctions and change of
Persons, or restrictions suitable to such a change, as Joh. 3.16, 17, 18. are
usual in Scripture, wherein we may easily see the truth of that affirmed, done
by Christ for all, and of that he has to do for All, that they might be
saved, to be indeed a truth (not depending for its truth on any ones believing,
but) verily true, whether they believe it or no, and therefore true, that they
might believe, and so true, that they shall one day confess it to be true,
when yet they may be denied by him, for that denying to believe, when he told
them. Phil. ^.10, 11. 2 Timothy 2.13. Which wisdom of the Spirit, speaking in
the Scripture, if observed, may help us to see the agreement of one place with
another, that through rashness, some think unlike, and also how the word may
be divided aright, when that which Scripture affirms for all, is so set
before them, and that which the Scripture appropriateth to Believers, be
applied to them, and it also proves the Proposition.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Consideration of. 1 Timothy 2.6.

FOr proof of the appearing sense of the words, and of the Proposition, three
things are here to be viewed; First the force of the words; Secondly the
Circumstances; Thirdly the scope of the Place.

First, for the sense of the word it self, All; it appears to be meant of
Adam, and all that come by propagation of him; because the opposition is
between God and men, and only one man, The man Jesus Christ between, who gave
himself a Ransom for all ( men, verse. 5.) so all were created by him, and
through his propitiation, are preserved by him, which also is given as the
ground, proving Reconciliation wrought by him, and life in him for all men, and
that hoe enlighteneth every one of them. Ioh. 1.1, 4, 5, 9. Psalm. 75.13. Col.
1.16, 20. Whence it is affirmed, All nations shall come and worship before him,
Psalm. 86.9. Yea, even those that have been enemies to him and his, and shall be
judged by him. Rev. 3.9. Isai. 45.23. And this grounded on his obedience to the
death of the Cross. Phil. 2.7, 11. Romans 14.9, 12. So that this man Christ
between God, and those men created by him, and he expressly said, to have given
himself a Ransom for All; And all that have being from Adam, and so his
nature being men: And here no exception of any one man, but the Man Jesus
Christ, who is God-Man: That gave himself a Ransom for All men, The force of
the word bears it to the largest sense, All Men.

And yet to open the sense a little more fully, consider the use of the word.

1. The word men is used in Scripture for Adam, and all his son, Hebr. 9.27.
and they are called men most frequently, in respect of the mature and being of
man, which they have from Adam. Psalm. 4.2. Prove. 8.4. though sometime in
opposition to God. Psalm. 90.20. Isa. 31.3.

First, Now very often, and in the fullest and most common sense, men, that are
but men, and neither regenerated to God, nor wholly reprobated, and given up to
Satan, are called men, Job 11.11, 12. Psalm. 12.1. and 4.2. and 53.2.

Secondly, And believers, that are regenerate, are also called men, and that
even because they are so. Acts 1.11. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. And they are also so
called, in respect of some weaknesses, and passions. Acts 14, 15. and sometime
in respect of some carnal walkings. 1 Cor. 3.3. But yet Believers are in
Scripture called something more, and better then men, even the Sons of God.
Joh. 1.12. 1 John 3.1. and Saints. 1 Cor. 1.1. and Brethren, and faithful in
Christ. Ephesians. 1.1. yea, Christians. Acts 11.26.

Some there are, who have imprisoned the truth in turighteousnesse, and hardened
their hearts against the ^eanes God used for their good, till they be given
over of God. Romans 1.19, 24. and 2.4, 5. Prove. 1.23, 36. And these be also
called men. Rev. 16.9. but yet these are in Scripture called also, something
other, and worse then men, as Reprobates. Jere. 6.28, 30. the seed of the
Serpent. Genes. 3.15. The Children of Beliall, Deur. 13.13. and of the Devil.
Joh. 8.44. 1 John 3.12. and with an emphasis, the wicked. Psalm. 9.17.

2. The words, All men, are found in Scripture to signify -- sometime all
these three sorts: Zaoh. 8.10. Ezekiel. 38.20. -- sometime the first and latter
sort together. 1 Thessalonians. 1.^. -- Sometime, though seldom, the Believers only,
whether sound or foined. 1 Cor. 7.7. -- sometime, and that usually, the first
and second sort together. Tit. 2.1^. 1 Timothy 4.10. Acts 17.30. Luke 2.14. -- And
sometime the first sort only. Tit. 3.2. Psalm. 53.2.

3. That, All men, 1 Timothy 2.6. Intentionally, expressly, principally, and
especially, is meant of the first sort, for natural men, sounes of Adam,
sinners, unbeleevers, unregenerate m^n; appears.

1. Because this sense includes All, at first, All men, having some time, in
which they are such, and neither better nor worse then such, before they be
either borne of God, or given over of God: Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. Tit. 3.3. Romans
3.9, 20.

2. Because Christ dyed to make the propitiation for them, as they were
sinners; and he is no where said, To dye, and give himself a ransom to that
end, for the good men, the Righteous, the Believers, and Regenerate, neither
when they were such, nor as they were such, nor because they were such (though
that they might be such,) but for men, sinners, unjust, ungodly, his enemies;
yea, he is expressly said, to have given himself, for our sins, and to take
away transgressions. Romans 5.6, 8, 10. 1 Pet. 3.18. Gal. 1.4.

3. Because this is a faithful saying, and worthy all acceptance, that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15.

And thus it is clear, the force of the words carries it, to all Adams sons.

Secondly, the Circumstances in the place, from the foregoing and following
verses, do carry it to the very same sense already expressed.

1. It is the Apostle Paul that exhorts Timothy, and the Churches also in
exhorting him, and to be exhorted by him, to pray for All men; And they are the
Churches, even the Believers, that are to pray for all men: And they are
others, even all men, set forth in the third Person generally, that are to be
prayed for: he says not for, of all forts some; but for all men: and naming
but one sort of men, which in those times might be most of all doubted of, he
expressly says, all of them. verse. 1, 2.

If any say, were they not to pray for Believers, I answer, yes especially, but
that is not in this place expressed, though more strongly included; as where
our Savior, speaking against blasphemy, expressing only ^dlo-words to be
counted for, does include blasphemy more strongly to be counted for. Matthew.
12.36. If any a^ke, may we pray for such as to the Churches knowledge, have
sinned against the holy Ghost? I answer, not; when they are so known to have
sinned that sin, for then they have cast aside the sacrifice and ransom of
Christ; and there is no more sacrifice for them, and so they are blotted out of
the hopeful book of life, and separated from these All men, of which they once
were, being now reprobated of God. Iere. 16.30. 1 Ioh. 5.16.

2. That this is the sense of all men, here appears by the Apostles care to
settle the Believers in this persuasion: That it is good in the sight of God,
to pray for all men: praying for their brethren, could not be doubted of them,
to be good in the sight of God; but whether for all men, unbeleevers,
persecutors and opposers of the Gospel, many weak ones might doubt it, which
doubt he labors to remove. verse. 3, 4, 5, 6. suitable to that, Matthew. 5.44, 48.

3. This farther appears by the motives by which he induces them to pray for
all men, which are only from Gods good will, and love to manward, and what in
Christ, he has do^e for them verse. 4, 5, 6. like the motive in like case given
by our Savior. Matt. 5.44.45. Whereas the motives to pray for believers, are
together with these something more sweet; As the knowledge of this grace
received by them, and working in them: Their uprightness with God and his,
their faith in the Lord JESUS, and love to all the Saints, their fellowship in
the Gospel. 1 Thessalonians. 1, 2, 3. Col. 1.3.4, 9. Phil. 1.4.6.

4. This farther appears by their manner of praying enjoined. viz. without
wrath, without doubting, verse. 8. which though to be shunned in Believers,
praying one for another; yet there it is not so incident, as when they think
of those that have done them much evil, and are still cross to them and their
holy Profession; so that here is an intimate minding of that. Luke 10.5. but
Believers praying one for another, is to be yet in a sweeter manner, with
longing howells, and desires; sweet remembrances, joy and confidence. Phil.
1.3, 4, 8. Ephesians. 6.18.

5. This yet more evidently appears by the things to be prayed for, for all
men, Viz. That God would so order their hearts, That we (believers distinct,)
might lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all good lines and honesty, that so
the Gospel might run, and be glorified even amongst them. Like that. 2 Thessalonians.
3.1. Joh. 17.22, 23. but the things to be prayed for, for Believers, are of an
higher nature: as that preservation, sanctification, union, fruitfulness, etc.
prayed for, Job. 17.9.21. That increasing of love, sincerity, filling with
fruits of righteousness, etc. Phil. 1.9, 10, 11. Tha^ spiritual Knowledge,
wisdom, strength guidance, etc. Col. 1.9, 10, 11. The Spirit of wisdom and
revelation, etc. as Ephesians. 1.17.20. and 3.14.17.

6. This general and large sense also appears, by the manner of mentioning
them that were to be prayed for: as, All men. Kings, and all that are in
Authority, or eminent place: of which, very few in those times, nor is it
usual to style Believers so, without addition of some other style therewith,
when they are mentioned to be prayed for: Who are mentioned in that respect (I
hope) as Christians, and of the Church, as Believers, as Saints, Us, one
another. Ephesians. 6.18. Hebr. 13.18. Jam. 5.1 8. not set out in a third Person,
distinct from the Church, as here they are: So that all the circumstances do
show the sense to be, All Adams sins, expressly, those unconverted, and
inclusively Believers, and so All. men, and every man.

Thirdly, the scope of the place carries also to the same sense; for by the
praecedent and consequent verses, and the words themselves; The Scope,

1. Appears to be a laying down of the Gospel; as it is to be Preached to
every Creature, according to the Command. Matthew. 28.20. Mar. 16.15, 16. which
is true, and remains true, whether the hearers believe it, or believe it not.
2 Timothy 2.13. and herein also to give a ground of Preaching to all men, and
every man the Gospel, as that which is true and certain, without any
peradventure yea, or peradventure nay, 2 Pet. 1.16. 1 Cor. 9.16. 2 Cor. 1.18.
That so on their believing, aeternall life may be unquestionably promised them.
Acts 10.43. and 13.38, 39. And their not believing, undoubtedly affirmed their
sin, by which they are under condemnation and wrath. Ioh. 3.18.36. and their
refusal condemnation. Joh. 3.19.

2. To be laid down as a ground of praying for all men; yea, though they yet
believe not, but hate and persecute Believers. Matthew. 5.44. Luke 13.34. and
herein also a Direction both how far, and how much of the Gospel is to be
preached to All men. Joh. 16.12. 1 Cor. 3.1.2. Hebr. 5.12.14. and 6.1, 2. and
how far: and for what things Believers are to pray for all men. Joh. 17.21,
22. Acts 7.60. And thus, and to these ends, and to this scope and End, as
appears. verse. 1.2, 8.

1. He shows the will of God concerning the Mediator and men, what he would
have the Mediator to do for men, namely, to save all men, that is (as other
places of Scripture show,) to make satisfaction for them, pay the price, and
make peace with God for them, and purchase them. Col. 1.20. 1 John 3.5. Joh.
1.29. That he might be their Lord, and free them from that necessity of
perishing they were in Joh. 3.17. and bring them all out of that death, they
were through Adams fall necessitated to have perished in, and so set them alive
before him, to dispose of. Romans 14.9, 12. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22.

2. He shows the will of God, what he would have the Mediator further to do
for all men (when he has in himself so saved them) namely, to bring all men to
the knowledge of the truth, ver. 4. that they may know such Redemption to have
been wrought by him for them, and to acknowledge him Lord, to the glory of God.
Ioh. 12.32. Romans 14.11. Phil. 2.11.

3. He shows, verse. 5. That this Mediator is, And that as God is one, so
between God and men (fallen into sin against God) there is one Mediator, and
that this Mediator, (who is God-man) is the man Christ Jesus. Joh. 1.27.

4. He shows, verse. 6. That the one part of the will of God, viz. Saving all
men, as far as salvation may forerunne the knowledge of the truth, Jesus
Christ has in himself already performed; In that he gave himself a Ransom for
all men: ANd this is so effectual, and acceptable with the Father; that by his
acknowledgement, sin is removed, death abolished, and enmity slain in and by
Christ, and peace obtained so far for all men, that he has given over all
into the dispose of Jesus Christ, and made him LORD and Judge of all. Matt.
3.17. 1 Ioh. 3.4, 5. 2 Timothy 1.10. Ephesians. 2.16, 17. 1 Pet. 3.22. Matthew. 11.27.
Ioh. 5.22, 27. Acts 10.36. and 17.31.

5. He shows that the other part of Gods will, that is, bringing all men to
the knowledge of the truth, Jesus Christ is performing, and will in due time
perform, being a Testimony in due time, or to be testified in due time: as is
shown in the common Salvation fore-spoke of here. Chap. 1. and such as by his
Spirit in the means, will not here be brought in, to the knowledge and
acknowledgement of the Truth, shall hereafter be brought to it, though then to
their woe. Ioh. 16.7.11. Phil. 2.10.

6. He shows, that on this ground, this Gospel may be preached to all men,
wheresoever such as have the word of grace put in their heart, and committed to
them do come. verse. 7. and chap. 1.15. 2 Cor. 5.10.19.

7. He shows, that on this ground also, prayers are to be made for all men,
for such things as may be helpful to bring them to the knowledge of the truth.
verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 8. That so (which is most to be desired,) they might be
overcome to believe it: or else left without excuse (to the glory of God,) at
that day, when they shall be constrained to acknowledge it.

Now all along, from the first to the eight, and so in verse. 6. no farther
thing is mentioned, but that which belongs to all men to hear; No more but the
truth of that which Christ has done for all men, and will do to all men: and
no more but such services of love, as Believers for the Gospels sake, are
indebted to all men in. Romans 1.14.15, 16. Phil. 2.15, 16. Matthew. 5.44.

The Gospel declaring still higher, and more peculiar privileges for those,
that by the Spirit in this Gospel, are brought not only to believe the truth
of all this grace, but there through to repentance, and to faith in Christ for
that salvation he works from heaven, and so to walking in that faith, and
therein testified the called and chosen of God. 1 These. 1.3, 4. Then, and to
such the Gospel holds forth such a portion of Spirit, such manifestations of
love, as before now they were not able to understand, nor capeable of
receiving. 1 Cor. 9.14, 15. Joh. 3.12. and 14.17. Such peculiar privileges in
many places named, as are peculiar to them, and never set forth in such
general words as the other, which would at some time have been, if every m^n,
and the World, had been but only the Elect: or if that spoken in general, had
been no larger then the special: So that it every way appears, that the
words All men, 1 Timothy 2.6. is as large as Every of All mankind: All that I have
met with against this large extent of the words All men, is this.

OBJECT. That the All here to be prayed for, is as large as the All Christ gave
himself a Ransom for. But we are not to pray for All men, for there are some
that sin unto death, for whom we are not to pray. Ergo.


But this Argument has no force, for Paul here directs to pray for All men,
and John shows us how long we may pray for some, even till they be known to
have sinned the sin unto death. 1 Ioh. 5.16. And what is that sin unto
death, but that willing treading under foot, and casting aside, and offering
dispite to, or blaspheaming the grace of God procured for them, by the Death
and Ransom of Christ, and tendered to them with light and power in the means,
till one be given up of God. Hebr. 6.5, 6. and 10.29. Joh. 3.19. And till this
be so known, even those were to be prayed for. And so this Argument is turned
against it self.

But there are two evil consequences arise from the Propositions, so, and to
such an end framed: The one to color that Impious opinion, of praying for the
dead, That are known to be Elect, if the All we are to pray for, were as large
as the All Christ gave himself a ransom for; The other of fastening an error
in the heart, of comparing and equalling man with God; as if all men, and every
man were no larger in Gods view, and in opposition to him, then in the view of
men, and opposition to them.

And to take away both, one saying may serve: Needful it is, that the
foundation be large enough to bear all the stones that are to be laid on it;
but not needful that every stone should be equal to the foundation in length
and breadth, whether applied to Persons, Doctrines or Uses: So that Christ gave
himself a Ransom for all men; Is a good ground for us to pray for all men in
our times, as it was for them before us in their times; and will be for those
after us in their times: But to reason crossly thus. Christ gave himself a
Ransom for no more, then we now, living may pray for, or those written to^
might, is monstrous.

So that every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess to God: Is a
good ground for any to say of themselves and others. Every one of us shall give
account of himself to God. Romans 14.11.12.

But to reason crossly thus, and for any sort of men to put in their but, and
say, none but us, or we shall appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ,
were a gross contradiction to the truth, and an abuse of Scripture; and the
same may be said of the Ransom: So that this firmly stands in 1 Timothy 2.6. when
the Question is asked, For how many has Christ given himself a Ransom? Then
without equivocation, limitation, or Gloss, to answer. For all men.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Consideration of that Sentence in Hebr. 2.9.

IT appears, that this Epistle was writ and sent to the Hebrews, Viz. The
zealous Jews that did believe, and such Gentiles, as believing, were yet
preselited and regulated to them; And most probable, the Epistle sent to those
at and about Jerusalem; who though the^ believed JESUS to be the Christ, the
Savior of the World, and doubted not, but that his death and Ransom given,
was for All men, and that therefore Christ should be the Judge of All: Acts
10.30. Yet the ^leer removal of many Jewish and Levitticall Rights and
Observations, they did not believe: Likewise the free participation of the
Privileges of the Gospel, by believing Gentiles, and fellowship with them,
without being regulated to them in such Jewish Observances, they neither yet
fully believed, nor could endure to see, or well abide the hearing of it,
whence, what hard conceptions they had of Paul, is evident. Acts 21.20.21. And
to what a strait Peter was driven to please them, and how reproved for it,
appears Gallathians 2.11, 14. Whence also this Epistle is without the Authors
Name prefixed to it: Nor is it so general as the Epistles of Peter and John,
Nor is the style like the style in Paul's other Epistles, nor could he speak in
such fullness of the height and extent of these privileges to them, as to the
Believing Gentiles. Hebr. 5.11, 12, 13. Yea, he uses many phrases more common,
with, and suitable to the Jews, then in his other Epistles; his principal
business in this Epistle, being not so much the opening of the foundation, as
the leading them to perfection, in the knowledge, enjoyment and usefulness of
the New Testament of Precious Promises, with the fruits thereof, as is evident
through the whole Epistle.

Besides in Hebr. 2. cap. the verses both before, and following the 9. verse,
treat of farther things, then the Ransom and Propitiation only, or that also
which is procured only thereby, and so belonging to All men, even of the
fruits of that: and the pouring out of his Spirit also by virtue of his
High Priesthood at his Fathers right hand, and so of higher Privileges then
can be affirmed for All men, or to any but the called and chosen of CHRIST.
Hebr. 3.1. and 9.15. whence also the Phrase is changed in verses following,
which is not so in. 1 Timothy 2.1, 8. though yet some Phrase he such, at if the
Gentiles had been writ to, and the Ransom and Propitiation only spoken of,
even some other Phrases also would have agreed in the same truth; for whereas
God made all Nations of ^ne blood. Acts 17.26. Did not Christ partake of the
same flesh and blood. Joh. 1.14. Gal. 4.4. And did not be partake of the nature
of Adam, and not of Angels. Luke 3.38. but here the Apostle writ to the Jews,
and of farther things then the Ransom and Propitiation only.

All which considered, if at all in any place of Scripture, the death of
Christ, as the Ransom and Propitiation speak of in the Third Person, as a
Propitiation for Faith, could be sound spoken of, as for Gods Elect and chosen
only, or for any less then All men, it would surely have been so found in
this place, there being so much cause for it, if any such saying could have
been in truth. But behold.

1. Here it is affirmed, for All men, not only in a general lump, but for
Every man, as intimating all the particulars in the general, every singular
man, such the force of the word here. Heb. 2.9.

2. Here also the opposition is between God and men (even men Created by him,
to whom it is appointed once to die, and after that the Judgment. Heb. 9.27.)
and the death of Christ for men bebetween; And is not that expressly said, to be
for Every man? like th^^ to the Gentiles, affirmed, 2 Corinthians 3.10, 14, 15.

3. Did not God also for a little time, make his Son inferior to the Angels,
in giving him a body that might suffer death, Hebr. 10.5. and is it not here
expressly said, to be for Every man, as well as that in 2 Cor. 5.10.14.

4. Did not God glorify Christ, in setting him forth as a public Person in the
room of All men (as the first Adam was, who was a figure of him to come, though
he lost his honor, and himself, and us quickly. Psalm. 49.7, 8, 20.) that he
might Ransom all the first Adam had lost, and be their Lord; is not that
expressly said here, to be every man, as it is. Romans 14.9.11, 12. and 2 Cor.
5.10.14, 15.

5. Has not God also glorified him at his own right hand, to be the Lord of
the dead and the Living, and that all shall come before him, and how to him,
and be Judged by him; even because, by the grace of GOD, he tasted death for
every man, as is here express. Phil. 2.7.11. Romans 14.9.

6. Is not this his death for every man, affirmed to be in love and good will,
by the grace of God, and so for a gracious end; and does he not on this ground,
call all the ends of the earth to look to him, and be saved. Is. 45.22. and is
not that the ends of the earth, that is of Gods creation. Is. 40.28. and is not
that meant here of men, in all the ends of the E^^th. Prove. 8.4.31, 32. and is
it not here expressly said, every man. And so the force of the word, with all
the Circumstances (and the drift of the Epistle, and bufinesse treated of, that
would have required limiting, if it might have been) do fully show: That if
the question be asked, For how many did JESUS CHRIST, by the grace of GOD,
taste death? Then, without any equivocation, limitation or Gloss, to answer
with Hebr. 2.9. For Every Man.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Consideration of like places in Scripture, speaking in like manner.

NOw other places of Scripture, that speak of the same business, namely of
the death of Christ, as the Ransom and Propitiation only, and that which is
the fruit of that only, And this propounded in the third Person generally, and
as the ground of Faith, and of Preaching the Gospel to all men, and praying for
all men, and inviting them to Believe, and waiting for the same, etc. must be
viewed.

2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them.

Two things are here evident: First, that there is a Reconciliation and Pardon
for the World, which God has already wrought in Christ, while the world lies
still in enmity, and under sin, for not receiving the same, so as it might
reconcile them to Christ, and so to God, in, and through Christ, that they
might receive that Notimputation mentioned, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Romans 4.5, 6. which
yet they have not; for he says not, God is, or God will be Reconciling the
world to himself, as speaking of the work of his Spirit, in the word of his
grace, with and in men; nor does he say, God was in the World reconciling them,
as speaking of the spiritual application of the Blood of Christ in the hearts
of men, reconciling them to God, but God was in Christ, reconciling, etc. as
speaking of the work of God in Christ, the Reconciliation he has already
wrought in Christ for men, (as that Col. 1.20.) and true, though they believe
it not: And this expressly distinct from that Reconciliation effected in Men by
his Spirit (in belief of the former,) reconciling them in their hearts and
Powers to GOD; of which before, Verse 18. Col. 10.21.

Secondly, the Gospel of this Reconciliation wrought by God in Christ, was
Preached by Christ in the world, that men might have believed it, and in
believing, have been by him reconciled to God. Joh. 1.4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11. And
now Christ is gone up to heaven, he has left his Servants in the Work, in his
place, for ministration, and has put his Word in their hearts, that they might
declare it in, and to the World; that men might believe this Reconciliation
wrought with God for men, in Christ, and therethrough, be reconciled to God by
Christ. verse 20, 21. and chap. 6.1, 2. compared with. Joh. 17.15.18.21, 23.

So that this Reconciliation, already wrought by God in Christ, to be declared
for so gracious an end, Is without all Controvercy, for the world, but what
World, let the Text show, -- The world of mankind. verse 11. We persuade men:
and that those men that must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ.
verse 10. that were dead. verse 14. and ought to live to Christ. verse 15.
whereof, in hearing this report, some are Reconciled to God by Christ. verse.
18. some not. verse. 11. some begun to be, verse. 20. some receive the grace of
this Tidings profitably; and some, (it is to be feared) receive in vain. Chap.
6.1, 2.

Joh. 1.9. He is the true light, which lighteneth every man that comes into
the world; here again it is evident, That through the Ransom given, and
propitiation made by Christ, and the life, light and redemption in him thereby
for men, There is life obtained, and a door of hope opened, and some mercy
extended, and some light at some time vouchsafed to every one that comes into
the world: But what World? Let the Text show. The world of Mankind. verse. 4.
which God made by Christ. verse. 3.10. Into which Christ came, and which know
him not. verse. 10. which were his own by Creation and Purchase, and mercy
vouchsafed, and yet received him not, verse. 3, 4, 5, 7, 1^. To as many of whom,
as did receive him, he gave Power to become the Sons of God. verse. 12.

But that this matter may yet more plainly appear, let us view what the holy
Ghost says of the World, in this respect; and that,

1. Of the world in general. Joh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God which takes
away the sins of the world. Joh. 3.17. God sent not his Son into the world,
to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. Joh. 4.42.

This is indeed, The CHRIST, The Savior of the World. 1. Joh. 4.14. We have
seen and do restify, that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the
world. Joh. 6.51. My flesh, which I give for the life of the world. Joh. 12.46.
I am come a light into the World.

2. Of the World, distributed into it is parts. Some believing on the Son of
God, when the Gospel comes, and some not believing. Joh. 3.16.18. God so loved
the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on
him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, (proved, verse. 17.) and then
it follows, He that believes (...) him, is not condemned, but he that
believes not, is condemned already, (he says not, Because Christ died not for
him, or came not to save him, but) because he has not believed in the Name of
the only begotten Son of GOD. verse. 19. And this is Condemnation, that light
is come into the world, and men love darkness rather, etc. and so verse 36.

3. Of the World, opposed to Believers in the World, whether Jews or Gentiles,
both being the whole World. 1 John 2.1. We have an Advocate with the Father,
JESUS CHRIST, the Righteous (and this is true of Believers, and peculiar to
them, but common to them all, whether Jews or Gentiles.) And he is the
Propitiation for our sins, and not for our sins only, but also for the
sins of the whole World.

4. Of the World divided, and such particulars set out, as cannot be the Elect
and chosen Sons of God. Joh. 18.47, 48. If any man hear my words, and
believe not, I judge him not; for I came not to judge the World, but to save
the World: He that rejects me, (...) and receives not my words, -- The Word
that I have spoken, shall judge him at the last day: Sure then, this Word and
Gospel of his was true, and they shall be rightly Judged by it. John 3.16.20.
and 16.8, 11.

5. Of the World, as the Elect are in due season, chosen and called forth of
the state and fellowship of the World, and so distinguished from it, while many
of the Elect are yet in, with, and of the World, Joh. 15.19. I have chosen you
out of the World; therefore the World hates you: And thus of the World
distinct, it is said of it. That it lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. and does
not know the Sons of God. 1 John 3.1. Sees not the Spirit, nor knows him.
Joh. 14.17. nor can perceive or receive the things of the Spirit. 1 Cor. 2.14.
but does persecute those that are led by that Spirit. Joh. 16.1, 2.33. Yet even
among these, and even in Fellowship with them also, are many of the Elect Ones,
to whom yet all these sayings agree: Though in due season they shall be called
out of the Fellowship of the World, as the Called ones have been, who were once
of them, as these now are. Acts 9.1, 6. 1 Pet. 3, 9, 10, 12. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3,
4. Tit. 3.3. and so All men in general, and Believers, and Unbeleevers, Elect
and Nonelect, together, called and uncalled, to be called the World, is
frequent in Scripture; And of it every way so called, CHRIST is called the
Savior of the world, and said to come, That the world might be saved.

But the Elect, called and chosen out of the World, distinct, they are called,
A peculiar People, A chosen generation, A Royal Priesthood, An holy Nation. 1
Pet. 2.9. The heavenly Jerusalem: Zion, The City of the Living God, The Church
and House of God. Hebr. 12.22, 23. and 3.6. Ephesians. 2.19, 20. The Sons and
Daughters of Almighty God, 2 Cor. 6.18. A people chosen out of the world. Joh.
15.19. Of whom Christ is not only the Savior, but the head and Husband, etc.
but that the Elect only, or distinct, should be called the world, is such a
thing, as I never found in Scripture, nor met with any, that could produce the
place where, and prove it so.

And now, if we couple with the death of Christ, as the Ransom and
Propitiation, This end of it, That he might be the Lord of All; and that all
might live to him, and therein become saveable, and so be made alive before
him, as to receive Absolution, or condemnation from him; what says the
Scripture?

Romans 1 4.9. To this end Christ both dyed, and rose and revived, That he might
be the Lord both of the dead, and of the Living.

2 Cor. 5.14, 15. We thus judge, that if One dyed for all, then were all
dead: And that he dyed for All; that they which live, should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but unto him that dyed for them, and rose again.

1 Cor. 15.22. As in Adam All dye, so in Christ shall All be made alive, and
we must All appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ. 2 Cor. 5.10.

And if we look on them that stumble at Christ in his Gospel and refuse and
deny him, does not the Scripture say, Such (2 Cor. 8.11.) perish, for whom
Christ dyed. 2 Pet. 2.1. even denying the LORD that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift destruction; And are they not said, To have troad under foot
the Son of God, and count the blood of the Covenant, wherewith they were
sanctified, an unholy thing, and to offer despite unto the Spirit of Grace.
Hebr. 10.29. and to be trees twice dead, Jude 12.

And if we look upon the accomplishment of this end of the death of Christ,
does not the Scripture say. Before him shall be gathered all Nations, etc.
Matthew. 25.32, 40. and that even because, to that end he dyed. Romans 14.9.11,
13. Phil. 2.8, 11. and rose: And so, in the Name of JESUS, every knee shall
bow, and every tongue shall confess, that JESUS is the LORD, etc. Isai. 45.23.
Psalm. 86.9.

And if we look on those, to whom the Gospel is to be preached, says not the
Scripture. Matt. 28.19. Teach all Nations. Mark. 16.15. Go ye into all the
World, and Preach the Gospel to every creature.

And does not all these places of Scripture, hold forth, and explain and
confirm the same sense, that 1 Timothy 2.6. and Hebr. 2.9. imports; and so
confirm the truth of the Proposition.

That JESUS CHRIST, by the grase, good will and favor of God, did taste death
for every man, and so gave himself a Ransom to God for all men, and so is
become the Propitiation of the sins of the world; and the Savior of the
world; Yea, that the world through him might be saved.

There is no one thing in all the Scriptures, more fully and often, and in
plain Sentences affirmed, then this.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Answering the most usual and strongest Objections, framed against this
part of the Truth.

THE Objections I have met with, I desire to couch as many together as I may,
and to set them down as faithfully, and in the greatest strength that I have
met with them, and to answer as directly to them.

OBJECTION I.
The Scripture, in such places as. 1 Timothy 2.6. Hebr. 2.9. and Joh. 4.42. Are
not to be understood in the sense which the words seem to Import; And this
Objection is fortifyed with diverse Reasons, as to instance the chief of them.

1. The words of Scripture cannot be always taken in the sense they Import;
as, I am the Vine, I am the Door, This is my Body.

2. The words, All men, and Every man, are often found to mean but some, even
Gods Elect and Chosen.

3. The death of Christ is often said to be but for many, and those many his
sheep.

4. There was great reason, that such general words, as All men, and the
World, should be used in those times when Christ and his Apostles were upon the
face of the earth, when they meant but some, even the Elect, Gods Elect and
chosen in all Nations.

ANSWER.
For the Affirmation, which is the Objection it self, the contrary may be
affirmed, for though the Scripture speaks sometime more plainly, sometimes
Metaphorically, and sometime Parabollically, and Figuratively; yet always truly,
and in that very sense the words so spoken, and as the place in which the words
are, and the businese about which they treat, do Import; For God is a God of
truth, and Christ is the Truth. Psalm. 31.5. Joh. 14, 6. and told the truth,
which he heard of God. Joh. 8.40.45. and did bear witness to the Truth. Joh.
18.37. and the holy Spirit, that convinces, and will convince the World of
sin, for not having believed on Christ. Joh. 16.8. and by whom the Prophets
and Apostles spoke. 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.21. Is the Spirit of Truth. 1 John
4.6. and 5.6. and the Word of God, both essential and isntrumental, is Truth.
Joh. 17.17. and the Word of Truth. 2 Cor. 6.7. Col. 1.5. And the Prophets spoke
the Truth of God, which Christ came to confirm. Romans 15.8, 13. And John
Paptist bear witness to the Truth. Joh. 5.33. And the Apostles renounced the
hidden things of dishonesty; not walking in craftiness, nor handling the Word
of God deceitfully; but by manifestation of the Truth, commending themselves to
every man's Conscience, in the sight of God. 2 Cor. 4.2. and spoke the Words of
Truth and sebernesse. Acts 26.25. And that with great plainness of speech; and
not with a veil over their face neither. 2 Cor. 3.12, 13. and the Scripture
tells us, That he that hates, dissembleth with his lips. Prove. 26.24. And
that God needs none to talk deceitfully for him. Joh. 13.7. how can it be
then, that any of us believing, and reverencing God and Christ, and his Spirit
as truth, and his Word, as a Word of Truth, and his Prophets and Apostles,
Preachers and Writers of Truth, and that with plainness: That when they all
say, That Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man, and gave
himself a Ransom for All men, and is the Savior of the World, and the
Propitiation for the sins of the whole world: That any of us, I say, should
presume to say, His Words have not the sense or meaning, they seem to import.
Truth it is, the mind of God in the Scripture is mysterious, and the
Scriptures are full of profound Mysteries, but they are divine and heavenly
Mysteries of Truth, Righteousness and Goodness, delivered in words of
Wisdom, (but not the wisdom of this World,) so that we need a spirit of
grace and Wisdom from Christ, to open our eyes to see, and our hearts to
receive them. 1 Cor. 2.8.15. Yet the mysteriousnesse of the Scriptures stands
not in any equivocall hiddennesse, and doubtfulness of speech, like the Oracles
of the Heathens supposed gods, that by the wit of men, might be made true,
which way soever taken, though contrary to what they imported, to those that
sought and trusted to them; but the Scriptures, though mysterious, yet so full
of unchangable truth, that when by the spirit of grace, the knowledge thereof
is so given to any man, that he understands the same: It will appear to be so
right and plain, and just, according to the words, in which it was expressed,
That he that understands will say, As I have heard, so have I found in the
house of God. Psalm. 48.8. and will not contradict, but confess the truth of
Christ's own sayings. Prove. 8.6, 9. Hear, for I will speak of excelient things,
and the opening of my lips shall be right things, for my mouth shall speak
truth, and wickedness is an abomination to my lips: And the words of my
mouth are in righteousness. Nothing froward, or wreathed, or perverse in them.
Let none of us therefore say any more, His words has not the sense they both
express and import: More need not be said to this; but because the Reasons
used to fortify the Objections, are by some used as Arguments, they must also
briefly be answered.

I. The first REASON from the words, I am the door, etc.
1. It is injurious; Seeing it is confessed by the most and soundest
Interpreters, and ordinarily used as an Argument against the Papists,
prohibiting Christian people the reading the Scriptures, under pretense of
their difficulty to be understood; that whatsoever is necessary to salvation,
is therein plainly delivered, even so, as the diligent and humble Reader may
easily understand. Now nothing more necessary, nor more plainly delivered; then
the foundation, and first beginnings of the Gospel of Christ, against which is
here Objected, and so the Affirmation of sound Interpreters; yea, and the
Scripture it self gainsaid.

2. It is unjust, seeing it is granted by Interpreters, that hard and difficult
places, as Sacramental Speeches, Allegories, Parables, etc. are to be opened
by plain places, and not plain places made dark by them. Now, I an the
Door, Joh. 10.9. and The Vine, Joh. 15.1. are Metaphorical speeches. And This
is my Body, Matthew. 26.26. is a Sacramental Speech: Thus confessed by All,
There being a greater Mystery, and mystical signification therein: then men,
at first hearing the Gospel, or in first receipt: till they have some
acquaintance with, and growth in the things of Christ, can understand:
Therefore very unjustly brought forth, to darken the sayings in Hebr. 2.9. 1 Timothy 2.6. and Joh. 4.42. being plain, and of the beginnings of the Gospel, by
which those other sayings are to be explained.

3. It is very gross, Intimating (yea some have said it,) As if the sense
those words seem to Import; were as if he mere a door of wood, and an earthly
Vine, and as if the Sacrament all bread were transubstantiate, and turned into,
and become the corporal or natural body of Christ: whereas there are no such
words in any place, nor any importing such a sense: and if it were lawful to
become ridiculous, to answer such ridiculous conceits, as are thought so
strong: as if no truth to be found in such sayings of Scripture, without
casting out the sense, the words seem to import: I would ask this puestion; Isa
master say to his servant, Reach my clothes in the Press: and a Dame says to
the maid, Turn the cheese in the Press; and the Child cries to his mother, The
Pott boiles over, and runs in the fire, cannot all these (by mean Country
people,) be understood in the very same sense the words import; though Press
have no one sense in one saying, and another in the other saying, and the
pottage, not the po^^ run in the fire; but I leave this, least I runn too
much into folly, to show this foolish arguing.

4. It is very false; for Jesus Christ is the very Door, and Way indeed of
entrance into any Peace with God, or approaching for any life to him. Joh.
14.16. Ephesians. 2.17, 19. And he is the true Vine indeed, of the Fathers setting,
and filled with all living sapp of the Spirit: whence all true fruit comes.
Joh. 15.1, 7. Hos. 14.8. And our Savior, being to finish his sufferings, and
shortly to leave the World, having newly eaten the Passover with his
Disciples, himself being the Truth of that was Typed and Shadowed thereby,
(both in Remembrance, and Thing remembered,) And now Instituting the Supper, in
which his Disciples and Believers may have him, and his Sufferings, with the
benefit thereof; in such fresh Remembrance: That they might have somewhat from
his own hands, to be in stead of his visible presence with them (who by spirit
would be still with them,) That they by faith, in use thereof, might have
fellowship with him, eat and drink with him; yea, eat his Flesh, and drink
his Blood; and so enjoy such Communion, as they become one Body in and with
him, and each other: He now in Delivery of this Remembrance,

1. Was present with them, speaking, and instructing them about the
Propitiation made by his Sacrifice, and the Testament seated in his blood.

2. He instituteth this Ordinance for them, to keep in mind, and show forth his
death, till he come again: and to have Communion with him, and one another.

3. The business was known to be mystical, and as we call it, Sacramental,
in which a Command and a Promise meet, in appointing the use of an outward
sign and Action: as in that they had now be about: as appears. Exodus 12.1.

4. This business was not appointed to, nor the words spoken to the men of the
world, to unbeleevers, (as that part of the Gospel here treated of, is also to
be) but to Believers, that had already some spiritual discerning, and a
Promise of a further portion of Spirit to be given them.

5. He says not, This is changed into my body, nor so much, as this bread is
my Body, nor a word to color such a gross conceit as Transubstantiation; nor
does he say, This is only a figne or figure of my body; his words are of more
force then so: and now to a spiritual understanding, what should be the
scense? but what the words by him spook on such an occasion, in such a
business, to his Disciples, do import: So that this Argument appears
injurious, unjust, absurd, and false, and so of no strength.

II. The Second REASON.
That the words All, and Every man, sometime mean but some: This Reason is
already answered, and proved vain and fraudulent in Chap 5. For,

1. If in a thousand places, where the opposition is not between God and men in
general, as in 1 Timothy 2.6. nor the speech of God and by God, as in the places
already instanced. Then it is not at all to the purpose.

2. The words All men, and Every man, when it is spoak by God, and of his
works, and the opposition between God and men in general, whether it speak of
the Creation of men by Christ, The fall of men in Adam, The Ransom given for
men by Christ: The resurrection of men, or their account giving to him, is
never found to mean less then All men, and every man, which proves the fraud
of this reason.

3. The words All men, and Every man, being always taken in the largest sense,
the scope of the place, the business treated on, and the Circumstances
therein, and sentence in which the words are used, will bear, as is shown
before: Chap. 5. and no larger affirmed here; This Argument is turned against
it self; that it must needs be so taken here in 1 Timothy 2.6. Hebr. 2.9.

3. The third Reason, That the death of Christ is often said to be but for
many, and those many, his Sheep.

1. This Reason is weak, and of no force, for the word many is often so used,
That it both signifies All, and Every man, and also amplifieth, or sets
forth the greatness of that Number, as in Dan. 12.2. Many of them that sleep
in the dust of the earth, shall awake Romans 15.19. Through the offense of one,
many be dead, by one man's disibedience many were made sinners: and in other
places, where many cannot, nor is by any Christian understood for less then
All men.

2. This Reason is equivocall, subtle, and fraudulent; seeing where All men,
and Every man is affirmed of, The Death of Christ, as the Ransom and
Propitiation, and the fruits thereof only, is affirmed for them.

But where the word many is in any place used in this business, there are more
ends of the Death of Christ, then this one affirmed of, as before is shown at
large, in Chap. 2. and 3.

3. This Reason is false and ungodly, for it is no where in Scripture said,
That Christ dyed, or gave himself a Ransom but for many, or only for many, or
only for his Sheep; and it is ungodliness to add, to, or diminish from the
Words of GOD in SCRIPTVRE.

4. This Reason is deceitful and erroneous; for the Scripture does no where
say, Those many he dyed for, are his Sheep, (much less his Elect, as the
Reason intends it.) As for the place, Joh. 10.15. usually instanced to this
end, it is therein much abused; for our Savior, Joh. 10. -- Did not set forth
the difference between such as he dyed for, and such as he dyed not for: or
such as he dyed for so, and so, and not so, and so: but the difference between
those that believe on him, and those that believe not on him, verse. 4, 5, 14,
26, 27. one hear his voice, and follow him, the other not, -- Nor did our
Savior here set forth the privileges of All he dyed for, or for whom he dyed
for so and so but of those that believe on him, through the Ministration of the
Gospel, and so to know him, and approach to God, and enter the Kingdom by him
verse. 3, 4, 9.27. -- Nor was our Savior here, setting forth the excellency of
those for whom he dyed, or dyed for so, and so only, wherein they are
preferred before others; but the excellency of his own love, with the fruits
thereof, to those (not only that he dyed for, but also) that are brought in by
his Ministration, to believe on him, verse. 11.27. -- Nor was our Savior here
treating so much of his Ransom giving, and Propitiation making, as of his
Ministration of the Gospel, and so of his love and faithfulness therein,
wherein he laid down his life for those ministered too, and therein gave us
example, not to make Propitiation for sin, but to testify Love in suffering.

Besides, the opposition appears here to be, not so much between Elect and
Not-Elect, as between Jews called, and Gentiles uncalled.

Besides, there is in Scripture great difference, between sheep, and sheep of
his flock and pasture, of which he here speaks. verse. 4, 5, 11, 15, 16.

Besides, sheep, verse. 4.5, 11, 15. are not mentioned, as all those for whom he
dyed, but as those that by his ministration are brought in to believe and enjoy
the benefit of his death, and to whom he ministers and communicates spirit.
verse. 3, 4, 27. like that John 17.6, 7, 8.

Besides, here is more ends of his death mentioned, then Ransom, or
Propitiation only: and yet it is not said, only for his sheep: and when the
Ransom or Propitiation is only mentioned, It is said, for all men, so that
this reason appears weak, fraudulent, ungodly and erroneous.

4. For the Affirmation: that there was great reason that such general words,
as All men, Every man, and the World, should be used in those times, when
Christ and his Apostles were upon the earth, when they meant but some, even
Gods Elect and chosen among All Nations.

This is as evil as all the Reasons before, and as gross as the Objection it
self; for though there be a holy and spiritual wisdom and Prudence to be
observed in speeches and carriages, in respect of the evilnesse of some times:
Amos 5.13. Mic. 7.5, 7. Matt. 3.13.16. Yet the holy Scripture does furnish us
hereto, for all times, and is able (through Faith) to make the Believer wise
unto Salvation, and the man of God perfect to every good work. 2 Timothy 3.15, 17.

But that any other doctrine, or contrary Words, should be necessary to deliver
the Gospel within these times, Is monstrous to affirm, and expressly
contradictory to the Scripture Commands.

Besides, according as it is written, Those, whose faith we are to follow, are
such whose word and Conversation has this end, To hold forth in the Gospel
JESUS CHRIST, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. Heb. 13.7, 8. And as
Jesus Christ is that Essential Word of God, which endures for ever: for is
the Word of the Gospel, which came forth of the mouth of God, and declares
Christ; That created and isntrumental Word of God, which in the truth,
plainness, certainty, and goodness of it, endures for ever. 1 Pet. 1.23, 25.
And though this Gospel came forth less largely and clearly at the first.
Genes. 3.15. 1 John 1.1, 2. yet after, more fully and clearly to Abraham.
Genes. 12. and 15. and 17. Gal. 3.8. And then more clearly still to Mases.
Deutr. 18.18, 19. and 30.11, 15. Acts 3.22, 26. Romans 10.6, 10. and so more
clearly still to Isaiah, and the residue of the Prophets. Isai. 53. and 55.
Acts 2.16, 36. Romans 10.13. etc. and yet still more clearly by John Baptist.
Luke 1.76, 79. Matthew. 11.9, 10, 11. But still more and most fully and clearly
by JESUS CHRIST, and his Apostles. Ioh. 1.16, 17. and 3.15.17. Ephesians. 3.5.
which Apostles of Jesus Christ (in respect of Christ being come and having
dyed, and being risen and ascended, and filled with spirit, and for whom, and
to what end, and what he is become for all men, and what to, and for those that
believe on him,) They have laid the foundation, and other foundation can no man
lay, then that which is by them laid. 1 Cor. 3.11. Ephesians. 2.20. And this is
done by them also, in words of Wisdom. 1 Cor. 2.4.7. And he that adds to
the words Christ has already revealed by them: God will add to him all the
Plagues recorded in that Book: and he that takes away from those words; God
will take away his part out of the Book of life. Revel. 22.18, 19. And if any
man, or Apostle, or Angel from heaven, shall preach any other Gospel, then that
they have preached, we are to hold him accursed. Gal. 1.8, 9. And what shall
we then account of this Reason.

Does not the words of Christ and his Apostles express their meaning? Or did
their words serve but for those times, Are they not necessary now? have any of
us found out fitter words to express the Gospel in these times, now Christ and
his Apostles are not upon the Earth: shall mortal man be more just then God?
Shall a man be more pure then his Maker: Job 4.17. shall any direct the spirit
of the Lord, and be his Counselor, to teach Him? Isai. 40.13. Does he need us?
Or shall not his Excellency make us afraid? Job 1 4.9, 11. Shall any presume to
prescribe him fitter words for these times: and then pull down his meaning to
their own, and say, What ever his words are, they have not the meaning they
seem to import: but their words have: and he meant as they do; O ye Heavens,
be astonished at this.

But here is not all the evil of this Reason; for it does not only deny the
truth and fitness of the words of the Gospel, and dishonor God, to put honor
upon man: but it pleads for, and justifies many ungodly and profane men: for
when Believers plead for their Brethrens -- waiting and praying for the spirit
of grace, to be more abundantly given them. Luke 11.13. Joh. 7.38, 39. Acts
3.38. And to desire to have spiritual and gifted men to Preach the Gospel. 1
Cor. 12.3, 11. 1 Timothy 3.2. and to have much Preaching and praying. 2 Timothy 4.2.
Col. 4.2. and to have good order in our Assemblies. 1 Cor. 14.40. and frequent
Assemblies. Hebr. 10.25. and brotherly Society. 1 Pet. 2.17. and 4.8, 11. and
patient enduring the reproaches the World casts on Christ and his Gospel.
Hebr. 13.13. and holding forth the Word of Life in the midst of a crooked
generation. Phil. 2.15, 16. and having all demeanours in the Church, and among
Believers, as like those approved in the Apostles time, as we can. 1 Cor.
11.1, 2. And allege the Scripture for all these. Do not many oppose, and put
by all these things, with this; You must consider the difference of Times:
Those things were not only good, but necessary in the Apostles times: But they
are not so necessary in these times: And this Reason not only justifies their
Plea, but exceeds it in evil; for it says as much even of the words of the
Doctrine of the Gospel.

Neither is this all, but this Reason opens the door to prefer humane Reason,
before the Divine Testimony of Scripture, and to yield rather to Reason, then
to Faith, and so opens the door to all Superstition: Yea, what Heresy will not
carnal Wisdom thus bring in, of which we are warned to take heed. Col. 2.8,
18, 23. So that this Reason proves naught; Yet that none be wronged, I will set
down what this Reason is, and that to the full, as serve have expressed it: Who
write thus.

THE REASON.
For did it not seem by Christ's own words. Matthew. 15.24. That he was sent to
none, but the lost sheep of the House of Israel. and Matthew. 10.5. JESUS
commanded his Apostles, not to go into the way of the Gentiles, nor enter into
any City of the Samaritanes: so Acts 16.6, 7. They were forbidden of the holy
Ghost, to preach the Word in Asia: They assayed to go into Bithinia, but the
Spirit suffered them not.

ANSWER.
This is the first part of the Reason, but it is very weak and frothy; For it
is evident to a mean understanding; that our Savior spoke not in Matthew. 15.24.
of his mission to dye, and give himself a ransom for men: but of his mission
for his ministration here on earth, which was for the Jews, the Circumcision.
Romans 8.9. which mission, with greater enlargednesse, at his departure, he left
with his Disciples. Matthew. 28.30. Ioh. 17.18. And yet this restraint of his
mission to the Jews, not wholly exclusive; for then the woman could not have
been commended for her faith, which she still held, and received help
thereby. Matthew. 15.24, 28. and of the same nature was the sending his
Disciples, and of no farther extent as yet. Matthew. 10.^. And this could be no
Reason to darken or straiten the extent of the Death and Ransom of Christ,
much less a Reason of using such general words, as All men, Every man, The
World, when they meant but some only: For

1. Before either this mission of the Disciples by Christ, or his so speaking
to the Woman of Canaan, he was said to be sent into the World, That the World
through him might be saved. Joh. 3.17. To be the Savior of the World. Joh.
4.42. To give his flesh for the life of the World. Joh. 6.51. To take away the
sin of the World, and to enlighten every man that comes into the World. Jo.
1.9, 29. therefore those things which followed after, could not be the cause or
occasions of this manner of speaking, that was so long, and often before.

2. Their mission was after enlarged, to go into all the World, and to preach
the Gospel to every creature. Mat, 28.20. Mar. 16.15. and so then, no necessity
of using words importing more then truth, nor before.

3. While these general words were frequent in use, the same is still affirmed
of the ministration of Christ, That it was of (or for the Jews) the
Circumcision: and that for the good of the Gentiles, and so affirmed to them.
Romans 15.8, 9. so that hitherto, this great Reason is reasonlesse.

As for that, Act. 16.6, 7. Paul had his Gospel revealed to him long before
that time, and that by Christ himself, and was sent to the Gentiles; And he
was kept back from those places, but at that time, because it was not Gods
season; or he had prepared other instruments for that People, many of whom ere
long received the Gospel sweetly. Acts 19.10. 1 Pet. 1.1. So as this gives no
cause at all, to doubt of the extent of that Ransom, much less to use words
inporting more then truth for all places could not be ministered to at once: nor
are the servants to appoint, which first, and which after; That belongs to God:
So as yet the Reason gets no strength; I will therefore add the refidue of it,
to see if that will.

REASON III.
And had not the Jews for a long time been the only people of God; and might
not other Nations think themselves excluded, being called Strangers and Alians;
and was not this a mystery newly revealed, to the Apostles themselves. Act.
10.45. They of the Circumcision, which believed, were astonished, -- because
that on the Gentiles also was powered forth the gift of the holy Ghost. Likewise
Acts 11.18. they admired. Now was there not great reason, to make it known,
that Christ was come to be a Savior of the World, not of Jews only, but
Gentiles also, of all other Nations, that he gave himself a Ransom for all,
not only the Jews, but also the Gentiles, That the Elect throughout the whole
world, might the better be encouraged, to take hold on Christ, according to the
saying, Isai. 45.22. Look unto me, and (...) ye saved, all the ends of the
Earth, and without doubt, this was one reason, that the words, All men, and
Every man, the World, and the whole World, are so frequent in Scripture.

ANSWER.
This is the sum, and the whole strength of the Reason, which ^^ll appears
very weak and frothy: for the ignorance of some in the mysteries of grace, is
no proof, That the God of Truth will speak beyond the bounds of Truth; he
hates dissembling, and pretendings of that which i^ not, and howsoever some
men may equivocate, and make fained pretenses of more then they (...) shall
they neither have examples, or word, or allowance from God, to countenance
them: JESUS CHRIST left not out the hardest things but told his Disciples the
worst at the first; he knows how to bring his matters about with words and
deeds of Truth, and directs the works of his Servants in Truth. Psalm. 145.17.
Isai. 61.8. but the truth is, this Reason argues ignorance in the mystory it
would tell others of;

For that affirmed in the. 1 Timothy 2.6. Hebr. 2.9. and so the Proposition here
treated of; It was revealed in some measure from the beginning; as to say,

That Jerus Christ should so far take away sin, and destroy the works of
the Devil. 1 Ioh. 3.5.8. and so ransom all men, that were fallen into sin
and death: that they should be given to him, that he^ might be their Lord, and
thus, so far made alive to him, that (...) should absolve and make happy all
that submit to his Government, in believing on him, and condemn all that would
none of his Government, but spoke against him: Isa. 53.6.11, 12. Romans 14.9.12.
Luke 19.14.27. this was contained in that Promise. G^n. 3.15. and expressed in
the Prophecy of Henock. Jude 14, 15. and more clearly by the following
Prophets, in which the higher things ^^re infoulded.

But to Abraham was revealed a great deal more and higher privileges, as that
Jesus Christ should come of him, even that premised seed, that should have the
Inheritance. And that wh^soever believed (...) him, should be of the same feed,
and so be made a Son in hi^^; and by him, be brought together with him to
partake of the Inheritance, and so this seed be multiplied into many and yet be
still one Seed, and this not of Jews only, but Gentiles also. This was first
revealed to Abraham; and he receiving, and walking in this faith, is therefore
called, The Father of the Faithful; that so believe, and walk in the same
says Gal. 3.7, 8, 14, 16, 29. Genesis (...) 15. and 17. Romans 4.11. and this is
more then that affirmed; 1. Tim. 2.6. Hebr. 2.9. or in the Proposition; which
was in some measure revealed before Abraham's time; in respect whereof, those
Fathers before were Fathers to him, and to Believers now also: but the
discovery of these higher Privileges, was first to him, and by him to others,
though yet more cleer^^ still unto and by the following Prophets, and still
more unto, and by John Baptist.

Yet though these two be both mysterious, even that revealed; before Abraham
his time, (which is the subject of this Discourse,) and that revealed to
Abraham; and the latter more mysterious then the former; yet was the mystery
greater still, as it was made known to the Apostles, and that in three
respects.

First, in that they were eyewitnesses of the Coming, Death, Resurrection and
Ascension of Christ, and had the fullness of the Propitiation, and manner of
making it, his glorious power, kingdom, authority, and coming again; and so
his becoming the Savior of the World; the head and husband of the Church, the
Lord and Judge of all, more gloriously; evidenced to them, then ever to any
before. Joh. 1.14. Acts 5.30, 31, 32. and 10.37.43. 1 John 1.1, 2, 3. 2 Pet.
1.16.18. Gal. 1.

2. In that they had a more full discovery and experiment of the privileges of
such as believe in Christ, and of the pouring forth of the holy Ghost, and of
the Union with Christ and Brethren, and conformity to Christ, and usefulness
and fruitfulness in the Church effected thereby: Then was in any Ages before,
Joh. 1.12.16. and 7.38, 39. and 16.7.15. Acts 2. and 10. Ephesians. 1, tot. and 2.
and 3.14.20.

3. In that the free participation of all this great grace, should be as free
for the Gentiles believing, as for the Jews, without either Circumcision, or
any imposition or regulation, undering them to the Jews. Ephesians. 3.5, 6, 7.

For in Gentiles being regulated to the Jews; the Jews never doubted, nor
made strange at the Gentiles participation of privilidges.

And the Jews that believed the Gospel, did not contend, for Preaching the
Gospel to the Gentiles (as doubting of the Ransom for them,) but for
Fellowship with them, and their participation of Privileges, without being
regulated to the Jews, at is before shown, Chap. 12.

So that Act. 10.45. and 11.18.1^. is altogether mistaken in the Allegation:
for the Reason argued, neither former unbelief, nor the after admiration in
them, to be because of the Ransom given for them: but because of the holy
Ghost given to, and fellowship had with them, before they were (and they not
being) regulated to the Jews.

And though the Revelation of the performance of the first, and the fullness of
the second, and the freeness of the third, were all in some measure hidden,
till they began to be so performed, and the stumble of the believing Jews, was
about the third, and all now cleared to the Apostles. Col. 1.25, 26, 27. yet
was this mystery jointly in all the three Branches, not altogether hidden, nor
now altogether newly revealed: for the Apostles spoke nothing, but what the
Prophets did say should come to pass, Acts 26.22. nothing, but what they had
the sure word of Prophecy for. 1 Pet. 1.19, 20. and so the Apostle gives us to
understand, that he means not, that it was not at all made known, but that it
was not so made known, as it is now. Ephesians. 3.5, 6.

Besides, the Apostles had (with this full and clear Revelation) the abundance
of Spirit given into them. Act. 2. and preached the Gospel, with the holy
Ghost, sent down from heaven. 1 Pet. 1.12. God confirming the same with diverse
fignes and miracles, and gifts of the holy Ghost. Hebr. 2.4.

They stood in no need therefore, to use words importing more, or other then
truth (and that in laying the foundation also) to bring in any to believe, much
Iesse, to bring the Elect, (which who, or what shall tell them their election.)
that they might believe, and lay hold on Christ, according to that, Isai.
45.22. this also being evident to be as large as all men, and every man: for to
men he calls, Prove. 8.4, 5. Joh. 1, 3, 4, 7. and the ends of the Earth, are
all men that are created by Christ. Isai. 40.20. and that shall come before him
to judgment. Isai. 45.23. Phil. 2.8, 11. so that All, and Every man, is as
evident to be meant. Isa. 45.22. as it is evident, that All and Every man were
made by God, and shall come in judgment to give account to God, and the death
of Christ, and this Call can no more be denied to be f^r All and Every man,
then All, and Every man can be denied to be made by him, and to come to
judgment before him: the same being affirmed in Scripture of all these. Isa.
40.28. and 45.23. Romans 14.9.12. 2 Cor. 5, 10, 14, 15.

Wherefore there is no Reason to affirm, that without doubt, this mentioned in
the latter part of the Reason, should be one Reason of the frequent mentioning
of those general words; All men.

For on whose part should it be a reason, for such an end? On the part of the
Jews, in respect of themselves, it could be no Reason, because they reckoned
themselves the People of God; and seed of Abraham, and for the Jews, in
respect of the Gentiles: it could be no reason, while the Ministration of the
Gospel was not sent to the Gentiles: If any say, Yes, to prepare them to
receive the Gentiles: We see it had not that effect, with the believing Jews;
who were not with such words prevailed withal, in that wherein they did
stumble; and yet to the Jews is the Gospel of Christ, being the Savior of All
men, Every man, the World, frequently set forth before the Commission of the
Ministration of the Gospel to the Gentiles. Joh. 1.4.7, 9.29. and 3.16, 17. and
6.51. and 12.46, 47, 48. and 8.13.

And on the part of such Gentiles, as were brought in to believe, before the
mentioning the use of such words to them, it could not be a Reason, and yet to
them also is the Gospel, so set forth in such general words. Romans 3.22. and
5.12.18. and 14.9, 12. 1 Cor. 15.22. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15, 19. 1 Timothy 2.4, 5.

And even so is it set forth, both to believing Jews and Gentiles: and that as
the Gospel they had to declare to such as yet believed not, whether Jews or
Gen^iles. Hebr. 2.9. 1 John 2.2. and 4.14. and Jews and Gentiles, and all
Nations, contain all and every man. Even the who! World: and it is no where
said of the death of Christ, it was for some Jews, and some Gentiles, some of
all Nations, much less can it be said, only for the Elect of all Nations; So
that this whole Reason is proved to be but a mere fancy, purposely framed, to
color the unbelief of That, which cannot be denied, to be plainly testified in
Scripture.

And now let the Objection, with the Three Arguments, and this great reason, be
truly considered apart and together, and the dealing with the Scripture,
according thereto: and this appears therein.

That it endeavors to make the Sentences and words of Scripture of no force at
all; and so adds strength to the blasphemy of those that have said; That the
Scripture is but a dumb Letter, Incky Divinity; a noose of wax, that may be
bended every way, according to the will of the Interpreter; whose blasphemous
mouths, by this means opened, will not be stopped till the words and sayings
of Scripture be stood too, in the sense they express and import.

2. From the grant of this Objection, and the use of such reasonings, by which
it is fortified, has been the opening of the door, for men to abuse the
Scripture, to the countenanceing of every Herecy, and sin, and for the
denial of truth affirmed, and duty commanded.

3. This is also that which has given the strength to some to plead, the
Church to give authority to the Scripture, and the need of a Pope to determine
the sense: and others of diverse Sects, to acknowledge no truth in any sentence
of Scripture, but according to the Interpretation and judgments of the Masters
of their Sects, and and others to look for vain and santasticall Revelations,
not heeding the Letter of Scripture, and so to fasten on any pleasing fancy,
though without, or against the sayings of Scriptures.

4. Yea, this is the root and preserver of all falsities, devisions and
contentions.

But that it may appear, I justly charge this Objection, with such use of
Arguments and Reasons to fortify the same: I will give a little instance of
such manner estimate of, and dealing with the Scripture.

These then are found plain sayings of Scripture, in general words.

1. God that made the World, and has made of one blood all Nations of men.
Act. 17.24, 26.

2. All have sinned. Romans 3.23. Through the offense of One, judgment came upon
all men to condemnation: All have sinned. Romans 5.18.12.

3. Death is passed upon all men. Romans 5.12. it is appointed to men once to
die. Hebr. 9.27.

4. All that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and come forth. Joh. 5.29.

5. All Nations shall be gathered before him. Matthew. 25.32. to judgment. 2
Cor. 5.10.

And as these are points of faith; so for points of practice.

1. Let all the Earth fear the Lord; let all the Inhabitants of the World
stand in awe of him. Psalm. 33.8.

2. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, Live peaceably with all men.
Romans 12.18. Honor all men. 1 Pet. 2.17.

3. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers. To. 13.1. Tit. 3.1.

4. Render to all their due; tribute to whom tribute, and Romans 13.7.

5. Let us do good unto all men. Gal. 6.10. showing meekness to All. Tit. 3.2.

Now let us see what this Objection, with the former Reasons, will do with all
these plain sayings of Scripture; in such general words.

OBJECTION.
The Scripture in such places as speaks so generally, are not to be understood
in the sense, the words seem to import.

REASON. I.
The words in Scripture cannot be always taken in the sense they seem to
import: The Door, the Vine, and etc.

REASON. II.
The words All men, and Every man, are often found in Scripture, to mean but
some, even Gods Elect and Chosen.

REASON. III.
It is said, Through the offense of One, many be dead, byone man's dis^bedience,
many were made sinners. Romans 5.15, 19, many of them that sleep in the dust of
the earth, shall awake. Dan. 12.2. And Believers have said, One God has
created us. Mal. 2.10. and in many things we offend all. Jam. 3.2. And every
one of us shall give account of himself to God. Romans 14.12. And lie not one to
another. Col. 3.9. Speak every man truth with his Neighbor; for we are
members one of another. Ephesians. 4.25. Be ye kindly affected one to another, with
Brotherly Love; in honor preferring one another, Romans 12.10. For bearing one
another; forgiving one another. Col. 3.13. That no man go beyond, or defraud
his Brother. 1 These. 4.6. In which places, you may see; who the many are, that
God both (...) and that have sinned, and that shall dye, and come to Judgment;
to whom we are to give honor, and render their dues, etc. even the Believers,
and Gods Elect and Chosen.

REASON IV.
And there was great reason, why in those times, they should use such general
words, as All Men, Every man, when they meant but some; for was it not said,
He showed his words unto Jacob, and his Statutes and Judgments unto Israel;
He bath not dealt so with any Nation, as Psalm. 147.19, 20. That now by these
general words; the Elect among the Gentiles, might be encouraged to fear the
Lord, and stand in awe of him; according to that in Psalm. 33.8.

Is not this ungodly dealing with, and profaning of the Scripture and if the
words do not bear the sense they import, who shall tell us what the sense is;
and what a gap is here to all wickedness! Yet those general words, All men,
Every Man, and the World, are not so often found in Scripture, in affirmation
of any of the forementiontioned particulars; As in affirming the death of
Christ as the Ransom; And surely, he that will not believe the same, for the
testimony the Scripture gives of it: does not believe any of the former for
the testimony of Scripture; but for some other cause that is moveable.

If any say, what need of Interpreters, if the Scriptures have the sense the
words thereof import: I Answer, they are very needful; not to Straighten, or
take away the sense the words import; or to devise another; But to open and
explain, That sense the words bears, and to cleerand evidence out of the
words themselves, and confirm it by other-like places, and so to press it on
us; and apply it to us for admonition, Instruction, Dehortation, Exhortation,
Consolation, and so to root out this evil estimate of the Scriptures and evil
dealing with it, from the hearts and mouths of all Christians; that the
Scripture may be esteemed meet to answer words of truth with, as is said. Prove.
22.21.

CHAP. XV.
Of Answering a second OBJECTION.

Objection II.
SAint JOHN makes it an infallible mark of the love of CHRIST, to them for
whom he laid down his life. 1 John 3.16.

But God has not loved every man in the World; For he hated Esau, Romans 9.13.
but his Church, and his own, whom he loves to the end. Ephesians. 5.25. Joh. 13.1.
Therefore Christ dyed not for Every man.

ANSWER.
1 John 3.1. Being spoken in the first Person: and applicatively of perception
of love in the Death of Christ: propounded for example and motive: It is much
abused, in being cited to this end; as may be seen, Chap. 3. and 4. and 5. and
so the Proposition is of no force: for it is a proof of the Love of God to the
World, That he sent his Son to be the Savior of the World, Joh. 3.16. and 1 John 4.14. and so of the Love of Christ to mankind. To give himself a Ransom
for all men. 1 Timothy 2.6. and yet a proof of more especial Love. To choose, and
bring any in the perception of this Love, to Union and Fellowship with himself.
Joh. 15.15, 16. and Tit. 3.4, 7. as in our Types, the bringing out of Egypt was
a proof of his Love to all so brought out; but yet more especial love to those
that hearkened to his Judgments, and did them. Deuteronomy. 7.8, 12, 13, 14.

Besides, the Apostles do not there propound the Death of Christ, to show how
many he dyed for; or as the foundation, to bring in unbelievers to believe, or
to show how many God loves; but only speaking of the perception of Love by
Believers: He shows wherein they perceived it; and that was, in that he laid
down his life for us. (and this was sure, when we were his enemies, and so
found when he called us also. Romans 5.8, 10. Ephesians. 1.2, 4. And that to this
end, to move us even so to love our Brother (who without question is beloved,)
whereas this Objection shuts the door of loving any, till, or farther then we
know his Election, Though the Gospel (this Objection opposes) gives a
certain ground, for loving all men with Love of Compassion. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.
Tit. 3.2, 3, 4. and for Loving Believers with Love of delight. Psalm. 16.2.
Coloss. 1.4, 5. Phil. 1.3, 4, 5, 8, 9.

This Assumption is full of infidelity and Blasphemy; If it had been, that God
does not love every man in the World: It might have been granted and proved;
But to say, God has not loved any but his Church, and chosen, whom he loves to
the end; is a blasphemy so great, that the same may be said of it, which is
spoken of that Apostasy, Jere. 2.10, 11, 12. For this, with one breath, both
blasphemeth, and contradicts our Saviors affirmation of Gods love of the
World, some part whereof will notwithstanding perish. Joh. 3.16, 17, 18, 19.

The Prophets affirmation, That the Lord is good to All; and his tender mercies
are over all his Works. Psalm. 145.8, 9. and 136.25.

Yea, the truth and force of all Gods earnest Expostulation, Intimation of
Love, Exhortations, and Call to such as refused. Deutr. 5.29. Hosea 5. and 7.1.
Isa. 5.4. Prove. 1.23, 24. Luke 19.42. Matthew. 23.37. Hos. 13.19.

Yea, the truth and force of our Saviors Exhortation to his Disciples, for
being like their heavenly Father, in Love and mercy to enemies. Matthew. 5.44.48.

The Testimony of Gods goodness in all his Works. Act. 14.17. Romans 2.4.

Yea, this Assumption goes yet further, in that it does not only say, God
does not now love them, (while they walk in sin) But God has not loved every
man in the World; no, not any time since Adams fall. So as to give any Ransom
for them; and so denies. Heb. 2.9.

Nay, it stops not here, (except his Elect, whom he loves for ever;) It says,
He has not loved any other of mankind; no, not when he made and beheld them
all righteous in Adam, as the Public Person; and blessed them, and avouched
all his works good. Eccl. 7.29. Genesis 1.27, 31. It says, God has not loved,
but hated them: (oh fearful! To say, that God hates the Righteous, Psalm.
45.7.) and so they could not fall from the love of God, in the fall of Adam;
since his Love was never toward them: nor could they fall under the hatred of
God, by sin, either Original or Actual, since they were under it before,
(if this Assumption were true;) for it says, he has not loved them: and if
any should tell them, Their sins are very great, for offending so loving a
God; for despising so rich a Ransom, and refusing the grace offered them in
the means; and giving way to serve sin, that cost Christ Jesus his blood, to
satisfy for them; And that they forsake their own mercies, by following lying
vanities: And so warn them of the great condemnation that will befall them for
the same, if they perish in their evils, and entreat them, by all the Mercies
of God, and sufferings of Christ for them; To hearken to the Gospel, Repent,
and believe, and turn unto Christ. This assumption holds them back, and says,
It is all Lies; for God has not loved them: Oh whether will this blasphemy
reach!

But to give some satisfying Answer to this Objection; Let the Scripture be
viewed, what it says of Love, or Hatred, which there appears twofold. First
the Scripture mentions a diverse kind or degree of Love in God toward men,
shown in the fruits thereof: as to say;

1. A Love of Compassion, Pity and Mercy, Psalm. 136.25. and 145.8, 9. Such a
Love, as extends it self so far for the good of man, (loved) in good things
afforded, That a man is made saveable; and so much is done for him, and to him;
That in accepting, and holding the same; and yielding thereto, and
therethrough, to God: He might be saved, Psalm. 36.5, 6, 7.

And less love then this, was not to the Angels, before they fell. Jude 6. Nor
less love to all Mankind, before they fall. Eccl. 7.29. Genesis 1.2. Yea, it was
not taken away from Mankind, upon the fall: though the fall deserved it. Gene.
3.15. but in this Love, Did God give his Son to be the Savior of the Worid.
Isa. 4.14. Joh. 3.16. And in this Love does GOD, for his Sons sake, who gave
himself a Ransom for all men, preserve them. Col. 1.16, 20. and therein gives
a witness of his Mercy. Act. 14.17. and that to lead them to Repentance. Romans
2.4.

2. A love of delight and pleasance, taking in the beloved, an abounding,
flowing, and honoring Love, that rests not till the Beloved be brought into
Union, Fellowship, and Possession of it self, and all its own Privileges. Number.
14.8. Psalm. 18.19. and 36.8. And in this Love does God love his Son Jesus
Christ. Pro. 8.30. Isa. 42. 1 Jo. 5.20. and 16.15. And in this Love does Jesus
Christ Love all his Elect and chosen Children. Psalm. 149.4. and 147.11. Joh.
15.9. and 17.21, 23. yet so, as this peculiar love, is not manifested to them,
till in sight and belief of the former Love, their hearts be overcome to
believe in JESUS CHRIST, and to love Him, and their Brethren, and to walk in
that love. 1 John 4.14, 16, 19. 1 Cor. 2.9. Joh. 14.21, 23.

Secondly, the Scripture mentions a diverse kind or degree of hatred, both in
God and man; Shown in the fruits, as to say;

1. A not so much loving, as others are beloved: and this expressly called
Hatred. Genes. 29.30.31.33. and so intimated, Luke 14.26. and thus it is said
of God; He refused the Tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the Tribe of
Ephraim. Psalm. 78.67. and so he is said to abhor Israel. verse. 59. and to
have been an Enemy to Israel. Lam. 2.5.

2. An Hatred that is furious, positive, tending to, and moving for the
overthrow and destruction of the hated. Deuteronomy. 19.11. Psalm. 78.76.

Now the love of Compassion, and the Hatred, that is in a less degree of Love,
may very well stand together, both in God. Hos. 11.5.8, 9. and in man, Jere.
9.1, 2. and so God may Love, with the Love of Compassion, and show tender
mercies, waiting with long suffering and patience for, and toward such as he
hides himself from: and is angry with; and speaks in words and works against.
Isai. 57.17, 18. and 63.10, 11. Jere. 18.7. Isa. 31.2.

And such kind of Love are his People commanded to follow, and be like him in,
even toward such, as for whom they cannot but mourn, and with whom they
cannot have intimate Union and Fellowship, with Gods allowance, who yet bids
them love them. Prove. 14.7. and 23.20. Ephesians. 5.11. Matthew. 5.44.48.

And to say, whosoever God Loves with this Love of Compassion, he loves for
ever, or to say he hates with any other hatred, then that which may be in that
lesser degree of Love, any, before they have hardened their hearts against him,
and turned from him, in abusing of, and rebelling against the fruits of his
Love vouchsafed, is plainly contrary to the Scripture. Hos. 9.10. I found
Israel like grapes, etc. to verse. 15. All their wickedness is in Gilgall for
there I hated them for the wickedness of their doings, I will drive them out
of my House; I will love them no more; So Zach. 7.11.13. and 1.18, 28. and 2.4,
5.

And that this Love to mankind may not be undervallewed: This I add, that the
discovery of this love of God to mankind, (in the gift of, and Propitiation
made by his Son, and fruits thereof,) is, That in and by which the Holy
Spirit does, (usually) first overcome a man, convince him, and enable him to
believe; and s^renew, and bring him in to God. Psalm. 36.5, 6, 7. and
107.1.8.15. So Christ set the same before Nicodemus, to that end. Joh.
3.5.15.20. and Paul the same to the Corinthians. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20, 21. and
confesses himself, and the rest of Believers, to be so brought in to God. Tit.
3.3, 4, 5. And those that have experimented this, can set forth the same Hope
for others, that are in no worse case, then themselves once were. 1 Timothy 1.14,
16. Tit. 3.

And as for the love of delight, that is peculiar, and appears not usually to
any, till in belief of the former, they be brought to love God, and therefore,
even so to be waited for. Joh. 14.21.23. and so intimated toward Brethren.
Ephe. 5.1, 2.

But now for such, as while the love of Gods Compassion flows toward them, in
his use of means to them, and moving his People with Compassion to endeavor
to do them good, and by his Spirit knocks at their hearts; If some of these
do, and will persist in rebellion, till he give them up to Satan; such are
Reprobated of God, and so hated of him; yea, and so far as they are known to
be such, they are so accounted, and hated of his People; And none but such set
forth in Scripture to be so hated of God. Prove. 1.23.33. Ezekiel. 24.13. Iere.
6.16.27, 30. 1 John 5.18. which overthrowes the Assumption, and the Objection.

As for the instances, Romans 9.13. although for the Elder to serve the younger,
be hated, in respect of peculiar love ( Psalm. 78.67.) yet it stands well enough
with the love of Compassion, and as for any other hatred of Esau, the Scripture
mentions none, until it was for the contempt of his Birthright, Heb. 12.17.
like that Hos. 9.14, 15. which is used to warn us, that we slight not the
Grace of Christ: As for the Hatred mentioned. Romans 9.13. If laying his
Mountains waste, (which was the fruit of it) did witness such hatred. Did not
the before giving him those Mountains, Testify like love, though not such as
to Jacob? Mal. 1.2, 3.

As for Ephe. 5.25. It speaks of the peculiar love of Christ to his Church,
and so of higher ends of giving himself, then Ransom and Propitiation which the
Church has received, even of the speciall^ fruits of Spiritual Application,
verse. 26. Nor is this here set forth as a Proposition for faith; But for an
example, for believing Husbands and Wives to follow in love, and if he had been
exhorting to love of Compassion and patience, toward the unjust and enemies:
He would have said, who suffered, the just, for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. So
that here he was not showing how many God loves, and Christ Dred for, which
other Places shown to be All men, of which before, Chap. 4.

As for Ioh. 13.1. will any argue hence, That because our Savior loved his
Apostles and his Disciples; that by the heavenly Call, were drawn in to him,
and followed him in this World, and that as he having loved them, so he loved
them to the end; and showed it in his care of them, ministration to them, and
Prayers for them: for of those, and such love, it is evident he means, Ioh.
13.14. and 15. and 16. and 17. Therefore he neither did, nor does love any, but
his Called ones: and so all must first love him, before they be at all loved of
him: (which is contrary to 1 Ioh. 4.10, 19.) The Citation of Ioh. 13.1. to this
Assumption, implies so much: but falsely, for it cannot be proved; That Judas
Iscariot was none of those that were Adversaries to Jesus Christ, for his Love,
and rewarded him evil for good, and hatred for his Love. Psalm. 109.4, 5. Joh.
6 70. and 17.12. and so the Assumption abides false.

To let pass the confounding, the Love of God, and the preception thereof in
one, without distinction: and the making the extent of the Love of Compassion,
and fruits thereof, and the extent of the love of Delight, and fruits thereof,
one, and of like largeness, without distinction: Both which the Scripture
distinguishes, besides the shutting the door against any more coming in to
God, or loving any which are not already come in, etc. which are the least
evils of this Objection.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Answering a Third OBJECTION.

Objection III.
ALL those for whom JESUS CHRIST did Die, and pay the price and Ransom, which
God required to satisfy his Justice: are justified by his blood. 1 John 1.7.
and shall be saved from wrath through him. Romans 5.9. God being a Most Just GOD,
cannot require the Debt twice. Viz. of Christ, and of those for whom he paid it.

But All men, and Every man is not justified by his Blood; nor shall be saved
from wrath through him.

Therefore you must needs yield, That Christ Dyed but for some, even his Elect,
unless you will deny God to be just.

ANSWER.
This Objection has all its strength in the first Proposition, with the reason
annexed to it: and to that I will bend the Answer.

First, in the Proposition, are two notorious untruth's; as to say, 1. That
all, that Christ did Die, and pay the price and Ransom for, which GOD required
to satisfy his Justice, are justified by His Blood. 1 John 1.7.

This is so contradictory to the Scripture, that little need be said thereof;
enough is already shown in the 8. Chap. from the comparison between Christ and
Adam, and how that all men fell, and became under sin and death in the first
Adam at once; Yet none by, or through him partake of that misery in sinfulness
and death, Till they come to have a being from him: And so, though all men be
in Christ, as the Public Person, restored and justified: yet by and through
him, of the benefit of that restoration, in justification by his blood; Do
none partake, till they come to have a being in him; and that which is
Natural, is first, as is there shown.

Besides, what ever justification be in Christ, (through his bloodshed) for
men, yet he is set forth to be a Propitiation, through faith in his blood, for
the Remission of Sins. Romans 3.25. And it is evident; that the Justification
by his blood, mentioned. Romans 5.9. Is a justification received by faith in his
blood: of such as have received the Atonement in believing: as is evident, Romans
5.1.3.11. neither is it any where said, by the Spirit of God; nor did he ever
teach any to say; That all that Christ Dyed, and gave himself a Ransom for;
either so are, or shall be justified by his blood; He ever affirms, that
Justification to be by blood, but not by bloodshed only, but by and in the
application of the bloodshed, the sprinkling or washing therewith. Heb. 12.24.
1 Pet. 1.2. And so have the justified ones confessed. Revel. 1.5. and this is
to be redeemed unto God, and justified by his blood. Revel. 5.9. of which
Justification by his blood, many that have it, had their time here on this
Earth, in which they wanted it. Col. 2.13. and many of the Elect (in Gods
Counsel,) that yet want it, for whom by this Objection, Christ should not have
Dyed.

As for that cleansing. 1 John 1.7. and forgiveness, verse. 9. it speaks of a
farther cleansing and dispensation of grace to such as are in Christ, and walk
in Christ, and so already justified by his blood; and so not to this purpose,
unless to make the Objection vile.

But this untruth is not only false and gross in it self; but opposes, and
denies many sayings of the Truth; for it denies the truth of our Saviors
sayings. Joh. 3.17, 18. and 8.^4. and the truth of the Spirits convincements.
Joh. 16.8.11. and the truth of many Affirmations of Scriptures, as that all
shall bear the Image of the first Adam. 1 Cor. 15 46. that all are by nature
Dead in Tresp^sses and sins; and so walk, till they be borne again. Ephesians.
2.1, 2, 3. Col. 1.21. That God justifyeth the ungodly in their coming in to
believe on him. Romans 4.5. Yea this untruth denies, that men are justified by
faith, so much, as by an Instrument receiving it, but only discerning it:
Seeing this ununtruth affirms them justified (not only in, but) by his
Blood; before they came to believe on him: and so contradicts. Act. 10.43. and
13.38. Romans 3.25, 26, 28. and 4.24, 25. and 5.1.11. So that the contrary to
this affirmation is true, namely;

That many, for whom JESUS CHRIST did Die, and shed his blood, remain yet
without that Justification that is in him, by virtue of his bloodshed for
them; and so are not justified by his blood, because they believe nor on him.
Act. 13.38. Joh. 3.18. 1 Timothy 1.12, 13, 14, 15.

2. That all that Christ did die, and pay the price and Ransom for, which God
required to satisfy his Justice; shall be saved from wrath through him.

This likewise is very false, and plainly contradictory to the Scripture, that
says in express terms, there will be many, even denying the Lord that bought
them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. 2 Pet. 1.1, 2. And this
untruth denies the Lordship of Christ, grounded on his death for All; and the
equity of his Judgment, and sentence of any to a second death. Romans 14.9.12.
Phil. 2.8, 11. Act. 17.30.31. 2 Cor. 5.10, 14, 15. as is shown Chap. 2. before;
And this untruth denies that aggravation of sin which Scripture uses, when
it charge with such an evil, as causing to perish the weak Brother, for
whom Christ Dyed. Romans 14.15. 1 Cor. 8.11. So that the contrary to this
Affirmation is true, That many for whom Christ dyed, and gave himself a
Ransom, that he might be their Lord, and they live to him, shall one day be
overthrown in wrath, or fire unquenchable, because they would not submit to
him, nor suffer him to Reign over them. 2 These. 1.8.

Secondly, In the Reason annexed to the Proposition, is both presumptuous
rashness, and gross ignorance declared; as to say:

1. A presumptuous rashness, in an intimate charging God with unjustice, for
did not God lay on Christ the iniquity of us all. Isai. 53.2, 6. 2 Cor. 5.19.
was not Christ manifested, to take away our sins, and is He not without
sin, even the just One. 1 John 3.5. and 2.1, 2. and has not God accepted him
and his Sacrifice and Ransom given. Matthew. 17, 5. Heb. 7.8, 9, 10. even for
all that for which he gave it; and is not God Righteous, to give his Son,
even all that which by virtue of his Ransom only, belonged to Jesus Christ:
Surely God is Righteous; but that were injustice, not only to require the
whole Debt again, but even any part thereof, either of him, or of any other,
that are discharged by him, or to detain from him, or any of his, any thing
that by virtue of that Ransom only, is due to be conferred on them: Isa.
53.10, 11.

Yet Gods own Children have complained, and cried out by reason of trouble,
with the law of sin in their members. Romans 7.15.24. Gal. 5.17. and God says
of his own Children, that are the members of Christ. Psalm. 89.32. I will
visit their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes; and
says expressly, They suffer for the punishment of their sin. Lam. 3.22, 39.
and in their Repentance, will have them accept the punishment of their
iniquity. Levit. 26.41. Mich. 7.9.

Now to say, the punishments upon Gods Children, are not punishments for sin,
but only corrections for amendment (they being both) is too weak an evasion,
and contradictory to the Scripture. Hos. 5.15. and 6.1, 2. and 12.1. Now is God
unrighteous, that punishes, God forbid. Romans 3.4, 5. Psalm. 51.4. But how will
the urgers of this Reason, for justifying the two Propositions; justify God;
and get out of this snare they have laid for others. I hope they will not say
with the Sea the Postscript
Papists, that Jesus Christ only paid the greatest part of the debt to his
Father, wholly in respect of eternal punishments, and left a part of the debt
in respect of Temporal punishments, for his people to pay, in bearing the same
here in sufferings and Penitential Satisfactions; and making up what is
wanting thereof in Purgatory: for this will exceedingly derogate from the
Sufferings and Satisfaction made by Christ, to his Father; and flying this, as
they have good cause to do; they have, by joining this Reason with the two
former Propositions, charged God with unjustice; and left no way to justify
him, in punishing any of his Elect, for whom Christ dyed, and paid the price,
they being already justified, and to be saved from wrath through him, as the
Proposition affirms; and what presumptuous rashness was this so to Reason
and affirm, for the maintenance of two falshods. Neither does Romans 5.9. say,
That all that Christ dyed, and paid the price for, shall be saved from wrath
through him.

But speaking of Believers that had experimented justification through his
blood: and it declares the more abundance of their confidence; That they should
now much rather be saved by his life, and from wrath through him.

2. Here appears gross ignorance, about the End of the Death of Christ, as
the price, Satisfaction for sin, and Ransom, which he gave himself to God,
for mankind: which was not, that by that Act of his with God, men should,
without any more done by him, See Postscript.
be presently possessed of all that Justification, freedom from deaths, and
enjoyment of life that is in him, or which he has wrought or purchased: No,
no, there was something else to be done by him from heaven, in application of
the former to effect that; it was not, that by that Act d^ne by himself, and in
his own body only, any of the Sons of men should receive, either
justification from sin in their Consciences, or purgation of sin out of
their Natures, which is to be effected by his Spirit, in application of that
blood, speaking Peace, and purging and renewing. Heb. 12.24. and 9.14. Tit.
3.4.5, 7. or Redemption of their bodies in a through and perfect Freedom from
all misery and Death, and trouble and sorrow of Soul, mortallity, weakness,
affliction and Death of body, which is to be affected at his pleasure through
his Divine Power, by virtue of his resurrection from the Dead. 1 Cor. 15. tot.
or the bringing them to, and possessing them of all the life, Righteousness
and Inheritance that he has obtained: which is to be effected through the
virtue of his blood, by his life, Spirit and Divine Power. Romans 5.10. 1 Pet.
1.5. Heb. 7.25.

But the End of His Death, in respect of the Ransom only, as perfected in and
by himself, in his own body, was; That he might be Lord of all men, and have
them in his dispose; That he might have all released to him, and have the
pardon in his hands, and Spirit and Life, and inheritance to give freely, as
he should think fit, who is of one mind with his Father; That he might have
Power and Authority to ease them of as much trouble, exercise as much patience,
and show them as much mercy and bounty, as might be meet to lead them to
Repentance; And also to use such means as he pleases, to Call and bring them
to Repentance, and Faith, and to send forth his Spirit to move at their Hearts,
that they might Repent and Believe:

That by Spiritual Application of his Blood; and exercise of his Divine Power;
he might justify, purify, and bring to eternal life, those that in
submission to his Spirit, in the means, do Repent and come in to believe on
him, -- To harden, and give up the rest in his Season, -- To raise all out of
their graves at the last; and to bring all before his Judgment Seat, and then
to possess of the Inheritance all that in the day of grace have believed on
him, and to sentence to a second death, all that throughout the day of grace
have rebelled against him, and for those ends he gave the ransom, and paid
the whole debt himself alone, and without requiring it again, or any part of
it of Christ, or any other; God has given all this over into the hands of
Christ, and will not, neither does deprive him of any part, nor any other of
any part, of that which by the dispensation of Christ, appertains to them; And
all this is already shown in Chap. 1. in the Reconciliation wrought by Christ
with God for men, and the common Salvation extended to men; and in Chap. 2. in
the first end of the death of Christ, in the three respects thereof, and in
Chap. 3. the second head thereof, and in the latter end of the 6. Chapter, in
stating the Question, and in Chap. 9.

Now then, that any mercy in patience and bounty is vouchsafed to men; that any
means is used, and any motion of Spirit afforded, is the fruit of the Ransom
of Christ, to lead to Repentance: That any misery yet, that lies on them, it is
from the Wisdom and Justice of Christ, whose season is not yet come to free
them. But that which holds any under finne and wrath, and condemnation, and
deprives them of the benefit of the Death and Ransom of Christ, is their
unbelief: Not simply, because they were sinners, but because by Repentance and
faith they come not in to him that has made Satisfaction for their sins.
Joh. 3.18.36. and 8.12. and this is Just, and according to Gods mind. Joh. 3.16.

And so to Answer the Objection.

All men were bound by virtue of the grace of God in the Creation, to Love God
with all their heart, mind, soul, and strength, and their Neighbors as
themselves; and to walk in that love; and the least variation, or short
coming thereof, leaves them under sin, curse and death, and helpless; they
having no power to fulfill this Law, having lost it in the fall, and so
hopeless. And by virtue of the grace of God in the Redemption wrought by
Christ, all men are again farther bound to this former love, and walking in
it; and short-comming thereof, leaves them also under sin, curse and death.
Gal. 3.10. And power thereto they yet have none, yet notwithout hope, in that
the Propitiation is made by him for them. Joh. 1.29. 1 John 2.2. and he it
filled with Spirit, to send forth to them, and will enlighten every of them.
Psalm. 68.18. By virtue of that common Salvation extended to all men by Christ,
the door to repentance and faith is opened, and they in the means, and in
some sort, by Spirit at one time or other, called to Repentance, and howsoever
God seems to winck it their follies till then; yet then he warns them to
repent, that so repenting, and coming in to believe in Christ, they may
through him receive remission of sins, and be enabled to love God in Christ,
and one another, as Christ has loved them; and to walk in that Faith and
Love. Act. 14.17. and 17.30, 31. and for want of this, they remain under sin
and wrath, and in danger of a Second Death. Joh. 3.17, 18, 19. and this is a
new Debt.

Now if Jesus Christ send forth more light and means, and strive farther with
them, and they be found hardening themselves, and rebelling against him; It
increases still their debt, Romans 2.4, 5. And if he visit with punishments, he
is just and Righteous, and there is mercy also in it. Joh. 33.14.23.

And if he still strive, and they still refuse both instruction and
correction, and will not submit and come in to their lawful Lord, that bought
them, and called them: if he give them up to Satan and destruction; Is not
this just? Joh. 3.19. Jere. 6.16.28, 30. And thus we find in Scripture, set
forth; That

All smarting corrections on Believers, are for sin against Grace, Goodness
and Spirit, in the means vouchsafed. Levit. 26.11.14.

All heavy judgments on others, for imprisoning the known truth in
unrighteousness. Romans 1.16, 17. and refusing to be gathered by Christ. Mat.
23.37. the great condemning evils are set down. Heb. 6.4, 5. and 10.29.

By our Saviors Affirmation. Joh. 3.18, 19. and the Spirits convincements.
Joh. 16 8, 11.

Unbelief is the main sin, and the cause why so many abide under the guilt of
sin, and the cause that sin has such Power, and brings forth so many evil
fruits in men; and it is the root and nurse of more grievous sins that they
fall into; and all may be concluded in one word. Not obeying the Gospel of God:
and this is the debt which God requires; and for which men shall suffer in
everlasting fire. 2 These. 1.8.

So that here is not two payments of one debt, but a new debt, in spising the
Goodness of GOD, in the Remedy provided, including the old Debt, in a new
manner of guiltiness, for despising the Remedy; not seeking, nor accepting the
Release procured by Christ. Joh. 5.40.

And here is another, even a Second death, when all are raised out of the
first,) even that which was not primely prepared for mankind, but for the
Devil and his Angels. Matthew. 25.41.

And it is justice with God, to give over all into the hands of his Son, who
will judge them All, according to the Gospel, in which he was set forth to
them; and they would not that he should Reign over them. Joh. 12.48. Romans 2.16.
Luke 19.14, 22, 27. And is not God and Christ just in all this?

Surely, among men this would be understood; If some Subjects had committed
Treason against their King, and offered indignity to his Crown, and had wasted
his treasure, and were for this banished from the Court, deprived of their
Estates, confined to dark Prison among slaves; and enjoined to suffer stripes
every day; and at a certain time, to suffer a shameful and tormenting death:
If the Kings soul longed to show them mercy, and his Justice not permitting;
and the Kings Son, with his Fathers consent, would undertake for these
Traitors, to bring them before the King again: and should for them lay down
his Crown, suffer the punishment due to them; and give a sufficient Ransom to
the King for them all: that he may have the Pardon for them all; and have them
all released to him, that He may be their Lord, and bring them out of Prison
at his Pleasure, and bestow the Inheritance on as many of them as would accept
his grace, and willingly come under his Government, and judge the rest: And
that he might have Liberty to ease them of so much of their daily pains in
the Prison, and show them what favors, and use what means he pleased to
persuade and allure them to come under his Government: And the King professes
himself to be fully satisfied with his Sons Ransom, and setts him on his
Throne, and gives all this into his hands, and sends word of this new Treaty to
the Imprisoned Traitors, and bids them to hearken and submit to his Son: And
the Kings Son begins to take Order for them; so that the greatest of their
daily Torments and Pains is taken away, many sweet refreshings and Liberties
afforded them in the Prison, to win them to good estimate of the Prince, who
sends his Ambassadors amongst them with the Proclamation of the Pardon, and
invitation to come in to the Government of the Prince, and Promise, that
whosoever so did, should both have the Pardon given him, and be made an Heir
with the Prince: If any of these prefer their Fellowship with the Slaves, and
Liberties given them in Prison, before these offers of the Prince, and refuse
to come under his gracious Government, And then at the appointed time, he call
them all out of Prison, and adjudge them a Double Punishment, and a more
grievous death then that he delivered them from; and aggravate their Rebellions
against him; By all the Evils they were found in when he undertook for them,
and all the cost he was at for them; and all the means he used toward them,
and all the Circumstances of their Rebellion against him: and so judge them to
Punishment accordingly; Will any reasonable man say now; That this were
injustice now in the King, or the Kings Son, or two payments of one debt; I
am persuaded not; Though no comparrison can fully set forth, but darkly hint
this business; And enough to Answer the Objection, which was directly framed
to gainsay the express and plain Sayings of Scripture.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Answering a Fourth OBJECTION.

Objection IV.
THose for whom Christ would not vouchsafe to manifest himself to, or to pray
for, He would not die for. Romans 8.32. Joh. 14.17, 22. and 17.9.

But Christ will not manifest himself to, nor pray for the world of the ungodly
and wicked men; Therefore he never dyed for them.

ANSWER.
This Objection is very false, and many ways faulty; For,

1. It were neither right nor good reasoning, to say, God would never make the
Heavens and the Earth, and a World of Creatures in both, for that man; and make
that man in His own Image, Righteous; and put him in a Paradise, and give him a
Tree of Life, and provide him a Sabboath, and make him Lord of the Works of
his hands; and put the Life and Privileges of all Mankind in his keeping; whom
he would not preserve in that good estate; yet has this Argument the same
(though in a less degree of) strength, to deny God's creating all men; yea, or
the first Adam righteous: That this Objection has, to deny the Death of
Christ as a Ransom for All. Eccl. 7.29. 1 Pet. 4.19.

2. The Objection expresses not what manifestation it means, and this is
sure; Christ will so manifest himself to All men, that they shall see what
right of Lordship he had over them, by virtue of his Death and Ransom given,
and Conquest made for them; Even so, that they shall see the greatness of
their sin, in despising and rebelling against Him, and Persecuting His; and
shall come before his Judgment Seat, and acknowledge him Lord, to the glory of
God. Isa. 45.23. and 66.14. Psalm. 86.9. Matthew. 25.31. Ezekiel. 35.11, 12. Romans
14.19.12. 2 Cor. 5.10. Phil. 2.10, 11.

3. If Jesus Christ had any where said; That he never did, nor ever would pray
for the World (which he never said,) yet it were evil in us, to use that as a
Reason to deny the truth of his own words; That said, he would give his flesh
for the life of the World. Joh. 6.51. and that he dyed for all. 2 Cor. 5.14,
15. and every man. Heb. 2.9. and gave himself a Ransom for All. 1 Timothy 2.6.

4. This Argument confounds into one, without difference or distinction.

First, Gods love of Compassion, (which belongs to all. Psalm. 145.8, 9. Joh.
3.16.) and his love of Delight, (which only belongs to all those which in
belief of his former Love, are brought in to love him. Joh. 21.23. 1 Cor. 2.9.
Prove. 8.17.)

Secondly, The Death of Christ, as the Propitiation and Ransom, (which is for
All. Heb. 2.9. 1 Timothy 2.6. 1 John 2.2.) and the advacation of Christ, (that is
only,) for Believers. 1 John 2.1. Joh. 14.16.

Thirdly, Christ sending his Spirit, to enlighten every man. Joh. 1.9. and
16.8, 11. and his Peculiar giving of Spirit, to comfort and lead Believers into
all Truth. Joh. 14.17. and 16.14, 15. All which things the Scripture makes
distinct, as is shown. Chap. 1. and 2. and 3. and 10.

5. Those to whom Christ does graciously manifest himself, are in his first
manifesting himself to them, found sinners, and ungodly, and of the World, as
they were when he Dyed for them. Isa. 55.5. and 65. 1 Matthew. 9.13. Act. 9.3, 4,
5. and 26.13, 18. 1 Timothy 1.13.16. Tit. 3.3, 4, 5.

So that this whole Argument is fallen without farther Answer; yet the Proofs
are to be considered, to see whether they countenance it, or be abused by it;

To prove the first Proposition is cited. Romans 8.32. He that spared not his
own Son, but delivered him up for us all: how shall be not with him, freely
give us all things also.

ANSWER. I.
This is not spoken in the third Person, nor of the Ransom only, nor as a
Proposition for unbeleevers to bring them in to believe, and so gives not
Answer to the Question, for how many be dyed? and so is dangerously abused, in
being brought to that end, as is shown, Chap. 3.4. This being applicatively
spoken, of and to Believers, to confirm them in that abundant hope which they
had, and which no other had or could have, till they believed, and so were in
Christ, as they were. 1 John 5.10.13.

2. This is not spoken so, as may serve the Proposition, viz. He that spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall He not freely
give us all things; It is not said so: But how shall he not with him also
freely give us all things: So speaking of his free giving him to us, and with
him all things also.

We that believe, do through the grace and mercy of God, in some measure
know, that Jesus Christ, having made the Propitiation, in being delivered up to
death for our sins; and raised for our Justification. Romans 4.25. Is now
exalted at Gods right hand: unmeasurably filled with the Holy Ghost, in our
nature glorified, The Advocate, high Priest, Prophet and King. Act. 2.32.33. 1 John 2.12. Heb. 5.7, 8. The Wisdom of God: the Power of God: the Son of
God, and Heir of the Kingdom. 1 Cor. 1.24. Matthew. 13.17. Heb. 1.2. The
brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his Person, by whom he
upholdeth all things, and that is one with the Father, and in whom the Father
dwells. Heb. 1.3. Joh. 10.30. and 14.9, 10, 11, 20. whose all that is the
Fathers, is, 1 Ioh. 16.15. Who is made of God, to us, wisdom, righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption. 1 Cor. 1.30. Who is the Fountain of Life and
spirit, out of whom it abundantly flows to all that believe on him, and
walk in that says, to make them Sons, to witness their Sonship, to
confirm them to Christ, To lead them into all Truth, to preserve them, to
cause all to work for good to them; to bring them to the Inheritanc and
Kingdom with himself. Psalm. 36.8, 9. Act. 2.33. Joh. 7.38, 39. Tit. 3.4.7.
Joh. 1.12. Romans 8.16. 2 Cor. 3.3.18. Joh. 16.13, 14. Romans 8.28.17. 1 Pet. 1.3.5.

Now when God, by his Spirit, so makes known his grace in Christ, through the
Gospel, that he enters the heart, with the grace of Christ enabling it to
believe, and so receive the Atonement, That the Believer is enabled thereby to
depend on Christ for the hope Discovered in him; Then and therein is the
Believer drawn, and given to Christ, Ioh. 6.44, 45. 1 Pet. 1.21, 22. and
Christ in and by his Word and Spirit, is given to the Believer. Tit. 3, 4, 5,
6. So as the Believers may say, Not only unto us a Son is borne; but also,
unto us a Son is given. Isai. 9.6.

They now by free-gift, and by believing receipt, having Christ, and having life
by having him, and being Sons also thereby. 1 John 5.10, 11, 12, 13. Joh.
1.12, 13. which gives them hope of all good. 1 Ioh. 3.1, 2.

And hence the Apostle raises the Conclusion of faith, he having now given us
freely this his own Son, whom before, when we were enemies, he delivered up
to death for us, How shall he not now (in giving him,) with him also freely
give us all things. Compare Romans 4.24, 25.5.1.5.10, 11. and 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
Gal. 3.29. with this. Romans 8.32. and all this will well appear.

So that this Place gives no Proof to the Proposition; and is dangerously
abused, to be cited to bear such a sense, as shuts the door against all the
choice uses of it, and opens a door to horrible abuse, for, were it not wicked
reasoning to say, because the Apostle says, of, and to Believers. Romans 14, 10,
12. We shall All stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. So that every one
of us shall give an account of himself to God. Therefore, that he dyed for All,
and we must All appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, is meant of the
Believers, and the Elect only.

To prove the Assumption, is cited. Joh. 14.17. Even the Spirit of Truth, whom
the World cannot receive, etc. verse. 22. Judas says unto him (not Iscariot,)
Lord, how is it that thou will manifest thy self to us, and not unto the world;
and 17.9. I pray not for the World, But for them which thou have given me, for
they are thine.

Ans. 1. These places speaks not of the Ransom and Propitiation only, nor yet
for that, and the fruits thereof only, but also of higher Communication of
Spirit and Privileges, which Jesus Christ, by virtue of his blood, (both as
the ransom, and as the seal of the New Testament) with which he is ascended,
does from his Fathers right hand, send forth to those that are Called, and do
believe on him, and to no other; though in the Counsel of God elected. So that
these Places prove not the Assumption; but are abused in being cited to it,
without any distinction, whereas Christ in the Scripture, makes a distinction
of -- these things. 1 Cor. 2.9. Heb. 9.14. Joh. 7.38, 39. and 3.12. as is
shown, Chap. 1.2.3. before.

2. Neither do these places say, the World of the wicked and ungodly men, as
the Assumption does, and incited them to it, would have them understand where,
if by wicked and ungodly, be meant the seed of the Serpent; which with an
Emphasis, are so called, Then it overthrows the Proposition, and conclusion:
and intimately confesses what it openly denies; For they are therefore even so
called, the wicked and ungodly, and of the wicked One, because they have
refused to come in to God by: yea, have despised and abused those mercies and
means Procured for, and extended to them, through the Death and Ransom of
Christ for them, and accompanied with some gift of his Spirit, to turn them in
to God, as is evident by comparing Genesis 4.3.7, 16. with 1 John 3.12. and Genesis
6.2, 3, 5. with 1 Pet. 3.18, 19, 20. 2 Pet. 2.1.5. Prove. 1.23.25. Act. 7.51.

But if by wicked and ungodly, be meant, the world of Mankind, as they are
Natural men, and unconverted, Then it either excludes many of them from being
wicked and ungodly, in any sense, and so contradicts the Scripture. Ephe. 2.1,
2, 3. Tit. 3.2, 3, 4. Col. 1.22. Romans 5.6. or else shuts them out, all, and
every one, (Elect as well as others,) from being of the number of them, for
whom Christ dyed; for they all are incapable of receiving that Portion of
Spirit here promised. Nor are such manifestations and Privileges here meant
for any (though Elect,) till they first so believe in Christ, that they love
him. Joh. 7.38, 39. 1 Cor. 2.9, 15. and howsoever this Assumption mingles
Natural men together with, and makes them one with the Seed of the Serpent,
and so sinfully abuses the Places cited; by Addition:

3. This Assumption, with the whole Argument, denies the truth of the Gospel,
which the Scripture shows plainly, is to be Preached to all men, even Every
man. Matthew. 28.19. Mar. 16.15, 16. Yea, the Proclamation of love of God, in
Giving his Son to die for them. Joh. 1.29. and 3.16, 17. that thereby they
may be shown.

1. The vileness of their sins, needing such a Ransom. Isa. 2.6. Hebr.
9.22. Gal. 3.13.

2. The emptiness of all their self-wrought Righteousness, to help them. Gal.
3.21. Psalm. 49.7.

3. The vanity of all worldly things, to recover them. Job. 28. tot. 1 Pet.
1.18.

4. The Pardon, Peace, Spirit and life that is in Christ, to Communicate to
those that do Repent, submit to, and believe on him. Act. 10.43. and 13.38.
Ephesians. 2.13.17.

5. That it is the good will of God, that they should Repent and believe. Act.
3.19, 26.

6. That he has showed mercy already to the chief of sinners, to encourage
them to believe, and turn in to him for the same. 1 Timothy 1.14, 15, 16.

7. That even they, if by this grace, be wrought on to Repentance, and overcome
to believe on Christ, they shall receive Remission of sins, and favor with
God, yea, Eternal life. Acts 10.43. and 13.38. Joh. 3.15, 16, 36.

8. That their not believing makes them impenitent, and till they do Repent
and Believe, they abide under sin, condemnation and wrath. Joh. 5.38, 40. and
3.18.36.

9. That if when light comes, and Spirit moves at their hearts, they do yield
and turn, Spirit will farther come in, and make them know the truth, and the
truth will make them free. Prove. 1.23. Ioh. 8.31, 32. but if then they refuse,
and harden their hearts against it, that is great condemnation, and if they so
persist, it endangers them to be given up of God; and then there will be no
Remedy, but they will be judged to a second death, by him that has dyed for
them, and now calls them, and they will none of his Counsel. Ioh. 3.19.
Prove. 1.23, 25. Psalm. 68.21. 2 These. 2.8.

And all this is true Gospel, whether men believe it, or believe it not, and on
this ground, and pressing all this as the Truth, and Oracles of God, are all
men to be exhorted to Repentance of their sins, to faith in Christ Jesus, and
so to be reconciled to God. Mar. 1.15. Act. 2.37. and 3.2. Cor. 5.14, 15, 19,
30.

And till by the Spirit in this Gospel, men be made Penitent, and brought in to
believe in Christ, they are no better then natural men, and of the world,
(though Elect,) and so incapable of such receipt of Spirit, and manifestations
as these. Ioh. 14.17, 22. 1 Cor. 2.14. which is also to be could them, to bring
them to Repentance and faith. Act. 2.37, 38.

But when any are brought in by the Spirit, in belief of this Gospel, brought
in to Christ, and fastened in cenfidence and love to him. Then may they look
and wait even for this portion of Spirit also. Joh. 14.17. and 7.38, 39. Act.
2.38. and abiding and walking in faith and Love, they shall receive the
manifestations of more abundant Love, and Privileges here promised. Joh.
14.21, 23. 1 Cor. 2.9. whereas the citing these places to the Assumption, has
shut the door against this also, leaving no way for any to know Christ Dyed
for him, till he have some special manifestation, which in this sense is not
first given. Joh. 14.17. Nor any hope of this, unless ones particular Election
be known, and so opens a way for men to look for, and be deluded by passionate
fancies and Satanicall Enthusiasmes. Jere. 2.8. and 8.8, 9.

4. For the particular instance of Joh. 17.9. It is also much abused; for,

1. This Text says not, the world of the wicked and ungodly, as the assumption
does; but, the world, and by world, it is evident is meant, Natural men,
unregenerated, not yet called by grace, and in that heavenly Call given to
Christ; and so had not received his words, and the manifestation of his Fathers
Love, Power, and goodness, in sending Christ, so as to believe on him, as it
is express, these prayed for, verse. 9. and verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. So that the world
world, verse. 9. includes all the Elect, that were yet in the world, and
uncalled forth: And this also farther appears in that; That for the same things
he prays for these that through his Preaching did now believe on him. verse.
6.9. He also after prays for the same, for so many as shall through their
Preaching believe on him. verse. 20. But all the way from verse. 9. to verse. 20.
no Petition for any thing for any before they believe; or yet that might bring
them to believe.

So that the Assumption rendering the word, world, for the wicked, not Elect
opposed to the Elect, it makes two sorts of Elect, one sort prayed for, verse.
9. another sort prayed for, verse. 20. or else it grants a sort of People in the
World, that are neither of the Elect, nor of the world, mentioned. verse. 9.
that were prayed for, verse. 20. And which way soever the Assumption will have
it, yet it holds forth this falsehood; That none of the Elect, were, are or
shall be beholding to the Prayer of Christ: for all or any of that Patience,
and goodness of God extended before their faith, or for the means and grace by
which they were brought to believe, or for their faith it self, seeing no such
things are here prayed for; for any but the World. verse. 21.23. Even the World
opposed to, and distinct from these called out of the world, both verse. 9. and
verse. 20.

2. This Text says not, he will not pray for the World, as the Assumption
says, but in the Present tense, in that very time; I pray not for the World;
It Is not in Preterperfect-tense, nor in the Future-Tense; and surely, to any
common understanding, I do not, I have not done, I will not do, are of a
various and diverse sense. Christ says, Joh. 13.18. to his Twelve Disciples; I
speak not of you All: yet in Joh. 6.70. Saying, I have chosen you Twelve, he
spoke of them all; and so it is evident, That as the Ransome-giver, he did pray
for such as were none of These prayed for, verse. 9.6, 7, 8. nor such as those
prayed for. verse. 20. but even the Transgressors. Isa. 53.12. and his
Crucifiers. Luke 23.34. such as the World. verse. 24.25.

3. The word, Not, in the Text, appears not to be so exclusive as the
Assumption with the whole Argument would make it to be; few can be so ignorant,
as not to know, that either in Scripture, or common speech; Not, does not
signify not at all, in every Place, Sentence or Business, but sometimes only.
Not so much, not so privily, and chiefly, and this also discernable enough in
the Places and Sentences in which it is so used: Christ, of his Ministration on
earth, which was chiefly and primely for the Jews. To. 15.8. Says to the
Woman of Canaan, Mar. 15.24. I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel: and yet he did help her, And occasionally, Preach the Gospel in
Samaria also, Joh. 4. and not without mission sure, so Paul says. 1 Cor. 1.17.
Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach, etc. And yet baptire some he did,
and surely not without mission also. verse. 14.16. And it is most like to be in
such a sense here, that, Not, is used, as appears. verse. 21.23. where the
world is put in for.

4. The things here prayed for, from verse. 9. to verse. 20. (as Preservation in
their gracious Estates, keeping them in the world, and from from the evil of
the world, that hated them, and out of which they were chosen: Sanctification
of them for carrying forth the Gospel, to the world: and perfecting them in
union and Conformity with himself, and one another in him and his Father.) Are
of a higher nature, then those things we are to pray for the world, or any in
it. Till they be called and chosen out of the world, as these were. 1 Cor. 1.9.
Joh. 14.16, 17, 21.23. and 16.14, 15. Phil. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. Short of which
things are those which we are to pray for; for the World. 1 Timothy 2.1.4, 6, 7,
8. as is seen in that which our Savior does intimately pray for; for the
World. verse. 21.23.

5. In this, Ioh. 17. our Savior prayed, not only as a Ransomegiver, and
Mediator between God and man, as 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. but also as a Prince and
High Priest over the House of God. The Mediator and Minister of the New
Testament, for all his Called and Chosen ones; such as these prayed for, were.
Heb. 3.1.6. and 8.1, 6. and 9.14, 15. And his praying here, is the same with
his Advocation, mentioned. 1 John 2.1. which is no where said to be for All
men, and the whole World, as his Propitiation is: So this Argument crosses the
Scripture, in saying, He Died for no more, then he so prayed for, or is such
an Advocate for. Ioh. 1.29. Heb. 3.9. 1 Ioh. 2.1, 2.

As this Argument does cross and deny our Saviors gracious End and Intention
in this Prayer. Ioh. 17. which appears to be for the furnishing of his chosen
Ones to be in his place of Ministration, in the World, as the light of the
World, to declare the Gospel to the World. verse. 11.17, 19, 20. And this also
to this very end; That through the grace of God, appearing in them, and through
their Ministration, the World might believe, that God has sent Christ, verse.
21. as these prayed for, did already believe. verse. 8. And that the World might
know, that God loves those that are (in Believing,) come in to Christ, and
made one with him, even with such peculiar love, as he loved Christ his Son.
verse. 23. That so such as by their Ministration, are brought in this sight and
Belief; To submit to, and be one with Christ, and with them may partake of this
Prayer, and all the things here prayed for. verse. 20. And those, that when this
light comes, love Darkness rather, shall be left excuselesse, and in another
day, made to see and confess the same, to the glory of God, and their own
confusion. Joh. 3.19. and Phil. 2.8.10, 11. when all this Prayer will be fully
answered.

So that all the way, in Ioh. 17. The Death and Ransom of CHRIST for the
World, and his good will for them, is Held forth; for which cause, Power is
given him over all fles^. verse. 2. Romans 14.9. And he leaves these in his Place
in the World. verse. 15. And sends them into the World. verse. 18. and prays for
blessing their Ministration in and to the World. verse. 19.23. and intentionally
for the World; that they might be convinced, and brought to know and believe
the Truth. verse. 21.25. which all those that do experiment in the day of
grace, Do therein experiment the Benefits of all this mercies of Christ; and
so of his intentionall praying for their faith, and so have the door opened
for all the rest, which door this Argument was framed to shut, but cannot.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Answering a Fifth OBJECTION.

Objection. V.
JESUS CHRIST dyed, and gave himself a Ransom for no more then the Father
Elected to Sonship, and Eternal Inheritance; And this appears by the
conexion, or contentation of Election, Calling, Justifification, and
Glorification. Romans 8.28, 29. of Election, Adoption, Redemption, and eternal
Inheritance. Ephesians. 1.3.11. besides the often mentioning of Election of some to
Salvation, and rejection of others in the Scripture.

But all are not Elected, some are Rejected, else there were no Election; and
to say, CHRIST dyed for All men, overthrowes Election.

Therefore Christ did not die, and give himself a Ransom for All Men.

ANSWER.
The first Proposition is directly contrary to the Scripture. Hebr. 2.9. 1 Timothy
2.6.

If to possess men of the Inheritance, had been the first and only end of
Christ his Death and Ransom; there might have been some color to have paused
on this bold and false assertion; But that is already proved false, in Chap.
2. and in Answer to the third Objection, and elsewhere.

2. There belongs more then the Death and Ransom of Christ, to bring men to
the Inheritance, as is shown Chapter 1. and elsewhere.

3. The Scripture expressly affirms him, to have Dyed, and rose, and revived, to
be Lord of all; and to have bought such as deny him, as is often, and at large
shown before.

So as this Proposition is so groosly false, as it deserves abhorring rather
then Answering; but the Reasons seems to have some weight for something, and
therefore requires Answer: and so I return Answer to it, as the first
Proposition in this Argument, is an Interrence Drawn from it.

ANSWER. I.
This is a farre-fetched, and mistaken Inferrence: evading the Business in
hand; for that opposed in the Inferrence, is the Redemption, Purchase, and
Atonement, made by Christ in one body, for all men. And those places alleged,
mention only the benefits thereof and of somewhat before, and somewhat
following, communicated to some, and in some measure enjoyed by them, yea with
such an enjoyment, as was yet wanting to many Believers; To whom the Apostle
writ; as appears, by the distinction and change of Person in his writing.
Romans 8.13.15, 16. Ephesians. 1.12, 13, 14. Neither is it said, does and will
Justify, and Glorify: But did, or has Predestined, Called, Justified,
Glorified, Romans 8.30. has Chosen, having Predestined, Has made us accepted;
we have Redemption, even forgiveness. Ephesians. 1.4, 5.6.7. which I hope none
will affirm, of all the Elect, much less of All Christ has dyed, and given
himself a Ransom for; So that this is an evasion, and mistake.

ANSWER. II.
This Reason given to fortify the Proposition or Inferrence, has mistaken the
end and scope of the Apostles conexion of Privileges; and of his words in both
places: which is not to set forth, how many Christ has Dyed, and given himself
a Ransom for: nor yet how many, either have or shall receive some fruits of his
Death and Ransom; But only to set forth the Privileges of those that have
begun to receive the Choice fruits of both his Propitiation and Advocation: And
that to these Ends; to show;

1. The ground of hopefulnesse to all that by the heavenly Call, are brought to
believe in Christ. 2. The way how to be sure of the enjoyment of this hope. 3.
And who have the full assurance of the same, and when they come to it. That so
he might encourage, comfort, and lead on the Believers, as appears through. R.
8. Ep. 1.
1. The ground of hopefulnesse to them that by the heavenly Call are brought in
to believe in Christ: Is this, That Jesus Christ is the first Elect and Chosen
One, and so the rate in which all that are Elected and Chosen, were Elected and
Chosen. Ephesians. 1.4. And that in him is the Image or Pattern, and lively being
and appearing of all that, to which all that are Chosen in him, are Chosen and
Predestined. Romans 8.16, 17, 23, 29, 30. So that, as Christ is the first
Elect, so was he Predestinate, yea, and Called, to work Redemption for the
Sons of men: to take away sin, and abolish Death, to offer the acceptable
Sacrifice; and by virtue of his blood, to enter the Holy of Holies, there to
send forth Spirit to Call the Sons of men: and to be the Head and High Priest
over all his House, that are partakers of the Heavenly Call, etc. Isai. 42.6.
Heb. 5.4. and 10. Joh. 6.37.

And him has God glorified at his Right hand: Heb. 2.9. and 7.25. and 8.1. So
that all that are by the Spirit, In the Gospel, Called and enabled to believe
in Jesus Christ, are called to him, that is the first, and Prime Elect, Chosen,
Called, Justified and Glorified; That they might be conformed to him, in the
Participation of the benefit of his Election, and of the mediation he was
Predestinate and Called to make, and of his Justification as he was in their
steads; And of his Glorification, as he is Glorified and filled with Spirit
for them; In which Participation abiding, he will enable them to suffer for
his sake, And to follow his Spirit, and to drink in the benefit of his
Justification, in this knowledge of their own Justification, in and through
him; and so in due season stablish them in his Everlasting Covenant, and
knowledge of their Election in Him.

And this is conform both to the Apostles Writing, and scope, as appears in
the view of Romans 3.23, 25. and so an end, through the 4. and 5. and 6. and 7.
and this 8. Chapter, and so to such as have acquaintance with spiritual
Enlightening. Psalm. 39.15.29. and Ephe. 1.1, 23.

2. The way to be sure of the enjoyment of this Hope, is by ab^ding in Jesus
Christ, to whom they are called, (who is both the Prime Elect, and also the
second Adam, Predestinate, Called, Justified, Glorified, as the Public
Person,) by abiding in his Doctrine, Teaching, and Spiritual leading to
confidence in an Conformity to him. Ioh. 15.1, 10. Heb. 3.6.14. 1 Ioh. 2.24,
25, 28. 2 Ioh. 9. and this may be seen by the Apostles Admonition, and caution
given to these. Romans Chap. 6. and this 8. verse. 5, 13, 14, 18. and by his
Prayers for the Ephesians. Chap. 1.17, 20. and 3.14.20. and his Profession to
the Collossians. Chap. 1.23.27. and 2.2.10. by all which it appears also to be
the scope of the Apostle, to direct them to this abiding, according to that of
old, said to our Types. Exodus 19.3.6.

3. Who have the full assurance of all this; and when they come to it; and they
are such, who are not only called, but in that heavenly Call, through grace,
believed, Drawn forth of themselves and the World, to take up their rest, and
well-pleasednesse in him; and inflamed with likement and love of him, and his
guidance; Not only Justified, but having experimented their justification, not
only in Christ, but by the Spirit of Christ, filling with Peace and joy in the
holy Ghost: and not only hoping for the glory to come; but even a First Fruits
of glory, in a portion of the Spirit, as the earnest of the Inheritance,
whereby they discern the hope of his Calling in his Election, and his
Everlasting Covenant made with them, and see the glorious riches of his
Inheritance, in the Saints and Justified ones; and are in a sort made Partakers
of the Divine Nature, experimenting that Power by which Christ was raised, and
exalted, experimenting that, Psalm. 84.11. Heb. 4.3. and 9.15. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4.
That prayed for, Ephesians. 1.17, 20. And this affirmed. Romans 8.28, 29, 30. and so
come to this glorying of the Apostle, in the following verses, to the End.

Now this objected inference, crosses the scope of the Apostles, and takes
away the ground of the Hope given, and shuts the door against the way, to
the enjoyment, and thrusts men to wander in dark reasonings for Election.

ASWER. III.
3. This Inferrence from these places, and the abuse of them, to fortify such a
Proposition, destroys the distinction, between the Gospel, and the
communication of the special benefits of the Gospel, between the Atonement
made by Christ, and the receipt thereof by the Called Ones, and the common and
special Salvation, which the Scripture distinguishes, as is before shown,
Chap. 1. and 2. and 10. and wholly denies and takes away the Gospel, to be
preached to unbeleevers, and all men, all Nations, and wholly confounds it into
one with those high mysteries that are to be opened to Believers, yea,
Believers grown, and it bars out all uncalled from believing: and all
Believers from Consolation, till they know their particular Election; as all
that view it, may see, and know it to be evil.

4. The Conexion it self, is wrested for this Inference; which has no even
rise thence, or from any other part of Scripture, where is no such conexion, as
if all Christ dyed for, and Ransomed, must of necessity partake of all these
Privileges. Nor as if all that partake of some fruits of his Ransom, must
needs partake of all these Privileges; Nor as if all that were called, must of
necessity Partake of them all: Scripture shows the contrary: yea, the Epistle
does the same to the Romans, also Chap. 14.9. Isai. 20. and this 8. Chap.
verse 13. intimates the same: But the concatination of all these high favors,
are made the peculiar Privileges of Elect sons of God. Romans 8.16, 17, 38,
39, 30. Ephesians. 1.3.14. whence the Calling and Election of Believers, is not
made fully sure to them, Till in Gods Actual Election, which follows their
Calling, they be established, and so in a First Fruits, made Partakers of all
these Privileges, as is shown before; whence they are exhorted thereto, on
that ground. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5, 10, 11. And this appears in the style put on
these. Romans 8.28. and the Prayer for the Ephesians. Chap. 1.17. All which is
obscured by this Inference.

5. If that which is not, and which the Inference would have had, had been in
the conexion; yet it would not have justified the Inferrence, as we may see in
a conexion. Psalm. 111.4, 5. The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion, and
Righteous; He has given meat to them that fear him: he will ever be mindful
of his Covenant; Now if any should from this conexion, Infer; That the Lordis
gracious, and full of Compassion, and has given meat to no other, but them
that fear him. Then Psalm. 145.8, 9. and 136.25. and 104.27, 28. and all
Scripture, and common experience, would convince him of folly and falsehood; and
so does it in this Inferrence also. All that is in the common Salvation
pertaines to the Special. But not all that is in the Special pertaines to the
common Salvation: See the 1 Timothy 4.10.

So that the truth of. 1 Timothy 2.4.6. Heb. 2.9. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.19. abides
firm.

As for the Addition to this Reason, with all that follows, it is but a cavil,
with a slander annexed, deserving no Answer. Wherefore in stead of Answer, To
take prejudice from the thoughts of any sober-minded: I will crave leave of the
juditious, under correction, of better, and more enlightened Judgment, To set
down briefly what I understand, and believe concerning this mystery.

I conceive the Scripture to set forth, an Election, of God, That is in and by
God. And according, as I conceive, that I see and find there, so I believe.

1. That God did Elect the man Christ, to union of Person, with the second
Person, in the Divine Nature, and so to be the Son of God, and a mighty King,
in and through whom, God would show forth all his goodness, and confirre his
Kingdom on him: Thus God calls him. Isa. 42.1. Mine Elect, in whom my soul
delights. And the Spirit says, He is (Col. 1.15.) the Firstborn of every
Creature.

And himself says, Prove. 8.22, 30. The Lord Possessed me in the beginning of
his way, before, etc. I was set up from everlasting, I was brought forth, etc.
And so as all other Chosen, being affirmed to be chosen in him. Ephesians. 1.4. He
must needs be first chosen; else, How they Chosen in him.

2. That in this very Election, God did Elect a certain number of men. In this
his Son, and to Sonship in him, a Conformity to him, and enjoyment of the
Kingdom with him. Ephesians. 1.4. Romans 8.29.

3. That at the same Election, God in his love to his Son Christ, and those
chosen in him; Did appoint a great, yet a certain number of other men, to be
Servants to his Son Christ, and those Chosen in him. Psalm. 7.2.11. and
119.91. Isai. 60.12. Col. 1.16.27.

4. That to this end, God did Decree, to creat all Mankind in one Adam, and to
set him forth, as the First man, and a public Person, in the room and place of
all Mankind, to stand or fall, for all that were by Propagation to come of him,
and in this Decree, he decreed that all the rest of Mankind, except his Son
Christ, should come forth of this First Adam, by Propagation; and in this
Decree, he decreed to make a World of Creatures, for the use and service of
Mankind, and to do all this, by and through, and for his Son Christ. Ioh.
1.1, 2, 3. Col. 1.16, 18, 19. Romans 11.36. And,

All this Election and Decree was free, and freely decreed by God, without any
respect, or motion from any foresight, of Good, or evil, righteousness or
sin in mankind, or in any of them, one or other. But according to Gods own
good pleasure, even because he so willed, and for the Glory of his Goodness.
Psalm. 104.1, 24. Isa. 4.3.7. Romans 9.11, 12. and 11.36.

5. That God foreseeing, that the first man Adam would fall, and so loose
himself, and all that were to come by propagation from him: and so all thr
Privileges of both Sons and Servants, that were put in his keeping (for
Election to Sonneship, or appontment to service, were neither in him, nor put
in his keeping,) Did Choose, Predestinate, or Preordaine, his Son Jesus
Christ, to be his Servant, by his Death and Resurrection, to ransom All men,
and recover again ( as a Second Adam,) the Privileges both of Sons and
Servants; And by his Spirit and Power, to make it known to them all in Due
season. Isai. 42.1.1 Pet. 1.20. 1 Timothy 2, 4, 5, 6. Heb. 10.5.10.

6. That GOD in this Decree or Predestination: did Predestinate All his Elect
Sons, to the Adoption of Sons, and Conformity to his Son Jesus Christ. By
and through his Son Jesus Christ: Not for any good seen in them, (who were
now beheld fallen,) but for the Praise of the glory of his Grace, Romans 8.26.
Ephesians. 1.5.

And all the residue of the sons of men, He Destinated to be servants to
Jesus Christ, and his People: in his Free Will, Not being moved thereto, with
respect of either good, or evil in Them. Romans 9.11, 12. and 14.9, 12.

7. That God to this end Decreed, To use such means as he pleased, to some
more, to some less, with some effectual Power therein, To call both Sons
and Servants to the acknowledgement of this their Lord.

In which they might be happy. To which end, his Spirit moves (...) the means.
Prove. 8.4, 5, 32. and 1.20, 23. Joh. 1.5.9.

8. God foreseeing, that both Sons and Servants, would sin against these
means, and so not come in to the obedience of their Lord, but Rebel against
him, He did freely, yet further Decree. Both:

First, To overcome his Elect and Predestinate Sons, (as Bullocks
unaccustomed to the yoke,) for the glory of his rich, and Free Grace in Christ:
and so freely to forgive their disobedience, and by his Spirit make them
willing, and bring them in to his Son, and Sanctify and preserve them in and
through his Sun, and by his grace and Spirit, to His Kingdom. Jere. 31.18,
20. 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 3.3, 4, 5, 7.

Secondly, To harden the residue, and give them up, for their contempt of the
means; and hardening their hearts there-against, and resisting his Spirit,
moving to their hearts, through the means: And this for the glory and praise
of the equity and security of his Justice. 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. Jer. 6.16.30.

9. That God decreed his Son. Jesus Christ, should be the Lord and disposer
of All, the Head and Governor of the Church, and Kingdom; and the Judge of
All men. That by him the glory of all the Kingdom, and Judgment may be given
to God. Isa. 9.6, 7. Romans 14.9.12. Act. 17.31. Phil. 2.10, 11. 1 Cor. 15.24, 27.

10. That all this whole Counsel of God (about Mankind; for There meddle no
further) was in himself, and open before him, and decreed at once, before the
World, or time was, there being neither first nor last, in respect of time in
the Decree of God, but only in Order, one thing decreed for another, though
his Decree be larger then Election, and all his Decrees in one, ordered to, and
for Election, which obtains all for the Elected. Acts 15.18. Romans 7.11.

And yet still agreeing with all hitherto said of Election; I find mentioned
in Scripture an Election not so high, as this before spoken of, Namely an
Election of some to be a Peculiar People, above all the People of the Earth,
which though it includes the forementioned Elected, yet it may also include
more, even some of the Servants also. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.

And also, I find mentioned in Scripture, an Election of some, to some Peculiar
Office for, and Service for, or in the Church, and this also includes more then
the Prime Elect. Isai. 45.1, 4. John. 6.70.

And both these Elections are included in the former Decree, and are from
Eternity also, but not to the enjoyment of the Privileges; by every one thus
Elected, for ever, as the Prime Election, without Controversy is. Joh. 17.12.
Act. 1.20. Act. 15.18.

And I am lead thus to conceive of the Election and Decree of God, both by the
Scriptures alleged, and other-like Places, and also by Gods working with man,
mentioned therein, being assured, that God works all things according to the
Council of his own will; so as look how his Word declares him to proceed in
his Works, we may be sure, such was his Purpose and Decree. Ephesians. 1.11.

And so through this whole discourse it appears, That the Death and Ransom of
Christ for All men, impeacheth not the Doctrine of Election or Predestination,
or of Gods showing mercy to whom he will, but agrees very well therewith: and
so is the whole Objection answered.

Only now I will add a few things appertaining to this business, by way of
caution.

1. That the Prime Election, yea, or Predestination to Adoption; Howsoever by
way of Intimation, and consequence, it be found often; yet in ten times reading,
and much searching the Scripture, I cannot find it expressly mentioned, and set
forth Ten times in all the Scripture.

2. That in respect of particulars, It is a Secret with God, till he do make
it known, so that we can not say; This or that man is, or is not Elected; but
we may know of, and say to any man, Christ Dyed for him, and is the
Propitiation for his sins, and if he Repent and Believe, he shall receive
Remission of sins. This being revealed. Now secret thing belongs to the Lord
our God, But things revealed, to us and our Children for ever. Deuteronomy. 29.

3. That Howsoever all Gods Counsels shall stand, yet those that have very
well known the same, have never made such use of it, as to put any
impossibility upon God, To do any of his Creatures good: John Baptist knew
stones were not Elected, yet (not speaking of Gods Will, but of his Power) He
said, God is able of these stones, to raise up Children unto Abraham. Matthew.
3.9. And Paul speaking of the rejected Jews, says, God is able to graft them
in again. Romans 11.23. and our Savior would not have his Disciples to think,
That he could not have obtained by Prayer; more then Twelve Legions of Angels.
Matt. 26.33. and plainly affirms to them, That with God all things are
possible. Luke 19.26.

It would therefore be an abuse of Election, in any sort to darken or weaken
the Doctrine of the Gospel thereby, or the hope it gives or sets before any.

4. That in Scripture, there is mentioned an actual Election, or Choice, which
is in time, (though according to that before time,) in which God pulls and
choseth men from among others, to such good things as he in his Counsel had
prepared for them. Isai 14.1. Isai. 4.9.7. Zach. 1.17. and 2.12. And to speak
of the choice part thereof; It Is manifest such an Election or Choice there is,
Not only because meneioned, but so mentioned in Scripture.

1. That it is called, an Election according to foreknowledge. 1 Pet. 12.
Foreknowledge in God, signifies even the Prime Election to Sonship, when it is
distinct from, and put before Predestination, and elsewhere. Romans 8.29.
compared with Ephesians. 1.4, 5. But when it is said, according to foreknowledge,
It points out that Work of God now done, according to that foreknowledge of
his, which works all things according to the Counsel of his own will. Act.
2.23. and 4.28. and 5.13.18. Ephesians. 1.11, 12. and so Election a work.

2. That often, no more is mentioned in it, then what the Elected do in some
measure knowingly enjoy. Joh. 15.16, 19. and 17.6, 8. 1 Pet. 2.2. and 2.9.
which is not usual in the mentioning Election in the Counsel of God. Romans 8.
Ephesians. 1.

3. That this Election is in the heavenly Call; and follows it. 2 Pet. 1.10.
Reu. 17.14. whereas Election in the Counsel of God is before the Call. 2 Timothy
1.9. Ephesians. 1.3.4. Yea this Election and Choice does not always so fasten on
men, in the beginning of the Call: So as they (though Called) can be said to be
Chosen. Matthew. 20.16. Joh. 2.23, 24. Though sometime it does so fasten on some,
in the beginning of the Call, and so prevail also, that they are said to be
Chosen from the beginning (of the Gospels) Call unto Salvation, through
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3, 4, 5. Act. 13.48. Coll. 1.4, 5, 6. and in due Season, it will
fasten on all Elected in his Counsel, when they are Partakers of the Heavenly
Call. Romans 11.7.2. Tim. 1.9. yet is this actual Election in the Work of GOD,
in order of time after the Call.

4. They that in the heavenly Call, are in believing, so purged with the blood
of Christ, that they are taken off themselves, and the World, and united to
Christ, in confidence, love and delight, so as they are given up to him, for
all Life, Guidance, Protection, and Hope: are affirmed to be actually Chosen
out of the World unto Salvation. Joh. 15.19. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3, 5.

5. There have been some found, in former and latter times, upon whom this
Actual Election has passed, and they therefore called Gods Elect and Chosen
Generation. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.2. Joh. 13.18.

6. They that are thus actually Chosen, and Prevailed with hereby, are said to
be biessed, and Called, and Chosen, and Faithful. Psalm. 65.4. Revel. 17.14.

And every one may know himself to be Elected in the Council of God, before
time, To all that, He finds himself in the Work of God, Chosen unto in Time.
Ephe. 1.3, 4.11.

5. That in Scripture is mentioned; an actual refusal, Preterition or
non-Election, according to the purpose of God also; in respect of some peculiar
favor, or Privilege: which yet may stand with Election to Sonship, and
eternal Salvation Psalm. 78.67, 68.

6. That in Scripture is mentioned an Actual Reprobation, and rejection of
some from the means, or from the blessing in the means of Eternal Life, and
so from Eternal Life it self; and this for their contempt of the means, and
resisting the holy Ghost. Jer. 6.16, 17, 27, 30. Prove. 1.24, 35. Romans 1, 18.28.

The term Reprobation, Scarce otherwise used; and of this Actual Choice, and
Actual Reprobation, the Scripture most speaks; Now the Gospel of CHRIST is a
Truth to be Preached to all; and hope of Life tendered on Believing, and after
entrance, this actual Election to be so set forth, that men be exhorted to
give all diligence, in following the Spirit, to make it sure; and if any be
slothful and disobedient: warning given, least by contempt they procure to
themselves actual Reprobation: which use the Scripture makes of them, and so
they are very useful to further the Gospel; which (by abuse,) This Objection
turns them against.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Answering a Sixth and Seventh OBJECTION.

Objection. VI.
THe Ransom and Mediation of Christ, is no larger then his Office of P^iest,
Prophet, and King:

But those Offices prtaine to his Church and Chosen, etc.

ANSWER.
This sober Objection does not deny the Death of Christ for All men; But only
seems to deny his Ransom and Mediation, for All Men. Though indeed, as he is
set forth in Scripture, He should not be the Lord of All men: nor challenge
their submission, and living to him; Nor show mercy, nor offer hope of life to
them, nor convince them of sin for not believing on him, nor raise them out
of their graves, nor cause them to confess him Lord; nor judge them according
to the Gospel; if he had not Ransomed them, and paid the Price; and mediated
for them. Romans 1 4.8, 9, 10, 12. 2 Cor. 5.10, 14, 15, 19. Phil. 2.7, 8, 9, 10,
11.

But the Answer to this Objection, is easy and plain in Scripture: for as the
Mediation of CHRIST, is both more general, and more special; more general,
as He is the One MEDIATOR between God and man. 1 Timothy 2.5. more special; as
he is the Mediator of the New Testament, etc. That they which are Called
might receive the Promise of Eternal Inheritance. Heb. 9.14. according to that
is said, He is the Savior of All men: specially of those that believe. 1 Timothy
4.10.

So as in all the Offices of Christ, as the Priest, the Prophet, the King;
there is both that which is more general, and also that which is more special
and Peculiar.

1. As a Priest he offered Sacrifice, in respect of one end; That is,
Propitiation for All men: Heb. 9.26. and 2.9. Io. r. 29. 1 John 2.2. In respect
of all the ends, Propitiation, and Sealing the New Testament, and Testification
to the Truth, and of the uttermost end in all; for his Called and and Chosen
Ones. Heb. 9.14, 15. Matt. 26.26. As the High Priest, at his Fathers
Right Hand, he in some sort interceeds, and puts in for Transgressors, and the
World. Isai. 53.12. Joh. 17.21, 23. but his special business, and Advocation,
is for his Called and Chosen ones. Hebr. 3.1.6, 8. 1 John 2.1.

2. As the great Prophet, he calls all men, and enlightens every one that
comes into the World. Prove. 8.4.32. Isai. 45.22. Joh. 1.4, 5, 6. But makes
known his Fathers Name, Words and Gouncells, in the secret of the Covenant,
only to his Called and Chosen ones. Ioh. 15, 16, 19, 20. and 16.13.15.17. and
6.7, 8. Psalm. 24.14.

3. As the King, He rules over all. Psalm. 103.19. and will convince All men
of sin, for not believing in him. Joh. 16.8.11. and Judge all, even such as
would not that He should Reign over them. Acts. 17.31. Luke 19.27. But he
enters in by the Spirit, and Rules in the hearts of his Chosen Ones. Gal. 2.20.
and freeth them of their darkness and bonds. Romans 7.25. and 8.2. Coll. 1.12.
and leads them. Romans 8.14. and overthrowes their Enemies. Mich. 7.18, 20. Romans
16, 20. Enriches them with Spiritual blessings. Ephesians. 1.3. and will plead
their Cause, and give them the Kingdom.

So at this is a motive to all men, to seek Him, and learn of Him, and come
in, and submit to him; This Argument confirming that which it seems to oppose.

OBJECTION VII.
IF God in any sort bad intended any Life or saving grace, by the Death and
Ransom of CHRIST for All men: or the residue of the World, besides the Elect;
he would surely use some means to bring them to some knowledge of Christ, and
so to Repentance, and Faith; But he seems to be so far from this; That to
many he vouchsafes no means at all. Psalm. 147.19, 20. And to others has
expressly, and utterly denied the means, when his Servants would have carried
the same among them. Act. 16.6, 7.

ANSWER.
This Objection denies neither the Death nor Ransom of Christ to be for all
men; But only any intendment of Life, and saving Grace thereby: neither does
it bend force to deny, That, for any, but only these, where the Declaration
of the Gospel, is not granted, and the force of the Objection is weak.

For 1. The Scripture has expressly affirmed Gods intention to be, that they
all might be saved, and repent, and believe, and to be surther saved. Ezekiel.
33.11. Joh. 3.17.1.4, 7. Romans 2.4. 1 Timothy 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.9.

2. If we cannot in the Works of God, see a fulfilling of the sayings of God,
It becomes us to admire his Wisdom, and Holiness, to bewail our ignorance,
and wait and supplicate for Light from him, and not by rash judgeing and
mistaking of his Works, to deny the truth of his Words. Romans 11.33, 34.

3. The Scripture testifies that God has, and does use some means toward
all men, not only in his Works of Creation and Providence; which gives some
Testimony of his Goodness, to lead to Repentance. Romans 1.19. Act. 14.16, 17.
and 17.26. with Psalm. 19.1.6. Romans 10.18. and 2.4. but with some further Light:
yea, it may be, some rumor of the Gospel (as much as drew Rahab to believe,)
for was it not declared to all the World? Genesis 13.15. Did not Adam and Evah,
and the long lived Fathers, and Noah's Preaching, and Arke-building; spread the
fame through the World? 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. after the Flood, was is not declared
by Noah, to all the world? Genesis 8.9. Did not Sem live to Abraham's time? and
(whether it were he or no?) was not Melchisedeck a Priest then living? Did not
Abraham travel? and Isreal's, and Jacobs spread far? Did Joh, and his three
Friends, and Elihu, in their several Countries, nothing this way? Did not
David's friendship with diverse Kings, Solomon's Reign over diverse Countries, the
Queen of Sheba, coming and returning to Solomon; spread the fame of the
Gospel? Did not the Captivities and dispersion of the Jews: The advancement of
Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiab and Mordecai; make some spread of this knowledge? Was
not our Saviors Star seen in the East? Were not the Jews in all Countries
at the coming of Christ? And does not the Apostles say expressly, their sound
went out into all the Earth, and their words to the ends of the world. Romans
10.18. And shall any of us say, God has used no means to lead them to seek
him, because we know not of it; far be such rashness from us, to contradict
the Scripture. Joh. 1.9. Romans 1.17. Act. 14.17. neither does Psalm. 147.19, 20.
say, he has used no means with them, but only not such, and so great means:
He has not dealt so with any Nation, as he did with Israel; nor then had he;
but that is not used no means at all:

4. Gods denial of his Servants to preach in some places for a time, as in
Act. 16.6, 7. proves not an utter denial of all means to them: for,

1. God might have formerly used means, which for their contempt of: the
greater might now be denied to them. Mat. 13.12. and 25.29.

2. God may deny the means for one time, and grant it in another, as to the
Gentiles and Samaritans: denied. Mat. 10.5. but granted. Mat. 28.20. Act. 8.11.

3. This denial might be in mercy; it may be God had not yet prepared them to
receive the Gospel, and so they might violently have resisted it, and procured
a curse, and God would after prepare them, and then they should receive it.
Matt. 4.5, 6. It might be many Jews amongst them, that now would have stoned
these Apostles, that should after receive the Gospel; as the Samaritans once;
stoning after receiving: But this is certain, Gods time was not yet come, and
some other were to have the Gospel before them: that yet had it not, suitable
to that, Romans 15.22.

4. Both Jews and Gentiles there, not long after both, had the Gospel: and
many received it; and obtained like precious Faith with the Apostles. Acts.
19.10. 1 Pet. 1.1. So that this Objection has lost all his strength.

5. Yet GOD may holily and justly deny the clear Revelation of the Gospel to
some, and their Posterity also, when they have resisted the light in the lesser
means, used before, especially when they have contemned the greater means
also, when offered, and hardened their hearts from profiting thereby; He may
then deny those means to Father and Children also, that walk in their
Fathers ways: yea, and harden their hearts from Profiting by such means as
are left them: And this is a good warning to others, to take heed of any
sleighting and abusing any means, much more to heed that the Gospel be not
abused and slighted; But no Proofs that God never used means, to those so
deprived and hardened; for why then did he deprive and harden them. Romans 1.18,
24. Act. 28.25, 28. Matthew. 23.37, 38. Romans 11.20, 21, 22, 23.

And thus have I answered all that I have found of any force, Objected, as for
that foolish and senseless Cavil: That this opinion; that JESUS CHRIST Dyed
for All men; Imports, That all men have Free Will by Nature to seek and
receive him. It is so false and groundless a fancy, as needs no Answer; yet
when such as say, He dyed not for All men, do prove those (they believe he
did Dye for:) have such Free Will by Nature; That also shall be Answered.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Arguments confirming the Truth of the Proposition, and that 1 Timothy 2.6.
and Hebr. 2.9. have the Sense they import.

Now to satisfy such as desire to have reason satisfied; I add these REASONS.
Argument. I.
THat which the Scripture often and plainly affirms in plain words, is
certainly true, and to be believed: Prove. 22.20.21. Isai. 8.20. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20.

But that Jesus Christ gave himself a Ransom, and by the grace of God, tasted
Death for Every man; is often and plainly affirmed in Scripture, as is before
shown, Chap. 7. to the 13.

Therefore the same is certainly a truth to be believed. Joh. 20.31. Act.
26.22.27.

ARGUMENT II.
Those for whom Jesus Christ and his Apostles in plain Terms, without any
exception or restraint affirm, That Christ came to save, and to that end Dyed,
and gave himself a Ransom for, and is the Propitiation for the sin; he
certainly did come to save, and gave himself a Ransom for them, and is the
Propitiation for their sins. Matthew. 26.24. Joh. 6.38. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. Hebr.
10.7. Joh. 8.38.45. 2 Pet. 1.16. Heb. 2.3, 4.

But Jesus Christ, and his Apostles have in plain terms affirmed; that Christ
came to save sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15. The world. Joh. 3.17. That he died for the
unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. The ungodly. Romans 5.6 for Every man. Heb. 2.9. gave
himself a Ransom for All men. 1 Timothy 2.6. and is the Propitiation for the
sins of the whole World. 1 John 2.2. And every of these affirmations, without
any exception or restraint; all being unjust, ungodly, sinners, and men: and of
the World. Romans 3.10, 19, 20, 23. Ephe. 2.1, 2, 3. Tit. 3.3. Joh. 3.4.6.

Therefore Jesus Christ came to save, dyed, and gave himself a Ransom for all
men; and is the Propitiation for their sins. Joh. 1.29.

ARGUMENT III.
That which the Scripture lays forth, as one end of the death of Christ, and
one ground and cause of Gods exalting Christ, to be the Lord and Judge of all;
and of the equity of his ^udgeing; That is certainly to be believed. Psalm.
12.6. and 18.130. and 119.40.

But the Scripture lays forth this, for one end of the Death and Resurrection
of Christ; That he might he the Lord of All. To. 14.9. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. and for
that Cause, (even his Death and Resurrection,) has God exalted him, to be the
Lord and Judge of All men; and his Judgments shall be just. Romans 14.9.11, 12.
2 Cor. 5.10. Phil. 2.7.^ 1. Act. 17.31. Romans 2.16. Therefore that Christ so
died, and rose again for All, is a Truth to be believed. 1 Timothy 2.6, 7.

ARGUMENT IV.
That which the Scripture so sets forth in general for the World of mankind,
as a truth for them all: That whosoever of the particulars, so believe, as to
come in to Christ, and receive the same; shall not perish, but have everlasting
life; is certainly a truth to be believed: Act. 5.20.

But that God sent forth his Son, to be the Savior of the World; Is in
Scripture so set forth in general, for all men; That whosoever of the
particulars so believe, as they come in to Christ, and receive the same, they
shall not perish, but have Everlasting life. Joh. 3.16, 17, 18.36. and 1.4.11,
12.

Therefore, that God sent his Son to be the Savior of the World, is a
certain Truth. 1 John 4.14.

ARGUMENT V.
That which God will one day cause every man to confess, to the glory of God.
Is certainly a truth; for God will own no lie; for his glory. Joh. 13.3.9.
Romans 3.3, 4.

But God will one day cause every man, to confess Jesus, (by virtue of his
Death and Ransom given,) to be the Lord: Even to the glory of God. Phil. 2.7,
8, 9, 10, 11. Isai. 45.22, 23. Romans 14.9.12. Psalm. 86.9.

Therefore it is certainly a truth; That Jesus Christ has given himself a
Ransom for All men; and has thereby the right of Lordship over them: and if
any will not believe, and come in to his Government; yet he abides faithful,
and cannot deny himself; But will one day bring them before him, and cause
them to confess him Lord, to the glory of God; when they shall be denied by
him; for denying him in the days of his Patience; 2 Timothy 2.12, 13, 14. Matt.
10.32, 33. 2 Cor. 5.10.

ARGUMENT VI.
That which may be proved in and by the Scripture, both by plain Sentences
therein, and necessary consequences imported thereby: without wresting,
wrangling, adding to, taking from, or altering the Sentences, and words of
Scripture; is a truth to be believed. Matthew. 22.29, 32. Romans 11.2.5, 6.

But that Jesus Christ gave himself a Ransom for all men; and by the Grace of
God, tasted death for every man, may be proved in and by the Scripture, both by
plain Sentences therein, and necessary Consequences imported thereby; without
wresting, wrangling, adding, or taking away, or altering the Words and
Sentences; as is already shown, Chap. 7. to the 13. which shall be now ordered
into several Proof.

Therefore that Jesus Christ gave himself for all men; and by the Grace of God,
tasted death for Every man; is a truth to be believed: Mar. 1.15. and 16.15,
16. 1 John 4.14.

PROOF I.
GOD so loved the World; that he gave his Son to be the Savior of the
World. 1 John 4.14. and sends his Servants to bear witness of his Son, That
all men through him might believe. Joh. 1.4.7. That whosoever believes on him,
might have Everlasting Life. Joh. 3.16, 17.

And he is willing that all should come to the Knowledge of the Truth. 1 Timothy
2.4. and be saved. 1 Timothy 1.15.

Nor will he be wanting in the sufficiency of helpfulnesse to them; If as
light comes, they will suffer themselves to be wrought on, and to receive it.
Prove. 1.23. and 8.4, 5. and is not this plain in Scripture.

PROOF. II.
Jesus Christ, the Son of God came into the World, to save the World. Joh.
12.47. To save sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15. To take away our sins, and destroy the
works of the Devil. 1 John 3.5.8. To take away the sins of the World. Joh.
1.29. and therefore dyed for all. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. and gave himself a Ransom
for All. 1 Timothy 2.6. To save that which was lost. Matthew. 18.11. And so his
Propitiation made, was for the world. 2 Cor. 5.19. The whole world. 1 John 2.2.
and all this is full and plain in the Scripture.

PROOF. III.
God in Christ, does in some means or other of his appointment, give some
witness to all men, of his mercy and goodness procured by Christ. Psalm.
19.1.6. Romans 10.18. Act. 14.17. And there through at one time or other, sends
forth some stirrings of the Spirit, to move in, and knock at the hearts of men,
to invite them to Repentance, and seeking God; and so to lay hold on the grace
and salvation offered; And this not in a show or Pretense, but in truth and
good will, ready to bestow it on them; And this is all fully Testified in
Scripture. Genesis 6.3. Isai. 45.22. Act. 17.30, 31. Joh. 1.19.

PROOF. IV.
The holy Ghost, that comes from the Father and the Son, shall reprove the
World of sin (even that part of the World also that refuses now to believe,)
That they are under sin, because they believe not on Christ, and that it is
their sin, that they have not believed on him: And how could it be their
sin, not to believe in Christ, and they for that cause under sin, if there
were neither enough in the Atonement made by Christ for them, nor truth in Gods
offer of mercy to them; nor Will or Power in the Spirits moving, in any sort
sufficient, to have brought them to believe at one time or other; And yet is
this evident in Scripture; and shall be by the holy Spirit, to be their great
sin; That fastens all other sins on them. Joh. 3.18, 19. and 8.24. and
12.48. and 15.22.24. and 16.8, 9, 10.11.

PROOF. V.
God has testified, both by his Word and his Oath, That he would that his
Son should so far save, as to work a Redemption for All men; and likewise
that he should bring all to the knowledge of the truth: that there-through
Redemption might be wrought in and upon them. 1 Timothy 2.4. with Joh. 3.17. So
he wills not, nor has any pleasure in the death of him, (even the wicked,)
That dies, But rather that be turn and live. Ezekiel. 18.23.32. and 33.11. And
dare any of us say, The God of Truth says, and swears that; of which he
has no inward and serious meaning; Oh far be such blasphemy from us. 1 Ioh.
5.10.

PROOF. VI.
The very words and Phrases used by the holy Ghost in Scriptures speaking of
the death of Christ, and the Ransom and Propitiation; To whom it belongs, and
who may seek it, and in believing, find Life, implies no less then all men;
As to instance; All Nations. Matt. 28.19, 20. The ends of the Earth. Isai.
45.22. and 49.6. Every Creature. Mar. 16.15. All. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. 1 Timothy 2.6.
Every man. Hebr. 2.9. The world. Ioh. 3.16, 17. 2 Cor. 5.19. The whole World. 1
Ioh. 2.2. That which was lost. Luke 19.10. Sinners. Matt. 9.13. unjust, 1 Pet.
3.18. ungodly, Romans 5.6. and that whosoever of these repent and believe in
Christ, shall receive this grace. Ioh. 3.16.18. Act. 10.43. Now all these so
often and indifferently used: were it not Pride and Error to devise Glosses to
restrain the Sense the Scripture holds forth; so full and large for All men.

PROOF. VII.
That whereas there are certain high and peculiar Privileges of the Spirit,
contained in the New Testament: Sealed by the blood of Christ, which belongs
not to all men; But only to the Saints, the Called and Chosen of the Lord: And
when they are alone distinctly mentioned; They are even so spoken of, as
belonging to them only. Mat. 13.11. Ioh. 14.17.21, 22, 23. and 16.13, 14, 15.
and 17.9, 20. Act. 2.38, 39. 1 Cor. 2.9, 14. Heb. 9.15. and 8. tot. 1 Pet.
2.3.9.

Yet when any of these Pecullar Privileges are so spoken of as joined together
with the Ransom and Propitiation which belongs to all: Then are they not
spoken of; in such a restraining and exclusive manner, or with such
appropriating words: But so, and with such words, as room is left to apply the
Ransom to all men, in speech, And withal so hold out the Privileges to them
that believe, that are Proper to them: That they may both have their comfort
and special hope: And also hold forth the Ransom, and keep open the door for
others. In belief, and receipt of the Propitiation, To come in and partake with
them: And so it is said, for his Sheep, for many: But no where, But, or only
for his Sheep; or but or only for many, which is a strong Proof of the Ransom,
being given for all men, as is shown, Chap. 3.10.

PROOF. VIII.
The Restoration wrought by Christ, in his own body for Mankind, is set forth
in Scripture, to be as large and full, for all men, and of as much force as the
fall of the first Adam: by and in himself for All men; In which respect, the
first Adam is said to have been a Figure of Christ, the second Adam. Romans 3.22,
23, 24. and 5.12, 14.18. 1 Corin. 1.21, 22, 45, 46, 47. as is before shown,
Chap. 8.

PROOF. IX.
The Lord Jesus Christ has sent and commanded his Servants to Preach the
Gospel to All Nations, to every Creature, and to tell them withal; That
whoever believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. Matt. 28.19, 20. Mar.
16.15, 16. and his Servants have so Preached to all. 2 Cor. 5.19. Rom 10.13.18.
And our Lord JESUS will make it to appear one Day, that he has not sent his
Servants upon a false Errand; Nor put a lie in their mouths, nor wished them
to dissemble: In offering that to all, which they knew belonged but to some,
even to fewest of all. But to speak the Truth. Isai. 44.26. and 61.8. 1 Timothy
1.12.

PROOF. X.
The Lord wills Believers, to Pray, even for the unjust, and their
Persecuters. Matthew. 5.44.48. Luke 6.28. Yea, even for all men: Yea, even for
Kings, and all in Authority: When few in Authority loved Christianity yet; yet
he said, Not some of that sort, but for All in Authority: and that on this
ground: It is good in the sight of God, who will have All men saved; and come
to the Knowledge of the truth. Luke 10.5. 1 Timothy 3.1.4.

Surely there is a Door of life opened for All men: 2 Timothy 1.10. for God has
not said to the Seed of Israel, Seek ye me in vain. Isai. 45.19. He will not
have his Children pray for vain things.

PROOF XI.
The Lord has given forth his Word and Promise, to be with his Servants, so
preaching the Gospel to all: and with his People so Praying for all, where they
come. That they may go on, with Confidence in both. Matthew. 28.20. 1 Timothy 2, 3,
8. Luke 10.6. Isaiah 54.17.

PROOF. XII.
The Lord has already performed and made good his Word to his Servants and
People, upon some of all sorts of men, and all sorts of Sinners; Showing them
mercy, To this very end; that none might exclude themselves; But all be
encouraged to Repent, Believe, and hope thereby. Act. 2. and 3. and 8. and 9.
and 10. and 11. and 16. and 19.28. 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. 1 Timothy 1.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

PROOF. XIII.
The blessing of Life has streamed in this Doctrine of the Love of God to
Mankind, yea in the Tender and Spiritual discovery of the Grace of God to
Mankind, (in the Ransom given, and Atonement made by Christ, for all men; with
the fruits thereof,) Has God in the first place overcommed his Chosen Ones, to
believe, and turn to God. Act. 13.48. Tit. 2.11.13. and 3, 4, 5.

PROOF. XIV.
Those, that when the Gospel comes, and any Spiritual Light therein to them:
when they refuse to Believe, and suffer themselves to be withdrawn by other
things; They are affirmed to Love, (or choose) darkness rather then Light.
Joh. 3.19. (which how could it be, if no Light in truth were for them,) in
following lying vanities to forsake their own Mercies. Jonah 2.8. To harden
their own hearts. Romans 2.5. To loose their own Souls. Matthew. 16.26. and to
destroy themselves. Hos. 13.9. and they being from Adam fallen* Into Darkness,
hardness, and their Souls lost, and Death passed on them:

How could these things be: If by Jesus Christ, no life had been obtained, no
atonement made. No restoration of their Souls, nor means procured and used,
that they might be saved: God is no hard master, to gather where he has not
strowne.

PROOF. XV.
God his earnest Expostulations, Contendings, Charges and Protestations, even
to such, as whereof many Perished. Romans 11.27. Isai. 10.22. As to instance; Oh
that there were such an heart in them, That they would fear me, etc. That it
might be well with them, etc. Deuteronomy. 5.29. What could have been done more for my
Vineyard, that I have not done in it, etc. Isai. 5.4, 5. What iniquity have
your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me? Jere. 2.5. Have I
been a wilderness to Israel, a land of Darkness; wherefore say my People, we
are Lords; we will come no more unto thee? ver. 31. Oh my People, what have I
done unto thee? wherein have I we aryed thee? Thestifie against me. Mich. 6.3.
How often would I have gathered, etc. and ye would not. Matthew. 23.37. Oh that
my People had harkned unto me, etc. I should soon have subdued their enemies,
etc. Psalm. 81.12, 13, 14. Because I have called, and ye refused, and no man
regarded, etc. Prove. 1.24, 25, 32. because, when they knew God, they glorified
him not as God, and Romans ^.21.28. Therefore thou art inexcusable oh man, etc.
Thou after thy ^^ardnesse and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self
wrath, etc. Romans 2.1.5. No Christian, I hope, will reply against God, and say;
Thou never meantest us good: there was no Ransom given for us; No Atonement
made for us; No good done us, no mercy shown us; nothing in truth, whereby we
might have been saved; nothing but an empty show, and a bare Pretense; But if
any should reason so evilly, yet shall not such answers stand. Jere. 2.25.

PROOF. XVI.
The Scriptures manner of setting forth the sin of such as despise and refuse
this grace, -- and their Estate, and the Persons perishing, as to say, They
turn the grace of God into wantonness. Jude 4. Tread under foot the Son of
God, Profane the blood of the Govenant, with which they were sanctified; offer
despite to the Spirit of grace. Heb. 10.29. Deny the Lord that bought them. 2
Pet. 2.1. They perish for whom Christ died. 1 Cor. 8.11. Trees twice dead,
plueked up by the roots. Jude 12.13. and bring upon themselves swift
destruction. 2 Pet 2.1. And how could all this be, if GOD had given his Son
in no sort for them; if Christ had shed no blood for to procure Remission for
them; if he had not bought them; nor had any grace or life, by his Spirit, to
bestow on them:

PROOF. XVII.
JESUS CHRIST, by virtue of his Death, shall be their Judge, and by the Gospel,
in which they might have been saved, will he Judge them to a second Death; and
how can that be, if he never died the first Death for them, and if there were
not Truth in his Gospel, Preached to them. Romans 14.9, 10, 11, 12. Phil. 2.7.11.
Romans 2.16. Joh. 12.47, 48, 50.

PROOF. XVIII.
Believers are exhorted to contend for the Faith of this Common Salvation,
which was once delivered to the Saints; which some having heard, oppose, and
others turn the offers of it into wantonness: and through not heeding, and
not walking in the faith of this Salvation already wrought by Christ for men:
They deprive themselves of, and wind out themselves from that Salvation; which
CHRIST by his Spirit, in Application of the former; would have wrought in them;
and so deprive themselves of the Salvation to come. Jude 3.4, 5.

And every of these PROOF'S be plain, and according to Scripture, and each of
force; how much more altogether, still justifying the sense, That 1 Timothy 2.6.
and Hebr. 2.9. imports; and the truth of the Proposition. in the beginning.

CHAP. XXI.
Of an Addition of some more Peculiarly proving the effectualnesse of the
Ransom of CHRIST with GOD, for All Men.

SOme there have been, that have granted, the Death of Christ, as the Ransom,
to be for All men, but believe it not to be effectual for All men; which
effectualnesse is already proved in this whole Discourse, and in all the
Arguments and Proofs; yet to remove that Doubt, I do add a few more Proofs
more peculiarly to confirm the effectualnesse of the Ransom of Christ, with
God, for all men; and that there be no mistake in this point, let this be
minded; That there is great difference between the giving of a Ransom, and the
application of a Ransom given, between the effectualnesse of a Ransom, with
him to whom it is given; and the effectualnesse in them to whom it is applied;
between effectualnesse with God for men, and effectualnesse in men to God: the
former of these may be, though the latter be wanting; But the latter cannot be,
where the former is wanting: Now of the latter of these, The effectualnesse of
the Application of the Ransom of Christ in men to God, is not here meant; That
being another, and after business of Christ, by his Spirit, in discovery of,
and helping men to believe the former, which is that here spoken too; Namely,
the effectualnesse of the giving of the Ransom by Christ to God for all men;
and that it is with God effectual for All men; is proved by the Word of God,
and the Works of God, and reason and Arguments according to the Scripture.

First, the Word of God, avoucheth the same in four things clearly.

1. In that it affirms the enmity, (brought in by Adams Apostasy only, and
farther Testified against the Gentiles by the Partition Wall,) to be, (on Gods
part) slain, and Christ to become the Peace, and the Propitiation of the
sins of the whole World. Romans 3.22, 24. and 5.12, 18. with Ephesians. 2.14, 15,
16. Col. 2.14, 15. 2 Cor. 5.19. 1 John 2.2. So far, that in and by Christ,
the Law is answered, and Justice satisfied, and Mercy and Truth met together in
him: Psalm. 85.10, 11. his Death being as acceptable with the Father, as if All
had died. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. And the Father Professing himself to be with him
well-pleased. Matt. 3.17. and 17.5. having accepted his Sacrifice, and set him
at his Right hand. Hebr. 10.12. Joh. 16.10. willing All men to hear his Son
CHRIST. Matthew. 17.5. Acts 3.22.

2. In that, That as Jesus Christ Dyed, and rose, and revived, That he might be
the Lord of the Dead, and of the Living; So the Father has given over all
judgment to him, and given all Power and Authority into his hands, and made
him Lord and Judge of All. Romans 14.9.12. Joh. 5.22.27. Matthew. 28.18. Acts
10.36. So as he has Power to forgive sins on earth. Matthew. 9.6. and Power
to judge; Romans 2.16. Power to save all that come to God by him. Hebr. 7.25. and
power to destroy all those that obey not his Gospel. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. and 2.8. and
save whom he will, he may; And to save, and not destroy men's lives, was the
Prime end of his first coming. Luke 9.56. and unless he that came to save
them; do for their Rebellion against him, condemn them; the Father will not
condemn them; having given all to the dispose and judgment of Christ. 2 Cor.
5.10.

3. That it affirms Jesus Christ to be exalted at Gods right hand, and filled
above measure with the Spirit, to send forth to men; to manifest himself in due
season. 1 Timothy 2.6. To send forth to the Rebellious, that the Lord might dwell
among them. Psalm. 68.18. Joh. 16.8, 10. and to such as are subdued, and brought
in to believe; to lead them into all truth, and make them useful. Joh. 16.13,
14, 15. Act. 2.32, 33. Ephesians. 4.7, 12. So as there is power in him, to Call
all, and to bring all that hear his Word, and submit themselves thereto, to
believe on him; and so to Life in and by him. Isal. 45.22, 24. and 50.4, 5.
Prove. 8.32, 35. 2 Cor. 5.14, 21.

4. In that it affirms, that all men, (not only those that submit to his
government in the day of grace) but also all others, shall one day appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and shall acknowledge him to be LORD, to
the glory of GOD; and then receive the Sentence from him. Isaiah 45.23. Philip.
2.10, 11. 2 Cor. 5.10. This Answer, or one of these, d^e prove his Ransom
effectual with GOD, for All Men; How much more all of them together.

Secondly, The Works of God mentioned in Scripture, proves the same also.

1. The Mercies of God, who according to his holy Truth, and Justice, and his
Word, gone out of his month; should be constantly testifying wrath, and heaping
Plague upon Plague, destroying with Curse all that are found sinners against
him, and his holy Law. Genesis 2.17. Deutr. 27. and 28. Gal. 3.10. If there were
not some Ransom between him and Mankind; But through JESUS CHRIST, and his
Ransom given, and Propitiation made and accepted, His Mercy is over all his
Works. Psalm. 145.8, 9. And hence comes by CHRIST, the Preservation of the
Earth, And Inhabitants thereof for men. Gods Patience, Long-suffering, Bounty,
Means to lead to Repentance, motion of Spirit in those means, as is already
showed in Chap. 1. The Common Salvation.

2. The wrath of God revealed from heaven, against all unrighteousness and
ungodliness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness, who will not yield
to the Light and motion of the Spirit, coming from Christ, in the means, but
smother it, and turn from it. Romans 1.16, 17, 18, 21, 24. and 2, 4, 5. Prove.
1.24, 32. and 8.36. and this wrath breaks out most abundantly, where this
grace Procured by CARIST, is with most light and means made known, to lead
men to Repentance, and they refuse and turn from the same. 2. Kings 17.7.23. 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16.17. Amos 3.2. Isai. 5.5, 6. Mat. 23.37, 38. Luke 12.47, 48.
The Lord with indignation revenging the wilful sinning, (after knowledge of
the truth vouchsafed) against the grace offered in Christ, by unkind
requitalls, and contempt thereof, disobedience thereto, and departure
therefrom, both in this World, and in the world to come. Nah. 1.2, 9. Jo. 3.19.
Mat. 12.32. Hebr. 10.26 29. 1 Pet. 3.19.20. 2 Pet. 2.1, 5, 10, 20, 23. 2 Thessalonians.
1.8. Jude 15. The LORD, the Judge of all the Earth, being righteous and holy in
all his Ways. Psalm. 145.17. will nor thus deal with any for refusing an
empty show, and bare Pretense of Good.

And both these his Works of Mercy, and wrath do fully Prove; The
effectualnesse of the Ransom of CHRIST with GOD for men.

Thirdly Reasons from Scripture, do also confirm the same (...) as to say.

REASON I.
That as Jesus CHRIST has abolished Death by his Coming, Sufferings and
Resurrection; So he has brought Life and Immortallity to Light, by the
Gospel. 2 Timothy 1.10.

REASON. II.
That the Grace of GOD, appearing through this Gospel, brings Salvation to
all men; and so appears to All Men, to whom it so comes; though teaching
Believers. Titus 2.11.

REASON. III.
That the time of Gods Patience, and showing mercy, bountifulness, and sending
his Servants with motions of his Grace in them; and moving to the hearts of
men, to invite them to Repentance, and turning to God, is a Day of grace and
Salvation, in which God is near, and to be found, and ready to receive, and
accept to Mercy, any that obey his Call, and turn to him. 2 Cor. 5.14.^1. and
6.1, 2. Revel. 3.20. Hebr. 3.13, 15.

And on this ground (in these three Reasons,) are all men invited by Gods
Servants, and by CHRIST in them, To look to CHRIST, and be saved, To seek him
while he may be sound, yea, even the Wicked and Unrighteous, To forsake their
own Way, and turn to him, and He will have mercy o^ them; and abundantly
Pardon them; Isai. 45.21, 22. and 42.1.8. and 55.1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8. And that
also with this warning; That if they now refuse, and pass over the day of
Grace, The Axe is at the root of the trees; and they will soon be out off; and
greater judgment befall them. Prove. 1.25.29. Matthew. 3.10. Acts 13.40.41. all
which do evidence the Ransom, given by Christ, to God for them; To have been
effectual with God.

As for that great ^^umble, which many make to themselves, to keep themselves
out from Believing this Truth; as that many perish, and miss of Eternal Life,
and if CHRIST had so died, and given himself a Ransom, as were effectual with
his Father for them; then JESUS CHRIST should loose the travel of ^is Soul in
his Death and Ransom given; This is Answered before in Chap. 1.

The special Salvation and distinction between the Common and the Special
Salvation; and in Chapter 16. in Answer of the Third Objection.

The Spirit in the Scripture, says not, that any perish, or miss of Eternal
Life, because CHRIST did not die for them, or because his Ransom given, and
Propitiation made, was not sufficient, or not effectual with GOD for them;

No such matter, but because, when Light comes, They will not Repent, submit to
him, come to him, receive him, and believe on him. Ioh. 1.11. and 3.19. and
5.40. 2 Pet. 2.1.

Besides, Scriptures shows something more required of men to be done in and
upon them by CHRIST, Then his Ransom and Propitiation by Death, and
Resurrection made with GOD for them:

That they be Justified, and Eternally saved by him; Even a Spiritual
Application of, and making them obedient to the Death and Blood-shedd of
CHRIST, That so they may be brought to believe on him; and be sprinkled and
washed from their sins with his Precious Blood. 1 Pet. 1.2. as afore-shewne
in Chapters aforesaid.

Whence so great wrath comes on them that despise and resist this Grace.

Yet there is no less on the part of CHRIST, in respect of his Death and
Ransom given for them; For he does, and shall see the Travel of his Soul.
Isaiah 53.11. and that so fully; As,

That he is the LORD of All. Acts 10.36.

And has been, and is, and shall be so glorified in the hearts of many;

That they shall run to him; and be by his Knowledge shall justify them.
Isai. 55.5. and 53.11.

And all the rest of men, shall one day be convinced of sin, because they
have not Believed on Him. John ^6.8, 9.

And All shall appear before his Judgment Seat; and then and there shall
confess him LORD, to the Glory of God. Philip. 2.10, 11.

And there shall give Account to him. Romans 14.9.12.

And He shall give the Judgment, and that according to the Gospel. Joh. 12.48.
Romans 2.16.

And so shall be glorified together, with his Father, in the Declaration of the
glorious goodness of his shining Truth, Justice, Mercy, free and abundant
Love, on those on his right hand; and his unfailing truth, with the Equity and
Severity of his Justice on them on his left hand. Matthew. 25.31.46.

By all which, it will then appear, that his Ransom was effectual, with his
Father; and has been effectual with many; and might have been with others; So
as All shall then know;

That by the Grace of GOD, be tasted Death for Every Man, and gave himself a
Ransom for All;

By virtue whereof, he then will show himself both KING and Judge.

And so much for Proof of the Proposition.
CHAP. XXII.
Of the Removing some Doubts, hindering some from Believing; That which they
confess, the Scripture plainly Affirms.

SOme do confess; That they cannot deny, but that the Scripture plainly
Affirms; That JESUS CHRIST gave himself a Ransom for All Men, and by the
grace of GOD, tasted Death for Every Man, and is the Savior of, and
Propitiation for the Sins of the World; but yet they are fearful to believe
the same in the Sense the words import: because in other places, it is said,
Faith is the gift of God. Ephesians. 2.8. and all that the Father gives Christ,
shall come to him. Joh. 6.37. and as many at more ordained to Eternal Life,
believed Act. 13.48. Whence, seeing all do not believe; They know not how to
believe that CHRIST dyed for All.

ANSWER.
This has been fully answered before; yet because it remains as a Doubt in
some, it shall be Particularly, with what is before said.

Ephesians. 2.8. For by grace y^^ are five^^, Through^ (...); and thee not of your
selves, it is the gift of God: In these words there is a clear distinction
between the grace by which we are saved, and the Faith through which we are
saved: And also here is a double affirmation; One intimate; and by the
conjunction, necessarily employed. Viz. That the grace by which we are saved, is
the Gift of God: The other express, Viz. That the Faith through which we are
saved, is also the Gift of God, again, The saving here affirmed of, is to be
minded, both in respect of that from which we are saved; and also in respect
of (...) Salvation it self.

It has been before shown how the Scripture distinctly sets forth;

First, a Reconciliation, Redemption, and Salvation, which Jesus Christ by
himself, in his own body wrought with God for men; ( which was for all Men.)

And secondly; a Reconciliation, Redemption, and Salvation, which by his
Spirit, in applying the former; he works in men to God, ( which though
offered in some sort to All,) yet received only by believers; as is shown,
Chap. 1. which double Reconciliation and Redemption, is suitable to the double
enmity against God, and the misery that mankind was fallen into.

First, through man's falling into sin, there was enmity, in the very
condition of all Mankind; which stood cross to God; to keep him from coming
in to men; and extending Mercy and Peace to them. Isa. 59.1, 2.

Secondly, through man's falling into sin, there is an enmity in the very
nature of all mankind, which rules in the hearts, and diffuseth it self through
all the Powers of soul and body; filling the man with averseness to God, and
so keeps a man from submitting and coming in to God for Mercy and Peace.
Romans 3.10.18.

God might, if it had so pleased him; have thrown mankind for sin, into
destruction, with the Devils, and their Angels, that first sinned; and then
drew mankind into finne; but he had more love to mankind; and being full of
Pity and Compassion toward men, he was ready to show Mercy, and extend peace
to mankind; But man being fallen into sin, and sinning; the Truth of God
pressed for man to die, and his Justice for man to suffer Curse, and if without
imposing this death and curse; mercy should be shown, and Peace extended to
men: it would blemish the truth and Justice of God, and so be against him.
Psalm. 5.4, 5. Such was the condition of mankind, and so filled with enmity
against God: for remedying whereof, JESUS CHRIST by his Fathers appointment,
became man, a Public Person, in the room of All; and so died for our sins,
and rose for our Justification, and offered himself a Ransom and Propitiatory
Sacrifice to God for All men: So as in him the sinner has dyed, and the Curse
is suffered; and so Mercy and Truth are met, Psalm. 85.10, 11. having slain
the Enmity (which was in the condition of Mankind,) Ephesians. 2.16. and made Peace
through the blood of his Cross. Coll. 1.20. which is intimated also. Ephesians.
2.5. By grace ye are saved: and yet there is another Reconciliation for Christ
to work. Coll. 1.20.

For notwithstanding this Reconciliation wrought by Christ for men; yet there
is an enmity in the nature of men still, they being by nature dead in
Trespasses and sins. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. alienated from, and enemies to God in
their minds, by wicked works. Col. 1.21. all out of the way, etc. Romans 3.10,
19. Such is the nature of mankind.

For remedying whereof, God has exalted JESUS CHRIST, and filled him with
Spirit to send forth in the Declaration of the former Reconciliation and Peace
made by him, thereby to convince, and subdue the Rebellious, and to work
repentance and faith in the subdued; through which faith they receive this
Salvation. Psalm. 68.18.20. Act. 5.30, 31, 32. as is before shown, Chap. 1. and
2. and 3. and 4. and so they are saved both from the enmity in their Condition,
by the grace of God in Christ, and from the enmity in their nature, by the same
grace, through faith wrought in their hearts; whereby they believe this grace,
and therethrough depend on him; and so receive remission of sins, and life,
and the beginnings of Salvation from Jesus Christ.

And thus also there appears a threefold salvation of the workeing of Jesus
Christ.

1. A Salvation, which is altogether without man, wrought by Jesus Christ
himself, in his own body, with God for men, whereby the enmity in men's
condition is slain; and so a way of Salvation opened for every man. 1. Tim.
2.4, 6. Heb. 2.9.

2. A salvation which is in the hearts and souls of men; discovering it self
in some fruits in their mortal bodies, which Jesus Christ works by his
spirit; making known, and applying the former; enabling men to believe; and
therethrough reconciling their hearts and Powers to God, so slaying the enmity
in Nature. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20, 21. Colloss. 1.20, 21, 22.

3. A total, complete, and Perfect Salvation, both of soul and body, made
glorious; for which the Believers do yet wait. To. 8.23. Phil. 3.20, 21.

And of the second of these, it plainly appears to be meant. Ephesians. 2.8.

So that by Scripture it appears, and in this Ephesians. 2. also, That the coming
of Jesus Christ into the World, and the Propitiation made by him, for the
sins of the World, is the grace of God, and his gift. Joh. 4.10. Ephesians. 2.12,
13.

The Patience and bounty of God procured hereby; and witnessing his mercy, and
leading to Repentance, is the grace of God, and his gift through grace also.
Mat. 5.45.48. Act. 14.17. Romans 2.4. Ephesians. 2.1.4.7.

The Declaration of the Gospel is also the grace of God, and his gift through
grace. Luke 1.77.79. Joh. 1.7. Ephesians. 2.17. The sending forth of Spirit in the
Gospel, to convince and turn men in to Christ, is also the grace of God, and
his gift through grace, whether men turn at his reproof, Yea, or no. Prove.
1.23. Joh. 1.4, 5, 9. Ephesians. 2.17.

The subduing of the heart, and bringing it in to believe; is also the grace of
God, and his gift through grace; of which meant. Ephesians. 2.8. Phillip. ^. 29. 1
Pet. 1.21, 22. And the establishing a man in the faith; is also the grace of
God, and his gift through grace. 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. Ephesians. 2.18, and. Now God
has sent his Son into the World, to be the Savior of the World; and Christ
has given himself a Ransom for All men, whether men believe or not, Christ at
one time or other enlightneth, and so tendereth convincements and Calls to
everyone that comes into the World, whether they submit to it or no. Prove.
1.23. and 4.45. Joh. 1.4, 5, 9. And thus does God in the means; and by his
Spirit, that is able to work it, offer to give, and tender the working of
faith in men at one time or other. Romans 2.4. Act. 17.30, 31. Genesis 6.3. Mat.
23.37. which is an admonition to all: to seek faith of God in the means; to
yield to his Spirit, when he is about to work it; To give him the glory, when
it is wrought; but no cause at all from hence to raise a doubt of the extent of
the Ransom, which is in the grace it self, that faith receives, and so
intimate. verse. 1.4, 5, 7, 12, 17.

ANSWER.
Joh. 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Those that hence raise the Doubt
about the extent of the Ransom, do it from the words, gives me; though it be
true, that the words themselves give no cause thereof, but let them be weighed.

1. Giving, as some would have it, giving by Election to Sonship, and eternal
inheritance; which election was in Christ without consideration or respect of
good or evil, righteousness or sin, and these are said to be chosen in
Christ; And so, (though not so spoken in Scripture,) may be truly said, to be
given him; But not the only number, that were given him; for as these are
given him, to be his members, and Brethren, and heirs with him; so were all
the rest of mankind, in the same Decree given him, to serve him and his People;
as is before shown, Chap. 18. In Answer of Objection the Fifth. But where this
Election and Decree is set forth under this term of being given to Christ, is
hard to find in Scripture; I cannot yet meet with two places, nor with any that
could show me them, and prove it so. But surely in this place it neither is,
nor can be taken, as so used; Though such a groundless apprehension thereof,
is that, whence some do raise to themselves this Doubt.

2. The Privileges and life of all mankind, was once put in the keeping of the
first man that God made, The first Adam, a type of him that was to come; and
he by one offense lost, and overthrew himself, and all mankind, and God in his
mercy to mankind; Sent forth his own Son, made of a Woman, in the likeness
of sinful flesh, and made him under the Law, and laid on him the sins of the
World; and the curse due to Mankind; That he might undertake for All Men, to
Ransom them; and open a way for them to come to God again.

And thus did God give All Men to Christ, to Ransom them; and pay the price
for them, and so work a Redemption for them, that they might be set alive
before him. Isai. 49.6. Romans 3.19.25. and 5.12.19. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. 1 John
4.14. Joh. 1.29. See Chap. 8.

And giving may be found sometime, though not often used in Scripture, to set
forth Gods giving of men to Christ, to undertake for them, to Ransom them; and
also given to him, he has so paid the Price, and satisfied for, that they
shall all come to him; and he will raise them up; and they shall acknowledge
him Lord, to the glory of God. Isai. 45.21, 22, 23. Joh. 12.22. Phil. 2.7.10,
11. 1 Cor. 15.22. and of this giving, is most likely to be meant. Ioh. 6.39.
Though giving be seldom so used:

3. Giving is sometimes used, to set forth that Act of God to Christ, in
respect of his acceptance of his Ransom, and his victory in his Resurrection;
in which he has given all men to Christ, to be his, and he to be their Lord,
and they to live to him, and he to possess them for an inheritance; To give
Inheritance to those that submit to his Government, and judge the rest. Romans
14.9. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Acts 10.36. and in this sense the word, Give, is used.
Psalm. 2.6, 8, 9. and elsewhere in Scripture; and in all these three Senses,
giving comprehends Adam, and all that comes of him; all men being given to
Christ in every of these Senses, as Scripture testifies.

4. Giving is sometime used for GOD'S giving Men to Christ, in the heavenly
Call, when by his Spirit sent forth in the Gospel; he not only enlightens men
in the knowledge of Christ, and the Propitiation made by him; and of Gods love
therein, and of that fullness of grace and truth that is in him to bestow; So
as thereby to convince them, and begin to draw them with the bands of Love;
Taking the yoke from off the Jaws, and laying meat before them; without which
none come to Christ. Ioh. 6.45. and notwithstanding which, many may draw back;
and not knowing aright this his goodness, be yet unchosen. Hos. 11.2, 3.
Matthew. 20.16. But in this heavenly Call, giving them so to see the Excellency
of Christ, that all things else becomes as loss in comparrison of him; and
they so instructed, and Prevailed with hereby, that they come in to him, and
believe on him, so as they are given up to him. Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. Io. 6.40.45.
and to these he makes known his Fathers Name; and gives them his Words, and
eternal Life, and will Preserve them, and raise them up to glory at the last
Day; And this giving to Christ, in and by the heavenly Call; is that meant.
Ioh. 6.37.40. and most usually by our Savior, speaking of this business. Ioh.
17.2.6, 9.12.24. and elsewhere, which is a good admonition to all of us to
abide in, and yield up to the heavenly Call; and therein to give all diligence
to make our Calling and Election sure. Heb. 3.1.14. 2 Pet. 1.10. But no color
to doubt of the Extent of the Ransom; which is the ground thereof. 2 Cor.
5.14.20.

ANSWER.
Acts 13.48. And when th, Gentiles heard this; They were glad, and glorified
the Word of the Lord; and as many as were ordained to eternal Life, believed.

1. This place speaks of a further business then the death of Christ, as the
Ransom and Propitiation only; The next and immediate end thereof: Not being
the taking enmity out of the Nature of men; and giving them Eternal Life to
all, or any; But the taking enmity out of the Condition of men; and that so
having them all given into his dispose; He might open a door of life to them,
and reconcile their Powers to God, that through his Call believe on him, and
give them Eternal Life; and judge and condemn those that refuse in his Call,
to submit to him. Coll. 1.20. Ephesians. 2.16, 17. Romans 14.9.12. 2 Cor. 5.10.20.
Heb. 5.9. 2 These. 1.8. So that this Sentence gave no color for the doubt, it
being neither here, nor in any place of Scripture said, That as many as Christ
dyed, and gave himself a Ransom for; either have done, shall or will believe
on him; and have Eternal Life.

2. The words, ordained to Eternal Life, (whence the doubt is raised,) It is
to be feared, are mistaken, as if they signified only the Prime Election to
Sonneship, and eternal Inheritance; whereas it is not found in Scripture any
one place; where that only Sense is set forth in the words, ordaining to Life;

( Of the word Ordaining. Act. 13.48.)
The word ordaining, being found in Scripture, to have a further Sense, and to
signify a great deal more; Even the Ordination, Constitution, Preparation,
furniture, and Consecration, of the Elected, both for the business and end,
for which they were elected, whether it be applied to JESUS CHRIST, or to those
Chosen in and by him, to Life. 1. Pet. 1.20. Acts. 10.42. Hebr. 10.5. Ephesians.
2.10. And this word ordaining, is most frequently used in Scripture, for an
actual Ordaining, Constituting, Preparing, Furnishishing, Consecrating, and so
making meet, and giving Liberty and Authority for that to which one is
ordained, and so it is with an actual Election, and Choice, being also more
then a Choice, even a furnishing, and consecrating to the business, and end
for which one is Chosen; And for the word is used; when it is spoken of the
Church. Act. 14.23. and 16.4. or of God his ordaining, Romans 13.1. 1 Cor. 12.28.
1 Timothy 2.7. and so our Savior of his Disciples, whom in his heavenly Call, he
had actually chosen out of the World, into Union and Fellowship with himself,
and one another; and appointed and consecrated them to hold forth the Word of
Life. and serve him in the Gospel. Joh. 15.15. I have Chosen you, and ordained
you, that you should go, and bring forth fruit, etc.

And this word ordaining, in this business, to be so taken for an actual
ordaining here, is evident by the like use of it in places speaking of the like
blessing. Coll. 1.12, 13. 1 Pet. 2.9. 1 John 5.11, 12. Joh. 6.36. And so the
Word ordaining, Acts 13.48. Imports.

1. The Abundance and Power of Spirit, that went in the Word to their hearts.
Act. 11.21.

2. The unfainednesse and effectualnesse of the Spirit, wrought in them, as, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3, 4, 5.

3. The evidencing the effectualnesse of their Calling and Election, as 1 Thessalonians. 1.3, 4, 5.

4. The abundance of grace Powered into them, as Romans 5.15. Tit. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Such as was not usual in the beginning, and first coming of the Gospel, to
and in every one, where the Spirit had any workings, as may be seen in some
that in some sort believed the report. Ioh. 23, 24. and 3.3, 21. and 6.21.38.
Act. 2.31. and 3. and 5. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. Romans 14. and 15. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3.
So that here was more then usual.

And here appears some cause for this in Act. 13.48. for here was a great
opposition, contradiction, and blasphemy of the Doctrine, by the Jews. verse.
45. and so God was pleased to send forth more abundance of Spirit and grace in
the Apostles ministration of the Gospel, when it was most abundantly opposed
and blasphemed, and did effect more in the hearts of many, at this and such
Seasons, then was otherwise usual, like that Act. 16.23.

It may be some convincements, and movings might touch the hearts of many; yea,
it may be some of the opposers and blaspheamers; But yet none so far
believed, as to receive the report, and yield to confess it, but only such,
and those, to whom this abundance of Spirit, in such evidence, and effectual
operation did come and enter, to prevail in their hearts; Not only to believe
the report and yield to confess it, (as with many at some other Seasons,) But
in Believing unfainedly, to cleave to Christ, and give up themselves to him; In
which their faith became effectual, and they at first partakers of the first
fruits of Eternal Life; So as that might be affirmed of them in their
beginning, which is said. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3, 4, 5. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. and 1 Pet. 1.1.2.

So that here were neither Hypocrites, nor feined Believers, nor any lying
under convincement, nor hanging in the birth; But all that were now brought in,
were thus ordained, constituted, prepared, consecrated, and brought to some
enjoyment of Eternal Life; So many as had such abundance of grace, and so
effectually believed at this time, and no more, and yet there were many of
them: which serves to set forth the power of the Gospel. Romans 1.16. Gods
Presence with his Servants in ministration thereof. Matthew. 28.19, 20. 2 Cor. 3.
and is a great encouragement to constancy in fighting the good fight, and
holding forth the Gospel, in time of greatest opposition and Persecution, when
there may be greatest blessing. 2 Timothy 4.1. and is very useful many ways, but
gives not the lest show for the doubt about extent of the Ransom: It neither
being said, how many as Christ dyed for, believed; nor yet so many as was in
Gods Council Elected to Life; for then what becomes of all Believers since;
nor yet as many in that place, nor which is less, as many of that Society, as
were Elected to Life; many such might be, that were afterward Called; and then
thus effectually Chosen and ordained; and so believed as these did. So that the
Words caused not the doubt, but are abused to color it.

3. The Word or Doctrine that these did hear, and in hearing, were glad of,
and did glorify, and praise it in their hearts, for the truth and goodness of
it, and for the love of God, and the Salvation in Christ, manifested therein,
It was not that part of the Gospel, which sets forth Gods Election of some to
Life, and his peculiar Love to them, (as this doubt pretends,) But even that
part of the Gospel, whereof the doubt is made; it being the same Prophesied in
Isai. 49.6. I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, That thou may
be my Salvation to the ends of the Earth. Where all the ends of the Earth
called to look to him, and be saved. Isa. 45.22. which is evident to be all
men. Prove. 8.45. In all the ends of the Earth. Isai. 4.28. Joh. 1.3, 4, 5, 9.
and so as large, as 1 Timothy 2.6. Hebr. 2.9. So that this place well considered,
would have prevented, or removed the doubt.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of some mention of the Benefit of this Doctrine held forth.

SOme not being able to gainsay the truth so plainly affirmed in Scripture, but
that it is plainly recorded, That Jesus Christ did by the grace of God, taste
death for Every Man; and gave himself a Ransom for All Men; came into the
World, to be the Savior of the World, and is the Propitiation for the sins
of the whole World; yet are pleased to demand, What profit is there in
maintaining this so Plainly, and in such a general and large Sense; as the
Scripture expresses it in?

To which this Answer might be given, that as man believes with the heart unto
Righteousness; So with the mouth confession is made unto Salvation; and so I
might say, it is one part of the service of our Lord Jesus. To hold forth the
Word of life, and to confess him, and not to be ashamed of his Words before
men: Romans 10.9, 10. Phil. 2.16. Matt. 10.27. Mar. 8.38.

But far be it, that any of us should say, What is the Almmighty, that we
should serve him? and what profit shall we have? Job 21.15. But hoping that
this Question is moved with a more Christian mind; I Answer to it.

ANSWER. I.
This is that Doctrine, which our Savior Jesus Christ, in such general words,
did himself Preach unto men, to bring them to Repentance and faith. Ioh. 3.16,
17. and 6.51. and 12.46, 47, 48. And which his Forerunner had also to that end
declared. Joh. 1.3, 4, 7, 9, 29.

2. The same doctrine in the same largeness did he put in the hearts of the
Apostles; and committed the ministration thereof to them, to declare. 2 Cor.
3.16.12. Acts. 13.47, 48. Tit. 3.4, 5.

3. The Confession of this Gospel, in such general words, has been an
approved Confession of Believers. Joh. 4.42. It is therefore unquestionable
very profitable; and if we should reject this Word of the Lord, as
unprofitable, what wisdom would be in us? Jere. 8.8, 9. yea, would not that
heavy sentence be verified in us. Isai. 29.10, 11. and 28.12, 13.

4. This Doctrine so held forth, is very profitable for all men; And that, both
first to convince them of the vileness of their sin, in which they have been
the Crucifiers of Christ, the emptiness of their Righteousness, the
greatness of Gods love to them; the horriblenesse of their Rebellion against
so loving a God; as is shown in nine Particulars. Chap. 17. in Answer of
Objection 4.

Secondly, to allure and move them to Repentance, of their sins; and from
dead Works; to belief of the Gospel, and Faith in Jesus Christ, our Lord; and
so to attend his Sayings, and receive his reproofs and Council, as that which
indeed appertains to them; So as his Death applied to these ends, may be said,
to be for All; for us, for you, for me, for thee, and so left to every man's
Conscience, without peradventure. Act. 2.3. Heb. 6.1, 2. 2 Cor. 3. and 4.1.6.
and 5.10, 14, 15, 19. And one doubt put in about the truth of Christ's death
and Ransom for all men; lays a bar to keep them from being convinced indeed
of the vileness of their sins, and shuts the door against them, for coming
in to Repentance and faith; leaving them in the dark to muse upon Election; or
driving them, with the Pharisee, to seek some fleshly righteousness, in which
they may be better then others; to claim Christ by.

5. This Doctrine, so believed, is Profitable for Believers, to keep them
humble and Patient. Romans 3.9. Tit. 3.3, 4. to move them with Love and Pity
toward others. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. To preserve their Confidence in God, for
special favors. Romans 5.1, 5, 6, 11. yea, it teaches to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts; and to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in
this present Life. Titus. 2.11, 12.

6. It is Profitable to the servants of Christ, in respect of themselves, and
others, in preserving a good estimate of Scripture; and freeing from those
fleshly reasonings, and those false affirmations; That all Christ dyed for,
shall be eternally saved; and that he shall justify by his knowledge, as many
as he dyed for; And those rash Furies of confounding what the Scripture makes
distinct; yea, it is profitable for Doctrine, reproof, correction, instruction
in righteousness. 2 Timothy 3.16. But desiring it rather may be found Profitable,
then said so to be; I entreat all that will vouchsafe the reading hereof, to
mind the Application in a few Uses; in which, especially in the Last, this
Question will be further answered.

And so give me leave to speak to thee, Reader, whosoever thou may be, as to
one, who I am sure Christ did indeed die, and give himself a Ransom to God,
for.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Uses of the Affirmation in, 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. As the Proposition at
first affirmed.

USE I.
IF thou be one, that as thou have heard of the Death of JESUS CHRIST, for All
men, so thou have neither opposed the Doctrine, nor yet set thy heart seriously
to attend what grace is offered thee therein, and what is required of thee, but
still live in, and allowest thy self to go on in, and serve diverse lusts and
Pleasures, in Profanation of Gods holy Word, Worship, Name, Sabbath, or in
abuse of thy members, to cruelty, uncleanness, fraud, or of the Creatures of
God, to gluttony, drunkenness, wantonness, pride; or any such like known sins;
surely in these days, and this Nation, thou can not but know that these and
such like evils are the breaches of the holy and righteous law of God: which
even from thy Creation thou art bound to keep; and so great is every sin in
the breach of that Law; That all the Creatures in the World, are insufficient
to satisfy for: So that if Jesus Christ had not in thy Nature and Place, become
under the Law, and so borne thy sins, and suffered the Curse for them, Thou
must have perished for ever; but this has Jesus Christ done to Redeem and
Ransom thee: Now I pray thee consider; Was sin so odious and hateful to
God? That no Sacrifices, no Ransom, nor Works, no Blood, nor anything less
then the Precious Blood of the Son of God, could p^ease his wrath, and
satisfy his Justice; and that the Punishment and Curse suffered for thy sin,
was so great, as to make such a Mighty One, to be in an Agony, and to sweat
great drops of Blood; and to cry out upon the Cross, because of the wrath that
was executed on him: yea, to Die also! and even thy sins also, with the rest
of us, the Thorns, the Spears, the Nails that pierced him, the Mallady that
caused him to sweat such drops of Blood! and the very cause for which he
suffered all these Stripes! Behold what a share thou have; what a hand thou
have had in the shedding of the Blood of the Son of God: In which Sufferings,
he yet willingly did die, and so gave himself a Ransom to God for thee; to
save and deliver thee from the Wrath of God, and the Snare of the Devil: and
that himself might be thy Lord: And shall neither the Blood he has shed, nor
the Love he has Testified thereby, melt and gain in thy heart toward him?
Did he shed his Blood, to satisfy for thy sins, and will thou still go on
in sin? Can thou delight, and allow thy self in those sins, for which the
Lord Jesus was so wounded, and suffered so much? Did he become under the Law
for thee, and for thy Debt; Die, and Rise, that thou might come under his
Government; and will thou still yield to continue in servitude of sin and
Satan? Is there through his blood, so much Patience and Bounty vouchsafed, to
lead thee to Repentance, and will thou still persist in impenitency? will thou
slight the means he by his blood has Procured, to invite thee to Repentance?
Will thou make thy members, which he by his blood has purchased, the Servants
of sin, that drew forth his blood? Will thou oppress or defraud People
purchased by his Blood? Will thou abuse to gluttony, Drunkenness, Wantonness
or Pride, those Creatures, the liberty of Sober and moderate use whereof was
purchased by his blood? Will thou still pass on thy time securely, without
seeing the Peace and Life that is in him, and was procured by his blood? Is all
the Sufferings and Death and Bloodshed of JESUS CHRIST, of no more esteem
with thee? Can thou so contemn and tread under foot, and cast as farthest
off, and least in thy thoughts, the Precious blood of JESUS CHRIST, shed for
thy sins? And will thou not suffer the application and belief thereof, to
rest and work upon thy heart, to melt thee, and wash thee from thy sins; to
fill thy heart with sorrow for, and loathing of thy sins, to Crucify the
flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof; and to turn thee in to Christ,
whose blood would speak Peace to thee, and purify thee? Will thou so Persist?
Oh what will thou say! or how will thou be able to endure, when thou shall be
brought before this thy Lord, that so dyed for thee, and have his Precious
Blood, and all his Sufferings, with all the Mercies extended therethrough to
thee; and all thy contempt and abuse thereof laid to thy Charge, and then to be
Judged by him that so dearly bought thee, and thou would none of his
Government, but set light by all his Sufferings and Counsels: Oh that thou
were wise, and would consider thy latter End, and who it is that Calls
thee to Repentance! And is it not he that dyed for thee, and paid thy Debt?
That has waited for thee, and forborne thee so long, that he might be
gracious to thee? That has Pardon and Peace, and Life to bestow upon thee, and
that by all his mercies given thee, and means he used toward thee? and calls
on thee to forsake thy own way, and thoughts, and turn to him, and he will
have mercy on thee, and abundantly Pardon. Isai 35.6, 7. does he not
complain of it, as that which is a new Piercing to him; that thou will go on
still, Pressing him with thy sins, and not come in to him, that thou might
have Life? Isa. 43.24. Ioh. 5.39, 40. Surely he came to save sinners; he dyed
for the ungodly: Say not therefore, There is no hope in him for thee, and
therefore thou will do as thou have done, and so refuse his Call. Jer. 2.25.
Neither say thou; Seeing he dyed for me, I shall have Peace; Though I walk
after the stubbornness of my own heart; for though he dyed for the Sinners;
Unjust, Ungodly, and his enemies; yet such shall not inherit his kingdom, and
have Eternal Life with him: they that would enjoy this Life, must suffer his
Blood, through his Word and Spirit, to cleanse, renew and bring them in, and
conform them to himself; therefore be not deceived, God will not be mocked. 1
Cor. 6.9. Ephesians. 5, 6. his word is already gone forth, that he that so turns
his Grace into wantonness, and will persist in his evil way, and still say,
he shall have Peace notwithstanding: The Lord will not be merciful to such a
one; but all the Plagues written in his Book, shall light upon such a man.
Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20, 21. and the Lord Jesus is a Righteous Judge, and will wound
the head of such, as when this grace of his is made known, will go on still
in their Trespasses. Psalm. 63.21. Wherefore I beseech thee, let the blood of
Christ, shed for thee, and his love testified therein, plevaile with thee, to
soften thy heart, and to turn thee from all thy evil ways into JESUS CHRIST,
And seek the Lord, while he may be found; turn and live, for there is Mercy in
him for thee; It is no lying fable that is told thee. 2 Pet. 1.16. He has
sworn, he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather that the
wicked turn from his way, and Live. Ezekiel. 33.11. and 18.23.32. Oh turn thee,
turn thee and Live; why will thou die, when he delights not to have it so?
Behold he has given himself a Ransom for thee; and received Spirit, to send
forth in the means; He has procueed Salvation, and made thee saveable, and
calls thee to Repentance, and faith, that thou might be saved; And all
this Treatise has been to Prove the door of Life open for thee: How long will thou now defer, and stand out against so great grace? will thou not be made
clean? When shall it once be? Jere. 13.27. Follow not lying vanities, to the
loss of thy own mercies. Jonah 2.8. Loose not thy own soul, now he has
Purchased it: Do not destroy thy self, now he has wrought Redemption for
thee: Oh refuse not to accept his grace, and submit to his government, that
has so deerly bought thee; Do not deny him, or despise his Council; Do no
longer persist in thy ownewayes; least thou Provoke him to give thee up, and so
an irrecoverable downfall come upon thee. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. which yet may be
Prevented.

The LORD in Mercy give thee so to believe, mind, and acknowledge the Death
and Lordship of JESUS CHRIST, that this, with all such warnings and entreaty;
may timely take place in thy heart.

USE. II.
If thou be one that have more attentively heeded the report of the Gospel, and
have so framed thy self, that thou art not only free from walking in such open
and manifest evil ways, as the former, but art also more dilligent in
frequenting the Church Assemblies, and sometimes reading the Scriptures; and
using some Prayers, and show some mercy to the Poor, and live justly and
peaceably amongst thy Neighbors, and herein concludest Peace to thy self, and
trustest hereby to come to Eternal Life; Not yet having received any
supernatural light and motion of the Spirit in the Gospel, applying the
precious Blood of Christ to thy heart, and so speaking Peace to thy soul, and
purifying thy nature thereby, and bringing thee in to God, to take comfort in
him: and seek the things of him, that are above; But that thou do yet mind
the things that are below, and art inwardly most busied, and careful to keep
and preserve to thy self a Name, or Riches, or Promotion amongst men, and so
taken up with cares, thoughts and exercise this way, That there is not room
enough for the Word of the Gospel, to take place and root in thee; nor for thee
so to heed and give up to it, that thou might receive from the holy Spirit
in the Word, the forceable application and effecacy of the Blood of JESUS
CHRIST; so that by reason of this thy neglect, thou art not yet, through the
Grace discovered in his blood, made penitent, and so united to CHRIST, nor has
received of the Spirit of Christ, to fasten thy confidence in him alone, that
he might be all in all to thee: I pray thee also mind the scope of this
Treatise, and especially Chap. 1. and 2. and what the Scripture says of this
business; It is a truth, that God has given us Eternal life, and that this
Life is in his Son; But if thou have not this his Son, and be not by an
unfeigned faith united to him, thou have not yet that Eternal Life that is in
him. Joh. 1.11, 12, 13. and 3.18. 1 John 5.11, 12. It is a truth, That Jesus
Christ has shed his blood for thee; but if by his Spirit thou be not sprinkled
and washed therewith, thou have no part with him in his special Privileges. 1
Pet. 1.2. Truth it is, he by his blood has bought thee, and procured Life for
thee, and means to use, and seek life; and so he is Lord over thee. Acts
10.36. But if thou have not his Spirit, to keep thee to him and in his
Government, thou art yet none of his Peculiar Ones. Romans 2.5.9, 10, 14.

I pray thee set thy heart to this business, it is no vain word, nor falsehood
that has been told thee: That Jesus Christ did Die for thee, and has life in
himself to bestow on thee, and in him is all fullness of heavenly Treasures,
and riches of Everlasting life; freely to bestow on all that come in to submit
to, and believe on him. Deuteronomy. 30.11.12, 20. Romans 10.7.11. do not therefore
suffer thy self to be detained and kept off from these heavenly riches, by
seeking worldly and fading things; It will be no rejoicing Profit to thee, if
thou should win the whole World, and loose thy own Soul. Mat. 16.26. be
not so unwise, as by following lying vanities, (the goodliest flourishings of
the World being no better,) To forsake thy own Mercies. Joh. 2.8. nor feed on
ashes, till a deceived heart turn thee aside. Isai. 44.20. Remember that there
is a way that seems right to a man, and yet the Issues thereof are the issues
of Death. Prove. 16.25. There is a generation that are Pure in their own eyes,
and yet are not washed from their filthiness. Prove. 30.12. Do not thou
therefore, by any of thy doings, speak Peace, and conceive Etaernall Life to
thy self, before Christ, by his Spirit, in the Word of Grace, make his blood
effectual in thee; and thereby speak Peace to thee; and so by Spirit give into
thy heart the belief of his goodness; and the hope of eternal life, renewing
thee; and seeing there is such Mercy and Hope, and Life in him, that Dyed for
thee; Beware thou do not fail, nor come short thereof; Let the Love of
Christ, and his Precious blood he shed for thee, and the hope Procured
therethrough; and in the Gospel set forth for thee, be of more account and
force with thee then so; But seek him, and rest not, till he by his Spirit
has applied his blood to thee, and washed and sealed thee therewith. Heb. 4.1.
and 12.15. Remember I pray thee, that wholesome warning of him that Dyed for
thee. Matthew. 7.21. Nvt every on that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the Kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in
Heaven: and is it not the will of our heavenly Father, that we should hear
his Son, and believe on him. Matthew. 3.17. Joh. 6.20. and is not JESUS CHRIST
the Author of Salvation, to them that obey him. Heb. 5.9. and is not this
Obedience, to obey his Gospel. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. Romans 6.17. and is that all
Obedience, to hear it Preached often, and to read it, and to live honestly
amongst men, and so to hope for Eternal life; Surely no, This Obedience is in
believing on him, and submission to him; and it begins in obedience to his
death and bloodshed; both in acceptance of it, and of what it requires and
Promises; and submission thereto, and to be conformed to him in it. 1 Pet. 1,
2. Phil. 2.5.8. Now I pray thee, has not the Gospel affirmed, that Christ
dyed, and gave himself a Ransom for thee; and is he not set forth in the
Gospel, as the Propitiation for thy sins, through faith in his blood. 1 John
2.2. Romans 3.25. Now does not this blood of his, so shed for thee; (if ever it
were Spiritually hinted to thy heart,) require of thee, and offer to work in
thee a sight and acknowledgement of the multitude and heynousnesse of thy
sins, that were laid on Christ. Isai. 53.2.6. Joh. 1.9. with a sensible
sorrow, and a piercing heart for them. Zath. 12.10. and killing the very Life
and delight in them. Gal. 5.24. Romans 6.6. with an abasing and loathing thy
self, as that cursed one, for whom he was made a Curse. Gal. 3.10, 13. and does
not the Spirit by this blood require, and offer to work in thee a renouncing
of trust or reliance in, or thinking to come before God in any Changes,
Righteousness or works of thy own, which is of the Law. Gal. 2.20. Phil.
3.7, 8, 9. And does it not likewise require, and offer to work in thee a
contempt and disrespect of all the glory and appearing Excellency of the Fame,
Riches, Pleasures and Promotions of this World. Gal. 6.14. Phil. 3.6.8. and
does it not require of thee, and offer to work conformity to him, in death; in
being as dead to sin, and to all the life and glory in humane and worldly
parts, righteousness, fame, riches, pleasures, friendship and life; and
submission to be deprived of any of them, as He, and the Gospel shall require;
That thou might find, and receive all thy wisdom, righteousness and
life, in and from him. Matthew. 16.24, 25. Phil. 3.3.7, 8, 9. and does it not
likewise promise in this submission to him, and dependence on him, Romission of
sins, Peace, Righteousness and life. Acts 10.43. and 13.36, 38. and does not
the great love of God testified in his bloodshed, sometime move at thy heart
to yield to all this, and let all ^oe, to come to him; who in this thy
obedience to the blood of Christ, will by his Spirit, sprinckle the same blood
in thy heart, and thereby speak Peace to thee, and purify thee, and consolate
thy heart, and shed abroad his love in thee, by his Spirit, and so acquint thee
with heavenly hope, and riches. Heb. 12.14. 1 Pet. 1.2. Tit. 3.4.7. Romans 5.15.
and till this be, Though Christ dyed for thee, and life be in him for thee, yet
thou have not Life; Therefore I pray thee, be not deceived; say not, Thou art
rich, when thou art yet poor. Revel. 3.17. but rather seek that which is true
riches indeed; and seek it of Christ, in whom it is; and rest not till thou be
submitted to him; and that he by his Spirit, take knowledge of thee, enable
thee to believe, and justify thee. Joh. 10.27. 1 Pet. 1.21, 22. Romans 3.26. So
as thou in some measure experiment that in Romans 5.1, 2. It will be to
thee-ward but a heavy knowledge, to stand before him one Day, and know that be
shed his blood for thee, and Redeemed thee, that he might be thy Lord, and
that true Gospel was Preached to thee, when all that blood shed for thee; and
all the Gospel, with all the entreaties of his Servants, and motions of his
Spirit, and all his Patience and Bounty shall be laid to thy charge, and come
in as witness against thee; because thou have not come in to his Regiment, and
submitted to his Death, set forth in his Gospel. Romans 14.9, 12. Matthew.
11.20.24. Now is the time in which he is to be found, and submitted too; and
Spirit received from him: He now offers thee grace. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. and 6.2.
Matthew. 25 1, 13. Do not fore-slow till it be too late, till the door be shutt,
for then it will not avail thee to say, LORD, open unto us, we have eat and
drurke in thy Presence, and thou have taught in our streets: Remember the Five
foolish Virgins. Luke 13.2, 5, 26. Matthew. 25.1.13. And defer not till it be
too late; which GOD in Mercy prevent: but seek in this time of finding; which
God in mercy grant thee.

USE III.
If thou be one that hold, That Christ dyed, and wrought Redemption for All
Men: and do desire to Partake of the benifit of his Death, and to have
Eternal Life with him; and for that end make Images to thy self, to put thee
in mind of him; and make interceeding Mediators of Angels and Saints
departed, to entreat his love for thee, and devisest Penitential abasements
and mortifications, as wareing hair garments, lying on bare boards, or chopped
straw, going barefoot on Pilgrimage, wilful Poverty, and usest diligence in
use of humane devises, and men's Precepts, to Worship God withal, and are at
labor and cost, and usest, and do many Works of Devotion, and of Mercy, and
Equity, to make thy self worthy of Christ, and life by him; and through all
these, to make up a Confidence of life to thy self; I pray thee, what wrong
should be done thee, if one shall charge thee with the sin of the Heathen, in
a higher degree then those. Romans 1.18 22. for do not thou herein hold the
Truth in unrighteousness, and professing to know GOD, thou do not glorify
him as GOD: but becommest vain in thy immaginations; and professing thy self
to be wise, thou becomest most foolish: for even in this way, wherein thou
think to serve and honor him, and to have life by him, thou do directly
disobey and dishonor him, and provokest him to curse thee.

I pray thee consider, and let thy heart answer without stop, is this obedience
or disobedience to the death and bloodshed of Jesus Christ: To be so alive to
thy own wisdom, thoughts, ways, and works; to choose thy own ways, and
put confidence therein; See and consider what is said before, to such as are
not gone a whoring in thy way; and what is written. Jer. 9.23, 24. 1 Cor. 1.29,
30, 31. 2 Cor. 10.17, 18. 1 John 5.20, 21. Isai. 66.1, 2, 3. and thou shall see
thy way sinful; is this to honor him, or to dishonor him, To advance thy
self in a Will Worship, and in Observation of things that Perish in thousing.
Coll. 3.18.23.

Does not his blood, spiritually applied to the heart, humble and melt,
mortify sin, appease the Conscience, and purify the heart? Zach. 12.10. 1
Pet. 1, 2. Hebr. 9.14. Why seek thou this in other things, devised by thy
self, or other men? Is not he full of Spirit, to imprint his Word in thy
heart? and is not his Spirit of devine force? and do not his Words do good to
them, that walk uprightly? Isai. 68.18. Acts 2.32. Heb. 8.1, 2, 6, 10. Jam.
4.5. Mal. 2.7. Joh. 1.14, 16, 17. Why seek thou to be minded of him, and to
serve him by humane devises? Is not he the brightness of his Fathers glory;
and the express Image of his Fathers Person? Even the He, that upholds all
things by the Word of his Power: who when he had by himself purged our sins;
sat down on the right band of the Majesty, on high. Hebr. 1.3. Who bears
and sees all things. Hebr. 4.12, 13. Whose lips are full of grace; being
also the most Excellent in Beauty. Psalm. 45.2. Cant. 5.10. and who breaths
forth Spirit to reprove, to comfort, to teach, and help to Pray, and return
answers of Prayers. Joh. 14.26. and 15.26. and 16.13, 15. Romans 8.26. Psalm.
85.8. Why dotest thou then on dead things, Images of men's making, that can
neither hear, nor see, nor taste, nor smell, nor speak, nor go, nor do
good, nor evil, but must be borne, and so make thy self (in respect of
spiritual life,) like them. Psalm. 115.4, 8. If thou say no, thou will have no
Image of God the Father; whose Image Christ is, but of Christ himself, as he
was Man; to mind thee of him sure.

Thou know thou have no Word of his so to do; and what dishonor do thou
to him, who has promised by his Word and Spirit, to be with his to the Worlds
end, and to manifest himself to such, as in believing, d^e honor and love him,
and walk in that love. Matthew. 28.20. Joh. 14.21, 22, 23. and if thou will have
Images of him; he has pointed such as can live, and breathe, and hear, and
speak; whom though thou may not worship; yet thou may show thy Love to him,
in loving and doing good to them; men and women of the same flesh and blood
with thee; who are his Creature, made in his Image. Jam. 3.9. and some of these
that are Partakers of his grace and Spirit, and thereby conformed to him in
some measure, and show forth his virtues. 2 Cor. 3.3. 1 Pet. 2.9. and these are
lively Images, and representations of him: on these look, for these be at cost
to Pity, and help them; to feed the hungry, and cloth the naked, for whom
Christ dyed; doing good to all, especially to them of the household of Faith;
and this done for Christ's sake, is to feed Christ, and to cloathe Christ, etc.
Gal. 3.8, 9, 10. Matt. 25.40. and these has he left with us, to this end.
Joh. 12.8. do not so dishonor him, to lay out thy cost on men's livelesse
Images.

Is not he that only Mediator and High Priest, that by his own blood, has
entered into the holy of holyes; and opened the way for us to approach with holy
boldness, remaining himself there, as our Advocate with the Father, who has
wrought redemption for us; and is the Propitiation for our sins, having left
his Promise, for that according to his will, we ask in his Name. Heb. 9.12,
24. and 10, 19, 20. 1 John 2.1, 2. and 5.14, 15. Joh. 16.23, 24. And why
turnest thou aside to others, to mediate for thee, and do him that dishonor;
But if thou say no, thou seek no Mediator between God and thee, but
Jesus Christ, but Angels, and Saints departed, to enterceed to Christ for thee;
I ask, where has he willed thee so to do; Nay he has bid thee, Seek the
Prayers of the Church, and the Saints that thou know, To whom thou may
make known thy griefs; and that are here on the Earth. James 6.13.18. And not
to them that have no Portion in the things done under the Sun; Eccles. 9.5,
6, 10. Isa. 63.16. who can neither hear, nor answer thee.

Is not he the great Prophet and Teacher of his Church? and has he not left
his Spirit and Word therewith, to teach the same, and sealed his care thereof,
and love there to by his bloodshed? Isa. 55.4. Acts 3.22. Matthew. 28.20. Isai.
59.21. 2 Pet. 3.2. Joh. 10.15. Ephesians. 5.22, 25. and can any Worship be pleasing
to him, but that which is through Faith in him, confidence in his blood, and
guidance of his Spirit, according to his Word: Jam. 1.6. Heb. 10.19, 24. Romans
8.26. 1 Pet. 1.21, 25. and 2.1, 3. 1 John 5.20.21. and think thou, he
wanted Wisdom, Love or care; why then followest thou Humane Devises, in
Worshipping him? Again, is this the way to Life, or Death, to serve and fear,
and worship him after thy own, or other men's devises, according to the
Doctrines and Precepts of men? Has not himself said, It is in vain so to
worship him. Mat. 15.9. and he will choose delusions for such. Isai. 66, 3, 4.
and that he will blast and curse them. Isai. 27.13, 14, 15. As thou therefore
esteemest the blood of CHRIST, shed for thee, and his Love testified therein;
as thou heedest his honor, and tenderest thy own Life, Turn from these
deceivable follyes, and abominations, and submit to the Gospel, and Spirit of
Christ therein; and seek him as thon art thereby directed; and there is hope of
Pardon and life to be met with for thee: As for those that are enamoured with
the Golden Cup, that is in the hand of the Whore, and so given up through
desire of her beauty, riches, honor, to Worship the Beast; I am not here lead
to speak to them; they may hear and see what is said of them. Revel. 14.9.10,
11. be not deceived by them.

USE IV.
If thou be one that have never yet experimented any Spiritual discoveries of
the Preciousnesse of the blood of Christ, shed for thee; so as through the
Gospel, to be therewith convinced of thy being under sin, for not believing
in Christ: and through the grace, righteousness and good will of Christ,
appearing therein, bowed to Repentance and overcome to believe in him; but only
having heard that Christ Dyed for sinners, and thou not knowing for which, nor
how many of them; but as thou supposest; Sure only for the Elect, and not
knowing who these Elect are; Thou have found in the Scriptures set forth, a
holy, righteous Law of Precepts, discovering such righteousness; as is verily
due from Man, the Creature of God, to be performed to God his Creator; and each
to other, for Gods sake; and to the keepers and fulfillers of this Law, thou
find a promise of Life; and to the Transgressors thereof a threatening of
death, and curse; and upon this ground thou have studied the Law, and seriously
attended good Sermons, and read good Books; Commenting on the same, thereby to
find out what sin is, and what righteousness is, and so to escape death, and
that Life might be attained; and by motives from the Law so urged; haste
endeavored to work sorrow upon thy heart for thy sins, by this Law
discovered in thee; and to do thy utmost to avoid every sin; that by the Law
thou know to be sin; to work thy heart to likement of every good duty
thou know the Law to require of thee; and to do thy utmost to perform the
same; and where thou against thy will, come short, to confess it to be thy
sin, and ask Pardon, and strive to do better; and then from some
attainements in affections and conversation, Perceivest in thy self a change
of Judgment, Affection and Conversation, from what thou were, to what thou
art, and from what the most of other men are; to that thy self, and some few
others are; and desires to increase in the same still; and from this thy change
and desire of Perseverance therein; and the approbation of others so changed,
of the truth and goodness of this thy Conversation and Conversion; thou
gatherest Peace in thy heart, and countest thy self more holy, and much better
then others not so changed; and thereupon conceivest thy self to be Elected,
and so one of those for whom Christ dyed, and therefore restest persuading thy
self, that thou art justified by his Blood, and one of the Children of God,
that shall be saved from wrath through him: Now it being thus with thee, I must
needs clear thee from that gross bypocrisie, and those appearing evils, of
those that pretend the same Conversion and Conversation, and boost of the same
Confidence; who yet are found to make sport of the ignorance, Profanness, open
sins, and follyes of others, in rymes, jeasts and scoffs, which they cannot
but know to be evil. Prove. 13.9. and who are found to slander their Brethren,
and to speak fair, and pretend Love to their faces, and to lay wait to catch
them; and to traduce and cast false aspertions on them, behind their backs.
Psalm. 35.11, 16. who can rail, equivocate, and dispense with known duties for
their own ends, and then cast that shame in their reports, on such as loath the
same, because they are not one with them, in every of their Opinions. Romans 3.8.
with which fault thou art not charged; Yet in love, I pray be willing to try
thy Confidence, and the rather, because it is the most dangerous of all
deceits, if thou should go on, and be deceived in this; at the last, the
loss will be unvaluable, and irrecoverable. Matt. 16.26. Eccles. 11.3. and 9,
10. and there have been many, and some appearing godly, that have thus deceived
themselves. Prove. 30.12. Revel. 3.1.17. and the Scripture no where shows,
that the Spirit speaks Peace, justifyeth, and witnesses sonship this way;
Thou art left to the Testimony of thy own heart; then which, nothing can be
more deceitful. Iere. 17.19. and he that trusts thereto, is by the Holy
Ghost said to be a fool. Prove. 28.26. Hoping therefore thou approvest not such
folly; nor wilt abhor Trial; I will endeavor to set thee on the same.

1. Does not this thy joy and Confidence, Proceed from ignorance of the
Spirituallity, and large extent of the righteousness required in the Law; as
Paul professes the same did in him, when he was a Pharisee. Phil. 3.4, 7. Romans
7.9.

2. Do not thou, in observing the Law to such an end, and gathering such
conclusions, and trust from such Attainements and Performances, according to
the same, as the Pharisees did. Luke 18.9, 11, 12.

Disobey the Law in the Prime end of it, and abuse it to such an end, as God
never gave it; for though it was in mercy ordained to Life, in a killing way,
and good, and fit for that end. Romans 7.7.12.

Yet not to give Life. Gal. 3.21. But to discover sin;

To sentence under the guilt of sin, to Curse and Death for sin, and so to
slay and kill all hopes, placed in, or gathered from any righteousness, to be
by men that way attained; That so in the abounding of the sinfulness of sin,
and the vanity of all humane righteousness; the grace of God in Christ, might
the more appear; and men yielding themselves as sinners, and cursed ones,
might submit to Christ, and accept of the grace in him, and seek Righteousness
and life in him, through heleeving. Romans 3.19, 20, 21, 22. and 7.7. and 5.20,
21. Gal. 2.19, 20. and 3.19. Romans 10.10.

3. Do thou not hereby, as much as lies in thee, by maintaining such
confidence, make the Death of Christ, and Faith in Christ, and the Promises of
God in the Gospel, and so the Grace of God in Christ, all vain, void, and of
none effect, as the Scripture affirms, that maintaining such Confidence does.
Gal. 2.21. and 3.17, 18, 21, 22. and 5.2, 3, 4. Romans 4.13, 14.5. and 11.6.

4. Wherein does the Scripture lead thee any where to challenge the Death of
Christ, and the Righteousness of Christ, by any Work or Righteousness of
thine, according to the Law, as that also, in which thou art not sound better
then others; Nay, does not the Scripture affirm the contrary of men's coming
in to Christ, by Faith unfeigned. 1 Timothy 15, 16. 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. Tit. 3.3, 4, 5.
Ephesians. 2.1.4, 5, 6. Romans 3.28. and 4.1.5, 6. and 5.1, 8, 9.

5. Does not the justifying such a Confidence as thine, maintain in the
mystery of it, that Opinion of Justification before God by Works, seeing the
first rise of thy Consolation and Confidence, to challenge life before God, was
not the Spiritual Application of the blood of Christ, to the Ungodly, and a
sinner; So speaking Peace to, and renewing thy heart, as Heb. 12.24. Tit. 3.3,
4, 5. But thy own Works, and Righteousness wrought and attained, was the
first Peace-speaker in thee, and that by which thou challengest right in, and
Justification by the blood of Christ. Luke 18.11, 12. Prove. 30.1 2. Romans
3.19.24, 25, 27.

6. Does not the Scripture plainly affirm, that this laboring to establish a
Righteousness of a man's own, to come before God with, and to challenge and
get the Righteousness of God by; does preceed from ignorance of the
Righteousness of God; and keeps men from submitting to the Righteousness of
God in Christ, and frustrateth men's enjoyment of that righteousness. Romans
10.2, 9, 4. and 9.31, 32, 33.

7. Have not such as were known to be yet without true Faith in Christ, and so
not yet borne again, had as good a conversion and conversation, and confidence
raised therefrom, as thou now have; what will thou say of Paul, when he was a
Pharisee. Romans 7.9. Phil. 3.4, 9. or of the Zealous Jews. Romans 10.2. or
Nicodemus, that came to be instructed of Christ. Ioh. 3.1, 2, 3. or of that
generation. Pro. 30.12.

If thou salst thou do nor trust in thy works (which cannot be avoided) but
that thou doing to thy utmost to obey God, in every of the commands of the
law, Thou trustest in Christ to make up that which is wanting on thy part, and
so to be justified and saved through him; This does not help thee, for the
Scripture shows, that he is no such daies-man, to lay his hand on thee, to
cause thee to perform and pay a part of thy debt, and to lay his hand on God,
to accept that ^^tle of thee and himself, to make up the rest; whence no such
coming to be justified before him. Job 9.15.30, 33. He has paid the full
debt, and made the Propitiation, and has the Pardon in his hands to dispose,
and by his grace in application of his blood; He justifies the ungodly, when
he helps them to believe. Romans 4.5. and 5.4.9. and is the Mediator of the
New Testament; That they might receive the promised Inheritance. Heb. 9.14, 15.

If thou say, that from thy change in frames and performances thou do not
conclude, that Christ dyed for thee, nor trust by them to be saved; but only
trustest thou art one of Christ's peculiar People, and so art justified by his
blood, and shall be saved from wrath throu^h him; Even this also does not help
thee, nor mend thy Plea; for the Scripture affirms this also, to be a
trusting in thy self; and that herein thou art not wise to compare thy self
with thy self; and with others, and that not he that commends himself, (as
thou art feign to do, impleading thy change, thy uprightness, humility, and
endeavors of obedience,) is approved, but he whom God commends. 2 Cor.
10.7.12, 18. and that it is (not the works of righteousness in us, but) the
Spirit of Christ, that by the blood of Christ, speaks peace too, and
purifieth the heart. 1 John 5.6, 7. Romans 8.1, 2, 15. Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. So that
thy hope and assurance on; through Trial, will prove but sandy; The Gospel no
where commending, every where faulting such a hope; That I say nothing of the
dangerousnesse of it, to puff one up with high thoughts of himself, Prove.
^^.13. and to lead to despising of others. Lake 18.9, 11. and so to some
Schism, Sect, or Faction; and with the Pharisee, inwardly to love none but
ones friends of the same sort with him, which sinners also do, Matthew. 5.42.48.

Wherefore I pray thee, to lay aside not any righteous affections and (...) but
all this thy confidence made up thereby; and (...) to the Death of Christ,
which was for sinners; that thou may come in at that door, where thou shall
be found no better then others; And let the Excellency of the grace of Christ
prevail with thee, as it did with Paul, Phil. 3.3, 9. and do not spend thy
strength for that which satisfyeth not, but incline thine ear, and hearken to
him, and wait for Spirit and Peace from him. Isa. 55.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Use. 5. If thou be one who being more enlightened with the Spirituality of the
Law, and more senseable of thy short-comming thereof; so as in all thy zeal,
watchfulness and endeavors, thou beholdest many failings, and much
sinfulness in thy self: so as the Law has Power to charge thee with much
sinfulness, and to sentence thee to death and curse, which causes in thee
Amazement, Fear, Sorrow and Perplexity, and thou strivest to ward and keep off
these charges of the Law, and to avoid these fears, by setting thy self still
to a more through observance of the Law, to which thou can by no means
answer, but that it still concludes thee a sinner, puts thee in fear, and
affords thee no hope of obtaining by it the life it Promises: But leaves thee
in great distress; and yet in all this the Law is just, and good, and holy,
only showing thee that, of which thou art indeed guilty; and to which thouart
indeed by desert liable too; and all this for good: That thou being hereby
slain, might see the greatness of the grace of God, in making of his Son
Jesus Christ, to become under the Law, and Sin, and a Curse for thee, that
thou might believe on him, and receive Life and Spirit from him; but now
sin shows its sinnfulnesse, and not the Commandment, but sin taking
occasion by the Commandment to deceive thee; As if it were not for such a
sinner to look for love in God; nor yet to believe in Christ, till he be more
conformed to the Law, contrary to that. Romans 4.5. and so holds the captive
under thee condemning Sentence of the Law, and having thee there in this
deceit, sin reviveth, and enclineth thy heart to hard thoughts of God; As one
that is an angry Judge, and bears thee no good will, and sometimes
discontented thoughts against God; As why did God make Adam, seeing he would
not keep him? and why has he given such a Law as cannot be kept? Nay, it stops
not here, but moves to think, Oh that there were no Law; yea, no Heaven, nor
Hell; yea, no God, and then not able to look on the horridness of such
thoughts; desperate Imaginations arise, as if now no more hope mothing now but
Hell, and what Temptations then follows, let silence speak; But stay, stay, I
pray thee, this is not the fruit of the Commandment, but of the deceitfulness
of sin, taking occasion by the Command; To which, oh yield not at all, but the
reproof and convincement of the Commandment receive, own the sin, say Amen
to the Curse, and behold him that came to save sinners, and was made sin and a
curse for thee. 1 Timothy 1.15. Gal. 4.4. Say not, I must be holy ^st, that is
impossible; Say not, I dare not, my sins have been so great, for it was for
thy sins he dyed, and where sin abounds, there will his grace abound much
more; and he that believes in him that Justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness. Romans 3.24.26. and 4.5. and 7.7.24, 25. thy sins
ought rather to be a spur to thee to believe on him that came to save
Sinners, and takes occasion to commend his righteousness by the
unrighteousness found in men. Romans 3.5. and 5.20, 21. Thou can not wind out
thy self from being of the number of those for whom Christ dyed; seeing it was
for every man. Heb. 2.9.

Do not now stand out against him through unbelief, he is no enemy of thine;
He has laid aside emnity, and is full of Love and compassion, ready to Pardon
abundantly; He was in Christ, reconciling the World to himself, not imputing
their trespasses to them; I pray thee therefore, lay aside thy emnity and hard
conceits of him; and let his love gain thee in to believe his Goodness in
Christ, and depend on him for life, and he will verily show thee mercy. Isa.
55.6, 7. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. and 6.2. Taste and see, that God is gracious. Psalm.
34.6.

Use. 6. If thou be one that have been so far enlightened by the Spirit in the
Gospel of the grace of God; that thou have so seen and believed the report
thereof, that thou see and know that Redemtion is wrought, Ransom given,
Propitiation made with God for Mankind by CHRIST. So at in him, sin is
satisfied for, Wrath appeased, Justice satisfied, Law answered, and Death
abolished, favor and Life obtained, and Spirit revived by CHRIST, to conserre
remission of sins, Righteousness and Life on such as Believe in him, and to
Renew and Lead them in all Truth, and bring them to the Inheritance.

So as hereby thou art convinced, that thou art under both power and guilt of
sin; because thou beleevest not on him; and thy heart hereby gained to
acknowledge him Lord; and so let go all other hopes and delights without
desiring after them; and to long after him; and that he by his Spirit would
enable thee to believe on him; But yet thou art not so far overcome by his
grace seen, as to be drawn upon him, so to believe in him, as to receive
remission of Sins, and Peace in thy heart, which still remains broken,
trembling, not healed, but gasping and panting after healing: I pray thee
remember what thou have heard, and what thou have seen concerning the
Propitiation made by Jesus Christ our Lord: and the great Love of God, in
giving him to dye for sinners, and wait with Patience at his Posts, in the use
of all such means as the Gospel has set forth for thee. Prove. 3.4, 14. and
8.33, 34, 35. Resort to the Church Assemblies, hear his Word, remember,
meditate, pray, have fellowship with such as do enjoy his grace; pity the
distressed; go on in the ordinary employments of thy Calling, his Providence
lays before thee, and be still desiring after him; and waiting when he will
by discoveries of his grace come to thee, and give thee Peace by his Spirit,
and through the blood of his Son: It is a good thing for thee thus to hope
and wait for the Salvation of God: Lam. 3.26. but do not thou point him his
way; and say it must be by such a one, in such a word or Promise in such a
manner, etc. Isa. 40.13. but wait, that it may be by his Spirit, glorifying his
grace, and giving in Peace by his blood, and so uniting thee to Christ: Let the
visit come by what instrument, in what Ordinance, with what part of his Word,
at what time, with more or less light, as it pleases him. Isai. 55.3.5. 1
Pet. 21, 22. only accept no other Props nor consolations, till by his Spirit,
applying, his blood, he give it; but stay, though it be in darkness upon that
Name and report of him and his goodness, which thou have heard of, and seen in
the Gospel, and so wait for his help, Isa. 50.4.10. if he cause thee, (as our
Types of old, Hosea. 3.3, 4, 5.) to wait many days, yet neither turn aside
to another, nor be discouraged to murmur, but say, I have sinned against him, I
will now bear his indignation, and wait till he bring me forth to the sight.
Mich. 7.9. neither faint, but look on him who died for thee, and now calls
thee, and has mercy to bestow on thee; it being his Office, to which he is
consecrate, and for which he is filled with Spirit, to speak good tidings to
the Poor, and heal the brokenhearted, and to comfort the mo^^ners that are
breken of all other hopes and contents, and cannot be at rest till they have it
in him, and he will not fail to perform his Office. Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. Yea, God
himself wills thee to look to Christ, and tells thee, he will not refuse
thee, nor cust thee off, though thou deserve it, nor fail till he have done
thee good: See at large: Isa. 42.1.8. And he has bid his servants, though
thou be feeble and trembling, yet to speak comfortably to thee, and to say to
thee, Be strong, searenot, your God with come, be will come and save you, then
the eyes of the blind shall be opened. Isa. 35.3, 4, 5. Wait therefore, and
use the means, and be not discouraged. Let his love, testified in shedding his
blood, to make the Propitiation when we were enemies, and his Love, in calling
us off our hurtful delights and Confidences, Prevail with thee, to think no
other thoughts of God, then such as suit with the acknowledgement of such Love:
and seeing he says, he are ye deaf, and look ye blind, that ye may see.
Isa. 42.18. He being able to give both ears and eyes; and of his
willingness, it would be a dishonor to the Love already discovered, to doubt;
say therefore, I will trust in him, though he kill me. Job. 13.15. All the
days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come. Job. 14.14. and so
waiting for his gracious Peace, speaking in his blood, sprinckling on thy
heart, his grace exceeding thy desires, he will in due time, satisfy thy soul
with good; blessed are they that wait for him: none of them shall be ashamed.
Esai. 30.18. and 49.23. Let this support thee till he come.

Use. 7. If thou be one of them that have gotten some knowledge, and it may be
some hint of Spiritual Light, in the report of the Gospel; so as thou can
speak much thereof to maintain this, that Christ dyed for all men, and that
the only means of enjoying him, is by frith, and not by works of the Law:
and that this faith is obtained by Spiritual evidence of his goodness, and
not made up by humane Reasons; and that all works of righteousness, and zeal
of men that is not, (flowing from faith, is but vain and bootlesse, and
boastest thy self to be a Christian, and a true believer; because of such a
spiritual ^^ine of Light, such a word, such a Promise given thee, (as thou
supposest, because stirring in thy Thoughts,) at such a time, and so take
courage to speak much of thy faith, and to censure others; that what ever the
goodness of God has drawn them too, yet not having received such a Light,
such a Promise as thou have, they have no true faith, and thou now think it
fit for thee to be a broacher and maintainer of the faith in every company, and
against all opposers; and yet thou thy self, by all the Spiritual light and
knowledge thou have; and all those Words and Promises, at such and such a time
received, have not been made obedient to the Death and sprinckling of the Blood
of Jesus Christ; So as thou art baptized into his Death, and buried with him
through this Baptizme into death; so as to be made to loathe thy self, thy
sins; thy own best things: so as in some measure to be dead to thy self, thy
own will, Pleasure, same, and to the world, with her glory, riches,
alurements, lusts, and to sin: So as by the grace and Divine Power and
goodness of Christ, and by his Spirit in the Gospel, to be made alive to
Christ, to know his voice, obey his Spirit, and live to him, and follow him;
give me leave to tell thee (with grief,) that while thou art such an one, and
go on still, in such and such known sins: thou have not as yet so learned
Christ, and been taught of him, as that thou have known and received him, as
the Truth is in Jesus. Ephesians. 4.20, 24. If thou say thou have light and
fellowship with him; and walk not in the light, but in darkness, thou
lie, and do not the Truth. 1 John 1.6, 7. Say not, thou have not received a
Promise, and so faith for thy Sanctification, but for thy Justification; Thou
have a Promise, and Faith, and know it; for this is not Scripture language,
nor have thou been taught by the Spirit of God; so to say: for the Spirit in
Callings, does sanctify to obedience, and sprinskling of the blood of Christ.
1 Pet. 1.2. his calling is holy, and to holiness. 2 Timothy 1.9. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.
Christ is always, and at once, Sanctification as well as Righteousness, and
effects both together. 1 Cor. 1.30. and according to Believers true knowing of
him; they are not only comforted in him, but conformed to him also. 2 Cor.
3.3.18. 1 John 3.2.3. Whence Believers are said both to be Called to be Saints,
and to be Saints by Calling. Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2. Hebr. 3.1.

Sever not thou what God has joined together; I dare not say, thou art not
Called, but it yet appears not that thou have yielded to the heavenly Call; so
as thou art therethrough Chosen; Many are Called but few chosen. Matthew. 22.14.
Joh. 15.16, 19. and 17.6, 7. If thou reply, Thou art not under the Law, but
under Grace: That i^ not spoken of thee, but such as are lead by the Spirit.
Gal. 5.6. who shall not fulfill the Lusts of the flesh as thou do. verse. 16.
If thou say, thou will not be under the Law of Precepts; I ask, Will thou make
thy self free? If Jesus Christ, who is free, and to whom it appertains to make
free, do make the freee; then he by his Spirit, in freeing thee from the
Charges, Terrors, and Curse of the Law, by showing how he by his blood has
made thee free; he does by the same Spirit humble, melt and purify thy heart,
and kill it with his love, that begets, and nourishes such like love in
thee, as leads to fulfill all righteousness, even all the Law requires, and
freely carries to more Love, holiness, and services of Love, then in thy
understanding, the Law required; and then, and so far, thou art free indeed.
To. 8.1, 2, 13, 14. and 5.1.5. and 13.9, 10. Joh. 8.36. But if without this,
Thou make thy self free; thy freedom is but an abuse of Liberty, for an
occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5.13. and a turning the Grace of God into
lasciviousness. Jude 4. No better then that boasted of, 2 Pet. 3.18, 19.
Remember and take heed thou be not of that Generation that is lofty. Prove.
30.13. And let the Grace and Bloodshed of Jesus Christ prevail with thee to
Repent, and Submitt, and turn into him; Which Grace, if submitted unto, will
teach thee to deny all ungodliness, and worldly Lust, and to live soberly,
righteously, and Godly, etc. Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. And till thou by this grace be
brought hereto, I know no Liberty thou have from God, either for thy glorying
of thy faith, or for thy so much Speakings, and Declaration of the Gospel; for
the charge is, that none presume above the Grace received, or speak beyond the
measure of Faith, that God has dealt to him. Romans 12.6.13. and how will thou
avoid that heavy Challenge? What have thou to do to declare my Statutes? Or
that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou hate
Instruction, and castest my words behind thee. Psalm. 50.16, 17.

Surely through thee the Name and Doctrine of Christ is by many blasphemed, and
many that have their Life and Teaching from Christ, are heavily slandered. Do
not say thou beleevest rightly, and would, but can live no better: for is
the Spirit of the Lord straightned? are these his doings? Do not his words dee
good to them that walk uprightly? Mich. 2.7.

Stand no longer out against his grace therefore; but humble thy self, and seek
him in truth, and that in time.

Use. 8. If thou be one that in the Perception of the greatness of Gods love
in Christ, and the Propitiation made by his death; and the fullness of grace
and truth that is in him, art drawn to loath thy self, thy sin, thy
self-wrought righteousness, with worldly Pomps and allurements: and by that
grace of his, spiritually discovered in the Gospel to thee, overcome to submit
to Christ Crucified, and to depend on him for Righteousness, Life, and
Spiritual Guidance; and there through has experimented Peace, and newness of
heart, and art carried to glorify him in walking suitable to his grace; and
seeking for the union and fellowship with, and conformity to Christ, with
desire of the good of others, in compassion to the ignorant and hearty love to
believers; But yet do not see, and so not believe the largeness of the
extent of the death of Christ, and the ransom given and Propitiation made by
him: that it should be for All men, for the world, for the whole world, and
Every man; as it is possible, that through the many oppositions in these latter
times, against the same, thou may be darkened therein, as some were about the
free Communication of the Gospel to the Gentiles, without undering them to the
Jews Observances in the Apostles times, yet notwithstanding, I both
acknowledge and thank God for his love so graciously made known to thee, and
for thy unfeigned faith, and his good work begun in thee; and I pray God
increase and perfect this work in thee more and more; and I kindly accept even
thy Prayers for the same in me also, and in love, and for his sake that has
loved us: I pray thee without prejudice, consider the Answers to this business
in this Trea^^e: and though thou do not receive them, yet whereto we have
already attained, let us walk by the same Rule of faith and loves in Christ,
as we have received him. Col. 2.6. and mind the same things (for the glory of
Christ, and good of others with our own,) even perfection in Union with
enjoyment of Conformity to Christ in his Death and Resurrection, and Spirit,
and if either of us be (in this matter of the extent of the Ransom,) otherwise
minded (then is right) God will also (in due season,) reveal even this unto
us. Phil. 3.7.15, 26. for which let us wait in love, and in the mean time,
let me request this of thee, That for the love and Reverence thou bear to
the Gospel, in which Christ was made known to thee, and to the Scriptures in
which this Gospel is set forth; That thou do not oppose, nor set thy reason
awork to find absurdities in that which is often in many places with joint
consent plainly affirmed in the Scriptures, nor prefer humane glosses before
the plain sayings often affirmed therein; but rather believe the Testimony of
them in Prove. 8.8, 9. and 22.21. nor let this be a stumble to thee, that
multitudes of all sorts do believe that Jesus Christ dyed for All Men: in
comparison of those few that believe, he only dyed for his Elect ones; for
this rather shows the glory and victory of the truth, that begets a kind of
Credence in those that yet obey it, not in this, as it does in other parts of
truth that are fundamental: as to instance, that there is a God, is by his
Power in his works so manifest, That all Nations are constrained to
acknowledge it; and though many know not who, and what a one this God is: yet
in this knowledge, that there is a God; they fancy some: This Some, That to be
He, and in their errors, devise similitudes to worship him by; and those
gross Atheists that conceit no God to be, are yery few to be found in any
age, or among any Nations; again, That this GOD is one, is generally held,
where any face of a Christian Church is; whether true or false, and few if any
will be found among these multitudes, to hold a Plurallity of Gods; again that
this one God is the Creator of the heaven and the Earth and Sea, and all
Creatures contained in them; is held by all, both good and bad among us; I
suppose, I should not say few, but none holding the contrary opinion; Again,
That this one God is distinct in three Persons, the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, is believed of us all, even multiudes, and very few of some sort of
familists, that hold this to be a humane device, and that there is no such
thing: again, that the second Person in the holy Trinity, did take man's Nature,
and not the Father, or the Holy Ghost; and suffered, and dyed for our sins;
and rose again, and ascended to heaven, and from thence shall come again to
judge; is believed generally among all professed Christians; and very few of
some sorts of familists, that are of another opinion; again, That Jesus Christ,
the Son of the Virgin Mary, that was borne in Bethlehem, in Judea, in the days
of Herod the King, when Augustus was Emperor of Rome, is the very Christ, the
Savior of the World: is generally held amongst all professed Christians, and
denied only by a very few of some sort of Familists; again, that Jesus Christ
is very God, is held generally in our Nation: and I hope, but very few Arrians,
and Socinians, that hold the contrary; Again, That Jesus Christ is true and
very man, is also generally held among us, and very few that deny it; and so
that Christ is God and Man in one Person; Again, That Repentance and faith in
Christ, are the means to partake of Life by Christ, and that this Repentance
and Faith, have Love, and goodworkes joined therewith; That Idolatry, Perjury,
Theft, Murder, Adultery, Lying, are verily sin, and deserve death; are
generally held; and very few I hope, of any other mind; Also, That all shall
die or be changed, and all rise again to Judgment; and that there is a
Heaven, and Everlasting Joys for the Righteous; and a Hell, and everlasting
Pain for the wicked, is generally held, and very few, in comparison of them
that hold the same, are those that deny it: All these fundamentalls are held,
not only by true Believers, and godly men; but have a kind of credence in the
heart, and are Professed by Papists, Arminians, Anabaptists, many sorts of
zealous Sectaries: yea, many profane and wicked men; And are these Parts of
Truth the worse, and to be shunned, or less esteemed, because they are holden
and professed by so many, and of such sorts. I verily believe thou will say,
No; and the same I say for this, That he gave himself a Ransom for All men:
But if thou say, That the Teaching of this Opinion, That Christ died for All
men, is embraced and followed by many Common People, loose men, and Sinners,
and few zealous ones regard it; I pray thee remember what was said of him that
dyed for all men; and of his Preaching. Job. 7.48. Have any of the Rulers or
Pharisees believed on him? but this common People, who know not the Law is
Cursed. Joh. 12.19. The world is gone after him; were this a good reason to
refuse his doctrine; But if thou say, many that affect this opinion; are still
loose and careless. Remember what thou have read. Mat. 13.47. The Kingdom of
Heaven is like unto a Net, that was cast into the Sea, and gathered of every
kind: Surely, there is that in the report of the Gospel, that is very fit to
affect many: But the trial is, where in the Call the application of the Blood
of Christ comes to reprove, convince, cast down, hold, and submit to Christ;
in which, whosoever is made obedient, is received, and this number is yet but few,
in comparison of the many that in this respect turn aside; besides, of the
contrary opinion, too too many are found very headdy, feirce, high-minded,
false, loose; so that there is no ground for this stumble; wherefore though
thou can not be of the same mind with me, in this branch of Truth; yet count
me not thy enemy for speaking the Truth; neither partake of other men's sins,
in receiving the false Accusations of such as have only some Moral
Conversions, and are yet strangers to the grace thou have received; That so we
may live and love as Brethren, and not be set in contentions one against
another; least by biting and devouring one another, it come to pass, that we
be consumed one of another. Gal. 5.15. Meddle not with the Talebearer, that
flattereth with his lips. Prove. 20.19. For where there is no Talebearer, the
strife cease. Prove. 26.20. And so let our contendings be against them that
turn the Grace of God into wantonness, and labor to overthrow the Faith.
Jude 1, 2, 3, 4. and let us live in Peace, and I doubt not, but the God of
Peace will be with us, and we shall in due Season agree in this part of Truth
also.

Use. 9. If thou be one that have not only in perception of the grace of
God in Christ, been drawn into him, as the former, but through Spiritual and
Supernatural light given in the Gospel; have seen in some measure, both the
fullness and largeness of the Propitiation made by Christ with God, and the
fullness of Grace and Truth that is in Christ: So as it has drawn thee off
all other Excellencies, and brought thee to see and find in him that which
answers all thy needs; removes every doubt and fear: and is enough to fill
and satisfy every desire; So as he is in thee all, and in all the desire of
thy heart, and the content and wel-pleasednesse of thy soul; thy whole stay, on
whom thou dependest; Thy Treasury, in whom thou enjoyest; thy fountain, whence
thou look for, and receivest all Wisdom, Righteousness, Holiness,
Freedom, Consolation and Life; I have no other thing I will now say to thee;
But as thou have received CHRIST JESUS, the Lord, so walk in him. Col. 3.6.

By the same Spirit, with the same Faith and Love, in the same low Estimate of
thy self, and high Estimate of, and desires after him, with the same content in
and with him; and the same readiness to do and suffer for his sake, and
according to the knowledge, faith, and grace vouchsafed thee, letting his word
(he has put in thy heart, and therethrough acquainted thee with himself)
dwell in thee richly, and teachingly. Coll. 3.16.

Ever keeping it in the believing Remembrance of his Death for our sins, and
Resurrection for our justification: and Assention to send forth Spirit to us,
with his Wisdom, Power, Love, and Faithfulness already begun to be manifest in
us, and with this remembrance, a constant Dependence on him, for Wisdom,
Strength, Preservation, and Perfection, with yielding to the grace that
proceeds from him. Romans 4.24, 25. and 5.1.11. and 12.12. Phil. 2.1, 2. and
thus walking in Faith and Love, and keeping this word of grace in believing
remembrance, thou shall be saved. 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3, 4. from Idolatry,
Superstition, Profanenes, Pride, Vainglory, hypocrisy, from
earthly-mindednesse, uncleanness, malice, falsehood, from intemperancy in
meats, drink, apparel; from coldness, deadness, murmurring, impatience,
back sliding, from barrenness in good, and though Tempted, yet kept from
fulfilling the lusts of the flesh. Jam. 1.21.25. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. Psalm.
119.9.103, 104. Gal. 5.16.18. and not only so, but this word of grace kept and
walked in; will be a fruitful spring in the heart of child-like affections to
God, and member-like to Brethren, and compassionate to those that are out of
the way, streaming forth motions in love, joy, patience, goodness, and to all
services of Love, according to opportunity given, to God, men, or Brethren.
Psalm. 1.2, 3. Hos. 14.8. Joh. 7.38, 39. and 15.1.8. 2 Pet. 1.4.11. Wherefore I
still entreat, that in that gracious word thou have received, and according
thereto, and according to thy receipt; so let us walk in all our Conversation;
as for those higher visits, embraces, and communication of his peculiar Love to
be waited for by us, it is not meet to treat thereof in this Treatise thus
occasioned.

Use 10. And to come toward a conclusion, who ever thou be; I pray thee let us
take notice of the goodness, excellency, and Preciousnesse of this Gospel in
this Declaration of the Death and Resurrection of Christ, and the great love of
God to Mankind, in giving his Son to die for our Sins, and the fullness and
fitness of the Propitiation he made thereby, and the life he is filled with at
his Fathers right hand; and the Spirit be has received, to send forth to the
Sons of men; and all still by virtue of the Precious blood of his once shed;
be not weary, but take it well, though I speak a word or two freely of this
Declaration of the Gospel, when it is spiritually enlightened to any heart, and
the heart enabled to perceive, and believe.

1. It is a true glass, in and through which the Believers looking, may see:
First, The hainousness of our sins, which we the chief whips, Thorns,
Spear, Nails, Cross, and malady that put the Son of God in our Nature, to
so much grievous sorrow, shame, pain, agony and Death. Esaias. 53.3.9. 2 Cor.
5.19.21. Romans 4.24. and the haynousness thereof appears in this; that nothing
else, nothing less then so great suffering and bloodshedding of the Son of
God could satisfy for, and take away sin. Heb. 9.9.12.22, 24. and 10.1.10.
Mat. 26.29. and also in this, that now they are against so good a God; and so
great goodness manifested, not only by Creation, but now much more by and
through a Redemption, with such Precious blood. Romans 2.4. Acts. 17.14.

2. The vanity, worthlesness and inabilitie of all the Sons of Adam, and of
all their righteousness, and best workings, and of all Creatures, with all
their excellencies, either to do away sin, or to make man righteous, or
Procure life with God; which if any, or all of them could; Then Gods only
begotten Son should have been spared. Esai. 59.16. and 50.2. and 63.5. Job
28.1.19. Hebr. 1.10. Gal. 2.21. Luke 22.42.

3. The woeful and unconceivable heavy condition of every man that comes to
hear the punishment of sin in his own Person; for when the first curse and
death, as the punishment of sin, borne by him for sinners, who never did
sin: did for a few hours Suffering, put this strong Captain to such an
agony, so to groan and cry out; What will it do to such, when all their
sins themselves have committed, come to be agravated by dispising so great
Patience and goodness procured by such a Redeemer, and therein despising the
Redemption it self, and refusing to come in to their Lord; that has so dearly
bought them, and for all their contempt, with all their sins therethrough
abiding on them, be cast into a Second death, and suffer therein for ever and
ever. Luke 22.44. and 23.30, 31. 2 Pet. 2.

4. The holy nature and attributes of God: as his exceeding hatred and
indignation against sin; his wonderful justice in fulfilling the Curse on
all Transgressors of the Law, and his truth, in causing the sinner to dye, all
seen in this, that he would not forbear, nor abate his own Son (that was
but set in sinners Place for them,) any part of the debt, but required it all
of him. Isai. 53. and also his infinite mercy, and compassionate love, even to
mankind fallen into sin and enmity against him, in providing and giving such
a Ransom for them. Joh. 3.16, 17. 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. his infinite wisdom, in
making Mercy and Truth, Righteousness and Peace, to meet in one, for recovery
of sinners; Truth fulfilled, and Justice satisfied in the Curse imposed; and
death inflicted on his Son, the Man Christ Jesus; and so on all in him, in
the room of all, and so mercy and Peace procured, and ready for Mankind; yea
his Mercy and Truth, in sending him forth to do all this. Psalm. 85.10, 11. 2
Cor. 5.14, 15, 19, 21. his infinite Power, in raising Christ from the death,
that dyed as the sinner, in the room of all: free from all those sins,
imputed to him, and a Victorer over the Curse and Death imposed on him, and
over the Devils that conflicted with him. Romans 1.4. and 4.25. and 15.3,
4.20.5, 7. Col. 2.14, 15. And so his Infinite Power, Mercy, Love, Truth,
Justice, Faithfulness, in Calling to his Son. Isai. 33.3. Joh. 6.44, 45. and
dispencing Pardon, Spirit and Life, to those that in his Call are submitted
too, and brought to believe on his Son. Isai. 33.10, 11. Joh. 7.9.

5. The Three Persons in one God: the Father that gave his Son. Ioh. 3.16. 1
Ioh. 4.14. and calls to his Son. Joh. 6.44, 45. Matt. 16.16. 2 Timothy 1.4. The
Son, that came forth from the Father, and gave himself a Ransom for All Men,
and went again to the Father. Joh. 16.28. 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. Heb. 11.1, 19. and
receives those that in the heavenly Call, are given him by the Father, and
makes known his Father, and his Fathers words to them, and presenting them
spotless in himself, and gives them the Privileges of sons. Joh.
6.37.8.17.4, 9. Col. 1.21, 22. Joh. 1.12, 13, 18. The holy Spirit that comes
from the Father, and the Son, with super-naturall and divine light and Power,
and teaches, and gives in the words of Christ, bears witness of him, and
affects faith, and a new heart, and witnesses Sonship. and leads the
Sons of God. Joh. 14.2, 6. and 15.26. and 16.13, 14, 15. Joh. 5.6, 7. Romans
8.14, 15, 16.

6. The glorious Love, Goodness, Excellency, beauty and Authority in Christ
Jesus, who is set forth herein to be God. Isa. 9.6. the Son of God, Mat. 3.17.
God made man. Gal. 4.4. God man, in one Person. Joh. 1.1.14. God with us. Mat.
1.25. whose Ransom given, and Propitiation made, is full, and fit for us, and
effectual with the Father. 1 Timothy 2.4, 6. 1 John 2.2. Hebr. 10, 1.10. who is
the rightful Lord of All. Act. 10.36. and Wisdom, and Power of God, and the
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, unto all that believe
on him. 1 Cor. 1.24, 30. the High Priest, Prophet and King. Heb. 5.7, 9. the
Fountain of Life and Spirit. ps. 36.8, 9.

7. The ground and certainty of the Resurrection from the dead. 1 Cor. 15. tot.
and of the equity and certainty of Christ's Judging All. Romans 14.9.11, 12. 2
Cor. 5.10. and of the equity and severity of the second Death. Joh. 3.19. Lu.
19.27. 2 Pet. 1.2.

8. The certain, sure and unspeakable happy, and blessed Estate of all those
that in believing, are made one with Christ, who are therein one with God in
him, and with Brethren in him, having the same Spirit, and Privileges now in
first fruits, and in due season of harvest. Ioh. 1.12.16. and 17.20. in respect
of all which, and such discoveries by the Spirit in the Gospel, believed.

I. The Gospel is rightly called a Glass. 1 Co. 13.12. 2 Co. 3, 3.18. Ja. 1.2,
3.

II. It is a sweet Prevailing motive, and powerful lodestone to draw a man,
1. To judge, condemn, and deny himself, and his own wisdom, parts,
righteousness. 2. To run to Christ, and wait, and rest on, seek and cleave to
him, desirously. 3. To submit the will, and all the Powers to Christ, to be
disposed, directed, and appointed by him in every thing: Seeing he dyed for us,
to ransom us: and is accepted of the Father, and filled with love, life, and
Spirit, for us. Ioh. 16.7.11. Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. Esai. 64.3, 8. Cant. 1, 2, 3. 2
Cor. 5.21. Gal. 2.19, 20. To. 12.1, 2. and 14.8, 9. and 8.28.

III. It is a sweet and healing medicine, that will both Purge and restore, and
comfort our Spirits. Isai. 55.1.4. Yea, healthful food that begets and
strengthens us to, and in a good frame. Ioh. 6.51. Yea, so living and powerful
it is, that 1. It quieteth the heart and Conscience from the terrors of the
Law, and fear of wrath and hell, and breeds sweet healthful Peace. Romans 2.8.
and 7.8. and 5.1, 2. Col. 1.21.2.14. 2. It breaks the hardness of the heart,
and breeds sweet meltings, and Godly sorrow, that makes the Heart, and all the
Powers flexable to Christ. Zach. 12.10. Act. 2.37. and 16, 32, 33. 3. It
inclines the heart to a true and thorough hatred of every sin, for which
Christ dyed, and of all dishonours, and Disobedience to him. Romans 7.15.24.
Psalm. 119.103, 104. 1 Cor. 16.22. 4 It kills the Power of Corruption, so as
it can neither hold a man from God, nor command and govern by its Law. Gal.
5.24. Romans 8.2. and 6.16.22. Heb. 9.14. 5. It takes the affections from the
world, and things thereof, and Crucifieth them thereto, and makes the World a
Crucified thing to them; Gal. 6.14. 1 John 2.15, 16, 17. 6. It quickneth up
child-like affections to God, with readiness to pray to him, praise and serve
him. 1 John 4.10, 16.19. Rev. 5.9, 10. and compassionate affections to men, for
whom Christ dyed, with readiness to pity them, and seek their good; 2 Cor.
5.11, 14, 15, 19, 20. and delightful love to Brethren, Partakers of the same
grace and fellowship with them, and services of Love for them. Phil. 1.3.9. 1
John 3.4, 7. 7 It breeds Patience and Constancy, and Victory in Sufferings;
Heb. 12.2, 7. Prove. 8.36. Rev. 12.11. 8 It strengthens to Confidence in God,
for all good things in every condition, and service of him therein. Romans 5.5,
11. and 8.32. and so makes strong; Phil. 4.13. and in some degree, Partakers of
the Divine Nature, etc. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4.

IV. It is the right Season of all things to us, when by faith we view them
through Christ crucified for us, as the Gospel sets him forth: in which it
will enable us.

1. To see sin foul and Pardonable, and to look on it with loathing, and
hope. 1 Ioh. 2.1, 2. and 9.

2. To receive favors, both Spiritual and Temperall, with high prizeing of
his Love, that purchased them with blood for us: with low esteem of our selves,
and care of right use, and return of Praises to God. Rev. 5.9, 10. and 1 Chronicles. 17.17.

3. To receive afflictions, as turned from being Curses and signs of hatred to
be instruments of blessing, fruits of love, and fatherly corrections to
conform to Christ, who is acquainted with them, and knows how to help,
being filled with Spirit, and having been in soorer trialls himself. Jam.
1.2.12. Heb. 12.7. and 2.18.

4. To behold unbeleevers, as objects of Pity and Compassion, and to mind us
of that we once were, and from what God has freely delivered, and what
humility in our selves, what thanks to God, what mercy and Patience toward
them: and what acknowledgement of all this is in such spectacles required of
us. 2 Cor. 5. Tit. 3.3, 4.

5. To behold believers as fit to be delightfulls, loved, tendered, helped,
served, entertained into fellowship, and being not only purchased with the
blood of Christ, but there through partakers of his grace. Act. 20.28. To. 14.
Ep. 4.2, 4.

6. To esteem highly, and use reverently and confidently, Prayer, hearing the
Word, all spiritual Ordinances, and fellowship with Brethren therein, as
things purchased for us, given us; and approach through them to God afforded
us, even through the Sufferings and Bloodshed of Jesus Christ. Hebr. 9.10.19,
26. and 4.15, 16.

V. It is the opening of the door and gate to the claiming Attainment and
Possession of all the Privileges of Sons. Joh. 10.9. and 14.6. and 1.12. as
first, to receive remission of sins. Act. 10.43. 1 John 1.9. and 2.1. 2
Access to God. Romans 5.1, 2. Ephesians. 2.18. 3 To lay hold on the Promises. 2 Cor.
1.20. and 5.20, 21. 4 To receive the Spirit. Joh. 7.38, 39. Ephe. 1.13. Gal.
3.14. 5 To newness and holiness of Life, and Nature. 2 Cor. 5.17. Ephesians. 4.20,
24. Col. 3.10, 11. 6 To pray with Confidence and assurance. Heb. 10, 19, 22.7
To attain to all things belonging to Eternal Life, fully in Christ our head,
in a measure in our selves. 2 Pet. 1.2, 3, 4. Ephesians. 1.4, 7.

VI. It is a sure, clear and perfect pattern for us to immitate. Ephesians. 5.1. ^
Of obedience to God. Phil. 2.8, 9. 2 Of love to Brethren. Jo. 15.12, 13. Ephesians.
5.2. 1 John 4.10, 11. 3 Of humbling and abasing our selves. Phil. 2.6, 7. 4 Of
loving Enemies, and doing good to such as wrong us. 1 Pet. 2.18. 5 Of meekness,
and confidence, and constancy in all Sufferings, Temptations, and Services; and
so of all holy walking with God. Heb. 5.7, 8. Ephesians. 5.1, 2.

VII. It is a sure Refuge to fly unto, Fort and Castle to hide ones self, and
dwell in, a Rock (...), against which no Power of hell can (...); It all so
(...) of (...) and (...) with all supplies of (...) and Assistance. Isa. 32.1,
2, 3, 4 Hebr. 7.25. Rev. 12.11, Ephesians. 6. (...).

8. Is (...) to cheer and guide us. Psalm. 119.130.105. Clothing to cover our
nakedness, and make (...) comely. Gal. 3.27. Esai. 61.2, 3. a Foutaine to
(...) defilements. Zach. 13.1. R^^. ^5. and 7.14. water of life to make and
lively and fruitful R^^ 22.19. and all that is good, to make us safe and
beautiful. 2 Pet. 1.3.

9. It brings us into a heavenly union and Fellowship with God, and all his
Holy Ones, and all heavenly and durable Riches. Ephesians. 2.17, 22. Heb. 12.22.24. 1
Pet. 2.3.5.6.9. That I say nothing of the discovery, hope, and dispensation of
(...) of (...) Love; to them their far brought. 1 John 3.1, 2, 3. But oh my
childishness, to darken Glory by striving to set it forth; for beyond our
conception is the Excellency of the Gospel, enlightened to the heart, and
believed. 1 Cor. 2.9, 12. a Word of life, of Grace and salvation indeed; happy
they, who have it in their heart, and walk therein, and thereafter; for this
will evidence mystery unto them, and show them the glory, of God, in the face
of Christ, and purge and heal them; Allure, fee^ and strengthen them, safe
guard and guide them; and being them to the Inheritance. 2 Cor. 4.6. Joh. 15,
1, 10. And the very key of this knowledge, the opening the door to it, the
instrument in which the Spirit goes forth, to acquaint men with it, is the
Declaration of Gods love to Mankind, in the gift of his Son, and the Ransom
given, and Propitiation made by his Son, and the report of all this lift, and
happiness, (...) sure for them that repent and berlieve: And of the heavy woe
that abide them that hurden themselves, and refuse, and so to ^^ire at them to
Repent and Believe: and this the Gospel (...) forth to and for All Men. 2 Cor.
5.10, 11, 14, 15. 21. 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. Every man. Heb. 2.9. The World. Joh.
3.16, 19. 2 Cor. 5.19. The whole world. 1 John 2.2. and 4.14. Even for sinners.
1 Timothy 1.16. and the straightning of this Common Salvation, (...) but for
son, and they such also, or (...) tell who they. be I fear will prove the
taking away the Key of Knowledge, and so keeping (...) from (...) found it.
(...) 11.5^.

(...) those wh^^ in this Declaration of the Gospel, are enlightened, and
brought in to (...), shall experiment all aforesaid Can have they to repent,
that say, The Gospel is of it self a week and insufficions Dectrine, or tending
(...) all to bless God for Christ, by whom we obtain all good things, so to
bless him for his Gospel, by which all th^s^ Treasury we discovered, and
brought to us, and (...) for the plain Expression of it in the Doctrine of the
Church of England; and to pray for the continuance of it: and that many may
submit too, and receive ^t, and that we may walk worthy of it: and for this
cause, let (...) be constant in love and belief of it, in attending to, and
obeying it: hearing, reading, meditating, living and walking in it; Let it
dwell and rule in our hearts, and let us bring forth the fruits of it: and so
speak seasonably, and much thereof; and Countenance all that thus do: And the
God of all grace fill us full of the blessings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
and by his Spirit guide us therein unto his Kingdom. AMEN.

Finis.
The POSTSCRIPT, containing a Declaration, to clear an Expression used in
Answer of the 3. Objection, mentioned in the Testification of the Truth of 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. (* See page. 98. line 15. etc.)
THe end of the Death of Christ, in respect of Propitiation made, and
Satisfaction and Ransom given by him to God for Mankind, (as I conceive and
believe, may without error be considered in a double respect, and so called a
two-sould End.

1. First in respect of that which according to the will of God, and Christ,
(which is one,) and may be looked at, as the agreement between them; God was
(upon the Satisfaction made, and Ransom Given,) to do Presently to Christ, and
for his sake. 2. In respect of that which Christ, by virtue of the said
Propitiation, Satisfaction, and Ransom given to God, should have Power,
fitness, and Authority to do in fit Season, and so, and then God to do
through him, and for his sake.

And I conceive, That without error, one may call the one, The first, the next
and immediate end of his Propitiation, Satisfaction and Ransom, because it was
to be done, Presently, and without any other medium, even for and because of
his Propitiation, Satisfaction, and Ransom given only: The other; The Second,
the Mediate, and Vltimate End; because it is that for the which (by the first,)
He is made perfect, and fitted to accomplish; And for accomplishing whereof,
He uses other means besides his Death, Resurrection, and Ascension; all
which are included in the offering himself Spotless, as the Ransom,
Satisfaction and Propitiation for mankind; The death mentioned, being the death
of him that is risen, ascended, and set at Gods right Hand; Even his
intercession, and sending forth means and Spirit therein: Thereby to make
known this grace, and so offer and apply the same; to make it effectual to
this latter end; in and by virtue of the former end, obtained by Ransom given,
and by the Power and operation of this latter, in sending forth means and
Spirit, for tender, and application of the former.

And for amplication hereof, I conceive, one may safely say, That in the first,
next, and immediate and of the Ransom given, many particulars are
comprehended. As 1. The Justification of Christ, as the Public Person that
stood in the room of all Mankind; and that from all the sins imputed to him,
and that in so full and fruitful a Justification; as all that are after
brought into him by Spirit, may not only in him; but with, and through him, be
in their own particulars justified: even as verily and as fully as the First
Adam, on the fall, was sentenced a Sinner: as the Public Person in the room of
all Mankind; So that all that after come by Propitiation, to have being from
him: are not only sinners in him, but with, and through him; as is shown.
Isai. 53.6, 7, 8. with Romans 3.22, 23, 24. and 5.12.18, 19.

2. The removing of the Enmity of the Condition of Mankind; So, as a perfect
Peace be acknowledged, made and accepted: and that all that lay in the way in
man's Condition, be so removed, and the door so opened; That God according to
his truth and Justice, may extend mercy, and offer grace and Life to man: which
without this Propitiation, Satisfaction and Ransom given, would (as God has
manifested himself in his word,) have been contrary to his truth and justice.

But now are therethrough agreeing in, and therewith, Joh. 1.29. Ephesians. 2.16.
Col. 1.20. and 2.4.15. Psalm. 85.10. Mat. 3.17.

3. The making of Jesus Christ, the Lord of All, and giving all over into the
dispose of Christ, as his purchased People: That he may Govern, dispose, and
judge them all; and that all may give account of themselves to Christ: Romans
14.9.12. 2 Cor. 5.10.14, 15.

4. The setting of Jesus Christ, at his Fathers right hand: and filling him
with Spirit, Power and Authority, To execute, That according to his will; which
is one and the same with the will of his Father; (And may be called the
agreement between the Father and him; who are one.) Psalm. 110.1. Hebr. 10.12. 1
Pet. 3.18.22.

1. Even so He, and God for his sake, might take off so much of the Punishment
of sin, into which man was taken, and entend so much Patience, Mercy and
Bounty, as may both bear forth some Testimony of his goodness, and also be
meet to move and lead men to Repentance. Col. 1.17. Psalm. 75.3. Act. 14.17. and
17.29. Romans 2.4. ^ He, and God for his sake, might use such further means by
sending forth the Gospel, either by a Rumor. Romans 10.18. or plain
Declaration; either more briefly, or more amply, as he pleases to acquaint
men with Christ; and to call to Repentance, and turning in to the Lord. Psalm.
68.11. Romans 10.14, 21. Prove. 8 ult. 3 He, and God for his sake, might in some
measure, at one time or other; and as often as he pleases; Send forth in and
according to the means; some light, and motion of the Spirit, to enlighten and
convince them of their Sins, and of the grace that is in him; and to move
them to Repentance and Faith, and so to come into their right and Lawful Lord.
Prove. 1.8.8. Joh. 1.5.7.9. Isay. 45.22. Genesis 6.3.5 That those, whosoever they
be, That in submission to the Spirit of Christ in the means, do come into
Christ; and through Repentance and Faith, submit to, and depend on Christ,
might have eternal Life. Joh. 3.16. Heb. 5.9. 6. That Christ, and God through
Christ, may raise up all men from the first death in his season; and so bring
them before Christ, to acknowledge him Lord, to the glory of God. Isa. 45.23.
Job. 5.28.16.8, 9.10. Phil. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. And of all these Particulars, I
understand is meant, in that is said. 1 Timothy 2.4. God will have all men saved:
and so far, I understand, he has saved all men; In this Salvation wrought
for man, and the way and door thereto opened for men, in and by himself, and so
much I understand to be comprehended, in that it is said, He gave himself a
Ransom for All Men. 1 Timothy 2.6. Yet is there another Particular in this first
end of the death and Ransom of Christ, in which the truth of all the former
will be one day manifested viz. 7. That Christ, and God through Christ, may
Judge all men, according to the Gospel, Romans 2.16. even according to the
Satisfaction and Ransom, He has given to the Father. Romans 14.9.12. 2 Cor.
5.10, 14, 15, 19. and according to the means He has used toward them. Joh.
3.18, 19 and 12.47, 48, 49. and 15.24. and according to the Power and Authority
he has received of his Father. Joh. 5.22.27. and according, as in the day of
his Patience and grace, and means used, They have accepted, or refused him, To
reign over them. Joh. 5.29. Matt. 25.34, 46. Luke 19.27.

And all these Particulars are contained in the first and next, and immediate
end of the death of Christ, as the Propitiation, Satisfaction and Ransom; and
for effecting of this Justification of, and in himself, as the Public Person,
and making such Peace, and removing this enmity of the condition of mankind;
and himself becoming the Lord of All: and obtaining such Power and fitness,
to show mercy to men, and call them into his Government, and that he might give
Eternal Life to all that come into him; and raise All, to acknowledge him
Lord, and Judge all according to his Gospel; He had all our sins imputed to
him; and bare all our Sorrows and Cu^s^; and so died, and rose, and gave
himself a Ransom for All Men: and so paid for this end the whole debt, and
left no part thereof, for this end, or any Particular in it, for any man to
pay, to make up any part of this Propitiation, Satisfaction, or Ransom. Isai.
53.2, 8. 2 Cor. 5.19. Hebr. 10, 12. 1 Timothy 2.6. And if any part of this
business, he came into the world to do, had been unperfected, He had been a
sinner: but we know that in him there is no sin. 1 John 3.5. Heb. 9.26. Joh.
1.29. And Christ having perfected all this business; If God should deny, or
hold from him any part of that he was presently to give him: and to do for his
sake; Then might there be some color for men to say, He were not just; But the
Scripture plainly affirms, all this end, and every particular in it, to be
fully obtained by Christ, and given to him by God. Joh. 5.20, 28. and so he
has in his Word Testified of him, and affirmed. 1 That He is Just, and his
righteous Servant, and the Holy One. Isai. 53.11. 1 John 2.1.20. 2 That in
respect of the enmity of man's condition, he has made Peace by his blood. Col.
1.20. Slain the enmity. Ephesians. 2.16. abolished Death. 2 Timothy 1.10. and taken
out of the way that which was contrary to us all. Col. 2.14, 15. 3 That God
has made him Lord of All, all are his, and ought to live unto him that dyed
for them, and rose again. Act. 2.36. and 10.36. Romans 14.8, 9. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.
4 That God has exalted him with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior,
and for to give Repentance and Remission of Sins. Act. 5.31. And so has
furnished him with Spirit and Authority; to preserve the Earth, and the
Inhabitants thereof. Psalm. 75.3. Heb. 1.3. and to make known his grace. Joh.
1.18. and send forth Spirit, that men might be brought in. Psalm. 68.18. Isai.
42.1. That the World might be saved. Joh. 3.17. 5 That such as believe on Him,
should receive Remission of sins, and Life. Act. 10.43. 6 That by him All
shall be raised, and made alive, and acknowledge him Lord to the glory of God.
1 Cor. 15.21, 22. Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. 7 That all shall appear before his
judgment seat. 2 Cor. 5.10. and therefore God is very Just and Righteous, and
requires no more payment of the debt, that Christ has once Paid, (nor of any
part thereof for the end for which he paid,) nor detaines Christ of any part of
his right, nor does any man wrong; Although most of those, for whom Christ
died, and gave himself a Ransom to God: do yet still, and for many days
abide, and remain under the bondage and Thraldom of the Sense of that
weakness and 1 Mortallity and Punishment that passed on them for sin. Romans
5.12, 14. 2 The blindness, ignorance, and enmity against God in their Nature.
Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 11. 3 The Condemnation and wrath unjustified in the Conscience,
and unjust in their particular Persons before God. Joh. 3.18.36. Ioh. 5.12.
Act. 13.40, 41. 4 Destitute of eternal Life. 1 John 5.10, 11, 12. For the
removing these evils from, and communicating this life to men, is another
business, and belongs to the Second: the mediate and ultimate end of the
Death and Ransom of Christ, there being more to be done by Christ, then a
Ransom giving to God; even such an Interceeding with him, by virtue of the
Ransom given. That mercy being indeed extended to men, and means used, and
Spirit sent forth to make known: and Tender this grace, to make it operative,
that men might be saved; which is accomplished in obtaining the last end
mentioned. For 1. There is a great difference, and evident enough to a
reasonable understanding, Between making Satisfaction to God for man's sins:
That the punishment might be lawfully taken off, and the Taking it off, in due
time from men. 2. Between the making Peace for men, and the taking enmity out
of their condition, and the creating peace in men, and taking enmity out of
their natures. 3. Between the justification of Christ, as the Public Person,
in the room of All men, and giving it into his hands to dispense: and the
justification of men by and through Christ, in his dispensation. 4 Between a
salvation obtained by Christ, and a possibility of men's being saved, and the
door and way of Salvation opened for them: And this salvation communicated unto
them, and they brought in, and eternally saved. The first of every of these is
true in Christ, for all Men: Though the latter be yet wanting to most men: and
this is also evident by the Change of Persons and expressions, and Tence, the
Scriptures uses. 1. In a distinct mentioning the first; It says, He has
given himself a Ransom. 1 Timothy 2.6. has made peace by his blood. Col. 1.20.
Slain enmity. ^ Pet. ^.6. abolished death. 2 Timothy 1.10. obtained eternal
redemption. Heb. 9.12. and God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself,
not imputing their Trespasses to them. 1 Cor. 5.19.

He is the Propitiation for our sins, and not for our sins only, but also
for the sins of the whole world. 1 John 2.2. and in him is Life, and the life
is the Light of men. Joh. 1.4. In mentioning the Second of every of the
forementioned, It says, That the World through him might be saved. Joh. 3.17.
That through him; him, in the means used, all men might believe; Joh. 1.7.
That All Men through him should be raised and made alive. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22.
That whosoever believes in Christ, should not perish, nor abide in darkness,
but have everlasting life. Joh. 3.16. and 12.46. That we being dead to sin,
should live unto righteousness. 1 Pet. 2.24. That they which live, should not
live unto themselves, but unto him. 2 Cor. 5.15. That he might bring us to
God. 1 Pet. 3.18. That we might be made the righteousness of God in him. 2
Cor. 5.21. which change of Speech shows a difference between the former and
latter of these things formentioned: That the former truly is for those, To
whom the latter is yet justly wanting. 2 It is Gods order, and unchangeable
Statute, That all men shall first, and for a time, bear the Image of the first
natural and earthy Adam, and once die. 1 Cor. 15.46.49. Hebr. 9.27. And Christ
did not die to give himself a Ransom to free men presently from sense of
Weakness, Sufferings, Mortallity, and death; that they might not pass through
it: and so to break the order made, and cancel the Statute appointed by God.
If any so conceive, they are deceived. Mat. 5.17, 18. but to do the will of
God that sent him. Joh. 6.38. So much whereof as belongs to the next, and
immediate end of his death and ransom given, is comprehended in the seven
Particulars, before set down: in all which appears, that the abiding of
Mortallity, Pains in this life to be passed through, is no blemish to the
Justice of God, nor argument of the failing of Christ Payment of the whole debt
for these Ends.

3. The Scriptures shows, That for removing from off men the curse
forementioned, and making known, and tendering the Life unto men: There is
something else beside the death and Ransom of Christ, and all those
forementioned Particulars obtained by him for Christ; still (and further) to
do for which He is gone up to heaven; and has received Spirit. That he might
do; in which he neither is, nor will be wanting in that which, if not
willingly resisted, might be sufficient.

For he there in some sort Interceeds for Transgressors. Isai. 5.3.12.

So as by virtue of his ransom, he does procure the preservation of the
Greatures for them Ps. 75.3. Col. 1.18. and Patience and bounty, by such
goodness, to give some. Testimony of himself, and to lead them to Repen^mee.
Act. 14.17. Romans 2.4. and further interceeds by virtue of his Ransom, for a
blessing on his Servants, and the Ministration of the Gospel by them, That the
World might be so brought through him to believe. Joh. 1.7. and 17.21.23. and
yet further sends forth Spirit at one time or other in the means to enlighten
them, That they might indeed believe. Joh. 1.7. and so fulfills that part of
his Fathers will. 1 Timothy 2.4. That would have all men come to the knowledge of
the Truth; whence he is also said to be a Testimony in due time. 1 Timothy 2.6.
But now, for men's participating of eternal life, there is somewhat also, both
by the will of the Father, and the Son, required on their part to be done in
them, and yielded to by them; Namely that they hearken to Christ, in what he
says in the means. Mat. 17.5. and turn at his reproof. Pro. 1.23. and to
suffer his Spirit to prevail in and with them, to repentance and faith Mar.
1.15. in which he will not be wanting on his part, that they might; But if when
light comes, they love darkness r^ther, and will none of him. Joh. 3.19. And
he, besides the forementioned remaining mortallity, do for this heap greater
Judgments. This is just To. 1.17. and if when he has brought them out of the
first death, to acknowledge him Lord, He send them to a second Death; it is
still just^, and a Testimony of his, before having sufficiently Ransomed them.
4. The Scripture shows, That the special Salvation to Eternal Life, was to
be, and is by him, here in a first fruits given to them that are Prevailed
with, to believe in him; and so he is the Savior of All men, but especially of
them that believe in him. 1 Timothy 4.10. But now, if these Believers do sin
against, and walk contrary to the grace received, and he, besides the
mortallity remaining on them, impose stripes; This is also just, and according
to the will of God, and argues no imperfection in Christ's Payment. Psalm. 89.30,
34. So that in all this, here is but one Payment for Propitiation, Satisfaction
and Ransom, and that done at ones, Perfectly by Christ Heb. 10, 1, 2, 14. and
no part thereof for that end, left for any to pay, nor paid again, for any.
Now if among them, believing the record the Scripture bears of Christ his
death and Propitiation made, and Satisfaction and Ransom given for all men,
and looking on the afflictions and death, that men, even (Believers,) suffer.
Some say, that Jesus Christ did bears the great^st part of the Punishment,
wholly in regard of the Eternal, and left some part of Temporary Punishments
for his own, to bear in this life. And others say, That in regard of
Propitiation, Satisfaction, and Ransom, Jesus Christ did bear all, and Paid
the whole debt, That he might have Power, to free in his Season; and according
to his and his Fathers will.

And that his Season is not in this life, to take all weakness and Mortallity,
no not from his own; and that besides; He will, and does inflict punishments
even on them, for their outgoings from his grace.

I see no difference here in the intention or Substance of the Doctrine or
issue of the business in both these sayings; but they may well stand without
contention.

Nor can the first of these sayings be paralleld with that I called the sayings
of Papists; for 1. Here is mentioned some part of punishment to be suffered in
this life, with an affirmation only, to be suffered Here, which sufferings are
also granted in the others sayings, whereas the Papists affirm a part to be
suffered, without such restrictions: So as if not all suffered here: It should
remain to be suffered in their devised Purgatory.

2. Here these Sayings are not said to be Satisfactory, and Propitiatory, as
the Papists imply, and say in their Affirmation: and the Sufferings themselves
are also granted in the other sayings.

3. The ground of the Papists assertion, is to strengthen the opinion of
Propitiatory Sacrifices, to be offered by the Priests, and the opinion of
Purgatory, and the practices of Prayers and Sacrifices for the dead: whereas
the former of these sayings; yields no color for such consequence, and the
latter yields all the Sufferings.

Yet have I inclined to the latter saying, without thought of any difference,
but only in the Expression: The first, coupling both the ends of the Death and
Ransom of Christ: and the second distinguishing speaks of the first end only:
which I being treating of; I had cause to incline to speak in that manner;
That those that affirm, that all that Christ dyed for, are justified by his
blood, and shall be saved from wrath through him, might see what is in their
saying, and such I leave to prove their assertion, which I know they cannot, or
to free themselves from being snared with that Popish opinion, which I know
they would be glad to do, and to them only, it belongs to do it.

And so having no intention of blemishing a good saying, nor contending without
cause, but only to maintain the truth against falsehood, I (...) that lawful
(...) of Expression* being also according to truth; which I might; if more
Juditious will, (without impairing the Strength of the Truth against that
Objection, or removing my right, conception thereof;) Give me a better
expression, I shall thankfully, accept it, and use it.) if not, I desire that I
have used, be no otherwise taken. Then it there appears, and I have Professed
to have meant it.

And for a Conclusion, this I add.
The grace of God in the Redemtion wrought by Christ, and fruits to all men
there through extended; binding much more to the Love of God and our Neighbor,
Then the grace testified in Creation: all failings and sinnings herein, are not
only against the Law in the one, but in both respects; The Preface to the
commands, using also the motives from both. Exodus 20. 1 Job. 3.4. And all done
by man's strength, and humane Consideration of both motives, is but Service
according to Law, and oldnesse of Letter, and that impertect and short of it
also. Joh. 3.6. Romans 7.5, 6. Gal. 3.10. So that sins so locked on, are
against both Law and Gospel also. Romans 3.10, 24. and 2.4, 5. The remaining of
any part of Punishment, till Christ's time of taking it off, may be rightly
called Punnishment, because it came on men, for sins at first. Genesis 3.19.
Lam. 3.39. And so may the stripes imposed for sinnings against Grace, because
for such sinnings they are imposed. Hos. 12.2. Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32. Lam. 4.22.
And they may be rightly called, Punishments and Chastisements, because they
cause sense of Pain; Corrections, because they come to straighten and amend.
Levit. 26.41. Hab. 1.12. Afflictions, because they Press, and cause to appear
what is in man. Isai. 26.16.19. Trials; Because they serve to Prove, Exercise,
and manifest. Jam. 1.2, 3. Pet. 1.6, 7. Sufferings for Christ and the Gospel,
are in themselves an honor and blessing, yet such sufferings may be also
sometimes, so mixed. That they may have in some respect, all the former names
also. Heb. 12.2.11. Yet in all this, God is just, and deprives Christ of no
part of his due, nor any other of that, which is right for them, by Christ's
Dispensation to enjoy. Nor are any of these Sufferings, a requiring again of
the debt, or any part of the debt Christ paid. Nor in any sort to make up any
want therein; for Propitiation, Satisfaction, and Ransom, for the end, for
which Christ gave it.

The clearing whereof, is the scope of these fore-written Lines.

FINIS.

