A CERTIFICATE FROM THE Lord Moor and Sir Henry Titchborne, Showing The
certainty of the clearing of the Harbor, and Country, twenty miles about
Tredagh, with the taking of Bewly and Stameene Castles, from the Rebels.

It is ordered this seventh day of April, 1642. By the Committee of the House
of Commons in Parliament concerning Printing, that this Certificate be
forthwith Printed.

John White.



Whereunto is added, Diverse overthrowes given at sundry times to the Rebels.

London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1642.

FOrasmuch as we have been long besieged in this Town of Drogheda, to the
disheartning of the English Shipping to come into the Harbor, or to traffic,
or trade hither; which siege we (under God) have now raised, Insomuch that we
have possessed our selves of the Towns, and Castles of Bewley and Stameene on
both sides of the mouth of the Harbor, and have burnt Mornanton; In all which
the enemy formerly lay, and endeavored to block up the River; and have
likewise so beaten the Enemy, that they have no force within 20. miles of this
Town, only Dundalk is not yet cleared. Now for the encouragement of the English
Shipping and Merchants, we have thought fit to signify thus much, and have
sent this small Ship which we took as a prize, and named (Gods-Gift) fraighted
by Master James Penteny, and Mr. George Peppard, with Hides and Tallow, to
inform the Merchants and Mariners of Chester, and Lever-pool-water, that they
may freely traffic and trade hither, and may cast Ankor, between this harbor
and Dublin free, and without interruption, Dated at Drogheda the 15. of March.
1641.

Signed, Moore, Hen. Titchborne.


Certain overthrowes given to the Rebels.
AT several times before the 19 of January, our people about ^ntrim had killed
of the Rebels at least 700: the 26 of February, there came 8000. Rebels, and
beleagured the Town of Antrim three days, the third day they made their
assault upon the Town; the enemies assaulted it in 5. several places, and were
beaten back with the loss of many common soldiers; and in the repulse two
Captains of the Rebels were killed, and one hurt; and many Arms taken, and none
of our side slain, only one hurt in the thigh. This last week there came
certain news to and from men of good credit, that 400. of Sir John Clotworthies
Regiment issued or sallied out upon 5000. of the Rebels, slew 500. common men,
and some Commanders. My Lord Conaway is safely arrived, and Sir John Clotworthy
daily expected, who by reason of the Scots not arrival in Ireland, when he
came into Scotland was necessitated to go to Edenborough to see what might be
the impediment and cause of their long stay, that so by removing it, and taking
them along with him he might better advance the service which in their absence
and want, could not but languish or go on with less success, unless there
had been greater forces of our own Nation there.

From Carrickfergus, April 2. 1642. Sir,
I Wrote to you from Dublin two Letters, wherein I showed you the estate of
this Kingdom at large, and the misery these rebellious people have run
themselves into: But now at this place here is no Aid come over yet, for the
Scots have lien this Month within 16 Leagues of this place, and in all this
time have not had a wind to bring them over: And when I arrived here some 10
days since, here was not above 700 men, and not Arms for a third part of those
neither, nor yet money to pay them; and for my part, I had as little as the
least, for I brought but one groat hither: But since here is 2 Ships arrived,
laden with Ammunition, and 3 Ships laden with Corn from London, and my Lord
Conway and his Troop; so now it is somewhat amended: But I hope very suddenly
it will be a great deal better, if once our Ships come with the Scottish Forces,
and some better Governors that will curb these Scots; for here has been great
want of good Commanders all this time. But I doubt not, that if the Lord bless
us, but that you shall see this a free Conquest in a short time: therefore I
could wish that you would sell the house at a venture; for if this Kingdom be
subdued, as I doubt not but that it will, then will here be brave living, and a
man with one hundred pounds in his purse shall purchase that here, whereupon he
may live better than he that has 100 per annum in England. Corn is very
reasonable now, over it has been; but the next year it will be dear hear, in
regard that there has been none sown since the^e Wars; and that that was before
sown, now will be destroyed. And thus desiring you to remember my duty to my
mother, I shall ever remain

Your obedient Son, T. K.
March 25. 1642. Dublin.
IT is credibly reported, That Sir Charles Coot will march out of Dublin with
an Army on Monday next to clear the Country on the other side of Dublin.

If we had but men enough to leave in Dublin to secure it, and were able to
march forth with 10000 men. I think we might go all over Ireland; for God has
put such terror and dread in the hearts of our enemies, that they are afraid
to stand against us; for 500 of them will not stand to fight with 100. Our
soldiers are all very resolute and courageous, and they want nothing but their
pay, which they have not received these seven weeks last past.



FINIS.

