Gangraenachrestum, OR, A PLASTER TO ALAY THE tumor, and prevent the spreading
of a pernicious Ulcer, like to have grown upon, and putrified the good report
of JO. MADDOCKS, and HENRY PINNELL.

Made up of a true Relation (wherein the faults of the former Impression by
Master Edwards are revised, corrected, and amended) concerning some passages at
POOL.

By the abused parties I. M. and H. P.

Psalm. 56.5. Every day they wrest my words: all their thoughts are against me
for evil.

Psalm. 63.11. The mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped.

Prove. 3.29. Devise not evil against thy neighbor seeing he dwells securely
by thee.

Accusamus saepe quod nos facimus; Deserte in aliorum vitia invehimur.
Cum tua praevideas oculis mala lippus inunctis,
Cur in amicorum vitiis tam cernis acutim?
Horat. OXFORD, Printed in the year 1646.

READER,
THE ensuing narration of my Brother was directed to me some months since; but
by reason of the great distance between him and me, and my unsetlednesse of
habitation, it came to my hands but very lately, else thou had seen it
sooner; though I am sorry thou have the sight of it (or mine) at all; in this
respect, that I fear the divisions of Reuben may increase the thoughts of thy
heart: Not that I desire to scatter in Israel, or divide in Jacob, we to him by
whom offenses come; would to God they were cut off that trouble thee: my
purpose is rather to compose and unite: to that end I here offer this piece of
truth to make up the breach made by the untruths of Master Edwards, and his
busy Pettifoggers. In one of his Canonical Epistles (for he thinks Gangrana
is authenticke) there thou shall find Master Maddocks and my self with a viper
on our hands; Act. 28.1, 2, 3, 4.
some men's books are like the Island of Melita, abounding with such kind of
venomous creatures. And though the barbarous people may expect our swelling and
sinking, the downfall and ruin of our reputation, by the poisoning of our
name and credit; yet I doubt not but to shake off this banefull beast without
any loss of life, or hurt of health at all. I once thought to have spread a
bigger plaster for my own sore; but since my brothers salve is enough for his
own wound and mine, I shall contract; but some answer must be put into this
infamous Declaration, lest the Knights of the Post be impannell'd, and I found
guilty of the heinous crime laid against me. Reader, thou shall be judge and I
will open the matter before thee as truly as if I had kissed the Book.

When the seige lay before Sherbourne Castle in Dorsetshire, I went to see
Poole; where (by the importunity of some friends) I preached, August 8. 1645.
Captain Throttle, sometime a Parson, Vicar or Curate, was offended at my
Sermon, pretending that blasphemy which S. F. takes for granted to be true, and
confidently commends it to a Credulous, Classical, Canonical Churchman as a
considerable ingredient for the Gangraemist to make up his tumifying volume.

But that thou may know the certainty of those things whereof thou have
been mis-inform'd, and that it may appear the offense was taken, through the
mistaking of Captain Throttle, and not given by my discourse, I shall recite
only that passage of his groundless exception, laying it at thy feet and
leaving it before the bar.

Having occasion to speak of the body of sin and death, as the great hindrance
of the Saints comfort, and withal holding forth their remedy and recovery by
Christ, Romans 7.
I brought in Paul personating a sad soul in a distressed condition Romans 7.14,
15, 24. and then proposed him as a pattern of their rejoyceing upon his
ground, v. 25. I say (as then I did) that the children of God in the Eclipse
of Christ may complain of that in themselves ( i.) the body of sin and death
from which they are delivered by Christ, in respect of their justification, of
which I then spoke and wherewith I bounded that part of my discourse; and did
the Saints always remember their deliverance from sin by Jesus Christ they
would not have that cause of complaining in them, which otherwise they will
have ariseing from, and tending to the bondage of their spirits. I endeavored
to illustrate the thing and explain my meaning by a parallel scripture. Psalm.
43.
Psalm. 43.5. when the soul does act upon, and trust in the goodness and
grace of God by faith in Christ then it is free from disquietnesse: the utmost
of my folly was, to prove David and Paul to have but one lip and speak the
same language, which is common to the Saints, this is the weakness wherewith
I charged Paul. Truly I never denied that Paul, Romans 3.23. Ephesians. 2.3.
or any other Saint had a body of sin about them; but in the handling the
same particular I proved all the sons and daughters of Adam to be sinners,
and to have need of Christ.

Reader I expose my self to thy censure. Say, whether (having granted all men
to be sinners in Adam, and concluded the old man to be a great hinderer of the
Saints comfort and peace) thou think I should (in the same breath) deny any
such thing as a body of sin and death to be in the godly, in any sense: but
if thou imputest mistake or forgetfullnesse to me, yet I have another string to
my bow. Master Bromhill, a preacher then in Poole, who took the notes of my
Sermon, and afterward searched them, bear me witness before many witnesses
that he found no such thing either in his memory or notes. He desired me then
to give Captain Throttle a meeting in private, which I consented unto; the
place appointed was at Master Gundrye's house who was then Preacher at
Dorchester; there I staid waiting his coming to give him satisfaction in a
loving and Christian-like way; Master Bromhill (after long delay) went to him,
but could not prevail to bring him; then I declared my utter detestation of
that horrid blasphemy, of which I am accused, in the presence of Master Gundrye
and Master Hussy, both of them Preachers and sober minded men. All this would
not suffice; the urgency of friends prevailed with me to preach again the next
day being Sabboth-day, that I might give public satisfaction; then I openly
in the Pulpit disclaimed that newborn blasphemy batched in Captain
Throttle's fancy; nor will I ever own the brats of other men's brains. I told
the people also that I was resolved not to turn my back upon their Town till
I had given and received some satisfaction concerning this matter: on the
morrow I expected again, and sought an opportunity to confer with this
Commander, but could not obtain it; but the next day when I was taking my
leave of the Major of the Town, he comes in with strange jealousies and
suspicions of midnight preaching and Sacraments, which I never so much as
dreamed of, but was as ignorant of such doings in Poole as of the blasphemy he
charged me with. But when he could not lay his chains upon me in Poole, he
breathed out high comminations what he would do with me in Parliament; where
he durst not show his face for his ears (for you know how they deal with
forgers) nor appear in this matter.

Thus far I have cleared my self by two witnesses. But if my memory should
fail or be rejected as invalid, and so my first evidence be put by; or if
Master Bromhill should be as false-hearted and as double-tongu'd an hypocrite
in this case, as he was between Master Butler and me when I should have
preached at Warum, and so my second witness miscarry; yet I have a cloud of
witnesses left to make up a third testimony to clear me from that foul crime
of blasphemy, such as will not vanish nor melt away before the brightest Sun
of justice; there be seven and twenty men and women of honest report whom I can
produce, who have given their names to witness the contrary of what my accuser
invented And yet I have greater witnesses then these; God and his Elect Angels
will one day appear for my justification.

Thus then the Gangraene gathers, Jer: 18.18.
Captain Throttle devises a devise and smites with the tongue. S. F. hears
the rumor and busters with his pen; Bayard is as bold with his heels as any
in the teame. There be two sorts of men that deals their blows as fortune
does her favors, with a blind eye and a careless hand. Jer: 20.10.
Report (say they) and we will report, come on it what will; though they are
forbidden so to do Ex. 23.1. that Facilefidian and over credulous popularity in
Italy presently fall foul on those innocent and harmless Hugonites in
France, if their Priests, Friars, and Ghostly Fathers but once bisse and clap
their hands at them. How easy is it for a Synedrium, a Conventicle, Session or
Assembly of High-preists and Elders to persuade the Common People to Vote
Christ to the Cross when they have procured false witness against him? The
Convocation at Poole may happily have as strong an influence upon the vulgar in
those parts. I know not what should be the intent of S. F. when he went to put
upon me that purple sin of blasphemy, which the Captain had lately plundered
in Abysso, where such robes are woven, unless it were to make the people spit
in my face and set their fists about my ears; a better man then I was served
thus before me; I shall not think it strange to be called Beelzebub the next
time. Whatever his design was I weigh not, but sure I am he told too loud a
lie when he did (interpretatively) call me Anabaptist. Let him ask friend or
foe, with whom I have discoursed about the point of baptism, and they will all
say his pen run before his wit. But let his paper-winged messenger fly as fast
as it can (with the news as light as it self), it cannot come before it is
welcome to the Confederate at Ludgate Hill, Master Gowers, (if I spell his name
right) who presently, instead of going his rode way to the Assembly, steps
aside (I wish he did not wrench his foot nor wrong his conscience) to cast
this mite into Master Edwards his Treasury. I doubt be was stung when he put
his finger into the Waspesnest. But it is no strange thing for one to lose his
way in these dark days, especially grave men that grow dim sighted. There
be that are called Seers, who yet are so blind that they grope as in the night
and cannot find the right door. I wish that this learned Rabbi had showed the
scribled paper to that solemn Assembly, whose learning and gravity I
reverence, before whom somebody threatened to make me give an account of my
doctrine, which I shall not refuse to do; that so he might have called me in
as a brother before he had set his Apparitor to deal with me as a Publican.
For I am persuaded the wise men of the Synod would have debated the business
and reasoned the case with him; they would (it may be) have questioned the
validity of his single testimony, and told him that he ought not to take up an
evil report upon so slight a ground; that he should do as he would be done
by; Act: 25.16 Qus aliquid Statuerit, altera inaudita par. te etc.
that it is against the Roman custom to condemn before trial; that to shut
one care destroys the principles of Morality and civil Justice; that a man
(though an heretic) is not to be rejected till after first or second
admonition; that the Church is first to be acquainted with the failings of the
Saints, and endeavor their reformation, before the world hear of them; that
we are not to take up our brothers skirt but to cover his nakedness with the
lapp of our own garment; doing all our things in love: Such lessons as these I
hope he learnes there, or else I shall think the worse of the Presbyterian way
as long as I know it. I shall leave this in Master Gowers his study; if he
please he may take it along with him to the Convent and have it put to the
Question at their next sitting, whether his carriage to me were according to
that reformation which they intend?

When I went to Master Edwards for satisfaction I could get little or none at
all of him, he confessed he never knew me, nor ever so much as heard of me but
by that Letter of S.F. of whom (by his own confession to me) he was as ignorant
as of my self; and therefore he might have suspected him as well as me; but
because one of the Presbytery had laid his hands on it, and it was brought to
him by Master Gowers, it was immediately ordained infallible, and became worthy
of all acceptance to him. But since he does persecute Ignorantly, (through too
much belief) not knowing the persons on whom the railing strokes of his false
tongue do fall, the Lord lay not this sin to his charge, but grant that he may
obtain mercy unto repentance. It Is high time he call for the prayers of the
Church; for he is dangerously sick of a Gangraene, and is far spent; I wish
he die not of that disease. There is great, fear that the worst is not past
with him yet; for aliquid latet, the cause (at least supervenient and
accidental) is not removed nor discovered: there is somewhat got within that
festers, though the intralls were not found before; the Gangraene has a core
at bottom; there be Canker worms lie too near his heart which feed the
malady and foment his distemper, putting him so often into his burning fits; he
feeds upon the Letters and words of Hymeneus and Philetus; 2 Timothy: 2.17.
there is no likelihood it should go well with him till he observe a better
diet. He is so in love with devouring words, Psalm. 52.4.
and has sucked so long at the Hornets hony-combe that he has got a blister
upon his false tongue, which is swollen so big that he cannot keep it within
the compass of his mouth: his grief must needs grow upon him so long as he
fosters it with unwholesome fare; till the malignant humors be banished his
bowels, and driven out of his inward parts; till his heart be fortified against
rotten inventions, and his ears stopped to keep out the venom of a
backbiting tongue, I cannot expect that the rage of his rankling ulcer should
abate, nor hope to see him restored to perfect health. (...).
His wound is incurable any other way then by cutting it off with the Spirits
sword of lenity and love. They which have done him much hurt are an heterodox,
heterogeneous, heretical generation of men which have swarved from the right
end of the Commandments (1 Timothy 1.6.) such as make pseudaevangelicall
conclusions against their neighbors from Traditionall premises: a
superstitious sort of men, a factious sect they are; given to popery and
bringing in popish innovations; hanging their faith upon other men's lips;
making the rumor of the world the rule of their censure; pragmaticall
whisperers, devoted to division; shooting their poisoned arrows in secret to
disturb the quiet of Israel; Anti-Covenanters, Psalm. 64.4.
not endeavoring the peace of the Kingdom wherein they live; you may call
them Traducers, or Reporters; S. F. let. in Gang.
their name lurks in the same Font where I was baptized an Anabaptist: Master
Edwards may register them in his Legend, if he please, to lengthen his
Catullian Catalogue, and patch up his Cinaedean and scurrilous pamphlets;
unless he judge them as supernumerary Sybils. They are a very proper potion
for his thin and empty bulk; for these araneous and spider-like ingredients
will make his bufonius book swell to a body of the greatest magnitude. All the
fear is lest he take too great a quantity, and so it be with him in his
swelling mood as it was with that little high-minded creature which thought to
rise above the ox in bigness: and this is much to be doubted, unless he be
like Mithridates to whom poison, was familiar; or that little ugly thing which
some Gentlewomen use to tie with a chain in the chimney corner, whose
distempered stomach will not be settled till it has eaten a spider. Ebrius and
petulans quid nullum, etc.
Some men are so petulant and drunk with passion and envy that they stand in a
white sheet till they have clothed others in purple or black; mischeife and
ruin of their neighbors good name is the Opium or Poppy that gives their
temples rest. You may guess at Master Edwards his diet and constitution by his
complexion, and so long as his queasy pen no better digesteth those crude, raw
and incocted informations, no mervaile if you read his sickness in his
forehead, as you may the substance of his book in the front of it.

My thoughts were once to have set up the wispe, and sat down in silence; but
lest Gangraena should soar with her borrowed and stolen feathers to the like
pitch of selfe-conceitednesse and ostentation, with the Antapology, I have laid
this shackle of truth on it to hinder it from mounting aloft into that swelling
vanity unto which it is so naturally addicted. For my own part I can bear all
private and personal injuries; 2 Cor. 12. Master Burroughes, Master Goodwin,
etc.
and take pleasure in reproaches for Christ's sake; I took it as a badge of
honor to be abused among my betters; I wish I were their companion in
abilities as I have been in opprobries. Yet it seemed strange to me when
Master Edwards told me that he neither knew me nor Foord that sent the Letter,
and yet that he should publish it; for though he feekes a double evasion, I
cannot excuse him of rash and unrighteous judgment. First, he says he had a
second letter from S. F. to confirm what he wrote in the first, and much more;
ergo the indictment is Billa vera, and I am found guilty. If one witness
(speaking twice) may go for two, Si sat sit accusasse quis erit innocens.
it is time for every man to learn his Neck-verse. But Verbum Sacerdotis is
Logic and Law enough for Canonists; though for my part I approve better of
the Moralists, who will not take an aspersion for a conviction. The Scribes and
Pharisees said once and again that Christ blaspheamed; Mat. 9.8.
was it therefore true? the poor multitude and common sort of people glorify
God for that which the Scribes accounted blaspheamy. Rapiunt ind^cti coelum,
etc.
Wise men often times come short of what simple ones attain unto. God will
have more praise from Babes then the wise and prudent of the world. Again, he
said the Letter was brought to him by an Assembly-man of whom I told you
before: if he had called him a Prophet, or one of the Sons of the Prophets,
or a Man of God, or a Master in Israel, he might have past for as good an
Oracle as they have at Poole; this would have struck the naise to the head
indeed; especially if he had sat in the chair of infallibillity that day that
he might not have erred in what he did. But can you think a man of that
gravity should be so light as to be blown from Ludgate Hill to Master Edwards
his house with one paper-puffe of false fame? I doubt there is hemlocke in the
Synods garden; though perhaps you might think there were no weeds at
Westminster. But grant that such a one did deliver me up to Master Edwards to
be crucified in my good name and credit; does he deserve to be judge that will
proceed without a jury? I suppose the scroule which the Synod man Received and
delivered contained only the Articles, not the Affidavit of S. F. and
therefore was no legal testimony against me: but righ or wrong in my name must
to the black bill. I am persuaded I should have found more favor from an
Heathen; if Pilate himself had been my judge he would have asked what evil I
had done; and heard me speak, and my witnesses too, (though suborned ones)
before he had past sentence on me: many times there is more justice and mercy
in Civil, then in Ecclesiastical Courts. Pilate had released Christ and never
stretched out his hand against him if the chief Priests and Elders had not
sat so near to jogge his Elbow Luk: 23.4, 5. etc. Luke 23.
there be some Divines so far transformed into the deity of the God Saturn
that they cannot endure to behold their own issue, but devour their offspring
as soon as it shootes forth: though a man be borne in a National Church (if
there be any such now) and received as a member by that which some call
baptism, and never cut off by sentence of excommunication; yet if he but
preach and practice that doctrine which that Church professes to maintain,
for all that he were better fly into Egypt then tarry in Judea: the Apostles
had better entertainment amongst the Gentles then amongst the Jews. Christ
had a safer protection under Pharaoh then under Herod; the children of the
Spirit were better expose themselves to mere strangers and Aliens then to
those that are borne but after the flesh; Gal. 4.29.
and safer will it be (for the outward man) to live amongst Publicans and
Sinners then amongst devour Jews; for if the Rulers of the Synagogue, the
Parson of the Parish etc. cannot entangle and quell them, Fo. 19.12.15.
the Civil Magistrate shall have little rest till a Crown of Thorns be on
their heads. What else is the meaning of whetting the secular sword so sharp
with Gangraenous Epistles to the Parliament and higher powers to suppress some
which worship God after that way which others (only) call, but not prove to be
Heresy?

I will now give over wrestling I was never brought up to these Olympian games,
nor do I delight in such exercises, though some make them their recreation. But
David may take his sling in hand as well as his sheep crook; he may fight
with a Philistine as well as feed his Fathers Ewes: because I am forced rather
then come upon the stage, give me leave to defend my self from Rabshekah's
pen, and Goliah's beam: you will not blame the peaceable and quiet traveller
for using his weapon and crying Thieves, Thieves, when he is set upon in the
way and like to be over-master'd by men-stealers, Q^^ semel amissa postea
nullus eris.
who would robb him of his good name, without which a man is no man; the
modestest damsel will lift up her voice when violence is offered to her
virginity, nor can I with silence, let pass these mendacious slanders which
impetuously attempt to ravish the purity and simplicity of the Gospel.

Methinkes these present times correspond much with the former and give a
clear interpretation of many passages in scripture. You know when Christ was
borne, not only Herod, but all Jerusalem was troubled at it, and when he comes
it is to kindle a fire, to send a sword, to set at variance etc. And though the
Temple of Jerusalem was built without the noise of an Axe or Hammer in it, 1
Kings 6.7. Yet the walls of that City were repaired in troblous times; Dan.
9.25.
when the workmen wrought with one hand, Neh. 4.17.
and held their weapon in the other. He that will work for God had need be
armed against men. I will hold thee no longer, though I intended once to have
examined the libellous letter of S.F. a little more narrowly before thee; yet I
shall rest, and desire thee to be satisfied for the present with what my
borther will say concerneing it in his Narrative. I could speak enough of all
my defamers, upon hear say to make them odious; but then I should do as I
have bin done by, and not as I would be done by, and want proof, it may be, as
well as they. I see there is falshoode in fame; I wonder wise men should give
heed to such lying vanities. As for that blackemouth'd book which keeps such
a snarling at the Saints I turn my back upon it; not for fear to flee from
it, but in disdain and scorn of it; For Major sum quam cuipossit Gangraena
nocere.

I trust to wear such armor of proof always upon me that will defend back
and belly from the insolent thrusts of infernal forgeryes; Integer vitae
scelerisque purus non eget Mauri jaculis.
and therefore shall cast off all other harness and appear noe more in Roman
buffe in this quarrel; Saul's armor sits not easy on me: my doctrine and
conversation shall be the shield and buckler of my reputation. I had been
silent still, but Codrus his bawling will break the string of Aegles his
tongue; too much foul play will make a dumb man speak: nothing but that
provoked the pen of him who was unwillinge to write, but is ready to serve thee
in the Gospel of Christ

August 18 1646. Henry Pinnell.

The Narrative of John Maddockes.
IN August last I came to Poole (in my way to Weymouth, and other Western
places) where staying a little time, I had one day some discourse with Master
Bromhill (riding from Winborne to Poole) wherein we did concur without any
difference at all, Master Bromhill desiring and engaging me to farther
acquaintance; after which (upon a Saturday) I visiting him at his quarters, we
fell into a discourse, wherein I lovingly and freely gave a full account of my
judgment, he assenting to every thing that I said excepting some little
difference concerning the exercise of a man's gifts without an external call;
wherein he said he was not fully satisfied in every particular in his own
judgment, yet objecting otherwise no error in my judgment, he invited
Ensign Tailor (who was going away) to stay and hear what discourse we had,
and what he said to me, which was expressly to this purpose (both in matter and
expression) if not verbatim, and as orderly placed here, as spoken by him.

Sir, I find you a man Orthodox and right in your judgment, and I would to
God you could stay in this Town, it might be a great means to prevent errors
amongst this people, and so long as it is you with them, in Gods name meet as
often as you will, and I would to God all the Lords people were Prophets, and
though I am not in my own judgment wholly satisfied concerning preaching
without a call, yet finding you such a man as you are, if you are satisfied in
it your self, do as you will, and I shall begrutch the opportunities that I
am not with you; whereupon I desired him to be with us the next day, and to
assist us in our communion together; he said his time would not then permit,
but desired that we might another time have a meeting together of the
Christians in the Town, wherein each might freely declare himself in love to
other, for the uniting themselves faster together in the bond of love.

At one meeting I was present, wherein there was abundance of love professed,
and nothing more longed for by us then the performance of the promises then
made; afterward in my absence they had (it seems) another meeting or two,
where Master S. F. says they did all (at least in appearance) punctually
agree, by which parenthesis (compared with consequences) is suspected, that
some were present, who were something in appearance, toward the Christians in
the Town, that they were not in heart.

After my return from Weymouth we had a meeting on the fifth of September,
1645. wherein Master S. F. with the consent of his brethren, propounded a
Question, which was it seems the maine thing stickled at, and propounded by
them the first meeting, but deferred till then upon some considerations. The
Question was, viz.

Quest. Whether a man out of office, or without an outward call (having only
the name of a brother) may in a continued speech vent his own thoughts upon a
place of Scripture, before those to whom he stands no otherwise related? To
which, Master Bromhill, with the approbation of the rest of his brethren (to
wit, Master S. Foord, Master Welsteede, Master Throttle, and Master Hussy) in
the first place premised two things in dislike of the affirmative.

First, that the original of that opinion were Anabaptists, Socinians, etc.

Secondly, that the Parliament and State were against it, and then gave his
reasons for his judgment against it, to which the rest of his brethren agreed.
After all which, I being desired to speak my judgment in it, (I desiring, and
they all promising, that in case we did not fully agree in our judgment, we
should notwithstanding preserve a Christian love and unity together according
to their former profession.)

I began lovingly and freely to declare the Reasons of my dissent from their
judgment, which you shall have here set down with this relation, more orderly
then could there be permitted, but the same things exactly.

After the handling (as I may so call it) in respect of the absurdities and
passion there vented) of some parts and pieces of the arguments propounded, it
was not denied, that such a practice is discovered in the Scripture, but not in
such times as these, the Church being then in persecution: it being next
demanded what other rule we have to walk by then they had, (an injunction
being on them and us to take heed to the most sure word of the Prophets) and
where, in the Scripture, the warrantablenesse of that practice is prohibited:
with other passages that are too large, and not my intention here to
perticularize; Master S. F. answered that it might be lawful to do it in the
North, in Wales, or other dark places, where no Ministers are, but it ought
not to be done in a place where a Minister is, without his trial and
approbation, so not denying it to be lawful in it self, and presidented in
the Scripture, but altogether unlawful, without that consideration; then after
demanding whether Christians should neglect their duty (held forth in the
Scripture) in case a Minister is so resolute as not to yield to it, though a
good thing? I replied, that I needed not to plead the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of that, for I had taken away that objection by my practice; in
discoursing first with Master Bromhill, declaring his words (as before) in
approbation of me, that I was Orthodox, etc. (which words of his, it seems
they were ignorant of) at which the objection being clearly frustrated, they
stood all silent, looking upon Master Bromhill for his answer, who stood up, to
mine and others admiration, and called the Living God to witness, that he
never spoke it to me; to which I replied before the people (which I suppose to
be 200 at least) that I wondered he had the face to deny that which was so
publickely spoken, and before four or five witnesses, one of which (by name
Ensign Tailor, a very godly man, and well approved of by Master Bromhill
himself) presently came before all the people, and witnessed to the truth of
it, rehearsing the same words of Master Bromhill's approbation of me, at which
Master Bromhill's stood up hastily with a blushing countenance, and made no
other answer but this; What do you mean to do? do you mean to shame me
before the people? if you shame me I will shame some of you; to which the
witness replied thus; shame you Sir, or shame you not, you did say so, and I
wonder you can deny it, After which, (Objections being so clearly removed) I
immediately appealed to themselves whether they had any accusation against me
either in Judgment or practice; ingeniously declaring what our practice was,
and how our communion together was managed; which was not only evident to the
people themselves, (our meetings being as public as possible could be) 1.
That no place might be left for an objection of doing any thing that we had
cause to be ashamed of, and likewise a^ for the satisfaction of those, who
through reports and calumnies of malicious spirits, were fearful that we did
some strange and ridiculous things, yet taking the opportunity of a free
liberty (apprehended by our carriage) to behold our practices, and be amongst
us, they condemned their own ignorance and folly in beleiving those things,
for which there was not a seeming ground. I say that the truth of what I
declared concerning our meetings, and the manner of our communion together, was
not only evident to the people by beholding our practices, but also Master
Throttle, (one of the Ministers, sometimes a Captain in the Parliament
(service) acknowledged presently that he had the notes of what was said and
done, yet not endeavoring the least exception against it; All which being so,
that no room was left but for a resolved supremacy (as if it had been
designed to ensnare me) storms of passionate accusations began to arise, which
presently vanished, and were not able to last; Master Throttle affirmed, that I
was an Anabaprist (as he calls it) which was generally known where my self was
known, to be contrary to my judgment: and I had (not long before) discoursed
against it; nay I presume he knew me to be otherwise minded; and I asking his
reason for what he said, he answered, because I held something which they hold;
by which rule, every Christian in England may be proved a Papist, for holding
something that the Papists hold; presently upon that he affirmed boldly that I
had said (there present) that there is no Church in England, infomuch that I
was constrained to desire him ingeniously and modestly to give me satisfaction,
by acknowledging his error presently, for the people did generally restifie
the contrary; and not only so, but Master S. F. also witnessed with them
presently, the falsehood of his accusation. Then Master S. F. (more ingenuously)
endeavored to try me with an interrogatory, viz. whether I believed in my
conscience that Master Bromhill was the Pastor of that congregation? to which I
replied, that though I would not (by such a desired power) be put upon
interrogatories, and give my own judgment in it, yet I would tell him, what
Master Bromhills own expressions were to me of his judgment in it. (viz.)
That when I said to him sat the forenamed discourse, which we had at Major
William Skuts house) that I conceived he would not so own himself Pastor of
that place, as to take the whole Town as a Church, to whom he stood so
related: he (shrinking at it) said these words; no I confess I should be loath
to do so; and though no error could appear to be vented in our communion
together, our discourses and exercises being always spent to edification of
each other, in truths that are not disputable, which I suppose none will
contradict, or if occasion be, will not be ashamed of public view; yet Master
S.F. passionately affirmed, that such private preaching (as he termed it) was
the occasion of all the errors now abroad; to which I replied, that it cannot
be so, nor his assertion true; for before private meetings were so common as
now, we had so many errors broached in the Pulpits, as has caused 3 or 4
years sitting of the Synod to discover, and it is not therefore erroneous,
because private or public; but beretiques will broach and vent errors in
either; nay not only so, but that I had also heard errors preached in their
pulpit, for one came up and bad the people pray, repent, etc. and therein they
should do God a courtesy; another bad them plow up the fallow ground of their
hearts, and save God a labor, which I there told them, I hoped none of them
would justify, but rather acknowledge to be fundamental errors. The men that
delivered it were Master Hall (lately gone from thence to Chichester) and
Master Welstoede (the Lectarer) who was present at this discourse, and as none
in his behalf justified what he had thus delivered as Orthodox, so himself
denied not the words.

Then Master Bromhill began to speak in this manner to the people; You see
(but with which eye none could tell) Master Maddockes his arguments are
confuted, will not hold, etc. I replying thus; Gentlemen, it is not your votes
of a confutation will serve, but it must be done by Scripture, and you and I
are parties, not competent judges in the business; let those that know Jesus
Christ, and have heard what has been said, speak what weight they conceive
to be in your arguments or mine; Master S.F. presently began to go (as he calls
it) Parliament way, dividing the house (which was indeed a convention of all
sorts of people in the Town) desiring them that were for me to stand to one
side, and those that were for them to the other side, as if there were an
intention to make a division of sides in the Garrison; I then de^^ing the
people to stand still in their places, lovingly asked Master S.F. it they would
vote the Gospel by multitudes, or rather (as before propounded) ask their
judgments, of whom we had expetience to be godly (they only being meet to
judge) and that though (as I told him) I looked not on himself, and some
others of them, in that notion of the multitude (he taking offense at that
expression) yet I appealed to him, and the rest, what the Scripture speaks of
the major part of the world, which indeed by and by appeared; for when they did
notwithstanding divide, (which was it seems the hopeful cord to hold when the
rest were broken) and had made up their side, one of that side did pawn her
little faith by swearing aloud that there was a base come off, others railed,
that are not able to give a reason ( pro or con) for scarce any thing of their
profession. This is known to all and the Ministers were desired immediately to
observe it, so that this considered, I conceive all will judge it to be as much
as is any where heard of, that in nigh 250. there should be by his own
confession in his Letter,) nigh 40 knowing Christians; one in 5 is more then
one of a City, and two of a tribe; yet I suppose Master S. F. himself knows he
speaks the least of one side, and to the most on the other, which I shall let
pass, it being so invalid a consideration; and I shall appeal to Master S. F.
with all that were present, whether their judgment or mine were best approved
by the major part of those that spoke; or whether any thing considerable (in
their own apprehensions) was spoken in the behalf of their arguments, but by
one Master Sprint, (a godly man) who had, not three days before, spoke to me
contradictory in private, which I there before them, told him of, and he then
also professed himself unsettled in his judgment, but desiring information in
it, and has since come to me, declaring the grounded dissent supon serious
consideration) in his judgment to theirs, and that little which himself had
said in the behalf of it, adding, that he is so far convinced, that if
occasion were he would freely declare his judgment against it in public. And
for the rest which Master S. F. calls my Proselytes.

1. I shall leave him to reckon with Jesus Christ for calling his Disciples my
Proselytes, no small affront to their Lord and Master.

I suppose Master S. F. cannot name one, that did fall off from that measure
which they did before profess to have received, nor prove that the number of
those that did thus walk in communion together, are since abated one.

So when all this would not serve (the design being, it seems, either to
overpower or daunt us, though the righteous are bold as a Lion) Master
Throttle passionately threatened to take course with me another time, whereupon
I desired him presently, if he knew any error in my judgment to accuse me
with it before the people, that they might not be deceived, or if I had
offended against the Laws, to procure an examination presently by Master Mayor
(who was newly gone thence) or some other Justice of the peace, and I would not
refuse any punishment which the Law inflicts. It not being fair, so to pretend
an abortive accusation before so many people, as if something extraordinary
were amiss, and then (probably) acquit me in private before two or three
persons; to which he answered, that he would do it when the Governor came
home; and asking him if the weapons of his warfare were carnal, he answered,
that some were, resolving (it seems) that what could not be done by spiritual
weapons, should (if it could) by carnal.

Thus I have as briefly as I can conveniently (and I am sure as truly as can be
done) according to my friends desire, in some measure I hope satisfied those,
whose cares have all most tingled (and I can scarce blame them, when (consider
the artificial pretenses of those gifted tongues, that are so eminently
inspired by an ambitious spirit) at the very name of such persons, and such a
meeting, which never appeared to them, but in the monstrous shape of
maliciously disguised stories; and also fully answered the desires of those,
who have been eyewitnesses of my conversation, have had an account of my
Judgment, and yet could scarce choose but wonder, what those acclamations
meant, that have so often been made behind my back: nay some have diverse
times since heard a justification of my self and others to our faces published
by some of the Grandees of our accusers; yea the same party, have heard both
the desperate slanders and accusations behind my back, and after that, the
justification to my face, by one and the same mouth; what all this means, I
leave to ingenuous people to judge, hoping that it will not be offensive to any
judicious person, that being so put upon it (unless my own ^^lence should
speak the guiltless, guilty) he who has so long (contentedly) undergone the
calumnies and reproaches of ignorance and malice, (tho^ugh never justified face
to face) does now at last only relate the truth, which will upon examination
be found exactly as it is here reported.

So I conclude this, and in the next place crave leave to observe four or five
things in the honest Gentleman's letter, wherein I conceive will appear, some
contradictions or mistakes, whether weak or wilful, I will not determine.

1. He says in the beginning of his Letter, that they were much infected with
Antinomi^n errors; and yet after says, that when they came to discourse
together, they did all punctually agree.

2. He says they were won into error, by the preaching of grace and
justification; and adds, that they endeavored to win them out by the same
means; necessarily implying, that the doctrine of grace and justification
winnes both into error and truth; contrary to 2 Tit. 11.12.

3. He says they call grace and justification, and that only, the preaching
of Christ.

To which I must speak my knowledge, that if he means all the doctrine of
grace, as well the foundation, as the right building upon that foundation, then
its truth, but if he means that they account nothing but the laying of the
Foundation to be a preaching of Christ, then its a great injury to them. For
though I cannot say that I am in every circumstance of some of their
judgments, (which can I suppose scarcely be said of many Christians in any
part of the Kingdom, though agreeing in Fundamentals, nay and in the maine of
discipline also; which likewise we find frequent in the Scriptures, eating and
not cating, regarding and not regarding of a day, etc. yet I know that they
account the preaching of duties to be the preaching of Christ.

4. Observe his Parenthesis (that Master Pinnell might as well have charged the
Holy Ghost with weakness as Paul) which I leave to Master Pinnell and all
judicious Christians to consider of.

5. He says that because enough was not allowed to those bare revelations,
they had prepared an argument (as they conceived) without exception, viz. their
oracle, a supernumerary Sybill at least, whose ecstasies they much confided in;
To this I must needs say, that I conceive Master S. F. to exceed the bounds of
Christian modesty, in calling a distracted woman the Saints oracle (for such I
am confident he conceives them) and shall leave him to another reekoning with
their Lord and Master for that; and likewise my self beard the invitation of
Master S. F. and his brethren, to see the woman, wherein did appear only some
kind of admiration at her condition and expressions, with a desire of their
visit, hoping for assistance to her by it. After which its most probable that
some discourse was of Revelations, and what God could do, to the end that the
discoveries of Gods spirit to his people, (which spirit reveals all that the
Saints know of God, though never contradictory to his word) should not be so
reproached as too frequently it is. But to my knowledge it was so generally
conceived amongst them that she was distracted, that my undoubted confidence
is, she was no oracle of theirs (whose oracle I presume is the Spirit and word
of God) nor in their apprehensions a supernumerary Sybill; though a Christians
being in such a case, may possibly cause (not a little) admiration in others.
And for their laboring to conceal it by entreaties and pretenses; I appeal
to any, whether more appeared then a desire that ignorant people, and enemies
to Christ, and the Saints, might not if possible take occasion by her
distraction which was hoped to be but short, and now I hear is in a measure
past) as usually they do in such cases, to attribute the Saints afflictions to
profession of religion.

In the next and last place, I shall give a true account of the Question
propounded, and the arguments for the affirmative, which (upon their desire)
were propounded by me, with very little, if any addition, and as exactly as
possible in the same terms, with the maine objections there made against them.

Quest. Whether a man out of office (or without an outward call) having only
the name of a brother, may in a continued speech vent his own thoughts upon a
place of Scripture, before those to whom he stands no otherwise related.

Ans. Affirmative.

1. Its a duty required in the Scripture, without restriction to length of
time, or number of persons, 3 Heb. 13. exhort one another daily, whiles it is
called to day. 1 Pet. 4.10. every man, as a steward of the manifold grace of
God, which he has received, must minister the same to others, and the rule is,
as he has received the gift. 12 Romans 6. Having then gifts differing (according
to the grace that is given us) whether prophecy, let us prophecy, or an office,
let us wait upon our office, whereas there is a distinction made between an
office, and prophesying, so both must be done according to the proportion of
faith, as in the 7 verse.

More fully, 1 Cor. 14.1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 30, 31, 39. in the first verse is an
express command to endeavor after (for the Churches good) the gift of
prophecy, and in the third verse is an explication of prophecy, he that
prophecyeth speaks unto men to edification, exhortation, and comfort, and in
the fourth and fifth he wishes that they did also prophecy, that they might
edify the Church; So in the twelfth verse, seek that ye may excel to the
edifying of the Church; and in the twenty fourth and twenty fifth verses,
implying prophecy to be, the Saints speaking out the experiences of their own
souls, he says, that thereby the secrets of unbeleivers hearts are made
manifest; since as face answers face in the water, so answers the heart of
man to man; but farther in the twenty sixth verse, he says every one of them
has some gift or other, a Psalm a Doctrine, an interpretation (which is
supposed to be of Scripture) a revelation; all which he exhorts them to use in
the Church, and for the Churches edification. This he speaks to the whole
Church, verse 23. and in 30.31. verses; if any one (without exception) has any
thing for edification revealed to him, the Spirit of God is not to be quenched
in him, the first is to hold his peace, according to that in the 1 These. 5.19.
20. quench not the spirit, despise not prophesying; and then its added, for ye
may all prophecy one by one, that all may learn and all may be comforted;
which as it forbids the quenching of the spirit, so it answers an objection
that might be then, and is now made, against the speaking or prophesying of
inferior gifted Saints, and those that are looked upon as weak ones; in which
answer is contained two reasons why such should not behindered, 2. that all may
learn, (Gifts and Talents increasing by Usury 2^. Mat.) 2. that they might all
be comforted, by the growth and increase of gifts and graces in the Church, it
being the spiritual disposition in a Saint, to rejoice in the increase, that
is of God though in another.

Two Objections were made against the premises.

1. Object: That by Prophets is there meant only Ministers in Office; and that
the word (all) has reference only to Prophets so taken: To this the Answer is
three fold.

1. That were superfluous, for it was never questioned whether men in Official
authority might exercise their gifts.

2. If only those are there meant, then of necessity, there must be at least 5
or 6 prophets or ministers in Office, in one Church (for the Apostle speaks of
such a particular Church as might come together, (the whole Church) at one
time, and in one place) there might three speak; and there must be others,
(the rest) to judge, against which is the practice of the objections, who
rather would have one officer to two Churches, speaking at will, as an
infallible Orator, or divine Oracle, and none must judge, so that (if it be
so) they have at least changed the Ordinances etc.

3. The Apostle lays down the restriction 34, 35. verses to be only of
women, which must be in opposition to men, not to prophets, let your women
keep silence in the Churches, for it is not permitted unto them to speak,
implying clearly, that it is permitted to men, and no shame for any but women,
to speak in the Church.

2. Second Objection was, that this would breed a great confusion; for all to
speak.

Answ: 1. all cannot speak, because all are not gifted.

2. If all could, and were so gifted, yet the Ordinance of God breeds, no
confusion, or as the Holy Ghost answers the objection (32, 33. verses) God is
not the author of confusion, but of peace, as it all Churches of the Saints,
and the spirits of the Prophets are Subject to the Prophets that is (I
conceive) one will not confusedly contend with another, but freely give way,
(to those that are most able) for the Churches edification, according to that
rule in the 26. verse, Lor all things be done to edifying: Again, though all
have liberty and may (seasonably and without confusion) speak or prephecie, it
does not therefore necessarily follow, that every member must speak something
every time that the Church it come together; such a conceit were absurd, all
things must be done to edification.

Thus for answer to those two objections, then observe farther, that in the 37.
verse, the Apostle lays down this only as necessary, to a man that thinks
himself a prophet or Spiritual, let him (says he) acknowledge the things
which I write unto you to be the commandments of the Lord, let him be rightly
principled in the doctrine of the Gospel, and in the 39.40. verses he
concludes thus; wherefore brethren covet to prophecy, and forbid not to speak
with tongues; hinder not the exercise of any guilt which God has given to the
Church. Yet in the 40. verse, let all be done decently and in order; so that
all the gifts given to the Church may be used in the Church, without confusion,
the spirits of the Prophets being subject to the Prophets, verse 31, 32, 33.

But if any man (says he) be ignorant, let him be ignorant, verse 28.

2 Argument in drawn from the example of the Saints in Scripture, 8 Acts,
4.11. chapter 19.20. 8 chap. ^ verse, note that all were feattered except the
Apostles; and 4 verse, they that were scattered went every where preaching the
word. So 11 chap 19, 20. they that were scattered upon the persecution that
arose about Stephen (some were men of Ciprus, etc.) preached the Lord Jesus
both to Jews and Grecians. 21 verse, the hand of the Lord was with them, and a
great number believed and turned unto the Lord; and in 22 verse, when tidings
came to the Church at Jerusalem, they sent Barnah as to assist them* who when
he was come, and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them, etc.
he never questioned their call to it: so in the 1 Phil. 14, 15. Paul speaking
of his bonds, and the things happened to him, that they were fallen out to the
suttherance of the Gospel, he says in the 14 verse, that many of the brethren
in the Lord, (which is the denomination of every member) waning confident by
his bonds, were much more bold to speak the word without fear; and in 15, 16,
17, 18. some (he says) did preach Christ out of envy and strife, supposing to
add afflictions to his bonds, yet he rejoiced that Christ was preached by
them; though it be altogether improbable, that they would ordeine such to
office, whose intentions were to add afflictions to Paul's bonds; for we find
them very careful of ordeining any that were not soundly tried; and Paul
charging Timothy to lay hands suddenly on no man; not do I remember mention
or complaint made of any such Officers in any of the Churches at that time.

Another proof is in the 18 Acts, 24.5, 6, 7, 8. where we find that Apollos
was instructed only in the baptism of John therefore not (in the least
measure) probable to be called to office in the Church by any of the Apostles,
when so ignorant of the way of God and the Churches walkings, yet he taught
diligently the things of the Lord, and spoke boldly in the Synagogue, and after
(only) a more full information in the way of God, by Aquila and Priscilla, he
mightily helped those that had believed through grace, convincing the Jews,
and that publickely, that Jesus was Christ.

3 Argument is drawn from the nature of faith it self, which is, to speak
what it has seen and heard, so the Apostles Peper and John argued. 4 Acts,
20. being threatened by the Council and Priests, and charged to speak no more
in the name of the Lord Jesus, the reason which they gave why they must speak,
was not drawn from any official authority, but from the working nature of
faith in them; we cannot (say they) but speak the things which we have seen
and heard. And in the 116 Psalm. 10. I did believe, says David, therefore have
I spoken. So in the 66 Psalm. 26. being experienced in the mercy of God
delivering him; as he says in another place, the word did (...) in his breast,
so here, he could not reserve in his own breast what God had done for him;
Come hither ( says he) all ye that fear the Lord, and I will tell you what he
has done for my soul. So in the 32 Psalm. 4.5. I acknowledged my transgression
(says he) and thou forgavest my iniquity, well in the 5 verse. For this shall
every one that is godly pray unto thee in a time when thou may be found;
implying that he would not be silent, but spread Gods name of pardoning
iniquity, transgression, and sin, which he had experience of, as an
encouragement to others, to expect the same which he had found; so 40 Psalm. 8,
9, 10. and in the 23 Jer. the Lord condemns them as false Prophets, that
speak when he has not spoken to them.

4 Argument is drawn from the end of God in giving of gifts: 1 Cor. 12.7. The
Apostle having asserted in the fourth verse that the Saints gifts, of what
measure and kind soever of which he nominates diverse, 8, 9, 10, 11, verses, are
by the self same spirit of God; he concludes in the 7 verse, but the
manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal. And in the
5 Matthew, 14. Christ to the Disciples speaks of it, as the end of God in
making them lights, that they might shine, and as an absurdity to Reason it
self, a thing which no man will do, to put a light candle under a bushel,
where no man shall have the benefit of it.

5 Argument: it is no where (in Scripture) contradicted, but often encouraged
and commended; 11 Numbers, 26.7. Eldad and Medad prophesied in the camp;
Joshua complaining to Moses of their preaching; Envyest thou (says Moses) for
my sake, I would to God all the Lords people were Prophets.

Obj. Against this was objected by Master S. F. Moses wished that they were all
Prophets, but not that they should prophecy before they were Prophets.

Ans. 1. None can prophecy before they are gifted and enabled to it.

2. It cannot have reference to an outward call, but to that which was the
objection, viz. Eldad and Medad (who were not of the Preisthood) prophesying by
the spirit of God, and Moses wish had been very superfluous, if when they were
thus prophets, they should not prophecy.

Again in the 1 These. 5.19. quench not the spirit, despise not prophesying: so
that where the spirit of God is, it ought not to be quenched, nor prophesying
by it; but the spirit of God ^s in many Christians out of office, therefore not
to be quenched etc. and Christ reprooves the Disciples, for forbidding the man
that cast out Devils in his name, and tells them, that no man that does a
miracle in his name, can lightly speak evil of hime so likewise in the 1 Cor.
12. Chap. 1, 3, 4, 5, v.

The Apostle desiring that they might not be ignorant concerning spiritual
gifts, and speaking of the diversities of operations and administrations from
the same Lord, and the same Spirit, he says in the third verse, that he gives
this to be understood by the Saints, that no man speaking by the spirit of God,
can call Jesus accursed; the spirit of God cannot possibly dishonor Jesus
Christ, and no man can say, that Jesus is the Lord (no man can truly exalt
Jesus Christ) but by the Holy Ghost: so in the 12 of Matthew Christ having (by
the spirit of God) cast out a Devil, the Pharisees accused him (blaspheming the
spirit of God) of casting out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils,
now observe Christ's answer, in justification of any thing done by the spirit of
God, after his conviction of them by their own children, and the impossibility
of a house standing which is divided: against it self, he says in the 28
verse, if I cast out Devils by the spirit of God, then the Kingdom of God is
come unto you; and in the third verse he that is not with me is against me, he
that gathers not with me scatters abroad (now gathering must be by
exhortation etc. and the Scripture restraines not to method or form in it) and
farther its added in the next verse (as a check or reproof of those that
undervalue and slight the Spirit of God) wherefore I say unto you, all manner
of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy against
the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, and whosoever shall speak a word
against the son of man etc. intimating the wilful quenching and despising of
the spirit of God, to be a sin of the highest nature, or as Mark has it,
brings in danger of eternal damnation, because they said he has an unclean
spirit.

6. Argument: Those that have not improved their Talents by gathering with
Jesus Christ, have been sentenced and condemned.

Matthew, 23. he that had but one talent, and kept it (...) a napkin, is
accounted an unprofitable servant, and bound hand and foot and cast into outer
darkness, and in the aforenamed (...) of Matthew, he that gathers not
scatters abroad.

7. Argument: That which is especially authorized a Call in Scripture, is a
sending and enabling by the Spirit of God to Preach the word of God.

10. Romans 15. compare with the 23 Jeremiah.

10. R^^enes: how shall he preach except he be sent, it implies that if he be
sent he can Preach, yet many of those that have been sent with the outward call
pleaded for, could never Preach the glad tidings of the Gospel of Peace; which
sent ones are there spoken of, with reference to the Peoples believing upon the
discovery of the Gospells glad tidings by them: compare with it the 23 Ier. 21.
I have not (says God) sent these Prophets yet they ran, which sending is
expounded in the latter part of the verse, I have not spoken to them yet they
Prophesied. So in the 16. verse. they speak a vision of their own heart, and
not out of the mouth of the Lord saying they shall have peace etc.

Yet these in the 13 and 14 verses, were Prophets of Sanaria, and Prophets of
Jerusalem, (outwardly called) and in the (...) verse the Lord says expressly,
that if they had stood in his Counsel, and caused his people to hear his
words, a blessing should have attended their Ministry, they should have turned
them from their evil ways, and from the evil of their doings.

It was there affirmed by Mr S.F. that the Lords complaint here was, that they
were not sent with an outward call, which if they were not, then.

1. First it must be cleared, why they are called Prophets of Samaria, and
Prophets of Jerusalem.

2. Secondly it must necessarily follow, that God will bless the endeavors of
men, without an outward Call, which stand in his Council, and Prench his word,
and not the visior of their own hearts verse 22.

I have now as briefly as I can, related the truth, not so much (if at all) for
my own vindication, as for the Saints and the Gospells sake, both which have
been so slandered and undermined by pretended Friends.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Title page for Deserte read Diserti. Page 4. lin. 24. for dealts r.
deal. p 9. l. 11. for ^ame r. name. l. 15. for right. right. p. 11. l. ^. for
borther r. brother. p. 18: Add [2] to the beginning of l. 25. p. 19. l. ^2.
for never r. ever. p. 22. l. 15. for Christians r. Christian.

There be many mistakes in stops and points* which, being but Punctil^^^^'s of
Grammar, and servants to wait upon an Emphasis in Oratory, I have left (by
reason of my absence from the Press) to exercise thy judgment and charity.


