A LETTER Of great Consequence; Sent by the Honorable, Robert Lord Monro, out
of the Kingdom of IRELAND, To the Honorable, The Committee for the Irish
affairs in ENGLAND, Concerning the state of the Rebellion there.

Together with the Relation of a great Victory he obtained, and of his taking
the Earl of Antrim, about whom was found diverse Papers, which discovered a
dangerous PLOT Against the Protestants in all His Majesty's Dominions, their
Plot being set down by consent of the QUEENS Majesty, for the Ruin of
Religion, and overthrow of His Majesty's three Kingdoms.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith printed
and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Printed for Edw. Husbands. July 8. 1643.

A Letter of great consequence, sent by the Honorable, Robert Lord Monro, out
of the Kingdom of Jreland, to the Honorable, the Committee for the Jrish
affairs in England, concerning the state of the Rebellion there.
Right Honorable;
EXpect nothing from your Honors real and faithful Servant in this adverse
time, but what brings comfort; In my last Expedition against the Rebels,
occasioned by sudden Intelligence, I went forth with two thousand Foot, and
three hundred Horse, being provided for ten days at no greater allowance then
seven Ounces of Meal a day for a Soldier, our scarcity being so great, that
for want of Victuals and Shoes we were unable to do the service we wish, or
your Honors expect from us; Nevertheless our fortune was such, that with this
small party, without Canon, for want of carriage Horses, we beat Owen Maccart
Oneale, Sir Philome Oneale, and Owen Maccart the General his son, being all
joined together with their Forces, and forced them to return upon Charlemount,
after quitting the Generals house to be spoiled and burnt by us, with the
whole houses in Lochgall, being the best Plantation in Vlster, and straitest
for defense of the Rebels: At the same time Colonel Hoome, with a party of
five hundred men, was busied in beleaguering the Castle of Newcastle; the
receipt of all the Intelligence comes from England to the Rebels in Vlster,
where it was my good fortune, in time of Treaty there, to trust a Barque come
from the Isle of Man, with that treacherous Papist the Earl of Antrim, whose
Brother Alexander was sent before to the Queens Majesty from York, to make way
for the Earl, in negotiating betwixt Her Majesty's Army in the North of
England, and the Papists on the borders of Scotland, in the Isles of Scotland
and the North parts thereof, and with the Rebels in Ireland; their Plot being
set down by the Queens Majesty's consent, for the ruin of Religion, and
overthrow of His Majesty's loyal Subjects in all the three Dominions, as
evidently does appear by the Letters, Characters, Passes and Papers found with
the Earl, directed by me to the Council of Scotland and the General. It
becomes me, as the servant of the Public, entrusted with your Commission
under the Great Seal of England, to inform truly your Honors of the great
prejudice, the Cause in hand suffers by your Honors neglect of this Army being
unable to do service as might be expected from them, if they received the half
of the Allowance your Soldiers receive at Dublin, and had Allowance for some
Horses for Carriage; in my opinion, in six weeks time we could settle Garrisons
in Vlster, and thereafter oversway your Enemies elsewhere, in any part within
His Majesty's Dominions, where your Enemies prevailed most.

Therefore my weak opinion is, this Army be not neglected wherein consists so
much of your peace and safety, having no friends you can repose in o more then
in us, who is desirous to see Religion flourish, Rebels subjected to
Obedience, and His Majesty's Throne established, in despite of Papists, and of
wicked Council mis-leading His Majesty to the ruin of His Dominions, who
could be the happiest Prince in the World if the Lord could move his heart to
harken to the counsel of those which shed their blood for his honor.

The Earl of ANTRIM shall God willing be kept close in the Castle of
Carrickfergus, till I be acquainted from your Honors concerning him, what
course shall be taken with him; and the Traitor conveyed him last away is to
be executed, since we can extort no discovery from him then is contained in
the Papers sent to SCOTLAND: So recommending your Honors, and your weighty
Affairs to the Direction and Protection of the Almighty, desirous to hear
from you, I remain

Your most humble, truly affectionate, and real Servant, Robert Monro,
General Major.
Carickfergus, the 23. of May, 1643.
To the Right Honorable; My very noble Friends, these on the Jrish Committee of
the Parliament of England, present these; With due respects.
FINIS.

