Jeremias Redivivus: OR, AN ELEGIACALL LAMENTATION ON The Death of our ENGLISH
JOSIAS, CHARLES the FIRST, King of Great Britain, etc.

Publicly Murdered by His Calvino-Judaicall SUBJECTS.

said to by written by Walther Mountacute

-- Quis talia fando
Myrmidonum Dolopumve aut duri miles Vlyssis
Temperet a lachrymis? --
may. 30 Printed in the Year, 1649.

AN ELEGY Upon KING CHARLES the First, Murdered publicly by His Subjects.
WEre not my Faith boy'd up by sacred blood,
It might be drowned in this prodigious flood;
Which reasons highest ground does so exceed,
It leaves my Soul no Anch'rage, but my Creed;
Where my Faith resting on the Original,
Supports it felf in this the Copies fall;
So while my faith floats on that Bloody wood,
My reasons cast away in this Red flood,
Which never o'reflowes us all: Those showers past
Made but Land-flouds, which did some valleys wast;
This stroke has cut the only neck of land,
Which beetween us, and this Red Sea did stand,
That covers now our world, which cursed lies
At once with two of Aegypts prodigies;
Over cast with darkness, and with blood o'rerun,
And justly, since our hearts have theirs outdone;
The inchanter led' them to a less known ill,
To act his sin, then 'twas their King to kill:
Which crime has widdowed our whole Nation,
Voided all Forms, left but privation
In Church and State; inverting every right;
Brought in Hels State, of fire without light:
No wonder then, if all good eyes look red,
Washing their Loyal hearts from blood so shed;
The which deserves, each pore should turn an eye,
To weep out, even a bloody Agony.
Let naught then pass for Music, but sad cries;
For Beauty, blood-les cheeks, and bloud-shot eyes.
All colors soil, but black; all odours have
Ill sent, but Myrrh, incensed upon this Grave:
It notes a Jew, not to believe us much
The cleaner made, by a Religious touch
Of this Dead Body; whom to judge to die
Seems the Judicial impiety.
To kill the King, the Spirit Legion paints
His rage with Law, the Temple and the Saints:
But the truth is, He feared, and did repine,
To be cast out, and back into the Swine;
And the case holds, in that the Spirit bends
His malice in this Act, against his ends:
For it is like, the sooner he will be sent
Out of that body, He would still torment:
Let Christians then use otherwise this blood,
Detest the Act, yet turn it to their good;
Thinking how like a King of death He dies;
We easily may the world and death despise:
Death had no sting for Him, and its sharp arm,
Only of all the troop, meant Him no harm.
And so He looked upon the Axe, as one
VVeapon yet left, to guard Him to His Throne;
In His great Name, then may His Subjects cry,
Death thou art swallowed up in Victory;
If this our loss a comfort can admit,
It Is that his narrowed Crown was grown unfit
For his enlarged Head, since his distress
Had greatned this, as it made that the less;
His Crown was fallen unto too low a thing
For Him, who was become so great a King;
So the same hands enthroned him in that Crown
They had exalted from him, not pulled down.
And thus Gods Truth by the^ has rendered more,
Then ere men's falsehood promised to restore;
Which, since by death alone, he could attain,
Was yet exempt from weakness, and from pain;
Death was enjoined by God, to touch a part,
Might make His passage quick, never move His heart
Which even expiring, was so far fro^death,
It seemed but to command away His breath.
And thus His Soul, of this her triumph proud,
Broke, like a flash of lightning, through the cloud
Of flesh and blood; and from the highest line
Of humane virtue, passed to be Divine:
Nor is it much less His virtues to relate,
Then the high glories of His present state;
Since both then pass all Acts, but of belief;
Silence may praise the one, the other grief.
And since, upon the Diamond, no less
Then Diamonds, will serve us to impresse:
I Will only wish, that for His Elegy,
This our Josias, had a Jeremie.
FINIS.

