A Brief DISCOURSE ABOUT BAPTISM.

By THOMAS MOORE, For his Friends.

LONDON, Printed by Gar: Dawson, for Tho: Brewster and G: Moule at the Sign of
the three Bibles under Mildreds Church in the Poultry. 1649.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, whoever thou art, that take so much pains, as to peruse
these ensuing lines; I pray thee take not any thing in it, as leading to
contention, it being writ to avoid it, and with a desire to move all to union
in minding that one Baptism, which is Baptism indeed, and so to a right
understanding, estimate, and use of all the mediums, or means of it, by which
it is effected; and whereas three of them are of continual, and frequent
exercise, in the acting, receipt, and usefulness, and one of them but once
done, or acted, and the use after in minding of it; And that being it, about
which so much difference is fallen out among Brethren; I having before writ a
Treatise something large about it, which has been in the hands of many
friends. In which also I discoursed of the New Testament, whose in-comming made
the first old, and decayed; The unacquaintednesse wherewith, as also of the
extent, and virtue, of the Death, and Ransom of Christ, I conceive to be the
chief cause of manies miscarriage in conception of the right use of the
Ordinance of baptizing with water, and there also I gave ground of answer for
all the Objections I had met with in books, and for that cause, and because
diverse have learnedly answered their Arguments, I have forborne in this all such
reasoning, and have only applied my self to the Scripture, the Tennor of the
Gospel, and Commission given by Jesus Christ, and touched upon the answer, or
faulting of nothing, but what mine ears have heard from diverse, and in diverse
places, yea, even from such as I love and reverence, or else of that I have in
manuscripts sent to my self by some others of the same outward practice; And in
this I have avoided to go in a contentious way; and as in love, and with desire
to prevent evil I have writ, so I leave it to be tried by the Scripture;
Consider it so, and the Lord give us understanding in all things.

So prays thy Well willer in Jesus Christ, THO. MOORE.
Wisbich Sept. 5. Anno 1649.
October. 15. 1649.

Imprimatur, JOHN DOWNAME.

Of Baptism commended since the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, in the
Evangelical and Apostolical Writings, as that which has great privileges in
it; and promises to it.
TWo things are meet to be considered 1. What this Baptism is? 2. What the
medium, or by which effected?


1. What this Baptism is?

It is a Baptizing into Jesus Christ, and so into his Death, that one patrake
of his resurrection, through the faith of the operation of God, Romans 6.3, 4.
Gal. 3.27. Col. 2.12.

And for the clearing of this to be Baptism indeed, and that it may more fully
appear what it is, to be baptized into Jesus Christ: four things are
considerable, viz. 1. What Baptizing into Jesus Christ signifies in Scripture
language? 2. What this Baptism comprehends in it according to Scripture? 3.
Why, or upon what occasion this name Baptism is put upon this work of God, and
how long it has been so called? 4. That this gracious work of God, in, and
upon a man, is the Baptism indeed, and that which has the special privileges
in, and promises of life to it.


1. For the first, It apeareth by the Scripture, that Baptizing into Jesus
Christ signifies; A bringing into the knowledge, belief, and acknowledgement
of Jesus Christ, according to that great name of him set forth in the Gospel;
That one may in that belief, and acknowledgement of Jesus to be the Christ, and
of that great name of his be humbled in himself, and comforted in, and renewed
by Christ, and so washed, or cleansed, and sanctified, and justified in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God; and so made one in
Christ, and conformed to him, and when this is done, a man is baptized indeed;
and though God in sending Gospel, and Spirit enlightening, convincing, and
bringing to an acknowledgment of Jesus to be the Christ, and make profession of
him; may be truly said to have baptized men unto Christ; yet if they have not
yielded to the operations of his grace, so as that it come for, be not
effected; They may also be truly said not to be baptized into Jesus Christ; as
of old, when God gave his Word, Oracle and statutes, with such presence of his
Spirit, as he made the scum to come aloft; he is said to have purged them, yet
they not yielding up to his will and operations, so as to have the scum cast
off, they are said not to be purged, Ezekiel. 24.13. And this the Apostle would
not have us ignorant of, but gives us to learn thus much from our types that
were, and are recorded for our instruction: namely, That 1 Cor. 10.1.2. All our
Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea; and were all
baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the Sea. Moses was the man that God
had appointed to be their Deliverer, Leader, Ruler, Prophet, And he by whom he
would deliver the Law, or first Testament to them, and he also to be the
Mediator of that Testament. But the people did not at first understand and
acknowledge Moses to be such a one; When God first put it in Moses heart to
visit his Brethren, and that he slew the Egyptian that wronged an Israelite;
Moses supposed, They would have understood this, but they did not understand,
but refused him; yet God did afterward send him to them to be a Ruler and
Deliverer, Acts 7.23. 25-35. And when he did come with the Lords Message to
them, and showed some sign among them; They believed, and bowed their heads,
and worshipped, Exodus 3. and 4.31. But when they came under some trial by sore
affliction, they altered their minds, and chod Moses and Aaron, as having done
them great wrong, Exodus 5.20.21. And though by the mighty works of God, they
were overcome to keep the Passover, and follow Moses out of Egypt, and had
the cloud going before them; yet it appears they were not brought to a right
understanding and acknowledgment of Moses; and that appears not only by their
fears, when Pharaoh and the Egyptians pursued them, but by their words,
faulting Moses, and declaring what had been their own saying to him in Egypt,
Exo. 14.10.11.12. But when Moses from God quieted them, and that God divided
the Sea for them, and put his cloud betwixt them and the Egyptians, and had his
people safely through the Sea to the shore, and gave them to see the Egyptians
drowned in the same sea; Then they feared the Lord, and believed the Lord, and
his servant Moses, Exodus 14.31. And so from that time forward Moses was
acknowledged a man of God, though only such as yielded up to the mind of God
made known by him, were the Israel of God indeed, Exodus 19.4, 8. And this work
is since baptising, in use called a baptising unto Moses; and so gives us to
understand; That baptising into Christ signifies; A bringing into such an
acknowledgement of him, as at first said. Namely, 1. To bring in to the
understanding, and acknowledgement of Jesus to be the Christ, the Son of God,
the Gift of God, the man, the Mediator, That having once dyed for our sins, and
risen for our justification, and offered himself a sacrifice to God; has
obtained redemption, and received spirit to send forth and so is the
propitiation for the sins of the whole world; the Savior of the world; the
Prophet and Mediator of the new Testament, Joh. 4.10, 42. and 6.62, 69. 1 John
5.1, 19, 20. 2. In that understanding and acknowledgement of Jesus Christ to
cleave to him, in faith and love, and so to depend on him, and yield to him,
for teaching, guidance, comfort, preservation, etc. Joh. 6.68, 69. 1 Pet. 1.
ver. 21. 3. In that understanding of, and adhering to Christ, to be wrought on
to more oneness with, and conformity to him, and imitation of him, 2 Cor.
3.3.18. Ephesians. 5.1, 2. And so is this baptising, a washing with, or plunging,
or putting into Christ, and so into union, and fellowship with Christ, yea, and
with the Members of Christ, Romans 6.3, 4 Gal. 3.27. Col 2.12. with 1 Cor. 12.13.
So that in this baptising into Christ, it is plain by Scripture: There is,


First, An ingrafting, or putting into Christ by spiritual evidence, and
power, effecting faith in, and love to Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.21. 1 Corinthians. 1.
verse 30.

Secondly. A washing with his blood, or in his love commended through the blood
of Christ, in which he washes, and cleanses from their sins Rev. 1.5. Zach.
13.1. Rom 5.8, 10. Tit. 3.4, 5 And that both in respect of the guilt of sin in
conscience, Act. 10 43. Romans 5.1. 1 Cor. 6.11. as also in respect of the
corrupt disposition in nature, Ephesians. 5.26 Tit. 3.4, 5, 6.

Thirdly, A sprinkling with the virtue of his blood, 1 Pet. 1.2. Heb 12 24. and
that both in respect of speaking peace, and freeing from the law of sin, and
death, Heb. 12 24. Romans 7.4, 5. and 8.2. as also of sealing to the day of
redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. And all this is contained in being baptized into
Christ. Compare 1 Cor, 10.1, 2. with Rom 6.3.

2 For the second thing. What this Baptism comprehends in it; and it
appears by that already said: That it contains in it, An ingrafting into
Christ, and Union with him, and Conformity to him: And so a Being clothed with
him, and under his Government and protection, Romans 6.3. Gal. 3.27. And so it is
evident that it comprehends in it 1 All that Circumcision did formerly, for
testifying the faith, or righteousness of God; for admission into the family
of Christ, for instructing to spiritual Circumcision, and spiritual
Circumcision it self, with all Son-like privileges appertaining thereto: And
hence the Apostles affirming, beleivers complete in Christ, takes away all that
might be objected for want of Circumcision, saying; In whom ye are also
circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body
of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ, buried with him in
Baptism, wherein also you are rison, etc. Col. 2.10, 11, 12. with Phil.
3.3.10. 2. The whole scope of the Commission given by Jesus Christ to the
Apostles for discipling with word and water; for admission into the family of
Christ in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost;
instructing in the ways of God, and his presence with them therein, as
appears by comparing Mat. 28.19, 20. with Mark 16.15.16. and Luke 24.45, 46,
47, and Act. 26, 17, 18 22, 23. 3. The new Birth it self, that is from above
of water and the spirit, it being the same mentioned in Baptism, Romans 6.3, 4.
Gal. 3.27. and Col. 2.12, 13, 14. That is set forth, John 3.3.5. Romans 5.8.10.
Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. 4. It contains in it all that was typed out in the washings,
cleansings, and purifyings in the Law, by which men were fitted to come to, and
partake of the holy things, as Temple, Altar, Sacrifices, etc. Levit. 15.31.
and 22.6. 2 Cor. 30.17.18. So in this baptizing or washing, are men made meet
to enter the Kingdom, etc. Ioh. 3.3.5. Col. 3.12.13. and 2.12.14. 1 Cor.
6.10.11. 5. It contains in it the Sealing, or marking to the day of
Redemption. which was typed in that sprinkling, Exodus 12.7.13. Ezekiel 9.4. Ephesians.
4.30. 6. It contains in it that very work in discovery of emptiness and
vanity, reproving vain confidences, leading to self-denial, and dying to
earthly and fleshly desires, conteuts etc. all by displaying the excellencies
of Christ; So that in yielding up thereto, men are preserved, raised and
quickened: And in offense taking thereat, and rebelling ther-against, men
perish; and in passing through this work, men come into Christ, and are
baptized into him, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. And such as stumble and rebel, are
overthrown, as the Egyptians in the Sea, Pro. 1.22, 23, 24. Ezekiel. 24.9.13 Joh
3.19, 20, 21. Phil. 3.3.9.10. Rom 6.3 4. 7. It has in it that hope that will
(as Noah's Ark) carry above all waters in temptations and troubles, 1 Pet. 3.22.
Mar. 16.16.


In a word, to be baptized into Christ, is to be made in him, and partaker of
the benefit of his death and resurrection, and conformed to him, so as one be
indeed dead to sin, self, world, and alive to God through Jesus Christ; And
so Baptism, is indeed that forementioned work of Grace in a Beleiver,
comprehending all that aforesaid.

3 For the third thing. Why, or upon what occasion, this name Baptism is put
upon this work of God, and how long it has been so called.

And this appears in Scripture to be from an outward ordinance given by God
for baptizing with water in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, as a testimony
of the truth of the Gospel preached, and an instruction to submission to
Christ, confessing of him, and waiting for spiritual baptizing into Christ
from him: And since that ordinance given, the work of grace in the heart has
been so called. In the beginning, the work of God in the heart was called
Faith, or a seeing the promises afar off, and being persuaded, and embracing
them, and confessing th^mselves strangers, Heb. 11.1, 2.6.13. And these withal
under their tuition, and joined with them in profession, were called sons of
God, Genesis 6 2.4 And those that were upright, or through amongst them, were
called righteous, or just, Heb. 11.2 4. 2 Pet. 2.7. but not Israel. But after
Jacob had with weeping, and supplication prevailed with God, and was by him
called Israel, and a people come forth of him, or by proseliting brought in to
him, Hos. 12.4. Gen 32.28. Then all of that Family were called Israel,
Israelites, and the house of Israel; Though they were also still called the
sons of God, them and theirs; yet then, those, and only those that were
borne of the promise, were the Israel of God, and Israelites indeed. Romans
9.6.8. Joh. 1.47. And yet these also called just, and righteous still also; So
also, the work of God in the heart, was never called Circumcision till after
God had given an ordinance of Circumcision to Abraham, and that it was
administered on that Family, to testify the truth of the faith Abraham taught,
to admit them into his Family, and to instruct them to attend on God, to
circumcise their hearts, to love him, Genesis 17. Deuteronomy. 10.16. and 30.2 6. Yet
then the people of Israel, they and all theirs, were also called circumcision,
Romans 15.8. Though the work of grace in the heart, to which the ordinance
instructed was Circumcision indeed, and from thence so called, Romans 2.28, 29.
So since Jesus Christ has suffered in the flesh, and overcome death, and
carried our nature into heaven, remaining there, the Christ, the great High
Priest, Prophet, and King, who will one day come again, and take his great
Power and Reign, now making those that believe on him spiritual Priests, etc.
Those that believe on him have been called Christians, Acts 11.26. and 26.28. 1
Pet. 4.16. Not but they are also called the Sons of God, and Israel, and Gods
people still; but now also Christians: And all outwardly baptized in, and
professing the name of Christ, are so called; But those that are borne a new of
water and the spirit, that believe with the heart unto righteousness, these
are the Christians indeed, the children of the promise, the seed of Abraham,
the Israel of God indeed, Joh. 3.3.5. Romans 9.8. Gal. 3.26.29. and 6.16. Even so
since the ordinance of baptizing with water in the name of the Lord Jesus was
in use, the work of Grace in the heart is called Baptism, Romans 6.3, 4, 5. Col
2.12, 13, 14. Gal. 3.26, 27. Not but that its still also called Faith, new
Birth, Circumcision, etc. but its also called Baptism.

4 For the fourth thing. That this gracious work of God in the heart, this
inward and spiritual Baptism, though it has had its denomination from the
use of the outwand Baptizing; yet is this inward and spiritual work the
Baptism indeed, that which profits, which has the privileges in it, and
promises to it, as appears plainly and plentifully in the Scriptures, 1 By
the Apostles Testimony of Circumcision, which was an ordinance given of God to
Abraham when he made the ever lasting Covenant with him, and gave him the
Gospel to preach, as Baptism given of Christ to the Apostles, when he
commanded them to preach the Gospel to all the world: And the Apostle speaking
of such Jews as were circumcised when Circumcision was in force, and
profitable to the keepers of the Law, yet he says, Romans 2.28, 29. He is not a
Jew that is one outwardly; neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the
flesh; But he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the
heart in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of
God. And the same may be said of Baptism. For, 2. Whereas Baptizing with water
in the name of the Lord Jesus, puts away the filth of the flesh, or outward
slain of Gentilisme, as outward Circumcision did put away the reproach of
Egypt, Josh. 5.8 9 The Apostle says plainly of it, 1 Pet. 3.21. Baptism does
also now save us (not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but) the answer
of a good conscience toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Agreeing
with that mentioned, Col. 2.12. which is wrought by the faith of the operation
of God. 3. It appears also, That this spiritual baptism was the end of the
Apostles preaching Gospel, and calling on their hearers to be baptized in the
name of the Lord Jesus; both in that they counsel to it for the remission of
sins, and that they might in believing on Christ receive remission of sins, and
also the gift of the Holy Ghost. As likewise in that, saying at one time, Acts
2.38. Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins. He says the same at another time in these
words, Acts 3.19 Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, etc. 4. It yet further appears in that the Apostle writing to the
Churches, of whom there is no doubt, or question made, but they were all
baptized with water in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and none blamed for
want of that; yet the Apostle speaks to them with a caution and distinction,
Romans 6.3. Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ,
were baptized into his death, etc. And again, Gal. 3.27. For as many of you as
have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Which as it leaves a
jealousy of some, so it evidenceth; All that by faith are not become the sons
of God, and be not baptized into the death of Jesus Christ, and risen with him
through the faith of the operation of God, and have so put on Christ, They have
not yet been baptized into Christ, and so have not the baptism, which is the
Baptism indeed, and so set out by the Apostle, Romans 6.3, 4, 5. Gal. 3.26, 27,
29. Col. 2.10.11, 12, 13, 14. 5. It yet further appears in that as the
Apostles have set forth this baptism to be into Christ, and that into the
Death of Christ, for participation of the virtue of his Resurrection, and this
by the faith of the operation of God, so as a man is become dead with Christ to
the world, etc. and risen with Christ, dead to sin, and alive to God; and so
one with Christ, and in him, that he is one with the Members of Christ,
baptized by one spirit into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13. Even so has the Apostle
plainly affirmed; That as there is one Body, and one Spirit, as we are called
in one hope of our calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; He makes no more
kinds of Baptism, then of Faith, yea then of God, and Christ: And thus we see
what Baptism is, and that there is but one Baptism, though the things, or
mediums, are ways by which it is effected, are many, and in that sense may be
called Baptismes, of which I will treat a little now; to show,


2. What the Mediums, Means, or things used in this Baptism, and by which it
is effected: are,

These appear to be four, 1. The Word. 2, Water. 3. The Holy Spirit. 4.
Afflictions.

1. The word or Gospel, which sets forth Jesus Christ, and him crucified, Gal
3.1. In opening of which, Jesus Christ is lift up, and set forth as the Son of
God, and the Son of man that has dyed for our sins, and is risen for our
justification, and has received Spirit to send forth, and is the propitiation
for our sins, the Savior of the world, That Whosoever believes in him may not
perish, but have everlasting lise, Joh. 3 14 15, 16 17. In this also is the
Name of God, even of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost displayed,
Psalm. 138.2. Deuteronomy 32.2.3. And this is the prime, or chief Ministerial way of
baptizing into Christ. As appears plainly in these things,

First, That the Commission given, Matthew. 28.19, 20, where Baptizing is given
as the medium of Discipling, and there only put in that name; in all other
places it is given in these terms, of preaching the Gosp l, Mark. 16.15. and
declaring his Name to such an end (as the effecting of that which is Baptism
indeed,) Acts 9.15. and 18 17, 18, 22, 23.

Secondly, When Jesus Christ opened the understanding of his Disciples, to
understand the things in the Scripture that concerned himself, Luk 24.27.44.45.
which they were to declare Act. 26.27.18, 22, 23. Was not then this, That which
they were helped to understand, that Thus it is written, and Thus it behoved
Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day, and so to enter into
his glory, Luke 24, 45, 46.25.26 And that repentance, and remission of sins
should be preached in his name among all Nations; and this expressly said to
be, that which Christ and his Apostles were witnesses of, Luke 24.47, 48. And
to which witnessing the promise of the Spirit is given, Luke 24.49. and so the
same that is in that Commission, Matthew 28. verse 19, 20.

Thirdly, The Apostles did perform the Commission given them, in so preaching
Christ, and repentance, and remission of sins in his name, Acts 2. and 3. and
8. and 10. and 13.38, 46. yea, not only when they baptized with water, but also
when they did not that themselves, 1 Cor. 1.14, 17.

Fourthly, As Jesus Christ set forth in the Gospel, is the Fountain set forth
to wash in for sin and uncleanness, Zach. 13.1. And the love of God extended
in the gift of him, and through his bleed is pure water, John 3.5.16. Rev. 5.
with Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. And the streams of spirit and grace, proceeding from him
is as a river and streams of pure water, Psalm. 46 4, 5. Rev. 22.1, 2. even so
the Word and Doctrine of the Gospel is compared to water, Deuteronomy. 32 1, 2, 3.
Isa. 48.1, 2. and 55.1. and by that, men pressed to wash, and cleanse their
hearts, and ways, Isa. 1.16, 17. Jer. 4.14. Yea, it being put to the question,
Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? Its answered, Psalm. 119.9, By
taking heed thereto, according to thy word; so that the Word, or Gospel, to be
one mean of baptising, is clearly held forth in the Scripture, and Commission
given by Christ.

If any object and say, But this has not been called baptising.

I answer, It was the same thing for washing and cleansing first, but not so
called, till the ordinance of baptising with water was given from Heaven, and
so God is nurtering the people to the acknowledgement of Moses, Exodus 14. was
never called Baptising them unto Moses; but being the same business in effect,
and for such an end, since the ordinance of baptising with water was given,
even that work is called baptising, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. But yet to be plainer.

Fifthly, The Doctrine of the Gospel, with the teaching thereof is encluded in
that word Baptism, and also called. Baptism in the writings of the
Evangelists; so Mark 1.3. John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the
Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins; And Luke 3.2, 3. The Word of
God came unto John the Son of Zacharias in the wilderness, and he came into
all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins. It is plain to such as shut not their eyes of purpose to
cavil, That the word of the Lord which came to John; that he received and that
he preached, and what that was is laid open both in the prophecy of him, Isa.
49.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 etc. and both Prophecy and explication of that former
Prophecy by his father, Luke 1.76, 79. and also in the affirming of his own
performance, Math. 3.1, 2. In those days came John the baptist preaching in
the wilderness of Judea, and saying, repent ye for the Kingdom of Heaven is
at hand. Search the places, and all the Scriptures speaking of this business,
and is it not plain, that he declared Christ to be come in the flesh, to be the
Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world; and so that the Kingdom of
God was nigh; and he (that is John) was not the Christ; but that he the Christ
was to come after him in ministration, and on that ground exhorted them to
repentance, and to believe on him that should come after him, in whom they
should receive forgiveness, etc. And then baptising with water, as a testimony
of the truth of his Doctrine, he did after preach, and call for amendment, and
fruits meet for repentance, promising; That he that came after him, should
baptize with the holy Ghost, and with fire, and purge his floor, etc. Though
the Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and Mediation of Christ, he did not so
fully set forth, as it is since set forth, nor set forth the person of Christ,
who, and which man he was, till Jesus was baptized, and John's own Ministration
toward an end, Mat. 3. Mark 1. Luke 3. John 1. and 3. Acts 13.24.25. And this
his preaching the Gospel, and baptising with water was called his baptism,
and his preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins: And so
when our Savior Christ did question the chief Priests, and Elders of the
Jews, whence the baptism of John was? They reasoned with themselves, saying,
If we shall say from Heaven, he will say unto us, why did you not then believe
him? Mat. 21.25. which believing must needs have reference to his Doctrine: And
thus Paul affirming John verily to have baptized with the baptism of
repentance, he describes it in both the parts; The Doctrine thus, saying unto
the people, that they should believe on him that should come after him, that
is, on Christ Jesus, and his baptising with water thus, and when they (that is
the people) heard this; they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, Acts
19.4, 5. And so it is said of Apollos that was mighty in the Scriptures, Acts
18.25. This man was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent in
Spirit, he spoke, and taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only
the Baptism of John; and surely that he spoke and taught, was that which he
knew, even the Baptism of John; and Aquilla and Prescilla, expounding to him
the way of God more perfectly, does evince, that they showed him the way of the
Lord, as it is more fully revealed since the ascenscion of Christ by his
Spirit, in the Doctrine of the Gospel, then it was in the baptism, or
preaching-Gospel before by John; so that it all the way appears, that since
the ordinance of baptising with water was given from heaven, the name of
baptism was put on the preaching the Doctrine of the Gospel. Yea surely
however the word baptizing, is often used for baptizing with elementary water in
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, yet its hard for any to show, and prove,
that the word Baptism in any place does not enclude also baptizing or
instructing with the word, which is likewise a spiritual water; Was not their
coming to his Baptism, a coming to hear, and be instructed by him, as well
as to be baptized with elementary water? Math. 3.7. And was not their being
baptized with the Baptism of John, a being instructed by him, as well as being
baptized with elementary water, how else came that fruit of it, that in hearing
Christ they justified God? Luke 7.29. But to proceed a little farther;

Sixthly, One end and efficacy of Baptism, yea the end is affirmed to be
wrought by the Word, or Doctrine of the Gospel, (as the instrument, and
medium) displaying the name of the Lord; and so our Savior said to his
Disciples, John 15.3. Ye are clean through the word that I have spoken to you;
And so the Apostle says to believers, 1 Cor. 6.11. Ye are washed, ye are
sanctified, ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit
of our God. And is not the setting forth Christ in Gospel preaching affirmed
to be for such ends, Acts 3.26. and 14.15. and 17.30, 31. and 26.17, 18, 22,
23. So that its clear; That the Word or Gospel is one medium of baptizing, and
by which Baptism into Christ is effected, and encluded in the name of
Baptism, and so called as other mediums, or means are; yea to say no more, but
as the truth is the plain and full preaching the Gospel, setting forth Christ
and him crucified, is the chief, the most necessary, profitable, and constantly
useful of all outward means for baptizing into Christ, and so into his death
etc. as appears by the plain evidence of Scriptures: By this faith, Romans 10
14.17. By this the Spirit received, Gal. 3.1, 2, 3, 5. In this the power of God
extended, Romans 1.16. and through this, the Baptism is by Spirit effected, 1
Cor. 6.11. Acts 26.18. And the receipt of this testimony has present blessing,
and future hope, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. 2 Thessalonians 1.10. Yea Paul, that blessed God, and
counted it great grace that he preached Gospel to many, yet thanks God that he
baptized few with water, 1 Cor. 1.14. But I shall for bear to say farther of
this medium.

2. Water (elementary water) to be applied, by being dipped, or plunged in, or
washed with, as a testimony of the truth of the Gospel, taught in the name of
the Lord Jesus Christ, which also is, the name of the Father, and the Son, and
the holy Ghost; That it is to be in, or rather into that name is evident by the
Commission given by Christ, Mat. 28.19. and the practice of John Baptist the
forerunner, Acts 19.4, 5. and the Apostles, and followers of Christ, Acts
3.38. and 10.48. and the end which is for baptizing into Christ, Romans 6.3. That
it was with elementary water is evident, Mat. 3.11, 16. Mar. 1.8. Luke 3.16.
Joh. 1.31, 3. and 3.22, 23. Act. 8 36.39. and 10.47, 48.

That it be by dipping in, or washing with, is evident by the Word, and all the
places cited. But how often to be dipped, or washed, whether the whole body, or
what part, and how much, or in what manner? there is no plain and express
type, either by command or example, and the word baptize signifies washing, as
well as dipping, and is so used in evangelicall writings, though also there be
another word rantizing used for rensing; besides, that at which it aims, and
to which it instructs, even the main business is called washing, Rev. 1.5.
and sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. 1 Pet. 1.2. A baptizing into Christ, into his
death, so as one be risen with him, and have put him on through the faith of
the operation of God, Romans 6.3, 4 5. Coll. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. Gall. 3.26, 27.
Now precisely to limit an outwaard business to a certain measure, where the
spirit has left freedom to necessity, safety, and convenience is to
streighten the ways of the Lord, more then himself has done, which is much to
be reproved with that in Job 4.17.

But this, that one be baptized with water, by being put in, or under water by
dipping in it, or washing with it, as a Testimony of the truth of the Gospel
report, and so in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: This is an
ordinance of the Gospel; A Medium of baptizing into Christ. And being
professedly done in the name of the Lord, it is verily outward Baptism, and an
ordinance of the Lord, whether it were done by a Minister of the Gospel, or
any attendant of such; Yea, and though it be very evil and sinful in him that
administreth it unholily, and mixeth men's Traditions with it; and evil also in
such as accept and approve thereof; Yet if the baptizing be as is said, the
Baptism is Baptism still, and the evils of men, and not the Lords Baptism to
be repented of: As may also be seen in that former and first outward Ordinance
given for testifying the truth of the Gospel, and admitting into the Family of
Abraham even Circumcision, that did precede Baptism.

I suppose it will be confessed by all, to be a wrong, and an exceeding evil
end, that Jacobs Sons had in persuading the Shechemites to Circumcision, etc.
Genesis 34.13.17, etc. Yet when good old Jacob cursed their cruelty, and murder,
in killing them, he faulted not the Circumcision of them, but intimately
acknowledged it, in that he says, They dug down a wall, or houghed the
Ox; Which implies, that had they not been slain, they had been one People with
them, and a defense, and help, Genesis 49.5, 6. And if there could have been an
error in respect of the persons acting; then surely it might have been in the
Shechemites circumcising themselves, Genesis 34.24. Or in Zipporah circumcising
her child in her Husbands presence, Exodus 4.25. Yet was that true Circumcision.

And for distemper of mind, dissembling in word, and blasphemy, while one is
exhorting to, acting, or using any Ordinance of God, it is grossly evil, I am
sure, and to be reproved and repented; Yet the dissembling of Jacobs Sons
Genesis 34.13. etc. nor the blasphemy of Zipporah, did not make null Circumcision
then used, Exodus 4.25, 26.

And for time; whereas Circumcision of the home-born should have been on the
eight day after birth; yet by occasion being neglected by some, near thirty
eight years; Yet was their Circumcision then approved of God himself, Josh.
5.5.9.

And indeed if any corruption of manners in Administrators could make null such
an Ordinance of God, done outwardly, or professedly for, or according to his
command; Then Circumcision, used by them that worshipped Baal, had been
nullified: When the House of Israel was so gone a whoring in that Idolatry,
that it was death for a man to be known that he would not bow the knee to
Baal; Yet the Circumcision of men in that time is neither faulted, nor they
prohibited, but invited to come to the Passover, and for their Purification
according to the Law, care was taken, and want in that bewailed, and healing
sought; But for their Circumcision fore-passed, it is not faulted at all, 2 Chronicles. 30.6.20.

And surely had error in such things made a nullity of the Ordinance of
Baptism, that when professedly done in his name, yet such errors, of men
baptizing, should make it no Baptism; Then would our Soviour have set his
choice Ministers to that work, but he set his Disciples to it, and so did the
Apostles their Attendants: Nor is there any prescriptions what manner of
persons, for Gifts, Office, Grace, or Demeanor they must be that baptize
others in the name of the Lord Jesus with water. Nor although we read in the
writings of the Apostles of diverse false Teachers, and diverse evil Livers, and
have there reproved both false Doctrine and evil life; Yet is not the outward
Baptism of any of them any where faulted, much less affirmed to be null: And
could the Testimony of Scripture, or the Ordinance of Baptism be made null in
it self by being in the hands of Idolaters, or by the addition of their
inventions therewith (as they are made void and ineffectuall to such Idolaters,
Mat. 15.1.9. Romans 2.) Then could not the outward Court of the Temple be left in
the hands of the Gentiles, nor the man of sin sit in the Temple of God, as is
affirmed, Rev. 11.2. 2 These. 2.4. Nor could such as are in Babylon, and have
fellowship therewith, be called Gods people, if they had not fore-had his
Baptism: If the Baptism had been Antichrists, and the Whores, then it might
have been said, Ye Antichristians and Babylonians, separate from your
fellows, and become my People; But the Baptism being the Lords, it is said,
Come out of her my People, Rev. 18.4. So that in professing Jesus to be the
Christ, as a witness of the truth of that profession: to baptize any that
refuse it not with water, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is
outward Baptism indeed, and a medium of baptizing into Christ: And such as
have been so baptized with water in that name, are outwardly baptized indeed,
and so engaged unto Christ, that they might be baptized into Christ, by being
farther baptized with the word, the Holy Spirit and affliction.

3. The Holy Spirit, in, and with his light and operation coming from the
Father and the Son, in, and with the means used, is the principal medium of
baptizing into Christ; And so John taught, that Jesus Christ should Baptize
with the Holy Ghost, Mat. 3.11. Mark 1.8. Luke 3.16. Joh. 1.33. And Jesus
Christ promised the same, Acts 1.5. And in that Acts 1.4.5. Our Savior gives
us to understand what baptizing with the Holy Ghost is. In the fourth verse he
bids them wait for the promise of the Father, which they had heard of him,
which is express in the same council, Luke 24.49. And the encouragement and
ground of hope he gave them is verse. 5. in these two. First, that John truly
baptized with water, he had his Commission from Heaven; preached truth, which
he testified by baptizing with water, and then told them that Jesus Christ
should baptize with the Holy Ghost. And secondly, Christ himself had promised
to send forth spirit to them, and endue them with Power from on high; and this
he assures them they shall receive, saying, Ye shall be baptized with the Holy
Ghost. In which two verses compared with Luke 24.45. to 49 and John 7.38, 39.
appears,

First, that there is a Baptizing with the Holy Ghost, that is the work, and
belongs to the Office of Jesus Christ, glorified with Gods right hand, Mark
1.7, 8.

Secondly, that Jesus Christ his sending forth Spirit into the hearts of
Beleivers, enduing them with power from on High, operating in, and teaching,
and leading them, is Baptizing them with the Holy Ghost, John 7.38, 39. Acts
1.4, 5.

Thirdly, that though this promise of the Spirit, in performance whereof is
baptizing with the Holy Ghost, was first and primely to the Apostles, and first
witnesses of the Resurrection of Christ; Yet it was also made to all that
through Grace believe on him, and to their Ministration, yea, not only in, and
through the promise made to them, but expressly to all Believers to be
fulfilled after the Ascension of Christ: So that baptizing with the Holy Ghost,
and communication of the Holy Spirit, to Enlighten, Teach, Comfort, etc. is
still abiding in the Church of God, as appears in Prophecy, Isa. 44.4.8. Joel
2.28. etc. Covenant, Isa, 59.20, 21. Promise, John 7.38, 39. And in the
Commission, Mat. 28.19, 20. And the ground rendered of exhortation to be
baptized, Acts 2.38, 39.

Fourthly, that this Baptizing with the Holy Ghost, contains in it two things.

1. Jesus Christ his sending of the Holy Ghost into the heart of Believers.

2. His baptizing Believers with, in, or by the holy Ghost, Acts 1.4, 5. Luke
24.49.

1. Jesus Christ his sending the Holy Ghost into the hearts of Believers, to
dwell, and keep a residence therein, Isa. 59.20, 21. Ezekiel. 36.27, 28. John
7.37, 38, 39.

First, To mind them of the sayings of Christ in those things which he by
himself, or his Servants had fore-taught them, opening their understandings to
conceive the things of him, and so teach them, Luke 24.45, 46. John 14 26. Isa.
54.13.14.

Secondly, To bear farther witness, and give in more evident testimony of
Jesus Christ what he has done, what he is, and will do, so firming them in
confidence in him, and with courage to bear witness of him, John 15.26. 2 Timothy
1.12.

Thirdly, To write his mind, and law in their inward parts, enclining their
heart in faith and love acording to his mind, and so leading them, Heb. 8.8
10. 2 Cor. 3.3, 17, 18. Romans 8.14.

Fourthly, To be an Advocate within them, to teach them how to pray to God, and
how to speak to men, Joh. 14.16, 17. Romans 8.26. Zach. 12.10. Mat. 10 19, 20.
Mark 13.11. Luke 12.11, 12.

2. Jesus Christ his baptizing them within, or by the holy Ghost, by his divine
light, and power in his minding them of, and witnessing in them the things of
Christ, effecting in them a new and Christ like Spirit, or disposition, Ezekiel.
36.26. 1 Cor. 2.16. He washes, purges, and cleanses them with pure water of
the love of God, commended through the blood of Jesus, Romans 5.1, 8, 10. Heb.
9.14. Rev. 1.5. Heb. 10.22.

First, Bringing them into the hearty acknowledgement of Jesus to be the
Christ, and their Lord, Savior, Propitiation, Life, Wisdom, Righteousness,
etc. and the All, and in All to them, 1 Cor. 1.30. Coll. 3, 10, 11. as before
page 3.

Secondly, Uniting them so to Christ in the belief of his Death and
Resurrection; that they begin to partake of the benefit thereof, being through
faith, dead with him, and raised with him, so as they are thereby, and therein
in some measure conformed to him, dead to sin, self, and world, and alive to
God, loving, and living to things above, Romans 6. Coll. 2.12. to 3.1, 2.

3. Filling them with the love of God he sheads abroad in their hearts, Rom
5.5. and with the virtues of Christ, and some useful gifts, with spiritual
strength that they might walk out in the same, 1 Cor. 1.12. Ephesians. 4.4-16. 1
Pet. 2.9. and in some more abundant filling, some are led to work miracles, and
some to speak with other tongues, which as they are for unbeleevers, that never
believed Jesus to be the Christ to convince them, 1 Cor. 14, 22. so they are
rather the fruits of some abundant baptizing, then simply the baptizing it
self; but this forementioned is the baptism wrought by the Spirit, Col. 1.12.

4. Afflictions and Sufferings for the name of Christ, are a medium of
Baptizing into Christ, which afflictions and sufferings are called, The Fiery
Trial; that is, to prove, and try the Faith, Love, and Patience of the
Believer, 1 Pet. 4.12, 13, 14. and 1.6, 7. To melt, subdue, purge, and cleanse
the Believers, Job 33.15-30. Isa. 27.7, 8, 9. And to make them partakers of
Gods Holiness, and the quiet fruit of his Righteousness, Heb. 12.7-14. And as
he has chosen them through the Furnace of assliction, Isa. 48 10. So has he
appointed them through manifold Afflictions to enter into his Kingdom, Acts
14.22. As Jesus first suffered, and then entered into his Glory, Luke 24.26.
That we may this way also be conformed to him, in the fellowship of his death,
and experiment, the virtue of his Resurrection, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9, 10. And thus
as Christ called his own Trials by suffering a Baptism, with which he was to
be baptized, Mat. 20.22. Luke 12.50. And with which even his are in some sort
to be baptized: Even so, though wicked men as instruments, do afflict and
persecute the Believers; yet because of his ordering and sanctifying hand, in
trying, purging, and doing good therewith, he is said to baptize his even with
fire, Mat. 3.11. Luke 3.16. And so affliction a medium of baptizing.

Now of these four Mediums, Word, Water, Spirit, and Affliction, there are but
two put on the Ministration of the Church, or servants of Christ; namely, that
of the Word, which they are sent to teach, open, Apply, Mark 16.15. 1 Cor.
1.17. 2 Timothy 4.2. And that with water in his Name, John 1.33. Mat. 28.19. As
for that with Spirit, it is his own work, John 1.33. And that of Afflictions,
is his ordering, and sanctifying the evil works of wicked men to beleivers
good, Romans 8.28.

And as all these tend, and work together for effecting, and accomplishing one
Baptism, which is into Christ, there being no other baptism of any kind
approved but this one, that is into Christ: Yet the several Mediums, as they
are Mediums of baptizing into Christ, are in that sense called Baptismes: And
though but two of these, that with Word, and that with Water, are to be used,
or minstred by the Church, or servants of Christ; yet the Doctrine of them all
belong to the Church and servants of Christ to teach what they be, and what be
the Ground, End, and Uses of them, and how to be accepted and received.

And the Ground and Foundation of this Doctrine, and teaching thereof, is the
same that is the foundation of Repentance from dead works, and of faith toward
God, Heb. 5.12. to Chapter 6.1, 2, 3. And as this Foundation is Jesus Christ; So
the Doctrine of it, or (as some call it) the Doctrinall Foundation is, That as
through the disobedince and fall of the first Adam, all fell in him, and became
under sin and death in him, and were convicted, and sentenced to death in the
conviction, and sentence that passed upon him, Genesis 3.6.11, 17, 19. Romans 5.12,
18. And this, though without the knowledge or motion of the Individuals or
particular persons that were to proceed from Adam, yet so verily, vertually and
indeed, that all that came forth from him by propagation, do then, and in that
birth, and there-through partake of sin, and misery, and in their own persons
bear the Image of the first Adam, as he was in his fall, Genesis 5.3. Romans 5.17,
19. Job. 4.1, to 4. Psalm. 51.5. Romans 9.8. Ephesians. 2.1, 2.

Even so, by, and through the obedience, and righteousness of the second man,
or last Adam; the Lord Jesus Christ, who as the public man, in the room of
all men, by the will, and appointment of the Father, and in oneness of will
with him therein; has by the grace of God tasted death for every man, and so
has dyed for out sins, in which the truth of the sentence, Genesis 2^ 17. is
fulfilled, and that curse denounced, suffered, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10, 13. and
by the power of God has overcome death, and is risen for our justification, 2 Timothy 1.10. Romans 4.25. 1 Cor 15, 3, 4. and has through the eternal spirit by
which he rose offered up his own spotless, and righteous body, yea, himself a
sacrifice to God in the Heavens, and so has obtained an eternal Redemption,
Heb. 8.3. and 9 12, 14. And is exalted at the right hand of God, and filled
with the Holy Spirit in the man, to send forth to men, Psalm. 68.18. And ever
lives being the Mediator between God and men, 1 Timothy 2.5. Thus in Jesus
Christ, as the public man, a new Creation is made; and he has so dyed for all
men, and made the Atonement for them, that by interpretation, according to
Gods acceptance of it in him, as in the public man, all have dyed, and are
risen, and Peace, and Righteousness, and Life, completed for them, though in
respect of their particular persons, they know it not, nor partake of it, nor
can partake, unless by regeneration they be made in Christ, in whom it is,
Romans 5.18. 2 Cor. 5.14, to 17. 1 John 2.2. and 5.10, 11, 12. John 3.26. Yet it
is so verily, vertually, and indeed in him for all men and unto all men, that
whosoever of them in the appearance of this grace, come in believing into him,
shall verily, and indeed, in his own person, receive and partake of this
Peace, Righteousness, and Life in Christ, and shall bear his Image, John
1.12, 13. and 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Acts 10.43. Romans 3.22.24, 25, 26. and
5.1.5, -- 11 -- 19. And this, with the love of God here-through testified to
men, as its held forth in the Gospel now, not only as it was in the promise at
first, as a thing to be done in its season, evidenced by testimonies of his
goodness, and though not so fully opened, yet vertuall to all Believers, Genesis
3.15. Heb. 11.6. No, nor yet alone added to this, the fuller pointing him out
to come, and the everlasting Covenant confirmed in him, Genesis 12. and 15. and
17. And so the setting him forth in Types, Sacrifices, and Prophesies, of which
Circumcision was a witness; yet so, as but one Nation partooke of those
privileges, Psalm. 147.19, 20. And the Ordinances given them, made a partition
wall between that Nation and other Nations, in respect of nighnesse to partake
of the privileges: But now is Jesus Christ set forth as he has already come
in the flesh, and has done and completed all that forementioned concerning
him; and so slain the enmity, made peace for all Nations, and made them nigh by
his blood, and in the Gospel came and preached peace: In which Gospel, the
Lord Jesus, with the things in him concerning our peace, are more fully set
open, than ever before the ascension of Jesus Christ in our nature, and more
abundance of grace, and spirit promised to all that believe on him, and this to
be declared without difference to all Nations, Mat. 28 19. Mark 16.15. And this
that Jesus Christ has done by his Death, Resurrcteion, and Ransome-giving, and
Mediation-making for all men, is rendered in the Gospel as the ground and reason
of all his Lordship over all, Romans 14.7, 8.9. Acts 2.36. And also as the
ground, reason, and proof of the Resurrection of all men, 1 Cor. 15. to the
end. And also as the ground, reason, and proof, that God will at the last day
judge all men by Jesus Christ, and cause all to confess him Lord, Acts 17.31.
Phil. 2 10, 11. And this given as the reason why God has made him a Prince,
and a Savior, and filled him with spirit to give repentance, and remission of
sins, and to rule all, John 5.27. Isa. 53. to the end. Phil. 2.7. to 11. Acts
5.30, 31. And indeed this is the foundation of repentance, and that whereby all
are admonished to repent, Luke 24.46, 47 Acts 17.30, 31. And the foundation of
Faith, and that which men are callssd on to believe, and there-through to
believe on him, Acts 13.38.48. and 16.31. And all this appears plainly to be
meant, Heb. 6.1, 2. if it be considered with Chap. 5.12. and other places of
Scripture, as Acts 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 3.11. And so likewise that the very same
word of the beginning of Christ, is the foundation of the Doctrine of
Baptismes, or of teaching Baptismes, or the Foundation, Ends, and Uses of the
Mediums of Baptizing, and so Baptism it self; the Doctrine, and End of all
being one, and tending to one Baptism, and so, 1. As the knowledge, and belief
of the death, resurrection, and ransom, giving of Christ, to have been for all
men, is the ground why the Apostles did preach remission of sins to all in
his name, and beseech them to repent, and be reconciled: etc. Luke 24.46, 47. 2
Cor. 5, 14 15, 19.20. Act. 13.32-37 38, 48. So likewise it was the ground of
their baptizing with the word, and so discipling by the Word all such as were
hearing, and did not turn away from the tender of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.14.
Acts 16.31.32. 2. The same knowledge of the redemption wrought by Christ for
all men, and his lordship over them, and having spirit to send forth to them,
was the ground of their baptizing with water in his name, and so discipling
those that refused not the Gospel when brought to them, Acts 2.41. and
16.14.31, 32. 3. The same knowledge, and belief concerning Jesus Christ, was
the ground of their acquainting men with the baptizing, with the holy Ghost,
and directing men to look up to, and wait on Christ for that, and to yield to
the Spirit, as in the means he should be vouchsafed to them, Mat. 3.11. Acts
2.39. Mat. 28.20. John 14.16, 26. and 16, 7-16. 4. And on the same ground did
they exhort to receive correction from the hand of God, and to be willing to
bear the Cross of Christ, directing them to look to Christ, and consider his
sufferings, in patience to possess their souls, and wait on him for profitable
use, and issue, assuring them, they shall so receive it from him, Heb. 12.2-12.
1 Pet. 1.5-7, and 2.21.


And thus did they teach all these as Mediums of baptizing tending to one
Baptism, even into Christ.

But they never taught these means, or mediums of baptizing, to be either the
foundation on which men were to be built, or to ground their hopes; nor yet to
be the end in respect of seize, as if life were had, and the true
baptism effected where ever these mediums are. For they always set forth
Jesus Christ to have dyed for our sins, and risen for our justification; to
be the foundation, and thereupon built, and bottomed their exhortations to
repentance, faith, love, and use of the ordinances of Christ, and accepting of,
and yielding to the mediums of baptizing, as is seen in the places fore-quoted,
and throughout their writings.

And they have put the mediums of baptizing in their right place, as Posts and
Gates to be waited at, and ways to be walked in, to meet with God, according
to that, Exodus 20.24. Prove. 8.34, 35. Isa. 64.5. Mat. 18.20. and 28, 20. Heb.
10.25.

But union in, and with Jesus Christ and conformity to him, have they set
forth, as the true effect, and completing of Baptism, and that in which life
is had, Romans 6.3-6. 1 Cor. 1.30. John 15.1. John 5.10-12. and without which
life is not enjoyed, nor Baptism indeed received and enjoyed, what mediums
soever pass on a man.

1. A man may be baptized with the Word; the Ministers instructing, and he
hearing it, and yet not partake of life, unless united with Jesus Christ, The
Word that is preached by faith in him, Heb. 4.2. 2. A man besides his hearing
the Word may be baptized with water in the name of the Lord Jesus, and so have
the filth of the flesh, in the stain of Gentilisme put away, and yet is not
purged in conscience by the spiritual application of the blood of Christ, so
as there be in him the answer-of a good conscience to Godward by the
Resurrection of Christ, he is yet short of spiritual and eternal salvation, 1
Pet. 3.21. 3. A man besides his hearing the Gospel, and being outwardly
baptized by the Servants of Christ, may also have from Jesus Christ some
supernatural illumination, and inspiration, with spiritual force, in
reproving, persuading, and moving; so knocking and calling for entrance, with
promise of farther favor; yet if the heart be not overcome at his reproofs,
and open not at his knockings, to let go other holds, and accept of, and rest
on him, the man remains in danger still, Rev. 3.20. Prove. 1.23, 24. Ezekiel.
24.13. Genesis 6.3. whence that Ephesians. 4.30. 4. A man besides his hearing, and
receiving outward Baptism, and partaking of some motions of spirit, so as in
some sort he believes, and makes profession of Christ, may also come to
suffer some things for the name of Christ: and yet if he abide not till Christ
be formed in him, that he may be perfected by Christ, and his Spirit, all his
sufferings may be in vain, Gall. 3.4.
So as if a man be not overcome by the grace and spirit of Christ, in, and by
these mediums to onenes with Christ, and conformity to him in some measure, he
is yet short of that which is Baptism indeed, in which happiness, and to
which the Promises belong: Truth it is, God may be said truly to have baptized,
because he has done it by his Servants, and these mediums, and made them
efficatious in opening their eyes to see, and moving their very heart; but they
closing their eyes, and hardening their heart, in not yielding up to the power
and opperations of his grace, so as to have the scum cast off, and to be closed
with, and conformed to Jesus; may yet in respect of the receipt and blessing, be
truly said, not to be baptized; as is foreshewn in the first and second pages.

And thus I have as plainly as I can with so much brevity shown, what the
Baptism is, that is so much commended in the Scripture, and what the mediums
of baptizing are, and of what use, that we may not mistake one for another, nor
confound all in one without distinction, and so make a confusion; but that
knowing all aright, we may know how, and when we are baptized into Christ, and
how far, and not rest short of that But though the knowledge hereof might be
useful many ways; yet that for which I have written this, is principally at
this time for information, about one of the mediums of baptizing, about which
it is grievous to consider the differences, and diffentions among brethren;
yea, what judging, unbrothering, and separating from one another: and that is
about baptizing with water in the name of the Lord Jesus; or which is all one,
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which is
before shown to be an ordinance of Jesus Christ, as a medium of discipling to,
and baptizing into Christ, and so called Baptism. And now minding what has
already been said of this, and all the other meniums, and so of the one
Baptiime effected by them all: I will put to consideration in this.

1. What this Ordinance of Baptizing with water in the Name of the Lord, is? 2.
Upon what ground it is to to be administered? 3. To what ends it is to be
administered? 4. Who are the subjects of of it, to whom it may be administered?


1. For the first, What this Ordinance of Baptizing with Water, etc. is? It is
an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, Annexed to the ministration of the Gospel, as its
now declared since the Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of Jesus Christ, and
his sending forth the Holy Ghost, for testifying the truth of the Gospel, and
engaging the Disciples to attend to the Gospel and Ordinances thereof, waiting
for Christ to baptize them with the Holy Ghost, and so receiving them into the
family of Christ, by Baptizing them with water, In the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And this appears in the Commission given
Matthew. 28.19. That it is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ is there express, verse.
18 19, That it is annexed unto the ministration of the Gospel, is evident in
that the Commission is for Gospel Preaching, verse. 19.20. with Mark. 16.15. and
Luke 24 46.47. That it is annexed to it, as it is now revealed since the
Ascension of Jesus Christ, etc. It is evident, in that they were not to go
forth with this Commission till they received the Holy Ghost, and were endued
with power from on high. Luke 24.47-49. Acts 1.4.5. That it was for testifying
the truth of the Gospel: and engaging the baptized, etc. is evident, In that it
is to be in, or into the Name of, etc. and so before John truly baptized with
water, Acts 1.5. So circumcision before was a seal of the righteousuesse of
faith, which Abrabam had before received; That in Preaching it, he might
testify by circumcision, that he might be the Father, etc. Romans 4.11. That it
be done with Water, is also evident in the Commission; For though water be not
named, yet it appears to be encluded, and meant; That Baptism with affliction
is not meant, as given in Commission to his Disciples to administer, though
afflictions are Metaphorically called water also; But his Disciples are to
serve one another in love, and not to bite, and aflict; they are either the
providence of God bringing correction as need is, Heb. 12. or the enemies of
truth that afflict, and persecute, Mat. 10. And it is the gracious work of
Christ himself to order and sanctify them, and make them means of humbling,
purging, baptizing and conforming to Christ, as is foreshewn parge 12, 13. Also
for baptizing with the holy Ghost, though that also be pure, spiritual and
living water; yet is it not meant in the commission, as given in charge to the
Servants of Christ to administer, for that is Christ his own work as is
foreshewn page 12, 13. And endeed Baptizing with the holy Ghost, and blessing
afflictions that they may help to baptize into Christ, is encluded in the
promise (to the Servants of Christ discharging their commission) in those words
verse. 20 And lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the world, as is
evident, comparing it with Mark 16.16, 17. Luke 24.45.49 John 14.16, 18. But
baptizing with the Word, and Gospel which is spiritual water, is meant, as
that which is principally given in charge in the commission, as is foresnewn
page 6, 7, 8. And yet that water is encluded is clear; but not alone from John's
baptizing with water, for that might have been, though in the Baptism given by
Christ after his resurrection, no clementary water were used, but only Word,
and Spirit; wherein also that might be fulfilled, Mark. 1.7 8. Acts 1.4, 5. So
that the allegation of John's baptizing with elementary water would be
forcelesse to urge it, meant in this commission, if there were no more to prove
it; nor would it make it clear and evident, that baptizing with elementary
water is meant in the commission, if there were no more to prove it, but adding
to the Baptists practice, the example of the Aposties baptizing with elementary
water after the ascension of Christ, for so for a time, they did use
circumcision also, and why not the ordinance given to the forerunner of Christ
for a time, though it had not been for continuance more then circumcision: nor
will this help or add to the force of the argument, to allege that, Mar 16.16.
For, 1. That is not the Commission; the Commission is given verse. 15. Go preach
the Gospel, etc. Now the beginning of verse. 16. is the Promise, and hope set
before the Preachers of the Gospel. viz. That he that believes (to wit the
Gospel) and is baptized shall be saved; so that is promise, not precept. 2. To
baptize with water is no more mentioned in Mark 16.6. then in Mat. 28.19.
though encluded. 3. It is not said, he that is not baptized, shall be damned,
as he that beleiveth not. 4. Simon Magus believed Philip, preaching the
Gospel, and was baptized (with water sure) in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
yet not saved, Acts 8.13. So that some farther baptizing is there meant, so
that all hitherto, if there were no more to be added to it, would be too weak
to prove baptizing with elementary water, to be still in force: Besides,
against this might be objected; That.


All our Fathers were under the cloud, and were all baptized to Moses, in the
cloud, and in the Sea, 1 Cor. 10.1.2. Yet, but only those that came out of
Egypt with Moses, passed through the Sea; and the following Generations were
not carried in their persons back again, to have the Sea again divided, and be
lead through; but as they were of them, and one, and the same Church, and kept
these wonders in believing remembrance, they were also baptized unto Moses,
brought to acknowledge him a man of God, and those Gods Laws, that were given
by him, and so did there rejoice in God, Psalm. 66.6. As in a like business the
same is said, Hos. 12.4. Even so, it might be said, that the baptizing with
water at the beginning, accompanied with those miracles, and visible gifts of
the Holy Ghost, did baptize the Nations unto the acknowledgment of Jesus, to be
the Christ: But that the after generations, that come to the same faith, and so
are of the same Church, are interessed in what was done to them; and, in
believing remembrance of those wonders, are baptized unto the acknowledgment of
Jesus, to be the Christ, and so rejoice in him, according to that, 1 Cor. 3.22,
23.

And though this be true, useful, and of force in some respects, yet the truth
is, it is of no force to deny the use of elementary water in baptizing, to be
included in the Commission given by Christ, but rather strengthens the
acknowledgment of it; and now to show that water is included, let it be
considered,

1. That the instructing with the Word, the work of the Holy Ghost, in the
heart, and the sanctifying afflictions to such gracious helpfulnes, was never
called baptizing, or baptism, till the outward ordinance of baptizing with
water was first given, and then they are so called: As after the giving the
ordinance of Circumcision, the work of grace in the heart, by word, or
affliction, was called Circumcision, and not before; So the ordinance of
Circumcision, whence that gracious work had such a denomination, was an
ordinance to continue, till completed in the death and resurrection of Jesus
Christ. And likewise the ordinance of baptizing with water, whence the work of
grace in the heart, by Word, Spirit, and Afflictions, has had such a
denomination as baptism, is to continue till it be completed in the glorious,
and visible appearing of Jesus Christ, and the resurrection of the Saints, when
also will be the end of the world, mentioned in the promise, and not before. As
for Gods working on the peoples hearts, in leading them through the Sea, to
bring them to acknowledge Moses to be a man of God, etc. That was no outward
ordinance given to the people to use, but Gods own work upon them, and yet not
called by the name of baptizing, till the ordinance of baptizing with water in
the name of Christ was in use, which confirms the continuance of that
ordinance, till Jesus Christ come again, as is shown, p. 5.6.

2. Our Savior would not speak as a Barbarian to his Disciples; for those led
by his spirit, would not so speak, 1 Cor. 14.15, to 19. Now baptizing with
water, was that which they had been acquainted with, and the other not yet so
fully understood by them. Now, though there was more in his words, which the
Spirit in his coming gave them to understand, John 14.26. Yet that which they
did understand, should not be in his words, in giving such a commission to
them, is derogatory to our Savior to imagine, Pro. 8, 6, 7, 8, 9.

And 3. The word baptizing is clear, to be after used for baptizing with
water, when water is not there mentioned; and that not only when baptizing is
spoke of, as distinct from preaching the Gospel, that is preferred before it, 1
Cor. 1.1^.17. But also where the distinction is not in such a manner expressed,
Acts 2.38.41. and 8.12, 13.16. and 16.15.33. and 18.8. And,

4. These three former considered, and found true; then the Apostles practice
in discharge of their Commission, besides preaching Gospel, baptizing with
water in the name of the Lord, Acts 8.36. and 10.47. Yea. and John Baptist
also, baptizing with water, does with the former proofs, clear it up, and
evidence, that elementary water is to be used in this ordinance of baptism,
and is included in the Commission, Mat. 28.19. And also in the promise, Mark
16.16. But now how much, or how little water, or in what manner, or how much
dipped, or washed, is left in some measure to convenience, necessity, and
safety, in the judgment of the Church, there being no precept, nor plain and
evident example for it. True, we find two examples, where water enough was, of
going into the water, and coming out of the water; but we find no mention,
either that they stripped themselves to go in, or how far they went in, or
how much they were dipped, or washed, being in: Yea, of our Savior, it is
affirmed, he was praying when he came forth, and as he was praying, the Holy
Ghost descended on him, Mat. 3.16. Luke 3.21, 22. And it being a custom in
those Countries, for many to go barelegged, and to wear Sandals, they might
go in to the knee; But neither their going in, nor coming forth, was their
baptizing; For Jesus when he was baptized, came straightway out of the water,
Mat. 3.16. Mark 1.9.10. And as for the Eunuch, Philip, as well as he, went
down into the water; And then Philip baptized him, and then they came both out
of the water, Acts 8.38 39. But no mention of the stripping of either, or their
clothing again, b^^ of the Spirit taking away Philip so soon as they came out
of the water, which implies no such stripping; besides, elsewhere it rather
appears, that for others, water was commanded to be fetched, Acts 10.47, 48.
So that dipping, or washing with water, is enough, most probable, the head, or
face; but I will here for bear the reasons for that, enough is said before of
this page 8, 9, 10 To show, that in profession of Jesus to be the Christ, to
baptize any of Adams race that refuse it not, with water, professedly in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, is the performance
of the outward ordinance of baptism; and one so baptized, is outwardly, and
once baptized indeed: Nor can the addition (by the Baptizer) of some humane
inventions, make the ordinance null, as is aforesaid.

2. For the second thing considerable, viz. Upon what grounds this ordinance of
baptizing with water, in the name of the Lord, is to be administered: And this
appears in the Commssion, with the ground thereof, Mat 28.18, 19. And the
Tenor of the Gospel, John 3.14, 15, 16, 17. Mark 1.16. with the residue of
scripture, to be these, viz. 1. The certainty given in the Gospel of a peace,
reconciliation, and redemption, wrought by Jesus Christ, in his Death,
Resurrection, and Sacrifice offered to God for all men, and his good will to
have it made known, and tendered to thema ll. This is the ground, both of
preaching Gospel to them, 1 Timothy 2.4-7. And of baptizing any of them with
water, Acts 18.8. 1 Cor. 2.13. and 15.4. as is already shown in page 14, 15,
16. And he that has not certainty in this, runs at an uncertainty in his
ministration, which Paul would not in any thing, 1 Cor. 9.26. 2. The
perscription of such as are to be baptized with water, to be subdued, or
brought into, or under the instruction, or tuition of such, as have accepted
the Doctrine of the Gospel, and make profession of it, which men of
understanding, and at their own dispose be not, nor can be so judged, till
they be found willing to hear, and to be instructed in the Doctrine of the
Gospel, Mat. 3. John. 4.1, 2. Acts 8. and 18.8. But children, not come to the
use of understanding, are so, and so to be accounted, from the gracious
providence of God, putting them in the Family, and into the charge, and under
the care, and tuition of such, whether by birth, or other providenciall way,
Genesis 17.12, 13. Acts 16.15. But of this, more anon. 3. The command of Jesus
Christ in his Commission, given to his Disciples, to go disciple all Nations,
baptizing them; baptizing being both with word, and water; neither to be pressed
violently, and where the tender of the Gospel is not rejected, the baptizing
with word, and water, are of the same extent.


And so the report of the Gospel, the work of God, in putting under the uition
of such as have accepted, and do profess the Gospel, and the command of
Christ, to disciple all Nations, baptizing them, is the ground, and bottom
upon which this baptism is to be administered: As for such as are to be
baptized, to confess their sins, and profess their faith, it is good in such
as are come to the use of understanding before they be baptized; Yet though it
be an encouragement, it is not the ground, and to them that think it so, it is
but partial, and fallible; But that set down before, is the Ground, and whole,
and constant, and sure to administer one, as will yet more clearly appear anon.

3. For the third thing considerable, viz. To what ends, this ordinance of
baptizing with water, is to be administered, and that is,

1. To be an outward, and sensible Testimony of the truth of the Gospel
preached, both in that there in affirmed to be already done, by Christ for men,
and also in the hope set forth therein for believers; and so, of the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, set forth thereby. Jesus
his giving this ordinance to be administered, is a testimony of his faithful
mind, and the truth of the faith, and Gospel given to preach: And so, when John
preached the Gospel, baptizing, and preaching the baptism of repentance, for
the remission of sins, Mark 1.3, 4. He is said to have truly baptized with
water. as witnessing verily the truth, Acts 1.5. And so, as all the Scripture,
Moses, the Law, and all Types foregoing; so all the ordinances of the Gospel,
do testify of Christ, John 5.39, to 44. Romans 3.21, 1 Cor. 11.26. As Abraham
received the sign of Circumcision, as a seal of the righteonsnesse of the
faith he had, etc. that he might be the Father: Abraham his receiving the sign,
was not simply his being circumcised, for so were all his family; but his
receiving that or dinance to administer, as a seal of the righteousness of the
faith, its not said, which all he circumcised, had; nor of the truth of his own
believing, but of the righteousness of the faith, that is, the Gospel God
preached to him, which he had to preach to his Family, and so to be a sensible
testimony, that he might be the Father of all that believe, Genesis 15. and 17.
with Romans 4.11. Even so also, the Apostles received this ordinance, to testify
withal to such an end; and so it is given as the Medium of discipling, in the
Commission, Mat. 28.19.

2. To receive into Gods Family, or the Family of Christ, or Abraham, and so to
engage the baptized, to yield up to, and wait on God, in the acknowledgment of
his great name, and observance of all his ordinances, and the things he has
already commanded by Jesus Christ to his Apostles: And so, as Circumcision
discipled into Abraham's Family, and bound to the Law, after given by Moses,
baptism disciples into the same family of God, and binds to believe, and
observe the sayings, and commands of Christ, fore-given in the Gospel; and this
is clear in the Commission, Mat. 28.19. 1 Cor. 1.13.-15. And in that baptism,
is into his name, and no other.

3. To set, or lay before them, the hope that is set forth in the new
Testament, confirmed by the death of Christ, for his baptizing them with the
Holy Ghost, and so sending forth spirit, to teach, and write his sayings, and
Law in their hearts, Mat. 3.11. Acts 1.4, 5. Luke 24 46, to 49. etc. as page
11.12.

And so, by witnessing the truth of the Gospel, accepting, and engaging them
into the Family of God, and setting such hope before them, they may disciple
them, that so in believing, they may thoroughly repent, and lay hold on Christ,
and therein receive remission of sins, and spirit, to lead a new life: And
thus is this baptism unto repentance, and to be received for the remission of
sins, Mat. 3.11. Mark 1.4. Acts 2.38. Neither, as some vainly gloss it,
causaliter, that it should cause it; nor declaratively, as if it did verily
declare remission of sins received; But as a Medium of coming into Chrrist,
that in believing, it may be received: And these are the ends of
administration, and not such, as in which this ordinance is made like the Types
of the Law, to have a sensible, and visible figure, or resemblance of Christ,
in the manner of his death, and resurrection, and conforming us to him, for
which no word, that conformity being the work of his Spirit, by word, and
afflictions.

4. For the fourth thing considerable, viz. Who are the subjects capable of
this ordinance of being baptized with water in the name of the Lord, and so may
have it administered to them: And that is express in the command, and
commission given by Jesus Christ to the Apostles, Mat. 28.19. To be all Nations
that were not fore-discipled, and refuse not in the tender of the Gospel to
them, to be discipled. They had a massage of good news, of Peace, and
Salvation, to declare, and tender to men; To all People; To all Nations, every
Family; To every man in the whole Creation, Luke 2.10. Acts 13.37.48. Luke
24.45, 46, 47. Mat. 10.11, 12. Luke 10.5, 6. Mark 16.15. And this, that they
might be discipled, that is, won in to accept mercy, to repent, and believe,
whether they do so accept, or no, John 3.17. and 5.34. Psalm. 78.5, to 10.
Ezekiel. 2. to the end. And for declaring this, they adventure their peace,
safety, and life, among men, Mat. 10. But if any Country, Family, or, man
refused this Gospel, and would none of it, they were not to force it with
violence; but to depart, and wait if God at another time would give them
repentance, etc. Mat. 10.13, 14. Luke 10.5, 6.10, 11. 2 Timothy 2.24. Mark 5.17,
18. But what Nation, Country, Family, or man soever, did accept the Message,
and were willing to be further instructed; those, and all under the tuition of
those, being presented by them, are they to go on discipling them, by
baptizing with word, and water, baptizing them with water in the name of the
Lord, and farther instructing them with the word, And thus to all Nations now,
as John did before to the Jews, Mark 1.3.4. So as they are to go to disciple
all Nations in this manner, so proclaiming, and tendering Gospel to them, that
none that reject the Gospel, be constrained to be baptized, and farther taught;
So likewise, none that refuse not the Gospel, are to be refused, or put by, but
to be baptized, and further taught, whether they be such, as in whom it yet
appears not; that they have in heart, truly repented, or do believe with the
heart, or such, as it appears they do with the heart believe, or such, as
have also in their believing, received the Holy Ghost, all, and every of these:
So John affirms himself, to baptize indeed those whom he called, Generation
of vipers (a name never put on any that did truly repent, and believe) and
reproves them of their vain confidence, and boasting, and intimates, as if some
of them were chafe, notwithstanding his flooring of them, Mat. 3.6.11, 12. And
so of Christ's own Disciples, which were baptized, and all others, called the
multitude, John 4.2. and 6.61. And it is expressly said of some of them, That
from the beginning they believed not; And after that sore judgment on
dissemblers, Acts 5. its said, And of others, durst no man join himself unto
them; which intimates strongly, that before they did, Acts 5.11, to 13.
Besides, he that weighes what is said to diverse Churches, and what the Apostles
minds them of, from those that. went through the Sea with Moses, may easily
perceive such to have been baptized, 1 Cor. 10.1, to 11. And for those, that in
hearing the Gospel, have believed before baptizing, some unfeignedly, and some
feignedly, they were also baptized, Acts 8.12, 13.36, 37. and 18.8. Yea, even
such as in believing the Gospel, did also receive the Holy Ghost, before they
were baptized with water in the name of the Lord, they also were so baptized,
Acts 10.47, 48. So that no one of these can be set forth to limit the ordinance
of baptism to any one, or two sorts of them, it being to be administered to
them all, and all the children by gracious providence, put in their tuition,
and charge, to bring up for the Lord, being a part of themselves, and presented
by them to be baptized: And this appears evidently in the Gospel, and by the
commission given, to be the plain, and express command of Jesus Christ, Mat.
28.19, 20.

1. By the ground of the Commission; namely, That all Power is given to Jesus
Christ in Heaven and Earth, verse. 18. And this by virtue of his death,
resurrection, and sacrifice offered to God, in which, children are also
concerned, Romans 14.8, 9. Phil. 2.7, to 11. 1 Timothy 2.5, 6.

2. By the business he set them about, which is to Disciple, or make
Disciples, or bring them into the House of God, the Family of Abraham; And so
as before they made Disciples, or received into the Family of Abraham, one
Nation; and proselited into that Nation of any Nation, and then in Discipling,
the Fathers Discipled the Children also by circumcision; even so now in
Discipling by baptizing the Parents, they are to Disciple the Children now by
Baptism, as then by Circumcision that did precede this ordinance of Baptism.
As for John's Baptism, That was to floor into the acknowledgement of Christ
come in the flesh, but not to bring into the Family of Abraham, for he was to
baptize none; but those of that Family before: And Circumcision was in force,
until the Resurrection of Jesus Christ; and now Baptism supplyeth that also,
Col. 2.11, 12. So that as Circumcision was an ordinance of the Gospel as then
revealed, so Baptism is now an ordinance of the same Gospel, as now more fully
revealed; and as Circumcision was for Discipling, or making of the Family of
Abraham then, so Baptism now; and as the work of grace had its name from
Circumcision then, so from Baptism now; as is foreshewn; only Baptism now is
more free, and of larger extent, Col. 3.10, 11. So that the business of
Discipling leads us to understand children now as formerly.

3. By the command, To Disciple all Nations, baptizing them, before the
privileges of ordinances belonged but to one Nation; and yet to all that
Nation, and so it was called one Nation, etc. Genesis 12.2. and 18.8. and 35.11.
and 46, 3. Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7, 8. Psalm. 147, 19, 20. Yet of these, such as walked in
Gods statutes were a holy nation, Exodus, 19.5, 6. But the whole Nation was
circumcised; and all but those by circumcision made of that Nation were
strangers to their privileges, Ephesians. 2 12. And so neither John Baptist, nor
the Disciples of Christ, till the resurrection of Christ, might go to minister
to any other Nations, Mat. 10.5. But now being risen, he commands them to go,
and make Disciples all Nations; now as the children were a part of that one
Nation, so are they of all Nations, and are Discipled in Discipling Nations, or
Families, though still such as are prevailed within the heavenly call, and
chosen, are the holy Nation, 1 Pet. 2.9.

4. By the manner of the expressions, and words in the Commission; Go ye
therefore and (teach, or) Disciple all Nations, baptizing them, etc. He says
not, teach, or make Disciples first, and then baptize, nor so much as Teach, or
Disciple, and Baptize; much less says he, baptize them taught; All these are
Additions, and Glosses put by some to the Text, to make it serve their private
ends; but the words are plain, in which are two things observable in this
business, whoever scoff at it.

First, That he propounds baptizing as the medium, or way of teaching, or
discipling,; Go disciple all Nations, baptizing them; A like speech in another
business, Heb. 12.1, 2. Let us run with patience the Race that is set before
us: Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith; Now none can first
run, and then look, but running in looking; yea, looking is the way of running;
for in beholding his glory, that is seen, which allures, draws, saves, and so
makes to run, Isa. 45.22. and 55.5. As the Believers shining is by holding
forth, the word of life in word and conversation, Phill. 2.15, 16, So here
discipling is by baptizing, when its said, disciple baptizing.

Secondly, That when he says, Go ye Disciple all Nations, baptizing them; It
being our Savior that spoke, the Disciples that were spoken too, and the
Nations that were spoken of, whom Jesus wills his Disciples, to disciple,
baptizing them; we are to note, that the word (them) is referred to the Nations
forementioned: And can be referred to no other supposed persons; as for that
is replied by some, that the word them in the Greek is of the Masculine Gender,
whereas the word Nations is of the Newter Gender; and so them cannot be
referred to Nations. They may cheat us that know not the Greek Tongue, if we
will be weaned from the scope of the words; but they that know the Greek Tongue
know; that the word Nations, or Gentiles in the Newter Gender has frequently a
word of the Masculine, as this word them, coming after it, and to be referred
to it; and often so used in the writings of the Apostles, as Rev. 2.26, 27. He
that overcommeth, and keeps my words unto the end, to him will I give power
over the Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron. And here them is,
and can be no other but the Nations, so Acts 28.28. The salvation of God is
sent unto the Gentiles, and that they will hear it; where (they) can mean no
other but the Gentiles, so Acts 13.48. and 26.17, 18. And so its evident, that
in the Commission to disciple all Nations, baptizing them: That this them is
the Nations they are to disciple, and so comprehends as many, as refuse not to
be discipled by them; Nations, Families, them, and their children; and thus it
fully appears in the Commission; children also are encluded. And yet that this
may appear according to the scope of the Gospel, I will add more.

5. That this also has been the way of God from the beginning of the Gospel
preaching, to number children with their parents under whose tuition they were,
until the children fall to cast off that tuition. And so in the first Ages of
the world, those under the tuition of such as professed the name of God, were
called, the Sons of God, when it could be neither for their good disposition,
nor their good conversation; but only for the name of those under whose tuition
they were; and when the tuition was cast off, that name was lost, Genesis 6.1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. And in after Ages, when God revealed the Gospel more fully to
Abraham, and made his covenant with him, to be tanght in his Family, and gave
him an ordinance for admission into that Family, he willed him, to take in the
children also by circumcising all his Males from eight days old, and upward,
Genesis 17.11, 12, 13. And after this when he ordained the Passover, and brought
his people out of Egypt, and directed them about the receiving in any one of
the Gentiles to become one Nation with them; He willed, that the children of
such a Gentile should be received also by circumcising all his Males, Exodus 12
48, 49. And our savior gives us to understand it still to be according to the
mind of God; that the discipling of the Father, is a discipling of the
children; when he says of Zacheus, Luke 19.9 This day as salvation come to
this house, forasmuch as he also is become a son of Abraham. And like to this
Doctrine did Paul preach to the Jailer, Acts 16.31. Believe in the Lord Jesus,
and thou shall be saved, and thy House. Which can be no less then in their
coming into Christ, a bringing the means of salvation to their Families; yea,
so far as by baptizng them, they may be admitted, and have interest in the
means; all which sounds like the Commission, Mat. 28.19.

6. That the children of the Jews, or circumcision, were a part of the
Jewish-state, yea, Church State, and fellowship, having interest in the
ordinances, and promises to that people; and so by our Savior it was said, of
such are the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19.14. And this Church State given to the
Gentiles, shall not the children of the Gentiles that receive it, be of the
same Church state, as the Jewish children were? Mat. 21.43. Acts 28.27, 28. and
13.46.47.

7. The children of the Jews, while Baptism could not be administered to
children because Circumcision was still in force till the Resurrection of
Christ, yet they had Imposition of hands, an ordinance that seems to require
more in those to whom administered, then outword Baptism does; yet our Savior
received the little children to this ordinance, and blessed them, and reproved
his Disciples for rebuking them that brought them, and counted their being
brought their coming; and said, Suffer little children, and forbid them not to
come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19.13.14.

8. The types that went before, and are set before us for usefulness about
Baptism, do comprehend children, and those under the tuition of Believers, 1
Cor. 10.1, 2. 1 Pet. 3.19.

9. Whole households are affirmed in the writings of the Apostles to have been
baptized, Acts 16.15, 33. 1 Cor. 1.16. And no warning given us to except
children in understanding thereof; and we were before directed, when a seal of
admission was given to a household to understand the children also, Genesis 17.12,
13. Ezod. 12 48

10. As the Nation, and Church of the Jews, had their children admitted with
themselves to an interest, and right in all the ordinances of God, to use as
they were sitted by instruction, being at first Circumcised, and also had the
promises, and hope of spirit set before them, R^m. 3.2. and 9.4. Acts 2.39. and
3.25. So now its affirmed, as that which was fore-prophefied, though not so
clearly revealed before the ascension of Jesus Christ, That the Gentiles should
be follow-heires, and of the some Body, and partakers of his promise in Christ,
by the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.6. suitable to that, Acts 2.39. And if the children of
Christians were cut off, the privileges were straightened, which I believe,
none understanding Gospel rightly, will affirm.

11. Yea, to say in a word, children are mentioned in the Apostles writings, as
part of the Christian Churches to whom he wrote, Ephesians. 6.4, Col. 3.21. And
Fathers willed to bring them up in the nurture of the Lord; And they affirmed
to be thildren of Abraham, that walk in the steps of the faith of Abraham, Gal.
3.8. And did not Abraham begin to teach his children to keep Gods commands, by
engaging them thereto by Circumcision; and shall not we begin to teach our
children to keep Christ's commands, by engaging them thereto by Baptism.

So that as the Gentiles come to be fellow-heires with the Jews, and as
children have formerly been a part of the Jewish Nation, and Church, and are
now a part of the Nations, according to the scope of the Gospel, and the words
of the Commission given by Christ, there is an express command for the
baptizing of them.

12. But yet, as the Gospel is rightly understood, believed, and in the heart
of any, there is yet more to be said for little children; as namely, 1. That
though they be conceived, and borne sinners, yet while they are not come to the
use of understanding, so as they have chosen no Idol, nor are yet capable of
the means that should bring them to believe, he that is the father of the
helpless, has them in his protection; and he that will not gather where he
has not sown, will not charge them with unbelief, and so, not with their
other sins; And so, in a sense of Christ's account, they may be said to
believe, Mat. 18.2.6. with 19.13.14. And though beyond our understanding how,
yet its as beleivable, as that there should be an carnest expectation of the
creature, Romans 8.19. But, if God will accept it as so, who are we, to fault
him? and if he will account our bringing our children to him, their coming,
let us accept of it. 2. That it flows from the word of grace, in the heart of
a believer, and the Law of God, and commands of Christ written therein, to
disciple their children, for the faith they have in believing the love of God
to them, and the Redemption wrought for them, leads them to take them as the
price of blood, put in their hands to bring up for God, as Jacob took his
children; And the love that has sprung up from Gods love in them, leads them
to love, and accept whom God accepts, and to reckon according to his judgment,
and so to receive them by Baptism, into his Family to bring up for him, having
his allowance. And thus much about this medium of baptizing.


As for objections against baptizing children, I have purposed to avoid
contention, and so shall meddle little farther then what is already done: As
for the demand of an example of children mentioned to be baptized; they are
enclusively mentioned in the word Nations, the word Households, in types
mentioned; But its enough, it is commanded, and was forementioned; and there
was reason of small mentioning them; because the writings were at the first
calling of the Churches: And it would have broke the Jews in pieces to have
seen their Circumcision at first to thrown down, which they yet so esteemed,
and even the Apostles saw not the largeness of the extent of their Commission
at first, Acts 10. and 11. As for that is said, Children understand it not. Its
answered, As much as they did curcumcision; and though they do not understand
it when baptized, yet as Christ said to Peter, they may afterward, John 13.7.
The pervertings of the Text, abuse of single examples to limit with etc. I will
omit, nor will I press any to more speedy baptizing their children, then
according as by the light they have in the Gospel, they see cause. As for such
as believe not the report of the Gospel in the extent of it, I pity them;
because I see not how they can go upon any certain grounds to baptize any
children at all; seeing they are not certain whether Christ dyed, and rose for
them, or not, but though I see not, I hope some of them do, or else they would
not do it.

But I will proceed no farther in this, believing it already proved, that all
of as that were baptized in our infancy in the name of the Father, and of the
Sin, and of the Holy Ghost professedly, we have been baptized; and had there
been some more errors then were of men's mixtures in the administration thereof;
though they were evil, and to be repented, yet they made not the Lords
Baptism null, as is shown pages 9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18. So that I look at my
self, and all so baptized, as engaged in the very acceptance of this Baptism,
as in the greatest, and most solemn row: To believe, and yield to the sayings
of Christ, to wait for, and yield to his spirit for conforming to the Douth of
Christ, that we might not live to our selves, but unto Christ. So that other
baptizing with elementary water we need not; but such a remembrance of Gods
mercy, and our engagement in that Baptism, that we yield to all the operations
of his grace in his sayings, in afflictions, and motions of his; that the
Baptism into oneness with, and conformity to Christ may be more effected in
us: But for men that have been baptized in the name of the Lord in their
infancy, after they come to believe, to be pressed again to be baptized with
water; I cannot but look at, as evil, and sinful; because there is nothing in
Christ's Commission for it, no precept, or example for it, nor promise to it in
all the Scripture; nor yet have I ever met with any place aledged for a
baptizing again with water any that were once professedly baptized so in the
name of the Lord Jesus before, but only that one place Acts 19 4, 5. Where if
that were true as they conceive, and granted, as they would have it, namely,
That those twelve were fore-baptized with water to John's Baptism, and then
baptized again by Paul in the name of the Lord Jesus. Yet makes it nothing for
their purpose; for then it would follow, That those who formerly baptized them,
did not themselves understand, what John's Baptism was, though they named it,
and baptized unto it; and so they were not before in words, or professedly
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, or in the Name of the Father, of the
Son, and Holy Ghost. And then it was not baptism that is the ordinance of the
Lord, and so it Paul did baptize them in the Name of the Lord Jesus; It was
because they were not so baptized before at all, as we in our infancy were, and
so it makes nothing for baptizing again, any that were professedly baptized in
that name; But indeed, there is no such saying, as that either Paul baptized
those Twelve, or that they were baptized again, the contrary rather appears.
For Luke in his story, telling of Paul's journey to Ephesus, And that he found
certain Disciples there; In the second verse, tells us of Paul's Question, and
their Answer; And in the third verse of Paul's Reply to, or Demand on their
Answer, Unto what then were ye baptized, and their return of Answer, unto
John's Baptism. And then Luke tess us again of Paul's return of Answer, and
instruction therein to them verse 4, and 5. And then of his Action toward them
in verse 6 In verse 4 Paul first justifies John's Baptism, (as our Savior,
Acts 1.5.) John verily baptized with the Baptism of repentance; Then Paul
describes John's Baptism, both in the doctrinall, and practical part thereof,
verse 4. Saying, that is, John said unto the people (that is, those John
preached too) That they should believe on him that should come after him, that
is on Ghrist Jesus; And then in verse 5. he deseribes the practical part of
John's Baptism by 1. The Time. 2. The Action. 3. The Manner of it.

1. For the Time, He stayed not till the people could testify such, and such a
work of grace in their hearts; But when the people (that is, John's hearers)
heard this (that is) did attend, and were willing to hear John's 'Doctrine and
be baptized.

2. That is the Action, Then they were baptized, John baptized them with water:
And

3. For the Manner, It was in the name of the Lord Jesus. So has Paul shown
John's Baptism to be right, And that he did truly baptize with water, as Acts
1.5. And so if Apollos, or other baptized these twelve with John's Baptism; it
was right, and enough for the outward, and they needed no more for that; nor
does Luke say Paul baptized these: But in verse 6. Luke tells us Paul's Action,
and Gods Blessing on it, he says not, when Paul had baptized them, But when
Paul had laid his hands on them (which is not Baptism, but another ordinance
of God, called imposition of hands; In which men praying to God for any, as in
confidence, they lift up hearts, and hands to God; so in testimony of that
confidence they laid on their hands on the party prayed for, Heb. 6.2.) like
the same done by Peter and John, Act. 8 15, 16, 17 and the same blessing there
was here; so that all the way here appears no second baptizing with water, and
however taken, nothing to the purpose of such urgers of it; indeed it is a
grief, that there is found so much Antichristianisme, and so many corruptions
in Ministers, and ministry, and such additions of men's superstitions, in any
Congregation, or Church of professed Christians, to dishonor God, and as
should make the Lords people to abhor the Lords Ordinances, yea, this of
Baptism; yet surely, This is also a grief to many, that some of the Lords
people do not discern to put difference, between the corruptions and
superstitions of men; and their posts set up by the posts of the Lord, and the
ordinances and posts of the Lord himself, so as for want of discerning, in
abhoring men's corruptions, they abhor also the ordinances and posts of the
Lord, in which they do verily transgress, 1 Samuel 2.17, 24. Though indeed
those evil doers are the cause thereof; And indeed for such as on such
occasions have been troubled, about their Baptism received in Infancy, and
thought in their Ignorance, and rash Zeal to better it by a renewing; though
their practice be not justifiable; yet I rather pity them, then judge them;
and desire they may not be led into farther inconveniences, but that they may
walk in the faith of the Lord Jesus, and love of their Brethren, according to
that name into which they were at first baptized; But for such, as have once
been outwarldy and professedly baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, that is,
In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, though in their infancy, to
renounce that Baptism, as null, as vain, as Antichristian, and Antichrists
Baptism, that they may have, and receive another Baptism, and put the Title
of the Lords Baptism upon that: This is surely more evil then the former, and
much more to be lamented; As may appear in three things; in which, oh that I
were mistaken; that is to say, 1. The evil they intimately and unknowingly
they do in this business. 2. The evil courses they are constrained to take to
accomplish this business. 3. The evil fruits that do follow the accomplishment
thereof.


1. For that they intimately, and unknowingly do, let it be considered; what
was professedly done in the Baptism they renounce, as null, and Antichristian;
And there will be found, That in that Baptism, they were received into, and
engaged unto the acknowledgement (even as now) of,

First, The Name of the Fater, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, or of
Christ, as set forth in the Gospel.

Secondly, The obligation (or covenant) to be the Lord Christ's, his own, and to
own his Lordship.

Thirdly, The hope of, and waiting in use of his ordinances for his holy
Spirit, to enlighten, teach, etc. The Commission and promise of Jesus Christ,
Matthew. 28.19, 20. Mark. 16.15, 16. being of as large, yea of a larger extent,
and as sure as that of God by Moses, Deuteronomy. 29.9, 10.15. and 30. with Romans
10.4.8.10, And the ordinance being the Lords, could not be null in it self by
men's failings? Now then, was not the dipping in, or washing with water, man, or
child, that made it Baptism; but by virtue of Christ's Commission given, the
Doing in that Name; And surely, when this baptism is renounced, they have not
another Name of God, another Gospel, in which is truth to declare, and into
which to baptize again; Nor have they another Jesus, that is the Christ, and
Jesus a Savior indeed, to engage unto by baptizing again. Nor have they
another Spirit, That is the Spirit of the Father, and Son, to set in
hopefulnesse for their baptized to wait for; If these things could be done in
a second baptism, it might be borne, 2 Cor. 11.3, 4. If not, Then the first
that was with water in that name being renounced, what is the second (for a
Church order, and such, or such a called Minister to baptize, or such an Age of
the man, or such a word of grace in the man, are not of the effence, or being
of outward baptism, as is foreshewed;) is it not in the receipt of it, upon
the renouncing of the first; A secret Hidden, and intimate denying of,

First, the name into which they were at first baptized, and so the Gospel and
Scripture setting forth that Name, and so leading to set loose from heeding
Scripture Testimony.

Secondly, the obligation, in which men were in that baptism engaged unto
Jesus Christ; to own and acknowledge his Lordship, and walk in his way, which
when they came to understand, If they renounced not the name Christian, they
have also accepted; But now in denying that first Baptism; They deny all that
continue that Baptism to be obliged, or engaged by any Covenant, or Vow on
their part, to own the Lordship of Jesus Christ, To believe his sayings, to
attend his Word, and Odinances, and to walk in his ways, and so set men loose
from their obligation to the Lord, and so far led to deny him, that bought
them; And also to deny,

Thirdly, That hope of the Spirit which was set before them in that Baptism.
And that this evil lurketh in the denial of the Lords baptism once received,
And that it is a dangerous evil, is evident by the Commission for the
ordinance, and all fore-writ about the grounds, ends, and subjects of it. But
that any of our brethren, either Baptizers, or Baptized do this evil
knowingly, or purposely, (yea surely I think at the first, They would abhor the
thoughts of such an evil) I do not charge them with it; But as a sin of
ignorance, intimate in the renouncing the first baptism: I desire, they might
never come knowingly to do such evil.

2. For the evil courses they are constrained to take, To bring men to
renounce their first Baptime, and take up another, and to justify the same,
when opposed by Scripture; Though all of them take not every of these ways,
But some one, some another, but I will mention none, but what I have met in
their discourses, and writings in my hands.

First, adding too, or taking from, many sayings of Scripture, to force in that
they have no Scripture for, as in Mat. 28.19. First Teach, and then Baptize,
and Baptize them taught, which are not there; Mat. 3. Denying them to be A
generation of Vipers in that sense, whom John calls so; others denying John to
have baptized them, when he says he did. But water, and laver mentioned, Joh.
3.5. Tit. 3.4, 5. For elementary water, which appears by our Saviors
exposition to be otherwise. Joh. 3.14.15, 16. And by Paul's, Romans 5.8, 10. with
Tit. 3.5.6, 7. And so denying all our Forefathers, till John's time, from
entering the Kingdom.

Secondly, Pretending their refusal of their first baptism to be; because
there is no mention of Children, not come to the use of understanding in either
precept, or example, to be baptized, and so the Scripture to be silent in it;
whereas they are much mentioned in that, as in the Gospel, That Jesus Christ
dyed, and rose, and gave himself a ransom for them And its already shown, They
are encluded, and as much mentioned, as any others distinct in the commission,
and encluded in the tenor of the Gospel; in which in former times, they were
mentioned expressly, and since intimately; So that the Scripture is not silent
in it. But as under the Law, for any once outwardly Circumcised, upon their
repentance, and faith, to be circumcised again; And so now since the Commission
given for any once baptized with water in the name of the Lord, upon their
repentance and faith, To be baptized with water again, there is neither Precept
for it, Example of it, nor Promise to it, and the Scripture is altogether
silent in it; And yet this they do, and stand to maintain.

Thirdly, Slandering, and defaming such, as at their persuasions, will not
renounce their first Baptism, and accept of theirs as maintainers of
Antichrist, denyers of the Lords baptism, deniers of believers to be baptized,
disobedient to, and breakers of Gods Commandments, especially, This of
baptism, whereas it appears by that already said, That for the Lord Christ
they stand; For his sayings they plead, and its before proved, to be the Lords
baptism they stand for; nor do they deny believers to be baptized with water,
if they were not fore-baptized; and if they were, there is no allowance in
Scripture to baptize them with water again, and for their disobedience to Gods
commands, they count it meet to acknowledge it, and seek for healing through
Christ, in all through ignorance, weakness, or violence of temptation, they
may be found to be faulty in, but to allow or maintain themselves in
disobedience to Gods commands, I hope the Lord will preserve them from; But to
do as their oponents, cry it out, in private and public; We walk in the
ways of Christ, we keep the Commandments of God; They look at, as too
pharisaycall; And yet sure to tell such as were once baptized in the name of
the Lord, That their Baptism was no Baptism; and so to take them off their
engagements to be the Lords, and live to him, is to break, and teach men to
break Gods commands.

Fourthly, Laying forth evil, and unsound Opinions, or Doctrines to ground
this their second Baptism on, as That (speaking of the Ordinance of Baptism
to say) to faith exhibited by Baptism is salvation promised, and setting forth
what baptism is, to say, its the application of water upon faith, which needs
no confutation, but the mentioning, though I have answered those under whose
hands I have it; But I verily believe, few there be, that will reason so
grossly, though some have done. But this have I found in those more sober;
That they declare their baptizing with water, as a foundation business, and so
make it a part of the foundation, and those other principles of doctrine,
mentioned Heb 6. to be other parcels of the foundation; because its said, The
Foundation of Repentance, etc. Whereas it has been told them; That the Word,
the Foundation of such a thing argues not, that thing to be the Foundation; as
to say, The Foundation of an House does not argue the House to be the
Foundation; nor is Baptism there put in, But the Doctrine of Baptismes: And
though this has also been alleged, That Jesus Christ is the Foundation; Yet
that has been answered, That he is the Foundation cmminently, but not only,
others may be a part of the Foundation, but he the chief, even the
Cornerstone; And for this alleged, Ephesians. 2.20. Built upon the Foundation of
the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone;
To which this answer given; That by all that went before, and followed after in
Ephesians. 2.20. These words, The Foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, implies
not at all, That the Prophets, and Apostles are the Foundation any more, then
the naming the Foundation of a House implies, that the House is the Foundation.
But with that went before, and which follows, It proves;

First, That Jesus Christ, is the foundation, which was set forth, and laid by
them, that were both eye witnesses, and the first witnesses of Jesus Christ his
coming in the flesh, and of his Death and Resurrection, etc. Both the prime
Apostles, and the Residue that were Prophets, and Evangelists also; For the
Prophers are here mentioned after Apostles, Acts 10 41. Hebr. 2.3.4. As also,
That he is the foundation upon which these Apostles, and Prophets, and all the
believers, that were Jews, were built; And the believers that were Gentiles
were built also upon the same foundation with them.

Secondly, That this Jesus Christ as he is the foundation; so he is also the
corner stone, that couples the walls, or buildings together, so as in being
built on him, the Apostles, and Prophets, and the Jews that believe; yea, all
the Church that went before, and the Gentiles that believe; yea, all that come
in to him, and are built on him after, They are by him united together, So as
they are one house, household, or Church, Ephesians. 2.14-18. 1 Pet. 2.4, 5.9. with
1 Cor. 12 12 13; And so Christ is affirmed to be both the Foundation, and The
cornerstone Isa. 28.16. And this not only primely and emminently, but also
only, For

Thirdly, Other Foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. Neither is there Salvation in any other; For there is none
Name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.11, 12. To
this, though nothing be opposed, yet not yielded; but waved, That it might not
weaken another opinion, About the necessity of the outward Ordinance of
Baptizing with water, which is employed by the reasoning of many, and affirmed
by some, To be as necessary as Faith; though our Savior would not so affirm
of that, which without controversy was true Baptism, and more then outward
baptism sure. Mark. 16.15.16.

Fifthly, By Interogations, and Queries, to put men to a mislike of their first
Baptism; As, were you so dipped, and plunged in water, when water was thrown
on your faces? Did you so coufesse your sins, and confess your faith? Had
you such and such holy ends, if not, then your Baptism was no Baptism? And so
urge them to renounce it, whereas though such things had been good, and
commendable in the Fathers of Families proselited from the Nations, when
circumcised, yet not required of all under their tuition, so one may say of
Heathens when discipled, such things are commendable in those of understanding
when baptized, but not required in all under their tuition; yet notwithstanding
there is no precept enjoining any to such or such a plunging, or a particular,
and verbal confession of sins; or such a confession and declaration of Faith,
and such holy ends to be aimed at in all that are received to be Baptized, so
as to put a necessity in such a case, more then God has, is but man's Doctrine,
and yet also an error in the manner, is before shown, not to null Baptism,
done in his Name.

Sixthly; By urging, when other means prevail not, to return to Rome, for
(say some) your Baptism binds you to be faithful to that Church, into which
you were membred, when baptized: whereas this, is not only without, but against
Scripture: For, first we were not baptized into the name of a man, or Minister,
or any order of men, or any Church, or Church order; But into the name of the
Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.12, 13. etc. Secondly, in Baptism we were reduced into
the outward Church, or Family of God, that profess his name, and not into a
Church Order, or membred into this, or that particular Congregation, no such
thing in the Commission: The Eunuch was baptized rightly sure, and yet received
into no particular Congregation, or Church Order, Acts 8.38 39. Yea, there were
many baptized, and that Churches also, before set in the outward order, as is
evident, by comparing Acts 13.14. with 14.1.19.21, 22, 23. That is not the end
of Baptism, to member into a particular Congregation, or into an outward
Church Order; such a business rather leads to the faulted, 1 Cor. 1.10, 11,
12, 13. and 4.6. No, nor to give the liberty of acknowledging Brotherhood;
Ananias rightly called Saul Brother before he was baptized, Acts 9.17, 18.

Seventhly, by taking advantage; when by these means men are made doubtful of
their first Baptism, and incline to think well of that they hold forth; to
urge them while they are yet in their passion, to receive their baptism,
presently pressing thereto, Acts 22.16. and 2.38, 39. Which was not to such as
were in any sort, or at any time baptized in the name of the Lord before: And
now, why tarriest thou, were rather words of encouragement, to take away
fears, then of pressing to the suddenness simply, Acts 9.11. to 17 18. And
surely, for such as had vile thoughts of Jesus, judged him not to be the
Christ, but persecuted, and crucified him, and were never fore-baptized in his
name: It was meet, on sight of their sin, they should repent, by changing
their minds into right thoughts of Christ, and testify the same, by being
baptized in his name; and what is this for any so fore-baptized, to be baptized
so again? But for men that were fore-baptized with water in the name of the
Lord, and have since been enlightened in the knowledge of his grace, and so come
to high thoughts of him, as the only he, the Foundation, the Peace, Life, etc.
So as they rest on him, and submit to him, would any have them to repent, and
change their minds in this, to more base thoughts of Jesus, and to testify it,
by renouncing their first Baptism, and taking up another? I hope not; though
the evil Spirit may secretly have such an aim, to produce it afterward. The
Lord keep us all from this, and I verily believe, all they in beginnings will
say, Amen.

3. For the evil consequences that follow on the practice of renouncing the
first Baptism, and taking up a second; They are such as are more ordinary, and
usual, and in a sort, necessary; or such as are occasional, though not so
ordinary: The more necessary, and ordinary evils that flow from this practice,
are;

First, by pressing the necessity of, and magnifying the outward ordinance,
etc. A baptizing rather into Baptism, or the name of Baptism, then into the
name of the Lord, though words carry it so; whence many in change of their
opinion, and Congregation, are baptized the third time.

Secondly, A slighting of the Lords ordinance of Baptism fore-administred, and
contending against it, and in magnifying their new Baptizing, an intimate
slighting of the gracious operations of the Holy Ghost in the hearts, and
appearing in the lives of Believers, retaining their first baptism, and not
accepting theirs; Yea, I have it under the hands of some, that all was
Antichristian, and of the world, before their second Baptism received, and so
to be disclaimed on receipt thereof.

Thirdly, A separation from Brotherhood, and Fellowship in the Gospel, and
ordinances of Jesus Christ, with those they have had even spiritual fellowship
withal, and tastes of his goodness in, Before.

Fourthly, A judging, despising, and censuring deeply, all those that maintain
their first Baptism, and approve not theirs.

The occasional evils which are not indeed so ordinary, are the springing up,
and appearing of that evil, which is foresaid to be intimately, and knowingly
done in the renouncing of the first Baptism, and taking up another, as page
33. when in zealous justifying of it, after follows in some, such a
magnifying of that obedience (as they conceive) to the ordinance of Baptism,
as they even put that Baptism in the place of Christ, and that obedience in
the place of Faith, and so ground, and bottom the justification of themselves,
and others and their hope of life on their own works, as their Declarations
declare. But, in some others, in a contrary, and more fearful extreme. A
slighting of the Gospel which is written, that declares the name in which at
first they were baptized, as a Dead, a killing Letter, yea, as a Fable, in the
words whereof, truth is not; but in some misterious, or misty imagination of an
Allegorical sense. And with this ere long, a slighting of the personal body
of the man Christ; And so, of his dying for our sins, and rising for our
justification, and offering himself a Sacrifice to God for us; and sitting in
Heaven to appear before God, and mediate for us, as but a Figure, a Type, a
Shadow, and of no farther profitable use to us. And with this, a slighting of
all the operations of the Spirit, that testified of him, and effected Faith,
Love, Union, Conformity from that appearance of him: All which they count but
fleshly, and knowing Christ after the flesh; how near this is to that sin
mentioned, Heb. 10.29. the very mentioning it does declare. And for those, that
after knowledge, and warning, persist in this evil, they soon come to deny the
very being of the body of the man Christ, and the resurrection of the bodies of
men that dye. I suppose, all that have any spark of grace remaining, will look
at this as a fearful evil; and it might warn to shun that practice, which
gives occasion of (...).

But in this I desire none to mistake me, as if I affirmed, such as receive a
second Baptism, are necessitated to this, nor yet all such as renounce the
first, to accept the second, or that only such do fall into this evil: Not
so, far be it from us so to think, or judge: But in observation, this some
discern, that for the most part, such as fall into this evil, are of those
that were never baptized into the knowledge, and acknowledgement of the Death,
Resurrection, and Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, in the extent, and virtue of it
for all men, and so were either zealous opposers of it, or if in some sort
acknowledging it a truth, yet counting it but a common, and light matter, which
yet is the Foundation, as is shown, page 18.19. Yet mostly, those of these that
fall into this evil, are such as before they fall into it, come to renounce
their first baptism, and accept a second, though when they fall into it, they
count themselves above all ordinances, and so slight their second also, in
respect of themselves, or else such as in their judgment come to be snared with
that practice, and to approve it as good; But conceiting Miracles of right to
be done by such as Baptize, they wait, and seek, for such like things, till
they conceit themselves above ordinances, and then not needing it, both sorts
of them still approving such a practice for others; it being the way to set
them loose from that name into which they were at first Baptized, that so
slighting Scripture, they may believe them.

And yet still farther I desire to be noted, that there are two sorts of men
that maintain this practice of renouncing the first Baptism, and taking up a
second. First, such as do not believe Jesus Christ to have dyed, and given
himself a Ransom for all men; or that there is any gracious life in him for
them all; But that Christ did this only for a certain company elect in Gods
hidden Counsel from Eternity, and that shall infallibly believe on him in
time, and so oppose the testimony of Scripture, that says, He gave himself a
ransom for all men: These, I know not how they can with a good conscience,
walking in their Faith, baptize any, till upon good grounds they be persuaded,
that they do in heart believe in Jesus Christ, and so are apted for renouncing
their first Baptism, and taking a second, though being brought to believe,
they might enjoy the use of their first Baptism, and have no good grounds to
renounce it, and take up a second: But it is meeter to reason with them, and
inform them about the truth of the Scripture, in the extent and virtue of the
Foundation, Acts 18.2.3. than to contend with them about the ordinance of
Baptism, in which it is no marveil though they be misled. But there are some,
that do profess to believe, and hold forth the extent of the Ransom; Oh that
they would seriously, without prejudice, or offence-taking, consider the things
written, for it is marveilous to me, and others, that any rightly understanding
that business, should deny the Baptizing of Children, by Gods gracious
providence put into the Tuition of such as believe, and profess Jesus to be
the Christ; But yet more marveilous that any (I hope there are not many) will
say, A horse may as well be baptized as an Infant; surely, they will deny that
to be true for a horse, that they will acknowledge to be true for an Infant;
that Jesus Christ took their nature, and dyed for their sins, and rose for
their justification; and that such as we treat of, are by gracious providence
put under the Tuition of Christians; to be brought up for God, in his fear:
And that (as John 13.) They may be instructed after, in this ordinance they now
understand not; all, or any of which, I hope none will say of a horse.

And thus have I shown the cause of fear and grief in such a practice, yet
not to cast aspersions on the person of any, but to show the evils that are so
incident to such a practice; neither yet to unbrother any because of such a
practice, unless such in whom, the last mentioned, occasional evils appear,
1 Cor. 16.22. For it belongs not to me, or others, to judge any, in observance
of an outward Ordinance, who, through some appearance in Scripture to their
understanding, Do that which they do unto the Lord, Romans 14 1. to 10 Yet this
I wish, that in this business, the Tenor of the Gospel, and the Commission of
Christ, be considered; and that in reasoning, they would state the question
right, not whether Believers may be baptized, for that none denies, but whether
Believers, that were fore-baptized in the name of the Lord, are, after they
come to believe, to be baptized with water in the name again; and then,
whether children in Believers Tuition, may not he so baptized, and till they
can prove the one, and disprove the other by that Gospel, and without taking
the foresaid evil ways, cease pressing their practice on others: And such as
are not yet entangled, to consider what is said, and not suffer themselves to
be snared. If any say, we do, and may run into as many evils, I confess, we
are as weak as others, and so I will neither justify my self, nor judge them,
but pray for the healing of their follies, and mine: But whatsoever evils
through weakness or violence of temptation, I, or others may be overtaken
withal; yet this I affirm, that the remembering, minding, and retaining the
Lords Baptism we have received, leads not to, but preserves from such
evils; For it leads us to acknowledge the great Love, and mercy of God, in
the gift of his Son, and testified, and tendered to us in the Gospel of his
Son, into whose name we were baptized, and so to count our selves engaged as
by vow, and solemn Covenant (which since we came to use of understanding, we
have accepted) To be the Lords, to live to him, to believe his sayings, and
wait for his Spirit, and walk in his ways, as is fore-shewn, page 23.24. If
any say, we plead thus to save our selves from trouble among men; I answer,
what through frailty we may do, we desire to acknowledge, and seek
preservation from, or, if overtaken, healing of it; But it will be no comfort,
to suffer for that we have no command in the word for, but in our
apprehensions, much against it. But although we shun that practice, yet if we
hold forth the word of life, in word, and conversation, acknowledging the
sayings, and ordinances of Christ, and our Brethren witnessing against the
Idolatry, and evil ways of men, we shall suffer as much as they, yea, and
with them, while we acknowledge that truth, which some of them with us do
hold, though we urge not a second Baptism, as of old some did Circumcision, to
glory in the flesh, and boast of another man's line withal, which, in our
judgments, would befall us in that practice: Wherefore I say no more to this,
but the Lord make us so mindful of him, in whose name we were baptized, that
we may, in beleiving his sayings, attending his Ordinances, and accepting to
bear his reproach, wait on him for his spirit to baptize us more and more into
union, and conformity with Jesus Christ in his Death, that we may experiment
more the virtue of his Resurrection; So shall we be more separate from the
world, in the Idolatry, Pride, carnal Reasonings, Superstitions, Customs,
Fashions, Uncleanness, Covetousness, and Oppressions thereof, and be found
more Loving, Tender, and Faithful to one another, and fruitful to the Spirit.
And so will our differences be healed, which God of his mercy grant, that we
may not bite one another, that so there be not a devouring, nor turning any out
of the way; But that we may all grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

Your Loving, though Unworthy Brother, THOMAS MOORE.

FINIS.

