FREE-PARLIAMENT QUAERES: PROPOSED TO Tender Consciences; AND Published for the
use of the Members now Elected.

By Alazonomastix Philalethes.

Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici? Printed in the year of our Redemption.
1660.

Free-Parliament Quaeres, etc.
1. Whether Coffee be not the most fitting Drink for the English Nation, since
we have equalled, nay out-gone the Turks themselves; for though they murdered
the Father, yet they presently set up the Son?

2. Whether our late Rumpers deserve not that that saying, Nulla fides pietasve
viris qui Castra sequuntur, should be thus interpreted, There is neither Faith
nor Pity to be showed to them nor their Janissaries?

3. Whether Hell at Westminster be not likely to lose its Customers, since the
Devils are turned out of the Parliament House?

4. Whether Thom. Scot can pretend to Liberty of Conscience, since he made an
Archbishops House a Prison or Gaol?

5. Whether by the Covenant, Sir Arthur Haslerigg ought not to be ejected from
the Bishopric of Durham, since by that we have sworn against all limbs of
Episcopacy?

6. Whether Hanging or Drowning be the best ways of Transportation of our late
Republicans to the Commonwealths of Vtopia or Oceana?

7. Whether that Prophecy the Saints shall rule the earth, be not meant of
Barbados, Jamaica, or some terra incognita?

8. Whether Col. John S. can keep off the Taxes of an Execution, by the profit
he got by printing the late Act of Assessement?

9. Whether F. and H. the late Commonwealth Printers should not change Names,
since the first swells like a Mountain, and the other is but a poor Leveller?

10. Whether Sir Arthur Haslerigg has not a President of Patience, in this his
falling into the pit of Adversity, from his falling into the ditch at Leicester?

11. Whether Bradshaw and Dun did not accompany each other to Hell, that the
Devil having got such a Judge, might not want a fit Executioner?

12. Whether the loss of writing the News of England, was not the Cause that
Nedham was so busy with the News from Brussels?

13. Why since England has so long been made Bedlam, the Sectarians should
rather be called Fanatics than Franticks?

14. Whether the Army be not dispossessed of the Devil, and Sir Arthur, since
they begin to submit to the Civil Authority?

15. Whether the Soldiers ought not to tear off their Red Coats, since Oliver
first instituted them, that they might resemble the Devils Pensioners, in
slaming Doublets?

16. Whether the Fanatics do not hate Monck now, as much as ever they did the
Church, their King, or Country?

17. If the Proverb be true, When Knaves fall out, Honest men may come by their
Goods; then whether Lamberts switching the Rump out of Doors, and their driving
him into the Tower, may not open a Door of Hope for something further?

18. Whether a Long Parliament, a Lord, and five Members, might not, were they
now conjoined together, be termed the Devils Coach with six Horses?

19. Whether there is not like to be a less Arbibitrary administration of
Justice in Hell, if Bradshaw be made President there, instead of Minos,
Rhadamanthus, or Aeacus?

20. Whether the next Parliament ought not to condemn Dr. John Owens Primer,
to be burnt by the Common Hangman, since it was made for the use of the
Children of the Rump?

21. Whether any of the late Rump could have stood for Parliament Men, if
neither fools nor knaves had been capable of Election?

22. Whether it be not the Cheapest way of buying Lands, with Col. Harvey and
others, to agree with the State for three moieties, and then cozen them of two?

23. Whether that Comedy, called The Costly Whore, was not intended for the
life of the Lady Sands, and was written by Henry Martin?

24. Whether the Bastard, a Tragedy, was compiled by Mr. Goff, or written by
J. Ireton?

25. Whether Orlando Furioso that ancient Italian Poem, was not meant for a
Prophetical Relation of the life of Sir Arthur Haslerigg?

26. Whether the Discontented Colonel, be not the fittest play to be acted by
our cashiered Officers, since they have now no more to do in State Comedies?

27. Whether Sir Arthur did not act the Raging Turk in Westminster Hall, when
he saw the admission of the Secluded Members?

28. Whether it was to know if he should be chosen for Parliament man, or when
he should take his turn at Tyburn, that the said Gentleman lately addressed
himself to the Star-cheater Lilly?

29. Whether Col. S. Creditors have any assurance of his honesty, since he
may, being a Printer, so easily change the first letters of his name, and make
it Cheater?

30. Whether Atkins be the Anagram of a Stink, or a Stink of Atkins; and
whether that be not a very fitting name for a Member of the Rump?

31. Whether the fifth of November, or the twenty one of February, deserve the
greater solemnity, as a day of delivery from the grander Traitors?

32. Why a Rump being a small and worst part of a man, so many good Saints
should go together to the making of it up?

33. Whether ever Doctors Commons might more fitly be called the Spiritual
Court than lately, when none but Saints were Judges and Proctors?

34. Whether the Proverb that says, Facilis descensus Averni, the way to Hell
is easy, be not a mistake, since our late Statesmen took such pains in it?

35. Whether the so stately equipping of the Naseby Frigate, be not for the
bringing home of the Son, since the Father lost his Crown and Dignity at that
fatal place, that so there may be an allusion to that Proverb?

-- Qua cuspide vulnus acuta
Tulerat, hac ipsa cuspide tulit opem.
36. Whether an act of Oblivion can ever be really passed for the late men of
the Tail; since they can never forget their former Rogueries, if they be
suffered to enjoy the profits of them?

37. Whether the salt of the English wits is not strangely unprofitable, since
it makes the Rump to stink more and more in the nostrils of the People?

38. Lastly, Whether it be not good service to the Nation, to keep the stink of
them thus fresh in their noses, that they may for the future avoid fouling
their fingers with them?

FINIS.

