The Jus Divinum OF GOVERNMENT; OR MAGISTRACY Proved to be God's Ordinance, AND
Justice the MAGISTSRATES Duty.

In a plain SERMON Preached before the Judges of Assize at East-Grinstead in
the County of Sussex.

By Zacheus Mountagu.

(...). LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Abel Roper at the Sign of the Sun over
against St Dunstans-Church in Fleetstreet, 1652.

To the Right Reverend JOHN PULESTON AND PETER WARBURTON, Both Justices of the
Common Pleas.
MY LORDS,
YOur importunate and joint desires, which my civility taught me to look upon
as Commands, are now satisfied, and that hasty Piece which when you first
called for it, was scarce legible, now waits upon you in a fairer hand. I
cannot promise you with fewer errors, for 'twas never since sub spongia, but I
am sure in better Characters; I wish it may but so happily take your eye, as
you were pleased to signify it took your ear, and be received with the same
candor and sweetness from the Press as it was from the Pulpit: I confess I
am not without some fear, that cross to that of the Poet, the instructions in
it will Segnius irritare animos, now they are, Occulis subjecta fidelibus, then
when they were dimissa per Aures. But however this Discourse, as others of this
nature, must take its fate; Your Honors called for it, and it being a Guest of
your own invitation, I hope you will not deny to bid it welcome; as for its
dress of language, I cannot but judge it plain and without affectation; but
yet, I hope, well enough accommodated to my Design, which was not to tickle the
Ear, but inform the Judgment. I know Truth is then best apparrelled, when she
shines in her own native Luster, and she fears so much that of the wanton to be
Ipsa pars minima sui, that she always chooses rather to affect the gravity
and decent plainness of a Matron. I considered farther how that Vocum aucupes,
they are usually Rerum proditores, and as the judicious Rawleigh observes,
Nihil odiosius sapientiae acumine nimio. Neither indeed was my Topic so jejune
and barren, as that I should be forced only to face it with words for want of
matter to line it through with. All that I dare promise or hope in behalf of
this plain-dealing Countrey-Sermon, is, that you will find it, if not acute
and Rhetorical, yet close and substantial, having in it the beauty of a word
spoken in season, and being so exactly fitted to the business of an Assize,
That if your Honors please to take it as a Line and Rule in your hand when you
are upon the Judgment Seat, it will help to render your judicial Proceedings
level and regular. It begs nothing of you but the Patronage of Justice, and the
pursuing of that as the main end of your Office; and that you would stand by
your own Helena of the Law, and not suffer her to have a Rape committed on her
by any of the sons of violence, in whom the Levelling humor is too
predominant: should our Laws fail, we should then quickly return to the bed of
Nature, where like Beasts the stoutest took all, and the weak should hold by no
other Title or Tenure, but that of Indulgence and Dispensation from the strong.
I have no more at present, but only this good wish to leave with your Honors,
that Justice may meet with a better Orator, and just Government with a stouter
Champion, and better Arms to shield and defend its right, then is the
unserviceable Pen and Tongue of him, who professes himself

In all his Capacities your Honors ready and real Servant Mountagu.

THE JVS DIVINVM OF GOVERNMENT.
DEUTERONOMY. 16.18. Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy Gates, which
the Lord thy God gives thee throughout thy Tribes: and they shall judge the
People with just Judgment.
I Shall Preface all with a borrowed note or two from one now in eminency. As
the natural body is distinguished into superior and inferior, into Noble and
ignoble parts, so is the political; as that body is a monster which is all
head, or whose head is too big for the body, so is that which has no head, or
a head too little; where all govern there is no government, and where all are
chief, there can be no Order: Magistrates are Rulers over the persons of the
people, but they are servants to the good of the people; as it is the duty of
all to serve them, so it is their office to to serve all: it is no paradox to
affirm, that Rulers are the greatest Servants. I confess God puts so much of
his own work into the hands of Magistrates and Judges, that he therefore puts
his own Name upon them, and he calls them Gods, they are god sindeed, but it is
in a smaller letter neither must they forget that they shall dye like men;
deservedly culpable was the Idolatrous Courtship of the pagan world, who
because truth her self calls Rulers Gods, were content to aequivocate from the
similitude to the essence, and so share among them not only the title but the
adoration too, but such pagan elogies are the worst of flatteries, and it is
better to be the Christians man, then the Heavens deity. The Sons of Ish they
must not forget they are Sons of Adam, and, though they are gods of their
subjects they are subject to God; Rule indeed is Gods ordinance, but 'twas
primitively designed for the worlds safety, and not the Creatures vain glory.
Rulers they are without a fiction, the true and real Atlas of the world 'its
weight and burden leans on them, and they are more for the peoples sake, then
the people for theirs: great things they are indeed, but God would not have
great things to be great in vain; Great things are in design and order to serve
and benefit the less: The Sun the Prince of lights, and the Heart of Nature,
serves as well for the eyes of a fly as the eyes of a Monarch, and the Sea
within its double depth of waters and wonders, supports and feeds as well the
smallest fish, as the great Leviathan it self who is made to sport and play
therein. Now what Universal causes are in nature, that should Governors be in
policy, they should impartially lay out themselves for the Common good of all
who have their interest in or dependances upon them. The Jewish Targum tells us,
how that it was the ancient mode, and solemn wont of the Hebrews, at the birth
of their Princes Children, to plant Trees, which they reputed sacred, and
dressed them with a careful diligence, that of them they might one day make
thrones for those little Monarchs, when they should be grown up to their
inauguration. And what could be the moral of this practice, but to teach they
Rulers, that like fruitful and spreading Trees, they ought to yield both shade
and shelter to the people, and feed them with their fruits, and secure them
with their protections, and that leading quiet and peaceable lives in all
godliness and honesty, they might be safe under their Covert? This is indeed
that wherein consists the preheminency of Magistrates and Judges, above the
lowest of the people, this is indeed that wherein especially they have the
advantage, and whereby they hold the title of gods, because they have both
capacity and opportunity to do more good then others, they have power to
succor the distressed, to relieve the the injured, and to help those weak ones
to their right, who have not power to right themselves. Thus much the Heathens
were convinced of, when one of their own Poets bespeaks the Emperor thus, Hoc
tecum Commune Deis, Ovid. 2. de ponto.
quod utrique rogati
Supplicibus vestris far soletis opem.


And it is the saying of another of them, Hoc reges habent magnificum and
ingens, Senec: in Med.
prodesse miseris, supplices fido lare protegere.

Amongst the many ceremonies that in elder times were wont to be used at the
installment or inauguration of Princes and Magistrates, this was a chief, they
were lifted up upon bucklers in the day of their Consecration, and there is not
the meanest Herald, but if he were asked the reason, Why Ensigns of
distinction were first born upon shields, but he would assign this, because
they who did first win them, and wear them, they interposed their own bodies
as a shield to bear off those fatal blows that would otherwise have lighted
upon the bodies of the People, and by this act of theirs paid a valuable
consideration for all their titles and honors. Judges and Rulers they are
called the shields of the Earth, Psalm. 47.9. Now what else is a shield, but a
kind of partition wall between a man and something that would hurt him? Valere
ad nocendum, may well be the Tyrants motto, but ad tegendum and protegendum,
the shields. Never was any Ensign of Magistracy better inscribed, then was
that of Elius Adrianus the noble Trajanes successor, who gave for his device
that best of mottoes. Non mihi sed populo, And the learned Navarrus and others
tell us, that to be a Prince or Ruler it is to be the Peoples man. And so much
seems employed in the practice of Romulus, who when he first founded the Roman
Monarchy which was integrated and composed of diverse people, which made a
voluntary tender and free submission of themselves to him, He expressly
enacted, that every one should present him with some of the earth, and fruits
of his own Country, which when he had amassed together, he interred it all in a
great pit, which he called the (Word) Intending by this ceremony to let us
know, that dominion or Royalty is nothing else but a heap of Wills, of Powers,
and Riches, united in one only Power. Romulus indeed he took of the flowers of
the people, but it was to make honey for them. Good Magistrates they gave more
to the people, then they take from them, and the good of a good Governor is so
great, that to this day the subtilest and the wisest of the Schoolmen have not
been able to determine it, whether man be more obliged to God for his being,
which consists in his natural Constitution, or for his well being, which
consists in his political institution. If you take Government out of the
world, you take the Sun out of the Firmament, and leave it no more a (...), a
beautiful structure, but a (...), a ruinous heap of confusion: Job speaking of
the territories of darkness, and shadows of death, he says, It Is a Land,
without order. And Ordo says Scaliger, it is Anima mundi. Simmetry and harmony,
they are the two supporters of the universe. Unity is the ground of perfection
and perpetuity, and what else is order, but unity, brancht out into all the
parts of Consociate bodies, to keep them entire and perfect. When Government
fails in any Land, why then such a Land becomes disjoynted and convulsed, and
Commonwealths become common miseries, and Cities become Forests, and Forests
everlasting terrors, and States distated, and all things are put into the
hands of might and force, and are acted according to the impulses of disordered
affections, tumultuous passions and brutish lusts, Religion, Reason, Law,
Justice being all Exiled and outlawed. Not without good reason therefore do
the great Masters of policy, pitch it down for a Maxim, that Tyranny is
rather to be endured then Anarchie, and that it is better to live under a Nero,
then under a Nerva, where nothing is lawful, rather then where all things are
lawful. For commonly, Omnia cum licent, non licet esse pium, an hour it were
time much too short, to speak of the numerous evils of anarchie or State
ataxies (were they my proper theme,) I must confess, I never saw them more
exactly lim'd, nor set out more to the life, by any pen or pencill, then by
that Curious one of Causinus (the Chrysostom of France) who in his draught of
Babylon, or the City of wicked policy, pourtrayes it thus; It Is built upon
ruins in a land of quicksilver, wholly cemented with blood, having frequent
Earthquakes, and the impetuous blasts and gusts of furious tempests, rending
and tearing all in pieces, the very water infected and the malignity of the air
killing all that breathed in it, and the inhabitants such men, as had little
else of man in them, but only shape and skin, having no other neighborhood but
Wolves, and Foxes, Panthers, and Tigers, Ravens on their houses, Comets over
their heads, Scorpious at their feet: and now surely he that shall but
seriously view and contemplate this lively Picture of an anarchicall State, not
only in these broken parts of it, I have now presented you with, but in the
entire piece and original draught of it, he will have just cause to cry out, O
the blessing of order! O, the immense and unspeakable good of a just
government. Where such a government once takes place, and becomes settled, why
there the earth is paradised, and the Heavens perpetually smiling, for the Sun
is in Libra, and all things are transacted as the days and nights in the
equinoctial, the waters are good, the seasons temperate, the winds calm, the
ground fertile, the abode delightful, and the contented inhabitants all
laboring like Bees in a bright summers day; the temples many, and large,
decent and glorious, the Altars laden with pure oblations, and smoking with
Clouds of acceptable incense, the Priests Solemn, diligent, and devout, The
Senators aged and Sacred, speaking like Oracles, and living like Angels, and
being safe, sine militis usu, every thing keeping its order, proportion,
weight, time, place, and measure, and being in the same tune and harmony, which
the infant and the innocent world was blessed with, when first the great
Architect set all things right, and wrote over them the motto of (good;)
nothing altered by heresy either in Doctrine or manners, nothing of complaint,
murmr, quarrel, tumult, or war, but all is as hushed and peaceable as the
Halcyons nest which stills the tempests and sliks and calmes the brow of
Heaven, where all the Citizens entertain one another like fingers on the hand,
every one taking part with the good of his fellow, being all great in the
obedience they render to the law, being all rich in the contenment of their
desires, and being all well pleased in the happiness one of another. In sum,
for I have no more room for particulars, whatsoever the Luxuriant and free
fancies of Poets, or the choice and delicate pens of antiquity, have either
conceited or written, of the Elysian fields, of the fortunate Islands, of the
felicities of a golden age, of the virtues and ornaments of an Agathopolis,
(which was dressed as rich as the Ideaes of the divine Plato could make it) why
all these do but help to piece out that train of blessings that follow a good
government. When any Land becomes blessed with such Magistrates and Judges, as
are indeed the faithful deputies of their Maker, and whose breasts are the
Oceans or sewers, into which all the cares of private men empty themselves, and
whose vigilant eyes are the constant sentinels of the peoples safety, and whose
steady hands have learned to hold the seals of justice try and even, and to
weigh right and wrong by their proper weights, and whose just breath is the
peoples best and wholsomest air, as being that that gives life and soul to all
their proprieties rights and privileges. In a word, when people have such
Judges, that neither turn Judgment into wormwood, nor into vinegar, that
neither imbitter it by injustice, nor sour it by delay, that suppress as well
fraud as force, that only hear causes speak, and not persons, that are
Melchisedeck-like, without father or mother, that hate to pay private wrongs
with the advantage of their office, that have so well got the rule over
themselves, that their passions do not unfit them to rule over others, that
look straight forward in a right line upon equity, without glancing aside upon
revenge, displeasure, or recompense; that keep not only their hearts clean, but
their hands too; and take heed of bos in lingua, that in that cause bestow
diligence in sifting, where the right is difficult in finding, that love to
have truth come naked to the bar without false bodies and disguises, that
neither make briars nor springes of the laws to catch every thing they lay hold
of, that neither crook nor bow the laws, by hard constructions and strained
inferences, but straiten them by just expositions, and if they seem to be
antiquated, or obsolete, wipe off their dust by a judicious clearing, that
never browbeat a Witness or look an Evidence damp, but with a gentle midwifery
helpout the stammering tongue, that his proof may not miscarry; that in their
callings approve themselves to be the dreadful instruments of Divine revenge,
and the ministers of God for good to the people, and to be legum vindices, the
guard of laws, and as was said of Cassius, reorum scopulos, the Rocks, or as
one calls them, the comets of the guilty, the refuge of innocence, the
paymasters of good deserts, the Champions of right, the patrons of peace, the
supporters of the Church, and the true Patres Patriae, or Fathers of their
Country, being more learned then witty, more reverend then plausible, and more
advised then confident, hearing all things debated with patience, and then
proceeding to sentence in uprightness, and pronouncing nothing but just
judgment. I say where Judges are such, happy, yea thrice happy are such a
people, and blessed is the Land that is in such a case; for then such a Land
becomes like the Israel of God, when her Officers are peace, and her Exactors
righteousness; such Magistrates God commands to be chose, to be Commissioned,
and to be empowered even over his own people: for so you see runs the Writ of
election in my Text. Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy gates,
which the Lord thy God gives thee throughout thy Tribes: and they shall judge
the people with just judgment.

In this great Patent and Divine Charter of Magistracy; or in this Theocratia
or Government of Gods own setting up; There is considerable, First, The Honor.
Secondly, The Office. First, The Dignity. Secondly, The Duty.

Or if these be too general, take it in more particulars.

First, Here is Gods mandamus from heaven for Government; here is the charge of
the Almighty for the erecting of a Magistracy; and this is contained in the
word (constituito) Thou shall (make) or Make thou.

Secondly, As here is the charge, so here is the style or the titles, Judices
and Moderatores constituito] Judges and Officers shall thou make.

Thirdly, Here are the persons invested with the right and power of electing
and constituting Officers, and they are the Collective body of the people, or
the Community in whole; and these are included in the Pronown [tibi] Judices
and Moderatores constituito tibi] Judges and Officers thou shall make thee.

Fourthly, Here is the Circuit of these Judges, or the Territories of these
Magistrates; In singulis portis tuis, quas Jehovah Deus tuus, dat tibi, per
tribus tuas] Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy gates, which
the Lord thy God gives thee throughout thy tribes. By Gates] we are to
understand all the Judicatories in Israel, for Gates they were (Domus Judicii)
the seats of Judgment: They were of old placed in the Gates, at the entrance
of Cities, for many reasons, as Tarnovius notes at large, upon Amos 5.10. but
principally for this, To let us know, that Justice sitting at the Gate, is a
better safeguard for a City, then a Corpsdu-gard, then either Bullwarks,
Percullises, draw-Bridges, or whatsoever else that has most defense in it.

Fifthly and lastly, Here is the duty of these Judges, in the concluding words
of the text, Qui judicent populum judicio justo] Judges and Officers shall thou
make thee in all thy gates which the Lord thy God gives thee throughout thy
tribes: and they shall judge the people with just judgment.

And thus I have presented you with the Logic of the Text, and showed you how
the parts lie in it. I shall endeavor to slide apace through them all, as
intending only, ut Canis ad Nilum, to glance upon the former, but to stop, yea
and to stay upon the later.

First then, I will begin with the (constituito) of the Text, Thou shall make.]
It Is Gods mandamus to his own Israel. Inde potestas, unde and spiritus, Tertul.
Apol.
so says Tertullian. And an ancienter then he, Cuius jussu homines, ejus jussu
Reges, so Irenaeus. Iren. lib. 5. cap. 24.
And an ancienter then either of them, The powers that are are ordained of God,
so Saint Paul, Romans 13.1. Anarchy is the peoples frenzy, but Magistracy the
Ordinance of the Almighty. I deny not but the primitive state of the first
created man, under God, was free and absolute; 'twas his Prerogative and
privilege, that he was born to Command and not to obey. But alas! How short
lived was this primitive state? Plus quam veri-simile est, etc. says the
Learned Usher, It Is more then probable, Annal. p. 2.
that the first day that Adam possessed his Paradise, he was forced to quit it;
And such was the guilt and misery of his first sin, that it not only broke the
peace between God and man, but also between man and beast, and between man and
man, and filled the creation with an universal attaxie and disorder; and so
Government became absolutely necessary for the setting of us to rights again:
So that what is said of the original of Laws, holds true of powers, Ex malis
moribus, bonae leges nascuntur, so Ex naturae vitiis bonae potestates, As good
Laws have their original from bad manners, so good Government from corrupted
natures; and therefore he that shall but trace Government to the springhead,
and first rise of it, he shall find it to be extracted from God, and to be as
old as the first man; It has not always, I confess, worn one and the same
face, and kept one and the same form, but as the world has altered, so has
the Government; at first the world was confined within one Family, and then it
began to widen by little and little, and when the world was thus but in
fasciis, the Government of it was Patriarchal, and the Governors of it were
called Patriarchs or Father-Princes, their compounded name speaking their mixed
Authority, and this kind of Government continued after the death of
Methuselah, for we read of him, that (...), Joseph. Antiq. l. 1. cap. 2.
that he passed over his Principality to Lamech his son. But now when this
first method of Government became discomposed and disturbed through the
numerosity of mankind, and by their far dispersed habitation, why then other
forms of Government succeeded, for men falling among themselves to do wrong
and violence, they saw it necessary to set up some Authority, that might
restrain by force and punishment, what was committed against peace and common
right, and this Authority and Power of self-defence and preservation, before
devolved, being originally and naturally in every one of them, and unitedly in
them all, they for ease, and for order, and that each man might not be his own
partial Judge, agreed to transfer and delegate it, either to one whom for
eminence of wisdom and integrity, they preferred above the rest, or else to
more then one, whom they judged of equal merit; the first of these was called a
King, the other Magistrates. Sometimes we read God did by his own immediate
designation, appoint the person, make and declare the choice, and invest him
with a right of Sovereignty over his people, as Moses, David and others; but
ordinarily God calls mediately, by committing it to the people to elect; both
the form of Government, and the Persons that are to sway it over them; and of
this nature is the (Constituito) in the Text. And thus from the charge I should
have came in the next place, to the style or title [Judices and Moderatores]
and then to the Circuit or Territories; but these I shall skip over, as less
material, and come to the main of the Text, viz. The great and important Duty
of all Judges and public Trustees of State, and that is, to execute judgment.
Non tantum potestas Judici concessa, sed fides, says Cicero pro Cluentio.
Judges they have not only power, but a trust reposed in them, not only Dignity
but Duty; and it is safer for mortals to hear of their duty then of their
dignity. Give me leave therefore (my Lords) to discourse freely and plainly to
you, concerning the great master-duty, concerning the Primum and the Vltimum,
the Alpha and Omega of your calling, viz. The execution of just judgment. If
the world be a Harp (as says the eloquent Sinesius) then Justice windeth up
the springs, stirs the fingers, touches the instrument, gives life to the
airs, and makes all the excellent harmonies. If the world be a ring, Justice
is the diamond, if it be an eye, Justice is the soul, if it be a Temple,
Justice is the Altar. In a word, that which the air is in the elementary world,
the Sun in the celestial, and the soul in the intellectual, that is Justice in
the civil. It is the air that all the afflicted desire to breathe, the Sun that
dispels all clouds, the great principle that in a civil sense gives life to
all; all yields to this virtue, it is inchased in all laudable actions, and all
laudable actions are incorporated in it, according to that of Aristotle, (...),
Arist. Eth. lib. 5.
it is inclusive of all other virtues, and they all run out from it as lines from
their center, and they all run into it, as rivers into the ocean. To be just is
to be all that which an honest man may be, for Justice is Suum cuique tribuere,
to give every man his due, and in a large sense it is every man's duty, as well as
the Magistrates, but it is not to be considered in the Text in such a latitude,
but as it is properly the act of Judges and Officers. Justice and judgment, in
the Scripture style and phrase, they are often Synonima's, and are put for one
and the same thing, but sometimes they are distinct. I have read of a tripple
acception of (Judgment) intra Grammaticos, as also intra Theologos.

First, Amongst Humanists and Philologers, Judgment is taken for the last act
of the understanding, and a conclusive resolution, and thus it relates to
contemplation.

Secondly, It Is sometimes Synonimous to discretion, and then it relates to
practice, when we consider not so much the very bare act or thing that we are
about, as the whole frame or machine of the business, as it stands
complexioned and circumstanced with time, place and beholders.

Thirdly, (Judgment) it not only relates to present practice, but it
enlightens and governs posterity, and so it comprehends under it decrees and
sentences, and judgments in Courts; and thus you see the word in the Critics
sense. Now intra Theologos, Judgment paisses first for severe and mere Justice,
for that which we call Summum Jus, which on Gods part is always just, though
to us it be a depth and unsearchable.

Secondly, It Is used to signify not only mere justice, but as it is attempered
and sweetened with mercy; Reuch. de Art. Cabal. lib. 1.
The Cabalists (as one which understood them well observes) have concluded that
the word (Judgment) applied to God, has every where a mixed and participant
nature, implies both judgment and mercy.

Thirdly, The word [Judgement] it is used to signify not only the judicial
part of the Law, as the Talmudists would straiten it, but the whole Law of God.
Judgment it sometimes implies that right which every man stands obliged at all
times to practice, and sometimes its put for the law or rule it self according
to which every man is to do right. (Judgment) is sometimes opposed to anger
and severity, and then it signifies mercy and moderation, and it is sometimes
opposed to folly and indiscretion, and then it implies an ability to judge, and
it is sometimes opposed to injustice and wrong which is the vulgar and common
import of it, and so tis-to be understood here in the Text; I have read Drusius
and some others differencing and distinguishing Judgment and Justice, thus;
First (Judgment) they say, it signifies the due order in trying and finding
out the state of a Cause, and (Justice) the passing of Sentence or Verdict upon
the trial; Secondly, Judgment they say is a clear knowledge of what ought to
be done, and Justice is the doing of that which we know: Justice is an
evennesse and uprightness of conscience, in passing every thing according to
received light and evidence; Thirdly, Judgment, say some, respects capital
causes which are for life, but Justice respects civil causes which are for
estate and liberty; Fourthly and lastly, [Judgement] says Drusius, Poenam
respicit, it is in condemning those that are guilty, but Justice that respects
Compensationem benefactorum, it is in acquitting the innocent, and in
recompensing them that do well. It is a Rule, That when Judgment and Justice
are put together in Scripture, the latter is but an epithete to the former, and
so it is in the Text, [They shall judge the people with just judgement] that is,
they shall do judgment justly, exactly, and to a hair.

So then (my Lords) you see your duty, just you must be, and that upon this
account.

First, Pinguior mactari Deo victima non potest quam homo sceleratus (says
one) We cannot present God with a more pleasing oblation then is that of the
cutting off of a criminal person; Judgments just execution it is attended on
with Gods approbation; See this in the case of Phineas, Psalm. 106.30, 31. yea
with Gods remuneration, Levi had the Vrim and Thummim, the Covenant of God, and
the honor of an infallible Priesthood, because he knew no relation, no
interest, no engagement, when he appeared on Gods side, and fulfilled his
command, Exodus 22.27.

Secondly, Jus or Legem dicere, though not Legem dare; Now without this Law is
but a ruffled skain of silk, where no end is to be found, a Meander and
Labyrinth without a clew, where men may sooner lose themselves then find any
place to sit down and rest in; Nay farther, the execution of Law is yours, now
this every man knows is the life of Law, without this Law is at least but
Justices bare Scales without her Sword, a Pistol that is charged only with
powder that can at most but threaten and make an empty noise. Oh then let the
Laws have life by your just execution of them; consider I beseech you, that the
Laws are the Nations joints, whereby each part is tied to other, which once cut
asunder, must needs discontinue and unjoint the whole frame, to its most
certain and unavoidable ruin. You are (my Lords) the subordinate Custodes
Libertatis Angliae, and should you be unjust you would then Briareus-like do
evil with an hundred hands, and give us just cause to cry out with the Poet,
Hei mihi custodes quisnam custodiet ipsos?

Thirdly, You must be just, Jeroboams Calves in Dan and Bethel, it is not Jehu's
pompous zeal that would fain be looked upon, it is not all the mountains of
Samaria, nor mines of India, it is neither Magazines, nor Arsenals, nor gold
piled up to heaven, nor silver as plenty as dust and stones, nor numerous
Armies, nor formidable Fleets, nor impregnable Forts, it is none of all these
that can exalt a Nation, it is only Justice that can do that, Prove. 14.34. just
Judges they are the best Saviors, and the best builders in any Land, for they
and only they make a Land a habitation of righteousness: on the other hand
injustice and public impunities they procure public and popular judgments,
the not doing Justice upon criminals, when publicly complained of and
demanded, especially when the persons interessed call for Justice, and the
execution of good Laws, and the Magistrates arm is at liberty, and in full
strength, this engages a Land deep in ruin; See this in the case of the
Benjamites, they refused to do justice upon the men that had forced and killed
the Levites Concubine, and they lost twenty five thousand in battle, their
Cities were destroyed, and the whole Tribe almost extinguished, and therefore
it is observable in Scripture, how that the punishing of great and public acts
of injustice, it is called, A putting away of evil from a Land. Not to punish an
evil is a voluntary retention of it, and makes that sin by forbearing become
National, which was in the acting but personal; And where impunities are, it is
no thank to the public if the best men be not as bad as the worst.

Fourthly, Qui malis parcit piis nocet, to spare the bad, it is cruelty and
hardheartednesse to the good, to let the Wolves and Bears alone, it is to wrong
the Sheep and Lambs; If you will pity Cataline (says one) pity Rome much more,
let the whole have a share in your pity, rather then a part, Pereat unus, magis
quam unitas, Better have one injurious person sit mourning, then a whole Nation
languishing.

Fifthly and lastly, You must be just, a terror both to evil works, and to
evil workers; Impunity often times proves the malefactors encouragement, and by
accident hardens him, whereas the acts of Justice being Gods appointments,
though they be pathemata corrections, yet they sometimes prove mathemata
instructions, and being blessed and sanctified by God, become wholesome,
spiritual discipline, and tend to the awakening of the secure conscience, and
to the bringing of it, both to a sight and sense of its crime and guilt; God
suffers penalties to fall sometimes upon the bodies of offenders, in mercy to
their souls; but however if Justice should not work to the saving of their
souls, yet it will be sure to work to the restraining of their sin, making
the measure of it the less, which is indeed a mercy. Grave is the speech of
Seneca, Vt nemo pereat, nisi quem perire etiam pereuntis intersit, That none
perish, but those to whom it is an advantage to perish. And thus much by way of
Argument, Why you must be just. I come next of all to discourse of the
Modification, How you must be just.

First, My Lords, You must be religiously just, it is indeed the first required
qualification, in all Judges and Magistrates, That they should be men fearing
God, there is so near an affinity between Justice and Religion, that as Priests
are called Judices Sacrorum, so Vlpian styles Judges Sacerdotes Justitiae;
Judges must not be like Cardinal Caraffa, of whom it was said, That he was
Securus de numine, out of all fear of Gods vengeance: without Religion Judges
will be but profane, and where the fear of God is not, there the fear of man
will be in too great a measure; Alvarez reports it to be a custom of the
Aethiopians, to place twelve empty Chairs about the Judges seat, and this not
out of state, but out of Religion, supposing that their gods sit there with
their Judges; And the Rabbis have a saying, That the Angels attend in all
Judicatories, how concerns it all Judges then to be religiously just, having
such attendants, and such assessors!

Secondly, You must be zealously just, for you judge not for man but for God;
Now he that does the work of the Lord negligently, a curse waits on him; the
righteous they are compared to Palm Trees, now they love hot regions, and a
warm soil, and so does Justice zealous hearts, it is St Bernards Note, Adami
voluntas non habuit fortitudinem, quia non habuit fervorem, You must execute
Justice magnanimiter, there must be an ardent zeal for the maintenance of Laws,
and there must be an actual application of all your endeavors, and of all the
forces of your mind and courage, to authorize Justice, to strengthen your arms
against the torrents of iniquity, and to put all your particular interests
under the discharge of your imploiments: where there is like to be great
opposition, there had need to be a great spirit, and great resolution, Odia qui
nimium timet, regnare nescit. To resist friends, and to over look enemies will
be no easy work, to be just under all the cross censures of the world, where
some will cry out, that you are too merciful, and others that you are too
severe, some that you do nothing, and some that you do too much; now surely it
must be a zeal for Justice that must make you struggle through all difficulties.
Moses he grindes to powder the golden Calf, Exodus 32.20. Number. 25.13.
and it was his zeal constrained him. Phineas he runs Zimri and Cosbi through
with his Javelin, and it was his zeal that fired him; Joh. 2.17.
And Christ he whips the buiers and sellers out of the Temple; and it was the
zeal of his fathers house that eat him up; but here you must be sure that this
holy fervor be of the right stamp, it must be pure and elementary not base and
culinary, not feeding upon carnal respects, it must be zeal for justice as an
act of justice, yea and it must be out of love too, or else whilst it is
Justice in the Law, it may be murder in the Judge.

Thirdly, You must be impartially just, like God in this, he accepts no man's
person, he accepts not the rich because he is rich, nor the poor because of his
poverty, (...) is the bane of Justice, Perit omne judicium ubi res transit in
affectum. Judges they are as the noble Spartan said of himself, Patriae and
legibus dati, they have bestowed themselves upon their Country, and upon the
Law, and therefore must know neither parents nor kindred in the cause of
Justice. The Statues of the Thebane Judges they were, they were without hands
and without eyes, that is, without corruption and without partiality; The
Athenians they were wont to judge in the dark, that so they might know no man's
face; Judges they must be swayed neither with foolish pity on the one hand, nor
with respect to might, power, friendship, or greatness on the other; usually
these are the two prejudices against the execution of justice, either carnal
pity, says he, is a poor man, or else carnal fear, says he, is a great man,
and so outward accidents come in the Scale rather then the merits of the Cause,
when judgment is misted or blinded, by any external glory and appearance, so
that Judges cannot discern truth or right, when they suffer any cause to be
overballanc'd by such foreign circumstances as have no affinity with it: this
is a vicious partiality in them: all corruption is not in bribes: the Judges
who absolved the beautiful strumpet Phryne, they had their hands clean but
their eyes foul: it was a gallant return which the noble Rutilius made his
friend, requesting of him an unlawful favor in such language as this, Quid
tua mihi opus est amicitia, si non impetro quod rogo? I had as good be without
such a friend as with him, who will not let me speed in what I ask: to whom he
replied, Imo, quid mihi tua, si tua causa aliquid inhoneste facturus sum? I can
want such a friend as you, if for your sake I must do that which is not honest.
Memorable is the act of justice, Helmodi. Chrone
performed by Canutus King of Denmark, who after he had examined the process
of twelve Thieves, and condemned them, he found one, who said he was extracted
of Royal blood: it is reason (says the King) some favor should be done to
this man, therefore give him the highest Gibbet. We read in the twelfth Novell
of Justinian, of an oath imposed upon Magistrates against inclining or
addicting to either party, yea they put themselves under a deep and bitter
execration and curse in case of partiality, imploring God in such language as
this, Let me have my part with Judas, and let the leprosy of Gehezi cleave to
me, and the trembling of Cain come upon me, and whatsoever else may astonish,
and dismay a man.

Fourthly, you must be sincerely just, (...), incorruptnesse and integrity,
it is the proper portion of Judges, Judges should be known by giving, not by
receiving; 'twas Claudians elogium of Honorius, Non hic privatis crescunt
aeraria damnis, foul hands will breed troubled consciences, you must take heed
of being takers, he that opens his hand to catch after a reward, cannot choose
but let fall his rule out of it; Men have a touchstone (says one) to try gold,
but gold is a touchstone to try men. I have read of one Ichis a Polonian Judge,
that having long stood up for a poor plaintiff against a rich defendant, he at
last received from the defendant a great sum of money stamped with the usual
stamp of that Country, which is a man in complete armor, and at the next
Sessions he in open Court adjudged the cause in favor of the defendant, and
being sharply blamed by his friends, he showed them his large fee, and demanded
of them, Quis posset tot armatis resistere? Who could stand out against so many
in complete armor? witty was the reply was that returned Demosthenes, who
having been well feed by the adverse party to be silent in a cause, being
called to plead pretended the Squinsie, his Client came hansomly over him,
saying (...), non est ista angina, sed argentumgina, it is the silver Squinsie;
Mazarinus complains of foreign Judges, that they too much resembled the
Haimatites or bloudstone, which has a special property to stanch blood, but as
Jewellers observe, it puts not forth this virtue unless it be let in, or
covered over with silver, and so applied to the vein; whereas Judges they
should be men hating covetuousnesse, if they be not they will be apt cunningly
to divert the strait current of the Law, to bring water to their own Mill: some
Judges there have been who for the cleanliness of the conveyance would like
mendicant friars touch no money themselves, but have a boy with a bag to receive
it for them, but O let all such corrupt Judges, who it may be buy justice by
wholesale and sell it by retale, let them consider seriously what is said Job
15.34. Fire shall consume the Tabernacle of Bribery, the Septuagint reads it,
(...), of men that take gifts, a gift transforms the Judge into a party, and
as Buxtorf upon the Hebrew word here notes, makes the Judge and pary to be but
one person, there is much gotten, but nothing gained by injustice, men give
bribes to undo others, and they that receive them undo themselves; I have read
of a Travellour, who coming to Rome, and seeing many curious piles and goodly
structures, he was inquisitive to know who built them: it was told him that
they were peccata Germanorum, the sins of Germany, meaning thereby that the
money brought for pardons out of Germany, built those houses: and may not we
make the same answer, when we look upon the Stately houses and Magnificent
palaces of corrupt Judges? may not we call them peccata Judicum, and say that
bribes and oppressions, bought such Seats, and built such and such houses? but
alas if the actor of Justice lives not to see the melting of such gettings, and
the spending of such earnings, yet the heir finds a fire in the foundation, he
hears the stones in the wall to cry out, that the mortar in which they were
laid, was tempered with the tears of widows and Orphans, and the blood of
innocents, and the beam out of the timber answers it, that that was set up by
pulling down the poor, and therefore it cannot stand: in Gods Court there is no
man can buy off a hell not a year or a day, for millions of worlds (my Lords)
it should be so in yours. I beseech you let nothing stick to your fingers, that
should make your faces to gather palenesse in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Fifthly, you must be deliberately just, Truth is the daughter of time, dies
diem docet, Justice has not a giddy running have, but a sober grave pace, it
was an ancient decree of the Areopagites, Orat. de Coron.
as Demosthenes relates it, (...), that Judges should hear both parties, with
equal indifferency, and attention, their full time. And 'twas the custom of
Philip of Macedon to stop one of his ears whilst the accuser was speaking, that
he might reserve it for the defendant: never was any Roman Emperor so much
taxed of injustice and folly, as Claudius Caesar, and the reason of his so
frequent mistakes was, because he often sentenced causes upon the bare hearing
of one side only, and sometimes upon the full hearing of neither. True is that
of Seneca, Sweton in claud.
Qui aliquid statuit part inaudita altera, aequum licet statuerit haud aequus
est. The ear is not only the sense of discipline and learning according to the
Philosopher, and of faith according the Apostle, but also of truth and Justice.
He that proceeds on halfe-evidence, he will not do quarter-Justice. Judges they
must be attentive, harkning with just and patient ears, to the pleadings of
both sides: witnesses should be heard out (though tedious) Judges should not
meet evidences half way, but stay till they come at them, some persons must be
impertinent, before they can be pertinent, and as (one says) if they tell the
story of a hen, you must give them leave to begin at the egg; it is no grace to
a Judge first to find that, which he might have heard in due time from the Bar;
or to show quickness off conceit in cutting of evidence or counsel too short,
for sometimes a man of a dreaming utterance may give a waking testimony: Judges
they should not prevent informations, by questions though pertinent, In this
sense, an over-speaking Judge is no well tuned Cymbal. It is related of
Theodosius, that when he had killed many men rashly, which did much trouble
him, it was afterward enacted by him that thirty days should use to intervene
between the sentence and the execution; for potest dilata paena exigi, exacta
revocari non potest, punishment deferred may be executed at pleasure, but if
once executed cannot be recalled; we may read how God himself, though he needs
no intelligence from his creatures, yet in his two great acts of justice when
he confounded the builders of Babel, and destroyed Sodom, he would not only
hear, but he would go and see; and Christ he prescribes a rule to all Judges,
Sicut audio, sic Judico. John 5.30.


Sixthly, You must be speedily just, see Ezra 7.26. you must execute Judgment
in the morning, Jer. 21.12. Noon justice and evening justice, it is not so
seasonable, it is not so acceptable to God as morning justice; delays break the
spirits of the innocent, and harden the hearts, and strengthen the hands of the
guilty. Jews the twelfth of France, he was wont to tax the delays,
reverences, and neglects, of Judges, and to say, that he did not love this
stretching of leather with the teeth. A man shall come into few of our Courts,
but he shall hear those that wait on them, crying out with him in the Poet, --
Quem das finem Rex magne laborum?

When shall we leave turning Ixions Wheel? and rolling Sisyphus his stone? I
would have all demurring Judges consider seriously, the admirable passage of
Theodorick King of the Romans, as it stands related at large in the Chronicle
of Alexandria; There was one Juvenalis a Widow, who came to him with a sad
complaint, that she had had a suit depending in the Court three years, which
might have been ended in a few days: the King demands of her the Judges names:
she tells him: there issues out an especial command from the King to them, to
give all the speedy dispatch that was possible to this Widows cause, which
they did, and in two days determined it to her very good liking; which being
done Theodorick calls for these Judges, and they supposing it had been to
receive their applause and reward, for their quick decision, and excellent
justice, hastened to him full of joy, but the King having first interrogated
with them, about the cause of their former delay, and having sharply
reprehended them, he commanded both their heads to be struck off, because they
had spun out that cause to a three years length, which two days would have
ended.

Seventhly, You must be steadfastly just, a Judge should be such an one qui nec
fallitur, nec flectitur, lenity becomes not a Judge, levitas est mobilitas
animi, qua homines levi de causa mentes vel sermones facile mutant, Judges must
not be like the vulgar Jews, who would this day deifie, and to morrow crucify
the same man, nor yet like Pilate who commanded Christ to the Cross with those
very lips, with which a little before he procounced him innocent. A Judge he
must be propositi tenax, though not pecuniarum petax; he must be like the
needle touched with the Loadstone of constancy, ever looking one way like the
unshaken rock, that in the midst of the angry foaming brine and raging
billows, appears that apt emblem of stabilitie, with this motto on it, Immota
triumphans, or else like the Egyptian pyramid, wearing this inscription Nec
flatu, Nec fluctu.

Eighthly, You must be mercifully just, there must be (...) an ordinate rule of
all affections: a Judge must not come under that character, that Josephus gives
Herod, that he was Legis dominus, but irae servus, Lord of the Law, but yet
Lorded over by his own lusts; a Judge must not be too much affianced to his own
will: Vel. pater lib. 1. Hist.
not like Brutus and Cassius, of whom Velleius Paterculus has this note,
quicquid voluit Brutus valde voluit, nimium Cassius; but he must plant his
Judgment upon an even ground, and as much as in him lies make inequality
equal, considering that merciful Aphorism of Solomon, Qui fortiter emungit,
elicit sanguinem, the wringing of the nose brings forth blood, where the
winepresse is hard wrought, it yields a harsh wine, that tastes of the
grapestone; a butcher they say may not be of the Jury, much less may he be a
Judge. There is just cause of relenting whether we consider our selves or
others, as being of the same mould, and subject to the same temptations with
others; Though we may and must delight in justice, yet say, Divines, to be glad
of it, as it is the evil and grief of an other, is very sinful; for a Judge
upon the Bench, to put the poor malefactor out of countenance, whom he may put
of life, what triumph is it? To jest at man in misery, it is the worst use a man
can put his wit to, and will come home to him, nay it is worse then brutish and
beneath a beast, the Lion scorns it, so says the Poet, Corpore magnanimo
satis est prostrasse leoni; O then my Lords be merciful even as your Heavenly
Father is merciful; and to whomsoever you think God himself if he were upon
the Bench, and in your place, would show mercy, why to all such let your mercy
extend; I have read of three cases, that seem to be out of the reach of civil
mercy. First wilful murder, prepared and projected murder, here your eye is
not to pity: in the time of the Law, and by Gods own order, such a murderer,
no Asylum, no City of refuge, Deuteronomy. 19.11, 12, 13.
no Sanctuary, no Altar could protect, but he might be snatched thence. A second
case is, when accessaries suffer then the principal must not be spared, this
the voice of God, Numb. 24 4, 5.
of nature, and of the Law, all give assent to. A third and last case is, when
the quarrel is laid in principles of irreconcilable enmity against true
Religion, and the government of Christ: and yet even in all these three grand
Cases, Luke 19.27.
though mercy must not degenerate into a softness prejudicial to Justice,
those Just sentences are best pronounced that are deepest drenched, and most
steeped in the Judges tears.

Ninthly and lastly, You must be universally just; You are called Scuta terrae,
the shields of the earth; and the Law with us it is called Lex terrae, to note
the universal Benignity thereof, and the equal interest that every person is to
have therein; to weigh one man's cause by the rule of Law, and another by the
rule of favor, this is like diverse weights and measures, which the Lord
abhorres; This is not to be Scutum a shield, but rather Galea a helmet, to
protect only the heads of the people; You must be like the Sun whose beams
shed themselves, with as sweet an influence on a Garden of Cucumbers, as on the
Forest of Lebanon; Your Justice must extend it self like the wisdom of Solomon,
from the Cedar to the Hysop; The Apostles rule is (...), the small as well as
the great must be heard. Deu. 1.17
Laws must neither be like Nets, to let out little Fishes, and catch only
great ones; nor yet like Cobwebs to be broken by great offenders, and to catch
only Flies. Universal Justice is that which respects all, rewarding the meanest
in well-doing, and punishing the greatest in evil-doing, if justice be thus
universal, 'twill cashier, 1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...), all Partiality, all
Bribery, and all Timidity; now Timiditas judicis; est calamit as innocentis.

And thus, my Lords, I have showed you why you must be just, and how you must
be just; I had thought in the next place to have reached the (...), the
obstructers of Justice, but I see that cannot be, without intrenching too far
upon that patience, which I would not abuse, or borrowing too much of that time
which is allotted your other affairs; I shall only therefore beg your pardon,
whilst in words as few as may be, I take leave particularly to apply this
great duty of the Text to those that shall be more immediately concerned in the
Transactions of this season. Justice you see is the great business of the
Text, and it is the great business of such a time as this; And that the people
may the better follow, let me beseech you (my Lords) to lead them the way in
this great duty; I confess I have been long speaking to you, and therefore I
shall only add these last words;

First, Be just to your selves, by subjecting within you your bodies to your
souls, and your souls to God: the first great acts of injustice, are to place
Passions upon Altars, Reason in Fetters, and to search for the Kingdom of
Heaven in the sway of our own private interests.

Secondly, My Lords, Be just to the people, which you can never be, unless you
be religious in devotion, fearing God, moderate in your passions, impartial in
your affections, mortified in your lusts, learned in the Laws, incorrupt in
your Courts, deliberate in your Counsels, patient in hearing, diligent in
sifting, expedite in proceeding, grave and solemn in sentencing, and concluding
only according to evidence; For Illud tantum judex novit, quod novit
judicialiter.

And thus from you (my Lords) that are commissioned for the Seat of Judgment,
I turn to those Gentlemen that are in Commission for this County; And as you at
such a time as this, when the Judges themselves are present, have least to do,
so I have least to say, only let me leave this Exhortation with you, Let me
beseech you to be like Jethro's Justices of peace, Exodus 18.21, 22, 23. Or like
Plato's Commonwealths-men for the Commonwealth; Study your Oath more then your
Commission, and think of your Duty more then your Dignity, and do not decline
the burdens that cleave to your Honors; and if the calling come upon you
before you are grown up to it, let double diligence make you old, and
experienced in the Law, though you be tender and green in years, and consider
that whatsoever swervings or stumblings any part of the Body politic makes,
within your verge, or under your eye, the blame will be sure to light upon you.

And thus from you the Justices let me address my self to those that shall be
Counselors, and Pleaders, and Advocates at this Assize. And let me beseech
you to be just, and never to plead that cause wherein your tongue must needs be
confuted by your conscience, nor again to set the neck of the Suit that has
once been broken by a definitive sentence. Remember what answer Papian the
Orator made to Caracalla the Emperor, when he was requested by him to defend
the fratricide of his brother Geta, Non tam facile est excusare fratricidium
quam facere, It is more easy to commit it then to defend it. Take heed you do
not, Per verborum aucupia, and tendicula, as Tully speaks, by cunning
construction either of Laws or Actions, protect injury, and wrong innocence.
When any Client comes to you, be sure you not only hear but examine, and pinch
his cause there most, where you fear it is foundred; if the cause be doubtful,
warrant no more then your own diligence, and whatsoever privacies have past
between your Clients and you, let them sleep between you, and not take air at
your tongue. Take heed of tediousness, and (as one says) do not make a
Trojan Siege of a Suit, but what you do, do it serio, and do it subito; Be
not like to those fickle and unstable Lawyers that Salust so bitterly
inveigheth against, condemning them for their floating and uncertainty, Qui
fluctuantes huc and illuc agitantur; who deny that to be Law this Term, which
they pleaded to be Law the last. And be sure to look to your hearts, and to
look to your hands, and keep them both clean; Be not like Ayat the Jew, who
could Vtraque manu tanquam dextra uti, Take bribes on both sides, and do
Justice on neither; Remember what Aegardus advises you to, Magis apud vos
valeat amor very quam lucri, Love Justice above your fee.

Lastly, Be faithful to the side that first retains you, and not like
Demosthenes, who, as Plutarch tells us, secretly wrote one Oration to Phormio,
and another in the same matter for Apollidorus his adversary. And thus from the
Councillors and Pleaders, I come to the Jurors. It were well if they would
learn too, not to go like Sheep one after another (Qua itur non qua eundum)
but to be lead by the sacredness of their Oath, and the light of their
Evidence, and to proceed Secundum allegata and probata, and not suffer
themselves to be blindely overruled by another man's prejudice; It many times
falls out that a tame Jury by the craft of some one cunning fellow in the
company, who happily comes possessed with prejudice to the cause, or ill will to
the person, are made to swallow any thing, and to give in a Verdict to the
Oppression of innocence, whereas their sin is never the less because they
sin with company: Let me beseech all those therefore that shall be of the
Jury at this Assize, to do no otherwise then as God shall put into their
hearts, and the Evidence shall lead them; If crafty Fore-men, or subtle and
wily After-men, will do that that is not just, and to make quick work of it,
conclude of a Verdict before they hear the Evidence; Let the honest Jury man
keep pace with the Evidence and his own conscience, and think it not pride but
Justice, to be honester (if not wiser) then his Leaders.

I have now only one word more to them that are to be Witnesses, and then I am
at an end. Let me beseech all such to be just, let them consider how that upon
their Testimony depends the issue of every Cause; if the Judges sentence, or
the Juries Verdict, point at a false hour, the fault may not be in the hand or
gnomon, either in the Judge or the Jury, but only in these wheels of the
Clock, the Witnesses; it concerns you therefore to be just, you must not dare
to think your Oath, Volaticum jusjurandum, a slip-knot; neither must you dare
out of ill will, or fear, or any base end to forge a Testimony, as Gashmu did;
Nehem. 6.6, 7.
nor yet to stretch a tender truth beyond measure, on purpose to do mischief,
Psa. 52.3, 4.
as Doeg did. Great is the sin of a false Witness. First, He sins against God,
Cujus veritatem annihilat. Secondly, He sins against the Judge, Cujus judicium
perturbat. Thirdly, He sins against the party accused, Quem suo testimonio
condemnat. Lastly, He sins against himself; first, against his fame and credit,
for what more infamous then for a man to be Punica, or Graecafide, to be such
an one whom neither word nor wax can bind? and which is worst of all, he sins
against his own soul, for a false Witness shall not be unpunished, and he that
speaks lies shall not escape, so says Solomon, Prove. 19.5. Let every
Witness therefore be just and speak the truth, and the whole truth, As God
shall help him.

And thus I have discharged all my Task in the Pulpit, save only putting up my
hearty prayer to God for you all, that from the highest to the lowest, from the
Judge to the Witness, you may all discharge yours in the Court, which I shall
next proceed to.

FINIS.

