A MAD DESIGN: OR, A Description of the King of Scots marching in his
Disguise, after the Rout at Worcester, With the Particulers where He was, and
what He and his Company did, every day and night after He fled from WORCESTER.
I.
CHARLES STVART sits upon the Globe, in a melancholy posture, between hope and
fear, he fixes his eyes upon Brittainy and Ireland, and viewes not only
Europe, but the world in a landscape, and has both Pope, Cardinal and the
Friars Pouch, tied to his Girdle by imagination.

II. The Bishop of Clogher, General to the Scots King in Ireland, at Mass with
the Marquess of Ormond, and the Lord Inchequeen attending with Torches at the
Altar upon him, and the Lord Taaffe holding up his train.

III. The Scots Army consisting of four parties and Factions. 1. Papists,
represented by the Cardinal and his troop in the Van, whereof the Marquess of
Huntley is General. 2. Prelaticall Malignants, represented by the Bishop and
Callis, and that fry, the General of which was the Duke of Buckingham. 3
Presbyterians represented by the two burning Torches, one of English Fugitives,
the other of Scottish brethren, that came for our gueds, the two Generals of
which are Major General Massey, and the Earl of Leven. And 4. Old Cavallers,
represented by the fools head upon a pole in the Rear, whereof the Earl of
Derby has been General, and the fool upon an Hobbyhorse; wherein the Earl
of Cleaveland has been his Competitor.

IV. The two ridiculous Anticks one with a Fiddle, and the other with a Torch,
set forth the ridiculousnesse of their condition when they marched into
England, carried up with high thoughts yet altogether in the dark, having
only a fools bawble to be their light to walk by, mirth of their own
whimsies to keep up their spirits, and a sheathed sword to trust in. And a
fools cap was the best piece they had to make them merry with, as appeared by
several intercepted Letters from Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Laudordale, and
others.

V. Lamenting posture of Ladies, Papists, Children, and Scotch women resemble
the rout at Worcester on the third of September 1651. bemoaning the sad
conditions of themselves, and their unhappy Cause, and unfortunate Husbands,
Fathers, and friends.

VI. The Scots Kings flight from Worcester represented by the Fool on
Horseback, riding backward, turning his face every way in fears, ushered by
Duke Hambleton and the Lord Wilmot, the particulers of which perambulation was
thus.

1 While he called upon Duke Hambleton to stir up his men, to keep the Royal
Fort at Worcester, September 3. himself gave the slip to his Lodging, and
fetched away the richest Treasure he could presently come at.

2 Whilst Major Cobbet was entering on the one side of his House, he escaped out
at a back door on the other, and about seven a clock that night with a party
of Horse posted away from Worcester, flying toward Scotland.

3 The next day being September 4th. Charles Stuart the Scots King, with the
Duke of Buckingham and the Lord Wilmot came to a Country-mans house in Cheshire
that stood alone, and asked for Victuals; the man told them he had none fit to
entertain his Majesty, but if they pleased to light, he would get what the
Country would afford; but seeing themselves discovered they were afraid, and
yet being very hungry and dry, asked for any thing they had, and some cold
powthered Beef was brought to them; the Scots King drunk off a Flaggon of
Beer, and with a piece of Bread in one hand, and of Beef in the other, the
others also having got each a slice away they all rid, and that morning marched
into the borders of Lancashire, and all that day after lay close in a hollow
Tree, turning loose their Horses at a far distance before they came to the
place where they resided.

4 On the fourth of September at night, they came like so many Hermits, or
Diogenes's out of their Tubs, and went a Pilgrimage all that night on foot,

5 The next day, September. 5. they betook themselves to hide them in a Wood,
and got among Thickets to hide themselves as well as they could, and got some
Hips and Hawes, and such things as they could conveniently get (without
venturning too far) in the Wood, where every noise put them into a fear of
being surprised.

6 On the fifth of September at night they went on their journey.

7 On the sixth of September, they came early in the morning to a Shepherds
Tent, which they surprised, and called to the Shepherd, who when he had opened
the doors, they kept him in the House, and would not let him go out, nor his
Wife, but discoursed about the Gentry thereabouts, by means whereof they came
to know that a Lady in which they had some confidence Lived near, whither they
hasted with all speed; and the Lord Wilmote coming to the door got admittance
to the Lady, and prevailed with her to give them all possible assistance; and
the Scots King being come to the Lady, and having saluted her, they sat in
Counsel to consider how the business should be ordered, and it was agreed,
and accordingly done.

1 That they should have their hair cut in the Country fashion, like plain
Country Fellows, which was done accordingly.

2 That they should wear plain Country fashioned clothes, which were
presently got for them.

3 That they should be reputed to be Servants to the said Lady.

4 That in this pretense she should go with them to Bristol, or some other
Port, to endeavor the transporting of them beyond the Seas.

8 On the seventh and eighth days of September they lay there, and waited on
the Lady in several offices, and places, and the Scots King himself stood
bare before her when he waited on her, as well as the rest.

9 On the ninth of September, they took an intended voyage for Bristol, and
the Scots King rid before the Lady on one Horse, the Duke of Buckingham before
her Gentlewoman upon another Horse, and the Lord Wilmot as her Groom upon an
Horse by himself.

10 About the middle of September they got to Bristol, but they heard in their
Inn so great talk what search was made after them, that they presently took
Horse, not daring to stay there, and away they came for London.

11 About the twentyeth of September they got to London, and went abroad
sometimes in the mornings, and at evenings, but generally lay very close all
day, and the Scots King and Wilmot waited upon the Lady at one Lodging, and the
Duke of Buckingham waited as a Serving-man to the Gentlewoman at another.

12 About the latter end of September, the Scots King with the Lady came to see
his. Soldiers in the Tuttle Fields at Westminster, and the Lady threw them
some moneys, but they stayed not.

13 Another day the Scots King came into Westminster Hall, and viewed the
States Arms over the places of Judicatory, and viewed the Scots Colors
hanging on both sides the Hall, that were taken from his Father, and from him.

14 The Lord Wilmot procured a Merchant to hire a ship of forty tuns to
transport them, which cost them 120. l.

15. About the middle of October having taken leave of, and thanked the Lady,
with many salutations and promises, to Graves-end they went, and from thence
on, and a shipboard.

16 As soon as my Lord was entered the Barque, and the King as his Servant; the
Master of the Vessel came to my Lord, and told him, that he knew the King, and
told him, That in case it should be known he could expect no mercy; which
saying troubled them: But at length what with money and promises, they
prevailed, and so set sail for Havre de Grace, where they landed; and from
thence to Roven, where they clothed themselves, and writ to Paris.

17 The late Queen of England his Mother receiving an express from him, made
present supplication to the King of France for his reception, in which the
Queen Mother was no little active with her, and so he was permitted, and an
Express sent to the Duke of Orleans for instructions therein.

18 Answer was returned back to appoint him Jesse by the way of Rhoane, and
some supplies of money from his Mother was sent to him; for his better
accommodation in the way.

19 The Scots King being upon his march sent an Express, giving many thanks
for the courtesy, and informing his intentions to be at Maguy the 28 ( alias
18) October: and he being advertised that there should be provisions made for
him at the Louver, he sent word that he intended the 29 ( alias 19 present) to
go from Maguy thither. On the said 28 of October, (which was the Saturday) the
Scots King had lain the night then pst within a days journey of Maguy; from
whence came an Express to his Royal Highness the Duke of Orleance, as also
Letters from his Mother.

20 The Duke of Orleance sent forth some Coaches from Paris, to meet him at
Maguy, where he lay that night.

21 And the next day being the Lords Day, Scots King came to Paris, being met a
little from the Towns end by the Duke of Orleance and some others. His
Highness the Duke of Orleance conducted the Scots King through part of the
City to the Louver, but with no small discontent of the Citizens, who are some
of them ready to mutiny about it, and yet many flocked to see him, and amongst
those diverse mocked and jeered; so that the great resort seemed to be rather in
derision and scorn, then out of any good will.

His Mother knew so well the dis-affections of the people, that she did not
come along at all with him, nor did meet him, until she heard that he was come
to the Louver, and then presently she repaired to him.

She has spent most part of her time of late about the raising of a Fabric at
Chaliot, for the making of a Nunnery, from whence she now came to visit her son.

22 There was then a grave Council held at the Louver, of the Scots King, the
Duke of Orleance, the late Queen of England, and some others, who after some
complements, required a Narrative of the English Affairs, the relation whereof
produced some laughter, at the rediculousnesse of his condition.

23 The Substance of the Scots Kings Speech.
The Scots King told them what happened at the fight at Worcester; gave some
reproachful words against the Scots, put some scurrilous language on the
Presbyterian party in England, and boasted much of his own valor.

Told them how he slipped out of Worcester, and how near he was taking there,
first in the Fort, and after in his Chamber:

How he disguised himself and went from County to County, and what shift he
made for victuals and lodging.

Sometimes being driven to beg a piece of bread and meat, and ride with bread
in one hand and meat in the other.

And sometimes setting a Guard about a little Cottage while he rested there
until the morning. That he went up and down London, in a Gentlewomans habit,
where he says, he never saw handsomer Coaches then they have now; that he met
with several persons that wished him no harm, and that at last he got to the
Seacoast, and there imbarqued himself for this Coast, in a Boat that my Lord
Wilmot had provided and hired beforehand. He said he knew nothing what was
become of the Duke of Buckingham; and that he had no other Company or Followers
but the said Wilmot, since he landed. He said further, that he was never in
better health, having got no harm at all in the fight.

24 Ormond and Inchequin are sent for from Caen, my Lord Taaffe from Holland,
who has been Treating with Loraine to undertake the business of Ireland,
which is all agreed on, if the King will consent that Lorraine shall have the
Title of Protector, and the Town of Lymrick, a cautionary Garrison for his
Soldiers. Upon these conditions he has undertaken to land six thousand Horse
and Foot before Christmas in Ireland. Taaffe has already received twenty
thousand Pistols, and about fourteen days since a small Vessel was sent to
Lymrick, to assure them of assistance.

25 Some are of opinion that the King shall suddenly make a marriage with
Madamaiselle, the Queen having treated much about it of late.

VII. The late Queen of England his Mother, with the Dukes of Orleance, Guise,
Beaufort, and Thurenne, with diverse Priests, and Nuns, came to visit him at
the Louver in Paris, where after they had had conference with, and lamented
him, they took their leave and returned; the Lords to the Court, and his
Mother with her Fry to Chaliot, where she is erecting a Nunnery.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed by Robert Ibbitson. 1651.


